
the project gutenberg ebook of the turn of the screw, by henri jame 

thi ebook is for the use of anyon anywher at no cost and with 
almost no restrict whatsoever. you may copi it, give it away or 
re-us it under the term of the project gutenberg licens includ 
with thi ebook or onlin at www.gutenberg.org 


title: the turn of the screw 

author: henri jame 

releas date: juli 12, 2008 [ebook #209] 
last updated: octob 23, 2018 

language: english 

charact set encoding: utf-8 

*** start OF thi project gutenberg ebook the turn OF the screw *** 

produc by judith boss, and david widger 




the turn of the screw 

by henri jame 



content 


the turn OF the screw 
I 
II 
iii 
IV 
V 
VI 
vii 
viii 
IX 
X 
XI 
xii 
xiii 
xiv 
XV 
xvi 
xvii 
xviii 
xix 
XX 
xxi 
xxii 
xxiii 
xxiv 



prefac 
the turn OF the screw 

the stori had held us, round the fire, suffici breathless, but 
except the obviou remark that it wa gruesome, as, on christma eve in 
an old house, a strang tale should essenti be, I rememb no 
comment utter till somebodi happen to say that it wa the onli case 
he had met in which such a visit had fallen on a child. the case, 
I may mention, wa that of an apparit in just such an old hous as 
had gather us for the occasion—an appearance, of a dread kind, to 
a littl boy sleep in the room with hi mother and wake her up in 
the terror of it; wake her not to dissip hi dread and sooth him 
to sleep again, but to encount also, herself, befor she had 
succeed in do so, the same sight that had shaken him. It wa thi 
observ that drew from douglas—not immediately, but later in the 
evening—a repli that had the interest consequ to which I call 
attention. someon els told a stori not particularli effective, which 
I saw he wa not following. thi I took for a sign that he had himself 
someth to produc and that we should onli have to wait. We wait in 
fact till two night later; but that same evening, befor we scattered, 
he brought out what wa in hi mind. 

“I quit agree—in regard to griffin’ ghost, or whatev it was—that 
it appear first to the littl boy, at so tender an age, add a 
particular touch. but it’ not the first occurr of it charm 
kind that I know to have involv a child. If the child give the 
effect anoth turn of the screw, what do you say to _two_ children—?” 

“we say, of course,” somebodi exclaimed, “that they give two turns! 
also that we want to hear about them.” 

I can see dougla there befor the fire, to which he had got up to 
present hi back, look down at hi interlocutor with hi hand in 
hi pockets. “nobodi but me, till now, ha ever heard. it’ quit too 
horrible.” this, naturally, wa declar by sever voic to give the 
thing the utmost price, and our friend, with quiet art, prepar hi 
triumph by turn hi eye over the rest of us and go on: “it’ 
beyond everything. noth at all that I know touch it.” 

“for sheer terror?” I rememb asking. 

He seem to say it wa not so simpl as that; to be realli at a loss 
how to qualifi it. He pass hi hand over hi eyes, made a littl 
winc grimace. “for dreadful—dreadfulness!” 

“oh, how delicious!” cri one of the women. 

He took no notic of her; he look at me, but as if, instead of me, he 
saw what he spoke of. “for gener uncanni ugli and horror and 
pain.” 

“well then,” I said, “just sit right down and begin.” 

He turn round to the fire, gave a kick to a log, watch it an 
instant. then as he face us again: “I can’t begin. I shall have to 
send to town.” there wa a unanim groan at this, and much reproach; 
after which, in hi preoccupi way, he explained. “the story’ 
written. it’ in a lock drawer—it ha not been out for years. I could 
write to my man and enclos the key; he could send down the packet as 
he find it.” It wa to me in particular that he appear to propound 
this—appear almost to appeal for aid not to hesitate. He had broken a 
thick of ice, the format of mani a winter; had had hi reason 
for a long silence. the other resent postponement, but it wa just 
hi scrupl that charm me. I adjur him to write by the first post 
and to agre with us for an earli hearing; then I ask him if the 
experi in question had been hi own. To thi hi answer wa prompt. 
“oh, thank god, no!” 

“and is the record yours? you took the thing down?” 

“noth but the impression. I took that _here_”—h tap hi heart. 
“i’v never lost it.” 

“then your manuscript—?” 

“i in old, fade ink, and in the most beauti hand.” He hung fire 
again. “A woman’s. she ha been dead these twenti years. she sent me 
the page in question befor she died.” they were all listen now, 
and of cours there wa somebodi to be arch, or at ani rate to draw the 
inference. but if he put the infer by without a smile it wa also 
without irritation. “she wa a most charm person, but she wa ten 
year older than I. she wa my sister’ governess,” he quietli said. 
“she wa the most agreeabl woman i’v ever known in her position; she 
would have been worthi of ani whatever. It wa long ago, and thi 
episod wa long before. I wa at trinity, and I found her at home on 
my come down the second summer. I wa much there that year—it wa a 
beauti one; and we had, in her off-hours, some stroll and talk in 
the garden—talk in which she struck me as aw clever and nice. Oh 
yes; don’t grin: I like her extrem and am glad to thi day to think 
she like me, too. If she hadn’t she wouldn’t have told me. she had 
never told anyone. It wasn’t simpli that she said so, but that I knew 
she hadn’t. I wa sure; I could see. you’ll easili judg whi when you 
hear.” 

“becaus the thing had been such a scare?” 

He continu to fix me. “you’ll easili judge,” he repeated: “_you_ 
will.” 

I fix him, too. “I see. she wa in love.” 

He laugh for the first time. “you _are_ acute. yes, she wa in love. 
that is, she had been. that came out—sh couldn’t tell her stori 
without it come out. I saw it, and she saw I saw it; but neither of 
us spoke of it. I rememb the time and the place—th corner of the 
lawn, the shade of the great beech and the long, hot summer 
afternoon. It wasn’t a scene for a shudder; but oh—!” He quit the 
fire and drop back into hi chair. 

“you’ll receiv the packet thursday morning?” I inquired. 

“probabl not till the second post.” 

“well then; after dinner—” 

“you’ll all meet me here?” He look us round again. “isn’t anybodi 
going?” It wa almost the tone of hope. 

“everybodi will stay!” 

“_i_ will”—and “_i_ will!” cri the ladi whose departur had been 
fixed. mrs. griffin, however, express the need for a littl more 
light. “who wa it she wa in love with?” 

“the stori will tell,” I took upon myself to reply. 

“oh, I can’t wait for the story!” 

“the stori _won’t_ tell,” said douglas; “not in ani literal, vulgar 
way.” 

“more’ the pity, then. that’ the onli way I ever understand.” 

“won’t _you_ tell, douglas?” somebodi els inquired. 

He sprang to hi feet again. “yes—tomorrow. now I must go to bed. good 
night.” and quickli catch up a candlestick, he left us slightli 
bewildered. from our end of the great brown hall we heard hi step on 
the stair; whereupon mrs. griffin spoke. “well, if I don’t know who she 
wa in love with, I know who _he_ was.” 

“she wa ten year older,” said her husband. 

“_raison de plus_—at that age! but it’ rather nice, hi long 
reticence.” 

“forti years!” griffin put in. 

“with thi outbreak at last.” 

“the outbreak,” I returned, “will make a tremend occas of 
thursday night;” and everyon so agre with me that, in the light of 
it, we lost all attent for everyth else. the last story, howev 
incomplet and like the mere open of a serial, had been told; we 
handshook and “candlestuck,” as somebodi said, and went to bed. 

I knew the next day that a letter contain the key had, by the first 
post, gone off to hi london apartments; but in spite of—or perhap 
just on account of—th eventu diffus of thi knowledg we quit 
let him alon till after dinner, till such an hour of the evening, in 
fact, as might best accord with the kind of emot on which our hope 
were fixed. then he becam as commun as we could desir and 
inde gave us hi best reason for be so. We had it from him again 
befor the fire in the hall, as we had had our mild wonder of the 
previou night. It appear that the narr he had promis to read 
us realli requir for a proper intellig a few word of prologue. 
let me say here distinctly, to have done with it, that thi narrative, 
from an exact transcript of my own made much later, is what I shall 
present give. poor douglas, befor hi death—when it wa in 
sight—commit to me the manuscript that reach him on the third of 
these day and that, on the same spot, with immens effect, he began to 
read to our hush littl circl on the night of the fourth. the 
depart ladi who had said they would stay didn’t, of course, thank 
heaven, stay: they departed, in consequ of arrang made, in a 
rage of curiosity, as they professed, produc by the touch with 
which he had alreadi work us up. but that onli made hi littl final 
auditori more compact and select, kept it, round the hearth, subject to 
a common thrill. 

the first of these touch convey that the written statement took up 
the tale at a point after it had, in a manner, begun. the fact to be in 
possess of wa therefor that hi old friend, the youngest of 
sever daughter of a poor countri parson, had, at the age of twenty, 
on take servic for the first time in the schoolroom, come up to 
london, in trepidation, to answer in person an advertis that had 
alreadi place her in brief correspond with the advertiser. thi 
person proved, on her present herself, for judgment, at a hous in 
harley street, that impress her as vast and imposing—thi prospect 
patron prove a gentleman, a bachelor in the prime of life, such a 
figur as had never risen, save in a dream or an old novel, befor a 
fluttered, anxiou girl out of a hampshir vicarage. one could easili 
fix hi type; it never, happily, die out. He wa handsom and bold and 
pleasant, off-hand and gay and kind. He struck her, inevitably, as 
gallant and splendid, but what took her most of all and gave her the 
courag she afterward show wa that he put the whole thing to her as 
a kind of favor, an oblig he should grate incur. she 
conceiv him as rich, but as fear extravagant—saw him all in a 
glow of high fashion, of good looks, of expens habits, of charm 
way with women. He had for hi own town resid a big hous fill 
with the spoil of travel and the trophi of the chase; but it wa to 
hi countri home, an old famili place in essex, that he wish her 
immedi to proceed. 

He had been left, by the death of their parent in india, guardian to a 
small nephew and a small niece, children of a younger, a militari 
brother, whom he had lost two year before. these children were, by the 
strangest of chanc for a man in hi position—a lone man without the 
right sort of experi or a grain of patience—veri heavili on hi 
hands. It had all been a great worri and, on hi own part doubtless, a 
seri of blunders, but he immens piti the poor chick and had 
done all he could; had in particular sent them down to hi other house, 
the proper place for them be of cours the country, and kept them 
there, from the first, with the best peopl he could find to look after 
them, part even with hi own servant to wait on them and go down 
himself, whenev he might, to see how they were doing. the awkward 
thing wa that they had practic no other relat and that hi own 
affair took up all hi time. He had put them in possess of bly, 
which wa healthi and secure, and had place at the head of their 
littl establishment—but below stair only—an excel woman, mrs. 
grose, whom he wa sure hi visitor would like and who had formerli 
been maid to hi mother. she wa now housekeep and wa also act 
for the time as superintend to the littl girl, of whom, without 
children of her own, she was, by good luck, extrem fond. there were 
plenti of peopl to help, but of cours the young ladi who should go 
down as gover would be in suprem authority. she would also have, 
in holidays, to look after the small boy, who had been for a term at 
school—young as he wa to be sent, but what els could be done?—and 
who, as the holiday were about to begin, would be back from one day to 
the other. there had been for the two children at first a young ladi 
whom they had had the misfortun to lose. she had done for them quit 
beautifully—sh wa a most respect person—til her death, the great 
awkward of which had, precisely, left no altern but the school 
for littl miles. mrs. grose, sinc then, in the way of manner and 
things, had done as she could for flora; and there were, further, a 
cook, a housemaid, a dairywoman, an old pony, an old groom, and an old 
gardener, all likewis thoroughli respectable. 

So far had dougla present hi pictur when someon put a question. 
“and what did the former gover die of?—of so much respectability?” 

our friend’ answer wa prompt. “that will come out. I don’t 
anticipate.” 

“excus me—i thought that wa just what you _are_ doing.” 

“in her successor’ place,” I suggested, “I should have wish to learn 
if the offic brought with it—” 

“necessari danger to life?” dougla complet my thought. “she did wish 
to learn, and she did learn. you shall hear tomorrow what she learned. 
meanwhile, of course, the prospect struck her as slightli grim. she wa 
young, untried, nervous: it wa a vision of seriou duti and littl 
company, of realli great loneliness. she hesitated—took a coupl of 
day to consult and consider. but the salari offer much exceed her 
modest measure, and on a second interview she face the music, she 
engaged.” and douglas, with this, made a paus that, for the benefit of 
the company, move me to throw in— 

“the moral of which wa of cours the seduct exercis by the 
splendid young man. she succumb to it.” 

He got up and, as he had done the night before, went to the fire, gave 
a stir to a log with hi foot, then stood a moment with hi back to us. 
“she saw him onli twice.” 

“yes, but that’ just the beauti of her passion.” 

A littl to my surprise, on this, dougla turn round to me. “it _was_ 
the beauti of it. there were others,” he went on, “who hadn’t 
succumbed. He told her frankli all hi difficulty—that for sever 
applic the condit had been prohibitive. they were, somehow, 
simpli afraid. It sound dull—it sound strange; and all the more so 
becaus of hi main condition.” 

“which was—?” 

“that she should never troubl him—but never, never: neither appeal nor 
complain nor write about anything; onli meet all question herself, 
receiv all money from hi solicitor, take the whole thing over and 
let him alone. she promis to do this, and she mention to me that 
when, for a moment, disburdened, delighted, he held her hand, thank 
her for the sacrifice, she alreadi felt rewarded.” 

“but wa that all her reward?” one of the ladi asked. 

“she never saw him again.” 

“oh!” said the lady; which, as our friend immedi left us again, 
wa the onli other word of import contribut to the subject till, 
the next night, by the corner of the hearth, in the best chair, he 
open the fade red cover of a thin old-fashion gilt-edg album. 
the whole thing took inde more night than one, but on the first 
occas the same ladi put anoth question. “what is your title?” 

“I haven’t one.” 

“oh, _i_ have!” I said. but douglas, without heed me, had begun to 
read with a fine clear that wa like a render to the ear of the 
beauti of hi author’ hand. 


I 

I rememb the whole begin as a success of flight and drops, a 
littl seesaw of the right throb and the wrong. after rising, in town, 
to meet hi appeal, I had at all event a coupl of veri bad days—found 
myself doubt again, felt inde sure I had made a mistake. In thi 
state of mind I spent the long hour of bumping, swing coach that 
carri me to the stop place at which I wa to be met by a vehicl 
from the house. thi convenience, I wa told, had been ordered, and I 
found, toward the close of the june afternoon, a commodi fli in 
wait for me. drive at that hour, on a love day, through a 
countri to which the summer sweet seem to offer me a friendli 
welcome, my fortitud mount afresh and, as we turn into the avenue, 
encount a repriev that wa probabl but a proof of the point to 
which it had sunk. I suppos I had expected, or had dreaded, someth 
so melancholi that what greet me wa a good surprise. I rememb as a 
most pleasant impress the broad, clear front, it open window and 
fresh curtain and the pair of maid look out; I rememb the lawn 
and the bright flower and the crunch of my wheel on the gravel and 
the cluster treetop over which the rook circl and caw in the 
golden sky. the scene had a great that made it a differ affair 
from my own scant home, and there immedi appear at the door, 
with a littl girl in her hand, a civil person who drop me as decent 
a curtsi as if I had been the mistress or a distinguish visitor. I 
had receiv in harley street a narrow notion of the place, and that, 
as I recal it, made me think the proprietor still more of a 
gentleman, suggest that what I wa to enjoy might be someth beyond 
hi promise. 

I had no drop again till the next day, for I wa carri triumphantli 
through the follow hour by my introduct to the younger of my 
pupils. the littl girl who accompani mrs. grose appear to me on 
the spot a creatur so charm as to make it a great fortun to have 
to do with her. she wa the most beauti child I had ever seen, and I 
afterward wonder that my employ had not told me more of her. I 
slept littl that night—i wa too much excited; and thi astonish me, 
too, I recollect, remain with me, ad to my sens of the 
liber with which I wa treated. the large, impress room, one of 
the best in the house, the great state bed, as I almost felt it, the 
full, figur draperies, the long glass in which, for the first time, 
I could see myself from head to foot, all struck me—lik the 
extraordinari charm of my small charge—a so mani thing thrown in. It 
wa thrown in as well, from the first moment, that I should get on with 
mrs. grose in a relat over which, on my way, in the coach, I fear I 
had rather brooded. the onli thing inde that in thi earli outlook 
might have made me shrink again wa the clear circumst of her be 
so glad to see me. I perceiv within half an hour that she wa so 
glad—stout, simple, plain, clean, wholesom woman—a to be posit 
on her guard against show it too much. I wonder even then a littl 
whi she should wish not to show it, and that, with reflection, with 
suspicion, might of cours have made me uneasy. 

but it wa a comfort that there could be no uneasi in a connect 
with anyth so beatif as the radiant imag of my littl girl, the 
vision of whose angel beauti had probabl more than anyth els to 
do with the restless that, befor morning, made me sever time 
rise and wander about my room to take in the whole pictur and 
prospect; to watch, from my open window, the faint summer dawn, to look 
at such portion of the rest of the hous as I could catch, and to 
listen, while, in the fade dusk, the first bird began to twitter, 
for the possibl recurr of a sound or two, less natur and not 
without, but within, that I had fanci I heard. there had been a 
moment when I believ I recognized, faint and far, the cri of a child; 
there had been anoth when I found myself just conscious start as 
at the passage, befor my door, of a light footstep. but these fanci 
were not mark enough not to be thrown off, and it is onli in the 
light, or the gloom, I should rather say, of other and subsequ 
matter that they now come back to me. To watch, teach, “form” littl 
flora would too evid be the make of a happi and use life. It 
had been agre between us downstair that after thi first occas I 
should have her as a matter of cours at night, her small white bed 
be alreadi arranged, to that end, in my room. what I had undertaken 
wa the whole care of her, and she had remained, just thi last time, 
with mrs. grose onli as an effect of our consider for my 
inevit strang and her natur timidity. In spite of thi 
timidity—which the child herself, in the oddest way in the world, had 
been perfectli frank and brave about, allow it, without a sign of 
uncomfort consciousness, with the deep, sweet seren inde of 
one of raphael’ holi infants, to be discussed, to be imput to her, 
and to determin us—i feel quit sure she would present like me. It 
wa part of what I alreadi like mrs. grose herself for, the pleasur I 
could see her feel in my admir and wonder as I sat at supper with 
four tall candl and with my pupil, in a high chair and a bib, 
brightli face me, between them, over bread and milk. there were 
natur thing that in flora’ presenc could pass between us onli as 
prodigi and gratifi looks, obscur and roundabout allusions. 

“and the littl boy—do he look like her? Is he too so veri 
remarkable?” 

one wouldn’t flatter a child. “oh, miss, _most_ remarkable. If you 
think well of thi one!”—and she stood there with a plate in her hand, 
beam at our companion, who look from one of us to the other with 
placid heavenli eye that contain noth to check us. 

“yes; if I do—?” 

“you _will_ be carri away by the littl gentleman!” 

“well, that, I think, is what I came for—to be carri away. i’m 
afraid, however,” I rememb feel the impuls to add, “i’m rather 
easili carri away. I wa carri away in london!” 

I can still see mrs. grose’ broad face as she took thi in. “in harley 
street?” 

“in harley street.” 

“well, miss, you’r not the first—and you won’t be the last.” 

“oh, i’v no pretension,” I could laugh, “to be the onli one. My 
other pupil, at ani rate, as I understand, come back tomorrow?” 

“not tomorrow—friday, miss. He arrives, as you did, by the coach, under 
care of the guard, and is to be met by the same carriage.” 

I forthwith express that the proper as well as the pleasant and 
friendli thing would be therefor that on the arriv of the public 
convey I should be in wait for him with hi littl sister; an 
idea in which mrs. grose concur so heartili that I somehow took her 
manner as a kind of comfort pledge—nev falsified, thank 
heaven!—that we should on everi question be quit at one. oh, she wa 
glad I wa there! 

what I felt the next day was, I suppose, noth that could be fairli 
call a reaction from the cheer of my arrival; it wa probabl at the 
most onli a slight oppress produc by a fuller measur of the 
scale, as I walk round them, gaze up at them, took them in, of my 
new circumstances. they had, as it were, an extent and mass for which I 
had not been prepar and in the presenc of which I found myself, 
freshly, a littl scare as well as a littl proud. lessons, in thi 
agitation, certainli suffer some delay; I reflect that my first 
duti was, by the gentlest art I could contrive, to win the child into 
the sens of know me. I spent the day with her out-of-doors; I 
arrang with her, to her great satisfaction, that it should be she, 
she only, who might show me the place. she show it step by step and 
room by room and secret by secret, with droll, delightful, childish 
talk about it and with the result, in half an hour, of our becom 
immens friends. young as she was, I wa struck, throughout our littl 
tour, with her confid and courag with the way, in empti chamber 
and dull corridors, on crook staircas that made me paus and even 
on the summit of an old machicol squar tower that made me dizzy, 
her morn music, her disposit to tell me so mani more thing than 
she asked, rang out and led me on. I have not seen bli sinc the day I 
left it, and I daresay that to my older and more inform eye it would 
now appear suffici contracted. but as my littl conductress, with 
her hair of gold and her frock of blue, danc befor me round corner 
and patter down passages, I had the view of a castl of romanc 
inhabit by a rosi sprite, such a place as would somehow, for 
divers of the young idea, take all color out of storybook and 
fairytales. wasn’t it just a storybook over which I had fallen adoz 
and adream? no; it wa a big, ugly, antique, but conveni house, 
embodi a few featur of a build still older, half-replac and 
half-utilized, in which I had the fanci of our be almost as lost as 
a hand of passeng in a great drift ship. well, I was, 
strangely, at the helm! 


II 

thi came home to me when, two day later, I drove over with flora to 
meet, as mrs. grose said, the littl gentleman; and all the more for an 
incid that, present itself the second evening, had deepli 
disconcert me. the first day had been, on the whole, as I have 
expressed, reassuring; but I wa to see it wind up in keen 
apprehension. the postbag, that evening—it came late—contain a letter 
for me, which, however, in the hand of my employer, I found to be 
compos but of a few word enclos another, address to himself, 
with a seal still unbroken. “this, I recognize, is from the headmaster, 
and the headmaster’ an aw bore. read him, please; deal with him; 
but mind you don’t report. not a word. i’m off!” I broke the seal with 
a great effort—so great a one that I wa a long time come to it; took 
the unopen missiv at last up to my room and onli attack it just 
befor go to bed. I had better have let it wait till morning, for it 
gave me a second sleepless night. with no counsel to take, the next 
day, I wa full of distress; and it final got so the better of me 
that I determin to open myself at least to mrs. grose. 

“what doe it mean? the child’ dismiss hi school.” 

she gave me a look that I remark at the moment; then, visibly, with a 
quick blankness, seem to tri to take it back. “but aren’t they all—?” 

“sent home—yes. but onli for the holidays. mile may never go back at 
all.” 

consciously, under my attention, she reddened. “they won’t take him?” 

“they absolut decline.” 

At thi she rais her eyes, which she had turn from me; I saw them 
fill with good tears. “what ha he done?” 

I hesitated; then I judg best simpli to hand her my letter—which, 
however, had the effect of make her, without take it, simpli put 
her hand behind her. she shook her head sadly. “such thing are not 
for me, miss.” 

My counselor couldn’t read! I winc at my mistake, which I attenu 
as I could, and open my letter again to repeat it to her; then, 
falter in the act and fold it up onc more, I put it back in my 
pocket. “i he realli _bad_?” 

the tear were still in her eyes. “do the gentlemen say so?” 

“they go into no particulars. they simpli express their regret that it 
should be imposs to keep him. that can have onli one meaning.” mrs. 
grose listen with dumb emotion; she forbor to ask me what thi 
mean might be; so that, presently, to put the thing with some 
coher and with the mere aid of her presenc to my own mind, I went 
on: “that he’ an injuri to the others.” 

At this, with one of the quick turn of simpl folk, she suddenli 
flame up. “master miles! _him_ an injury?” 

there wa such a flood of good faith in it that, though I had not yet 
seen the child, my veri fear made me jump to the absurd of the 
idea. I found myself, to meet my friend the better, offer it, on the 
spot, sarcastically. “to hi poor littl innoc mates!” 

“it’ too dreadful,” cri mrs. grose, “to say such cruel things! why, 
he’ scarc ten year old.” 

“yes, yes; it would be incredible.” 

she wa evid grate for such a profession. “see him, miss, 
first. _then_ believ it!” I felt forthwith a new impati to see 
him; it wa the begin of a curios that, for all the next hours, 
wa to deepen almost to pain. mrs. grose wa aware, I could judge, of 
what she had produc in me, and she follow it up with assurance. 
“you might as well believ it of the littl lady. bless her,” she ad 
the next moment—“_look_ at her!” 

I turn and saw that flora, whom, ten minut before, I had 
establish in the schoolroom with a sheet of white paper, a pencil, 
and a copi of nice “round o’s,” now present herself to view at the 
open door. she express in her littl way an extraordinari detach 
from disagre duties, look to me, however, with a great childish 
light that seem to offer it as a mere result of the affect she had 
conceiv for my person, which had render necessari that she should 
follow me. I need noth more than thi to feel the full forc of 
mrs. grose’ comparison, and, catch my pupil in my arms, cover her 
with kiss in which there wa a sob of atonement. 

nonetheless, the rest of the day I watch for further occas to 
approach my colleague, especi as, toward evening, I began to fanci 
she rather sought to avoid me. I overtook her, I remember, on the 
staircase; we went down together, and at the bottom I detain her, 
hold her there with a hand on her arm. “I take what you said to me 
at noon as a declar that _you’ve_ never known him to be bad.” 

she threw back her head; she had clearly, by thi time, and veri 
honestly, adopt an attitude. “oh, never known him—i don’t pretend 
_that!_” 

I wa upset again. “then you _have_ known him—?” 

“ye indeed, miss, thank god!” 

On reflect I accept this. “you mean that a boy who never is—?” 

“i no boy for _me!_” 

I held her tighter. “you like them with the spirit to be naughty?” 
then, keep pace with her answer, “so do i!” I eagerli brought out. 
“but not to the degre to contaminate—” 

“to contaminate?”—mi big word left her at a loss. I explain it. “to 
corrupt.” 

she stared, take my mean in; but it produc in her an odd laugh. 
“are you afraid he’ll corrupt _you?_” she put the question with such a 
fine bold humor that, with a laugh, a littl silli doubtless, to match 
her own, I gave way for the time to the apprehens of ridicule. 

but the next day, as the hour for my drive approached, I crop up in 
anoth place. “what wa the ladi who wa here before?” 

“the last governess? she wa also young and pretty—almost as young and 
almost as pretty, miss, even as you.” 

“ah, then, I hope her youth and her beauti help her!” I recollect 
throw off. “he seem to like us young and pretty!” 

“oh, he _did_,” mrs. grose assented: “it wa the way he like 
everyone!” she had no sooner spoken inde than she caught herself up. 
“I mean that’ _his_ way—th master’s.” 

I wa struck. “but of whom did you speak first?” 

she look blank, but she colored. “why, of _him_.” 

“of the master?” 

“of who else?” 

there wa so obvious no one els that the next moment I had lost my 
impress of her have accident said more than she meant; and I 
mere ask what I want to know. “did _she_ see anyth in the 
boy—?” 

“that wasn’t right? she never told me.” 

I had a scruple, but I overcam it. “wa she careful—particular?” 

mrs. grose appear to tri to be conscientious. “about some 
things—yes.” 

“but not about all?” 

again she considered. “well, miss—she’ gone. I won’t tell tales.” 

“I quit understand your feeling,” I hasten to reply; but I thought 
it, after an instant, not oppos to thi concess to pursue: “did 
she die here?” 

“no—sh went off.” 

I don’t know what there wa in thi breviti of mrs. grose’ that struck 
me as ambiguous. “went off to die?” mrs. grose look straight out of 
the window, but I felt that, hypothetically, I had a right to know what 
young person engag for bli were expect to do. “she wa taken ill, 
you mean, and went home?” 

“she wa not taken ill, so far as appeared, in thi house. she left it, 
at the end of the year, to go home, as she said, for a short holiday, 
to which the time she had put in had certainli given her a right. We 
had then a young woman—a nursemaid who had stay on and who wa a good 
girl and clever; and _she_ took the children altogeth for the 
interval. but our young ladi never came back, and at the veri moment I 
wa expect her I heard from the master that she wa dead.” 

I turn thi over. “but of what?” 

“he never told me! but please, miss,” said mrs. grose, “I must get to 
my work.” 


iii 

her thu turn her back on me wa fortun not, for my just 
preoccupations, a snub that could check the growth of our mutual 
esteem. We met, after I had brought home littl miles, more intim 
than ever on the ground of my stupefaction, my gener emotion: so 
monstrou wa I then readi to pronounc it that such a child as had now 
been reveal to me should be under an interdict. I wa a littl late 
on the scene, and I felt, as he stood wist look out for me 
befor the door of the inn at which the coach had put him down, that I 
had seen him, on the instant, without and within, in the great glow of 
freshness, the same posit fragranc of purity, in which I had, from 
the first moment, seen hi littl sister. He wa incred beautiful, 
and mrs. grose had put her finger on it: everyth but a sort of 
passion of tender for him wa swept away by hi presence. what I 
then and there took him to my heart for wa someth divin that I 
have never found to the same degre in ani child—hi indescrib 
littl air of know noth in the world but love. It would have been 
imposs to carri a bad name with a greater sweet of innocence, 
and by the time I had got back to bli with him I remain mere 
bewildered—so far, that is, as I wa not outraged—bi the sens of the 
horribl letter lock up in my room, in a drawer. As soon as I could 
compass a privat word with mrs. grose I declar to her that it wa 
grotesque. 

she promptli understood me. “you mean the cruel charge—?” 

“it doesn’t live an instant. My dear woman, _look_ at him!” 

she smile at my pretent to have discov hi charm. “I assur 
you, miss, I do noth else! what will you say, then?” she immedi 
added. 

“in answer to the letter?” I had made up my mind. “nothing.” 

“and to hi uncle?” 

I wa incisive. “nothing.” 

“and to the boy himself?” 

I wa wonderful. “nothing.” 

she gave with her apron a great wipe to her mouth. “then i’ll stand by 
you. we’ll see it out.” 

“we’ll see it out!” I ardent echoed, give her my hand to make it a 
vow. 

she held me there a moment, then whisk up her apron again with her 
detach hand. “would you mind, miss, if I use the freedom—” 

“to kiss me? no!” I took the good creatur in my arm and, after we had 
embrac like sisters, felt still more fortifi and indignant. 

this, at all events, wa for the time: a time so full that, as I recal 
the way it went, it remind me of all the art I now need to make it a 
littl distinct. what I look back at with amaz is the situat I 
accepted. I had undertaken, with my companion, to see it out, and I wa 
under a charm, apparently, that could smooth away the extent and the 
far and difficult connect of such an effort. I wa lift aloft on 
a great wave of infatu and pity. I found it simple, in my 
ignorance, my confusion, and perhap my conceit, to assum that I could 
deal with a boy whose educ for the world wa all on the point of 
beginning. I am unabl even to rememb at thi day what propos I 
frame for the end of hi holiday and the resumpt of hi studies. 
lesson with me, indeed, that charm summer, we all had a theori that 
he wa to have; but I now feel that, for weeks, the lesson must have 
been rather my own. I learn something—at first, certainly—that had 
not been one of the teach of my small, smother life; learn to 
be amused, and even amusing, and not to think for the morrow. It wa 
the first time, in a manner, that I had known space and air and 
freedom, all the music of summer and all the mysteri of nature. and 
then there wa consideration—and consider wa sweet. oh, it wa a 
trap—not designed, but deep—to my imagination, to my delicacy, perhap 
to my vanity; to whatever, in me, wa most excitable. the best way to 
pictur it all is to say that I wa off my guard. they gave me so 
littl trouble—they were of a gentl so extraordinary. I use to 
speculate—but even thi with a dim disconnectedness—a to how the rough 
futur (for all futur are rough!) would handl them and might bruis 
them. they had the bloom of health and happiness; and yet, as if I had 
been in charg of a pair of littl grandees, of princ of the blood, 
for whom everything, to be right, would have to be enclos and 
protected, the onli form that, in my fancy, the afteryear could take 
for them wa that of a romantic, a realli royal extens of the garden 
and the park. It may be, of course, abov all, that what suddenli broke 
into thi give the previou time a charm of stillness—that hush in 
which someth gather or crouches. the chang wa actual like the 
spring of a beast. 

In the first week the day were long; they often, at their finest, 
gave me what I use to call my own hour, the hour when, for my pupils, 
teatim and bedtim have come and gone, I had, befor my final 
retirement, a small interv alone. much as I like my companions, thi 
hour wa the thing in the day I like most; and I like it best of all 
when, as the light faded—or rather, I should say, the day linger and 
the last call of the last bird sounded, in a flush sky, from the 
old trees—i could take a turn into the ground and enjoy, almost with a 
sens of properti that amus and flatter me, the beauti and digniti 
of the place. It wa a pleasur at these moment to feel myself 
tranquil and justified; doubtless, perhaps, also to reflect that by my 
discretion, my quiet good sens and gener high propriety, I wa 
give pleasure—if he ever thought of it!—to the person to whose 
pressur I had responded. what I wa do wa what he had earnestli 
hope and directli ask of me, and that I _could_, after all, do it 
prove even a greater joy than I had expected. I daresay I fanci 
myself, in short, a remark young woman and took comfort in the 
faith that thi would more publicli appear. well, I need to be 
remark to offer a front to the remark thing that present 
gave their first sign. 

It wa plump, one afternoon, in the middl of my veri hour: the 
children were tuck away, and I had come out for my stroll. one of the 
thought that, as I don’t in the least shrink now from noting, use to 
be with me in these wander wa that it would be as charm as a 
charm stori suddenli to meet someone. someon would appear there at 
the turn of a path and would stand befor me and smile and approve. I 
didn’t ask more than that—i onli ask that he should _know;_ and the 
onli way to be sure he knew would be to see it, and the kind light of 
it, in hi handsom face. that wa exactli present to me—bi which I 
mean the face was—when, on the first of these occasions, at the end of 
a long june day, I stop short on emerg from one of the 
plantat and come into view of the house. what arrest me on the 
spot—and with a shock much greater than ani vision had allow for—wa 
the sens that my imagin had, in a flash, turn real. He did 
stand there!—but high up, beyond the lawn and at the veri top of the 
tower to which, on that first morning, littl flora had conduct me. 
thi tower wa one of a pair—square, incongruous, crenel 
structures—that were distinguished, for some reason, though I could see 
littl difference, as the new and the old. they flank opposit end 
of the hous and were probabl architectur absurdities, redeem in a 
measur inde by not be wholli disengag nor of a height too 
pretentious, dating, in their gingerbread antiquity, from a romant 
reviv that wa alreadi a respect past. I admir them, had 
fanci about them, for we could all profit in a degree, especi 
when they loom through the dusk, by the grandeur of their actual 
battlements; yet it wa not at such an elev that the figur I had 
so often invok seem most in place. 

It produc in me, thi figure, in the clear twilight, I remember, two 
distinct gasp of emotion, which were, sharply, the shock of my first 
and that of my second surprise. My second wa a violent percept of 
the mistak of my first: the man who met my eye wa not the person I 
had precipit supposed. there came to me thu a bewilder of 
vision of which, after these years, there is no live view that I can 
hope to give. An unknown man in a lone place is a permit object of 
fear to a young woman privat bred; and the figur that face me 
was—a few more second assur me—a littl anyon els I knew as it 
wa the imag that had been in my mind. I had not seen it in harley 
street—i had not seen it anywhere. the place, moreover, in the 
strangest way in the world, had, on the instant, and by the veri fact 
of it appearance, becom a solitude. To me at least, make my 
statement here with a deliber with which I have never made it, the 
whole feel of the moment returns. It wa as if, while I took in—what 
I did take in—al the rest of the scene had been stricken with death. I 
can hear again, as I write, the intens hush in which the sound of 
even dropped. the rook stop caw in the golden sky, and the 
friendli hour lost, for the minute, all it voice. but there wa no 
other chang in nature, unless inde it were a chang that I saw with 
a stranger sharpness. the gold wa still in the sky, the clear in 
the air, and the man who look at me over the battlement wa as 
definit as a pictur in a frame. that’ how I thought, with 
extraordinari quickness, of each person that he might have been and 
that he wa not. We were confront across our distanc quit long 
enough for me to ask myself with intens who then he wa and to feel, 
as an effect of my inabl to say, a wonder that in a few instant 
more becam intense. 

the great question, or one of these, is, afterward, I know, with regard 
to certain matters, the question of how long they have lasted. well, 
thi matter of mine, think what you will of it, last while I caught 
at a dozen possibilities, none of which made a differ for the 
better, that I could see, in there have been in the house—and for how 
long, abov all?—a person of whom I wa in ignorance. It last while I 
just bridl a littl with the sens that my offic demand that there 
should be no such ignor and no such person. It last while thi 
visitant, at all events—and there wa a touch of the strang freedom, 
as I remember, in the sign of familiar of hi wear no hat—seem 
to fix me, from hi position, with just the question, just the scrutini 
through the fade light, that hi own presenc provoked. We were too 
far apart to call to each other, but there wa a moment at which, at 
shorter range, some challeng between us, break the hush, would have 
been the right result of our straight mutual stare. He wa in one of 
the angles, the one away from the house, veri erect, as it struck me, 
and with both hand on the ledge. So I saw him as I see the letter I 
form on thi page; then, exactly, after a minute, as if to add to the 
spectacle, he slowli chang hi place—passed, look at me hard all 
the while, to the opposit corner of the platform. yes, I had the 
sharpest sens that dure thi transit he never took hi eye from me, 
and I can see at thi moment the way hi hand, as he went, pass from 
one of the crenel to the next. He stop at the other corner, 
but less long, and even as he turn away still markedli fix me. He 
turn away; that wa all I knew. 


IV 

It wa not that I didn’t wait, on thi occasion, for more, for I wa 
root as deepli as I wa shaken. wa there a “secret” at bly—a mysteri 
of udolpho or an insane, an unmention rel kept in unsuspect 
confinement? I can’t say how long I turn it over, or how long, in a 
confus of curios and dread, I remain where I had had my 
collision; I onli recal that when I re-ent the hous dark had 
quit close in. agitation, in the interval, certainli had held me and 
driven me, for I must, in circl about the place, have walk three 
miles; but I wa to be, later on, so much more overwhelm that thi 
mere dawn of alarm wa a compar human chill. the most singular 
part of it, in fact—singular as the rest had been—wa the part I 
became, in the hall, awar of in meet mrs. grose. thi pictur come 
back to me in the gener train—th impression, as I receiv it on my 
return, of the wide white panel space, bright in the lamplight and 
with it portrait and red carpet, and of the good surpris look of my 
friend, which immedi told me she had miss me. It came to me 
straightway, under her contact, that, with plain heartiness, mere 
reliev anxieti at my appearance, she knew noth whatev that could 
bear upon the incid I had there readi for her. I had not suspect 
in advanc that her comfort face would pull me up, and I somehow 
measur the import of what I had seen by my thu find myself 
hesit to mention it. scarc anyth in the whole histori seem to 
me so odd as thi fact that my real begin of fear wa one, as I may 
say, with the instinct of spare my companion. On the spot, 
accordingly, in the pleasant hall and with her eye on me, I, for a 
reason that I couldn’t then have phrased, achiev an inward 
resolution—off a vagu pretext for my late and, with the plea 
of the beauti of the night and of the heavi dew and wet feet, went as 
soon as possibl to my room. 

here it wa anoth affair; here, for mani day after, it wa a queer 
affair enough. there were hours, from day to day—or at least there were 
moments, snatch even from clear duties—when I had to shut myself up 
to think. It wa not so much yet that I wa more nervou than I could 
bear to be as that I wa remark afraid of becom so; for the 
truth I had now to turn over was, simpli and clearly, the truth that I 
could arriv at no account whatev of the visitor with whom I had been 
so inexplic and yet, as it seem to me, so intim concerned. 
It took littl time to see that I could sound without form of inquiri 
and without excit remark ani domest complications. the shock I had 
suffer must have sharpen all my senses; I felt sure, at the end of 
three day and as the result of mere closer attention, that I had not 
been practic upon by the servant nor made the object of ani “game.” 
Of whatev it wa that I knew, noth wa known around me. there wa 
but one sane inference: someon had taken a liberti rather gross. that 
wa what, repeatedly, I dip into my room and lock the door to say 
to myself. We had been, collectively, subject to an intrusion; some 
unscrupul traveler, curiou in old houses, had made hi way in 
unobserved, enjoy the prospect from the best point of view, and then 
stolen out as he came. If he had given me such a bold hard stare, that 
wa but a part of hi indiscretion. the good thing, after all, wa that 
we should sure see no more of him. 

thi wa not so good a thing, I admit, as not to leav me to judg that 
what, essentially, made noth els much signifi wa simpli my 
charm work. My charm work wa just my life with mile and flora, 
and through noth could I so like it as through feel that I could 
throw myself into it in trouble. the attract of my small charg wa 
a constant joy, lead me to wonder afresh at the vaniti of my 
origin fears, the distast I had begun by entertain for the 
probabl gray prose of my office. there wa to be no gray prose, it 
appeared, and no long grind; so how could work not be charm that 
present itself as daili beauty? It wa all the romanc of the nurseri 
and the poetri of the schoolroom. I don’t mean by this, of course, that 
we studi onli fiction and verse; I mean I can express no otherwis 
the sort of interest my companion inspired. how can I describ that 
except by say that instead of grow use to them—and it’ a marvel 
for a governess: I call the sisterhood to witness!—i made constant 
fresh discoveries. there wa one direction, assuredly, in which these 
discoveri stopped: deep obscur continu to cover the region of 
the boy’ conduct at school. It had been promptli given me, I have 
noted, to face that mysteri without a pang. perhap even it would be 
nearer the truth to say that—without a word—h himself had clear it 
up. He had made the whole charg absurd. My conclus bloom there 
with the real rose flush of hi innocence: he wa onli too fine and 
fair for the littl horrid, unclean school-world, and he had paid a 
price for it. I reflect acut that the sens of such differences, 
such superior of quality, always, on the part of the 
majority—which could includ even stupid, sordid headmasters—turn 
infal to the vindictive. 

both the children had a gentl (it wa their onli fault, and it 
never made mile a muff) that kept them—how shall I express it?—almost 
imperson and certainli quit unpunishable. they were like the cherub 
of the anecdote, who had—morally, at ani rate—noth to whack! I 
rememb feel with mile in especi as if he had had, as it were, 
no history. We expect of a small child a scant one, but there wa in 
thi beauti littl boy someth extraordinarili sensitive, yet 
extraordinarili happy, that, more than in ani creatur of hi age I 
have seen, struck me as begin anew each day. He had never for a 
second suffered. I took thi as a direct disproof of hi have realli 
been chastised. If he had been wick he would have “caught” it, and I 
should have caught it by the rebound—i should have found the trace. I 
found noth at all, and he wa therefor an angel. He never spoke of 
hi school, never mention a comrad or a master; and I, for my part, 
wa quit too much disgust to allud to them. Of cours I wa under 
the spell, and the wonder part is that, even at the time, I 
perfectli knew I was. but I gave myself up to it; it wa an antidot to 
ani pain, and I had more pain than one. I wa in receipt in these day 
of disturb letter from home, where thing were not go well. but 
with my children, what thing in the world mattered? that wa the 
question I use to put to my scrappi retirements. I wa dazzl by 
their loveliness. 

there wa a sunday—to get on—when it rain with such forc and for so 
mani hour that there could be no process to church; in consequ 
of which, as the day declined, I had arrang with mrs. grose that, 
should the even show improvement, we would attend togeth the late 
service. the rain happili stopped, and I prepar for our walk, which, 
through the park and by the good road to the village, would be a matter 
of twenti minutes. come downstair to meet my colleagu in the hall, 
I rememb a pair of glove that had requir three stitch and that 
had receiv them—with a public perhap not edifying—whil I sat 
with the children at their tea, serv on sundays, by exception, in 
that cold, clean templ of mahogani and brass, the “grown-up” dine 
room. the glove had been drop there, and I turn in to recov 
them. the day wa gray enough, but the afternoon light still lingered, 
and it enabl me, on cross the threshold, not onli to recognize, on 
a chair near the wide window, then closed, the articl I wanted, but 
to becom awar of a person on the other side of the window and look 
straight in. one step into the room had sufficed; my vision wa 
instantaneous; it wa all there. the person look straight in wa the 
person who had alreadi appear to me. He appear thu again with I 
won’t say greater distinctness, for that wa impossible, but with a 
near that repres a forward stride in our intercours and made 
me, as I met him, catch my breath and turn cold. He wa the same—h wa 
the same, and seen, thi time, as he had been seen before, from the 
waist up, the window, though the dine room wa on the ground floor, 
not go down to the terrac on which he stood. hi face wa close to 
the glass, yet the effect of thi better view was, strangely, onli to 
show me how intens the former had been. He remain but a few 
seconds—long enough to convinc me he also saw and recognized; but it 
wa as if I had been look at him for year and had known him always. 
something, however, happen thi time that had not happen before; 
hi stare into my face, through the glass and across the room, wa as 
deep and hard as then, but it quit me for a moment dure which I 
could still watch it, see it fix success sever other things. On 
the spot there came to me the ad shock of a certitud that it wa 
not for me he had come there. He had come for someon else. 

the flash of thi knowledge—for it wa knowledg in the midst of 
dread—produc in me the most extraordinari effect, start as I stood 
there, a sudden vibrat of duti and courage. I say courag becaus I 
wa beyond all doubt alreadi far gone. I bound straight out of the 
door again, reach that of the house, got, in an instant, upon the 
drive, and, pass along the terrac as fast as I could rush, turn a 
corner and came full in sight. but it wa in sight of noth now—mi 
visitor had vanished. I stopped, I almost dropped, with the real relief 
of this; but I took in the whole scene—i gave him time to reappear. I 
call it time, but how long wa it? I can’t speak to the purpos today 
of the durat of these things. that kind of measur must have left 
me: they couldn’t have last as they actual appear to me to last. 
the terrac and the whole place, the lawn and the garden beyond it, all 
I could see of the park, were empti with a great emptiness. there were 
shrubberi and big trees, but I rememb the clear assur I felt 
that none of them conceal him. He wa there or wa not there: not 
there if I didn’t see him. I got hold of this; then, instinctively, 
instead of return as I had come, went to the window. It wa 
confusedli present to me that I ought to place myself where he had 
stood. I did so; I appli my face to the pane and looked, as he had 
looked, into the room. As if, at thi moment, to show me exactli what 
hi rang had been, mrs. grose, as I had done for himself just before, 
came in from the hall. with thi I had the full imag of a repetit 
of what had alreadi occurred. she saw me as I had seen my own visitant; 
she pull up short as I had done; I gave her someth of the shock 
that I had received. she turn white, and thi made me ask myself if I 
had blanch as much. she stared, in short, and retreat on just _my_ 
lines, and I knew she had then pass out and come round to me and that 
I should present meet her. I remain where I was, and while I wait 
I thought of more thing than one. but there’ onli one I take space to 
mention. I wonder whi _she_ should be scared. 


V 

oh, she let me know as soon as, round the corner of the house, she 
loom again into view. “what in the name of good is the matter—?” 
she wa now flush and out of breath. 

I said noth till she came quit near. “with me?” I must have made a 
wonder face. “do I show it?” 

“you’r as white as a sheet. you look awful.” 

I considered; I could meet on this, without scruple, ani innocence. My 
need to respect the bloom of mrs. grose’ had dropped, without a 
rustle, from my shoulders, and if I waver for the instant it wa not 
with what I kept back. I put out my hand to her and she took it; I held 
her hard a little, like to feel her close to me. there wa a kind of 
support in the shi heav of her surprise. “you came for me for church, 
of course, but I can’t go.” 

“ha anyth happened?” 

“yes. you must know now. did I look veri queer?” 

“through thi window? dreadful!” 

“well,” I said, “i’v been frightened.” mrs. grose’ eye express 
plainli that _she_ had no wish to be, yet also that she knew too well 
her place not to be readi to share with me ani mark inconvenience. 
oh, it wa quit settl that she _must_ share! “just what you saw from 
the dine room a minut ago wa the effect of that. what _i_ saw—just 
before—wa much worse.” 

her hand tightened. “what wa it?” 

“an extraordinari man. look in.” 

“what extraordinari man?” 

“I haven’t the least idea.” 

mrs. grose gaze round us in vain. “then where is he gone?” 

“I know still less.” 

“have you seen him before?” 

“yes—once. On the old tower.” 

she could onli look at me harder. “do you mean he’ a stranger?” 

“oh, veri much!” 

“yet you didn’t tell me?” 

“no—for reasons. but now that you’v guessed—” 

mrs. grose’ round eye encount thi charge. “ah, I haven’t 
guessed!” she said veri simply. “how can I if _you_ don’t imagine?” 

“I don’t in the veri least.” 

“you’v seen him nowher but on the tower?” 

“and on thi spot just now.” 

mrs. grose look round again. “what wa he do on the tower?” 

“onli stand there and look down at me.” 

she thought a minute. “wa he a gentleman?” 

I found I had no need to think. “no.” she gaze in deeper wonder. “no.” 

“then nobodi about the place? nobodi from the village?” 

“nobody—nobody. I didn’t tell you, but I made sure.” 

she breath a vagu relief: thi was, oddly, so much to the good. It 
onli went inde a littl way. “but if he isn’t a gentleman—” 

“what _is_ he? he’ a horror.” 

“A horror?” 

“he’s—god help me if I know _what_ he is!” 

mrs. grose look round onc more; she fix her eye on the duskier 
distance, then, pull herself together, turn to me with abrupt 
inconsequence. “it’ time we should be at church.” 

“oh, i’m not fit for church!” 

“won’t it do you good?” 

“it won’t do _them!_— I nod at the house. 

“the children?” 

“I can’t leav them now.” 

“you’r afraid—?” 

I spoke boldly. “i’m afraid of _him_.” 

mrs. grose’ larg face show me, at this, for the first time, the 
faraway faint glimmer of a conscious more acute: I somehow made out 
in it the delay dawn of an idea I myself had not given her and that 
wa as yet quit obscur to me. It come back to me that I thought 
instantli of thi as someth I could get from her; and I felt it to 
be connect with the desir she present show to know more. “when 
wa it—on the tower?” 

“about the middl of the month. At thi same hour.” 

“almost at dark,” said mrs. grose. 

“oh, no, not nearly. I saw him as I see you.” 

“then how did he get in?” 

“and how did he get out?” I laughed. “I had no opportun to ask him! 
thi evening, you see,” I pursued, “he ha not been abl to get in.” 

“he onli peeps?” 

“I hope it will be confin to that!” she had now let go my hand; she 
turn away a little. I wait an instant; then I brought out: “go to 
church. goodbye. I must watch.” 

slowli she face me again. “do you fear for them?” 

We met in anoth long look. “don’t _you?_” instead of answer she 
came nearer to the window and, for a minute, appli her face to the 
glass. “you see how he could see,” I meanwhil went on. 

she didn’t move. “how long wa he here?” 

“till I came out. I came to meet him.” 

mrs. grose at last turn round, and there wa still more in her face. 
“_i_ couldn’t have come out.” 

“neither could i!” I laugh again. “but I did come. I have my duty.” 

“so have I mine,” she replied; after which she added: “what is he 
like?” 

“i’v been die to tell you. but he’ like nobody.” 

“nobody?” she echoed. 

“he ha no hat.” then see in her face that she already, in this, 
with a deeper dismay, found a touch of picture, I quickli ad stroke 
to stroke. “he ha red hair, veri red, close-curling, and a pale face, 
long in shape, with straight, good featur and little, rather queer 
whisker that are as red as hi hair. hi eyebrow are, somehow, 
darker; they look particularli arch and as if they might move a good 
deal. hi eye are sharp, strange—awfully; but I onli know clearli that 
they’r rather small and veri fixed. hi mouth’ wide, and hi lip are 
thin, and except for hi littl whisker he’ quit clean-shaven. He 
give me a sort of sens of look like an actor.” 

“an actor!” It wa imposs to resembl one less, at least, than mrs. 
grose at that moment. 

“i’v never seen one, but so I suppos them. he’ tall, active, erect,” 
I continued, “but never—no, never!—a gentleman.” 

My companion’ face had blanch as I went on; her round eye start 
and her mild mouth gaped. “A gentleman?” she gasped, confounded, 
stupefied: “a gentleman _he?_” 

“you know him then?” 

she visibl tri to hold herself. “but he _is_ handsome?” 

I saw the way to help her. “remarkably!” 

“and dressed—?” 

“in somebody’ clothes.” “they’r smart, but they’r not hi own.” 

she broke into a breathless affirm groan: “they’r the master’s!” 

I caught it up. “you _do_ know him?” 

she falter but a second. “quint!” she cried. 

“quint?” 

“peter quint—hi own man, hi valet, when he wa here!” 

“when the master was?” 

gape still, but meet me, she piec it all together. “he never 
wore hi hat, but he did wear—well, there were waistcoat missed. they 
were both here—last year. then the master went, and quint wa alone.” 

I followed, but halt a little. “alone?” 

“alon with _us_.” then, as from a deeper depth, “in charge,” she 
added. 

“and what becam of him?” 

she hung fire so long that I wa still more mystified. “he went, too,” 
she brought out at last. 

“went where?” 

her expression, at this, becam extraordinary. “god know where! He 
died.” 

“died?” I almost shrieked. 

she seem fairli to squar herself, plant herself more firmli to utter 
the wonder of it. “yes. mr. quint is dead.” 


VI 

It took of cours more than that particular passag to place us 
togeth in presenc of what we had now to live with as we could—mi 
dread liabil to impress of the order so vividli exemplified, 
and my companion’ knowledge, henceforth—a knowledg half constern 
and half compassion—of that liability. there had been, thi evening, 
after the revel left me, for an hour, so prostrate—ther had been, 
for either of us, no attend on ani servic but a littl servic of 
tear and vows, of prayer and promises, a climax to the seri of 
mutual challeng and pledg that had straightway ensu on our 
retreat togeth to the schoolroom and shut ourselv up there 
to have everyth out. the result of our have everyth out wa 
simpli to reduc our situat to the last rigor of it elements. she 
herself had seen nothing, not the shadow of a shadow, and nobodi in the 
hous but the gover wa in the governess’ plight; yet she accept 
without directli impugn my saniti the truth as I gave it to her, and 
end by show me, on thi ground, an awestricken tenderness, an 
express of the sens of my more than question privilege, of 
which the veri breath ha remain with me as that of the sweetest of 
human charities. 

what wa settl between us, accordingly, that night, wa that we 
thought we might bear thing together; and I wa not even sure that, in 
spite of her exemption, it wa she who had the best of the burden. I 
knew at thi hour, I think, as well as I knew later, what I wa capabl 
of meet to shelter my pupils; but it took me some time to be wholli 
sure of what my honest alli wa prepar for to keep term with so 
compromis a contract. I wa queer compani enough—quit as queer as 
the compani I received; but as I trace over what we went through I see 
how much common ground we must have found in the one idea that, by good 
fortune, _could_ steadi us. It wa the idea, the second movement, that 
led me straight out, as I may say, of the inner chamber of my dread. I 
could take the air in the court, at least, and there mrs. grose could 
join me. perfectli can I recal now the particular way strength came to 
me befor we separ for the night. We had gone over and over everi 
featur of what I had seen. 

“he wa look for someon else, you say—someon who wa not you?” 

“he wa look for littl miles.” A portent clear now possess 
me. “_that’s_ whom he wa look for.” 

“but how do you know?” 

“I know, I know, I know!” My exalt grew. “and _you_ know, my 
dear!” 

she didn’t deni this, but I required, I felt, not even so much tell 
as that. she resum in a moment, at ani rate: “what if _he_ should see 
him?” 

“littl miles? that’ what he wants!” 

she look immens scare again. “the child?” 

“heaven forbid! the man. He want to appear to _them_.” that he might 
wa an aw conception, and yet, somehow, I could keep it at bay; 
which, moreover, as we linger there, wa what I succeed in 
practic proving. I had an absolut certainti that I should see 
again what I had alreadi seen, but someth within me said that by 
offer myself brave as the sole subject of such experience, by 
accepting, by inviting, by surmount it all, I should serv as an 
expiatori victim and guard the tranquil of my companions. the 
children, in especial, I should thu fenc about and absolut save. I 
recal one of the last thing I said that night to mrs. grose. 

“it doe strike me that my pupil have never mentioned—” 

she look at me hard as I musingli pull up. “hi have been here 
and the time they were with him?” 

“the time they were with him, and hi name, hi presence, hi history, 
in ani way.” 

“oh, the littl ladi doesn’t remember. she never heard or knew.” 

“the circumst of hi death?” I thought with some intensity. 
“perhap not. but mile would remember—mil would know.” 

“ah, don’t tri him!” broke from mrs. grose. 

I return her the look she had given me. “don’t be afraid.” I 
continu to think. “it _is_ rather odd.” 

“that he ha never spoken of him?” 

“never by the least allusion. and you tell me they were ‘great 
friends’?” 

“oh, it wasn’t _him!_” mrs. grose with emphasi declared. “it wa 
quint’ own fancy. To play with him, I mean—to spoil him.” she paus a 
moment; then she added: “quint wa much too free.” 

thi gave me, straight from my vision of hi face—_such_ a face!—a 
sudden sick of disgust. “too free with _my_ boy?” 

“too free with everyone!” 

I forbore, for the moment, to analyz thi descript further than by 
the reflect that a part of it appli to sever of the member of 
the household, of the half-dozen maid and men who were still of our 
small colony. but there wa everything, for our apprehension, in the 
lucki fact that no discomfort legend, no perturb of scullions, 
had ever, within anyone’ memori attach to the kind old place. It had 
neither bad name nor ill fame, and mrs. grose, most apparently, onli 
desir to cling to me and to quak in silence. I even put her, the 
veri last thing of all, to the test. It wa when, at midnight, she had 
her hand on the schoolroom door to take leave. “I have it from you 
then—for it’ of great importance—that he wa definit and admittedli 
bad?” 

“oh, not admittedly. _i_ knew it—but the master didn’t.” 

“and you never told him?” 

“well, he didn’t like tale-bearing—h hate complaints. He wa terribl 
short with anyth of that kind, and if peopl were all right to 
_him_—” 

“he wouldn’t be bother with more?” thi squar well enough with my 
impress of him: he wa not a trouble-lov gentleman, nor so veri 
particular perhap about some of the compani _he_ kept. all the same, I 
press my interlocutress. “I promis you _i_ would have told!” 

she felt my discrimination. “I daresay I wa wrong. but, really, I wa 
afraid.” 

“afraid of what?” 

“of thing that man could do. quint wa so clever—h wa so deep.” 

I took thi in still more than, probably, I showed. “you weren’t afraid 
of anyth else? not of hi effect—?” 

“hi effect?” she repeat with a face of anguish and wait while I 
faltered. 

“on innoc littl preciou lives. they were in your charge.” 

“no, they were not in mine!” she roundli and distress returned. 
“the master believ in him and place him here becaus he wa suppos 
not to be well and the countri air so good for him. So he had 
everyth to say. yes”—sh let me have it—“even about _them_.” 

“them—that creature?” I had to smother a kind of howl. “and you could 
bear it!” 

“no. I couldn’t—and I can’t now!” and the poor woman burst into tears. 

A rigid control, from the next day, was, as I have said, to follow 
them; yet how often and how passionately, for a week, we came back 
togeth to the subject! much as we had discuss it that sunday night, 
I was, in the immedi later hour in especial—for it may be imagin 
whether I slept—stil haunt with the shadow of someth she had not 
told me. I myself had kept back nothing, but there wa a word mrs. 
grose had kept back. I wa sure, moreover, by morning, that thi wa 
not from a failur of frankness, but becaus on everi side there were 
fears. It seem to me indeed, in retrospect, that by the time the 
morrow’ sun wa high I had restlessli read into the fact befor us 
almost all the mean they were to receiv from subsequ and more 
cruel occurrences. what they gave me abov all wa just the sinist 
figur of the live man—th dead one would keep awhile!—and of the 
month he had continu pass at bly, which, ad up, made a 
formid stretch. the limit of thi evil time had arriv onli when, 
on the dawn of a winter’ morning, peter quint wa found, by a labor 
go to earli work, stone dead on the road from the village: a 
catastroph explained—superfici at least—bi a visibl wound to hi 
head; such a wound as might have been produced—and as, on the final 
evidence, _had_ been—bi a fatal slip, in the dark and after leav the 
public house, on the steepish ici slope, a wrong path altogether, at 
the bottom of which he lay. the ici slope, the turn mistaken at night 
and in liquor, account for much—practically, in the end and after the 
inquest and boundless chatter, for everything; but there had been 
matter in hi life—strang passag and perils, secret disorders, 
vice more than suspected—that would have account for a good deal 
more. 

I scarc know how to put my stori into word that shall be a credibl 
pictur of my state of mind; but I wa in these day liter abl to 
find a joy in the extraordinari flight of heroism the occas demand 
of me. I now saw that I had been ask for a servic admir and 
difficult; and there would be a great in let it be seen—oh, in 
the right quarter!—that I could succeed where mani anoth girl might 
have failed. It wa an immens help to me—i confess I rather applaud 
myself as I look back!—that I saw my servic so strongli and so simply. 
I wa there to protect and defend the littl creatur in the world the 
most bereav and the most lovable, the appeal of whose helpless 
had suddenli becom onli too explicit, a deep, constant ach of one’ 
own commit heart. We were cut off, really, together; we were unit 
in our danger. they had noth but me, and i—well, I had _them_. It 
wa in short a magnific chance. thi chanc present itself to me 
in an imag richli material. I wa a screen—i wa to stand befor them. 
the more I saw, the less they would. I began to watch them in a stifl 
suspense, a disguis excit that might well, had it continu too 
long, have turn to someth like madness. what save me, as I now 
see, wa that it turn to someth els altogether. It didn’t last as 
suspense—it wa supersed by horribl proofs. proofs, I say, yes—from 
the moment I realli took hold. 

thi moment date from an afternoon hour that I happen to spend in 
the ground with the younger of my pupil alone. We had left mile 
indoors, on the red cushion of a deep window seat; he had wish to 
finish a book, and I had been glad to encourag a purpos so laudabl 
in a young man whose onli defect wa an occasion excess of the 
restless. hi sister, on the contrary, had been alert to come out, and 
I stroll with her half an hour, seek the shade, for the sun wa 
still high and the day except warm. I wa awar afresh, with 
her, as we went, of how, like her brother, she contrived—it wa the 
charm thing in both children—to let me alon without appear to 
drop me and to accompani me without appear to surround. they were 
never importun and yet never listless. My attent to them all 
realli went to see them amus themselv immens without me: thi 
wa a spectacl they seem activ to prepar and that engag me as 
an activ admirer. I walk in a world of their invention—they had no 
occas whatev to draw upon mine; so that my time wa taken onli 
with being, for them, some remark person or thing that the game of 
the moment requir and that wa merely, thank to my superior, my 
exalt stamp, a happi and highli distinguish sinecure. I forget what 
I wa on the present occasion; I onli rememb that I wa someth 
veri import and veri quiet and that flora wa play veri hard. We 
were on the edg of the lake, and, as we had late begun geography, 
the lake wa the sea of azof. 

suddenly, in these circumstances, I becam awar that, on the other 
side of the sea of azof, we had an interest spectator. the way thi 
knowledg gather in me wa the strangest thing in the world—th 
strangest, that is, except the veri much stranger in which it quickli 
merg itself. I had sat down with a piec of work—for I wa someth 
or other that could sit—on the old stone bench which overlook the 
pond; and in thi posit I began to take in with certitude, and yet 
without direct vision, the presence, at a distance, of a third person. 
the old trees, the thick shrubbery, made a great and pleasant shade, 
but it wa all suffus with the bright of the hot, still hour. 
there wa no ambigu in anything; none whatever, at least, in the 
convict I from one moment to anoth found myself form as to what 
I should see straight befor me and across the lake as a consequ of 
rais my eyes. they were attach at thi junctur to the stitch 
in which I wa engaged, and I can feel onc more the spasm of my effort 
not to move them till I should so have steadi myself as to be abl to 
make up my mind what to do. there wa an alien object in view—a figur 
whose right of presenc I instantly, passion questioned. I 
recollect count over perfectli the possibilities, remind myself 
that noth wa more natural, for instance, then the appear of one 
of the men about the place, or even of a messenger, a postman, or a 
tradesman’ boy, from the village. that remind had as littl effect 
on my practic certitud as I wa conscious—stil even without 
looking—of it have upon the charact and attitud of our visitor. 
noth wa more natur than that these thing should be the other 
thing that they absolut were not. 

Of the posit ident of the apparit I would assur myself as 
soon as the small clock of my courag should have tick out the right 
second; meanwhile, with an effort that wa alreadi sharp enough, I 
transfer my eye straight to littl flora, who, at the moment, wa 
about ten yard away. My heart had stood still for an instant with the 
wonder and terror of the question whether she too would see; and I held 
my breath while I wait for what a cri from her, what some sudden 
innoc sign either of interest or of alarm, would tell me. I waited, 
but noth came; then, in the first place—and there is someth more 
dire in this, I feel, than in anyth I have to relate—i wa 
determin by a sens that, within a minute, all sound from her had 
previous dropped; and, in the second, by the circumst that, also 
within the minute, she had, in her play, turn her back to the water. 
thi wa her attitud when I at last look at her—look with the 
confirm convict that we were still, together, under direct 
person notice. she had pick up a small flat piec of wood, which 
happen to have in it a littl hole that had evid suggest to 
her the idea of stick in anoth fragment that might figur as a 
mast and make the thing a boat. thi second morsel, as I watch her, 
she wa veri markedli and intent attempt to tighten in it place. 
My apprehens of what she wa do sustain me so that after some 
second I felt I wa readi for more. then I again shift my eyes—i 
face what I had to face. 


vii 

I got hold of mrs. grose as soon after thi as I could; and I can give 
no intellig account of how I fought out the interval. yet I still 
hear myself cri as I fairli threw myself into her arms: “they 
_know_—it’ too monstrous: they know, they know!” 

“and what on earth—?” I felt her incredul as she held me. 

“why, all that _we_ know—and heaven know what els besides!” then, as 
she releas me, I made it out to her, made it out perhap onli now 
with full coher even to myself. “two hour ago, in the garden”—i 
could scarc articulate—“flora _saw!_” 

mrs. grose took it as she might have taken a blow in the stomach. “she 
ha told you?” she panted. 

“not a word—that’ the horror. she kept it to herself! the child of 
eight, _that_ child!” unutter still, for me, wa the stupefact 
of it. 

mrs. grose, of course, could onli gape the wider. “then how do you 
know?” 

“I wa there—i saw with my eyes: saw that she wa perfectli aware.” 

“do you mean awar of _him?_” 

“no—of _her_.” I wa consciou as I spoke that I look prodigi 
things, for I got the slow reflect of them in my companion’ face. 
“anoth person—thi time; but a figur of quit as unmistak horror 
and evil: a woman in black, pale and dreadful—with such an air also, 
and such a face!—on the other side of the lake. I wa there with the 
child—quiet for the hour; and in the midst of it she came.” 

“came how—from where?” 

“from where they come from! she just appear and stood there—but not 
so near.” 

“and without come nearer?” 

“oh, for the effect and the feeling, she might have been as close as 
you!” 

My friend, with an odd impulse, fell back a step. “wa she someon 
you’v never seen?” 

“yes. but someon the child has. someon _you_ have.” then, to show how 
I had thought it all out: “mi predecessor—th one who died.” 

“miss jessel?” 

“miss jessel. you don’t believ me?” I pressed. 

she turn right and left in her distress. “how can you be sure?” 

thi drew from me, in the state of my nerves, a flash of impatience. 
“then ask flora—_she’s_ sure!” but I had no sooner spoken than I caught 
myself up. “no, for god’ sake, _don’t!_ she’ll say she isn’t—she’l 
lie!” 

mrs. grose wa not too bewild instinct to protest. “ah, how 
_can_ you?” 

“becaus i’m clear. flora doesn’t want me to know.” 

“it’ onli then to spare you.” 

“no, no—ther are depths, depths! the more I go over it, the more I see 
in it, and the more I see in it, the more I fear. I don’t know what I 
_don’t_ see—what I _don’t_ fear!” 

mrs. grose tri to keep up with me. “you mean you’r afraid of see 
her again?” 

“oh, no; that’ nothing—now!” then I explained. “it’ of _not_ see 
her.” 

but my companion onli look wan. “I don’t understand you.” 

“why, it’ that the child may keep it up—and that the child assuredli 
_will_—without my know it.” 

At the imag of thi possibl mrs. grose for a moment collapsed, yet 
present to pull herself togeth again, as if from the posit forc 
of the sens of what, should we yield an inch, there would realli be to 
give way to. “dear, dear—w must keep our heads! and after all, if she 
doesn’t mind it—!” she even tri a grim joke. “perhap she like it!” 

“like _such_ things—a scrap of an infant!” 

“isn’t it just a proof of her bless innocence?” my friend brave 
inquired. 

she brought me, for the instant, almost round. “oh, we must clutch at 
_that_—w must cling to it! If it isn’t a proof of what you say, it’ a 
proof of—god know what! for the woman’ a horror of horrors.” 

mrs. grose, at this, fix her eye a minut on the ground; then at 
last rais them, “tell me how you know,” she said. 

“then you admit it’ what she was?” I cried. 

“tell me how you know,” my friend simpli repeated. 

“know? By see her! By the way she looked.” 

“at you, do you mean—so wickedly?” 

“dear me, no—i could have born that. she gave me never a glance. she 
onli fix the child.” 

mrs. grose tri to see it. “fix her?” 

“ah, with such aw eyes!” 

she stare at mine as if they might realli have resembl them. “do you 
mean of dislike?” 

“god help us, no. Of someth much worse.” 

“wors than dislike?”—thi left her inde at a loss. 

“with a determination—indescribable. with a kind of furi of intention.” 

I made her turn pale. “intention?” 

“to get hold of her.” mrs. grose—h eye just linger on mine—gav a 
shudder and walk to the window; and while she stood there look out 
I complet my statement. “_that’s_ what flora knows.” 

after a littl she turn round. “the person wa in black, you say?” 

“in mourning—rath poor, almost shabby. but—yes—with extraordinari 
beauty.” I now recogn to what I had at last, stroke by stroke, 
brought the victim of my confidence, for she quit visibl weigh 
this. “oh, handsome—very, very,” I insisted; “wonder handsome. but 
infamous.” 

she slowli came back to me. “miss jessel—_was_ infamous.” she onc more 
took my hand in both her own, hold it as tight as if to fortifi me 
against the increas of alarm I might draw from thi disclosure. “they 
were both infamous,” she final said. 

so, for a little, we face it onc more together; and I found 
absolut a degre of help in see it now so straight. “I 
appreciate,” I said, “the great decenc of your not have hitherto 
spoken; but the time ha certainli come to give me the whole thing.” 
she appear to assent to this, but still onli in silence; see which 
I went on: “I must have it now. Of what did she die? come, there wa 
someth between them.” 

“there wa everything.” 

“in spite of the difference—?” 

“oh, of their rank, their condition”—sh brought it woefulli out. 
“_she_ wa a lady.” 

I turn it over; I again saw. “yes—sh wa a lady.” 

“and he so dread below,” said mrs. grose. 

I felt that I doubtless needn’t press too hard, in such company, on the 
place of a servant in the scale; but there wa noth to prevent an 
accept of my companion’ own measur of my predecessor’ abasement. 
there wa a way to deal with that, and I dealt; the more readili for my 
full vision—on the evidence—of our employer’ late clever, good-look 
“own” man; impudent, assured, spoiled, depraved. “the fellow wa a 
hound.” 

mrs. grose consid as if it were perhap a littl a case for a sens 
of shades. “i’v never seen one like him. He did what he wished.” 

“with _her?_” 

“with them all.” 

It wa as if now in my friend’ own eye miss jessel had again 
appeared. I seem at ani rate, for an instant, to see their evoc 
of her as distinctli as I had seen her by the pond; and I brought out 
with decision: “it must have been also what _she_ wished!” 

mrs. grose’ face signifi that it had been indeed, but she said at 
the same time: “poor woman—sh paid for it!” 

“then you do know what she die of?” I asked. 

“no—i know nothing. I want not to know; I wa glad enough I didn’t; 
and I thank heaven she wa well out of this!” 

“yet you had, then, your idea—” 

“of her real reason for leaving? oh, yes—a to that. she couldn’t have 
stayed. fanci it here—for a governess! and afterward I imagined—and I 
still imagine. and what I imagin is dreadful.” 

“not so dread as what _i_ do,” I replied; on which I must have shown 
her—a I wa inde but too conscious—a front of miser defeat. It 
brought out again all her compass for me, and at the renew touch 
of her kind my power to resist broke down. I burst, as I had, the 
other time, made her burst, into tears; she took me to her motherli 
breast, and my lament overflowed. “I don’t do it!” I sob in 
despair; “I don’t save or shield them! it’ far wors than I 
dreamed—they’r lost!” 


viii 

what I had said to mrs. grose wa true enough: there were in the matter 
I had put befor her depth and possibl that I lack resolut 
to sound; so that when we met onc more in the wonder of it we were of 
a common mind about the duti of resist to extravag fancies. We 
were to keep our head if we should keep noth else—difficult inde 
as that might be in the face of what, in our prodigi experience, wa 
least to be questioned. late that night, while the hous slept, we had 
anoth talk in my room, when she went all the way with me as to it 
be beyond doubt that I had seen exactli what I had seen. To hold her 
perfectli in the pinch of that, I found I had onli to ask her how, if I 
had “made it up,” I came to be abl to give, of each of the person 
appear to me, a pictur disclosing, to the last detail, their 
special marks—a portrait on the exhibit of which she had instantli 
recogn and name them. she wish of course—smal blame to her!—to 
sink the whole subject; and I wa quick to assur her that my own 
interest in it had now violent taken the form of a search for the way 
to escap from it. I encount her on the ground of a probabl 
that with recurrence—for recurr we took for granted—i should get 
use to my danger, distinctli profess that my person exposur had 
suddenli becom the least of my discomforts. It wa my new suspicion 
that wa intolerable; and yet even to thi complic the later hour 
of the day had brought a littl ease. 

On leav her, after my first outbreak, I had of cours return to my 
pupils, associ the right remedi for my dismay with that sens of 
their charm which I had alreadi found to be a thing I could posit 
cultiv and which had never fail me yet. I had simply, in other 
words, plung afresh into flora’ special societi and there becom 
aware—it wa almost a luxury!—that she could put her littl consciou 
hand straight upon the spot that ached. she had look at me in sweet 
specul and then had accus me to my face of have “cried.” I had 
suppos I had brush away the ugli signs: but I could literally—for 
the time, at all events—rejoice, under thi fathomless charity, that 
they had not entir disappeared. To gaze into the depth of blue of 
the child’ eye and pronounc their loveli a trick of prematur 
cun wa to be guilti of a cynic in prefer to which I 
natur prefer to abjur my judgment and, so far as might be, my 
agitation. I couldn’t abjur for mere want to, but I could repeat 
to mrs. grose—a I did there, over and over, in the small hours—that 
with their voic in the air, their pressur on one’ heart, and their 
fragrant face against one’ cheek, everyth fell to the ground but 
their incapac and their beauty. It wa a piti that, somehow, to 
settl thi onc for all, I had equal to re-enumer the sign of 
subtleti that, in the afternoon, by the lake had made a miracl of my 
show of self-possession. It wa a piti to be oblig to reinvestig 
the certitud of the moment itself and repeat how it had come to me as 
a revel that the inconceiv communion I then surpris wa a 
matter, for either party, of habit. It wa a piti that I should have 
had to quaver out again the reason for my not having, in my delusion, 
so much as question that the littl girl saw our visit even as I 
actual saw mrs. grose herself, and that she wanted, by just so much 
as she did thu see, to make me suppos she didn’t, and at the same 
time, without show anything, arriv at a guess as to whether I 
myself did! It wa a piti that I need onc more to describ the 
portent littl activ by which she sought to divert my 
attention—th percept increas of movement, the greater intens 
of play, the singing, the gabbl of nonsense, and the invit to 
romp. 

yet if I had not indulged, to prove there wa noth in it, in thi 
review, I should have miss the two or three dim element of comfort 
that still remain to me. I should not for instanc have been abl to 
assever to my friend that I wa certain—which wa so much to the 
good—that _i_ at least had not betray myself. I should not have been 
prompted, by stress of need, by desper of mind—i scarc know what 
to call it—to invok such further aid to intellig as might spring 
from push my colleagu fairli to the wall. she had told me, bit by 
bit, under pressure, a great deal; but a small shifti spot on the wrong 
side of it all still sometim brush my brow like the wing of a bat; 
and I rememb how on thi occasion—for the sleep hous and the 
concentr alik of our danger and our watch seem to help—i felt 
the import of give the last jerk to the curtain. “I don’t believ 
anyth so horrible,” I recollect saying; “no, let us put it 
definitely, my dear, that I don’t. but if I did, you know, there’ a 
thing I should requir now, just without spare you the least bit 
more—oh, not a scrap, come!—to get out of you. what wa it you had in 
mind when, in our distress, befor mile came back, over the letter 
from hi school, you said, under my insistence, that you didn’t pretend 
for him that he had not liter _ever_ been ‘bad’? He ha _not_ 
liter ‘ever,’ in these week that I myself have live with him and 
so close watch him; he ha been an imperturb littl prodigi of 
delightful, lovabl goodness. therefor you might perfectli have made 
the claim for him if you had not, as it happened, seen an except to 
take. what wa your exception, and to what passag in your person 
observ of him did you refer?” 

It wa a dread auster inquiry, but leviti wa not our note, and, 
at ani rate, befor the gray dawn admonish us to separ I had got 
my answer. what my friend had had in mind prove to be immens to the 
purpose. It wa neither more nor less than the circumst that for a 
period of sever month quint and the boy had been perpetu 
together. It wa in fact the veri appropri truth that she had 
ventur to critic the propriety, to hint at the incongruity, of so 
close an alliance, and even to go so far on the subject as a frank 
overtur to miss jessel. miss jessel had, with a most strang manner, 
request her to mind her business, and the good woman had, on this, 
directli approach littl miles. what she had said to him, sinc I 
pressed, wa that _she_ like to see young gentlemen not forget their 
station. 

I press again, of course, at this. “you remind him that quint wa 
onli a base menial?” 

“a you might say! and it wa hi answer, for one thing, that wa bad.” 

“and for anoth thing?” I waited. “he repeat your word to quint?” 

“no, not that. it’ just what he _wouldn’t!_” she could still impress 
upon me. “I wa sure, at ani rate,” she added, “that he didn’t. but he 
deni certain occasions.” 

“what occasions?” 

“when they had been about togeth quit as if quint were hi tutor—and 
a veri grand one—and miss jessel onli for the littl lady. when he had 
gone off with the fellow, I mean, and spent hour with him.” 

“he then prevar about it—h said he hadn’t?” her assent wa clear 
enough to caus me to add in a moment: “I see. He lied.” 

“oh!” mrs. grose mumbled. thi wa a suggest that it didn’t matter; 
which inde she back up by a further remark. “you see, after all, 
miss jessel didn’t mind. she didn’t forbid him.” 

I considered. “did he put that to you as a justification?” 

At thi she drop again. “no, he never spoke of it.” 

“never mention her in connect with quint?” 

she saw, visibl flushing, where I wa come out. “well, he didn’t 
show anything. He denied,” she repeated; “he denied.” 

lord, how I press her now! “so that you could see he knew what wa 
between the two wretches?” 

“I don’t know—i don’t know!” the poor woman groaned. 

“you do know, you dear thing,” I replied; “onli you haven’t my dread 
bold of mind, and you keep back, out of timid and modesti and 
delicacy, even the impress that, in the past, when you had, without 
my aid, to flounder about in silence, most of all made you miserable. 
but I shall get it out of you yet! there wa someth in the boy that 
suggest to you,” I continued, “that he cover and conceal their 
relation.” 

“oh, he couldn’t prevent—” 

“your learn the truth? I daresay! but, heavens,” I fell, with 
vehemence, athinking, “what it show that they must, to that extent, 
have succeed in make of him!” 

“ah, noth that’ not nice _now!_” mrs. grose lugubri pleaded. 

“I don’t wonder you look queer,” I persisted, “when I mention to 
you the letter from hi school!” 

“I doubt if I look as queer as you!” she retort with home force. 
“and if he wa so bad then as that come to, how is he such an angel 
now?” 

“yes, indeed—and if he wa a fiend at school! how, how, how? well,” I 
said in my torment, “you must put it to me again, but I shall not be 
abl to tell you for some days. only, put it to me again!” I cri in a 
way that made my friend stare. “there are direct in which I must 
not for the present let myself go.” meanwhil I return to her first 
example—th one to which she had just previous referred—of the boy’ 
happi capac for an occasion slip. “if quint—on your remonstr 
at the time you speak of—wa a base menial, one of the thing mile 
said to you, I find myself guessing, wa that you were another.” again 
her admiss wa so adequ that I continued: “and you forgav him 
that?” 

“wouldn’t _you?_” 

“oh, yes!” and we exchang there, in the stillness, a sound of the 
oddest amusement. then I went on: “at all events, while he wa with the 
man—” 

“miss flora wa with the woman. It suit them all!” 

It suit me, too, I felt, onli too well; by which I mean that it 
suit exactli the particularli deadli view I wa in the veri act of 
forbid myself to entertain. but I so far succeed in check the 
express of thi view that I will throw, just here, no further light 
on it than may be offer by the mention of my final observ to 
mrs. grose. “hi have lie and been impud are, I confess, less 
engag specimen than I had hope to have from you of the outbreak in 
him of the littl natur man. still,” I mused, “they must do, for they 
make me feel more than ever that I must watch.” 

It made me blush, the next minute, to see in my friend’ face how much 
more unreservedli she had forgiven him than her anecdot struck me as 
present to my own tender an occas for doing. thi came out 
when, at the schoolroom door, she quit me. “sure you don’t accus 
_him_—” 

“of carri on an intercours that he conceal from me? ah, rememb 
that, until further evidence, I now accus nobody.” then, befor 
shut her out to go, by anoth passage, to her own place, “I must 
just wait,” I wound up. 


IX 

I wait and waited, and the days, as they elapsed, took someth from 
my consternation. A veri few of them, in fact, passing, in constant 
sight of my pupils, without a fresh incident, suffic to give to 
grievou fanci and even to odiou memori a kind of brush of the 
sponge. I have spoken of the surrend to their extraordinari childish 
grace as a thing I could activ cultivate, and it may be imagin if 
I neglect now to address myself to thi sourc for whatev it would 
yield. stranger than I can express, certainly, wa the effort to 
struggl against my new lights; it would doubtless have been, however, 
a greater tension still had it not been so frequent successful. I 
use to wonder how my littl charg could help guess that I thought 
strang thing about them; and the circumst that these thing onli 
made them more interest wa not by itself a direct aid to keep 
them in the dark. I trembl lest they should see that they _were_ so 
immens more interesting. put thing at the worst, at all events, 
as in medit I so often did, ani cloud of their innoc could 
onli be—blameless and foredoom as they were—a reason the more for 
take risks. there were moment when, by an irresist impulse, I 
found myself catch them up and press them to my heart. As soon as 
I had done so I use to say to myself: “what will they think of that? 
doesn’t it betray too much?” It would have been easi to get into a sad, 
wild tangl about how much I might betray; but the real account, I 
feel, of the hour of peac that I could still enjoy wa that the 
immedi charm of my companion wa a beguil still effect even 
under the shadow of the possibl that it wa studied. for if it 
occur to me that I might occasion excit suspicion by the littl 
outbreak of my sharper passion for them, so too I rememb wonder 
if I mightn’t see a queer in the traceabl increas of their own 
demonstrations. 

they were at thi period extravagantli and preternatur fond of me; 
which, after all, I could reflect, wa no more than a grace respons 
in children perpetu bow over and hugged. the homag of which they 
were so lavish succeeded, in truth, for my nerves, quit as well as if 
I never appear to myself, as I may say, liter to catch them at a 
purpos in it. they had never, I think, want to do so mani thing for 
their poor protectress; I mean—though they got their lesson better and 
better, which wa natur what would pleas her most—in the way of 
diverting, entertaining, surpris her; read her passages, tell 
her stories, act her charades, pounc out at her, in disguises, as 
anim and histor characters, and abov all astonish her by the 
“pieces” they had secretli got by heart and could intermin recite. 
I should never get to the bottom—wer I to let myself go even now—of 
the prodigi privat commentary, all under still more privat 
correction, with which, in these days, I overscor their full hours. 
they had shown me from the first a facil for everything, a gener 
faculti which, take a fresh start, achiev remark flights. they 
got their littl task as if they love them, and indulged, from the 
mere exuber of the gift, in the most unimpos littl miracl of 
memory. they not onli pop out at me as tiger and as romans, but as 
shakespeareans, astronomers, and navigators. thi wa so singularli the 
case that it had presum much to do with the fact as to which, at 
the present day, I am at a loss for a differ explanation: I allud 
to my unnatur composur on the subject of anoth school for miles. 
what I rememb is that I wa content not, for the time, to open the 
question, and that content must have sprung from the sens of hi 
perpetu strike show of cleverness. He wa too clever for a bad 
governess, for a parson’ daughter, to spoil; and the strangest if not 
the brightest thread in the pensiv embroideri I just spoke of wa the 
impress I might have got, if I had dare to work it out, that he wa 
under some influenc oper in hi small intellectu life as a 
tremend incitement. 

If it wa easi to reflect, however, that such a boy could postpon 
school, it wa at least as mark that for such a boy to have been 
“kick out” by a schoolmast wa a mystif without end. let me 
add that in their compani now—and I wa care almost never to be out 
of it—i could follow no scent veri far. We live in a cloud of music 
and love and success and privat theatricals. the music sens in each 
of the children wa of the quickest, but the elder in especi had a 
marvel knack of catch and repeating. the schoolroom piano broke 
into all gruesom fancies; and when that fail there were 
confabul in corners, with a sequel of one of them go out in 
the highest spirit in order to “come in” as someth new. I had had 
brother myself, and it wa no revel to me that littl girl could 
be slavish idolat of littl boys. what surpass everyth wa that 
there wa a littl boy in the world who could have for the inferior 
age, sex, and intellig so fine a consideration. they were 
extraordinarili at one, and to say that they never either quarrel or 
complain is to make the note of prais coars for their qualiti of 
sweetness. sometimes, indeed, when I drop into coarseness, I perhap 
came across trace of littl understand between them by which one 
of them should keep me occupi while the other slip away. there is 
a _naïf_ side, I suppose, in all diplomacy; but if my pupil practic 
upon me, it wa sure with the minimum of grossness. It wa all in the 
other quarter that, after a lull, the gross broke out. 

I find that I realli hang back; but I must take my plunge. In go on 
with the record of what wa hideou at bly, I not onli challeng the 
most liber faith—for which I littl care; but—and thi is anoth 
matter—i renew what I myself suffered, I again push my way through it 
to the end. there came suddenli an hour after which, as I look back, 
the affair seem to me to have been all pure suffering; but I have at 
least reach the heart of it, and the straightest road out is 
doubtless to advance. one evening—with noth to lead up or to prepar 
it—i felt the cold touch of the impress that had breath on me the 
night of my arriv and which, much lighter then, as I have mentioned, 
I should probabl have made littl of in memori had my subsequ 
sojourn been less agitated. I had not gone to bed; I sat read by a 
coupl of candles. there wa a room of old book at bly—last-centuri 
fiction, some of it, which, to the extent of a distinctli deprec 
renown, but never to so much as that of a stray specimen, had reach 
the sequest home and appeal to the unavow curios of my 
youth. I rememb that the book I had in my hand wa fielding’ 
_amelia_; also that I wa wholli awake. I recal further both a gener 
convict that it wa horribl late and a particular object to 
look at my watch. I figure, finally, that the white curtain draping, 
in the fashion of those days, the head of flora’ littl bed, shrouded, 
as I had assur myself long before, the perfect of childish rest. I 
recollect in short that, though I wa deepli interest in my author, I 
found myself, at the turn of a page and with hi spell all scattered, 
look straight up from him and hard at the door of my room. there wa 
a moment dure which I listened, remind of the faint sens I had 
had, the first night, of there be someth undefin astir in the 
house, and note the soft breath of the open casement just move the 
half-drawn blind. then, with all the mark of a deliber that must 
have seem magnific had there been anyon to admir it, I laid down 
my book, rose to my feet, and, take a candle, went straight out of 
the room and, from the passage, on which my light made littl 
impression, noiselessli close and lock the door. 

I can say now neither what determin nor what guid me, but I went 
straight along the lobby, hold my candl high, till I came within 
sight of the tall window that presid over the great turn of the 
staircase. At thi point I precipit found myself awar of three 
things. they were practic simultaneous, yet they had flash of 
succession. My candle, under a bold flourish, went out, and I 
perceived, by the uncov window, that the yield dusk of earliest 
morn render it unnecessary. without it, the next instant, I saw 
that there wa someon on the stair. I speak of sequences, but I 
requir no laps of second to stiffen myself for a third encount 
with quint. the apparit had reach the land halfway up and wa 
therefor on the spot nearest the window, where at sight of me, it 
stop short and fix me exactli as it had fix me from the tower 
and from the garden. He knew me as well as I knew him; and so, in the 
cold, faint twilight, with a glimmer in the high glass and anoth on 
the polish of the oak stair below, we face each other in our common 
intensity. He wa absolutely, on thi occasion, a living, detestable, 
danger presence. but that wa not the wonder of wonders; I reserv 
thi distinct for quit anoth circumstance: the circumst that 
dread had unmistak quit me and that there wa noth in me 
there that didn’t meet and measur him. 

I had plenti of anguish after that extraordinari moment, but I had, 
thank god, no terror. and he knew I had not—i found myself at the end 
of an instant magnific awar of this. I felt, in a fierc rigor of 
confidence, that if I stood my ground a minut I should cease—for the 
time, at least—to have him to reckon with; and dure the minute, 
accordingly, the thing wa as human and hideou as a real interview: 
hideou just becaus it _was_ human, as human as to have met alone, in 
the small hours, in a sleep house, some enemy, some adventurer, some 
criminal. It wa the dead silenc of our long gaze at such close 
quarter that gave the whole horror, huge as it was, it onli note of 
the unnatural. If I had met a murder in such a place and at such an 
hour, we still at least would have spoken. someth would have passed, 
in life, between us; if noth had passed, one of us would have moved. 
the moment wa so prolong that it would have taken but littl more to 
make me doubt if even _i_ were in life. I can’t express what follow 
it save by say that the silenc itself—which wa inde in a manner 
an attest of my strength—becam the element into which I saw the 
figur disappear; in which I definit saw it turn as I might have 
seen the low wretch to which it had onc belong turn on receipt of an 
order, and pass, with my eye on the villain back that no hunch 
could have more disfigured, straight down the staircas and into the 
dark in which the next bend wa lost. 


X 

I remain awhil at the top of the stair, but with the effect 
present of understand that when my visitor had gone, he had gone: 
then I return to my room. the foremost thing I saw there by the light 
of the candl I had left burn wa that flora’ littl bed wa empty; 
and on thi I caught my breath with all the terror that, five minut 
before, I had been abl to resist. I dash at the place in which I had 
left her lie and over which (for the small silk counterpan and the 
sheet were disarranged) the white curtain had been deceivingli pull 
forward; then my step, to my unutter relief, produc an answer 
sound: I perceiv an agit of the window blind, and the child, 
duck down, emerg rosili from the other side of it. she stood there 
in so much of her candor and so littl of her nightgown, with her pink 
bare feet and the golden glow of her curls. she look intens grave, 
and I had never had such a sens of lose an advantag acquir (the 
thrill of which had just been so prodigious) as on my conscious 
that she address me with a reproach. “you naughty: where _have_ you 
been?”—instead of challeng her own irregular I found myself 
arraign and explaining. she herself explained, for that matter, with 
the loveliest, eagerest simplicity. she had known suddenly, as she lay 
there, that I wa out of the room, and had jump up to see what had 
becom of me. I had dropped, with the joy of her reappearance, back 
into my chair—feel then, and then only, a littl faint; and she had 
patter straight over to me, thrown herself upon my knee, given 
herself to be held with the flame of the candl full in the wonder 
littl face that wa still flush with sleep. I rememb close my 
eye an instant, yieldingly, consciously, as befor the excess of 
someth beauti that shone out of the blue of her own. “you were 
look for me out of the window?” I said. “you thought I might be 
walk in the grounds?” 

“well, you know, I thought someon was”—sh never blanch as she 
smile out that at me. 

oh, how I look at her now! “and did you see anyone?” 

“ah, _no!_” she returned, almost with the full privileg of childish 
inconsequence, resentfully, though with a long sweet in her littl 
drawl of the negative. 

At that moment, in the state of my nerves, I absolut believ she 
lied; and if I onc more close my eye it wa befor the dazzl of the 
three or four possibl way in which I might take thi up. one of 
these, for a moment, tempt me with such singular intens that, to 
withstand it, I must have grip my littl girl with a spasm that, 
wonderfully, she submit to without a cri or a sign of fright. whi 
not break out at her on the spot and have it all over?—g it to her 
straight in her love littl light face? “you see, you see, you 
_know_ that you do and that you alreadi quit suspect I believ it; 
therefore, whi not frankli confess it to me, so that we may at least 
live with it togeth and learn perhaps, in the strang of our 
fate, where we are and what it means?” thi solicit dropped, alas, 
as it came: if I could immedi have succumb to it I might have 
spare myself—well, you’ll see what. instead of succumb I sprang 
again to my feet, look at her bed, and took a helpless middl way. 
“whi did you pull the curtain over the place to make me think you were 
still there?” 

flora lumin considered; after which, with her littl divin smile: 
“becaus I don’t like to frighten you!” 

“but if I had, by your idea, gone out—?” 

she absolut declin to be puzzled; she turn her eye to the flame 
of the candl as if the question were as irrelevant, or at ani rate as 
impersonal, as mrs. marcet or nine-times-nine. “oh, but you know,” she 
quit adequ answered, “that you might come back, you dear, and 
that you _have!_” and after a little, when she had got into bed, I had, 
for a long time, by almost sit on her to hold her hand, to prove 
that I recogn the pertin of my return. 

you may imagin the gener complexion, from that moment, of my nights. 
I repeatedli sat up till I didn’t know when; I select moment when my 
roommat unmistak slept, and, steal out, took noiseless turn in 
the passag and even push as far as to where I had last met quint. 
but I never met him there again; and I may as well say at onc that I 
on no other occas saw him in the house. I just missed, on the 
staircase, on the other hand, a differ adventure. look down it 
from the top I onc recogn the presenc of a woman seat on one of 
the lower step with her back present to me, her bodi half-bow and 
her head, in an attitud of woe, in her hands. I had been there but an 
instant, however, when she vanish without look round at me. I 
knew, nonetheless, exactli what dread face she had to show; and I 
wonder whether, if instead of be abov I had been below, I should 
have had, for go up, the same nerv I had late shown quint. well, 
there continu to be plenti of chanc for nerve. On the eleventh night 
after my latest encount with that gentleman—they were all number 
now—i had an alarm that peril skirt it and that indeed, from the 
particular qualiti of it unexpectedness, prove quit my sharpest 
shock. It wa precis the first night dure thi seri that, weari 
with watching, I had felt that I might again without laxiti lay myself 
down at my old hour. I slept immedi and, as I afterward knew, till 
about one o’clock; but when I woke it wa to sit straight up, as 
complet rous as if a hand had shook me. I had left a light 
burning, but it wa now out, and I felt an instant certainti that flora 
had extinguish it. thi brought me to my feet and straight, in the 
darkness, to her bed, which I found she had left. A glanc at the 
window enlighten me further, and the strike of a match complet 
the picture. 

the child had again got up—thi time blow out the taper, and had 
again, for some purpos of observ or response, squeez in behind 
the blind and wa peer out into the night. that she now saw—a she 
had not, I had satisfi myself, the previou time—wa prove to me by 
the fact that she wa disturb neither by my reillumin nor by the 
hast I made to get into slipper and into a wrap. hidden, protected, 
absorbed, she evid rest on the sill—th casement open 
forward—and gave herself up. there wa a great still moon to help her, 
and thi fact had count in my quick decision. she wa face to face 
with the apparit we had met at the lake, and could now commun 
with it as she had not then been abl to do. what I, on my side, had to 
care for was, without disturb her, to reach, from the corridor, some 
other window in the same quarter. I got to the door without her hear 
me; I got out of it, close it, and listened, from the other side, for 
some sound from her. while I stood in the passag I had my eye on her 
brother’ door, which wa but ten step off and which, indescribably, 
produc in me a renew of the strang impuls that I late spoke of 
as my temptation. what if I should go straight in and march to _his_ 
window?—what if, by risk to hi boyish bewilder a revel of 
my motive, I should throw across the rest of the mysteri the long 
halter of my boldness? 

thi thought held me suffici to make me cross to hi threshold and 
paus again. I preternatur listened; I figur to myself what might 
portent be; I wonder if hi bed were also empti and he too were 
secretli at watch. It wa a deep, soundless minute, at the end of which 
my impuls failed. He wa quiet; he might be innocent; the risk wa 
hideous; I turn away. there wa a figur in the grounds—a figur 
prowl for a sight, the visitor with whom flora wa engaged; but it 
wa not the visitor most concern with my boy. I hesit afresh, but 
on other ground and onli for a few seconds; then I had made my choice. 
there were empti room at bly, and it wa onli a question of choos 
the right one. the right one suddenli present itself to me as the 
lower one—though high abov the gardens—in the solid corner of the 
hous that I have spoken of as the old tower. thi wa a large, squar 
chamber, arrang with some state as a bedroom, the extravag size of 
which made it so inconveni that it had not for years, though kept by 
mrs. grose in exemplari order, been occupied. I had often admir it 
and I knew my way about in it; I had only, after just falter at the 
first chill gloom of it disuse, to pass across it and unbolt as 
quietli as I could one of the shutters. achiev thi transit, I 
uncov the glass without a sound and, appli my face to the pane, 
wa able, the dark without be much less than within, to see that 
I command the right direction. then I saw someth more. the moon 
made the night extraordinarili penetr and show me on the lawn a 
person, diminish by distance, who stood there motionless and as if 
fascinated, look up to where I had appeared—looking, that is, not so 
much straight at me as at someth that wa appar abov me. there 
wa clearli anoth person abov me—ther wa a person on the tower; 
but the presenc on the lawn wa not in the least what I had conceiv 
and had confid hurri to meet. the presenc on the lawn—i felt 
sick as I made it out—wa poor littl mile himself. 


XI 

It wa not till late next day that I spoke to mrs. grose; the rigor 
with which I kept my pupil in sight make it often difficult to meet 
her privately, and the more as we each felt the import of not 
provoking—on the part of the servant quit as much as on that of the 
children—ani suspicion of a secret flurri or that of a discuss of 
mysteries. I drew a great secur in thi particular from her mere 
smooth aspect. there wa noth in her fresh face to pass on to other 
my horribl confidences. she believ me, I wa sure, absolutely: if 
she hadn’t I don’t know what would have becom of me, for I couldn’t 
have born the busi alone. but she wa a magnific monument to 
the bless of a want of imagination, and if she could see in our 
littl charg noth but their beauti and amiability, their happi 
and cleverness, she had no direct commun with the sourc of my 
trouble. If they had been at all visibl blight or battered, she 
would doubtless have grown, on trace it back, haggard enough to match 
them; as matter stood, however, I could feel her, when she survey 
them, with her larg white arm fold and the habit of seren in all 
her look, thank the lord’ merci that if they were ruin the piec 
would still serve. flight of fanci gave place, in her mind, to a 
steadi firesid glow, and I had alreadi begun to perceiv how, with the 
develop of the convict that—a time went on without a public 
accident—our young thing could, after all, look out for themselves, 
she address her greatest solicitud to the sad case present by 
their instructress. that, for myself, wa a sound simplification: I 
could engag that, to the world, my face should tell no tales, but it 
would have been, in the conditions, an immens ad strain to find 
myself anxiou about hers. 

At the hour I now speak of she had join me, under pressure, on the 
terrace, where, with the laps of the season, the afternoon sun wa now 
agreeable; and we sat there togeth while, befor us, at a distance, 
but within call if we wished, the children stroll to and fro in one 
of their most manag moods. they move slowly, in unison, below us, 
over the lawn, the boy, as they went, read aloud from a storybook 
and pass hi arm round hi sister to keep her quit in touch. mrs. 
grose watch them with posit placidity; then I caught the 
suppress intellectu creak with which she conscienti turn to 
take from me a view of the back of the tapestry. I had made her a 
receptacl of lurid things, but there wa an odd recognit of my 
superiority—mi accomplish and my function—in her patienc under my 
pain. she offer her mind to my disclosur as, had I wish to mix a 
witch’ broth and propos it with assurance, she would have held out a 
larg clean saucepan. thi had becom thoroughli her attitud by the 
time that, in my recit of the event of the night, I reach the 
point of what mile had said to me when, after see him, at such a 
monstrou hour, almost on the veri spot where he happen now to be, I 
had gone down to bring him in; choos then, at the window, with a 
concentr need of not alarm the house, rather that method than a 
signal more resonant. I had left her meanwhil in littl doubt of my 
small hope of repres with success even to her actual sympathi my 
sens of the real splendor of the littl inspir with which, after 
I had got him into the house, the boy met my final articul 
challenge. As soon as I appear in the moonlight on the terrace, he 
had come to me as straight as possible; on which I had taken hi hand 
without a word and led him, through the dark spaces, up the staircas 
where quint had so hungrili hover for him, along the lobbi where I 
had listen and trembled, and so to hi forsaken room. 

not a sound, on the way, had pass between us, and I had wondered—oh, 
_how_ I had wondered!—if he were grope about in hi littl mind for 
someth plausibl and not too grotesque. It would tax hi invention, 
certainly, and I felt, thi time, over hi real embarrassment, a 
curiou thrill of triumph. It wa a sharp trap for the inscrutable! He 
couldn’t play ani longer at innocence; so how the deuc would he get 
out of it? there beat in me indeed, with the passion throb of thi 
question an equal dumb appeal as to how the deuc _i_ should. I wa 
confront at last, as never yet, with all the risk attach even now 
to sound my own horrid note. I rememb in fact that as we push 
into hi littl chamber, where the bed had not been slept in at all and 
the window, uncov to the moonlight, made the place so clear that 
there wa no need of strike a match—i rememb how I suddenli 
dropped, sank upon the edg of the bed from the forc of the idea that 
he must know how he really, as they say, “had” me. He could do what he 
liked, with all hi clever to help him, so long as I should 
continu to defer to the old tradit of the crimin of those 
caretak of the young who minist to superstit and fears. He 
“had” me indeed, and in a cleft stick; for who would ever absolv me, 
who would consent that I should go unhung, if, by the faintest tremor 
of an overture, I were the first to introduc into our perfect 
intercours an element so dire? no, no: it wa useless to attempt to 
convey to mrs. grose, just as it is scarc less so to attempt to 
suggest here, how, in our short, stiff brush in the dark, he fairli 
shook me with admiration. I wa of cours thoroughli kind and merciful; 
never, never yet had I place on hi littl shoulder hand of such 
tender as those with which, while I rest against the bed, I held 
him there well under fire. I had no altern but, in form at least, 
to put it to him. 

“you must tell me now—and all the truth. what did you go out for? what 
were you do there?” 

I can still see hi wonder smile, the white of hi beauti eyes, 
and the uncov of hi littl teeth shine to me in the dusk. “if I 
tell you why, will you understand?” My heart, at this, leap into my 
mouth. _would_ he tell me why? I found no sound on my lip to press it, 
and I wa awar of repli onli with a vague, repeated, grimac nod. 
He wa gentl itself, and while I wag my head at him he stood 
there more than ever a littl fairi prince. It wa hi bright 
inde that gave me a respite. would it be so great if he were realli 
go to tell me? “well,” he said at last, “just exactli in order that 
you should do this.” 

“do what?” 

“think me—for a change—_bad!_” I shall never forget the sweet and 
gaieti with which he brought out the word, nor how, on top of it, he 
bent forward and kiss me. It wa practic the end of everything. I 
met hi kiss and I had to make, while I fold him for a minut in my 
arms, the most stupend effort not to cry. He had given exactli the 
account of himself that permit least of my go behind it, and it 
wa onli with the effect of confirm my accept of it that, as I 
present glanc about the room, I could say— 

“then you didn’t undress at all?” 

He fairli glitter in the gloom. “not at all. I sat up and read.” 

“and when did you go down?” 

“at midnight. when i’m bad I _am_ bad!” 

“I see, I see—it’ charming. but how could you be sure I would know 
it?” 

“oh, I arrang that with flora.” hi answer rang out with a 
readiness! “she wa to get up and look out.” 

“which is what she did do.” It wa I who fell into the trap! 

“so she disturb you, and, to see what she wa look at, you also 
looked—y saw.” 

“while you,” I concurred, “caught your death in the night air!” 

He liter bloom so from thi exploit that he could afford 
radiantli to assent. “how otherwis should I have been bad enough?” he 
asked. then, after anoth embrace, the incid and our interview 
close on my recognit of all the reserv of good that, for hi 
joke, he had been abl to draw upon. 


xii 

the particular impress I had receiv prove in the morn light, I 
repeat, not quit success present to mrs. grose, though I 
reinforc it with the mention of still anoth remark that he had made 
befor we separated. “it all lie in half a dozen words,” I said to 
her, “word that realli settl the matter. ‘think, you know, what I 
_might_ do!’ He threw that off to show me how good he is. He know down 
to the ground what he ‘might’ do. that’ what he gave them a tast of 
at school.” 

“lord, you do change!” cri my friend. 

“I don’t change—i simpli make it out. the four, depend upon it, 
perpetu meet. If on either of these last night you had been with 
either child, you would clearli have understood. the more i’v watch 
and wait the more i’v felt that if there were noth els to make 
it sure it would be made so by the systemat silenc of each. _never_, 
by a slip of the tongue, have they so much as allud to either of 
their old friends, ani more than mile ha allud to hi expulsion. 
oh, yes, we may sit here and look at them, and they may show off to us 
there to their fill; but even while they pretend to be lost in their 
fairytal they’r steep in their vision of the dead restored. he’ 
not read to her,” I declared; “they’r talk of _them_—they’r 
talk horrors! I go on, I know, as if I were crazy; and it’ a wonder 
i’m not. what i’v seen would have made _you_ so; but it ha onli made 
me more lucid, made me get hold of still other things.” 

My lucid must have seem awful, but the charm creatur who were 
victim of it, pass and repass in their interlock sweetness, 
gave my colleagu someth to hold on by; and I felt how tight she 
held as, without stir in the breath of my passion, she cover them 
still with her eyes. “of what other thing have you got hold?” 

“why, of the veri thing that have delighted, fascinated, and yet, at 
bottom, as I now so strang see, mystifi and troubl me. their 
more than earthli beauty, their absolut unnatur goodness. it’ a 
game,” I went on; “it’ a polici and a fraud!” 

“on the part of littl darlings—?” 

“a yet mere love babies? yes, mad as that seems!” the veri act of 
bring it out realli help me to trace it—follow it all up and piec 
it all together. “they haven’t been good—they’v onli been absent. It 
ha been easi to live with them, becaus they’r simpli lead a life 
of their own. they’r not mine—they’r not ours. they’r hi and 
they’r hers!” 

“quint’ and that woman’s?” 

“quint’ and that woman’s. they want to get to them.” 

oh, how, at this, poor mrs. grose appear to studi them! “but for 
what?” 

“for the love of all the evil that, in those dread days, the pair 
put into them. and to pli them with that evil still, to keep up the 
work of demons, is what bring the other back.” 

“laws!” said my friend under her breath. the exclam wa homely, 
but it reveal a real accept of my further proof of what, in the 
bad time—for there had been a wors even than this!—must have occurred. 
there could have been no such justif for me as the plain assent 
of her experi to whatev depth of deprav I found credibl in 
our brace of scoundrels. It wa in obviou submiss of memori that 
she brought out after a moment: “they _were_ rascals! but what can they 
now do?” she pursued. 

“do?” I echo so loud that mile and flora, as they pass at their 
distance, paus an instant in their walk and look at us. “don’t they 
do enough?” I demand in a lower tone, while the children, have 
smile and nod and kiss hand to us, resum their exhibition. We 
were held by it a minute; then I answered: “they can destroy them!” At 
thi my companion did turn, but the inquiri she launch wa a silent 
one, the effect of which wa to make me more explicit. “they don’t 
know, as yet, quit how—but they’r tri hard. they’r seen onli 
across, as it were, and beyond—in strang place and on high places, 
the top of towers, the roof of houses, the outsid of windows, the 
further edg of pools; but there’ a deep design, on either side, to 
shorten the distanc and overcom the obstacle; and the success of the 
tempter is onli a question of time. they’v onli to keep to their 
suggest of danger.” 

“for the children to come?” 

“and perish in the attempt!” mrs. grose slowli got up, and I 
scrupul added: “unless, of course, we can prevent!” 

stand there befor me while I kept my seat, she visibl turn 
thing over. “their uncl must do the preventing. He must take them 
away.” 

“and who’ to make him?” 

she had been scan the distance, but she now drop on me a foolish 
face. “you, miss.” 

“bi write to him that hi hous is poison and hi littl nephew and 
niec mad?” 

“but if they _are_, miss?” 

“and if I am myself, you mean? that’ charm news to be sent him by a 
gover whose prime undertak wa to give him no worry.” 

mrs. grose considered, follow the children again. “yes, he do hate 
worry. that wa the great reason—” 

“whi those fiend took him in so long? No doubt, though hi 
indiffer must have been awful. As i’m not a fiend, at ani rate, I 
shouldn’t take him in.” 

My companion, after an instant and for all answer, sat down again and 
grasp my arm. “make him at ani rate come to you.” 

I stared. “to _me?_” I had a sudden fear of what she might do. “‘him’?” 

“he ought to _be_ here—h ought to help.” 

I quickli rose, and I think I must have shown her a queerer face than 
ever yet. “you see me ask him for a visit?” no, with her eye on my 
face she evid couldn’t. instead of it even—a a woman read 
another—sh could see what I myself saw: hi derision, hi amusement, 
hi contempt for the breakdown of my resign at be left alon 
and for the fine machineri I had set in motion to attract hi attent 
to my slight charms. she didn’t know—no one knew—how proud I had been 
to serv him and to stick to our terms; yet she nonetheless took the 
measure, I think, of the warn I now gave her. “if you should so lose 
your head as to appeal to him for me—” 

she wa realli frightened. “yes, miss?” 

“I would leave, on the spot, both him and you.” 


xiii 

It wa all veri well to join them, but speak to them prove quit as 
much as ever an effort beyond my strength—offered, in close quarters, 
difficulti as insurmount as before. thi situat continu a 
month, and with new aggrav and particular notes, the note abov 
all, sharper and sharper, of the small iron conscious on the part 
of my pupils. It wa not, I am as sure today as I wa sure then, my 
mere infern imagination: it wa absolut traceabl that they were 
awar of my predica and that thi strang relat made, in a 
manner, for a long time, the air in which we moved. I don’t mean that 
they had their tongu in their cheek or did anyth vulgar, for that 
wa not one of their dangers: I do mean, on the other hand, that the 
element of the unnam and untouch became, between us, greater than 
ani other, and that so much avoid could not have been so 
success effect without a great deal of tacit arrangement. It wa 
as if, at moments, we were perpetu come into sight of subject 
befor which we must stop short, turn suddenli out of alley that we 
perceiv to be blind, close with a littl bang that made us look at 
each other—for, like all bangs, it wa someth louder than we had 
intended—th door we had indiscreetli opened. all road lead to rome, 
and there were time when it might have struck us that almost everi 
branch of studi or subject of convers skirt forbidden ground. 
forbidden ground wa the question of the return of the dead in gener 
and of whatever, in especial, might survive, in memory, of the friend 
littl children had lost. there were day when I could have sworn that 
one of them had, with a small invis nudge, said to the other: “she 
think she’ll do it thi time—but she _won’t!_” To “do it” would have 
been to indulg for instance—and for onc in a way—in some direct 
refer to the ladi who had prepar them for my discipline. they had 
a delight endless appetit for passag in my own history, to which 
I had again and again treat them; they were in possess of 
everyth that had ever happen to me, had had, with everi 
circumst the stori of my smallest adventur and of those of my 
brother and sister and of the cat and the dog at home, as well as 
mani particular of the eccentr natur of my father, of the furnitur 
and arrang of our house, and of the convers of the old women 
of our village. there were thing enough, take one with another, to 
chatter about, if one went veri fast and knew by instinct when to go 
round. they pull with an art of their own the string of my invent 
and my memory; and noth els perhaps, when I thought of such 
occas afterward, gave me so the suspicion of be watch from 
under cover. It wa in ani case over _my_ life, _my_ past, and _my_ 
friend alon that we could take anyth like our ease—a state of 
affair that led them sometim without the least pertin to break 
out into sociabl reminders. I wa invited—with no visibl 
connection—to repeat afresh goodi gosling’ celebr _mot_ or to 
confirm the detail alreadi suppli as to the clever of the 
vicarag pony. 

It wa partli at such junctur as these and partli at quit differ 
one that, with the turn my matter had now taken, my predicament, as I 
have call it, grew most sensible. the fact that the day pass for 
me without anoth encount ought, it would have appeared, to have 
done someth toward sooth my nerves. sinc the light brush, that 
second night on the upper landing, of the presenc of a woman at the 
foot of the stair, I had seen nothing, whether in or out of the house, 
that one had better not have seen. there wa mani a corner round which 
I expect to come upon quint, and mani a situat that, in a mere 
sinist way, would have favor the appear of miss jessel. the 
summer had turned, the summer had gone; the autumn had drop upon bli 
and had blown out half our lights. the place, with it gray sky and 
wither garlands, it bare space and scatter dead leaves, wa like 
a theater after the performance—al strewn with crumpl playbills. 
there were exactli state of the air, condit of sound and of 
stillness, unspeak impress of the _kind_ of minist moment, 
that brought back to me, long enough to catch it, the feel of the 
medium in which, that june even out of doors, I had had my first 
sight of quint, and in which, too, at those other instants, I had, 
after see him through the window, look for him in vain in the 
circl of shrubbery. I recogn the signs, the portents—i recogn 
the moment, the spot. but they remain unaccompani and empty, and I 
continu unmolested; if unmolest one could call a young woman whose 
sensibl had, in the most extraordinari fashion, not declin but 
deepened. I had said in my talk with mrs. grose on that horrid scene of 
flora’ by the lake—and had perplex her by so saying—that it would 
from that moment distress me much more to lose my power than to keep 
it. I had then express what wa vividli in my mind: the truth that, 
whether the children realli saw or not—since, that is, it wa not yet 
definit proved—i greatli preferred, as a safeguard, the full of 
my own exposure. I wa readi to know the veri worst that wa to be 
known. what I had then had an ugli glimps of wa that my eye might be 
seal just while their were most opened. well, my eye _were_ sealed, 
it appeared, at present—a consumm for which it seem blasphem 
not to thank god. there was, alas, a difficulti about that: I would 
have thank him with all my soul had I not had in a proportion 
measur thi convict of the secret of my pupils. 

how can I retrac today the strang step of my obsession? there were 
time of our be togeth when I would have been readi to swear that, 
literally, in my presence, but with my direct sens of it closed, they 
had visitor who were known and were welcome. then it wa that, had I 
not been deter by the veri chanc that such an injuri might prove 
greater than the injuri to be averted, my exult would have broken 
out. “they’r here, they’r here, you littl wretches,” I would have 
cried, “and you can’t deni it now!” the littl wretch deni it with 
all the ad volum of their sociabl and their tenderness, in just 
the crystal depth of which—lik the flash of a fish in a stream—th 
mockeri of their advantag peep up. the shock, in truth, had sunk 
into me still deeper than I knew on the night when, look out to see 
either quint or miss jessel under the stars, I had beheld the boy over 
whose rest I watch and who had immedi brought in with him—had 
straightway, there, turn it on me—th love upward look with which, 
from the battlement abov me, the hideou apparit of quint had 
played. If it wa a question of a scare, my discoveri on thi occas 
had scare me more than ani other, and it wa in the condit of 
nerv produc by it that I made my actual inductions. they harass 
me so that sometimes, at odd moments, I shut myself up audibl to 
rehearse—it wa at onc a fantast relief and a renew despair—th 
manner in which I might come to the point. I approach it from one 
side and the other while, in my room, I flung myself about, but I 
alway broke down in the monstrou utter of names. As they die 
away on my lips, I said to myself that I should inde help them to 
repres someth infamous, if, by pronounc them, I should violat 
as rare a littl case of instinct delicaci as ani schoolroom, 
probably, had ever known. when I said to myself: “_they_ have the 
manner to be silent, and you, trust as you are, the base to 
speak!” I felt myself crimson and I cover my face with my hands. 
after these secret scene I chatter more than ever, go on volubl 
enough till one of our prodigious, palpabl hush occurred—i can call 
them noth else—th strange, dizzi lift or swim (I tri for terms!) 
into a stillness, a paus of all life, that had noth to do with the 
more or less nois that at the moment we might be engag in make and 
that I could hear through ani deepen exhilar or quicken 
recit or louder strum of the piano. then it wa that the others, 
the outsiders, were there. though they were not angels, they “passed,” 
as the french say, caus me, while they stayed, to trembl with the 
fear of their address to their younger victim some yet more 
infern messag or more vivid imag than they had thought good enough 
for myself. 

what it wa most imposs to get rid of wa the cruel idea that, 
whatev I had seen, mile and flora saw _more_—th terribl and 
unguess and that sprang from dread passag of intercours in 
the past. such thing natur left on the surface, for the time, a 
chill which we vocifer deni that we felt; and we had, all three, 
with repetition, got into such splendid train that we went, each 
time, almost automatically, to mark the close of the incident, through 
the veri same movements. It wa strike of the children, at all 
events, to kiss me inveter with a kind of wild irrelev and 
never to fail—on or the other—of the preciou question that had help 
us through mani a peril. “when do you think he _will_ come? don’t you 
think we _ought_ to write?”—ther wa noth like that inquiry, we 
found by experience, for carri off an awkwardness. “he” of cours 
wa their uncl in harley street; and we live in much profus of 
theori that he might at ani moment arriv to mingl in our circle. It 
wa imposs to have given less encourag than he had done to 
such a doctrine, but if we had not had the doctrin to fall back upon 
we should have depriv each other of some of our finest exhibitions. 
He never wrote to them—that may have been selfish, but it wa a part of 
the flatteri of hi trust of me; for the way in which a man pay hi 
highest tribut to a woman is apt to be but by the more festal 
celebr of one of the sacr law of hi comfort; and I held that I 
carri out the spirit of the pledg given not to appeal to him when I 
let my charg understand that their own letter were but charm 
literari exercises. they were too beauti to be posted; I kept them 
myself; I have them all to thi hour. thi wa a rule inde which onli 
ad to the satir effect of my be pli with the supposit that 
he might at ani moment be among us. It wa exactli as if my charg 
knew how almost more awkward than anyth els that might be for me. 
there appear to me, moreover, as I look back, no note in all thi more 
extraordinari than the mere fact that, in spite of my tension and of 
their triumph, I never lost patienc with them. ador they must in 
truth have been, I now reflect, that I didn’t in these day hate them! 
would exasperation, however, if relief had longer been postponed, 
final have betray me? It littl matters, for relief arrived. I call 
it relief, though it wa onli the relief that a snap bring to a strain 
or the burst of a thunderstorm to a day of suffocation. It wa at least 
change, and it came with a rush. 


xiv 

walk to church a certain sunday morning, I had littl mile at my 
side and hi sister, in advanc of us and at mrs. grose’s, well in 
sight. It wa a crisp, clear day, the first of it order for some time; 
the night had brought a touch of frost, and the autumn air, bright and 
sharp, made the church bell almost gay. It wa an odd accid of 
thought that I should have happen at such a moment to be particularli 
and veri grate struck with the obedi of my littl charges. whi 
did they never resent my inexorable, my perpetu society? someth or 
other had brought nearer home to me that I had all but pin the boy 
to my shawl and that, in the way our companion were marshal befor 
me, I might have appear to provid against some danger of rebellion. 
I wa like a gaoler with an eye to possibl surpris and escapes. but 
all thi belonged—i mean their magnific littl surrender—just to the 
special array of the fact that were most abysmal. turn out for 
sunday by hi uncle’ tailor, who had had a free hand and a notion of 
pretti waistcoat and of hi grand littl air, miles’ whole titl to 
independence, the right of hi sex and situation, were so stamp upon 
him that if he had suddenli struck for freedom I should have had 
noth to say. I wa by the strangest of chanc wonder how I 
should meet him when the revolut unmistak occurred. I call it a 
revolut becaus I now see how, with the word he spoke, the curtain 
rose on the last act of my dread drama, and the catastroph wa 
precipitated. “look here, my dear, you know,” he charmingli said, “when 
in the world, please, am I go back to school?” 

transcrib here the speech sound harmless enough, particularli as 
utter in the sweet, high, casual pipe with which, at all 
interlocutors, but abov all at hi etern governess, he threw off 
inton as if he were toss roses. there wa someth in them 
that alway made one “catch,” and I caught, at ani rate, now so 
effectu that I stop as short as if one of the tree of the park 
had fallen across the road. there wa someth new, on the spot, 
between us, and he wa perfectli awar that I recogn it, though, to 
enabl me to do so, he had no need to look a whit less candid and 
charm than usual. I could feel in him how he already, from my at 
first find noth to reply, perceiv the advantag he had gained. 
I wa so slow to find anyth that he had plenti of time, after a 
minute, to continu with hi suggest but inconclus smile: “you 
know, my dear, that for a fellow to be with a ladi _always_—!” hi “mi 
dear” wa constantli on hi lip for me, and noth could have 
express more the exact shade of the sentiment with which I desir to 
inspir my pupil than it fond familiarity. It wa so respect 
easy. 

but, oh, how I felt that at present I must pick my own phrases! I 
rememb that, to gain time, I tri to laugh, and I seem to see in 
the beauti face with which he watch me how ugli and queer I 
looked. “and alway with the same lady?” I returned. 

He neither blanch nor winked. the whole thing wa virtual out 
between us. “ah, of course, she’ a jolly, ‘perfect’ lady; but, after 
all, i’m a fellow, don’t you see? that’s—well, get on.” 

I linger there with him an instant ever so kindly. “yes, you’r 
get on.” oh, but I felt helpless! 

I have kept to thi day the heartbreak littl idea of how he seem 
to know that and to play with it. “and you can’t say i’v not been 
aw good, can you?” 

I laid my hand on hi shoulder, for, though I felt how much better it 
would have been to walk on, I wa not yet quit able. “no, I can’t say 
that, miles.” 

“except just that one night, you know—!” 

“that one night?” I couldn’t look as straight as he. 

“why, when I went down—went out of the house.” 

“oh, yes. but I forget what you did it for.” 

“you forget?”—h spoke with the sweet extravag of childish 
reproach. “why, it wa to show you I could!” 

“oh, yes, you could.” 

“and I can again.” 

I felt that I might, perhaps, after all, succeed in keep my wit 
about me. “certainly. but you won’t.” 

“no, not _that_ again. It wa nothing.” 

“it wa nothing,” I said. “but we must go on.” 

He resum our walk with me, pass hi hand into my arm. “then when 
_am_ I go back?” 

I wore, in turn it over, my most respons air. “were you veri 
happi at school?” 

He just considered. “oh, i’m happi enough anywhere!” 

“well, then,” I quavered, “if you’r just as happi here—!” 

“ah, but that isn’t everything! Of cours _you_ know a lot—” 

“but you hint that you know almost as much?” I risk as he paused. 

“not half I want to!” mile honestli professed. “but it isn’t so much 
that.” 

“what is it, then?” 

“well—i want to see more life.” 

“I see; I see.” We had arriv within sight of the church and of 
variou persons, includ sever of the household of bly, on their 
way to it and cluster about the door to see us go in. I quicken our 
step; I want to get there befor the question between us open up 
much further; I reflect hungrili that, for more than an hour, he 
would have to be silent; and I thought with envi of the compar 
dusk of the pew and of the almost spiritu help of the hassock on 
which I might bend my knees. I seem liter to be run a race 
with some confus to which he wa about to reduc me, but I felt that 
he had got in first when, befor we had even enter the churchyard, he 
threw out— 

“I want my own sort!” 

It liter made me bound forward. “there are not mani of your own 
sort, miles!” I laughed. “unless perhap dear littl flora!” 

“you realli compar me to a babi girl?” 

thi found me singularli weak. “don’t you, then, _love_ our sweet 
flora?” 

“if I didn’t—and you, too; if I didn’t—!” he repeat as if retreat 
for a jump, yet leav hi thought so unfinish that, after we had 
come into the gate, anoth stop, which he impos on me by the 
pressur of hi arm, had becom inevitable. mrs. grose and flora had 
pass into the church, the other worshipp had followed, and we 
were, for the minute, alon among the old, thick graves. We had paused, 
on the path from the gate, by a low, oblong, tablelik tomb. 

“yes, if you didn’t—?” 

He looked, while I waited, at the graves. “well, you know what!” but he 
didn’t move, and he present produc someth that made me drop 
straight down on the stone slab, as if suddenli to rest. “doe my uncl 
think what _you_ think?” 

I markedli rested. “how do you know what I think?” 

“ah, well, of cours I don’t; for it strike me you never tell me. but 
I mean doe _he_ know?” 

“know what, miles?” 

“why, the way i’m go on.” 

I perceiv quickli enough that I could make, to thi inquiry, no 
answer that would not involv someth of a sacrific of my employer. 
yet it appear to me that we were all, at bly, suffici sacrif 
to make that venial. “I don’t think your uncl much cares.” 

miles, on this, stood look at me. “then don’t you think he can be 
made to?” 

“in what way?” 

“why, by hi come down.” 

“but who’ll get him to come down?” 

“_i_ will!” the boy said with extraordinari bright and emphasis. He 
gave me anoth look charg with that express and then march off 
alon into church. 


XV 

the busi wa practic settl from the moment I never follow 
him. It wa a piti surrend to agitation, but my be awar of 
thi had somehow no power to restor me. I onli sat there on my tomb 
and read into what my littl friend had said to me the full of it 
meaning; by the time I had grasp the whole of which I had also 
embraced, for absence, the pretext that I wa asham to offer my 
pupil and the rest of the congreg such an exampl of delay. what 
I said to myself abov all wa that mile had got someth out of me 
and that the proof of it, for him, would be just thi awkward collapse. 
He had got out of me that there wa someth I wa much afraid of and 
that he should probabl be abl to make use of my fear to gain, for hi 
own purpose, more freedom. My fear wa of have to deal with the 
intoler question of the ground of hi dismiss from school, for 
that wa realli but the question of the horror gather behind. that 
hi uncl should arriv to treat with me of these thing wa a solut 
that, strictli speaking, I ought now to have desir to bring on; but I 
could so littl face the ugli and the pain of it that I simpli 
procrastin and live from hand to mouth. the boy, to my deep 
discomposure, wa immens in the right, wa in a posit to say to 
me: “either you clear up with my guardian the mysteri of thi 
interrupt of my studies, or you ceas to expect me to lead with you 
a life that’ so unnatur for a boy.” what wa so unnatur for the 
particular boy I wa concern with wa thi sudden revel of a 
conscious and a plan. 

that wa what realli overcam me, what prevent my go in. I walk 
round the church, hesitating, hovering; I reflect that I had already, 
with him, hurt myself beyond repair. therefor I could patch up 
nothing, and it wa too extrem an effort to squeez besid him into 
the pew: he would be so much more sure than ever to pass hi arm into 
mine and make me sit there for an hour in close, silent contact with 
hi commentari on our talk. for the first minut sinc hi arriv I 
want to get away from him. As I paus beneath the high east window 
and listen to the sound of worship, I wa taken with an impuls that 
might master me, I felt, complet should I give it the least 
encouragement. I might easili put an end to my predica by get 
away altogether. here wa my chance; there wa no one to stop me; I 
could give the whole thing up—turn my back and retreat. It wa onli a 
question of hurri again, for a few preparations, to the hous which 
the attend at church of so mani of the servant would practic 
have left unoccupied. No one, in short, could blame me if I should just 
drive desper off. what wa it to get away if I got away onli till 
dinner? that would be in a coupl of hours, at the end of which—i had 
the acut prevision—mi littl pupil would play at innoc wonder 
about my nonappear in their train. 

“what _did_ you do, you naughty, bad thing? whi in the world, to worri 
us so—and take our thought off, too, don’t you know?—did you desert us 
at the veri door?” I couldn’t meet such question nor, as they ask 
them, their fals littl love eyes; yet it wa all so exactli what I 
should have to meet that, as the prospect grew sharp to me, I at last 
let myself go. 

I got, so far as the immedi moment wa concerned, away; I came 
straight out of the churchyard and, think hard, retrac my step 
through the park. It seem to me that by the time I reach the hous 
I had made up my mind I would fly. the sunday still both of the 
approach and of the interior, in which I met no one, fairli excit 
me with a sens of opportunity. were I to get off quickly, thi way, I 
should get off without a scene, without a word. My quick would have 
to be remarkable, however, and the question of a convey wa the 
great one to settle. tormented, in the hall, with difficulti and 
obstacles, I rememb sink down at the foot of the 
staircase—suddenli collaps there on the lowest step and then, with a 
revulsion, recal that it wa exactli where more than a month 
before, in the dark of night and just so bow with evil things, I 
had seen the specter of the most horribl of women. At thi I wa abl 
to straighten myself; I went the rest of the way up; I made, in my 
bewilderment, for the schoolroom, where there were object belong to 
me that I should have to take. but I open the door to find again, in 
a flash, my eye unsealed. In the presenc of what I saw I reel 
straight back upon my resistance. 

seat at my own tabl in clear noonday light I saw a person whom, 
without my previou experience, I should have taken at the first blush 
for some housemaid who might have stay at home to look after the 
place and who, avail herself of rare relief from observ and of 
the schoolroom tabl and my pens, ink, and paper, had appli herself 
to the consider effort of a letter to her sweetheart. there wa an 
effort in the way that, while her arm rest on the table, her hand 
with evid weari support her head; but at the moment I took 
thi in I had alreadi becom awar that, in spite of my entrance, her 
attitud strang persisted. then it was—with the veri act of it 
announc itself—that her ident flare up in a chang of posture. 
she rose, not as if she had heard me, but with an indescrib grand 
melancholi of indiffer and detachment, and, within a dozen feet of 
me, stood there as my vile predecessor. dishonor and tragic, she wa 
all befor me; but even as I fix and, for memory, secur it, the 
aw imag pass away. dark as midnight in her black dress, her 
haggard beauti and her unutter woe, she had look at me long 
enough to appear to say that her right to sit at my tabl wa as good 
as mine to sit at hers. while these instant lasted, indeed, I had the 
extraordinari chill of feel that it wa I who wa the intruder. It 
wa as a wild protest against it that, actual address her—“you 
terrible, miser woman!”—i heard myself break into a sound that, by 
the open door, rang through the long passag and the empti house. she 
look at me as if she heard me, but I had recov myself and clear 
the air. there wa noth in the room the next minut but the sunshin 
and a sens that I must stay. 


xvi 

I had so perfectli expect that the return of my pupil would be 
mark by a demonstr that I wa freshli upset at have to take 
into account that they were dumb about my absence. instead of gaili 
denounc and caress me, they made no allus to my have fail 
them, and I wa left, for the time, on perceiv that she too said 
nothing, to studi mrs. grose’ odd face. I did thi to such purpos 
that I made sure they had in some way bribe her to silence; a silenc 
that, however, I would engag to break down on the first privat 
opportunity. thi opportun came befor tea: I secur five minut 
with her in the housekeeper’ room, where, in the twilight, amid a 
smell of late bake bread, but with the place all swept and 
garnished, I found her sit in pain placid befor the fire. So 
I see her still, so I see her best: face the flame from her straight 
chair in the dusky, shine room, a larg clean imag of the “put 
away”—of drawer close and lock and rest without a remedy. 

“oh, yes, they ask me to say nothing; and to pleas them—so long as 
they were there—of cours I promised. but what had happen to you?” 

“I onli went with you for the walk,” I said. “I had then to come back 
to meet a friend.” 

she show her surprise. “A friend—_you?_” 

“oh, yes, I have a couple!” I laughed. “but did the children give you a 
reason?” 

“for not allud to your leav us? yes; they said you would like it 
better. Do you like it better?” 

My face had made her rueful. “no, I like it worse!” but after an 
instant I added: “did they say whi I should like it better?” 

“no; master mile onli said, ‘we must do noth but what she likes!’” 

“I wish inde he would. and what did flora say?” 

“miss flora wa too sweet. she said, ‘oh, of course, of course!’—and I 
said the same.” 

I thought a moment. “you were too sweet, too—i can hear you all. but 
nonetheless, between mile and me, it’ now all out.” 

“all out?” My companion stared. “but what, miss?” 

“everything. It doesn’t matter. i’v made up my mind. I came home, my 
dear,” I went on, “for a talk with miss jessel.” 

I had by thi time form the habit of have mrs. grose liter well 
in hand in advanc of my sound that note; so that even now, as she 
brave blink under the signal of my word, I could keep her 
compar firm. “A talk! Do you mean she spoke?” 

“it came to that. I found her, on my return, in the schoolroom.” 

“and what did she say?” I can hear the good woman still, and the candor 
of her stupefaction. 

“that she suffer the torments—!” 

It wa this, of a truth, that made her, as she fill out my picture, 
gape. “do you mean,” she faltered, “—of the lost?” 

“of the lost. Of the damned. and that’ why, to share them—” I falter 
myself with the horror of it. 

but my companion, with less imagination, kept me up. “to share them—?” 

“she want flora.” mrs. grose might, as I gave it to her, fairli have 
fallen away from me had I not been prepared. I still held her there, to 
show I was. “a i’v told you, however, it doesn’t matter.” 

“becaus you’v made up your mind? but to what?” 

“to everything.” 

“and what do you call ‘everything’?” 

“why, send for their uncle.” 

“oh, miss, in piti do,” my friend broke out. “ah, but I will, I _will!_ 
I see it’ the onli way. what’ ‘out,’ as I told you, with mile is 
that if he think i’m afraid to—and ha idea of what he gain by 
that—h shall see he’ mistaken. yes, yes; hi uncl shall have it here 
from me on the spot (and befor the boy himself, if necessary) that if 
i’m to be reproach with have done noth again about more school—” 

“yes, miss—” my companion press me. 

“well, there’ that aw reason.” 

there were now clearli so mani of these for my poor colleagu that she 
wa excus for be vague. “but—a—which?” 

“why, the letter from hi old place.” 

“you’ll show it to the master?” 

“I ought to have done so on the instant.” 

“oh, no!” said mrs. grose with decision. 

“i’ll put it befor him,” I went on inexorably, “that I can’t undertak 
to work the question on behalf of a child who ha been expelled—” 

“for we’v never in the least known what!” mrs. grose declared. 

“for wickedness. for what else—when he’ so clever and beauti and 
perfect? Is he stupid? Is he untidy? Is he infirm? Is he ill-natured? 
he’ exquisite—so it can be onli _that_; and that would open up the 
whole thing. after all,” I said, “it’ their uncle’ fault. If he left 
here such people—!” 

“he didn’t realli in the least know them. the fault’ mine.” she had 
turn quit pale. 

“well, you shan’t suffer,” I answered. 

“the children shan’t!” she emphat returned. 

I wa silent awhile; we look at each other. “then what am I to tell 
him?” 

“you needn’t tell him anything. _i’ll_ tell him.” 

I measur this. “do you mean you’ll write—?” rememb she couldn’t, 
I caught myself up. “how do you communicate?” 

“I tell the bailiff. _he_ writes.” 

“and should you like him to write our story?” 

My question had a sarcast forc that I had not fulli intended, and it 
made her, after a moment, inconsequ break down. the tear were 
again in her eyes. “ah, miss, _you_ write!” 

“well—tonight,” I at last answered; and on thi we separated. 


xvii 

I went so far, in the evening, as to make a beginning. the weather had 
chang back, a great wind wa abroad, and beneath the lamp, in my 
room, with flora at peac besid me, I sat for a long time befor a 
blank sheet of paper and listen to the lash of the rain and the 
batter of the gusts. final I went out, take a candle; I cross the 
passag and listen a minut at miles’ door. what, under my endless 
obsession, I had been impel to listen for wa some betray of hi 
not be at rest, and I present caught one, but not in the form I 
had expected. hi voic tinkl out. “I say, you there—com in.” It wa 
a gaieti in the gloom! 

I went in with my light and found him, in bed, veri wide awake, but 
veri much at hi ease. “well, what are _you_ up to?” he ask with a 
grace of sociabl in which it occur to me that mrs. grose, had 
she been present, might have look in vain for proof that anyth wa 
“out.” 

I stood over him with my candle. “how did you know I wa there?” 

“why, of cours I heard you. did you fanci you made no noise? you’r 
like a troop of cavalry!” he beauti laughed. 

“then you weren’t asleep?” 

“not much! I lie awak and think.” 

I had put my candle, designedly, a short way off, and then, as he held 
out hi friendli old hand to me, had sat down on the edg of hi bed. 
“what is it,” I asked, “that you think of?” 

“what in the world, my dear, but _you?_” 

“ah, the pride I take in your appreci doesn’t insist on that! I 
had so far rather you slept.” 

“well, I think also, you know, of thi queer busi of ours.” 

I mark the cool of hi firm littl hand. “of what queer business, 
miles?” 

“why, the way you bring me up. and all the rest!” 

I fairli held my breath a minute, and even from my glimmer taper 
there wa light enough to show how he smile up at me from hi pillow. 
“what do you mean by all the rest?” 

“oh, you know, you know!” 

I could say noth for a minute, though I felt, as I held hi hand and 
our eye continu to meet, that my silenc had all the air of 
admit hi charg and that noth in the whole world of realiti wa 
perhap at that moment so fabul as our actual relation. “certainli 
you shall go back to school,” I said, “if it be that that troubl you. 
but not to the old place—w must find another, a better. how could I 
know it did troubl you, thi question, when you never told me so, 
never spoke of it at all?” hi clear, listen face, frame in it 
smooth whiteness, made him for the minut as appeal as some wist 
patient in a children’ hospital; and I would have given, as the 
resembl came to me, all I possess on earth realli to be the nurs 
or the sister of chariti who might have help to cure him. well, even 
as it was, I perhap might help! “do you know you’v never said a word 
to me about your school—i mean the old one; never mention it in ani 
way?” 

He seem to wonder; he smile with the same loveliness. but he clearli 
gain time; he waited, he call for guidance. “haven’t i?” It wasn’t 
for _me_ to help him—it wa for the thing I had met! 

someth in hi tone and the express of hi face, as I got thi 
from him, set my heart ach with such a pang as it had never yet 
known; so unutter touch wa it to see hi littl brain puzzl 
and hi littl resourc tax to play, under the spell laid on him, a 
part of innoc and consistency. “no, never—from the hour you came 
back. you’v never mention to me one of your masters, one of your 
comrades, nor the least littl thing that ever happen to you at 
school. never, littl miles—no, never—hav you given me an inkl of 
anyth that _may_ have happen there. therefor you can fanci how 
much i’m in the dark. until you came out, that way, thi morning, you 
had, sinc the first hour I saw you, scarc even made a refer to 
anyth in your previou life. you seem so perfectli to accept the 
present.” It wa extraordinari how my absolut convict of hi secret 
precoc (or whatev I might call the poison of an influenc that I 
dare but half to phrase) made him, in spite of the faint breath of hi 
inward trouble, appear as access as an older person—impos him 
almost as an intellectu equal. “I thought you want to go on as you 
are.” 

It struck me that at thi he just faintli colored. He gave, at ani 
rate, like a convalesc slightli fatigued, a languid shake of hi 
head. “I don’t—i don’t. I want to get away.” 

“you’r tire of bly?” 

“oh, no, I like bly.” 

“well, then—?” 

“oh, _you_ know what a boy wants!” 

I felt that I didn’t know so well as miles, and I took temporari 
refuge. “you want to go to your uncle?” 

again, at this, with hi sweet iron face, he made a movement on the 
pillow. “ah, you can’t get off with that!” 

I wa silent a little, and it wa I, now, I think, who chang color. 
“mi dear, I don’t want to get off!” 

“you can’t, even if you do. you can’t, you can’t!”—h lay beauti 
staring. “mi uncl must come down, and you must complet settl 
things.” 

“if we do,” I return with some spirit, “you may be sure it will be to 
take you quit away.” 

“well, don’t you understand that that’ exactli what i’m work for? 
you’ll have to tell him—about the way you’v let it all drop: you’ll 
have to tell him a tremend lot!” 

the exult with which he utter thi help me somehow, for the 
instant, to meet him rather more. “and how much will _you_, miles, have 
to tell him? there are thing he’ll ask you!” 

He turn it over. “veri likely. but what things?” 

“the thing you’v never told me. To make up hi mind what to do with 
you. He can’t send you back—” 

“oh, I don’t want to go back!” he broke in. “I want a new field.” 

He said it with admir serenity, with posit unimpeach gaiety; 
and doubtless it wa that veri note that most evok for me the 
poignancy, the unnatur childish tragedy, of hi probabl reappear 
at the end of three month with all thi bravado and still more 
dishonor. It overwhelm me now that I should never be abl to bear 
that, and it made me let myself go. I threw myself upon him and in the 
tender of my piti I embrac him. “dear littl miles, dear littl 
miles—!” 

My face wa close to his, and he let me kiss him, simpli take it with 
indulg good humor. “well, old lady?” 

“i there nothing—noth at all that you want to tell me?” 

He turn off a little, face round toward the wall and hold up hi 
hand to look at as one had seen sick children look. “i’v told you—i 
told you thi morning.” 

oh, I wa sorri for him! “that you just want me not to worri you?” 

He look round at me now, as if in recognit of my understand 
him; then ever so gently, “to let me alone,” he replied. 

there wa even a singular littl digniti in it, someth that made me 
releas him, yet, when I had slowli risen, linger besid him. god know 
I never wish to harass him, but I felt that merely, at this, to turn 
my back on him wa to abandon or, to put it more truly, to lose him. 
“i’v just begun a letter to your uncle,” I said. 

“well, then, finish it!” 

I wait a minute. “what happen before?” 

He gaze up at me again. “befor what?” 

“befor you came back. and befor you went away.” 

for some time he wa silent, but he continu to meet my eyes. “what 
happened?” 

It made me, the sound of the words, in which it seem to me that I 
caught for the veri first time a small faint quaver of consent 
consciousness—it made me drop on my knee besid the bed and seiz onc 
more the chanc of possess him. “dear littl miles, dear littl 
miles, if you _knew_ how I want to help you! it’ onli that, it’ 
noth but that, and i’d rather die than give you a pain or do you a 
wrong—i’d rather die than hurt a hair of you. dear littl miles”—oh, I 
brought it out now even if I _should_ go too far—“i just want you to 
help me to save you!” but I knew in a moment after thi that I had gone 
too far. the answer to my appeal wa instantaneous, but it came in the 
form of an extraordinari blast and chill, a gust of frozen air, and a 
shake of the room as great as if, in the wild wind, the casement had 
crash in. the boy gave a loud, high shriek, which, lost in the rest 
of the shock of sound, might have seemed, indistinctly, though I wa so 
close to him, a note either of jubil or of terror. I jump to my 
feet again and wa consciou of darkness. So for a moment we remained, 
while I stare about me and saw that the drawn curtain were unstir 
and the window tight. “why, the candle’ out!” I then cried. 

“it wa I who blew it, dear!” said miles. 


xviii 

the next day, after lessons, mrs. grose found a moment to say to me 
quietly: “have you written, miss?” 

“yes—i’v written.” but I didn’t add—for the hour—that my letter, 
seal and directed, wa still in my pocket. there would be time enough 
to send it befor the messeng should go to the village. meanwhil 
there had been, on the part of my pupils, no more brilliant, more 
exemplari morning. It wa exactli as if they had both had at heart to 
gloss over ani recent littl friction. they perform the dizziest 
feat of arithmetic, soar quit out of _my_ feebl range, and 
perpetrated, in higher spirit than ever, geograph and histor 
jokes. It wa conspicu of cours in mile in particular that he 
appear to wish to show how easili he could let me down. thi child, 
to my memory, realli live in a set of beauti and miseri that no 
word can translate; there wa a distinct all hi own in everi 
impuls he revealed; never wa a small natur creature, to the 
uniniti eye all frank and freedom, a more ingenious, a more 
extraordinari littl gentleman. I had perpetu to guard against the 
wonder of contempl into which my initi view betray me; to 
check the irrelev gaze and discourag sigh in which I constantli 
both attack and renounc the enigma of what such a littl gentleman 
could have done that deserv a penalty. say that, by the dark prodigi 
I knew, the imagin of all evil _had_ been open up to him: all 
the justic within me ach for the proof that it could ever have 
flower into an act. 

He had never, at ani rate, been such a littl gentleman as when, after 
our earli dinner on thi dread day, he came round to me and ask if 
I shouldn’t like him, for half an hour, to play to me. david play to 
saul could never have shown a finer sens of the occasion. It wa 
liter a charm exhibit of tact, of magnanimity, and quit 
tantamount to hi say outright: “the true knight we love to read 
about never push an advantag too far. I know what you mean now: you 
mean that—to be let alon yourself and not follow up—you’l ceas to 
worri and spi upon me, won’t keep me so close to you, will let me go 
and come. well, I ‘come,’ you see—but I don’t go! there’l be plenti of 
time for that. I do realli delight in your society, and I onli want to 
show you that I contend for a principle.” It may be imagin whether 
I resist thi appeal or fail to accompani him again, hand in hand, 
to the schoolroom. He sat down at the old piano and play as he had 
never played; and if there are those who think he had better have been 
kick a footbal I can onli say that I wholli agre with them. for at 
the end of a time that under hi influenc I had quit ceas to 
measure, I start up with a strang sens of have liter slept at 
my post. It wa after luncheon, and by the schoolroom fire, and yet I 
hadn’t really, in the least, slept: I had onli done someth much 
worse—i had forgotten. where, all thi time, wa flora? when I put the 
question to miles, he play on a minut befor answer and then 
could onli say: “why, my dear, how do _i_ know?”—break moreov into 
a happi laugh which, immedi after, as if it were a vocal 
accompaniment, he prolong into incoherent, extravag song. 

I went straight to my room, but hi sister wa not there; then, befor 
go downstairs, I look into sever others. As she wa nowher 
about she would sure be with mrs. grose, whom, in the comfort of that 
theory, I accordingli proceed in quest of. I found her where I had 
found her the even before, but she met my quick challeng with 
blank, scare ignorance. she had onli suppos that, after the repast, 
I had carri off both the children; as to which she wa quit in her 
right, for it wa the veri first time I had allow the littl girl out 
of my sight without some special provision. Of cours now inde she 
might be with the maids, so that the immedi thing wa to look for 
her without an air of alarm. thi we promptli arrang between us; but 
when, ten minut later and in pursuanc of our arrangement, we met in 
the hall, it wa onli to report on either side that after guard 
inquiri we had altogeth fail to trace her. for a minut there, 
apart from observation, we exchang mute alarms, and I could feel with 
what high interest my friend return me all those I had from the first 
given her. 

“she’ll be above,” she present said—“in one of the room you haven’t 
searched.” 

“no; she’ at a distance.” I had made up my mind. “she ha gone out.” 

mrs. grose stared. “without a hat?” 

I natur also look volumes. “isn’t that woman alway without one?” 

“she’ with _her?_” 

“she’ with _her!_” I declared. “we must find them.” 

My hand wa on my friend’ arm, but she fail for the moment, 
confront with such an account of the matter, to respond to my 
pressure. she communed, on the contrary, on the spot, with her 
uneasiness. “and where’ master miles?” 

“oh, _he’s_ with quint. they’r in the schoolroom.” 

“lord, miss!” My view, I wa myself aware—and therefor I suppos my 
tone—had never yet reach so calm an assurance. 

“the trick’ played,” I went on; “they’v success work their 
plan. He found the most divin littl way to keep me quiet while she 
went off.” 

“‘divine’?” mrs. grose bewilderedli echoed. 

“infernal, then!” I almost cheer rejoined. “he ha provid for 
himself as well. but come!” 

she had helplessli gloom at the upper regions. “you leav him—?” 

“so long with quint? yes—i don’t mind that now.” 

she alway ended, at these moments, by get possess of my hand, 
and in thi manner she could at present still stay me. but after 
gasp an instant at my sudden resignation, “becaus of your letter?” 
she eagerli brought out. 

I quickly, by way of answer, felt for my letter, drew it forth, held it 
up, and then, free myself, went and laid it on the great hall table. 
“luke will take it,” I said as I came back. I reach the hous door 
and open it; I wa alreadi on the steps. 

My companion still demurred: the storm of the night and the earli 
morn had dropped, but the afternoon wa damp and gray. I came down 
to the drive while she stood in the doorway. “you go with noth on?” 

“what do I care when the child ha nothing? I can’t wait to dress,” I 
cried, “and if you must do so, I leav you. tri meanwhile, yourself, 
upstairs.” 

“with _them?_” oh, on this, the poor woman promptli join me! 


xix 

We went straight to the lake, as it wa call at bly, and I daresay 
rightli called, though I reflect that it may in fact have been a sheet 
of water less remark than it appear to my untravel eyes. My 
acquaint with sheet of water wa small, and the pool of bly, at 
all event on the few occas of my consenting, under the protect 
of my pupils, to affront it surfac in the old flat-bottom boat 
moor there for our use, had impress me both with it extent and it 
agitation. the usual place of embark wa half a mile from the 
house, but I had an intim convict that, wherev flora might be, 
she wa not near home. she had not given me the slip for ani small 
adventure, and, sinc the day of the veri great one that I had share 
with her by the pond, I had been aware, in our walks, of the quarter to 
which she most inclined. thi wa whi I had now given to mrs. grose’ 
step so mark a direction—a direct that made her, when she 
perceiv it, oppos a resist that show me she wa freshli 
mystified. “you’r go to the water, miss?—you think she’ _in_—?” 

“she may be, though the depth is, I believe, nowher veri great. but 
what I judg most like is that she’ on the spot from which, the 
other day, we saw togeth what I told you.” 

“when she pretend not to see—?” 

“with that astound self-possession? i’v alway been sure she want 
to go back alone. and now her brother ha manag it for her.” 

mrs. grose still stood where she had stopped. “you suppos they realli 
_talk_ of them?” 

“I could meet thi with a confidence! they say thing that, if we heard 
them, would simpli appal us.” 

“and if she _is_ there—” 

“yes?” 

“then miss jessel is?” 

“beyond a doubt. you shall see.” 

“oh, thank you!” my friend cried, plant so firm that, take it in, I 
went straight on without her. By the time I reach the pool, however, 
she wa close behind me, and I knew that, whatever, to her 
apprehension, might befal me, the exposur of my societi struck her as 
her least danger. she exhal a moan of relief as we at last came in 
sight of the greater part of the water without a sight of the child. 
there wa no trace of flora on that nearer side of the bank where my 
observ of her had been most startling, and none on the opposit 
edge, where, save for a margin of some twenti yards, a thick cops came 
down to the water. the pond, oblong in shape, had a width so scant 
compar to it length that, with it end out of view, it might have 
been taken for a scant river. We look at the empti expanse, and then 
I felt the suggest of my friend’ eyes. I knew what she meant and I 
repli with a neg headshake. 

“no, no; wait! she ha taken the boat.” 

My companion stare at the vacant moor place and then again across 
the lake. “then where is it?” 

“our not see it is the strongest of proofs. she ha use it to go 
over, and then ha manag to hide it.” 

“all alone—that child?” 

“she’ not alone, and at such time she’ not a child: she’ an old, 
old woman.” I scan all the visibl shore while mrs. grose took 
again, into the queer element I offer her, one of her plung of 
submission; then I point out that the boat might perfectli be in a 
small refug form by one of the recess of the pool, an indent 
masked, for the hither side, by a project of the bank and by a clump 
of tree grow close to the water. 

“but if the boat’ there, where on earth’ _she?_” my colleagu 
anxious asked. 

“that’ exactli what we must learn.” and I start to walk further. 

“bi go all the way round?” 

“certainly, far as it is. It will take us but ten minutes, but it’ far 
enough to have made the child prefer not to walk. she went straight 
over.” 

“laws!” cri my friend again; the chain of my logic wa ever too much 
for her. It drag her at my heel even now, and when we had got 
halfway round—a devious, tiresom process, on ground much broken and by 
a path choke with overgrowth—i paus to give her breath. I sustain 
her with a grate arm, assur her that she might huge help me; 
and thi start us afresh, so that in the cours of but few minut 
more we reach a point from which we found the boat to be where I had 
suppos it. It had been intent left as much as possibl out of 
sight and wa tie to one of the stake of a fenc that came, just 
there, down to the brink and that had been an assist to 
disembarking. I recognized, as I look at the pair of short, thick 
oars, quit safe drawn up, the prodigi charact of the feat for a 
littl girl; but I had lived, by thi time, too long among wonder and 
had pant to too mani liveli measures. there wa a gate in the 
fence, through which we passed, and that brought us, after a trifl 
interval, more into the open. then, “there she is!” we both exclaim 
at once. 

flora, a short way off, stood befor us on the grass and smile as if 
her perform wa now complete. the next thing she did, however, wa 
to stoop straight down and pluck—quit as if it were all she wa there 
for—a big, ugli spray of wither fern. I instantli becam sure she had 
just come out of the copse. she wait for us, not herself take a 
step, and I wa consciou of the rare solemn with which we present 
approach her. she smile and smiled, and we met; but it wa all done 
in a silenc by thi time flagrantli ominous. mrs. grose wa the first 
to break the spell: she threw herself on her knee and, draw the 
child to her breast, clasp in a long embrac the littl tender, 
yield body. while thi dumb convuls last I could onli watch 
it—which I did the more intent when I saw flora’ face peep at me 
over our companion’ shoulder. It wa seriou now—th flicker had left 
it; but it strengthen the pang with which I at that moment envi 
mrs. grose the simplic of _her_ relation. still, all thi while, 
noth more pass between us save that flora had let her foolish fern 
again drop to the ground. what she and I had virtual said to each 
other wa that pretext were useless now. when mrs. grose final got 
up she kept the child’ hand, so that the two were still befor me; and 
the singular retic of our communion wa even more mark in the 
frank look she launch me. “i’ll be hanged,” it said, “if _i’ll_ 
speak!” 

It wa flora who, gaze all over me in candid wonder, wa the first. 
she wa struck with our barehead aspect. “why, where are your 
things?” 

“where your are, my dear!” I promptli returned. 

she had alreadi got back her gaiety, and appear to take thi as an 
answer quit sufficient. “and where’ miles?” she went on. 

there wa someth in the small valor of it that quit finish me: 
these three word from her were, in a flash like the glitter of a drawn 
blade, the jostl of the cup that my hand, for week and weeks, had 
held high and full to the brim that now, even befor speaking, I felt 
overflow in a deluge. “i’ll tell you if you’ll tell _me_—” I heard 
myself say, then heard the tremor in which it broke. 

“well, what?” 

mrs. grose’ suspens blaze at me, but it wa too late now, and I 
brought the thing out handsomely. “where, my pet, is miss jessel?” 


XX 

just as in the churchyard with miles, the whole thing wa upon us. much 
as I had made of the fact that thi name had never once, between us, 
been sounded, the quick, smitten glare with which the child’ face now 
receiv it fairli liken my breach of the silenc to the smash of a 
pane of glass. It ad to the interpos cry, as if to stay the blow, 
that mrs. grose, at the same instant, utter over my violence—th 
shriek of a creatur scared, or rather wounded, which, in turn, within 
a few seconds, wa complet by a gasp of my own. I seiz my 
colleague’ arm. “she’ there, she’ there!” 

miss jessel stood befor us on the opposit bank exactli as she had 
stood the other time, and I remember, strangely, as the first feel 
now produc in me, my thrill of joy at have brought on a proof. she 
wa there, and I wa justified; she wa there, and I wa neither cruel 
nor mad. she wa there for poor scare mrs. grose, but she wa there 
most for flora; and no moment of my monstrou time wa perhap so 
extraordinari as that in which I conscious threw out to her—with the 
sens that, pale and raven demon as she was, she would catch and 
understand it—an inarticul messag of gratitude. she rose erect on 
the spot my friend and I had late quitted, and there wa not, in all 
the long reach of her desire, an inch of her evil that fell short. thi 
first vivid of vision and emot were thing of a few seconds, 
dure which mrs. grose’ daze blink across to where I point struck 
me as a sovereign sign that she too at last saw, just as it carri my 
own eye precipit to the child. the revel then of the manner 
in which flora wa affect startl me, in truth, far more than it 
would have done to find her also mere agitated, for direct dismay wa 
of cours not what I had expected. prepar and on her guard as our 
pursuit had actual made her, she would repress everi betrayal; and I 
wa therefor shaken, on the spot, by my first glimps of the 
particular one for which I had not allowed. To see her, without a 
convuls of her small pink face, not even feign to glanc in the 
direct of the prodigi I announced, but only, instead of that, turn 
at _me_ an express of hard, still gravity, an express absolut 
new and unpreced and that appear to read and accus and judg 
me—thi wa a stroke that somehow convert the littl girl herself 
into the veri presenc that could make me quail. I quail even though 
my certitud that she thoroughli saw wa never greater than at that 
instant, and in the immedi need to defend myself I call it 
passion to witness. “she’ there, you littl unhappi thing—there, 
there, _there_, and you see her as well as you see me!” I had said 
shortli befor to mrs. grose that she wa not at these time a child, 
but an old, old woman, and that descript of her could not have been 
more strikingli confirm than in the way in which, for all answer to 
this, she simpli show me, without a concession, an admission, of her 
eyes, a counten of deeper and deeper, of inde suddenli quit 
fixed, reprobation. I wa by thi time—if I can put the whole thing at 
all together—mor appal at what I may properli call her manner than 
at anyth else, though it wa simultan with thi that I becam 
awar of have mrs. grose also, and veri formidably, to reckon with. 
My elder companion, the next moment, at ani rate, blot out 
everyth but her own flush face and her loud, shock protest, a 
burst of high disapproval. “what a dread turn, to be sure, miss! 
where on earth do you see anything?” 

I could onli grasp her more quickli yet, for even while she spoke the 
hideou plain presenc stood undim and undaunted. It had alreadi 
last a minute, and it last while I continued, seiz my colleague, 
quit thrust her at it and present her to it, to insist with my 
point hand. “you don’t see her exactli as _we_ see?—you mean to say 
you don’t now—_now?_ she’ as big as a blaze fire! onli look, dearest 
woman, _look_—!” she looked, even as I did, and gave me, with her deep 
groan of negation, repulsion, compassion—th mixtur with her piti of 
her relief at her exemption—a sense, touch to me even then, that she 
would have back me up if she could. I might well have need that, 
for with thi hard blow of the proof that her eye were hopelessli 
seal I felt my own situat horribl crumble, I felt—i saw—mi livid 
predecessor press, from her position, on my defeat, and I wa 
conscious, more than all, of what I should have from thi instant to 
deal with in the astound littl attitud of flora. into thi 
attitud mrs. grose immedi and violent entered, breaking, even 
while there pierc through my sens of ruin a prodigi privat 
triumph, into breathless reassurance. 

“she isn’t there, littl lady, and nobody’ there—and you never see 
nothing, my sweet! how can poor miss jessel—when poor miss jessel’ 
dead and buried? _we_ know, don’t we, love?”—and she appealed, 
blunder in, to the child. “it’ all a mere mistak and a worri and a 
joke—and we’ll go home as fast as we can!” 

our companion, on this, had respond with a strange, quick prim of 
propriety, and they were again, with mrs. grose on her feet, united, as 
it were, in pain opposit to me. flora continu to fix me with her 
small mask of reprobation, and even at that minut I pray god to 
forgiv me for seem to see that, as she stood there hold tight to 
our friend’ dress, her incompar childish beauti had suddenli 
failed, had quit vanished. i’v said it already—sh wa literally, she 
wa hideously, hard; she had turn common and almost ugly. “I don’t 
know what you mean. I see nobody. I see nothing. I never _have_. I 
think you’r cruel. I don’t like you!” then, after thi deliverance, 
which might have been that of a vulgarli pert littl girl in the 
street, she hug mrs. grose more close and buri in her skirt the 
dread littl face. In thi posit she produc an almost furiou 
wail. “take me away, take me away—oh, take me away from _her!_” 

“from _me?_” I panted. 

“from you—from you!” she cried. 

even mrs. grose look across at me dismayed, while I had noth to do 
but commun again with the figur that, on the opposit bank, 
without a movement, as rigidli still as if catching, beyond the 
interval, our voices, wa as vividli there for my disast as it wa 
not there for my service. the wretch child had spoken exactli as if 
she had got from some outsid sourc each of her stab littl words, 
and I could therefore, in the full despair of all I had to accept, but 
sadli shake my head at her. “if I had ever doubted, all my doubt would 
at present have gone. i’v been live with the miser truth, and 
now it ha onli too much close round me. Of cours i’v lost you: i’v 
interfered, and you’v seen—und _her_ dictation”—with which I faced, 
over the pool again, our infern witness—“th easi and perfect way to 
meet it. i’v done my best, but i’v lost you. goodbye.” for mrs. grose 
I had an imperative, an almost frantic “go, go!” befor which, in 
infinit distress, but mute possess of the littl girl and clearli 
convinced, in spite of her blindness, that someth aw had occur 
and some collaps engulf us, she retreated, by the way we had come, 
as fast as she could move. 

Of what first happen when I wa left alon I had no subsequ 
memory. I onli knew that at the end of, I suppose, a quarter of an 
hour, an odor damp and roughness, chill and pierc my 
trouble, had made me understand that I must have thrown myself, on my 
face, on the ground and given way to a wild of grief. I must have 
lain there long and cri and sobbed, for when I rais my head the day 
wa almost done. I got up and look a moment, through the twilight, at 
the gray pool and it blank, haunt edge, and then I took, back to the 
house, my dreari and difficult course. when I reach the gate in the 
fenc the boat, to my surprise, wa gone, so that I had a fresh 
reflect to make on flora’ extraordinari command of the situation. 
she pass that night, by the most tacit, and I should add, were not 
the word so grotesqu a fals note, the happiest of arrangements, with 
mrs. grose. I saw neither of them on my return, but, on the other hand, 
as by an ambigu compensation, I saw a great deal of miles. I saw—i 
can use no other phrase—so much of him that it wa as if it were more 
than it had ever been. No even I had pass at bli had the 
portent qualiti of thi one; in spite of which—and in spite also of 
the deeper depth of constern that had open beneath my 
feet—ther wa literally, in the eb actual, an extraordinarili 
sweet sadness. On reach the hous I had never so much as look for 
the boy; I had simpli gone straight to my room to chang what I wa 
wear and to take in, at a glance, much materi testimoni to flora’ 
rupture. her littl belong had all been removed. when later, by the 
schoolroom fire, I wa serv with tea by the usual maid, I indulged, 
on the articl of my other pupil, in no inquiri whatever. He had hi 
freedom now—h might have it to the end! well, he did have it; and it 
consisted—in part at least—of hi come in at about eight o’clock and 
sit down with me in silence. On the remov of the tea thing I had 
blown out the candl and drawn my chair closer: I wa consciou of a 
mortal cold and felt as if I should never again be warm. so, when 
he appeared, I wa sit in the glow with my thoughts. He paus a 
moment by the door as if to look at me; then—a if to share them—cam 
to the other side of the hearth and sank into a chair. We sat there in 
absolut stillness; yet he wanted, I felt, to be with me. 


xxi 

befor a new day, in my room, had fulli broken, my eye open to mrs. 
grose, who had come to my bedsid with wors news. flora wa so 
markedli feverish that an ill wa perhap at hand; she had pass a 
night of extrem unrest, a night agit abov all by fear that had 
for their subject not in the least her former, but wholli her present, 
governess. It wa not against the possibl re-entr of miss jessel 
on the scene that she protested—it wa conspicu and passion 
against mine. I wa promptli on my feet of course, and with an immens 
deal to ask; the more that my friend had discern now gird her 
loin to meet me onc more. thi I felt as soon as I had put to her the 
question of her sens of the child’ sincer as against my own. “she 
persist in deni to you that she saw, or ha ever seen, anything?” 

My visitor’ trouble, truly, wa great. “ah, miss, it isn’t a matter on 
which I can push her! yet it isn’t either, I must say, as if I much 
need to. It ha made her, everi inch of her, quit old.” 

“oh, I see her perfectli from here. she resents, for all the world like 
some high littl personage, the imput on her truth and, as 
it were, her respectability. ‘miss jessel indeed—_she!_’ ah, she’ 
‘respectable,’ the chit! the impress she gave me there yesterday 
was, I assur you, the veri strangest of all; it wa quit beyond ani 
of the others. I _did_ put my foot in it! she’ll never speak to me 
again.” 

hideou and obscur as it all was, it held mrs. grose briefli silent; 
then she grant my point with a frank which, I made sure, had more 
behind it. “I think indeed, miss, she never will. she do have a grand 
manner about it!” 

“and that manner”—i sum it up—“i practic what’ the matter with 
her now!” 

oh, that manner, I could see in my visitor’ face, and not a littl 
els besides! “she ask me everi three minut if I think you’r come 
in.” 

“I see—i see.” I, too, on my side, had so much more than work it out. 
“ha she said to you sinc yesterday—except to repudi her 
familiar with anyth so dreadful—a singl other word about miss 
jessel?” 

“not one, miss. and of cours you know,” my friend added, “I took it 
from her, by the lake, that, just then and there at least, there _was_ 
nobody.” 

“rather! and, naturally, you take it from her still.” 

“I don’t contradict her. what els can I do?” 

“noth in the world! you’v the cleverest littl person to deal with. 
they’v made them—their two friends, I mean—stil clever even than 
natur did; for it wa wondrou materi to play on! flora ha now her 
grievance, and she’ll work it to the end.” 

“yes, miss; but to _what_ end?” 

“why, that of deal with me to her uncle. she’ll make me out to him 
the lowest creature—!” 

I winc at the fair show of the scene in mrs. grose’ face; she look 
for a minut as if she sharpli saw them together. “and him who think 
so well of you!” 

“he ha an odd way—it come over me now,” I laughed, “—of prove it! 
but that doesn’t matter. what flora wants, of course, is to get rid of 
me.” 

My companion brave concurred. “never again to so much as look at 
you.” 

“so that what you’v come to me now for,” I asked, “i to speed me on 
my way?” befor she had time to reply, however, I had her in check. 
“i’v a better idea—th result of my reflections. My go _would_ seem 
the right thing, and on sunday I wa terribl near it. yet that won’t 
do. it’ _you_ who must go. you must take flora.” 

My visitor, at this, did speculate. “but where in the world—?” 

“away from here. away from _them_. away, even most of all, now, from 
me. straight to her uncle.” 

“onli to tell on you—?” 

“no, not ‘only’! To leav me, in addition, with my remedy.” 

she wa still vague. “and what _is_ your remedy?” 

“your loyalty, to begin with. and then miles’s.” 

she look at me hard. “do you think he—?” 

“won’t, if he ha the chance, turn on me? yes, I ventur still to think 
it. At all events, I want to try. get off with hi sister as soon as 
possibl and leav me with him alone.” I wa amazed, myself, at the 
spirit I had still in reserve, and therefor perhap a trifl the more 
disconcert at the way in which, in spite of thi fine exampl of it, 
she hesitated. “there’ one thing, of course,” I went on: “they 
mustn’t, befor she goes, see each other for three seconds.” then it 
came over me that, in spite of flora’ presum sequestr from 
the instant of her return from the pool, it might alreadi be too late. 
“do you mean,” I anxious asked, “that they _have_ met?” 

At thi she quit flushed. “ah, miss, i’m not such a fool as that! If 
i’v been oblig to leav her three or four times, it ha been each 
time with one of the maids, and at present, though she’ alone, she’ 
lock in safe. and yet—and yet!” there were too mani things. 

“and yet what?” 

“well, are you so sure of the littl gentleman?” 

“i’m not sure of anyth but _you_. but I have, sinc last evening, a 
new hope. I think he want to give me an opening. I do believ 
that—poor littl exquisit wretch!—h want to speak. last evening, in 
the firelight and the silence, he sat with me for two hour as if it 
were just coming.” 

mrs. grose look hard, through the window, at the gray, gather day. 
“and did it come?” 

“no, though I wait and waited, I confess it didn’t, and it wa 
without a breach of the silenc or so much as a faint allus to hi 
sister’ condit and absenc that we at last kiss for good night. 
all the same,” I continued, “I can’t, if her uncl see her, consent to 
hi see her brother without my have given the boy—and most of all 
becaus thing have got so bad—a littl more time.” 

My friend appear on thi ground more reluct than I could quit 
understand. “what do you mean by more time?” 

“well, a day or two—real to bring it out. he’ll then be on _my_ 
side—of which you see the importance. If noth comes, I shall onli 
fail, and you will, at the worst, have help me by doing, on your 
arriv in town, whatev you may have found possible.” So I put it 
befor her, but she continu for a littl so inscrut embarrass 
that I came again to her aid. “unless, indeed,” I wound up, “you realli 
want _not_ to go.” 

I could see it, in her face, at last clear itself; she put out her hand 
to me as a pledge. “i’ll go—i’l go. i’ll go thi morning.” 

I want to be veri just. “if you _should_ wish still to wait, I would 
engag she shouldn’t see me.” 

“no, no: it’ the place itself. she must leav it.” she held me a 
moment with heavi eyes, then brought out the rest. “your idea’ the 
right one. I myself, miss—” 

“well?” 

“I can’t stay.” 

the look she gave me with it made me jump at possibilities. “you mean 
that, sinc yesterday, you _have_ seen—?” 

she shook her head with dignity. “i’v _heard_—!” 

“heard?” 

“from that child—horrors! there!” she sigh with tragic relief. “on my 
honor, miss, she say things—!” but at thi evoc she broke down; 
she dropped, with a sudden sob, upon my sofa and, as I had seen her do 
before, gave way to all the grief of it. 

It wa quit in anoth manner that I, for my part, let myself go. “oh, 
thank god!” 

she sprang up again at this, dri her eye with a groan. “‘thank 
god’?” 

“it so justifi me!” 

“it doe that, miss!” 

I couldn’t have desir more emphasis, but I just hesitated. “she’ so 
horrible?” 

I saw my colleagu scarc knew how to put it. “realli shocking.” 

“and about me?” 

“about you, miss—sinc you must have it. it’ beyond everything, for a 
young lady; and I can’t think wherev she must have pick up—” 

“the appal languag she appli to me? I can, then!” I broke in 
with a laugh that wa doubtless signific enough. 

It only, in truth, left my friend still more grave. “well, perhap I 
ought to also—sinc i’v heard some of it before! yet I can’t bear it,” 
the poor woman went on while, with the same movement, she glanced, on 
my dress table, at the face of my watch. “but I must go back.” 

I kept her, however. “ah, if you can’t bear it—!” 

“how can I stop with her, you mean? why, just _for_ that: to get her 
away. far from this,” she pursued, “far from _them_—” 

“she may be different? she may be free?” I seiz her almost with joy. 
“then, in spite of yesterday, you _believe_—” 

“in such doings?” her simpl descript of them required, in the light 
of her expression, to be carri no further, and she gave me the whole 
thing as she had never done. “I believe.” 

yes, it wa a joy, and we were still shoulder to shoulder: if I might 
continu sure of that I should care but littl what els happened. My 
support in the presenc of disast would be the same as it had been in 
my earli need of confidence, and if my friend would answer for my 
honesty, I would answer for all the rest. On the point of take leav 
of her, nonetheless, I wa to some extent embarrassed. “there’ one 
thing, of course—it occur to me—to remember. My letter, give the 
alarm, will have reach town befor you.” 

I now perceiv still more how she had been beat about the bush and 
how weari at last it had made her. “your letter won’t have got there. 
your letter never went.” 

“what then becam of it?” 

“good knows! master miles—” 

“do you mean _he_ took it?” I gasped. 

she hung fire, but she overcam her reluctance. “I mean that I saw 
yesterday, when I came back with miss flora, that it wasn’t where you 
had put it. later in the even I had the chanc to question luke, and 
he declar that he had neither notic nor touch it.” We could onli 
exchange, on this, one of our deeper mutual soundings, and it wa mrs. 
grose who first brought up the plumb with an almost elat “you see!” 

“yes, I see that if mile took it instead he probabl will have read it 
and destroy it.” 

“and don’t you see anyth else?” 

I face her a moment with a sad smile. “it strike me that by thi time 
your eye are open even wider than mine.” 

they prove to be so indeed, but she could still blush, almost, to show 
it. “I make out now what he must have done at school.” and she gave, in 
her simpl sharpness, an almost droll disillus nod. “he stole!” 

I turn it over—i tri to be more judicial. “well—perhaps.” 

she look as if she found me unexpectedli calm. “he stole _letters!_” 

she couldn’t know my reason for a calm after all pretti shallow; 
so I show them off as I might. “I hope then it wa to more purpos 
than in thi case! the note, at ani rate, that I put on the tabl 
yesterday,” I pursued, “will have given him so scant an advantage—for 
it contain onli the bare demand for an interview—that he is alreadi 
much asham of have gone so far for so little, and that what he had 
on hi mind last even wa precis the need of confession.” I 
seem to myself, for the instant, to have master it, to see it all. 
“leav us, leav us”—i wa already, at the door, hurri her off. 
“i’ll get it out of him. he’ll meet me—he’l confess. If he confesses, 
he’ saved. and if he’ saved—” 

“then _you_ are?” the dear woman kiss me on this, and I took her 
farewell. “i’ll save you without him!” she cri as she went. 


xxii 

yet it wa when she had got off—and I miss her on the spot—that the 
great pinch realli came. If I had count on what it would give me to 
find myself alon with miles, I speedili perceived, at least, that it 
would give me a measure. No hour of my stay in fact wa so assail 
with apprehens as that of my come down to learn that the carriag 
contain mrs. grose and my younger pupil had alreadi roll out of 
the gates. now I _was_, I said to myself, face to face with the 
elements, and for much of the rest of the day, while I fought my 
weakness, I could consid that I had been suprem rash. It wa a 
tighter place still than I had yet turn round in; all the more that, 
for the first time, I could see in the aspect of other a confus 
reflect of the crisis. what had happen natur caus them all 
to stare; there wa too littl of the explained, throw out whatev we 
might, in the sudden of my colleague’ act. the maid and the men 
look blank; the effect of which on my nerv wa an aggrav until 
I saw the necess of make it a posit aid. It wa precisely, in 
short, by just clutch the helm that I avoid total wreck; and I 
dare say that, to bear up at all, I became, that morning, veri grand 
and veri dry. I welcom the conscious that I wa charg with much 
to do, and I caus it to be known as well that, left thu to myself, I 
wa quit remark firm. I wander with that manner, for the next 
hour or two, all over the place and looked, I have no doubt, as if I 
were readi for ani onset. so, for the benefit of whom it might concern, 
I parad with a sick heart. 

the person it appear least to concern prove to be, till dinner, 
littl mile himself. My perambul had given me, meanwhile, no 
glimps of him, but they had tend to make more public the chang 
take place in our relat as a consequ of hi have at the 
piano, the day before, kept me, in flora’ interest, so beguil and 
befooled. the stamp of public had of cours been fulli given by her 
confin and departure, and the chang itself wa now usher in by 
our nonobserv of the regular custom of the schoolroom. He had 
alreadi disappear when, on my way down, I push open hi door, and I 
learn below that he had breakfasted—in the presenc of a coupl of 
the maids—with mrs. grose and hi sister. He had then gone out, as he 
said, for a stroll; than which nothing, I reflected, could better have 
express hi frank view of the abrupt transform of my office. 
what he would not permit thi offic to consist of wa yet to be 
settled: there wa a queer relief, at all events—i mean for myself in 
especial—in the renounc of one pretension. If so much had sprung 
to the surface, I scarc put it too strongli in say that what had 
perhap sprung highest wa the absurd of our prolong the fiction 
that I had anyth more to teach him. It suffici stuck out that, 
by tacit littl trick in which even more than myself he carri out 
the care for my dignity, I had had to appeal to him to let me off 
strain to meet him on the ground of hi true capacity. He had at ani 
rate hi freedom now; I wa never to touch it again; as I had ampli 
shown, moreover, when, on hi join me in the schoolroom the previou 
night, I had uttered, on the subject of the interv just concluded, 
neither challeng nor hint. I had too much, from thi moment, my other 
ideas. yet when he at last arrived, the difficulti of appli them, 
the accumul of my problem, were brought straight home to me by 
the beauti littl presenc on which what had occur had as yet, 
for the eye, drop neither stain nor shadow. 

To mark, for the house, the high state I cultiv I decre that my 
meal with the boy should be served, as we call it, downstairs; so 
that I had been await him in the ponder pomp of the room outsid 
of the window of which I had had from mrs. grose, that first scare 
sunday, my flash of someth it would scarc have done to call light. 
here at present I felt afresh—for I had felt it again and again—how my 
equilibrium depend on the success of my rigid will, the will to shut 
my eye as tight as possibl to the truth that what I had to deal with 
was, revoltingly, against nature. I could onli get on at all by take 
“nature” into my confid and my account, by treat my monstrou 
ordeal as a push in a direct unusual, of course, and unpleasant, but 
demanding, after all, for a fair front, onli anoth turn of the screw 
of ordinari human virtue. No attempt, nonetheless, could well requir 
more tact than just thi attempt to supply, one’ self, _all_ the 
nature. how could I put even a littl of that articl into a 
suppress of refer to what had occurred? how, on the other hand, 
could I make refer without a new plung into the hideou obscure? 
well, a sort of answer, after a time, had come to me, and it wa so far 
confirm as that I wa met, incontestably, by the quicken vision of 
what wa rare in my littl companion. It wa inde as if he had found 
even now—a he had so often found at lessons—stil some other delic 
way to eas me off. wasn’t there light in the fact which, as we share 
our solitude, broke out with a speciou glitter it had never yet quit 
worn?—th fact that (opportun aiding, preciou opportun which had 
now come) it would be preposterous, with a child so endowed, to forego 
the help one might wrest from absolut intelligence? what had hi 
intellig been given him for but to save him? mightn’t one, to reach 
hi mind, risk the stretch of an angular arm over hi character? It wa 
as if, when we were face to face in the dine room, he had liter 
shown me the way. the roast mutton wa on the table, and I had 
dispens with attendance. miles, befor he sat down, stood a moment 
with hi hand in hi pocket and look at the joint, on which he 
seem on the point of pass some humor judgment. but what he 
present produc was: “I say, my dear, is she realli veri aw 
ill?” 

“littl flora? not so bad but that she’ll present be better. london 
will set her up. bli had ceas to agre with her. come here and take 
your mutton.” 

He alertli obey me, carri the plate care to hi seat, and, 
when he wa established, went on. “did bli disagre with her so 
terribl suddenly?” 

“not so suddenli as you might think. one had seen it come on.” 

“then whi didn’t you get her off before?” 

“befor what?” 

“befor she becam too ill to travel.” 

I found myself prompt. “she’ _not_ too ill to travel: she onli might 
have becom so if she had stayed. thi wa just the moment to seize. 
the journey will dissip the influence”—oh, I wa grand!—“and carri 
it off.” 

“I see, I see”—miles, for that matter, wa grand, too. He settl to 
hi repast with the charm littl “tabl manner” that, from the day 
of hi arrival, had reliev me of all gross of admonition. 
whatev he had been driven from school for, it wa not for ugli 
feeding. He wa irreproachable, as always, today; but he wa 
unmistak more conscious. He wa discern tri to take for 
grant more thing than he found, without assistance, quit easy; and 
he drop into peac silenc while he felt hi situation. our meal 
wa of the briefest—min a vain pretense, and I had the thing 
immedi removed. while thi wa done mile stood again with hi 
hand in hi littl pocket and hi back to me—stood and look out of 
the wide window through which, that other day, I had seen what pull 
me up. We continu silent while the maid wa with us—a silent, it 
whimsic occur to me, as some young coupl who, on their wed 
journey, at the inn, feel shi in the presenc of the waiter. He turn 
round onli when the waiter had left us. “well—so we’r alone!” 


xxiii 

“oh, more or less.” I fanci my smile wa pale. “not absolutely. We 
shouldn’t like that!” I went on. 

“no—i suppos we shouldn’t. Of cours we have the others.” 

“we have the others—w have inde the others,” I concurred. 

“yet even though we have them,” he returned, still with hi hand in 
hi pocket and plant there in front of me, “they don’t much count, 
do they?” 

I made the best of it, but I felt wan. “it depend on what you call 
‘much’!” 

“yes”—with all accommodation—“everyth depends!” On this, however, he 
face to the window again and present reach it with hi vague, 
restless, cogit step. He remain there awhile, with hi forehead 
against the glass, in contempl of the stupid shrub I knew and the 
dull thing of november. I had alway my hypocrisi of “work,” behind 
which, now, I gain the sofa. steadi myself with it there as I had 
repeatedli done at those moment of torment that I have describ as 
the moment of my know the children to be given to someth from 
which I wa barred, I suffici obey my habit of be prepar 
for the worst. but an extraordinari impress drop on me as I 
extract a mean from the boy’ embarrass back—non other than the 
impress that I wa not bar now. thi infer grew in a few 
minut to sharp intens and seem bound up with the direct 
percept that it wa posit _he_ who was. the frame and squar 
of the great window were a kind of image, for him, of a kind of 
failure. I felt that I saw him, at ani rate, shut in or shut out. He 
wa admirable, but not comfortable: I took it in with a throb of hope. 
wasn’t he looking, through the haunt pane, for someth he couldn’t 
see?—and wasn’t it the first time in the whole busi that he had 
known such a lapse? the first, the veri first: I found it a splendid 
portent. It made him anxious, though he watch himself; he had been 
anxiou all day and, even while in hi usual sweet littl manner he sat 
at table, had need all hi small strang geniu to give it a gloss. 
when he at last turn round to meet me, it wa almost as if thi 
geniu had succumbed. “well, I think i’m glad bli agre with _me!_” 

“you would certainli seem to have seen, these twenty-four hours, a good 
deal more of it than for some time before. I hope,” I went on bravely, 
“that you’v been enjoy yourself.” 

“oh, yes, i’v been ever so far; all round about—mil and mile away. 
i’v never been so free.” 

He had realli a manner of hi own, and I could onli tri to keep up with 
him. “well, do you like it?” 

He stood there smiling; then at last he put into two words—“do 
_you?_”—mor discrimin than I had ever heard two word contain. 
befor I had time to deal with that, however, he continu as if with 
the sens that thi wa an impertin to be softened. “noth could 
be more charm than the way you take it, for of cours if we’r alon 
togeth now it’ you that are alon most. but I hope,” he threw in, 
“you don’t particularli mind!” 

“have to do with you?” I asked. “mi dear child, how can I help 
minding? though i’v renounc all claim to your company—you’r so 
beyond me—i at least greatli enjoy it. what els should I stay on for?” 

He look at me more directly, and the express of hi face, graver 
now, struck me as the most beauti I had ever found in it. “you stay 
on just for _that?_” 

“certainly. I stay on as your friend and from the tremend interest I 
take in you till someth can be done for you that may be more worth 
your while. that needn’t surpris you.” My voic trembl so that I 
felt it imposs to suppress the shake. “don’t you rememb how I 
told you, when I came and sat on your bed the night of the storm, that 
there wa noth in the world I wouldn’t do for you?” 

“yes, yes!” he, on hi side, more and more visibl nervous, had a tone 
to master; but he wa so much more success than I that, laugh out 
through hi gravity, he could pretend we were pleasantli jesting. “onli 
that, I think, wa to get me to do someth for _you!_” 

“it wa partli to get you to do something,” I conceded. “but, you know, 
you didn’t do it.” 

“oh, yes,” he said with the brightest superfici eagerness, “you 
want me to tell you something.” 

“that’ it. out, straight out. what you have on your mind, you know.” 

“ah, then, is _that_ what you’v stay over for?” 

He spoke with a gaieti through which I could still catch the finest 
littl quiver of resent passion; but I can’t begin to express the 
effect upon me of an implic of surrend even so faint. It wa as 
if what I had yearn for had come at last onli to astonish me. “well, 
yes—i may as well make a clean breast of it, it wa precis for 
that.” 

He wait so long that I suppos it for the purpos of repudi the 
assumpt on which my action had been founded; but what he final 
said was: “do you mean now—here?” 

“there couldn’t be a better place or time.” He look round him 
uneasily, and I had the rare—oh, the queer!—impress of the veri 
first symptom I had seen in him of the approach of immedi fear. It 
wa as if he were suddenli afraid of me—which struck me inde as 
perhap the best thing to make him. yet in the veri pang of the effort 
I felt it vain to tri sternness, and I heard myself the next instant so 
gentl as to be almost grotesque. “you want so to go out again?” 

“awfully!” He smile at me heroically, and the touch littl braveri 
of it wa enhanc by hi actual flush with pain. He had pick up 
hi hat, which he had brought in, and stood twirl it in a way that 
gave me, even as I wa just nearli reach port, a pervers horror of 
what I wa doing. To do it in _any_ way wa an act of violence, for 
what did it consist of but the obtrus of the idea of gross and 
guilt on a small helpless creatur who had been for me a revel of 
the possibl of beauti intercourse? wasn’t it base to creat 
for a be so exquisit a mere alien awkwardness? I suppos I now read 
into our situat a clear it couldn’t have had at the time, for I 
seem to see our poor eye alreadi light with some spark of a 
previs of the anguish that wa to come. So we circl about, with 
terror and scruples, like fighter not dare to close. but it wa for 
each other we feared! that kept us a littl longer suspend and 
unbruised. “i’ll tell you everything,” mile said—“i mean i’ll tell you 
anyth you like. you’ll stay on with me, and we shall both be all 
right, and I _will_ tell you—i _will_. but not now.” 

“whi not now?” 

My insist turn him from me and kept him onc more at hi window 
in a silenc dure which, between us, you might have heard a pin drop. 
then he wa befor me again with the air of a person for whom, outside, 
someon who had frankli to be reckon with wa waiting. “I have to see 
luke.” 

I had not yet reduc him to quit so vulgar a lie, and I felt 
proportion ashamed. but, horribl as it was, hi lie made up my 
truth. I achiev thought a few loop of my knitting. “well, then, 
go to luke, and i’ll wait for what you promise. only, in return for 
that, satisfy, befor you leav me, one veri much smaller request.” 

He look as if he felt he had succeed enough to be abl still a 
littl to bargain. “veri much smaller—?” 

“yes, a mere fraction of the whole. tell me”—oh, my work preoccupi 
me, and I wa offhand!—“if, yesterday afternoon, from the tabl in the 
hall, you took, you know, my letter.” 


xxiv 

My sens of how he receiv thi suffer for a minut from someth 
that I can describ onli as a fierc split of my attention—a stroke 
that at first, as I sprang straight up, reduc me to the mere blind 
movement of get hold of him, draw him close, and, while I just 
fell for support against the nearest piec of furniture, instinct 
keep him with hi back to the window. the appear wa full upon 
us that I had alreadi had to deal with here: peter quint had come into 
view like a sentinel befor a prison. the next thing I saw wa that, 
from outside, he had reach the window, and then I knew that, close to 
the glass and glare in through it, he offer onc more to the room 
hi white face of damnation. It repres but grossli what took place 
within me at the sight to say that on the second my decis wa made; 
yet I believ that no woman so overwhelm ever in so short a time 
recov her grasp of the _act_. It came to me in the veri horror of 
the immedi presenc that the act would be, see and face what I 
saw and faced, to keep the boy himself unaware. the inspiration—i can 
call it by no other name—wa that I felt how voluntarily, how 
transcendently, I _might_. It wa like fight with a demon for a 
human soul, and when I had fairli so apprais it I saw how the human 
soul—held out, in the tremor of my hands, at arm’ length—had a perfect 
dew of sweat on a love childish forehead. the face that wa close to 
mine wa as white as the face against the glass, and out of it 
present came a sound, not low nor weak, but as if from much further 
away, that I drank like a waft of fragrance. 

“yes—i took it.” 

At this, with a moan of joy, I enfolded, I drew him close; and while I 
held him to my breast, where I could feel in the sudden fever of hi 
littl bodi the tremend puls of hi littl heart, I kept my eye on 
the thing at the window and saw it move and shift it posture. I have 
liken it to a sentinel, but it slow wheel, for a moment, wa rather 
the prowl of a baffl beast. My present quicken courage, however, 
wa such that, not too much to let it through, I had to shade, as it 
were, my flame. meanwhil the glare of the face wa again at the 
window, the scoundrel fix as if to watch and wait. It wa the veri 
confid that I might now defi him, as well as the posit 
certitude, by thi time, of the child’ unconsciousness, that made me 
go on. “what did you take it for?” 

“to see what you said about me.” 

“you open the letter?” 

“I open it.” 

My eye were now, as I held him off a littl again, on miles’ own 
face, in which the collaps of mockeri show me how complet wa the 
ravag of uneasiness. what wa prodigi wa that at last, by my 
success, hi sens wa seal and hi commun stopped: he knew 
that he wa in presence, but knew not of what, and knew still less that 
I also wa and that I did know. and what did thi strain of troubl 
matter when my eye went back to the window onli to see that the air 
wa clear again and—bi my person triumph—th influenc quenched? 
there wa noth there. I felt that the caus wa mine and that I 
should sure get _all_. “and you found nothing!”—i let my elat out. 

He gave the most mournful, thought littl headshake. “nothing.” 

“nothing, nothing!” I almost shout in my joy. 

“nothing, nothing,” he sadli repeated. 

I kiss hi forehead; it wa drenched. “so what have you done with 
it?” 

“i’v burn it.” 

“burn it?” It wa now or never. “i that what you did at school?” 

oh, what thi brought up! “at school?” 

“did you take letters?—or other things?” 

“other things?” He appear now to be think of someth far off and 
that reach him onli through the pressur of hi anxiety. yet it did 
reach him. “did I _steal?_” 

I felt myself redden to the root of my hair as well as wonder if it 
were more strang to put to a gentleman such a question or to see him 
take it with allow that gave the veri distanc of hi fall in the 
world. “wa it for that you mightn’t go back?” 

the onli thing he felt wa rather a dreari littl surprise. “did you 
know I mightn’t go back?” 

“I know everything.” 

He gave me at thi the longest and strangest look. “everything?” 

“everything. therefor _did_ you—?” but I couldn’t say it again. 

mile could, veri simply. “no. I didn’t steal.” 

My face must have shown him I believ him utterly; yet my hands—but it 
wa for pure tenderness—shook him as if to ask him why, if it wa all 
for nothing, he had condemn me to month of torment. “what then did 
you do?” 

He look in vagu pain all round the top of the room and drew hi 
breath, two or three time over, as if with difficulty. He might have 
been stand at the bottom of the sea and rais hi eye to some 
faint green twilight. “well—i said things.” 

“onli that?” 

“they thought it wa enough!” 

“to turn you out for?” 

never, truly, had a person “turn out” shown so littl to explain it 
as thi littl person! He appear to weigh my question, but in a 
manner quit detach and almost helpless. “well, I suppos I 
oughtn’t.” 

“but to whom did you say them?” 

He evid tri to remember, but it dropped—h had lost it. “I don’t 
know!” 

He almost smile at me in the desol of hi surrender, which wa 
inde practically, by thi time, so complet that I ought to have left 
it there. but I wa infatuated—i wa blind with victory, though even 
then the veri effect that wa to have brought him so much nearer wa 
alreadi that of ad separation. “wa it to everyone?” I asked. 

“no; it wa onli to—” but he gave a sick littl headshake. “I don’t 
rememb their names.” 

“were they then so many?” 

“no—onli a few. those I liked.” 

those he liked? I seem to float not into clearness, but into a darker 
obscure, and within a minut there had come to me out of my veri piti 
the appal alarm of hi be perhap innocent. It wa for the 
instant confound and bottomless, for if he _were_ innocent, what 
then on earth wa _i?_ paralyzed, while it lasted, by the mere brush of 
the question, I let him go a little, so that, with a deep-drawn sigh, 
he turn away from me again; which, as he face toward the clear 
window, I suffered, feel that I had noth now there to keep him 
from. “and did they repeat what you said?” I went on after a moment. 

He wa soon at some distanc from me, still breath hard and again 
with the air, though now without anger for it, of be confin 
against hi will. onc more, as he had done before, he look up at the 
dim day as if, of what had hitherto sustain him, noth wa left but 
an unspeak anxiety. “oh, yes,” he nevertheless replied—“they must 
have repeat them. To those _they_ liked,” he added. 

there was, somehow, less of it than I had expected; but I turn it 
over. “and these thing came round—?” 

“to the masters? oh, yes!” he answer veri simply. “but I didn’t know 
they’d tell.” 

“the masters? they didn’t—they’v never told. that’ whi I ask you.” 

He turn to me again hi littl beauti fever face. “yes, it wa 
too bad.” 

“too bad?” 

“what I suppos I sometim said. To write home.” 

I can’t name the exquisit patho of the contradict given to such a 
speech by such a speaker; I onli know that the next instant I heard 
myself throw off with home force: “stuff and nonsense!” but the next 
after that I must have sound stern enough. “what _were_ these 
things?” 

My stern wa all for hi judge, hi executioner; yet it made him 
avert himself again, and that movement made _me_, with a singl bound 
and an irrepress cry, spring straight upon him. for there again, 
against the glass, as if to blight hi confess and stay hi answer, 
wa the hideou author of our woe—th white face of damnation. I felt a 
sick swim at the drop of my victori and all the return of my battle, so 
that the wild of my verit leap onli serv as a great betrayal. 
I saw him, from the midst of my act, meet it with a divination, and on 
the percept that even now he onli guessed, and that the window wa 
still to hi own eye free, I let the impuls flame up to convert the 
climax of hi dismay into the veri proof of hi liberation. “no more, 
no more, no more!” I shrieked, as I tri to press him against me, to 
my visitant. 

“i she _here?_” mile pant as he caught with hi seal eye the 
direct of my words. then as hi strang “she” stagger me and, with 
a gasp, I echo it, “miss jessel, miss jessel!” he with a sudden furi 
gave me back. 

I seized, stupefied, hi supposition—som sequel to what we had done to 
flora, but thi made me onli want to show him that it wa better still 
than that. “it’ not miss jessel! but it’ at the window—straight 
befor us. it’ _there_—th coward horror, there for the last time!” 

At this, after a second in which hi head made the movement of a 
baffl dog’ on a scent and then gave a frantic littl shake for air 
and light, he wa at me in a white rage, bewildered, glare vainli 
over the place and miss wholly, though it now, to my sense, fill 
the room like the tast of poison, the wide, overwhelm presence. 
“it’ _he?_” 

I wa so determin to have all my proof that I flash into ice to 
challeng him. “whom do you mean by ‘he’?” 

“peter quint—you devil!” hi face gave again, round the room, it 
convuls supplication. “_where?_” 

they are in my ear still, hi suprem surrend of the name and hi 
tribut to my devotion. “what doe he matter now, my own?—what will he 
_ever_ matter? _i_ have you,” I launch at the beast, “but he ha lost 
you forever!” then, for the demonstr of my work, “there, _there!_” 
I said to miles. 

but he had alreadi jerk straight round, stared, glare again, and 
seen but the quiet day. with the stroke of the loss I wa so proud of 
he utter the cri of a creatur hurl over an abyss, and the grasp 
with which I recov him might have been that of catch him in hi 
fall. I caught him, yes, I held him—it may be imagin with what a 
passion; but at the end of a minut I began to feel what it truli wa 
that I held. We were alon with the quiet day, and hi littl heart, 
dispossessed, had stopped. 





end of the project gutenberg ebook of the turn of the screw, by henri jame 


*** end OF thi project gutenberg ebook the turn OF the screw *** 

***** thi file should be name 209-0.txt or 209-0.zip ***** 
thi and all associ file of variou format will be found in: 
http://www.gutenberg.org/2/0/209/ 

produc by judith boss, and david widger 

updat edit will replac the previou one--th old edit will 
be renamed. 

creat the work from print edit not protect by u.s. copyright 
law mean that no one own a unit state copyright in these works, 
so the foundat (and you!) can copi and distribut it in the unit 
state without permiss and without pay copyright 
royalties. special rules, set forth in the gener term of use part 
of thi license, appli to copi and distribut project 
gutenberg-tm electron work to protect the project gutenberg-tm 
concept and trademark. project gutenberg is a regist trademark, 
and may not be use if you charg for the ebooks, unless you receiv 
specif permission. If you do not charg anyth for copi of thi 
ebook, compli with the rule is veri easy. you may use thi ebook 
for nearli ani purpos such as creation of deriv works, reports, 
perform and research. they may be modifi and print and given 
away--y may do practic anyth in the unit state with ebook 
not protect by u.s. copyright law. redistribut is subject to the 
trademark license, especi commerci redistribution. 

start: full licens 

the full project gutenberg licens 
pleas read thi befor you distribut OR use thi work 

To protect the project gutenberg-tm mission of promot the free 
distribut of electron works, by use or distribut thi work 
(or ani other work associ in ani way with the phrase "project 
gutenberg"), you agre to compli with all the term of the full 
project gutenberg-tm licens avail with thi file or onlin at 
www.gutenberg.org/license. 

section 1. gener term of use and redistribut project 
gutenberg-tm electron work 

1.a. By read or use ani part of thi project gutenberg-tm 
electron work, you indic that you have read, understand, agre to 
and accept all the term of thi licens and intellectu properti 
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agre to abid by all 
the term of thi agreement, you must ceas use and return or 
destroy all copi of project gutenberg-tm electron work in your 
possession. If you paid a fee for obtain a copi of or access to a 
project gutenberg-tm electron work and you do not agre to be bound 
by the term of thi agreement, you may obtain a refund from the 
person or entiti to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 
1.e.8. 

1.b. "project gutenberg" is a regist trademark. It may onli be 
use on or associ in ani way with an electron work by peopl who 
agre to be bound by the term of thi agreement. there are a few 
thing that you can do with most project gutenberg-tm electron work 
even without compli with the full term of thi agreement. see 
paragraph 1.c below. there are a lot of thing you can do with project 
gutenberg-tm electron work if you follow the term of thi 
agreement and help preserv free futur access to project gutenberg-tm 
electron works. see paragraph 1.e below. 

1.c. the project gutenberg literari archiv foundat ("the 
foundation" or pglaf), own a compil copyright in the collect 
of project gutenberg-tm electron works. nearli all the individu 
work in the collect are in the public domain in the unit 
states. If an individu work is unprotect by copyright law in the 
unit state and you are locat in the unit states, we do not 
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing, 
display or creat deriv work base on the work as long as 
all refer to project gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope 
that you will support the project gutenberg-tm mission of promot 
free access to electron work by freeli share project gutenberg-tm 
work in complianc with the term of thi agreement for keep the 
project gutenberg-tm name associ with the work. you can easili 
compli with the term of thi agreement by keep thi work in the 
same format with it attach full project gutenberg-tm licens when 
you share it without charg with others. 

1.d. the copyright law of the place where you are locat also govern 
what you can do with thi work. copyright law in most countri are 
in a constant state of change. If you are outsid the unit states, 
check the law of your countri in addit to the term of thi 
agreement befor downloading, copying, displaying, performing, 
distribut or creat deriv work base on thi work or ani 
other project gutenberg-tm work. the foundat make no 
represent concern the copyright statu of ani work in ani 
countri outsid the unit states. 

1.e. unless you have remov all refer to project gutenberg: 

1.e.1. the follow sentence, with activ link to, or other 
immedi access to, the full project gutenberg-tm licens must appear 
promin whenev ani copi of a project gutenberg-tm work (ani work 
on which the phrase "project gutenberg" appears, or with which the 
phrase "project gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, 
performed, viewed, copi or distributed: 

thi ebook is for the use of anyon anywher in the unit state and 
most other part of the world at no cost and with almost no 
restrict whatsoever. you may copi it, give it away or re-us it 
under the term of the project gutenberg licens includ with thi 
ebook or onlin at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not locat in the 
unit states, you'll have to check the law of the countri where you 
are locat befor use thi ebook. 

1.e.2. If an individu project gutenberg-tm electron work is 
deriv from text not protect by u.s. copyright law (doe not 
contain a notic indic that it is post with permiss of the 
copyright holder), the work can be copi and distribut to anyon in 
the unit state without pay ani fee or charges. If you are 
redistribut or provid access to a work with the phrase "project 
gutenberg" associ with or appear on the work, you must compli 
either with the requir of paragraph 1.e.1 through 1.e.7 or 
obtain permiss for the use of the work and the project gutenberg-tm 
trademark as set forth in paragraph 1.e.8 or 1.e.9. 

1.e.3. If an individu project gutenberg-tm electron work is post 
with the permiss of the copyright holder, your use and distribut 
must compli with both paragraph 1.e.1 through 1.e.7 and ani 
addit term impos by the copyright holder. addit term 
will be link to the project gutenberg-tm licens for all work 
post with the permiss of the copyright holder found at the 
begin of thi work. 

1.e.4. Do not unlink or detach or remov the full project gutenberg-tm 
licens term from thi work, or ani file contain a part of thi 
work or ani other work associ with project gutenberg-tm. 

1.e.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribut or redistribut thi 
electron work, or ani part of thi electron work, without 
promin display the sentenc set forth in paragraph 1.e.1 with 
activ link or immedi access to the full term of the project 
gutenberg-tm license. 

1.e.6. you may convert to and distribut thi work in ani binary, 
compressed, mark up, nonproprietari or proprietari form, includ 
ani word process or hypertext form. however, if you provid access 
to or distribut copi of a project gutenberg-tm work in a format 
other than "plain vanilla ascii" or other format use in the offici 
version post on the offici project gutenberg-tm web site 
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no addit cost, fee or expens 
to the user, provid a copy, a mean of export a copy, or a mean 
of obtain a copi upon request, of the work in it origin "plain 
vanilla ascii" or other form. ani altern format must includ the 
full project gutenberg-tm licens as specifi in paragraph 1.e.1. 

1.e.7. Do not charg a fee for access to, viewing, displaying, 
performing, copi or distribut ani project gutenberg-tm work 
unless you compli with paragraph 1.e.8 or 1.e.9. 

1.e.8. you may charg a reason fee for copi of or provid 
access to or distribut project gutenberg-tm electron work 
provid that 

* you pay a royalti fee of 20% of the gross profit you deriv from 
the use of project gutenberg-tm work calcul use the method 
you alreadi use to calcul your applic taxes. the fee is owe 
to the owner of the project gutenberg-tm trademark, but he ha 
agre to donat royalti under thi paragraph to the project 
gutenberg literari archiv foundation. royalti payment must be paid 
within 60 day follow each date on which you prepar (or are 
legal requir to prepare) your period tax returns. royalti 
payment should be clearli mark as such and sent to the project 
gutenberg literari archiv foundat at the address specifi in 
section 4, "inform about donat to the project gutenberg 
literari archiv foundation." 

* you provid a full refund of ani money paid by a user who notifi 
you in write (or by e-mail) within 30 day of receipt that s/he 
doe not agre to the term of the full project gutenberg-tm 
license. you must requir such a user to return or destroy all 
copi of the work possess in a physic medium and discontinu 
all use of and all access to other copi of project gutenberg-tm 
works. 

* you provide, in accord with paragraph 1.f.3, a full refund of 
ani money paid for a work or a replac copy, if a defect in the 
electron work is discov and report to you within 90 day of 
receipt of the work. 

* you compli with all other term of thi agreement for free 
distribut of project gutenberg-tm works. 

1.e.9. If you wish to charg a fee or distribut a project 
gutenberg-tm electron work or group of work on differ term than 
are set forth in thi agreement, you must obtain permiss in write 
from both the project gutenberg literari archiv foundat and the 
project gutenberg trademark llc, the owner of the project gutenberg-tm 
trademark. contact the foundat as set forth in section 3 below. 

1.f. 

1.f.1. project gutenberg volunt and employe expend consider 
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcrib and proofread 
work not protect by u.s. copyright law in creat the project 
gutenberg-tm collection. despit these efforts, project gutenberg-tm 
electron works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may 
contain "defects," such as, but not limit to, incomplete, inaccur 
or corrupt data, transcript errors, a copyright or other 
intellectu properti infringement, a defect or damag disk or 
other medium, a comput virus, or comput code that damag or 
cannot be read by your equipment. 

1.f.2. limit warranty, disclaim OF damag - except for the "right 
of replac or refund" describ in paragraph 1.f.3, the project 
gutenberg literari archiv foundation, the owner of the project 
gutenberg-tm trademark, and ani other parti distribut a project 
gutenberg-tm electron work under thi agreement, disclaim all 
liabil to you for damages, cost and expenses, includ legal 
fees. you agre that you have NO remedi for negligence, strict 
liability, breach OF warranti OR breach OF contract except those 
provid IN paragraph 1.f.3. you agre that the foundation, the 
trademark owner, and ani distributor under thi agreement will not BE 
liabl TO you for actual, direct, indirect, consequential, punit OR 
incident damag even IF you give notic OF the possibl OF such 
damage. 

1.f.3. limit right OF replac OR refund - If you discov a 
defect in thi electron work within 90 day of receiv it, you can 
receiv a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by send a 
written explan to the person you receiv the work from. If you 
receiv the work on a physic medium, you must return the medium 
with your written explanation. the person or entiti that provid you 
with the defect work may elect to provid a replac copi in 
lieu of a refund. If you receiv the work electronically, the person 
or entiti provid it to you may choos to give you a second 
opportun to receiv the work electron in lieu of a refund. If 
the second copi is also defective, you may demand a refund in write 
without further opportun to fix the problem. 

1.f.4. except for the limit right of replac or refund set forth 
in paragraph 1.f.3, thi work is provid to you 'as-is', with NO 
other warranti OF ani kind, express OR implied, includ but not 
limit TO warranti OF merchant OR fit for ani purpose. 

1.f.5. some state do not allow disclaim of certain impli 
warranti or the exclus or limit of certain type of 
damages. If ani disclaim or limit set forth in thi agreement 
violat the law of the state applic to thi agreement, the 
agreement shall be interpret to make the maximum disclaim or 
limit permit by the applic state law. the invalid or 
unenforc of ani provis of thi agreement shall not void the 
remain provisions. 

1.f.6. indemn - you agre to indemnifi and hold the foundation, the 
trademark owner, ani agent or employe of the foundation, anyon 
provid copi of project gutenberg-tm electron work in 
accord with thi agreement, and ani volunt associ with the 
production, promot and distribut of project gutenberg-tm 
electron works, harmless from all liability, cost and expenses, 
includ legal fees, that aris directli or indirectli from ani of 
the follow which you do or caus to occur: (a) distribut of thi 
or ani project gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or 
addit or delet to ani project gutenberg-tm work, and (c) ani 
defect you cause. 

section 2. inform about the mission of project gutenberg-tm 

project gutenberg-tm is synonym with the free distribut of 
electron work in format readabl by the widest varieti of 
comput includ obsolete, old, middle-ag and new computers. It 
exist becaus of the effort of hundr of volunt and donat 
from peopl in all walk of life. 

volunt and financi support to provid volunt with the 
assist they need are critic to reach project gutenberg-tm' 
goal and ensur that the project gutenberg-tm collect will 
remain freeli avail for gener to come. In 2001, the project 
gutenberg literari archiv foundat wa creat to provid a secur 
and perman futur for project gutenberg-tm and futur 
generations. To learn more about the project gutenberg literari 
archiv foundat and how your effort and donat can help, see 
section 3 and 4 and the foundat inform page at 
www.gutenberg.org 



section 3. inform about the project gutenberg literari archiv foundat 

the project gutenberg literari archiv foundat is a non profit 
501(c)(3) educ corpor organ under the law of the 
state of mississippi and grant tax exempt statu by the intern 
revenu service. the foundation' ein or feder tax identif 
number is 64-6221541. contribut to the project gutenberg literari 
archiv foundat are tax deduct to the full extent permit by 
u.s. feder law and your state' laws. 

the foundation' princip offic is in fairbanks, alaska, with the 
mail address: PO box 750175, fairbanks, AK 99775, but it 
volunt and employe are scatter throughout numer 
locations. it busi offic is locat at 809 north 1500 west, salt 
lake city, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. email contact link and up to 
date contact inform can be found at the foundation' web site and 
offici page at www.gutenberg.org/contact 

for addit contact information: 

dr. gregori B. newbi 
chief execut and director 
gbnewby@pglaf.org 

section 4. inform about donat to the project gutenberg 
literari archiv foundat 

project gutenberg-tm depend upon and cannot surviv without wide 
spread public support and donat to carri out it mission of 
increas the number of public domain and licens work that can be 
freeli distribut in machin readabl form access by the widest 
array of equip includ outdat equipment. mani small donat 
($1 to $5,000) are particularli import to maintain tax exempt 
statu with the irs. 

the foundat is commit to compli with the law regul 
chariti and charit donat in all 50 state of the unit 
states. complianc requir are not uniform and it take a 
consider effort, much paperwork and mani fee to meet and keep up 
with these requirements. We do not solicit donat in locat 
where we have not receiv written confirm of compliance. To send 
donat or determin the statu of complianc for ani particular 
state visit www.gutenberg.org/don 

while we cannot and do not solicit contribut from state where we 
have not met the solicit requirements, we know of no prohibit 
against accept unsolicit donat from donor in such state who 
approach us with offer to donate. 

intern donat are grate accepted, but we cannot make 
ani statement concern tax treatment of donat receiv from 
outsid the unit states. u.s. law alon swamp our small staff. 

pleas check the project gutenberg web page for current donat 
method and addresses. donat are accept in a number of other 
way includ checks, onlin payment and credit card donations. To 
donate, pleas visit: www.gutenberg.org/don 

section 5. gener inform about project gutenberg-tm electron works. 

professor michael S. hart wa the origin of the project 
gutenberg-tm concept of a librari of electron work that could be 
freeli share with anyone. for forti years, he produc and 
distribut project gutenberg-tm ebook with onli a loos network of 
volunt support. 

project gutenberg-tm ebook are often creat from sever print 
editions, all of which are confirm as not protect by copyright in 
the u.s. unless a copyright notic is included. thus, we do not 
necessarili keep ebook in complianc with ani particular paper 
edition. 

most peopl start at our web site which ha the main PG search 
facility: www.gutenberg.org 

thi web site includ inform about project gutenberg-tm, 
includ how to make donat to the project gutenberg literari 
archiv foundation, how to help produc our new ebooks, and how to 
subscrib to our email newslett to hear about new ebooks. 


