the project gutenberg ebook of the king in yellow, by robert W. chamber 

thi ebook is for the use of anyon anywher at no cost and with 
almost no restrict whatsoever. you may copi it, give it away or 
re-us it under the term of the project gutenberg licens includ 
with thi ebook or onlin at www.gutenberg.org 


title: the king in yellow 

author: robert W. chamber 

post date: septemb 10, 2012 [ebook #8492] 
releas date: july, 2005 
first posted: juli 16, 2003 

language: english 


*** start OF thi project gutenberg ebook the king IN yellow *** 




produc by suzann shell, beth trapaga, charl franks, 
and the onlin distribut proofread team 











the king IN yellow 

BY 

robert W. chamber 






origin public date: 1895 


the king IN yellow 
IS dedic 
TO 
MY brother 

along the shore the cloud wave break, 
the twin sun sink behind the lake, 
the shadow lengthen 
In carcosa. 

strang is the night where black star rise, 
and strang moon circl through the sky 
but stranger still is 
lost carcosa. 

song that the hyad shall sing, 
where flap the tatter of the king, 
must die unheard in 
dim carcosa. 

song of my soul, my voic is dead; 
die thou, unsung, as tear unsh 
shall dri and die in 
lost carcosa. 

cassilda' song in "the king in yellow," act i, scene 2. 




the repair OF reput 


I 

"ne raillon pa le fous; leur foli dure plu longtemp que 
la nôtre.... voila tout la différence." 
prefac 
toward the end of the year 1920 the govern of the unit state had 
practic complet the programme, adopt dure the last month of 
presid winthrop' administration. the countri wa appar tranquil. 
everybodi know how the tariff and labour question were settled. the war 
with germany, incid on that country' seizur of the samoan islands, 
had left no visibl scar upon the republic, and the temporari occup 
of norfolk by the invad armi had been forgotten in the joy over 
repeat naval victories, and the subsequ ridicul plight of gener 
von gartenlaube' forc in the state of new jersey. the cuban and 
hawaiian invest had paid one hundr per cent and the territori of 
samoa wa well worth it cost as a coal station. the countri wa in a 
superb state of defence. everi coast citi had been well suppli with land 
fortifications; the armi under the parent eye of the gener staff, 
organ accord to the prussian system, had been increas to 300,000 
men, with a territori reserv of a million; and six magnific 
squadron of cruiser and battle-ship patrol the six station of the 
navig seas, leav a steam reserv ampli fit to control home 
waters. the gentlemen from the west had at last been constrain to 
acknowledg that a colleg for the train of diplomat wa as necessari 
as law school are for the train of barristers; consequ we were no 
longer repres abroad by incompet patriots. the nation wa 
prosperous; chicago, for a moment paralyz after a second great fire, had 
risen from it ruins, white and imperial, and more beauti than the white 
citi which had been built for it playth in 1893. everywher good 
architectur wa replac bad, and even in new york, a sudden crave for 
decenc had swept away a great portion of the exist horrors. street 
had been widened, properli pave and lighted, tree had been planted, 
squar laid out, elev structur demolish and underground road 
built to replac them. the new govern build and barrack were fine 
bit of architecture, and the long system of stone quay which complet 
surround the island had been turn into park which prove a god-send 
to the population. the subsid of the state theatr and state opera 
brought it own reward. the unit state nation academi of design wa 
much like european institut of the same kind. nobodi envi the 
secretari of fine arts, either hi cabinet posit or hi portfolio. the 
secretari of forestri and game preserv had a much easier time, thank 
to the new system of nation mount police. We had profit well by the 
latest treati with franc and england; the exclus of foreign-born 
jew as a measur of self-preservation, the settlement of the new 
independ negro state of suanee, the check of immigration, the new 
law concern naturalization, and the gradual central of power in 
the execut all contribut to nation calm and prosperity. when the 
govern solv the indian problem and squadron of indian cavalri 
scout in nativ costum were substitut for the pitiabl organ 
tack on to the tail of skeleton regiment by a former secretari of 
war, the nation drew a long sigh of relief. when, after the coloss 
congress of religions, bigotri and intoler were laid in their grave 
and kind and chariti began to draw war sect together, mani 
thought the millennium had arrived, at least in the new world which after 
all is a world by itself. 

but self-preserv is the first law, and the unit state had to look 
on in helpless sorrow as germany, italy, spain and belgium writh in the 
throe of anarchy, while russia, watch from the caucasus, stoop and 
bound them one by one. 

In the citi of new york the summer of 1899 wa signal by the 
dismantl of the elev railroads. the summer of 1900 will live in 
the memori of new york peopl for mani a cycle; the dodg statu wa 
remov in that year. In the follow winter began that agit for 
the repeal of the law prohibit suicid which bore it final fruit in 
the month of april, 1920, when the first govern lethal chamber wa 
open on washington square. 

I had walk down that day from dr. archer' hous on madison avenue, 
where I had been as a mere formality. ever sinc that fall from my horse, 
four year before, I had been troubl at time with pain in the back of 
my head and neck, but now for month they had been absent, and the doctor 
sent me away that day say there wa noth more to be cure in me. It 
wa hardli worth hi fee to be told that; I knew it myself. still I did 
not grudg him the money. what I mind wa the mistak which he made at 
first. when they pick me up from the pavement where I lay unconscious, 
and somebodi had merci sent a bullet through my horse' head, I wa 
carri to dr. archer, and he, pronounc my brain affected, place me 
in hi privat asylum where I wa oblig to endur treatment for 
insanity. At last he decid that I wa well, and I, know that my mind 
had alway been as sound as his, if not sounder, "paid my tuition" as he 
jokingli call it, and left. I told him, smiling, that I would get even 
with him for hi mistake, and he laugh heartily, and ask me to call 
onc in a while. I did so, hope for a chanc to even up accounts, but 
he gave me none, and I told him I would wait. 

the fall from my hors had fortun left no evil results; on the 
contrari it had chang my whole charact for the better. from a lazi 
young man about town, I had becom active, energetic, temperate, and 
abov all--oh, abov all else--ambitious. there wa onli one thing which 
troubl me, I laugh at my own uneasiness, and yet it troubl me. 

dure my convalesc I had bought and read for the first time, _the 
king in yellow_. I rememb after finish the first act that it 
occur to me that I had better stop. I start up and flung the book 
into the fireplace; the volum struck the bar grate and fell open on 
the hearth in the firelight. If I had not caught a glimps of the open 
word in the second act I should never have finish it, but as I stoop 
to pick it up, my eye becam rivet to the open page, and with a cri of 
terror, or perhap it wa of joy so poignant that I suffer in everi 
nerve, I snatch the thing out of the coal and crept shake to my 
bedroom, where I read it and reread it, and wept and laugh and trembl 
with a horror which at time assail me yet. thi is the thing that 
troubl me, for I cannot forget carcosa where black star hang in the 
heavens; where the shadow of men' thought lengthen in the afternoon, 
when the twin sun sink into the lake of hali; and my mind will bear for 
ever the memori of the pallid mask. I pray god will curs the writer, as 
the writer ha curs the world with thi beautiful, stupend creation, 
terribl in it simplicity, irresist in it truth--a world which now 
trembl befor the king in yellow. when the french govern seiz the 
translat copi which had just arriv in paris, london, of course, 
becam eager to read it. It is well known how the book spread like an 
infecti disease, from citi to city, from contin to continent, 
bar out here, confisc there, denounc by press and pulpit, 
censur even by the most advanc of literari anarchists. No definit 
principl had been violat in those wick pages, no doctrin 
promulgated, no convict outraged. It could not be judg by ani known 
standard, yet, although it wa acknowledg that the suprem note of art 
had been struck in _the king in yellow_, all felt that human natur 
could not bear the strain, nor thrive on word in which the essenc of 
purest poison lurked. the veri banal and innoc of the first act 
onli allow the blow to fall afterward with more aw effect. 

It was, I remember, the 13th day of april, 1920, that the first 
govern lethal chamber wa establish on the south side of washington 
square, between wooster street and south fifth avenue. the block which 
had formerli consist of a lot of shabbi old buildings, use as café 
and restaur for foreigners, had been acquir by the govern in 
the winter of 1898. the french and italian café and restaur were 
torn down; the whole block wa enclos by a gild iron railing, and 
convert into a love garden with lawns, flower and fountains. In the 
centr of the garden stood a small, white building, sever classic in 
architecture, and surround by thicket of flowers. six ionic column 
support the roof, and the singl door wa of bronze. A splendid marbl 
group of the "fates" stood befor the door, the work of a young american 
sculptor, bori yvain, who had die in pari when onli twenty-thre year 
old. 

the inaugur ceremoni were in progress as I cross univers 
place and enter the square. I thread my way through the silent throng 
of spectators, but wa stop at fourth street by a cordon of police. A 
regiment of unit state lancer were drawn up in a hollow squar round 
the lethal chamber. On a rais tribun face washington park stood the 
governor of new york, and behind him were group the mayor of new 
york and brooklyn, the inspector-gener of police, the command of 
the state troops, colonel livingston, militari aid to the presid of the 
unit states, gener blount, command at governor' island, 
major-gener hamilton, command the garrison of new york and brooklyn, 
admir buffbi of the fleet in the north river, surgeon-gener 
lanceford, the staff of the nation free hospital, senat wyse and 
franklin of new york, and the commission of public works. the tribun 
wa surround by a squadron of hussar of the nation guard. 

the governor wa finish hi repli to the short speech of the 
surgeon-general. I heard him say: "the law prohibit suicid and 
provid punish for ani attempt at self-destruct have been 
repealed. the govern ha seen fit to acknowledg the right of man to 
end an exist which may have becom intoler to him, through 
physic suffer or mental despair. It is believ that the commun 
will be benefit by the remov of such peopl from their midst. sinc 
the passag of thi law, the number of suicid in the unit state ha 
not increased. now the govern ha determin to establish a lethal 
chamber in everi city, town and villag in the country, it remain to be 
seen whether or not that class of human creatur from whose despond 
rank new victim of self-destruct fall daili will accept the relief 
thu provided." He paused, and turn to the white lethal chamber. the 
silenc in the street wa absolute. "there a painless death await him 
who can no longer bear the sorrow of thi life. If death is welcom let 
him seek it there." then quickli turn to the militari aid of the 
president' household, he said, "I declar the lethal chamber open," and 
again face the vast crowd he cri in a clear voice: "citizen of new 
york and of the unit state of america, through me the govern 
declar the lethal chamber to be open." 

the solemn hush wa broken by a sharp cri of command, the squadron of 
hussar file after the governor' carriage, the lancer wheel and 
form along fifth avenu to wait for the command of the garrison, and 
the mount polic follow them. I left the crowd to gape and stare at 
the white marbl death chamber, and, cross south fifth avenue, walk 
along the western side of that thoroughfar to bleecker street. then I 
turn to the right and stop befor a dingi shop which bore the sign: 

hawberk, armourer. 

I glanc in at the doorway and saw hawberk busi in hi littl shop at 
the end of the hall. He look up, and catch sight of me cri in hi 
deep, hearti voice, "come in, mr. castaigne!" constance, hi daughter, 
rose to meet me as I cross the threshold, and held out her pretti 
hand, but I saw the blush of disappoint on her cheeks, and knew 
that it wa anoth castaign she had expected, my cousin louis. I 
smile at her confus and compliment her on the banner she wa 
embroid from a colour plate. old hawberk sat rivet the worn 
greav of some ancient suit of armour, and the ting! ting! ting! of hi 
littl hammer sound pleasantli in the quaint shop. present he 
drop hi hammer, and fuss about for a moment with a tini wrench. 
the soft clash of the mail sent a thrill of pleasur through me. I 
love to hear the music of steel brush against steel, the mellow 
shock of the mallet on thigh pieces, and the jingl of chain armour. 
that wa the onli reason I went to see hawberk. He had never interest 
me personally, nor did constance, except for the fact of her be in 
love with louis. thi did occupi my attention, and sometim even kept 
me awak at night. but I knew in my heart that all would come right, 
and that I should arrang their futur as I expect to arrang that of 
my kind doctor, john archer. however, I should never have troubl 
myself about visit them just then, had it not been, as I say, that 
the music of the tinkl hammer had for me thi strong fascination. I 
would sit for hours, listen and listening, and when a stray sunbeam 
struck the inlaid steel, the sensat it gave me wa almost too keen 
to endure. My eye would becom fixed, dilat with a pleasur that 
stretch everi nerv almost to breaking, until some movement of the 
old armour cut off the ray of sunlight, then, still thrill 
secretly, I lean back and listen again to the sound of the 
polish rag, swish! swish! rub rust from the rivets. 

constanc work with the embroideri over her knees, now and then paus 
to examin more close the pattern in the colour plate from the 
metropolitan museum. 

"who is thi for?" I asked. 

hawberk explained, that in addit to the treasur of armour in the 
metropolitan museum of which he had been appoint armourer, he also 
had charg of sever collect belong to rich amateurs. thi wa the 
miss greav of a famou suit which a client of hi had trace to a 
littl shop in pari on the quai d'orsay. he, hawberk, had negoti for 
and secur the greave, and now the suit wa complete. He laid down hi 
hammer and read me the histori of the suit, trace sinc 1450 from owner 
to owner until it wa acquir by thoma stainbridge. when hi superb 
collect wa sold, thi client of hawberk' bought the suit, and sinc 
then the search for the miss greav had been push until it was, 
almost by accident, locat in paris. 

"did you continu the search so persist without ani certainti of the 
greav be still in existence?" I demanded. 

"of course," he repli coolly. 

then for the first time I took a person interest in hawberk. 

"it wa worth someth to you," I ventured. 

"no," he replied, laughing, "mi pleasur in find it wa my reward." 

"have you no ambit to be rich?" I asked, smiling. 

"mi one ambit is to be the best armour in the world," he answer 
gravely. 

constanc ask me if I had seen the ceremoni at the lethal chamber. 
she herself had notic cavalri pass up broadway that morning, and had 
wish to see the inauguration, but her father want the banner 
finished, and she had stay at hi request. 

"did you see your cousin, mr. castaigne, there?" she asked, with the 
slightest tremor of her soft eyelashes. 

"no," I repli carelessly. "louis' regiment is manoeuvr out in 
westchest county." I rose and pick up my hat and cane. 

"are you go upstair to see the lunat again?" laugh old hawberk. 
If hawberk knew how I loath that word "lunatic," he would never use it 
in my presence. It rous certain feel within me which I do not care 
to explain. however, I answer him quietly: "I think I shall drop in and 
see mr. wild for a moment or two." 

"poor fellow," said constance, with a shake of the head, "it must be hard 
to live alon year after year poor, crippl and almost demented. It is 
veri good of you, mr. castaigne, to visit him as often as you do." 

"I think he is vicious," observ hawberk, begin again with hi 
hammer. I listen to the golden tinkl on the greav plates; when he had 
finish I replied: 

"no, he is not vicious, nor is he in the least demented. hi mind is a 
wonder chamber, from which he can extract treasur that you and I would 
give year of our life to acquire."' 

hawberk laughed. 

I continu a littl impatiently: "he know histori as no one els could 
know it. nothing, howev trivial, escap hi search, and hi memori is 
so absolute, so precis in details, that were it known in new york that 
such a man existed, the peopl could not honour him enough." 

"nonsense," mutter hawberk, search on the floor for a fallen rivet. 

"i it nonsense," I asked, manag to suppress what I felt, "i it 
nonsens when he say that the tasset and cuissard of the enamel 
suit of armour commonli known as the 'prince' emblazoned' can be found 
among a mass of rusti theatric properties, broken stove and 
ragpicker' refus in a garret in pell street?" 

hawberk' hammer fell to the ground, but he pick it up and asked, with 
a great deal of calm, how I knew that the tasset and left cuissard were 
miss from the "prince' emblazoned." 

"I did not know until mr. wild mention it to me the other day. He said 
they were in the garret of 998 pell street." 

"nonsense," he cried, but I notic hi hand trembl under hi leathern 
apron. 

"i thi nonsens too?" I ask pleasantly, "i it nonsens when mr. 
wild continu speak of you as the marqui of avonshir and of miss 
constance--" 

I did not finish, for constanc had start to her feet with terror 
written on everi feature. hawberk look at me and slowli smooth hi 
leathern apron. 

"that is impossible," he observed, "mr. wild may know a great mani 
things--" 

"about armour, for instance, and the 'prince' emblazoned,'" I 
interposed, smiling. 

"yes," he continued, slowly, "about armour also--may be--but he is wrong 
in regard to the marqui of avonshire, who, as you know, kill hi 
wife' traduc year ago, and went to australia where he did not long 
surviv hi wife." 

"mr. wild is wrong," murmur constance. her lip were blanched, but her 
voic wa sweet and calm. 

"let us agree, if you please, that in thi one circumst mr. wild is 
wrong," I said. 




II 

I climb the three dilapid flight of stairs, which I had so often 
climb before, and knock at a small door at the end of the corridor. 
mr. wild open the door and I walk in. 

when he had double-lock the door and push a heavi chest against it, 
he came and sat down besid me, peer up into my face with hi littl 
light-colour eyes. half a dozen new scratch cover hi nose and 
cheeks, and the silver wire which support hi artifici ear had 
becom displaced. I thought I had never seen him so hideous 
fascinating. He had no ears. the artifici ones, which now stood out at 
an angl from the fine wire, were hi one weakness. they were made of wax 
and paint a shell pink, but the rest of hi face wa yellow. He might 
better have revel in the luxuri of some artifici finger for hi 
left hand, which wa absolut fingerless, but it seem to caus him no 
inconvenience, and he wa satisfi with hi wax ears. He wa veri small, 
scarc higher than a child of ten, but hi arm were magnific 
developed, and hi thigh as thick as ani athlete's. still, the most 
remark thing about mr. wild wa that a man of hi marvel 
intellig and knowledg should have such a head. It wa flat and 
pointed, like the head of mani of those unfortun whom peopl 
imprison in asylum for the weak-minded. mani call him insane, but I 
knew him to be as sane as I was. 

I do not deni that he wa eccentric; the mania he had for keep that 
cat and teas her until she flew at hi face like a demon, wa 
certainli eccentric. I never could understand whi he kept the creature, 
nor what pleasur he found in shut himself up in hi room with thi 
surly, viciou beast. I rememb once, glanc up from the manuscript I 
wa studi by the light of some tallow dips, and see mr. wild 
squat motionless on hi high chair, hi eye fairli blaze with 
excitement, while the cat, which had risen from her place befor the 
stove, came creep across the floor right at him. befor I could move 
she flatten her belli to the ground, crouched, trembled, and sprang 
into hi face. howl and foam they roll over and over on the 
floor, scratch and clawing, until the cat scream and fled under the 
cabinet, and mr. wild turn over on hi back, hi limb contract and 
curl up like the leg of a die spider. He _was_ eccentric. 

mr. wild had climb into hi high chair, and, after studi my face, 
pick up a dog's-ear ledger and open it. 

"henri B. matthews," he read, "book-keep with whysot whysot and 
company, dealer in church ornaments. call april 3rd. reput 
damag on the race-track. known as a welcher. reput to be repair 
by august 1st. retain five dollars." He turn the page and ran hi 
fingerless knuckl down the closely-written columns. 

"p. green dusenberry, minist of the gospel, fairbeach, new jersey. 
reput damag in the bowery. To be repair as soon as possible. 
retain $100." 

He cough and added, "called, april 6th." 

"then you are not in need of money, mr. wilde," I inquired. 

"listen," he cough again. 

"mrs. C. hamilton chester, of chester park, new york city. call april 
7th. reput damag at dieppe, france. To be repair by octob 1st 
retain $500. 

"note.--c. hamilton chester, captain u.s.s. 'avalanche', order home 
from south sea squadron octob 1st." 

"well," I said, "the profess of a repair of reput is 
lucrative." 

hi colourless eye sought mine, "I onli want to demonstr that I 
wa correct. you said it wa imposs to succeed as a repair of 
reputations; that even if I did succeed in certain case it would cost 
me more than I would gain by it. to-day I have five hundr men in my 
employ, who are poorli paid, but who pursu the work with an enthusiasm 
which possibl may be born of fear. these men enter everi shade and grade 
of society; some even are pillar of the most exclus social temples; 
other are the prop and pride of the financi world; still others, hold 
undisput sway among the 'fanci and the talent.' I choos them at my 
leisur from those who repli to my advertisements. It is easi enough, 
they are all cowards. I could trebl the number in twenti day if I 
wished. So you see, those who have in their keep the reput of 
their fellow-citizens, I have in my pay." 

"they may turn on you," I suggested. 

He rub hi thumb over hi crop ears, and adjust the wax 
substitutes. "I think not," he murmur thoughtfully, "I seldom have to 
appli the whip, and then onli once. besid they like their wages." 

"how do you appli the whip?" I demanded. 

hi face for a moment wa aw to look upon. hi eye dwindl to a pair 
of green sparks. 

"I invit them to come and have a littl chat with me," he said in a soft 
voice. 

A knock at the door interrupt him, and hi face resum it amiabl 
expression. 

"who is it?" he inquired. 

"mr. steylette," wa the answer. 

"come to-morrow," repli mr. wilde. 

"impossible," began the other, but wa silenc by a sort of bark from 
mr. wilde. 

"come to-morrow," he repeated. 

We heard somebodi move away from the door and turn the corner by the 
stairway. 

"who is that?" I asked. 

"arnold steylette, owner and editor in chief of the great new york 
daily." 

He drum on the ledger with hi fingerless hand adding: "I pay him veri 
badly, but he think it a good bargain." 

"arnold steylette!" I repeat amazed. 

"yes," said mr. wilde, with a self-satisfi cough. 

the cat, which had enter the room as he spoke, hesitated, look up at 
him and snarled. He climb down from the chair and squat on the 
floor, took the creatur into hi arm and caress her. the cat ceas 
snarl and present began a loud pur which seem to increas in 
timbr as he stroke her. "where are the notes?" I asked. He point to 
the table, and for the hundredth time I pick up the bundl of 
manuscript entitled-- 

"the imperi dynasti OF america." 

one by one I studi the well-worn pages, worn onli by my own handling, 
and although I knew all by heart, from the beginning, "when from carcosa, 
the hyades, hastur, and aldebaran," to "castaigne, loui de calvados, 
born decemb 19th, 1877," I read it with an eager, rapt attention, 
paus to repeat part of it aloud, and dwell especi on "hildr 
de calvados, onli son of hildr castaign and edyth land castaigne, 
first in succession," etc., etc. 

when I finished, mr. wild nod and coughed. 

"speak of your legitim ambition," he said, "how do constanc and 
loui get along?" 

"she love him," I repli simply. 

the cat on hi knee suddenli turn and struck at hi eyes, and he flung 
her off and climb on to the chair opposit me. 

"and dr. archer! but that' a matter you can settl ani time you wish," 
he added. 

"yes," I replied, "dr. archer can wait, but it is time I saw my cousin 
louis." 

"it is time," he repeated. then he took anoth ledger from the tabl and 
ran over the leav rapidly. "we are now in commun with ten 
thousand men," he muttered. "we can count on one hundr thousand within 
the first twenty-eight hours, and in forty-eight hour the state will 
rise _en masse_. the countri follow the state, and the portion that 
will not, I mean california and the northwest, might better never have 
been inhabited. I shall not send them the yellow sign." 

the blood rush to my head, but I onli answered, "A new broom sweep 
clean." 

"the ambit of caesar and of napoleon pale befor that which could not 
rest until it had seiz the mind of men and control even their 
unborn thoughts," said mr. wilde. 

"you are speak of the king in yellow," I groaned, with a shudder. 

"he is a king whom emperor have served." 

"I am content to serv him," I replied. 

mr. wild sat rub hi ear with hi crippl hand. "perhap constanc 
doe not love him," he suggested. 

I start to reply, but a sudden burst of militari music from the street 
below drown my voice. the twentieth dragoon regiment, formerli in 
garrison at mount st. vincent, wa return from the manoeuvr in 
westchest county, to it new barrack on east washington square. It wa 
my cousin' regiment. they were a fine lot of fellows, in their pale 
blue, tight-fit jackets, jaunti busbi and white ride breech with 
the doubl yellow stripe, into which their limb seem moulded. everi 
other squadron wa arm with lances, from the metal point of which 
flutter yellow and white pennons. the band passed, play the 
regiment march, then came the colonel and staff, the hors crowd 
and trampling, while their head bob in unison, and the pennon 
flutter from their lanc points. the troopers, who rode with the 
beauti english seat, look brown as berri from their bloodless 
campaign among the farm of westchester, and the music of their sabr 
against the stirrups, and the jingl of spur and carbin wa delight 
to me. I saw loui ride with hi squadron. He wa as handsom an 
offic as I have ever seen. mr. wilde, who had mount a chair by the 
window, saw him too, but said nothing. loui turn and look straight 
at hawberk' shop as he passed, and I could see the flush on hi brown 
cheeks. I think constanc must have been at the window. when the last 
trooper had clatter by, and the last pennon vanish into south fifth 
avenue, mr. wild clamber out of hi chair and drag the chest away 
from the door. 

"yes," he said, "it is time that you saw your cousin louis." 

He unlock the door and I pick up my hat and stick and step into 
the corridor. the stair were dark. grope about, I set my foot on 
someth soft, which snarl and spit, and I aim a murder blow at 
the cat, but my cane shiver to splinter against the balustrade, and 
the beast scurri back into mr. wilde' room. 

pass hawberk' door again I saw him still at work on the armour, but 
I did not stop, and step out into bleecker street, I follow it to 
wooster, skirt the ground of the lethal chamber, and cross 
washington park went straight to my room in the benedick. here I lunch 
comfortably, read the _herald_ and the _meteor_, and final went 
to the steel safe in my bedroom and set the time combination. the 
three and three-quart minut which it is necessari to wait, while the 
time lock is opening, are to me golden moments. from the instant I set 
the combin to the moment when I grasp the knob and swing back 
the solid steel doors, I live in an ecstasi of expectation. those moment 
must be like moment pass in paradise. I know what I am to find at 
the end of the time limit. I know what the massiv safe hold secur for 
me, for me alone, and the exquisit pleasur of wait is hardli enhanc 
when the safe open and I lift, from it velvet crown, a diadem of purest 
gold, blaze with diamonds. I do thi everi day, and yet the joy of 
wait and at last touch again the diadem, onli seem to increas as 
the day pass. It is a diadem fit for a king among kings, an emperor 
among emperors. the king in yellow might scorn it, but it shall be worn 
by hi royal servant. 

I held it in my arm until the alarm in the safe rang harshly, and then 
tenderly, proudly, I replac it and shut the steel doors. I walk 
slowli back into my study, which face washington square, and lean on 
the window sill. the afternoon sun pour into my windows, and a gentl 
breez stir the branch of the elm and mapl in the park, now 
cover with bud and tender foliage. A flock of pigeon circl about 
the tower of the memori church; sometim alight on the purpl tile 
roof, sometim wheel downward to the loto fountain in front of the 
marbl arch. the garden were busi with the flower bed around the 
fountain, and the freshli turn earth smell sweet and spicy. A lawn 
mower, drawn by a fat white horse, clink across the green sward, and 
watering-cart pour shower of spray over the asphalt drives. around 
the statu of peter stuyvesant, which in 1897 had replac the 
monstros suppos to repres garibaldi, children play in the 
spring sunshine, and nurs girl wheel elabor babi carriag with a 
reckless disregard for the pasty-fac occupants, which could probabl be 
explain by the presenc of half a dozen trim dragoon trooper languidli 
loll on the benches. through the trees, the washington memori arch 
glisten like silver in the sunshine, and beyond, on the eastern 
extrem of the squar the grey stone barrack of the dragoons, and the 
white granit artilleri stabl were aliv with colour and motion. 

I look at the lethal chamber on the corner of the squar opposite. A 
few curiou peopl still linger about the gild iron railing, but 
insid the ground the path were deserted. I watch the fountain 
rippl and sparkle; the sparrow had alreadi found thi new bath nook, 
and the basin were cover with the dusty-feath littl things. two 
or three white peacock pick their way across the lawns, and a drab 
colour pigeon sat so motionless on the arm of one of the "fates," that 
it seem to be a part of the sculptur stone. 

As I wa turn carelessli away, a slight commot in the group of 
curiou loiter around the gate attract my attention. A young man 
had entered, and wa advanc with nervou stride along the gravel path 
which lead to the bronz door of the lethal chamber. He paus a moment 
befor the "fates," and as he rais hi head to those three mysteri 
faces, the pigeon rose from it sculptur perch, circl about for a 
moment and wheel to the east. the young man press hi hand to hi 
face, and then with an undefin gestur sprang up the marbl steps, 
the bronz door close behind him, and half an hour later the loiter 
slouch away, and the frighten pigeon return to it perch in the 
arm of fate. 

I put on my hat and went out into the park for a littl walk befor 
dinner. As I cross the central driveway a group of offic passed, and 
one of them call out, "hello, hildred," and came back to shake hand 
with me. It wa my cousin louis, who stood smile and tap hi 
spur heel with hi riding-whip. 

"just back from westchester," he said; "been do the bucolic; milk and 
curds, you know, dairy-maid in sunbonnets, who say 'haeow' and 'I don't 
think' when you tell them they are pretty. i'm nearli dead for a squar 
meal at delmonico's. what' the news?" 

"there is none," I repli pleasantly. "I saw your regiment come in thi 
morning." 

"did you? I didn't see you. where were you?" 

"in mr. wilde' window." 

"oh, hell!" he began impatiently, "that man is stark mad! I don't 
understand whi you--" 

He saw how annoy I felt by thi outburst, and beg my pardon. 

"really, old chap," he said, "I don't mean to run down a man you like, 
but for the life of me I can't see what the deuc you find in common with 
mr. wilde. he' not well bred, to put it generously; he is hideous 
deformed; hi head is the head of a crimin insan person. you know 
yourself he' been in an asylum--" 

"so have i," I interrupt calmly. 

loui look startl and confus for a moment, but recov and 
slap me heartili on the shoulder. "you were complet cured," he 
began; but I stop him again. 

"I suppos you mean that I wa simpli acknowledg never to have been 
insane." 

"of cours that--that' what I meant," he laughed. 

I dislik hi laugh becaus I knew it wa forced, but I nod gaili and 
ask him where he wa going. loui look after hi brother offic who 
had now almost reach broadway. 

"we had intend to sampl a brunswick cocktail, but to tell you the 
truth I wa anxiou for an excus to go and see hawberk instead. come 
along, i'll make you my excuse." 

We found old hawberk, neatli attir in a fresh spring suit, stand at 
the door of hi shop and snif the air. 

"I had just decid to take constanc for a littl stroll befor dinner," 
he repli to the impetu volley of question from louis. "we thought 
of walk on the park terrac along the north river." 

At that moment constanc appear and grew pale and rosi by turn as 
loui bent over her small glove fingers. I tri to excus myself, 
alleg an engag uptown, but loui and constanc would not listen, 
and I saw I wa expect to remain and engag old hawberk' attention. 
after all it would be just as well if I kept my eye on louis, I thought, 
and when they hail a spring street horse-car, I got in after them and 
took my seat besid the armourer. 

the beauti line of park and granit terrac overlook the wharv 
along the north river, which were built in 1910 and finish in the 
autumn of 1917, had becom one of the most popular promenad in the 
metropolis. they extend from the batteri to 190th street, overlook 
the nobl river and afford a fine view of the jersey shore and the 
highland opposite. café and restaur were scatter here and there 
among the trees, and twice a week militari band from the garrison play 
in the kiosqu on the parapets. 

We sat down in the sunshin on the bench at the foot of the equestrian 
statu of gener sheridan. constanc tip her sunshad to shield her 
eyes, and she and loui began a murmur convers which wa 
imposs to catch. old hawberk, lean on hi ivori head cane, 
light an excel cigar, the mate to which I polit refused, and 
smile at vacancy. the sun hung low abov the staten island woods, and 
the bay wa dy with golden hue reflect from the sun-warm sail of 
the ship in the harbour. 

brigs, schooners, yachts, clumsi ferry-boats, their deck swarm with 
people, railroad transport carri line of brown, blue and white 
freight cars, state sound steamers, déclassé tramp steamers, coasters, 
dredgers, scows, and everywher pervad the entir bay impud littl 
tug puf and whistl officiously;--thes were the craft which 
churn the sunlight water as far as the eye could reach. In calm 
contrast to the hurri of sail vessel and steamer a silent fleet of 
white warship lay motionless in midstream. 

constance' merri laugh arous me from my reverie. 

"what _are_ you stare at?" she inquired. 

"nothing--th fleet," I smiled. 

then loui told us what the vessel were, point out each by it 
rel posit to the old red fort on governor' island. 

"that littl cigar shape thing is a torpedo boat," he explained; "there 
are four more lie close together. they are the _tarpon_, the _falcon_, 
the _sea fox_, and the _octopus_. the gun-boat just abov are the 
_princeton_, the _champlain_, the _still water_ and the _erie_. next to 
them lie the cruiser _faragut_ and _lo angeles_, and abov them the 
battl ship _california_, and _dakota_, and the _washington_ which is 
the flag ship. those two squatti look chunk of metal which are 
anchor there off castl william are the doubl turret monitor 
_terrible_ and _magnificent_; behind them lie the ram, _osceola_." 

constanc look at him with deep approv in her beauti eyes. "what 
load of thing you know for a soldier," she said, and we all join in 
the laugh which followed. 

present loui rose with a nod to us and offer hi arm to constance, 
and they stroll away along the river wall. hawberk watch them for a 
moment and then turn to me. 

"mr. wild wa right," he said. "I have found the miss tasset and 
left cuissard of the 'prince' emblazoned,' in a vile old junk garret in 
pell street." 

"998?" I inquired, with a smile. 

"yes." 

"mr. wild is a veri intellig man," I observed. 

"I want to give him the credit of thi most import discovery," 
continu hawberk. "and I intend it shall be known that he is entitl 
to the fame of it." 

"he won't thank you for that," I answer sharply; "pleas say noth 
about it." 

"do you know what it is worth?" said hawberk. 

"no, fifti dollars, perhaps." 

"it is valu at five hundred, but the owner of the 'prince' emblazoned' 
will give two thousand dollar to the person who complet hi suit; that 
reward also belong to mr. wilde." 

"he doesn't want it! He refus it!" I answer angrily. "what do you 
know about mr. wilde? He doesn't need the money. He is rich--or will 
be--rich than ani live man except myself. what will we care for money 
then--what will we care, he and I, when--when--" 

"when what?" demand hawberk, astonished. 

"you will see," I replied, on my guard again. 

He look at me narrowly, much as doctor archer use to, and I knew he 
thought I wa mental unsound. perhap it wa fortun for him that he 
did not use the word lunat just then. 

"no," I repli to hi unspoken thought, "I am not mental weak; my mind 
is as healthi as mr. wilde's. I do not care to explain just yet what I 
have on hand, but it is an invest which will pay more than mere gold, 
silver and preciou stones. It will secur the happi and prosper 
of a continent--yes, a hemisphere!" 

"oh," said hawberk. 

"and eventually," I continu more quietly, "it will secur the happi 
of the whole world." 

"and incident your own happi and prosper as well as mr. 
wilde's?" 

"exactly," I smiled. but I could have throttl him for take that tone. 

He look at me in silenc for a while and then said veri gently, "whi 
don't you give up your book and studies, mr. castaigne, and take a tramp 
among the mountain somewher or other? you use to be fond of fishing. 
take a cast or two at the trout in the rangelys." 

"I don't care for fish ani more," I answered, without a shade of 
annoy in my voice. 

"you use to be fond of everything," he continued; "athletics, yachting, 
shooting, riding--" 

"I have never care to ride sinc my fall," I said quietly. 

"ah, yes, your fall," he repeated, look away from me. 

I thought thi nonsens had gone far enough, so I brought the 
convers back to mr. wilde; but he wa scan my face again in a 
manner highli offens to me. 

"mr. wilde," he repeated, "do you know what he did thi afternoon? He 
came downstair and nail a sign over the hall door next to mine; it 
read: 

"mr. wilde, 
repair OF reputations. 
third bell. 

"do you know what a repair of reput can be?" 

"I do," I replied, suppress the rage within. 

"oh," he said again. 

loui and constanc came stroll by and stop to ask if we would join 
them. hawberk look at hi watch. At the same moment a puff of smoke 
shot from the casem of castl william, and the boom of the sunset gun 
roll across the water and wa re-echo from the highland opposite. 
the flag came run down from the flag-pole, the bugl sound on the 
white deck of the warships, and the first electr light sparkl out 
from the jersey shore. 

As I turn into the citi with hawberk I heard constanc murmur someth 
to loui which I did not understand; but loui whisper "mi darling," in 
reply; and again, walk ahead with hawberk through the squar I heard a 
murmur of "sweetheart," and "mi own constance," and I knew the time had 
nearli arriv when I should speak of import matter with my cousin 
louis. 




iii 

one morn earli in may I stood befor the steel safe in my bedroom, 
tri on the golden jewel crown. the diamond flash fire as I 
turn to the mirror, and the heavi beaten gold burn like a halo about 
my head. I rememb camilla' agon scream and the aw word 
echo through the dim street of carcosa. they were the last line in 
the first act, and I dare not think of what followed--dar not, even 
in the spring sunshine, there in my own room, surround with familiar 
objects, reassur by the bustl from the street and the voic of the 
servant in the hallway outside. for those poison word had drop 
slowli into my heart, as death-sweat drop upon a bed-sheet and is 
absorbed. trembling, I put the diadem from my head and wipe my forehead, 
but I thought of hastur and of my own right ambition, and I rememb 
mr. wild as I had last left him, hi face all torn and bloodi from the 
claw of that devil' creature, and what he said--ah, what he said. the 
alarm bell in the safe began to whirr harshly, and I knew my time wa up; 
but I would not heed it, and replac the flash circlet upon my head 
I turn defiantli to the mirror. I stood for a long time absorb in the 
chang express of my own eyes. the mirror reflect a face which wa 
like my own, but whiter, and so thin that I hardli recogn it and all 
the time I kept repeat between my clench teeth, "the day ha come! 
the day ha come!" while the alarm in the safe whir and clamoured, and 
the diamond sparkl and flame abov my brow. I heard a door open but 
did not heed it. It wa onli when I saw two face in the mirror:--it wa 
onli when anoth face rose over my shoulder, and two other eye met 
mine. I wheel like a flash and seiz a long knife from my 
dressing-table, and my cousin sprang back veri pale, crying: "hildred! 
for god' sake!" then as my hand fell, he said: "it is I, louis, don't 
you know me?" I stood silent. I could not have spoken for my life. He 
walk up to me and took the knife from my hand. 

"what is all this?" he inquired, in a gentl voice. "are you ill?" 

"no," I replied. but I doubt if he heard me. 

"come, come, old fellow," he cried, "take off that brass crown and toddl 
into the study. are you go to a masquerade? what' all thi theatric 
tinsel anyway?" 

I wa glad he thought the crown wa made of brass and paste, yet I didn't 
like him ani the better for think so. I let him take it from my hand, 
know it wa best to humour him. He toss the splendid diadem in the 
air, and catch it, turn to me smiling. 

"it' dear at fifti cents," he said. "what' it for?" 

I did not answer, but took the circlet from hi hands, and place it in 
the safe shut the massiv steel door. the alarm ceas it infern din 
at once. He watch me curiously, but did not seem to notic the sudden 
ceas of the alarm. He did, however, speak of the safe as a biscuit 
box. fear lest he might examin the combin I led the way into my 
study. loui threw himself on the sofa and flick at fli with hi 
etern riding-whip. He wore hi fatigu uniform with the braid jacket 
and jaunti cap, and I notic that hi riding-boot were all splash 
with red mud. 

"where have you been?" I inquired. 

"jump mud creek in jersey," he said. "I haven't had time to chang 
yet; I wa rather in a hurri to see you. haven't you got a glass of 
something? i'm dead tired; been in the saddl twenty-four hours." 

I gave him some brandi from my medicin store, which he drank with a 
grimace. 

"damn bad stuff," he observed. "i'll give you an address where they 
sell brandi that is brandy." 

"it' good enough for my needs," I said indifferently. "I use it to rub 
my chest with." He stare and flick at anoth fly. 

"see here, old fellow," he began, "i'v got someth to suggest to you. 
it' four year now that you'v shut yourself up here like an owl, never 
go anywhere, never take ani healthi exercise, never do a damn 
thing but pore over those book up there on the mantelpiece." 

He glanc along the row of shelves. "napoleon, napoleon, napoleon!" he 
read. "for heaven' sake, have you noth but napoleon there?" 

"I wish they were bound in gold," I said. "but wait, yes, there is 
anoth book, _the king in yellow_." I look him steadili in the 
eye. 

"have you never read it?" I asked. 

"i? no, thank god! I don't want to be driven crazy." 

I saw he regret hi speech as soon as he had utter it. there is onli 
one word which I loath more than I do lunat and that word is crazy. 
but I control myself and ask him whi he thought _the king in 
yellow_ dangerous. 

"oh, I don't know," he said, hastily. "I onli rememb the excit it 
creat and the denunci from pulpit and press. I believ the author 
shot himself after bring forth thi monstrosity, didn't he?" 

"I understand he is still alive," I answered. 

"that' probabl true," he muttered; "bullet couldn't kill a fiend like 
that." 

"it is a book of great truths," I said. 

"yes," he replied, "of 'truths' which send men frantic and blast their 
lives. I don't care if the thing is, as they say, the veri suprem 
essenc of art. it' a crime to have written it, and I for one shall 
never open it pages." 

"i that what you have come to tell me?" I asked. 

"no," he said, "I came to tell you that I am go to be married." 

I believ for a moment my heart ceas to beat, but I kept my eye on hi 
face. 

"yes," he continued, smile happily, "marri to the sweetest girl on 
earth." 

"constanc hawberk," I said mechanically. 

"how did you know?" he cried, astonished. "I didn't know it myself until 
that even last april, when we stroll down to the embank befor 
dinner." 

"when is it to be?" I asked. 

"it wa to have been next september, but an hour ago a despatch came 
order our regiment to the presidio, san francisco. We leav at noon 
to-morrow. to-morrow," he repeated. "just think, hildred, to-morrow I 
shall be the happiest fellow that ever drew breath in thi jolli world, 
for constanc will go with me." 

I offer him my hand in congratulation, and he seiz and shook it like 
the good-natur fool he was--or pretend to be. 

"I am go to get my squadron as a wed present," he rattl on. 
"captain and mrs. loui castaigne, eh, hildred?" 

then he told me where it wa to be and who were to be there, and made me 
promis to come and be best man. I set my teeth and listen to hi 
boyish chatter without show what I felt, but-- 

I wa get to the limit of my endurance, and when he jump up, and, 
switch hi spur till they jingled, said he must go, I did not detain 
him. 

"there' one thing I want to ask of you," I said quietly. 

"out with it, it' promised," he laughed. 

"I want you to meet me for a quarter of an hour' talk to-night." 

"of course, if you wish," he said, somewhat puzzled. "where?" 

"anywhere, in the park there." 

"what time, hildred?" 

"midnight." 

"what in the name of--" he began, but check himself and laughingli 
assented. I watch him go down the stair and hurri away, hi sabr 
bang at everi stride. He turn into bleecker street, and I knew he 
wa go to see constance. I gave him ten minut to disappear and then 
follow in hi footsteps, take with me the jewel crown and the 
silken robe embroid with the yellow sign. when I turn into bleecker 
street, and enter the doorway which bore the sign-- 

mr. wilde, 
repair OF reputations. 
third bell. 

I saw old hawberk move about in hi shop, and imagin I heard 
constance' voic in the parlour; but I avoid them both and hurri up 
the trembl stairway to mr. wilde' apartment. I knock and enter 
without ceremony. mr. wild lay groan on the floor, hi face cover 
with blood, hi cloth torn to shreds. drop of blood were scatter 
about over the carpet, which had also been rip and fray in the 
evid recent struggle. 

"it' that curs cat," he said, ceas hi groans, and turn hi 
colourless eye to me; "she attack me while I wa asleep. I believ she 
will kill me yet." 

thi wa too much, so I went into the kitchen, and, seiz a hatchet 
from the pantry, start to find the infern beast and settl her then 
and there. My search wa fruitless, and after a while I gave it up and 
came back to find mr. wild squat on hi high chair by the table. He 
had wash hi face and chang hi clothes. the great furrow which the 
cat' claw had plough up in hi face he had fill with collodion, and 
a rag hid the wound in hi throat. I told him I should kill the cat when 
I came across her, but he onli shook hi head and turn to the open 
ledger befor him. He read name after name of the peopl who had come to 
him in regard to their reputation, and the sum he had amass were 
startling. 

"I put on the screw now and then," he explained. 

"one day or other some of these peopl will assassin you," I insisted. 

"do you think so?" he said, rub hi mutil ears. 

It wa useless to argu with him, so I took down the manuscript entitl 
imperi dynasti of america, for the last time I should ever take it down 
in mr. wilde' study. I read it through, thrill and trembl with 
pleasure. when I had finish mr. wild took the manuscript and, turn 
to the dark passag which lead from hi studi to hi bed-chamber, 
call out in a loud voice, "vance." then for the first time, I notic a 
man crouch there in the shadow. how I had overlook him dure my 
search for the cat, I cannot imagine. 

"vance, come in," cri mr. wilde. 

the figur rose and crept toward us, and I shall never forget the face 
that he rais to mine, as the light from the window illumin it. 

"vance, thi is mr. castaigne," said mr. wilde. befor he had finish 
speaking, the man threw himself on the ground befor the table, cri 
and grasping, "oh, god! oh, my god! help me! forgiv me! oh, mr. 
castaigne, keep that man away. you cannot, you cannot mean it! you are 
different--sav me! I am broken down--i wa in a madhous and now--when 
all wa come right--when I had forgotten the king--th king in yellow 
and--but I shall go mad again--i shall go mad--" 

hi voic die into a choke rattle, for mr. wild had leapt on him and 
hi right hand encircl the man' throat. when vanc fell in a heap on 
the floor, mr. wild clamber nimbl into hi chair again, and rub 
hi mangl ear with the stump of hi hand, turn to me and ask me 
for the ledger. I reach it down from the shelf and he open it. after 
a moment' search among the beauti written pages, he cough 
complacently, and point to the name vance. 

"vance," he read aloud, "osgood oswald vance." At the sound of hi name, 
the man on the floor rais hi head and turn a convuls face to mr. 
wilde. hi eye were inject with blood, hi lip tumefied. "call 
april 28th," continu mr. wilde. "occupation, cashier in the seaforth 
nation bank; ha serv a term of forgeri at sing sing, from whenc he 
wa transfer to the asylum for the crimin insane. pardon by the 
governor of new york, and discharg from the asylum, januari 19, 1918. 
reput damag at sheepshead bay. rumour that he live beyond hi 
income. reput to be repair at once. retain $1,500. 

"note.--ha embezzl sum amount to $30,000 sinc march 20, 1919, 
excel family, and secur present posit through uncle' influence. 
father, presid of seaforth bank." 

I look at the man on the floor. 

"get up, vance," said mr. wild in a gentl voice. vanc rose as if 
hypnotized. "he will do as we suggest now," observ mr. wilde, and 
open the manuscript, he read the entir histori of the imperi 
dynasti of america. then in a kind and sooth murmur he ran over the 
import point with vance, who stood like one stunned. hi eye were so 
blank and vacant that I imagin he had becom half-witted, and remark 
it to mr. wild who repli that it wa of no consequ anyway. veri 
patient we point out to vanc what hi share in the affair would be, 
and he seem to understand after a while. mr. wild explain the 
manuscript, use sever volum on heraldry, to substanti the result 
of hi researches. He mention the establish of the dynasti in 
carcosa, the lake which connect hastur, aldebaran and the mysteri of 
the hyades. He spoke of cassilda and camilla, and sound the cloudi 
depth of demhe, and the lake of hali. "the scollop tatter of the king 
in yellow must hide yhtill forever," he muttered, but I do not believ 
vanc heard him. then by degre he led vanc along the ramif of 
the imperi family, to uoht and thale, from naotalba and phantom of 
truth, to aldones, and then toss asid hi manuscript and notes, he 
began the wonder stori of the last king. fascin and thrill I 
watch him. He threw up hi head, hi long arm were stretch out in a 
magnific gestur of pride and power, and hi eye blaze deep in their 
socket like two emeralds. vanc listen stupefied. As for me, when at 
last mr. wild had finished, and point to me, cried, "the cousin of 
the king!" my head swam with excitement. 

control myself with a superhuman effort, I explain to vanc whi I 
alon wa worthi of the crown and whi my cousin must be exil or die. 
I made him understand that my cousin must never marry, even after 
renounc all hi claims, and how that least of all he should marri the 
daughter of the marqui of avonshir and bring england into the question. 
I show him a list of thousand of name which mr. wild had drawn up; 
everi man whose name wa there had receiv the yellow sign which no 
live human be dare disregard. the city, the state, the whole land, 
were readi to rise and trembl befor the pallid mask. 

the time had come, the peopl should know the son of hastur, and the 
whole world bow to the black star which hang in the sky over carcosa. 

vanc lean on the table, hi head buri in hi hands. mr. wild drew 
a rough sketch on the margin of yesterday' _herald_ with a bit of 
lead pencil. It wa a plan of hawberk' rooms. then he wrote out the 
order and affix the seal, and shake like a palsi man I sign my 
first writ of execut with my name hildred-rex. 

mr. wild clamber to the floor and unlock the cabinet, took a long 
squar box from the first shelf. thi he brought to the tabl and opened. 
A new knife lay in the tissu paper insid and I pick it up and hand 
it to vance, along with the order and the plan of hawberk' apartment. 
then mr. wild told vanc he could go; and he went, shambl like an 
outcast of the slums. 

I sat for a while watch the daylight fade behind the squar tower of 
the judson memori church, and finally, gather up the manuscript and 
notes, took my hat and start for the door. 

mr. wild watch me in silence. when I had step into the hall I 
look back. mr. wilde' small eye were still fix on me. behind him, 
the shadow gather in the fade light. then I close the door behind 
me and went out into the darken streets. 

I had eaten noth sinc breakfast, but I wa not hungry. A wretched, 
half-starv creature, who stood look across the street at the lethal 
chamber, notic me and came up to tell me a tale of misery. I gave him 
money, I don't know why, and he went away without thank me. An 
hour later anoth outcast approach and whine hi story. I had a blank 
bit of paper in my pocket, on which wa trace the yellow sign, and I 
hand it to him. He look at it stupidli for a moment, and then with an 
uncertain glanc at me, fold it with what seem to me exagger care 
and place it in hi bosom. 

the electr light were sparkl among the trees, and the new moon 
shone in the sky abov the lethal chamber. It wa tiresom wait in the 
square; I wander from the marbl arch to the artilleri stabl and back 
again to the loto fountain. the flower and grass exhal a fragranc 
which troubl me. the jet of the fountain play in the moonlight, and 
the music splash of fall drop remind me of the tinkl of chain 
mail in hawberk' shop. but it wa not so fascinating, and the dull 
sparkl of the moonlight on the water brought no such sensat of 
exquisit pleasure, as when the sunshin play over the polish steel 
of a corselet on hawberk' knee. I watch the bat dart and turn 
abov the water plant in the fountain basin, but their rapid, jerki 
flight set my nerv on edge, and I went away again to walk aimlessli to 
and fro among the trees. 

the artilleri stabl were dark, but in the cavalri barrack the 
officers' window were brilliantli lighted, and the sallyport wa 
constantli fill with trooper in fatigue, carri straw and har 
and basket fill with tin dishes. 

twice the mount sentri at the gate wa chang while I wander up and 
down the asphalt walk. I look at my watch. It wa nearli time. the 
light in the barrack went out one by one, the bar gate wa closed, 
and everi minut or two an offic pass in through the side wicket, 
leav a rattl of accoutr and a jingl of spur on the night air. 
the squar had becom veri silent. the last homeless loiter had been 
driven away by the grey-coat park policeman, the car track along 
wooster street were deserted, and the onli sound which broke the 
still wa the stamp of the sentry' hors and the ring of hi 
sabr against the saddl pommel. In the barracks, the officers' quarter 
were still lighted, and militari servant pass and repass befor the 
bay windows. twelv o'clock sound from the new spire of st. franci 
xavier, and at the last stroke of the sad-ton bell a figur pass 
through the wicket besid the portcullis, return the salut of the 
sentry, and cross the street enter the squar and advanc toward 
the benedick apart house. 

"louis," I called. 

the man pivot on hi spur heel and came straight toward me. 

"i that you, hildred?" 

"yes, you are on time." 

I took hi offer hand, and we stroll toward the lethal chamber. 

He rattl on about hi wed and the grace of constance, and their 
futur prospects, call my attent to hi captain' shoulder-straps, 
and the tripl gold arabesqu on hi sleev and fatigu cap. I believ I 
listen as much to the music of hi spur and sabr as I did to hi 
boyish babble, and at last we stood under the elm on the fourth street 
corner of the squar opposit the lethal chamber. then he laugh and 
ask me what I want with him. I motion him to a seat on a bench 
under the electr light, and sat down besid him. He look at me 
curiously, with that same search glanc which I hate and fear so in 
doctors. I felt the insult of hi look, but he did not know it, and I 
care conceal my feelings. 

"well, old chap," he inquired, "what can I do for you?" 

I drew from my pocket the manuscript and note of the imperi dynasti 
of america, and look him in the eye said: 

"I will tell you. On your word as a soldier, promis me to read thi 
manuscript from begin to end, without ask me a question. promis 
me to read these note in the same way, and promis me to listen to what 
I have to tell later." 

"I promise, if you wish it," he said pleasantly. "give me the paper, 
hildred." 

He began to read, rais hi eyebrow with a puzzled, whimsic air, 
which made me trembl with suppress anger. As he advanc his, eyebrow 
contracted, and hi lip seem to form the word "rubbish." 

then he look slightli bored, but appar for my sake read, with an 
attempt at interest, which present ceas to be an effort He start 
when in the close written page he came to hi own name, and when he 
came to mine he lower the paper, and look sharpli at me for a moment 
but he kept hi word, and resum hi reading, and I let the half-form 
question die on hi lip unanswered. when he came to the end and read the 
signatur of mr. wilde, he fold the paper care and return it to 
me. I hand him the notes, and he settl back, push hi fatigu cap 
up to hi forehead, with a boyish gesture, which I rememb so well in 
school. I watch hi face as he read, and when he finish I took the 
note with the manuscript, and place them in my pocket. then I unfold 
a scroll mark with the yellow sign. He saw the sign, but he did not 
seem to recogn it, and I call hi attent to it somewhat sharply. 

"well," he said, "I see it. what is it?" 

"it is the yellow sign," I said angrily. 

"oh, that' it, is it?" said louis, in that flatter voice, which 
doctor archer use to employ with me, and would probabl have employ 
again, had I not settl hi affair for him. 

I kept my rage down and answer as steadili as possible, "listen, you 
have engag your word?" 

"I am listening, old chap," he repli soothingly. 

I began to speak veri calmly. 

"dr. archer, have by some mean becom possess of the secret of the 
imperi succession, attempt to depriv me of my right, alleg that 
becaus of a fall from my hors four year ago, I had becom mental 
deficient. He presum to place me under restraint in hi own hous in 
hope of either drive me insan or poison me. I have not forgotten 
it. I visit him last night and the interview wa final." 

loui turn quit pale, but did not move. I resum triumphantly, "there 
are yet three peopl to be interview in the interest of mr. wild and 
myself. they are my cousin louis, mr. hawberk, and hi daughter 
constance." 

loui sprang to hi feet and I aros also, and flung the paper mark 
with the yellow sign to the ground. 

"oh, I don't need that to tell you what I have to say," I cried, with a 
laugh of triumph. "you must renounc the crown to me, do you hear, to 
_me_." 

loui look at me with a startl air, but recov himself said 
kindly, "of cours I renounc the--what is it I must renounce?" 

"the crown," I said angrily. 

"of course," he answered, "I renounc it. come, old chap, i'll walk back 
to your room with you." 

"don't tri ani of your doctor' trick on me," I cried, trembl with 
fury. "don't act as if you think I am insane." 

"what nonsense," he replied. "come, it' get late, hildred." 

"no," I shouted, "you must listen. you cannot marry, I forbid it. Do you 
hear? I forbid it. you shall renounc the crown, and in reward I grant 
you exile, but if you refus you shall die." 

He tri to calm me, but I wa rous at last, and draw my long knife 
bar hi way. 

then I told him how they would find dr. archer in the cellar with hi 
throat open, and I laugh in hi face when I thought of vanc and hi 
knife, and the order sign by me. 

"ah, you are the king," I cried, "but I shall be king. who are you to 
keep me from empir over all the habit earth! I wa born the cousin 
of a king, but I shall be king!" 

loui stood white and rigid befor me. suddenli a man came run up 
fourth street, enter the gate of the lethal temple, travers the path 
to the bronz door at full speed, and plung into the death chamber 
with the cri of one demented, and I laugh until I wept tears, for I had 
recogn vance, and knew that hawberk and hi daughter were no longer 
in my way. 

"go," I cri to louis, "you have ceas to be a menace. you will never 
marri constanc now, and if you marri ani one els in your exile, I will 
visit you as I did my doctor last night. mr. wild take charg of you 
to-morrow." then I turn and dart into south fifth avenue, and with a 
cri of terror loui drop hi belt and sabr and follow me like the 
wind. I heard him close behind me at the corner of bleecker street, and I 
dash into the doorway under hawberk' sign. He cried, "halt, or I 
fire!" but when he saw that I flew up the stair leav hawberk' shop 
below, he left me, and I heard him hammer and shout at their door 
as though it were possibl to arous the dead. 

mr. wilde' door wa open, and I enter crying, "it is done, it is done! 
let the nation rise and look upon their king!" but I could not find mr. 
wilde, so I went to the cabinet and took the splendid diadem from it 
case. then I drew on the white silk robe, embroid with the yellow 
sign, and place the crown upon my head. At last I wa king, king by my 
right in hastur, king becaus I knew the mysteri of the hyades, and my 
mind had sound the depth of the lake of hali. I wa king! the first 
grey pencil of dawn would rais a tempest which would shake two 
hemispheres. then as I stood, my everi nerv pitch to the highest 
tension, faint with the joy and splendour of my thought, without, in the 
dark passage, a man groaned. 

I seiz the tallow dip and sprang to the door. the cat pass me like a 
demon, and the tallow dip went out, but my long knife flew swifter than 
she, and I heard her screech, and I knew that my knife had found her. for 
a moment I listen to her tumbl and thump about in the darkness, 
and then when her frenzi ceased, I light a lamp and rais it over my 
head. mr. wild lay on the floor with hi throat torn open. At first I 
thought he wa dead, but as I looked, a green sparkl came into hi 
sunken eyes, hi mutil hand trembled, and then a spasm stretch hi 
mouth from ear to ear. for a moment my terror and despair gave place to 
hope, but as I bent over him hi eyebal roll clean around in hi 
head, and he died. then while I stood, transfix with rage and despair, 
see my crown, my empire, everi hope and everi ambition, my veri life, 
lie prostrat there with the dead master, _they_ came, seiz me 
from behind, and bound me until my vein stood out like cords, and my 
voic fail with the paroxysm of my frenzi screams. but I still 
raged, bleed and infuri among them, and more than one policeman 
felt my sharp teeth. then when I could no longer move they came nearer; I 
saw old hawberk, and behind him my cousin louis' ghastli face, and 
farther away, in the corner, a woman, constance, weep softly. 

"ah! I see it now!" I shrieked. "you have seiz the throne and the 
empire. woe! woe to you who are crown with the crown of the king in 
yellow!" 


[editor' note.--mr. castaign die yesterday in the asylum for crimin 
insane.] 




the mask 

camilla: you, sir, should unmask. 

stranger: indeed? 

cassilda: inde it' time. We all have laid asid disguis but you. 

stranger: I wear no mask. 

camilla: (terrified, asid to cassilda.) No mask? No mask! 

_the king in yellow, act I, scene 2_. 


I 

although I knew noth of chemistry, I listen fascinated. He pick up 
an easter lili which genevièv had brought that morn from notr dame, 
and drop it into the basin. instantli the liquid lost it crystallin 
clearness. for a second the lili wa envelop in a milk-whit foam, 
which disappeared, leav the fluid opalescent. chang tint of orang 
and crimson play over the surface, and then what seem to be a ray of 
pure sunlight struck through from the bottom where the lili wa resting. 
At the same instant he plung hi hand into the basin and drew out the 
flower. "there is no danger," he explained, "if you choos the right 
moment. that golden ray is the signal." 

He held the lili toward me, and I took it in my hand. It had turn to 
stone, to the purest marble. 

"you see," he said, "it is without a flaw. what sculptor could reproduc 
it?" 

the marbl wa white as snow, but in it depth the vein of the lili 
were ting with palest azure, and a faint flush linger deep in it 
heart. 

"don't ask me the reason of that," he smiled, notic my wonder. "I have 
no idea whi the vein and heart are tinted, but they alway are. 
yesterday I tri one of geneviève' gold-fish,--ther it is." 

the fish look as if sculptur in marble. but if you held it to the 
light the stone wa beauti vein with a faint blue, and from 
somewher within came a rosi light like the tint which slumber in an 
opal. I look into the basin. onc more it seem fill with clearest 
crystal. 

"if I should touch it now?" I demanded. 

"I don't know," he replied, "but you had better not try." 

"there is one thing i'm curiou about," I said, "and that is where the 
ray of sunlight came from." 

"it look like a sunbeam true enough," he said. "I don't know, it alway 
come when I immers ani live thing. perhaps," he continued, smiling, 
"perhap it is the vital spark of the creatur escap to the sourc 
from whenc it came." 

I saw he wa mocking, and threaten him with a mahl-stick, but he onli 
laugh and chang the subject. 

"stay to lunch. genevièv will be here directly." 

"I saw her go to earli mass," I said, "and she look as fresh and 
sweet as that lily--befor you destroy it." 

"do you think I destroy it?" said bori gravely. 

"destroyed, preserved, how can we tell?" 

We sat in the corner of a studio near hi unfinish group of the 
"fates." He lean back on the sofa, twirl a sculptor' chisel and 
squint at hi work. 

"bi the way," he said, "I have finish point up that old academ 
ariadne, and I suppos it will have to go to the salon. it' all I have 
readi thi year, but after the success the 'madonna' brought me I feel 
asham to send a thing like that." 

the "madonna," an exquisit marbl for which genevièv had sat, had been 
the sensat of last year' salon. I look at the ariadne. It wa a 
magnific piec of technic work, but I agre with bori that the 
world would expect someth better of him than that. still, it wa 
imposs now to think of finish in time for the salon that splendid 
terribl group half shroud in the marbl behind me. the "fates" would 
have to wait. 

We were proud of bori yvain. We claim him and he claim us on the 
strength of hi have been born in america, although hi father wa 
french and hi mother wa a russian. everi one in the beaux art call 
him boris. and yet there were onli two of us whom he address in the 
same familiar way--jack scott and myself. 

perhap my be in love with genevièv had someth to do with hi 
affect for me. not that it had ever been acknowledg between us. but 
after all wa settled, and she had told me with tear in her eye that it 
wa bori whom she loved, I went over to hi hous and congratul him. 
the perfect cordial of that interview did not deceiv either of us, I 
alway believed, although to one at least it wa a great comfort. I do 
not think he and genevièv ever spoke of the matter together, but bori 
knew. 

genevièv wa lovely. the madonna-lik puriti of her face might have been 
inspir by the sanctu in gounod' mass. but I wa alway glad when she 
chang that mood for what we call her "april manoeuvres." she wa 
often as variabl as an april day. In the morn grave, dignifi and 
sweet, at noon laughing, capricious, at even whatev one least 
expected. I prefer her so rather than in that madonna-lik 
tranquil which stir the depth of my heart. I wa dream of 
genevièv when he spoke again. 

"what do you think of my discovery, alec?" 

"I think it wonderful." 

"I shall make no use of it, you know, beyond satisfi my own curios 
so far as may be, and the secret will die with me." 

"it would be rather a blow to sculpture, would it not? We painter lose 
more than we ever gain by photography." 

bori nodded, play with the edg of the chisel. 

"thi new viciou discoveri would corrupt the world of art. no, I shall 
never confid the secret to ani one," he said slowly. 

It would be hard to find ani one less inform about such phenomena than 
myself; but of cours I had heard of miner spring so satur with 
silica that the leav and twig which fell into them were turn to 
stone after a time. I dimli comprehend the process, how the silica 
replac the veget matter, atom by atom, and the result wa a 
duplic of the object in stone. this, I confess, had never interest 
me greatly, and as for the ancient fossil thu produced, they disgust 
me. boris, it appeared, feel curios instead of repugnance, had 
investig the subject, and had accident stumbl on a solut 
which, attack the immers object with a feroc unheard of, in a 
second did the work of years. thi wa all I could make out of the 
strang stori he had just been tell me. He spoke again after a long 
silence. 

"I am almost frighten when I think what I have found. scientist would 
go mad over the discovery. It wa so simpl too; it discov itself. 
when I think of that formula, and that new element precipit in 
metal scales--" 

"what new element?" 

"oh, I haven't thought of name it, and I don't believ I ever shall. 
there are enough preciou metal now in the world to cut throat over." 

I prick up my ears. "have you struck gold, boris?" 

"no, better;--but see here, alec!" he laughed, start up. "you and I 
have all we need in thi world. ah! how sinist and covet you look 
already!" I laugh too, and told him I wa devour by the desir for 
gold, and we had better talk of someth else; so when genevièv came in 
shortli after, we had turn our back on alchemy. 

genevièv wa dress in silveri grey from head to foot. the light 
glint along the soft curv of her fair hair as she turn her cheek to 
boris; then she saw me and return my greeting. she had never befor 
fail to blow me a kiss from the tip of her white fingers, and I 
promptli complain of the omission. she smile and held out her hand, 
which drop almost befor it had touch mine; then she said, look 
at boris-- 

"you must ask alec to stay for luncheon." thi also wa someth new. 
she had alway ask me herself until to-day. 

"I did," said bori shortly. 

"and you said yes, I hope?" she turn to me with a charm convent 
smile. I might have been an acquaint of the day befor yesterday. I 
made her a low bow. "j'avai bien l'honneur, madame," but refus to 
take up our usual banter tone, she murmur a hospit commonplac 
and disappeared. bori and I look at one another. 

"I had better go home, don't you think?" I asked. 

"hang if I know," he repli frankly. 

while we were discuss the advis of my departur genevièv 
reappear in the doorway without her bonnet. she wa wonder 
beautiful, but her colour wa too deep and her love eye were too 
bright. she came straight up to me and took my arm. 

"luncheon is ready. wa I cross, alec? I thought I had a headache, but I 
haven't. come here, boris;" and she slip her other arm through his. 
"alec know that after you there is no one in the world whom I like as 
well as I like him, so if he sometim feel snub it won't hurt him." 

"À la bonheur!" I cried, "who say there are no thunderstorm in april?" 

"are you ready?" chant boris. "ay ready;" and arm-in-arm we race into 
the dining-room, scandal the servants. after all we were not so much 
to blame; genevièv wa eighteen, bori wa twenty-three, and I not quit 
twenty-one. 




II 

some work that I wa do about thi time on the decor for 
geneviève' boudoir kept me constantli at the quaint littl hotel in the 
rue sainte-cécile. bori and I in those day labour hard but as we 
pleased, which wa fitfully, and we all three, with jack scott, idl a 
great deal together. 

one quiet afternoon I had been wander alon over the hous examin 
curios, pri into odd corners, bring out sweetmeat and cigar from 
strang hiding-places, and at last I stop in the bathing-room. boris, 
all over clay, stood there wash hi hands. 

the room wa built of rose-colour marbl except the floor, which wa 
tessel in rose and grey. In the centr wa a squar pool sunken 
below the surfac of the floor; step led down into it, sculptur 
pillar support a fresco ceiling. A delici marbl cupid appear 
to have just alight on hi pedest at the upper end of the room. the 
whole interior wa boris' work and mine. boris, in hi working-cloth of 
white canvas, scrape the trace of clay and red model wax from hi 
handsom hands, and coquet over hi shoulder with the cupid. 

"I see you," he insisted, "don't tri to look the other way and pretend 
not to see me. you know who made you, littl humbug!" 

It wa alway my rôle to interpret cupid' sentiment in these 
conversations, and when my turn came I respond in such a manner, that 
bori seiz my arm and drag me toward the pool, declar he would 
duck me. next instant he drop my arm and turn pale. "good god!" he 
said, "I forgot the pool is full of the solution!" 

I shiver a little, and dryli advis him to rememb better where he 
had store the preciou liquid. 

"in heaven' name, whi do you keep a small lake of that gruesom stuff 
here of all places?" I asked. 

"I want to experi on someth large," he replied. 

"on me, for instance?" 

"ah! that came too close for jesting; but I do want to watch the action 
of that solut on a more highli organ live body; there is that 
big white rabbit," he said, follow me into the studio. 

jack scott, wear a paint-stain jacket, came wander in, 
appropri all the orient sweetmeat he could lay hi hand on, 
loot the cigarett case, and final he and bori disappear togeth 
to visit the luxembourg gallery, where a new silver bronz by rodin and a 
landscap of monet' were claim the exclus attent of artist 
france. I went back to the studio, and resum my work. It wa a 
renaiss screen, which bori want me to paint for geneviève' 
boudoir. but the small boy who wa unwillingli dawdl through a seri 
of pose for it, to-day refus all bribe to be good. He never rest an 
instant in the same position, and insid of five minut I had as mani 
differ outlin of the littl beggar. 

"are you posing, or are you execut a song and dance, my friend?" I 
inquired. 

"whichev monsieur pleases," he replied, with an angel smile. 

Of cours I dismiss him for the day, and of cours I paid him for the 
full time, that be the way we spoil our models. 

after the young imp had gone, I made a few perfunctori daub at my work, 
but wa so thoroughli out of humour, that it took me the rest of the 
afternoon to undo the damag I had done, so at last I scrape my palette, 
stuck my brush in a bowl of black soap, and stroll into the 
smoking-room. I realli believ that, except geneviève' apartments, no 
room in the hous wa so free from the perfum of tobacco as thi one. It 
wa a queer chao of odd and ends, hung with threadbar tapestry. A 
sweet-ton old spinet in good repair stood by the window. there were 
stand of weapons, some old and dull, other bright and modern, festoon 
of indian and turkish armour over the mantel, two or three good pictures, 
and a pipe-rack. It wa here that we use to come for new sensat in 
smoking. I doubt if ani type of pipe ever exist which wa not 
repres in that rack. when we had select one, we immedi 
carri it somewher els and smoke it; for the place was, on the whole, 
more gloomi and less invit than ani in the house. but thi afternoon, 
the twilight wa veri soothing, the rug and skin on the floor look 
brown and soft and drowsy; the big couch wa pile with cushions--i found 
my pipe and curl up there for an unaccustom smoke in the 
smoking-room. I had chosen one with a long flexibl stem, and light it 
fell to dreaming. after a while it went out, but I did not stir. I 
dream on and present fell asleep. 

I awok to the saddest music I had ever heard. the room wa quit dark, I 
had no idea what time it was. A ray of moonlight silver one edg of the 
old spinet, and the polish wood seem to exhal the sound as perfum 
float abov a box of sandalwood. some one rose in the darkness, and came 
away weep quietly, and I wa fool enough to cri out "geneviève!" 

she drop at my voice, and, I had time to curs myself while I made a 
light and tri to rais her from the floor. she shrank away with a 
murmur of pain. she wa veri quiet, and ask for boris. I carri her to 
the divan, and went to look for him, but he wa not in the house, and the 
servant were gone to bed. perplex and anxious, I hurri back to 
geneviève. she lay where I had left her, look veri white. 

"I can't find bori nor ani of the servants," I said. 

"I know," she answer faintly, "bori ha gone to ept with mr. scott. I 
did not rememb when I sent you for him just now." 

"but he can't get back in that case befor to-morrow afternoon, and--ar 
you hurt? did I frighten you into falling? what an aw fool I am, but I 
wa onli half awake." 

"bori thought you had gone home befor dinner. Do pleas excus us for 
let you stay here all thi time." 

"I have had a long nap," I laughed, "so sound that I did not know whether 
I wa still asleep or not when I found myself stare at a figur that 
wa move toward me, and call out your name. have you been tri the 
old spinet? you must have play veri softly." 

I would tell a thousand more lie wors than that one to see the look of 
relief that came into her face. she smile adorably, and said in her 
natur voice: "alec, I trip on that wolf' head, and I think my ankl 
is sprained. pleas call marie, and then go home." 

I did as she bade me, and left her there when the maid came in. 




iii 

At noon next day when I called, I found bori walk restlessli about 
hi studio. 

"genevièv is asleep just now," he told me, "the sprain is nothing, but 
whi should she have such a high fever? the doctor can't account for it; 
or els he will not," he muttered. 

"genevièv ha a fever?" I asked. 

"I should say so, and ha actual been a littl light-head at 
interv all night. the idea! gay littl geneviève, without a care in 
the world,--and she keep say her heart' broken, and she want to 
die!" 

My own heart stood still. 

bori lean against the door of hi studio, look down, hi hand in 
hi pockets, hi kind, keen eye clouded, a new line of troubl drawn 
"over the mouth' good mark, that made the smile." the maid had order to 
summon him the instant genevièv open her eyes. We wait and waited, 
and boris, grow restless, wander about, fuss with model wax 
and red clay. suddenli he start for the next room. "come and see my 
rose-colour bath full of death!" he cried. 

"i it death?" I asked, to humour hi mood. 

"you are not prepar to call it life, I suppose," he answered. As he 
spoke he pluck a solitari goldfish squirm and twist out of it 
globe. "we'll send thi one after the other--wherev that is," he said. 
there wa feverish excit in hi voice. A dull weight of fever lay on 
my limb and on my brain as I follow him to the fair crystal pool with 
it pink-tint sides; and he drop the creatur in. falling, it 
scale flash with a hot orang gleam in it angri twist and 
contortions; the moment it struck the liquid it becam rigid and sank 
heavili to the bottom. then came the milki foam, the splendid hue 
radiat on the surfac and then the shaft of pure seren light broke 
through from seemingli infinit depths. bori plung in hi hand and 
drew out an exquisit marbl thing, blue-veined, rose-tinted, and 
glisten with opalesc drops. 

"child' play," he muttered, and look wearily, longingli at me,--a if 
I could answer such questions! but jack scott came in and enter into 
the "game," as he call it, with ardour. noth would do but to tri the 
experi on the white rabbit then and there. I wa will that bori 
should find distract from hi cares, but I hate to see the life go 
out of a warm, live creatur and I declin to be present. pick up a 
book at random, I sat down in the studio to read. alas! I had found 
_the king in yellow_. after a few moments, which seem ages, I wa 
put it away with a nervou shudder, when bori and jack came in 
bring their marbl rabbit. At the same time the bell rang above, and a 
cri came from the sick-room. bori wa gone like a flash, and the next 
moment he called, "jack, run for the doctor; bring him back with you. 
alec, come here." 

I went and stood at her door. A frighten maid came out in hast and ran 
away to fetch some remedy. geneviève, sit bolt upright, with crimson 
cheek and glitter eyes, babbl incessantli and resist boris' 
gentl restraint. He call me to help. At my first touch she sigh and 
sank back, close her eyes, and then--then--a we still bent abov her, 
she open them again, look straight into boris' face--poor 
fever-craz girl!--and told her secret. At the same instant our three 
live turn into new channels; the bond that held us so long togeth 
snap for ever and a new bond wa forg in it place, for she had 
spoken my name, and as the fever tortur her, her heart pour out it 
load of hidden sorrow. amaz and dumb I bow my head, while my face 
burn like a live coal, and the blood surg in my ears, stupefi me 
with it clamour. incap of movement, incap of speech, I listen 
to her feverish word in an agoni of shame and sorrow. I could not 
silenc her, I could not look at boris. then I felt an arm upon my 
shoulder, and bori turn a bloodless face to mine. 

"it is not your fault, alec; don't griev so if she love you--" but he 
could not finish; and as the doctor step swiftli into the room, 
saying--"ah, the fever!" I seiz jack scott and hurri him to the 
street, saying, "bori would rather be alone." We cross the street to 
our own apartments, and that night, see I wa go to be ill too, he 
went for the doctor again. the last thing I recollect with ani 
distinct wa hear jack say, "for heaven' sake, doctor, what ail 
him, to wear a face like that?" and I thought of _the king in 
yellow_ and the pallid mask. 

I wa veri ill, for the strain of two year which I had endur sinc 
that fatal may morn when genevièv murmured, "I love you, but I think 
I love bori best," told on me at last. I had never imagin that it 
could becom more than I could endure. outwardli tranquil, I had deceiv 
myself. although the inward battl rage night after night, and I, lie 
alon in my room, curs myself for rebelli thought unloy to bori 
and unworthi of geneviève, the morn alway brought relief, and I 
return to genevièv and to my dear bori with a heart wash clean by 
the tempest of the night. 

never in word or deed or thought while with them had I betray my sorrow 
even to myself. 

the mask of self-decept wa no longer a mask for me, it wa a part of 
me. night lift it, lay bare the stifl truth below; but there wa 
no one to see except myself, and when the day broke the mask fell back 
again of it own accord. these thought pass through my troubl mind 
as I lay sick, but they were hopelessli entangl with vision of white 
creatures, heavi as stone, crawl about in boris' basin,--of the wolf' 
head on the rug, foam and snap at geneviève, who lay smile 
besid it. I thought, too, of the king in yellow wrap in the fantast 
colour of hi tatter mantle, and that bitter cri of cassilda, "not 
upon us, oh king, not upon us!" feverishli I struggl to put it from me, 
but I saw the lake of hali, thin and blank, without a rippl or wind to 
stir it, and I saw the tower of carcosa behind the moon. aldebaran, the 
hyades, alar, hastur, glide through the cloud-rift which flutter and 
flap as they pass like the scollop tatter of the king in yellow. 
among all these, one sane thought persisted. It never wavered, no matter 
what els wa go on in my disord mind, that my chief reason for 
exist wa to meet some requir of bori and geneviève. what thi 
oblig was, it nature, wa never clear; sometim it seem to be 
protection, sometim support, through a great crisis. whatev it seem 
to be for the time, it weight rest onli on me, and I wa never so ill 
or so weak that I did not respond with my whole soul. there were alway 
crowd of face about me, mostli strange, but a few I recognized, bori 
among them. afterward they told me that thi could not have been, but I 
know that onc at least he bent over me. It wa onli a touch, a faint 
echo of hi voice, then the cloud settl back on my senses, and I lost 
him, but he _did_ stand there and bend over me _once_ at least. 

At last, one morn I awok to find the sunlight fall across my bed, 
and jack scott read besid me. I had not strength enough to speak 
aloud, neither could I think, much less remember, but I could smile 
feebly, as jack' eye met mine, and when he jump up and ask eagerli 
if I want anything, I could whisper, "yes--boris." jack move to the 
head of my bed, and lean down to arrang my pillow: I did not see hi 
face, but he answer heartily, "you must wait, alec; you are too weak to 
see even boris." 

I wait and I grew strong; in a few day I wa abl to see whom I would, 
but meanwhil I had thought and remembered. from the moment when all the 
past grew clear again in my mind, I never doubt what I should do when 
the time came, and I felt sure that bori would have resolv upon the 
same cours so far as he wa concerned; as for what pertain to me 
alone, I knew he would see that also as I did. I no longer ask for ani 
one. I never inquir whi no messag came from them; whi dure the week 
I lay there, wait and grow stronger, I never heard their name 
spoken. preoccupi with my own search for the right way, and with my 
feebl but determin fight against despair, I simpli acquiesc in 
jack' reticence, take for grant that he wa afraid to speak of them, 
lest I should turn unruli and insist on see them. meanwhil I said 
over and over to myself, how would it be when life began again for us 
all? We would take up our relat exactli as they were befor genevièv 
fell ill. bori and I would look into each other' eyes, and there would 
be neither rancour nor cowardic nor mistrust in that glance. I would be 
with them again for a littl while in the dear intimaci of their home, 
and then, without pretext or explanation, I would disappear from their 
live for ever. bori would know; geneviève--th onli comfort wa that 
she would never know. It seemed, as I thought it over, that I had found 
the mean of that sens of oblig which had persist all through 
my delirium, and the onli possibl answer to it. so, when I wa quit 
ready, I beckon jack to me one day, and said-- 

"jack, I want bori at once; and take my dearest greet to 
geneviève...." 

when at last he made me understand that they were both dead, I fell into 
a wild rage that tore all my littl convalesc strength to atoms. I 
rave and curs myself into a relapse, from which I crawl forth some 
week afterward a boy of twenty-on who believ that hi youth wa gone 
for ever. I seem to be past the capabl of further suffering, and 
one day when jack hand me a letter and the key to boris' house, I took 
them without a tremor and ask him to tell me all. It wa cruel of me to 
ask him, but there wa no help for it, and he lean wearili on hi thin 
hands, to reopen the wound which could never entir heal. He began veri 
quietly-- 

"alec, unless you have a clue that I know noth about, you will not be 
abl to explain ani more than I what ha happened. I suspect that you 
would rather not hear these details, but you must learn them, els I 
would spare you the relation. god know I wish I could be spare the 
telling. I shall use few words. 

"that day when I left you in the doctor' care and came back to boris, I 
found him work on the 'fates.' geneviève, he said, wa sleep under 
the influenc of drugs. she had been quit out of her mind, he said. He 
kept on working, not talk ani more, and I watch him. befor long, I 
saw that the third figur of the group--th one look straight ahead, 
out over the world--bor hi face; not as you ever saw it, but as it 
look then and to the end. thi is one thing for which I should like to 
find an explanation, but I never shall. 

"well, he work and I watch him in silence, and we went on that way 
until nearli midnight. then we heard the door open and shut sharply, and 
a swift rush in the next room. bori sprang through the doorway and I 
followed; but we were too late. she lay at the bottom of the pool, her 
hand across her breast. then bori shot himself through the heart." jack 
stop speaking, drop of sweat stood under hi eyes, and hi thin 
cheek twitched. "I carri bori to hi room. then I went back and let 
that hellish fluid out of the pool, and turn on all the water, wash 
the marbl clean of everi drop. when at length I dare descend the steps, 
I found her lie there as white as snow. At last, when I had decid 
what wa best to do, I went into the laboratory, and first empti the 
solut in the basin into the waste-pipe; then I pour the content of 
everi jar and bottl after it. there wa wood in the fire-place, so I 
built a fire, and break the lock of boris' cabinet I burnt everi 
paper, notebook and letter that I found there. with a mallet from the 
studio I smash to piec all the empti bottles, then load them into 
a coal-scuttle, I carri them to the cellar and threw them over the 
red-hot bed of the furnace. six time I made the journey, and at last, 
not a vestig remain of anyth which might again aid in seek for 
the formula which bori had found. then at last I dare call the doctor. 
He is a good man, and togeth we struggl to keep it from the public. 
without him I never could have succeeded. At last we got the servant 
paid and sent away into the country, where old rosier keep them quiet 
with stone of boris' and geneviève' travel in distant lands, from 
whenc they will not return for years. We buri bori in the littl 
cemeteri of sèvres. the doctor is a good creature, and know when to piti 
a man who can bear no more. He gave hi certif of heart diseas and 
ask no question of me." 

then, lift hi head from hi hands, he said, "open the letter, alec; 
it is for us both." 

I tore it open. It wa boris' will date a year before. He left 
everyth to geneviève, and in case of her die childless, I wa to 
take control of the hous in the rue sainte-cécile, and jack scott the 
manag at ept. On our death the properti revert to hi mother' 
famili in russia, with the except of the sculptur marbl execut 
by himself. these he left to me. 

the page blur under our eyes, and jack got up and walk to the 
window. present he return and sat down again. I dread to hear what 
he wa go to say, but he spoke with the same simplic and 
gentleness. 

"genevièv lie befor the madonna in the marbl room. the madonna bend 
tenderli abov her, and genevièv smile back into that calm face that 
never would have been except for her." 

hi voic broke, but he grasp my hand, saying, "courage, alec." next 
morn he left for ept to fulfil hi trust. 




IV 

the same even I took the key and went into the hous I had known so 
well. everyth wa in order, but the silenc wa terrible. though I 
went twice to the door of the marbl room, I could not forc myself to 
enter. It wa beyond my strength. I went into the smoking-room and sat 
down befor the spinet. A small lace handkerchief lay on the keys, and I 
turn away, choking. It wa plain I could not stay, so I lock everi 
door, everi window, and the three front and back gates, and went away. 
next morn alcid pack my valise, and leav him in charg of my 
apart I took the orient express for constantinople. dure the two 
year that I wander through the east, at first, in our letters, we 
never mention genevièv and boris, but gradual their name crept in. 
I recollect particularli a passag in one of jack' letter repli to 
one of mine-- 

"what you tell me of see bori bend over you while you lay ill, and 
feel hi touch on your face, and hear hi voice, of cours troubl 
me. thi that you describ must have happen a fortnight after he died. 
I say to myself that you were dreaming, that it wa part of your 
delirium, but the explan doe not satisfi me, nor would it you." 

toward the end of the second year a letter came from jack to me in india 
so unlik anyth that I had ever known of him that I decid to return 
at onc to paris. He wrote: "I am well, and sell all my pictur as 
artist do who have no need of money. I have not a care of my own, but I 
am more restless than if I had. I am unabl to shake off a strang 
anxieti about you. It is not apprehension, it is rather a breathless 
expectancy--of what, god knows! I can onli say it is wear me out. 
night I dream alway of you and boris. I can never recal anyth 
afterward, but I wake in the morn with my heart beating, and all day 
the excit increas until I fall asleep at night to recal the same 
experience. I am quit exhaust by it, and have determin to break up 
thi morbid condition. I must see you. shall I go to bombay, or will you 
come to paris?" 

I telegraph him to expect me by the next steamer. 

when we met I thought he had chang veri little; I, he insisted, look 
in splendid health. It wa good to hear hi voic again, and as we sat 
and chat about what life still held for us, we felt that it wa 
pleasant to be aliv in the bright spring weather. 

We stay in pari togeth a week, and then I went for a week to ept 
with him, but first of all we went to the cemeteri at sèvres, where bori 
lay. 

"shall we place the 'fates' in the littl grove abov him?" jack asked, 
and I answered-- 

"I think onli the 'madonna' should watch over boris' grave." but jack wa 
none the better for my home-coming. the dream of which he could not 
retain even the least definit outlin continued, and he said that at 
time the sens of breathless expect wa suffocating. 

"you see I do you harm and not good," I said. "tri a chang without me." 
So he start alon for a rambl among the channel islands, and I went 
back to paris. I had not yet enter boris' house, now mine, sinc my 
return, but I knew it must be done. It had been kept in order by jack; 
there were servant there, so I gave up my own apart and went there 
to live. instead of the agit I had feared, I found myself abl to 
paint there tranquilly. I visit all the rooms--al but one. I could not 
bring myself to enter the marbl room where genevièv lay, and yet I felt 
the long grow daili to look upon her face, to kneel besid her. 

one april afternoon, I lay dream in the smoking-room, just as I had 
lain two year before, and mechan I look among the tawni eastern 
rug for the wolf-skin. At last I distinguish the point ear and flat 
cruel head, and I thought of my dream where I saw genevièv lie besid 
it. the helmet still hung against the threadbar tapestry, among them 
the old spanish morion which I rememb genevièv had onc put on when 
we were amus ourselv with the ancient bit of mail. I turn my eye 
to the spinet; everi yellow key seem eloqu of her caress hand, 
and I rose, drawn by the strength of my life' passion to the seal door 
of the marbl room. the heavi door swung inward under my trembl 
hands. sunlight pour through the window, tip with gold the wing of 
cupid, and linger like a nimbu over the brow of the madonna. her 
tender face bent in compass over a marbl form so exquisit pure 
that I knelt and sign myself. genevièv lay in the shadow under the 
madonna, and yet, through her white arms, I saw the pale azur vein, and 
beneath her softli clasp hand the fold of her dress were ting with 
rose, as if from some faint warm light within her breast. 

bending, with a break heart, I touch the marbl draperi with my 
lips, then crept back into the silent house. 

A maid came and brought me a letter, and I sat down in the littl 
conservatori to read it; but as I wa about to break the seal, see the 
girl lingering, I ask her what she wanted. 

she stammer someth about a white rabbit that had been caught in the 
house, and ask what should be done with it I told her to let it loos 
in the wall garden behind the house, and open my letter. It wa from 
jack, but so incoher that I thought he must have lost hi reason. It 
wa noth but a seri of prayer to me not to leav the hous until he 
could get back; he could not tell me why, there were the dreams, he 
said--h could explain nothing, but he wa sure that I must not leav the 
hous in the rue sainte-cécile. 

As I finish read I rais my eye and saw the same maid-serv 
stand in the doorway hold a glass dish in which two gold-fish were 
swimming: "put them back into the tank and tell me what you mean by 
interrupt me," I said. 

with a half-suppress whimper she empti water and fish into an 
aquarium at the end of the conservatory, and turn to me ask my 
permiss to leav my service. she said peopl were play trick on 
her, evid with a design of get her into trouble; the marbl 
rabbit had been stolen and a live one had been brought into the house; 
the two beauti marbl fish were gone, and she had just found those 
common live thing flop on the dining-room floor. I reassur her and 
sent her away, say I would look about myself. I went into the studio; 
there wa noth there but my canvas and some casts, except the marbl 
of the easter lily. I saw it on a tabl across the room. then I strode 
angrili over to it. but the flower I lift from the tabl wa fresh and 
fragil and fill the air with perfume. 

then suddenli I comprehended, and sprang through the hall-way to the 
marbl room. the door flew open, the sunlight stream into my face, and 
through it, in a heavenli glory, the madonna smiled, as genevièv lift 
her flush face from her marbl couch and open her sleepi eyes. 




IN the court OF the dragon 


"oh, thou who burn'st in heart for those who burn 
In hell, whose fire thyself shall feed in turn; 
how long be crying--'merci on them.' god! 
why, who art thou to teach and He to learn?" 

In the church of st. barnabé vesper were over; the clergi left the 
altar; the littl choir-boy flock across the chancel and settl in 
the stalls. A suiss in rich uniform march down the south aisle, 
sound hi staff at everi fourth step on the stone pavement; behind him 
came that eloqu preacher and good man, monseigneur c----. 

My chair wa near the chancel rail, I now turn toward the west end of 
the church. the other peopl between the altar and the pulpit turn too. 
there wa a littl scrape and rustl while the congreg seat 
itself again; the preacher mount the pulpit stairs, and the organ 
voluntari ceased. 

I had alway found the organ-play at st. barnabé highli interesting. 
learn and scientif it was, too much so for my small knowledge, but 
express a vivid if cold intelligence. moreover, it possess the 
french qualiti of taste: tast reign supreme, self-controlled, 
dignifi and reticent. 

to-day, however, from the first chord I had felt a chang for the worse, 
a sinist change. dure vesper it had been chiefli the chancel organ 
which support the beauti choir, but now and again, quit wantonli as 
it seemed, from the west galleri where the great organ stands, a heavi 
hand had struck across the church at the seren peac of those clear 
voices. It wa someth more than harsh and dissonant, and it betray 
no lack of skill. As it recur again and again, it set me think of 
what my architect' book say about the custom in earli time to 
consecr the choir as soon as it wa built, and that the nave, be 
finish sometim half a centuri later, often did not get ani bless 
at all: I wonder idli if that had been the case at st. barnabé, and 
whether someth not usual suppos to be at home in a christian 
church might have enter undetect and taken possess of the west 
gallery. I had read of such thing happening, too, but not in work on 
architecture. 

then I rememb that st. barnabé wa not much more than a hundr year 
old, and smile at the incongru associ of mediaev superstit 
with that cheer littl piec of eighteenth-centuri rococo. 

but now vesper were over, and there should have follow a few quiet 
chords, fit to accompani meditation, while we wait for the sermon. 
instead of that, the discord at the lower end of the church broke out 
with the departur of the clergy, as if now noth could control it. 

I belong to those children of an older and simpler gener who do not 
love to seek for psycholog subtleti in art; and I have ever refus 
to find in music anyth more than melodi and harmony, but I felt that 
in the labyrinth of sound now issu from that instrument there wa 
someth be hunted. Up and down the pedal chase him, while the 
manual blare approval. poor devil! whoever he was, there seem small 
hope of escape! 

My nervou annoy chang to anger. who wa do this? how dare he 
play like that in the midst of divin service? I glanc at the peopl 
near me: not one appear to be in the least disturbed. the placid brow 
of the kneel nuns, still turn toward the altar, lost none of their 
devout abstract under the pale shadow of their white head-dress. the 
fashion ladi besid me wa look expectantli at monseigneur c----. 
for all her face betrayed, the organ might have been sing an ave 
maria. 

but now, at last, the preacher had made the sign of the cross, and 
command silence. I turn to him gladly. thu far I had not found the 
rest I had count on when I enter st. barnabé that afternoon. 

I wa worn out by three night of physic suffer and mental trouble: 
the last had been the worst, and it wa an exhaust body, and a mind 
benumb and yet acut sensitive, which I had brought to my favourit 
church for healing. for I had been read _the king in yellow_. 

"the sun ariseth; they gather themselv togeth and lay them down in 
their dens." monseigneur c---- deliv hi text in a calm voice, 
glanc quietli over the congregation. My eye turned, I knew not why, 
toward the lower end of the church. the organist wa come from behind 
hi pipes, and pass along the galleri on hi way out, I saw him 
disappear by a small door that lead to some stair which descend 
directli to the street. He wa a slender man, and hi face wa as white 
as hi coat wa black. "good riddance!" I thought, "with your wick 
music! I hope your assist will play the close voluntary." 

with a feel of relief--with a deep, calm feel of relief, I turn 
back to the mild face in the pulpit and settl myself to listen. here, 
at last, wa the eas of mind I long for. 

"mi children," said the preacher, "one truth the human soul find hardest 
of all to learn: that it ha noth to fear. It can never be made to see 
that noth can realli harm it." 

"curiou doctrine!" I thought, "for a cathol priest. let us see how he 
will reconcil that with the fathers." 

"noth can realli harm the soul," he went on, in, hi coolest, clearest 
tones, "because----" 

but I never heard the rest; my eye left hi face, I knew not for what 
reason, and sought the lower end of the church. the same man wa come 
out from behind the organ, and wa pass along the galleri _the same 
way_. but there had not been time for him to return, and if he had 
returned, I must have seen him. I felt a faint chill, and my heart sank; 
and yet, hi go and come were no affair of mine. I look at him: I 
could not look away from hi black figur and hi white face. when he wa 
exactli opposit to me, he turn and sent across the church straight 
into my eyes, a look of hate, intens and deadly: I have never seen ani 
other like it; would to god I might never see it again! then he 
disappear by the same door through which I had watch him depart less 
than sixti second before. 

I sat and tri to collect my thoughts. My first sensat wa like that 
of a veri young child badli hurt, when it catch it breath befor 
cri out. 

To suddenli find myself the object of such hatr wa exquisit 
painful: and thi man wa an utter stranger. whi should he hate me 
so?--me, whom he had never seen before? for the moment all other 
sensat wa merg in thi one pang: even fear wa subordin to 
grief, and for that moment I never doubted; but in the next I began to 
reason, and a sens of the incongru came to my aid. 

As I have said, st. barnabé is a modern church. It is small and well 
lighted; one see all over it almost at a glance. the organ galleri get 
a strong white light from a row of long window in the clerestory, which 
have not even colour glass. 

the pulpit be in the middl of the church, it follow that, when I 
wa turn toward it, whatev move at the west end could not fail to 
attract my eye. when the organist pass it wa no wonder that I saw him: 
I had simpli miscalcul the interv between hi first and hi second 
passing. He had come in that last time by the other side-door. As for the 
look which had so upset me, there had been no such thing, and I wa a 
nervou fool. 

I look about. thi wa a like place to harbour supernatur horrors! 
that clear-cut, reason face of monseigneur c----, hi collect 
manner and easy, grace gestures, were they not just a littl 
discourag to the notion of a gruesom mystery? I glanc abov hi 
head, and almost laughed. that flyaway ladi support one corner of the 
pulpit canopy, which look like a fring damask table-cloth in a high 
wind, at the first attempt of a basilisk to pose up there in the organ 
loft, she would point her gold trumpet at him, and puff him out of 
existence! I laugh to myself over thi conceit, which, at the time, I 
thought veri amusing, and sat and chaf myself and everyth else, 
from the old harpi outsid the railing, who had made me pay ten centim 
for my chair, befor she would let me in (she wa more like a basilisk, I 
told myself, than wa my organist with the anaem complexion): from that 
grim old dame, to, yes, alas! monseigneur c---- himself. for all 
devout had fled. I had never yet done such a thing in my life, but 
now I felt a desir to mock. 

As for the sermon, I could not hear a word of it for the jingl in my 
ear of 

"the skirt of st. paul ha reached. 
have preach us those six lent lectures, 
more unctuou than ever he preached," 

keep time to the most fantast and irrever thoughts. 

It wa no use to sit there ani longer: I must get out of door and shake 
myself free from thi hate mood. I knew the rude I wa committing, 
but still I rose and left the church. 

A spring sun wa shine on the rue st. honoré, as I ran down the church 
steps. On one corner stood a barrow full of yellow jonquils, pale violet 
from the riviera, dark russian violets, and white roman hyacinth in a 
golden cloud of mimosa. the street wa full of sunday pleasure-seekers. I 
swung my cane and laugh with the rest. some one overtook and pass me. 
He never turned, but there wa the same deadli malign in hi white 
profil that there had been in hi eyes. I watch him as long as I could 
see him. hi lith back express the same menace; everi step that 
carri him away from me seem to bear him on some errand connect with 
my destruction. 

I wa creep along, my feet almost refus to move. there began to 
dawn in me a sens of respons for someth long forgotten. It 
began to seem as if I deserv that which he threatened: it reach a 
long way back--a long, long way back. It had lain dormant all these 
years: it wa there, though, and present it would rise and confront me. 
but I would tri to escape; and I stumbl as best I could into the rue de 
rivoli, across the place de la concord and on to the quai. I look with 
sick eye upon the sun, shine through the white foam of the fountain, 
pour over the back of the duski bronz river-gods, on the far-away 
arc, a structur of amethyst mist, on the countless vista of grey stem 
and bare branch faintli green. then I saw him again come down one of 
the chestnut alley of the cour la reine. 

I left the river-side, plung blindli across to the champ elysé and 
turn toward the arc. the set sun wa send it ray along the 
green sward of the rond-point: in the full glow he sat on a bench, 
children and young mother all about him. He wa noth but a sunday 
lounger, like the others, like myself. I said the word almost aloud, and 
all the while I gaze on the malign hatr of hi face. but he wa not 
look at me. I crept past and drag my leaden feet up the avenue. I 
knew that everi time I met him brought him nearer to the accomplish 
of hi purpos and my fate. and still I tri to save myself. 

the last ray of sunset were pour through the great arc. I pass 
under it, and met him face to face. I had left him far down the champ 
elysées, and yet he came in with a stream of peopl who were return 
from the boi de boulogne. He came so close that he brush me. hi 
slender frame felt like iron insid it loos black covering. He show 
no sign of haste, nor of fatigue, nor of ani human feeling. hi whole 
be express one thing: the will, and the power to work me evil. 

In anguish I watch him where he went down the broad crowd avenue, 
that wa all flash with wheel and the trap of hors and the 
helmet of the gard republicaine. 

He wa soon lost to sight; then I turn and fled. into the bois, and far 
out beyond it--i know not where I went, but after a long while as it 
seem to me, night had fallen, and I found myself sit at a tabl 
befor a small café. I had wander back into the bois. It wa hour now 
sinc I had seen him. physic fatigu and mental suffer had left me 
no power to think or feel. I wa tired, so tired! I long to hide away 
in my own den. I resolv to go home. but that wa a long way off. 

I live in the court of the dragon, a narrow passag that lead from the 
rue de renn to the rue du dragon. 

It is an "impasse"; travers onli for foot passengers. over the 
entranc on the rue de renn is a balcony, support by an iron dragon. 
within the court tall old hous rise on either side, and close the end 
that give on the two streets. huge gates, swung back dure the day into 
the wall of the deep archways, close thi court, after midnight, and one 
must enter then by ring at certain small door on the side. the sunken 
pavement collect unsavouri pools. steep stairway pitch down to door 
that open on the court. the ground floor are occupi by shop of 
second-hand dealers, and by iron workers. all day long the place ring 
with the clink of hammer and the clang of metal bars. 

unsavouri as it is below, there is cheerfulness, and comfort, and hard, 
honest work above. 

five flight up are the ateli of architect and painters, and the 
hiding-plac of middle-ag student like myself who want to live alone. 
when I first came here to live I wa young, and not alone. 

I had to walk a while befor ani convey appeared, but at last, when I 
had almost reach the arc de triomph again, an empti cab came along and 
I took it. 

from the arc to the rue de renn is a drive of more than half an hour, 
especi when one is convey by a tire cab hors that ha been at the 
merci of sunday fete-makers. 

there had been time befor I pass under the dragon' wing to meet my 
enemi over and over again, but I never saw him once, and now refug wa 
close at hand. 

befor the wide gateway a small mob of children were playing. our 
concierg and hi wife walk among them, with their black poodle, 
keep order; some coupl were waltz on the side-walk. I return 
their greet and hurri in. 

all the inhabit of the court had troop out into the street. the 
place wa quit deserted, light by a few lantern hung high up, in 
which the ga burn dimly. 

My apart wa at the top of a house, halfway down the court, reach 
by a staircas that descend almost into the street, with onli a bit of 
passage-way intervening, I set my foot on the threshold of the open door, 
the friendli old ruinou stair rose befor me, lead up to rest and 
shelter. look back over my right shoulder, I saw _him,_ ten pace 
off. He must have enter the court with me. 

He wa come straight on, neither slowly, nor swiftly, but straight on 
to me. and now he wa look at me. for the first time sinc our eye 
encount across the church they met now again, and I knew that the 
time had come. 

retreat backward, down the court, I face him. I meant to escap by 
the entranc on the rue du dragon. hi eye told me that I never should 
escape. 

It seem age while we were going, I retreating, he advancing, down the 
court in perfect silence; but at last I felt the shadow of the archway, 
and the next step brought me within it. I had meant to turn here and 
spring through into the street. but the shadow wa not that of an 
archway; it wa that of a vault. the great door on the rue du dragon 
were closed. I felt thi by the black which surround me, and at the 
same instant I read it in hi face. how hi face gleam in the darkness, 
draw swiftli nearer! the deep vaults, the huge close doors, their 
cold iron clamp were all on hi side. the thing which he had threaten 
had arrived: it gather and bore down on me from the fathomless shadows; 
the point from which it would strike wa hi infern eyes. hopeless, I 
set my back against the bar door and defi him. 


there wa a scrape of chair on the stone floor, and a rustl as the 
congreg rose. I could hear the suisse' staff in the south aisle, 
preced monseigneur c---- to the sacristy. 

the kneel nuns, rous from their devout abstraction, made their 
rever and went away. the fashion lady, my neighbour, rose also, 
with grace reserve. As she depart her glanc just flit over my 
face in disapproval. 

half dead, or so it seem to me, yet intens aliv to everi trifle, I 
sat among the leisur move crowd, then rose too and went toward the 
door. 

I had slept through the sermon. had I slept through the sermon? I look 
up and saw him pass along the galleri to hi place. onli hi side I 
saw; the thin bent arm in it black cover look like one of those 
devilish, nameless instrument which lie in the disus torture-chamb 
of mediaev castles. 

but I had escap him, though hi eye had said I should not. _had_ 
I escap him? that which gave him the power over me came back out of 
oblivion, where I had hope to keep it. for I knew him now. death and the 
aw abod of lost souls, whither my weak long ago had sent 
him--they had chang him for everi other eye, but not for mine. I had 
recogn him almost from the first; I had never doubt what he wa 
come to do; and now I knew while my bodi sat safe in the cheer littl 
church, he had been hunt my soul in the court of the dragon. 

I crept to the door: the organ broke out overhead with a blare. A 
dazzl light fill the church, blot the altar from my eyes. the 
peopl fade away, the arches, the vault roof vanished. I rais my 
sear eye to the fathomless glare, and I saw the black star hang in 
the heavens: and the wet wind from the lake of hali chill my face. 

and now, far away, over leagu of toss cloud-waves, I saw the moon 
drip with spray; and beyond, the tower of carcosa rose behind the 
moon. 

death and the aw abod of lost souls, whither my weak long ago had 
sent him, had chang him for everi other eye but mine. and now I heard 
_hi voice_, rising, swelling, thunder through the flare light, 
and as I fell, the radianc increasing, increasing, pour over me in 
wave of flame. then I sank into the depths, and I heard the king in 
yellow whisper to my soul: "it is a fear thing to fall into the 
hand of the live god!" 




the yellow sign 

"let the red dawn surmis 
what we shall do, 
when thi blue starlight die 
and all is through." 


I 

there are so mani thing which are imposs to explain! whi should 
certain chord in music make me think of the brown and golden tint of 
autumn foliage? whi should the mass of saint cécile bend my thought 
wander among cavern whose wall blaze with rag mass of virgin 
silver? what wa it in the roar and turmoil of broadway at six o'clock 
that flash befor my eye the pictur of a still breton forest where 
sunlight filter through spring foliag and sylvia bent, half curiously, 
half tenderly, over a small green lizard, murmuring: "to think that thi 
also is a littl ward of god!" 

when I first saw the watchman hi back wa toward me. I look at him 
indiffer until he went into the church. I paid no more attent to 
him than I had to ani other man who loung through washington squar 
that morning, and when I shut my window and turn back into my studio I 
had forgotten him. late in the afternoon, the day be warm, I rais 
the window again and lean out to get a sniff of air. A man wa stand 
in the courtyard of the church, and I notic him again with as littl 
interest as I had that morning. I look across the squar to where the 
fountain wa play and then, with my mind fill with vagu impress 
of trees, asphalt drives, and the move group of nursemaid and 
holiday-makers, I start to walk back to my easel. As I turned, my 
listless glanc includ the man below in the churchyard. hi face wa 
toward me now, and with a perfectli involuntari movement I bent to see 
it. At the same moment he rais hi head and look at me. instantli I 
thought of a coffin-worm. whatev it wa about the man that repel me 
I did not know, but the impress of a plump white grave-worm wa so 
intens and nauseat that I must have shown it in my expression, for he 
turn hi puffi face away with a movement which made me think of a 
disturb grub in a chestnut. 

I went back to my easel and motion the model to resum her pose. after 
work a while I wa satisfi that I wa spoil what I had done as 
rapidli as possible, and I took up a palett knife and scrape the colour 
out again. the flesh tone were sallow and unhealthy, and I did not 
understand how I could have paint such sickli colour into a studi which 
befor that had glow with healthi tones. 

I look at tessie. she had not changed, and the clear flush of health 
dy her neck and cheek as I frowned. 

"i it someth i'v done?" she said. 

"no,--i'v made a mess of thi arm, and for the life of me I can't see 
how I came to paint such mud as that into the canvas," I replied. 

"don't I pose well?" she insisted. 

"of course, perfectly." 

"then it' not my fault?" 

"no. it' my own." 

"I am veri sorry," she said. 

I told her she could rest while I appli rag and turpentin to the 
plagu spot on my canvas, and she went off to smoke a cigarett and look 
over the illustr in the _courrier français_. 

I did not know whether it wa someth in the turpentin or a defect in 
the canvas, but the more I scrub the more that gangren seem to 
spread. I work like a beaver to get it out, and yet the diseas 
appear to creep from limb to limb of the studi befor me. alarmed, I 
strove to arrest it, but now the colour on the breast chang and the 
whole figur seem to absorb the infect as a spong soak up water. 
vigor I pli palette-knife, turpentine, and scraper, think all 
the time what a _séance_ I should hold with duval who had sold me 
the canvas; but soon I notic that it wa not the canva which wa 
defect nor yet the colour of edward. "it must be the turpentine," I 
thought angrily, "or els my eye have becom so blur and confus by 
the afternoon light that I can't see straight." I call tessie, the 
model. she came and lean over my chair blow ring of smoke into the 
air. 

"what _have_ you been do to it?" she exclaim 

"nothing," I growled, "it must be thi turpentine!" 

"what a horribl colour it is now," she continued. "do you think my flesh 
resembl green cheese?" 

"no, I don't," I said angrily; "did you ever know me to paint like that 
before?" 

"no, indeed!" 

"well, then!" 

"it must be the turpentine, or something," she admitted. 

she slip on a japanes robe and walk to the window. I scrape and 
rub until I wa tired, and final pick up my brush and hurl 
them through the canva with a forcibl expression, the tone alon of 
which reach tessie' ears. 

nevertheless she promptli began: "that' it! swear and act silli and ruin 
your brushes! you have been three week on that study, and now look! 
what' the good of rip the canvas? what creatur artist are!" 

I felt about as much asham as I usual did after such an outbreak, and 
I turn the ruin canva to the wall. tessi help me clean my 
brushes, and then danc away to dress. from the screen she regal me 
with bit of advic concern whole or partial loss of temper, until, 
thinking, perhaps, I had been torment sufficiently, she came out to 
implor me to button her waist where she could not reach it on the 
shoulder. 

"everyth went wrong from the time you came back from the window and 
talk about that horrid-look man you saw in the churchyard," she 
announced. 

"yes, he probabl bewitch the picture," I said, yawning. I look at my 
watch. 

"it' after six, I know," said tessie, adjust her hat befor the 
mirror. 

"yes," I replied, "I didn't mean to keep you so long." I lean out of 
the window but recoil with disgust, for the young man with the pasti 
face stood below in the churchyard. tessi saw my gestur of disapprov 
and lean from the window. 

"i that the man you don't like?" she whispered. 

I nodded. 

"I can't see hi face, but he doe look fat and soft. someway or other," 
she continued, turn to look at me, "he remind me of a dream,--an 
aw dream I onc had. or," she mused, look down at her shape 
shoes, "wa it a dream after all?" 

"how should I know?" I smiled. 

tessi smile in reply. 

"you were in it," she said, "so perhap you might know someth about 
it." 

"tessie! tessie!" I protested, "don't you dare flatter by say that you 
dream about me!" 

"but I did," she insisted; "shall I tell you about it?" 

"go ahead," I replied, light a cigarette. 

tessi lean back on the open window-sil and began veri seriously. 

"one night last winter I wa lie in bed think about noth at all 
in particular. I had been pose for you and I wa tire out, yet it 
seem imposs for me to sleep. I heard the bell in the citi ring 
ten, eleven, and midnight. I must have fallen asleep about midnight 
becaus I don't rememb hear the bell after that. It seem to me 
that I had scarc close my eye when I dream that someth impel 
me to go to the window. I rose, and rais the sash lean out. 
twenty-fifth street wa desert as far as I could see. I began to be 
afraid; everyth outsid seem so--so black and uncomfortable. then 
the sound of wheel in the distanc came to my ears, and it seem to me 
as though that wa what I must wait for. veri slowli the wheel 
approached, and, finally, I could make out a vehicl move along the 
street. It came nearer and nearer, and when it pass beneath my window I 
saw it wa a hearse. then, as I trembl with fear, the driver turn and 
look straight at me. when I awok I wa stand by the open window 
shiver with cold, but the black-plum hears and the driver were 
gone. I dream thi dream again in march last, and again awok besid 
the open window. last night the dream came again. you rememb how it wa 
raining; when I awoke, stand at the open window, my night-dress wa 
soaked." 

"but where did I come into the dream?" I asked. 

"you--you were in the coffin; but you were not dead." 

"in the coffin?" 

"yes." 

"how did you know? could you see me?" 

"no; I onli knew you were there." 

"had you been eat welsh rarebits, or lobster salad?" I began, 
laughing, but the girl interrupt me with a frighten cry. 

"hello! what' up?" I said, as she shrank into the embrasur by the 
window. 

"the--th man below in the churchyard;--h drove the hearse." 

"nonsense," I said, but tessie' eye were wide with terror. I went to 
the window and look out. the man wa gone. "come, tessie," I urged, 
"don't be foolish. you have pose too long; you are nervous." 

"do you think I could forget that face?" she murmured. "three time I saw 
the hears pass below my window, and everi time the driver turn and 
look up at me. oh, hi face wa so white and--and soft? It look 
dead--it look as if it had been dead a long time." 

I induc the girl to sit down and swallow a glass of marsala. then I sat 
down besid her, and tri to give her some advice. 

"look here, tessie," I said, "you go to the countri for a week or two, 
and you'll have no more dream about hearses. you pose all day, and when 
night come your nerv are upset. you can't keep thi up. then again, 
instead of go to bed when your day' work is done, you run off to 
picnic at sulzer' park, or go to the eldorado or coney island, and when 
you come down here next morn you are fag out. there wa no real 
hearse. there wa a soft-shel crab dream." 

she smile faintly. 

"what about the man in the churchyard?" 

"oh, he' onli an ordinari unhealthy, everyday creature." 

"a true as my name is tessi reardon, I swear to you, mr. scott, that 
the face of the man below in the churchyard is the face of the man who 
drove the hearse!" 

"what of it?" I said. "it' an honest trade." 

"then you think I _did_ see the hearse?" 

"oh," I said diplomatically, "if you realli did, it might not be unlik 
that the man below drove it. there is noth in that." 

tessi rose, unrol her scent handkerchief, and take a bit of gum 
from a knot in the hem, place it in her mouth. then draw on her 
glove she offer me her hand, with a frank, "good-night, mr. scott," 
and walk out. 




II 

the next morning, thomas, the bell-boy, brought me the _herald_ and 
a bit of news. the church next door had been sold. I thank heaven for 
it, not that be a cathol I had ani repugn for the congreg 
next door, but becaus my nerv were shatter by a blatant exhorter, 
whose everi word echo through the aisl of the church as if it had been 
my own rooms, and who insist on hi r' with a nasal persist which 
revolt my everi instinct. then, too, there wa a fiend in human shape, 
an organist, who reel off some of the grand old hymn with an 
interpret of hi own, and I long for the blood of a creatur who 
could play the doxolog with an amend of minor chord which one hear 
onli in a quartet of veri young undergraduates. I believ the minist 
wa a good man, but when he bellowed: "and the lorrrrd said unto moses, 
the lorrrd is a man of war; the lorrrd is hi name. My wrath shall wax 
hot and I will kill you with the sworrrrd!" I wonder how mani centuri 
of purgatori it would take to aton for such a sin. 

"who bought the property?" I ask thomas. 

"nobodi that I knows, sir. they do say the gent wot own thi 'ere 
'amilton flat wa lookin' at it. 'E might be a bildin' more studios." 

I walk to the window. the young man with the unhealthi face stood by 
the churchyard gate, and at the mere sight of him the same overwhelm 
repugn took possess of me. 

"bi the way, thomas," I said, "who is that fellow down there?" 

thoma sniffed. "that there worm, sir? 'e night-watchman of the church, 
sir. 'E maik me tire a-sittin' out all night on them step and lookin' 
at you insultin' like. i'd a punch 'i 'ed, sir--beg pardon, sir--" 

"go on, thomas." 

"one night a comin' 'ome with arry, the other english boy, I see 'im a 
sittin' there on them steps. We 'ad molli and jen with us, sir, the two 
girl on the tray service, an' 'e look so insultin' at us that I up and 
sez: 'wat you look hat, you fat slug?'--beg pardon, sir, but that' 
'ow I sez, sir. then 'e don't say nothin' and I sez: 'come out and i'll 
punch that puddin' 'ed.' then I hopen the gate an' goe in, but 'e don't 
say nothin', onli look insultin' like. then I 'it 'im one, but, ugh! 
'i 'ed wa that cold and mushi it ud sicken you to touch 'im." 

"what did he do then?" I ask curiously. 

"'im? nawthin'." 

"and you, thomas?" 

the young fellow flush with embarrass and smile uneasily. 

"mr. scott, sir, I ain't no coward, an' I can't make it out at all whi I 
run. I wa in the 5th lawncers, sir, bugler at tel-el-kebir, an' wa shot 
by the wells." 

"you don't mean to say you ran away?" 

"yes, sir; I run." 

"why?" 

"that' just what I want to know, sir. I grab molli an' run, an' the 
rest wa as frighten as i." 

"but what were they frighten at?" 

thoma refus to answer for a while, but now my curios wa arous 
about the repuls young man below and I press him. three years' 
sojourn in america had not onli modifi thomas' cockney dialect but had 
given him the american' fear of ridicule. 

"you won't believ me, mr. scott, sir?" 

"yes, I will." 

"you will lawf at me, sir?" 

"nonsense!" 

He hesitated. "well, sir, it' gawd' truth that when I 'it 'im 'e 
grab me wrists, sir, and when I twist 'i soft, mushi fist one of 
'i finger come off in me 'and." 

the utter loath and horror of thomas' face must have been reflect in 
my own, for he added: 

"it' orful, an' now when I see 'im I just go away. 'E maik me hill." 

when thoma had gone I went to the window. the man stood besid the 
church-rail with both hand on the gate, but I hastili retreat to my 
easel again, sicken and horrified, for I saw that the middl finger of 
hi right hand wa missing. 

At nine o'clock tessi appear and vanish behind the screen with a 
merri "good morning, mr. scott." when she had reappear and taken her 
pose upon the model-stand I start a new canvas, much to her delight. 
she remain silent as long as I wa on the drawing, but as soon as the 
scrape of the charcoal ceas and I took up my fix she began to 
chatter. 

"oh, I had such a love time last night. We went to toni pastor's." 

"who are 'we'?" I demanded. 

"oh, maggie, you know, mr. whyte' model, and pinki mccormick--w call 
her pinki becaus she' got that beauti red hair you artist like so 
much--and lizzi burke." 

I sent a shower of spray from the fix over the canvas, and said: 
"well, go on." 

"we saw kelli and babi barn the skirt-danc and--and all the rest. I 
made a mash." 

"then you have gone back on me, tessie?" 

she laugh and shook her head. 

"he' lizzi burke' brother, ed. he' a perfect gen'l'man." 

I felt constrain to give her some parent advic concern mashing, 
which she took with a bright smile. 

"oh, I can take care of a strang mash," she said, examin her chew 
gum, "but Ed is different. lizzi is my best friend." 

then she relat how Ed had come back from the stock mill in lowell, 
massachusetts, to find her and lizzi grown up, and what an accomplish 
young man he was, and how he thought noth of squander half-a-dollar 
for ice-cream and oyster to celebr hi entri as clerk into the 
woollen depart of macy's. befor she finish I began to paint, and 
she resum the pose, smile and chatter like a sparrow. By noon I 
had the studi fairli well rub in and tessi came to look at it. 

"that' better," she said. 

I thought so too, and ate my lunch with a satisfi feel that all wa 
go well. tessi spread her lunch on a draw tabl opposit me and we 
drank our claret from the same bottl and light our cigarett from the 
same match. I wa veri much attach to tessie. I had watch her shoot 
up into a slender but exquisit form woman from a frail, awkward 
child. she had pose for me dure the last three years, and among all my 
model she wa my favourite. It would have troubl me veri much inde 
had she becom "tough" or "fly," as the phrase goes, but I never notic 
ani deterior of her manner, and felt at heart that she wa all 
right. she and I never discuss moral at all, and I had no intent of 
do so, partli becaus I had none myself, and partli becaus I knew she 
would do what she like in spite of me. still I did hope she would steer 
clear of complications, becaus I wish her well, and then also I had a 
selfish desir to retain the best model I had. I knew that mashing, as 
she term it, had no signific with girl like tessie, and that such 
thing in america did not resembl in the least the same thing in paris. 
yet, have live with my eye open, I also knew that somebodi would take 
tessi away some day, in one manner or another, and though I profess to 
myself that marriag wa nonsense, I sincer hope that, in thi case, 
there would be a priest at the end of the vista. I am a catholic. when I 
listen to high mass, when I sign myself, I feel that everything, 
includ myself, is more cheerful, and when I confess, it doe me good. 
A man who live as much alon as I do, must confess to somebody. then, 
again, sylvia wa catholic, and it wa reason enough for me. but I wa 
speak of tessie, which is veri different. tessi also wa cathol and 
much more devout than I, so, take it all in all, I had littl fear for 
my pretti model until she should fall in love. but _then_ I knew 
that fate alon would decid her futur for her, and I pray inwardli 
that fate would keep her away from men like me and throw into her path 
noth but Ed burk and jimmi mccormicks, bless her sweet face! 

tessi sat blow ring of smoke up to the ceil and tinkl the ice 
in her tumbler. 

"do you know that I also had a dream last night?" I observed. 

"not about that man," she laughed. 

"exactly. A dream similar to yours, onli much worse." 

It wa foolish and thoughtless of me to say this, but you know how littl 
tact the averag painter has. "I must have fallen asleep about ten 
o'clock," I continued, "and after a while I dreamt that I awoke. So 
plainli did I hear the midnight bells, the wind in the tree-branches, and 
the whistl of steamer from the bay, that even now I can scarc 
believ I wa not awake. I seem to be lie in a box which had a glass 
cover. dimli I saw the street lamp as I passed, for I must tell you, 
tessie, the box in which I reclin appear to lie in a cushion wagon 
which jolt me over a stoni pavement. after a while I becam impati 
and tri to move, but the box wa too narrow. My hand were cross on 
my breast, so I could not rais them to help myself. I listen and then 
tri to call. My voic wa gone. I could hear the trampl of the hors 
attach to the wagon, and even the breath of the driver. then anoth 
sound broke upon my ear like the rais of a window sash. I manag to 
turn my head a little, and found I could look, not onli through the glass 
cover of my box, but also through the glass pane in the side of the 
cover vehicle. I saw houses, empti and silent, with neither light nor 
life about ani of them except one. In that hous a window wa open on 
the first floor, and a figur all in white stood look down into the 
street. It wa you." 

tessi had turn her face away from me and lean on the tabl with her 
elbow. 

"I could see your face," I resumed, "and it seem to me to be veri 
sorrowful. then we pass on and turn into a narrow black lane. 
present the hors stopped. I wait and waited, close my eye with 
ear and impatience, but all wa silent as the grave. after what seem to 
me hours, I began to feel uncomfortable. A sens that somebodi wa close 
to me made me unclos my eyes. then I saw the white face of the 
hearse-driv look at me through the coffin-lid----" 

A sob from tessi interrupt me. she wa trembl like a leaf. I saw I 
had made an ass of myself and attempt to repair the damage. 

"why, tess," I said, "I onli told you thi to show you what influenc 
your stori might have on anoth person' dreams. you don't suppos I 
realli lay in a coffin, do you? what are you trembl for? don't you see 
that your dream and my unreason dislik for that inoffens watchman 
of the church simpli set my brain work as soon as I fell asleep?" 

she laid her head between her arms, and sob as if her heart would 
break. what a preciou tripl donkey I had made of myself! but I wa 
about to break my record. I went over and put my arm about her. 

"tessi dear, forgiv me," I said; "I had no busi to frighten you 
with such nonsense. you are too sensibl a girl, too good a cathol to 
believ in dreams." 

her hand tighten on mine and her head fell back upon my shoulder, but 
she still trembl and I pet her and comfort her. 

"come, tess, open your eye and smile." 

her eye open with a slow languid movement and met mine, but their 
express wa so queer that I hasten to reassur her again. 

"it' all humbug, tessie; you sure are not afraid that ani harm will 
come to you becaus of that." 

"no," she said, but her scarlet lip quivered. 

"then, what' the matter? are you afraid?" 

"yes. not for myself." 

"for me, then?" I demand gaily. 

"for you," she murmur in a voic almost inaudible. "i--i care for you." 

At first I start to laugh, but when I understood her, a shock pass 
through me, and I sat like one turn to stone. thi wa the crown bit 
of idioci I had committed. dure the moment which elaps between her 
repli and my answer I thought of a thousand respons to that innoc 
confession. I could pass it by with a laugh, I could misunderstand her 
and assur her as to my health, I could simpli point out that it wa 
imposs she could love me. but my repli wa quicker than my thoughts, 
and I might think and think now when it wa too late, for I had kiss 
her on the mouth. 

that even I took my usual walk in washington park, ponder over the 
occurr of the day. I wa thoroughli committed. there wa no back out 
now, and I stare the futur straight in the face. I wa not good, not 
even scrupulous, but I had no idea of deceiv either myself or tessie. 
the one passion of my life lay buri in the sunlit forest of brittany. 
wa it buri for ever? hope cri "no!" for three year I had been 
listen to the voic of hope, and for three year I had wait for a 
footstep on my threshold. had sylvia forgotten? "no!" cri hope. 

I said that I wa no good. that is true, but still I wa not exactli a 
comic opera villain. I had led an easy-go reckless life, take what 
invit me of pleasure, deplor and sometim bitterli regret 
consequences. In one thing alone, except my painting, wa I serious, and 
that wa someth which lay hidden if not lost in the breton forests. 

It wa too late for me to regret what had occur dure the day. 
whatev it had been, pity, a sudden tender for sorrow, or the more 
brutal instinct of gratifi vanity, it wa all the same now, and unless 
I wish to bruis an innoc heart, my path lay mark befor me. the 
fire and strength, the depth of passion of a love which I had never even 
suspected, with all my imagin experi in the world, left me no 
altern but to respond or send her away. whether becaus I am so 
cowardli about give pain to others, or whether it wa that I have 
littl of the gloomi puritan in me, I do not know, but I shrank from 
disclaim respons for that thoughtless kiss, and in fact had no 
time to do so befor the gate of her heart open and the flood pour 
forth. other who habitu do their duti and find a sullen satisfact 
in make themselv and everybodi els unhappy, might have withstood it. 
I did not. I dare not. after the storm had abat I did tell her that 
she might better have love Ed burk and worn a plain gold ring, but she 
would not hear of it, and I thought perhap as long as she had decid to 
love somebodi she could not marry, it had better be me. I, at least, 
could treat her with an intellig affection, and whenev she becam 
tire of her infatu she could go none the wors for it. for I wa 
decid on that point although I knew how hard it would be. I rememb 
the usual termin of platon liaisons, and thought how disgust I 
had been whenev I heard of one. I knew I wa undertak a great deal 
for so unscrupul a man as I was, and I dream the future, but never 
for one moment did I doubt that she wa safe with me. had it been anybodi 
but tessi I should not have bother my head about scruples. for it did 
not occur to me to sacrific tessi as I would have sacrif a woman of 
the world. I look the futur squar in the face and saw the sever 
probabl end to the affair. she would either tire of the whole thing, 
or becom so unhappi that I should have either to marri her or go away. 
If I marri her we would be unhappy. I with a wife unsuit to me, and 
she with a husband unsuit for ani woman. for my past life could 
scarc entitl me to marry. If I went away she might either fall ill, 
recover, and marri some eddi burke, or she might recklessli or 
deliber go and do someth foolish. On the other hand, if she tire 
of me, then her whole life would be befor her with beauti vista of 
eddi burk and marriag ring and twin and harlem flat and heaven 
know what. As I stroll along through the tree by the washington arch, 
I decid that she should find a substanti friend in me, anyway, and 
the futur could take care of itself. then I went into the hous and put 
on my even dress, for the littl faintly-perfum note on my dresser 
said, "have a cab at the stage door at eleven," and the note wa sign 
"edith carmichel, metropolitan theatre." 

I took supper that night, or rather we took supper, miss carmichel and I, 
at solari's, and the dawn wa just begin to gild the cross on the 
memori church as I enter washington squar after leav edith at the 
brunswick. there wa not a soul in the park as I pass along the tree 
and took the walk which lead from the garibaldi statu to the hamilton 
apart house, but as I pass the churchyard I saw a figur sit on 
the stone steps. In spite of myself a chill crept over me at the sight of 
the white puffi face, and I hasten to pass. then he said someth 
which might have been address to me or might mere have been a mutter 
to himself, but a sudden furiou anger flame up within me that such a 
creatur should address me. for an instant I felt like wheel about and 
smash my stick over hi head, but I walk on, and enter the 
hamilton went to my apartment. for some time I toss about the bed 
tri to get the sound of hi voic out of my ears, but could not. It 
fill my head, that mutter sound, like thick oili smoke from a 
fat-rend vat or an odour of noisom decay. and as I lay and toss 
about, the voic in my ear seem more distinct, and I began to 
understand the word he had muttered. they came to me slowli as if I had 
forgotten them, and at last I could make some sens out of the sounds. It 
wa this: 

"have you found the yellow sign?" 

"have you found the yellow sign?" 

"have you found the yellow sign?" 

I wa furious. what did he mean by that? then with a curs upon him and 
hi I roll over and went to sleep, but when I awok later I look pale 
and haggard, for I had dream the dream of the night before, and it 
troubl me more than I care to think. 

I dress and went down into my studio. tessi sat by the window, but as 
I came in she rose and put both arm around my neck for an innoc kiss. 
she look so sweet and dainti that I kiss her again and then sat down 
befor the easel. 

"hello! where' the studi I began yesterday?" I asked. 

tessi look conscious, but did not answer. I began to hunt among the 
pile of canvases, saying, "hurri up, tess, and get ready; we must take 
advantag of the morn light." 

when at last I gave up the search among the other canvas and turn to 
look around the room for the miss studi I notic tessi stand by 
the screen with her cloth still on. 

"what' the matter," I asked, "don't you feel well?" 

"yes." 

"then hurry." 

"do you want me to pose as--a I have alway posed?" 

then I understood. here wa a new complication. I had lost, of course, 
the best nude model I had ever seen. I look at tessie. her face wa 
scarlet. alas! alas! We had eaten of the tree of knowledge, and eden and 
nativ innoc were dream of the past--i mean for her. 

I suppos she notic the disappoint on my face, for she said: "I 
will pose if you wish. the studi is behind the screen here where I put 
it." 

"no," I said, "we will begin someth new;" and I went into my wardrob 
and pick out a moorish costum which fairli blaze with tinsel. It wa 
a genuin costume, and tessi retir to the screen with it enchanted. 
when she came forth again I wa astonished. her long black hair wa bound 
abov her forehead with a circlet of turquoises, and the ends, curl 
about her glitter girdle. her feet were encas in the embroid 
point slipper and the skirt of her costume, curious wrought with 
arabesqu in silver, fell to her ankles. the deep metal blue vest 
embroid with silver and the short mauresqu jacket spangl and sewn 
with turquois becam her wonderfully. she came up to me and held up her 
face smiling. I slip my hand into my pocket, and draw out a gold 
chain with a cross attached, drop it over her head. 

"it' yours, tessie." 

"mine?" she faltered. 

"yours. now go and pose," then with a radiant smile she ran behind the 
screen and present reappear with a littl box on which wa written my 
name. 

"I had intend to give it to you when I went home to-night," she said, 
"but I can't wait now." 

I open the box. On the pink cotton insid lay a clasp of black onyx, on 
which wa inlaid a curiou symbol or letter in gold. It wa neither 
arab nor chinese, nor, as I found afterwards, did it belong to ani 
human script. 

"it' all I had to give you for a keepsake," she said timidly. 

I wa annoyed, but I told her how much I should prize it, and promis to 
wear it always. she fasten it on my coat beneath the lapel. 

"how foolish, tess, to go and buy me such a beauti thing as this," I 
said. 

"I did not buy it," she laughed. 

"where did you get it?" 

then she told me how she had found it one day while come from the 
aquarium in the battery, how she had advertis it and watch the 
papers, but at last gave up all hope of find the owner. 

"that wa last winter," she said, "the veri day I had the first horrid 
dream about the hearse." 

I rememb my dream of the previou night but said nothing, and 
present my charcoal wa fli over a new canvas, and tessi stood 
motionless on the model-stand. 




iii 

the day follow wa a disastr one for me. while move a frame 
canva from one easel to anoth my foot slip on the polish floor, 
and I fell heavili on both wrists. they were so badli sprain that it 
wa useless to attempt to hold a brush, and I wa oblig to wander about 
the studio, glare at unfinish draw and sketches, until despair 
seiz me and I sat down to smoke and twiddl my thumb with rage. the 
rain blew against the window and rattl on the roof of the church, 
drive me into a nervou fit with it intermin patter. tessi sat 
sew by the window, and everi now and then rais her head and look 
at me with such innoc compass that I began to feel asham of my 
irrit and look about for someth to occupi me. I had read all 
the paper and all the book in the library, but for the sake of 
someth to do I went to the bookcas and shove them open with my 
elbow. I knew everi volum by it colour and examin them all, pass 
slowli around the librari and whistl to keep up my spirits. I wa 
turn to go into the dining-room when my eye fell upon a book bound in 
serpent skin, stand in a corner of the top shelf of the last bookcase. 
I did not rememb it, and from the floor could not deciph the pale 
letter on the back, so I went to the smoking-room and call tessie. 
she came in from the studio and climb up to reach the book. 

"what is it?" I asked. 

"_the king in yellow._" 

I wa dumfounded. who had place it there? how came it in my rooms? I had 
long ago decid that I should never open that book, and noth on earth 
could have persuad me to buy it. fear lest curios might tempt me 
to open it, I had never even look at it in book-stores. If I ever had 
had ani curios to read it, the aw tragedi of young castaigne, whom 
I knew, prevent me from explor it wick pages. I had alway 
refus to listen to ani descript of it, and indeed, nobodi ever 
ventur to discuss the second part aloud, so I had absolut no 
knowledg of what those leav might reveal. I stare at the poison 
mottl bind as I would at a snake. 

"don't touch it, tessie," I said; "come down." 

Of cours my admonit wa enough to arous her curiosity, and befor I 
could prevent it she took the book and, laughing, danc off into the 
studio with it. I call to her, but she slip away with a torment 
smile at my helpless hands, and I follow her with some impatience. 

"tessie!" I cried, enter the library, "listen, I am serious. put that 
book away. I do not wish you to open it!" the librari wa empty. I went 
into both drawing-rooms, then into the bedrooms, laundry, kitchen, and 
final return to the librari and began a systemat search. she had 
hidden herself so well that it wa half-an-hour later when I discov 
her crouch white and silent by the lattic window in the store-room 
above. At the first glanc I saw she had been punish for her 
foolishness. _the king in yellow_ lay at her feet, but the book wa 
open at the second part. I look at tessi and saw it wa too late. she 
had open _the king in yellow_. then I took her by the hand and led 
her into the studio. she seem dazed, and when I told her to lie down on 
the sofa she obey me without a word. after a while she close her eye 
and her breath becam regular and deep, but I could not determin 
whether or not she slept. for a long while I sat silent besid her, but 
she neither stir nor spoke, and at last I rose, and, enter the 
unus store-room, took the book in my least injur hand. It seem 
heavi as lead, but I carri it into the studio again, and sit down 
on the rug besid the sofa, open it and read it through from begin 
to end. 

when, faint with excess of my emotions, I drop the volum and lean 
wearili back against the sofa, tessi open her eye and look at 
me.... 

We had been speak for some time in a dull monoton strain befor I 
realiz that we were discuss _the king in yellow_. Oh the sin of 
write such words,--word which are clear as crystal, limpid and music 
as bubbl springs, word which sparkl and glow like the poison 
diamond of the medicis! Oh the wickedness, the hopeless damnat of a 
soul who could fascin and paralyz human creatur with such 
words,--word understood by the ignor and wise alike, word which are 
more preciou than jewels, more sooth than music, more aw than 
death! 

We talk on, unmind of the gather shadows, and she wa beg me 
to throw away the clasp of black onyx quaintli inlaid with what we now 
knew to be the yellow sign. I never shall know whi I refused, though even 
at thi hour, here in my bedroom as I write thi confession, I should be 
glad to know _what_ it wa that prevent me from tear the yellow 
sign from my breast and cast it into the fire. I am sure I wish to 
do so, and yet tessi plead with me in vain. night fell and the hour 
drag on, but still we murmur to each other of the king and the 
pallid mask, and midnight sound from the misti spire in the 
fog-wrap city. We spoke of hastur and of cassilda, while outsid the 
fog roll against the blank window-pan as the cloud wave roll and 
break on the shore of hali. 

the hous wa veri silent now, and not a sound came up from the misti 
streets. tessi lay among the cushions, her face a grey blot in the 
gloom, but her hand were clasp in mine, and I knew that she knew and 
read my thought as I read hers, for we had understood the mysteri of the 
hyad and the phantom of truth wa laid. then as we answer each other, 
swiftly, silently, thought on thought, the shadow stir in the gloom 
about us, and far in the distant street we heard a sound. nearer and 
nearer it came, the dull crunch of wheels, nearer and yet nearer, and 
now, outsid befor the door it ceased, and I drag myself to the 
window and saw a black-plum hearse. the gate below open and shut, and 
I crept shake to my door and bolt it, but I knew no bolts, no locks, 
could keep that creatur out who wa come for the yellow sign. and now 
I heard him move veri softli along the hall. now he wa at the door, 
and the bolt rot at hi touch. now he had entered. with eye start 
from my head I peer into the darkness, but when he came into the room I 
did not see him. It wa onli when I felt him envelop me in hi cold soft 
grasp that I cri out and struggl with deadli fury, but my hand were 
useless and he tore the onyx clasp from my coat and struck me full in the 
face. then, as I fell, I heard tessie' soft cri and her spirit fled: and 
even while fall I long to follow her, for I knew that the king in 
yellow had open hi tatter mantl and there wa onli god to cri to 
now. 

I could tell more, but I cannot see what help it will be to the world. As 
for me, I am past human help or hope. As I lie here, writing, careless 
even whether or not I die befor I finish, I can see the doctor gather 
up hi powder and phial with a vagu gestur to the good priest besid 
me, which I understand. 

they will be veri curiou to know the tragedy--they of the outsid world 
who write book and print million of newspapers, but I shall write no 
more, and the father confessor will seal my last word with the seal of 
sanctiti when hi holi offic is done. they of the outsid world may send 
their creatur into wreck home and death-smitten firesides, and their 
newspap will batten on blood and tears, but with me their spi must 
halt befor the confessional. they know that tessi is dead and that I am 
dying. they know how the peopl in the house, arous by an infern 
scream, rush into my room and found one live and two dead, but they 
do not know what I shall tell them now; they do not know that the doctor 
said as he point to a horribl decompos heap on the floor--th livid 
corps of the watchman from the church: "I have no theory, no explanation. 
that man must have been dead for months!" 


I think I am dying. I wish the priest would-- 




the demoisel d'i 

"mai je croy que je 
sui descendu on puiz 
ténébreux onquel disoit 
heraclytu estr vereté cachée." 

"there be three thing which are too wonder for me, yea, four which I 
know not: 

"the way of an eagl in the air; the way of a serpent upon a rock; the 
way of a ship in the midst of the sea; and the way of a man with a maid." 


I 

the utter desol of the scene began to have it effect; I sat down to 
face the situat and, if possible, recal to mind some landmark which 
might aid me in extric myself from my present position. If I could 
onli find the ocean again all would be clear, for I knew one could see 
the island of groix from the cliffs. 

I laid down my gun, and kneel behind a rock light a pipe. then I 
look at my watch. It wa nearli four o'clock. I might have wander far 
from kerselec sinc daybreak. 

stand the day befor on the cliff below kerselec with goulven, 
look out over the sombr moor among which I had now lost my way, 
these down had appear to me level as a meadow, stretch to the 
horizon, and although I knew how decept is distance, I could not 
realiz that what from kerselec seem to be mere grassi hollow were 
great valley cover with gors and heather, and what look like 
scatter boulder were in realiti enorm cliff of granite. 

"it' a bad place for a stranger," old goulven had said: "you'd better 
take a guide;" and I had replied, "I shall not lose myself." now I knew 
that I had lost myself, as I sat there smoking, with the sea-wind blow 
in my face. On everi side stretch the moorland, cover with flower 
gors and heath and granit boulders. there wa not a tree in sight, much 
less a house. after a while, I pick up the gun, and turn my back on 
the sun tramp on again. 

there wa littl use in follow ani of the brawl stream which everi 
now and then cross my path, for, instead of flow into the sea, they 
ran inland to reedi pool in the hollow of the moors. I had follow 
several, but they all led me to swamp or silent littl pond from which 
the snipe rose peep and wheel away in an ecstasi of fright I began 
to feel fatigued, and the gun gall my shoulder in spite of the doubl 
pads. the sun sank lower and lower, shine level across yellow gors and 
the moorland pools. 

As I walk my own gigant shadow led me on, seem to lengthen at 
everi step. the gors scrape against my leggings, crackl beneath my 
feet, shower the brown earth with blossoms, and the brake bow and 
billow along my path. from tuft of heath rabbit scurri away through 
the bracken, and among the swamp grass I heard the wild duck' drowsi 
quack. onc a fox stole across my path, and again, as I stoop to drink 
at a hurri rill, a heron flap heavili from the reed besid me. I 
turn to look at the sun. It seem to touch the edg of the plain. 
when at last I decid that it wa useless to go on, and that I must make 
up my mind to spend at least one night on the moors, I threw myself down 
thoroughli fag out. the even sunlight slant warm across my body, 
but the sea-wind began to rise, and I felt a chill strike through me 
from my wet shooting-boots. high overhead gull were wheel and toss 
like bit of white paper; from some distant marsh a solitari curlew 
called. littl by littl the sun sank into the plain, and the zenith 
flush with the after-glow. I watch the sky chang from palest gold to 
pink and then to smoulder fire. cloud of midg danc abov me, and 
high in the calm air a bat dip and soared. My eyelid began to droop. 
then as I shook off the drowsi a sudden crash among the bracken 
rous me. I rais my eyes. A great bird hung quiver in the air abov 
my face. for an instant I stared, incap of motion; then someth 
leap past me in the fern and the bird rose, wheeled, and pitch 
headlong into the brake. 

I wa on my feet in an instant peer through the gorse. there came the 
sound of a struggl from a bunch of heather close by, and then all wa 
quiet. I step forward, my gun poised, but when I came to the heather 
the gun fell under my arm again, and I stood motionless in silent 
astonish A dead hare lay on the ground, and on the hare stood a 
magnific falcon, one talon buri in the creature' neck, the other 
plant firmli on it limp flank. but what astonish me, wa not the 
mere sight of a falcon sit upon it prey. I had seen that more than 
once. It wa that the falcon wa fit with a sort of leash about both 
talons, and from the leash hung a round bit of metal like a sleigh-bell. 
the bird turn it fierc yellow eye on me, and then stoop and struck 
it curv beak into the quarry. At the same instant hurri step 
sound among the heather, and a girl sprang into the covert in front. 
without a glanc at me she walk up to the falcon, and pass her 
glove hand under it breast, rais it from the quarry. then she deftli 
slip a small hood over the bird' head, and hold it out on her 
gauntlet, stoop and pick up the hare. 

she pass a cord about the animal' leg and fasten the end of the 
thong to her girdle. then she start to retrac her step through the 
covert As she pass me I rais my cap and she acknowledg my presenc 
with a scarc percept inclination. I had been so astonished, so 
lost in admir of the scene befor my eyes, that it had not occur 
to me that here wa my salvation. but as she move away I recollect 
that unless I want to sleep on a windi moor that night I had better 
recov my speech without delay. At my first word she hesitated, and as I 
step befor her I thought a look of fear came into her beauti eyes. 
but as I humbl explain my unpleas plight, her face flush and she 
look at me in wonder. 

"sure you did not come from kerselec!" she repeated. 

her sweet voic had no trace of the breton accent nor of ani accent which 
I knew, and yet there wa someth in it I seem to have heard before, 
someth quaint and indefinable, like the theme of an old song. 

I explain that I wa an american, unacquaint with finistère, shoot 
there for my own amusement. 

"an american," she repeat in the same quaint music tones. "I have 
never befor seen an american." 

for a moment she stood silent, then look at me she said. "if you 
should walk all night you could not reach kerselec now, even if you had a 
guide." 

thi wa pleasant news. 

"but," I began, "if I could onli find a peasant' hut where I might get 
someth to eat, and shelter." 

the falcon on her wrist flutter and shook it head. the girl smooth 
it glossi back and glanc at me. 

"look around," she said gently. "can you see the end of these moors? 
look, north, south, east, west. can you see anyth but moorland and 
bracken?" 

"no," I said. 

"the moor is wild and desolate. It is easi to enter, but sometim they 
who enter never leav it. there are no peasants' hut here." 

"well," I said, "if you will tell me in which direct kerselec lies, 
to-morrow it will take me no longer to go back than it ha to come." 

she look at me again with an express almost like pity. 

"ah," she said, "to come is easi and take hours; to go is different--and 
may take centuries." 

I stare at her in amaz but decid that I had misunderstood her. 
then befor I had time to speak she drew a whistl from her belt and 
sound it. 

"sit down and rest," she said to me; "you have come a long distanc and 
are tired." 

she gather up her pleat skirt and motion me to follow pick her 
dainti way through the gors to a flat rock among the ferns. 

"they will be here directly," she said, and take a seat at one end of 
the rock invit me to sit down on the other edge. the after-glow wa 
begin to fade in the sky and a singl star twinkl faintli through 
the rosi haze. A long waver triangl of water-fowl drift southward 
over our heads, and from the swamp around plover were calling. 

"they are veri beautiful--thes moors," she said quietly. 

"beautiful, but cruel to strangers," I answered. 

"beauti and cruel," she repeat dreamily, "beauti and cruel." 

"like a woman," I said stupidly. 

"oh," she cri with a littl catch in her breath, and look at me. her 
dark eye met mine, and I thought she seem angri or frightened. 

"like a woman," she repeat under her breath, "how cruel to say so!" 
then after a pause, as though speak aloud to herself, "how cruel for 
him to say that!" 

I don't know what sort of an apolog I offer for my inane, though 
harmless speech, but I know that she seem so troubl about it that I 
began to think I had said someth veri dread without know it, and 
rememb with horror the pitfal and snare which the french languag 
set for foreigners. while I wa tri to imagin what I might have 
said, a sound of voic came across the moor, and the girl rose to her 
feet. 

"no," she said, with a trace of a smile on her pale face, "I will not 
accept your apologies, monsieur, but I must prove you wrong, and that 
shall be my revenge. look. here come hastur and raoul." 

two men loom up in the twilight. one had a sack across hi shoulder 
and the other carri a hoop befor him as a waiter carri a tray. the 
hoop wa fasten with strap to hi shoulders, and around the edg of 
the circlet sat three hood falcon fit with tinkl bells. the girl 
step up to the falconer, and with a quick turn of her wrist 
transfer her falcon to the hoop, where it quickli sidl off and 
nestl among it mates, who shook their hood head and ruffl their 
feather till the bell jess tinkl again. the other man step 
forward and bow respect took up the hare and drop it into the 
game-sack. 

"these are my piqueurs," said the girl, turn to me with a gentl 
dignity. "raoul is a good fauconnier, and I shall some day make him grand 
veneur. hastur is incomparable." 

the two silent men salut me respectfully. 

"did I not tell you, monsieur, that I should prove you wrong?" she 
continued. "this, then, is my revenge, that you do me the courtesi of 
accept food and shelter at my own house." 

befor I could answer she spoke to the falconers, who start instantli 
across the heath, and with a graciou gestur to me she followed. I don't 
know whether I made her understand how profoundli grate I felt, but 
she seem pleas to listen, as we walk over the dewi heather. 

"are you not veri tired?" she asked. 

I had clean forgotten my fatigu in her presence, and I told her so. 

"don't you think your gallantri is a littl old-fashioned?" she said; and 
when I look confus and humbled, she ad quietly, "oh, I like it, I 
like everyth old-fashioned, and it is delight to hear you say such 
pretti things." 

the moorland around us wa veri still now under it ghostli sheet of 
mist. the plover had ceas their calling; the cricket and all the 
littl creatur of the field were silent as we passed, yet it seem to 
me as if I could hear them begin again far behind us. well in 
advance, the two tall falcon strode across the heather, and the faint 
jingl of the hawks' bell came to our ear in distant murmur 
chimes. 

suddenli a splendid hound dash out of the mist in front, follow by 
anoth and anoth until half-a-dozen or more were bound and leap 
around the girl besid me. she caress and quiet them with her glove 
hand, speak to them in quaint term which I rememb to have seen in 
old french manuscripts. 

then the falcon on the circlet born by the falcon ahead began to beat 
their wing and scream, and from somewher out of sight the note of a 
hunting-horn float across the moor. the hound sprang away befor us 
and vanish in the twilight, the falcon flap and squeal upon their 
perch, and the girl, take up the song of the horn, began to hum. clear 
and mellow her voic sound in the night air. 

"chasseur, chasseur, chassez encore, 
quittez rosett et jeanneton, 
tonton, tonton, tontaine, tonton, 
ou, pour, rabattre, dè l'aurore, 
que le amour soient de planton, 
tonton, tontaine, tonton." 

As I listen to her love voic a grey mass which rapidli grew more 
distinct loom up in front, and the horn rang out joyous through the 
tumult of the hound and falcons. A torch glimmer at a gate, a light 
stream through an open door, and we step upon a wooden bridg 
which trembl under our feet and rose creak and strain behind us 
as we pass over the moat and into a small stone court, wall on everi 
side. from an open doorway a man came and, bend in salutation, 
present a cup to the girl besid me. she took the cup and touch it 
with her lips, then lower it turn to me and said in a low voice, "I 
bid you welcome." 

At that moment one of the falcon came with anoth cup, but befor 
hand it to me, present it to the girl, who tast it. the falcon 
made a gestur to receiv it, but she hesit a moment, and then, 
step forward, offer me the cup with her own hands. I felt thi to 
be an act of extraordinari graciousness, but hardli knew what wa 
expect of me, and did not rais it to my lip at once. the girl flush 
crimson. I saw that I must act quickly. 

"mademoiselle," I faltered, "a stranger whom you have save from danger 
he may never realiz empti thi cup to the gentlest and loveliest 
hostess of france." 

"in hi name," she murmured, cross herself as I drain the cup. then 
step into the doorway she turn to me with a pretti gestur and, 
take my hand in hers, led me into the house, say again and again: 
"you are veri welcome, inde you are welcom to the château d'ys." 




II 

I awok next morn with the music of the horn in my ears, and leap 
out of the ancient bed, went to a curtain window where the sunlight 
filter through littl deep-set panes. the horn ceas as I look into 
the court below. 

A man who might have been brother to the two falcon of the night 
befor stood in the midst of a pack of hounds. A curv horn wa strap 
over hi back, and in hi hand he held a long-lash whip. the dog 
whine and yelped, danc around him in anticipation; there wa the 
stamp of horses, too, in the wall yard. 

"mount!" cri a voic in breton, and with a clatter of hoof the two 
falconers, with falcon upon their wrists, rode into the courtyard among 
the hounds. then I heard anoth voic which sent the blood throb 
through my heart: "piriou louis, hunt the hound well and spare neither 
spur nor whip. thou raoul and thou gaston, see that the _epervier_ 
doe not prove himself _niais_, and if it be best in your judgment, 
_fait courtoisi à l'oiseau. jardin un oiseau_, like the 
_mué_ there on hastur' wrist, is not difficult, but thou, raoul, 
mayest not find it so simpl to govern that _hagard_. twice last 
week he foam _au vif_ and lost the _beccade_ although he is 
use to the _leurre_. the bird act like a stupid _branchier. 
paîtr un hagard n'est pa si facile."_ 

wa I dreaming? the old languag of falconri which I had read in yellow 
manuscripts--th old forgotten french of the middl age wa sound in 
my ear while the hound bay and the hawks' bell tinkl accompani 
to the stamp horses. she spoke again in the sweet forgotten language: 

"if you would rather attach the _longe_ and leav thi _hagard au 
bloc_, raoul, I shall say nothing; for it were a piti to spoil so fair 
a day' sport with an ill-train _sors_. _essim abaisser_,--it is 
possibl the best way. _ça lui donnera de reins._ I wa perhap hasti 
with the bird. It take time to pass _à la filière_ and the exercis 
_d'escap_." 

then the falcon raoul bow in hi stirrup and replied: "if it be the 
pleasur of mademoiselle, I shall keep the hawk." 

"it is my wish," she answered. "falconri I know, but you have yet to give 
me mani a lesson in _autourserie_, my poor raoul. sieur piriou loui 
mount!" 

the huntsman sprang into an archway and in an instant returned, mount 
upon a strong black horse, follow by a piqueur also mounted. 

"ah!" she cri joyously, "speed glemarec rené! speed! speed all! sound 
thi horn, sieur piriou!" 

the silveri music of the hunting-horn fill the courtyard, the hound 
sprang through the gateway and gallop hoof-beat plung out of the 
pave court; loud on the drawbridge, suddenli muffled, then lost in the 
heather and bracken of the moors. distant and more distant sound the 
horn, until it becam so faint that the sudden carol of a soar lark 
drown it in my ears. I heard the voic below respond to some call 
from within the house. 

"I do not regret the chase, I will go anoth time courtesi to the 
stranger, pelagie, remember!" 

and a feebl voic came quaver from within the house, 
"_courtoisie_." 

I stripped, and rub myself from head to foot in the huge earthen basin 
of ici water which stood upon the stone floor at the foot of my bed. then 
I look about for my clothes. they were gone, but on a settl near the 
door lay a heap of garment which I inspect with astonishment. As my 
cloth had vanished, I wa compel to attir myself in the costum 
which had evid been place there for me to wear while my own cloth 
dried. everyth wa there, cap, shoes, and hunt doublet of silveri 
grey homespun; but the close-fit costum and seamless shoe belong 
to anoth century, and I rememb the strang costum of the three 
falcon in the court-yard. I wa sure that it wa not the modern dress 
of ani portion of franc or brittany; but not until I wa dress and 
stood befor a mirror between the window did I realiz that I wa 
cloth much more like a young huntsman of the middl age than like a 
breton of that day. I hesit and pick up the cap. should I go down 
and present myself in that strang guise? there seem to be no help for 
it, my own cloth were gone and there wa no bell in the ancient chamber 
to call a servant; so I content myself with remov a short hawk' 
feather from the cap, and, open the door, went downstairs. 

By the fireplac in the larg room at the foot of the stair an old 
breton woman sat spin with a distaff. she look up at me when I 
appeared, and, smile frankly, wish me health in the breton language, 
to which I laughingli repli in french. At the same moment my hostess 
appear and return my salut with a grace and digniti that sent a 
thrill to my heart. her love head with it dark curli hair wa crown 
with a head-dress which set all doubt as to the epoch of my own costum 
at rest. her slender figur wa exquisit set off in the homespun 
hunting-gown edg with silver, and on her gauntlet-cov wrist she 
bore one of her pet hawks. with perfect simplic she took my hand 
and led me into the garden in the court, and seat herself befor a 
tabl invit me veri sweetli to sit besid her. then she ask me in her 
soft quaint accent how I had pass the night, and whether I wa veri 
much inconvenienc by wear the cloth which old pelagi had put 
there for me while I slept. I look at my own cloth and shoes, dri 
in the sun by the garden-wall, and hate them. what horror they were 
compar with the grace costum which I now wore! I told her thi 
laughing, but she agre with me veri seriously. 

"we will throw them away," she said in a quiet voice. In my astonish 
I attempt to explain that I not onli could not think of accept 
cloth from anybody, although for all I knew it might be the custom of 
hospit in that part of the country, but that I should cut an 
imposs figur if I return to franc cloth as I wa then. 

she laugh and toss her pretti head, say someth in old french 
which I did not understand, and then pelagi trot out with a tray on 
which stood two bowl of milk, a loaf of white bread, fruit, a platter of 
honey-comb, and a flagon of deep red wine. "you see I have not yet broken 
my fast becaus I wish you to eat with me. but I am veri hungry," she 
smiled. 

"I would rather die than forget one word of what you have said!" I 
blurt out, while my cheek burned. "she will think me mad," I ad to 
myself, but she turn to me with sparkl eyes. 

"ah!" she murmured. "then monsieur know all that there is of chivalry--" 

she cross herself and broke bread. I sat and watch her white hands, 
not dare to rais my eye to hers. 

"will you not eat?" she asked. "whi do you look so troubled?" 

ah, why? I knew it now. I knew I would give my life to touch with my lip 
those rosi palms--i understood now that from the moment when I look 
into her dark eye there on the moor last night I had love her. My great 
and sudden passion held me speechless. 

"are you ill at ease?" she ask again. 

then, like a man who pronounc hi own doom, I answer in a low voice: 
"yes, I am ill at eas for love of you." and as she did not stir nor 
answer, the same power move my lip in spite of me and I said, "i, who 
am unworthi of the lightest of your thoughts, I who abus hospit and 
repay your gentl courtesi with bold presumption, I love you." 

she lean her head upon her hands, and answer softly, "I love you. 
your word are veri dear to me. I love you." 

"then I shall win you." 

"win me," she replied. 

but all the time I had been sit silent, my face turn toward her. 
she, also silent, her sweet face rest on her upturn palm, sat face 
me, and as her eye look into mine I knew that neither she nor I had 
spoken human speech; but I knew that her soul had answer mine, and I 
drew myself up feel youth and joyou love cours through everi vein. 
she, with a bright colour in her love face, seem as one awaken from 
a dream, and her eye sought mine with a question glanc which made me 
trembl with delight. We broke our fast, speak of ourselves. I told 
her my name and she told me hers, the demoisel jeann d'ys. 

she spoke of her father and mother' death, and how the nineteen of her 
year had been pass in the littl fortifi farm alon with her nurs 
pelagie, glemarec rené the piqueur, and the four falconers, raoul, 
gaston, hastur, and the sieur piriou louis, who had serv her father. 
she had never been outsid the moorland--nev even had seen a human soul 
before, except the falcon and pelagie. she did not know how she had 
heard of kerselec; perhap the falcon had spoken of it. she knew the 
legend of loup garou and jeann la flamm from her nurs pelagie. she 
embroid and spun flax. her hawk and hound were her onli 
distraction. when she had met me there on the moor she had been so 
frighten that she almost drop at the sound of my voice. she had, it 
wa true, seen ship at sea from the cliffs, but as far as the eye could 
reach the moor over which she gallop were destitut of ani sign of 
human life. there wa a legend which old pelagi told, how anybodi onc 
lost in the unexplor moorland might never return, becaus the moor 
were enchanted. she did not know whether it wa true, she never had 
thought about it until she met me. she did not know whether the falcon 
had even been outside, or whether they could go if they would. the book 
in the hous which pelagie, the nurse, had taught her to read were 
hundr of year old. 

all thi she told me with a sweet serious seldom seen in ani one but 
children. My own name she found easi to pronounce, and insisted, becaus 
my first name wa philip, I must have french blood in me. she did not 
seem curiou to learn anyth about the outsid world, and I thought 
perhap she consid it had forfeit her interest and respect from the 
stori of her nurse. 

We were still sit at the table, and she wa throw grape to the 
small field bird which came fearlessli to our veri feet. 

I began to speak in a vagu way of going, but she would not hear of it, 
and befor I knew it I had promis to stay a week and hunt with hawk and 
hound in their company. I also obtain permiss to come again from 
kerselec and visit her after my return. 

"why," she said innocently, "I do not know what I should do if you never 
came back;" and I, know that I had no right to awaken her with the 
sudden shock which the avow of my own love would bring to her, sat 
silent, hardli dare to breathe. 

"you will come veri often?" she asked. 

"veri often," I said. 

"everi day?" 

"everi day." 

"oh," she sighed, "I am veri happy. come and see my hawks." 

she rose and took my hand again with a childlik innoc of possession, 
and we walk through the garden and fruit tree to a grassi lawn which 
wa border by a brook. over the lawn were scatter fifteen or twenti 
stump of trees--parti imbed in the grass--and upon all of these 
except two sat falcons. they were attach to the stump by thong which 
were in turn fasten with steel rivet to their leg just abov the 
talons. A littl stream of pure spring water flow in a wind cours 
within easi distanc of each perch. 

the bird set up a clamour when the girl appeared, but she went from one 
to another, caress some, take other for an instant upon her wrist, 
or stoop to adjust their jesses. 

"are they not pretty?" she said. "see, here is a falcon-gentil. We call 
it 'ignoble,' becaus it take the quarri in direct chase. thi is a blue 
falcon. In falconri we call it 'noble' becaus it rise over the quarry, 
and wheeling, drop upon it from above. thi white bird is a gerfalcon 
from the north. It is also 'noble!' here is a merlin, and thi tiercelet 
is a falcon-heroner." 

I ask her how she had learn the old languag of falconry. she did not 
remember, but thought her father must have taught it to her when she wa 
veri young. 

then she led me away and show me the young falcon still in the nest. 
"they are term _niais_ in falconry," she explained. "A 
_branchier_ is the young bird which is just abl to leav the nest 
and hop from branch to branch. A young bird which ha not yet moult is 
call a _sors_, and a _mué_ is a hawk which ha moult in 
captivity. when we catch a wild falcon which ha chang it plumag we 
term it a _hagard_. raoul first taught me to dress a falcon. shall I 
teach you how it is done?" 

she seat herself on the bank of the stream among the falcon and I 
threw myself at her feet to listen. 

then the demoisel d'i held up one rosy-tip finger and began veri 
gravely. 

"first one must catch the falcon." 

"I am caught," I answered. 

she laugh veri prettili and told me my _dressage_ would perhap be 
difficult, as I wa noble. 

"I am alreadi tamed," I replied; "jess and belled." 

she laughed, delighted. "oh, my brave falcon; then you will return at my 
call?" 

"I am yours," I answer gravely. 

she sat silent for a moment. then the colour heighten in her cheek and 
she held up her finger again, saying, "listen; I wish to speak of 
falconry--" 

"I listen, countess jeann d'ys." 

but again she fell into the reverie, and her eye seem fix on 
someth beyond the summer clouds. 

"philip," she said at last. 

"jeanne," I whispered. 

"that is all,--that is what I wished," she sighed,--"philip and jeanne." 

she held her hand toward me and I touch it with my lips. 

"win me," she said, but thi time it wa the bodi and soul which spoke in 
unison. 

after a while she began again: "let us speak of falconry." 

"begin," I replied; "we have caught the falcon." 

then jeann d'i took my hand in both of her and told me how with 
infinit patienc the young falcon wa taught to perch upon the wrist, 
how littl by littl it becam use to the bell jess and the 
_chaperon à cornette_. 

"they must first have a good appetite," she said; "then littl by littl 
I reduc their nourishment; which in falconri we call _pât_. when, 
after mani night pass _au bloc_ as these bird are now, I prevail 
upon the _hagard_ to stay quietli on the wrist, then the bird is 
readi to be taught to come for it food. I fix the _pât_ to the end 
of a thong, or _leurre_, and teach the bird to come to me as soon as 
I begin to whirl the cord in circl about my head. At first I drop the 
_pât_ when the falcon comes, and he eat the food on the ground. 
after a littl he will learn to seiz the _leurre_ in motion as I 
whirl it around my head or drag it over the ground. after thi it is easi 
to teach the falcon to strike at game, alway rememb to _'fair 
courtoisi á l'oiseau'_, that is, to allow the bird to tast the 
quarry." 

A squeal from one of the falcon interrupt her, and she aros to adjust 
the _longe_ which had becom whip about the _bloc_, but the 
bird still flap it wing and screamed. 

"what _is_ the matter?" she said. "philip, can you see?" 

I look around and at first saw noth to caus the commotion, which 
wa now heighten by the scream and flap of all the birds. then my 
eye fell upon the flat rock besid the stream from which the girl had 
risen. A grey serpent wa move slowli across the surfac of the 
boulder, and the eye in it flat triangular head sparkl like jet. 

"A couleuvre," she said quietly. 

"it is harmless, is it not?" I asked. 

she point to the black v-shape figur on the neck. 

"it is certain death," she said; "it is a viper." 

We watch the reptil move slowli over the smooth rock to where the 
sunlight fell in a broad warm patch. 

I start forward to examin it, but she clung to my arm crying, "don't, 
philip, I am afraid." 

"for me?" 

"for you, philip,--i love you." 

then I took her in my arm and kiss her on the lips, but all I could 
say was: "jeanne, jeanne, jeanne." and as she lay trembl on my breast, 
someth struck my foot in the grass below, but I did not heed it. then 
again someth struck my ankle, and a sharp pain shot through me. I 
look into the sweet face of jeann d'i and kiss her, and with all my 
strength lift her in my arm and flung her from me. then bending, I 
tore the viper from my ankl and set my heel upon it head. I rememb 
feel weak and numb,--i rememb fall to the ground. through my 
slowli glaze eye I saw jeanne' white face bend close to mine, and 
when the light in my eye went out I still felt her arm about my neck, 
and her soft cheek against my drawn lips. 


when I open my eyes, I look around in terror. jeann wa gone. I saw 
the stream and the flat rock; I saw the crush viper in the grass besid 
me, but the hawk and _blocs_ had disappeared. I sprang to my feet. 
the garden, the fruit trees, the drawbridg and the wall court were 
gone. I stare stupidli at a heap of crumbl ruins, ivy-cov and 
grey, through which great tree had push their way. I crept forward, 
drag my numb foot, and as I moved, a falcon sail from the 
tree-top among the ruins, and soaring, mount in narrow circles, 
fade and vanish in the cloud above. 

"jeanne, jeanne," I cried, but my voic die on my lips, and I fell on my 
knee among the weeds. and as god will it, I, not knowing, had fallen 
kneel befor a crumbl shrine carv in stone for our mother of 
sorrows. I saw the sad face of the virgin wrought in the cold stone. I 
saw the cross and thorn at her feet, and beneath it I read: 

"pray for the soul OF the 
demoisel jeann d'ys, 
who die 
IN her youth for love OF 
philip, A stranger. 
a.d. 1573." 

but upon the ici slab lay a woman' glove still warm and fragrant. 




the prophets' paradis 

"if but the vine and love abjur band 
are in the prophets' paradis to stand, 
alack, I doubt the prophets' paradise, 
were empti as the hollow of one' hand." 




the studio 

He smiled, saying, "seek her throughout the world." 

I said, "whi tell me of the world? My world is here, between these wall 
and the sheet of glass above; here among gild flagon and dull jewel 
arms, tarnish frame and canvasses, black chest and high-back 
chairs, quaintli carv and stain in blue and gold." 

"for whom do you wait?" he said, and I answered, "when she come I shall 
know her." 

On my hearth a tongu of flame whisper secret to the whiten ashes. 
In the street below I heard footsteps, a voice, and a song. 

"for whom then do you wait?" he said, and I answered, "I shall know her." 

footsteps, a voice, and a song in the street below, and I knew the song 
but neither the step nor the voice. 

"fool!" he cried, "the song is the same, the voic and step have but 
chang with years!" 

On the hearth a tongu of flame whisper abov the whiten ashes: 
"wait no more; they have passed, the step and the voic in the street 
below." 

then he smiled, saying, "for whom do you wait? seek her throughout the 
world!" 

I answered, "mi world is here, between these wall and the sheet of glass 
above; here among gild flagon and dull jewel arms, tarnish frame 
and canvasses, black chest and high-back chairs, quaintli carv and 
stain in blue and gold." 




the phantom 

the phantom of the past would go no further. 

"if it is true," she sighed, "that you find in me a friend, let us turn 
back together. you will forget, here, under the summer sky." 

I held her close, pleading, caressing; I seiz her, white with anger, 
but she resisted. 

"if it is true," she sighed, "that you find in me a friend, let us turn 
back together." 

the phantom of the past would go no further. 




the sacrific 

I went into a field of flowers, whose petal are whiter than snow and 
whose heart are pure gold. 

far afield a woman cried, "I have kill him I loved!" and from a jar she 
pour blood upon the flower whose petal are whiter than snow and whose 
heart are pure gold. 

far afield I followed, and on the jar I read a thousand names, while from 
within the fresh blood bubbl to the brim. 

"I have kill him I loved!" she cried. "the world' athirst; now let it 
drink!" she passed, and far afield I watch her pour blood upon the 
flower whose petal are whiter than snow and whose heart are pure gold. 




destini 

I came to the bridg which few may pass. 

"pass!" cri the keeper, but I laughed, saying, "there is time;" and he 
smile and shut the gates. 

To the bridg which few may pass came young and old. all were refused. 
idli I stood and count them, until, weari of their nois and 
lamentations, I came again to the bridg which few may pass. 

those in the throng about the gate shriek out, "he come too late!" 
but I laughed, saying, "there is time." 

"pass!" cri the keeper as I entered; then smile and shut the gates. 




the throng 

there, where the throng wa thickest in the street, I stood with pierrot. 
all eye were turn on me. 

"what are they laugh at?" I asked, but he grinned, dust the chalk 
from my black cloak. "I cannot see; it must be someth droll, perhap 
an honest thief!" 

all eye were turn on me. 

"he ha rob you of your purse!" they laughed. 

"mi purse!" I cried; "pierrot--help! it is a thief!" 

they laughed: "he ha rob you of your purse!" 

then truth step out, hold a mirror. "if he is an honest thief," 
cri truth, "pierrot shall find him with thi mirror!" but he onli 
grinned, dust the chalk from my black cloak. 

"you see," he said, "truth is an honest thief, she bring you back your 
mirror." 

all eye were turn on me. 

"arrest truth!" I cried, forget it wa not a mirror but a purs I 
lost, stand with pierrot, there, where the throng wa thickest in the 
street. 




the jester 

"wa she fair?" I asked, but he onli chuckled, listen to the bell 
jingl on hi cap. 

"stabbed," he tittered. "think of the long journey, the day of peril, 
the dread nights! think how he wandered, for her sake, year after 
year, through hostil lands, yearn for kith and kin, yearn for 
her!" 

"stabbed," he tittered, listen to the bell jingl on hi cap. 

"wa she fair?" I asked, but he onli snarled, mutter to the bell 
jingl on hi cap. 

"she kiss him at the gate," he tittered, "but in the hall hi brother' 
welcom touch hi heart." 

"wa she fair?" I asked. 

"stabbed," he chuckled. "think of the long journey, the day of peril, 
the dread nights! think how he wandered, for her sake, year after year 
through hostil lands, yearn for kith and kin, yearn for her!" 

"she kiss him at the gate, but in the hall hi brother' welcom 
touch hi heart." 

"wa she fair?" I asked; but he onli snarled, listen to the bell 
jingl in hi cap. 




the green room 

the clown turn hi powder face to the mirror. 

"if to be fair is to be beautiful," he said, "who can compar with me in 
my white mask?" 

"who can compar with him in hi white mask?" I ask of death besid me. 

"who can compar with me?" said death, "for I am paler still." 

"you are veri beautiful," sigh the clown, turn hi powder face 
from the mirror. 




the love test 

"if it is true that you love," said love, "then wait no longer. give her 
these jewel which would dishonour her and so dishonour you in love 
one dishonoured. If it is true that you love," said love, "then wait no 
longer." 

I took the jewel and went to her, but she trod upon them, sobbing: 
"teach me to wait--i love you!" 

"then wait, if it is true," said love. 




the street OF the four wind 

"ferm te yeux à demi, 
crois te bra sur ton sein, 
Et de ton coeur endormi 
chass à jamai tout dessein." 

"je chant la nature, 
le étoil du soir, le larm du matin, 
le coucher de soleil à l'horizon lointain, 
Le ciel qui parl au coeur d'exist future!" 


I 

the anim paus on the threshold, interrog alert, readi for flight 
if necessary. severn laid down hi palette, and held out a hand of 
welcome. the cat remain motionless, her yellow eye fasten upon 
severn. 

"puss," he said, in hi low, pleasant voice, "come in." 

the tip of her thin tail twitch uncertainly. 

"come in," he said again. 

appar she found hi voic reassuring, for she slowli settl upon all 
fours, her eye still fasten upon him, her tail tuck under her gaunt 
flanks. 

He rose from hi easel smiling. she eye him quietly, and when he walk 
toward her she watch him bend abov her without a wince; her eye 
follow hi hand until it touch her head. then she utter a rag 
mew. 

It had long been severn' custom to convers with animals, probabl 
becaus he live so much alone; and now he said, "what' the matter, 
puss?" 

her timid eye sought his. 

"I understand," he said gently, "you shall have it at once." 

then move quietli about he busi himself with the duti of a host, 
rins a saucer, fill it with the rest of the milk from the bottl on 
the window-sill, and kneel down, crumbl a roll into the hollow of hi 
hand. 

the creatur rose and crept toward the saucer. 

with the handl of a palette-knif he stir the crumb and milk togeth 
and step back as she thrust her nose into the mess. He watch her in 
silence. from time to time the saucer clink upon the tile floor as she 
reach for a morsel on the rim; and at last the bread wa all gone, and 
her purpl tongu travel over everi unlick spot until the saucer 
shone like polish marble. then she sat up, and coolli turn her back 
to him, began her ablutions. 

"keep it up," said severn, much interested, "you need it." 

she flatten one ear, but neither turn nor interrupt her toilet. As 
the grime wa slowli remov severn observ that natur had intend her 
for a white cat. her fur had disappear in patches, from diseas or the 
chanc of war, her tail wa boni and her spine sharp. but what charm she 
had were becom appar under vigor licking, and he wait until she 
had finish befor re-open the conversation. when at last she close 
her eye and fold her forepaw under her breast, he began again veri 
gently: "puss, tell me your troubles." 

At the sound of hi voic she broke into a harsh rumbl which he 
recogn as an attempt to purr. He bent over to rub her cheek and she 
mew again, an amiabl inquir littl mew, to which he replied, 
"certainly, you are greatli improved, and when you recov your plumag 
you will be a gorgeou bird." much flattered, she stood up and march 
around and around hi legs, push her head between them and make 
pleas remarks, to which he respond with grave politeness. 

"now, what sent you here," he said--"her into the street of the four 
winds, and up five flight to the veri door where you would be welcome? 
what wa it that prevent your medit flight when I turn from my 
canva to encount your yellow eyes? are you a latin quarter cat as I am 
a latin quarter man? and whi do you wear a rose-colour flower garter 
buckl about your neck?" the cat had climb into hi lap, and now sat 
pur as he pass hi hand over her thin coat. 

"excus me," he continu in lazi sooth tones, harmon with her 
purring, "if I seem indelicate, but I cannot help muse on thi 
rose-colour garter, flower so quaintli and fasten with a silver 
clasp. for the clasp is silver; I can see the mint mark on the edge, as is 
prescrib by the law of the french republic. now, whi is thi garter 
woven of rose silk and delic embroidered,--whi is thi silken garter 
with it silver clasp about your famish throat? Am I indiscreet when I 
inquir if it owner is your owner? Is she some age dame live in memori 
of youth vanities, fond, dote on you, decor you with her 
intim person attire? the circumfer of the garter would suggest 
this, for your neck is thin, and the garter fit you. but then again I 
notice--i notic most things--that the garter is capabl of be much 
enlarged. these small silver-rim eyelets, of which I count five, are 
proof of that. and now I observ that the fifth eyelet is worn out, as 
though the tongu of the clasp were accustom to lie there. that seem to 
argu a well-round form." 

the cat curl her toe in contentment. the street wa veri still outside. 

He murmur on: "whi should your mistress decor you with an articl 
most necessari to her at all times? anyway, at most times. how did she 
come to slip thi bit of silk and silver about your neck? wa it the 
capric of a moment,--when you, befor you had lost your pristin 
plumpness, march sing into her bedroom to bid her good-morning? Of 
course, and she sat up among the pillows, her coil hair tumbl to her 
shoulders, as you sprang upon the bed purring: 'good-day, my lady.' oh, it 
is veri easi to understand," he yawned, rest hi head on the back of 
the chair. the cat still purred, tighten and relax her pad claw 
over hi knee. 

"shall I tell you all about her, cat? she is veri beautiful--your 
mistress," he murmur drowsily, "and her hair is heavi as burnish 
gold. I could paint her,--not on canvas--for I should need shade and 
tone and hue and dye more splendid than the iri of a splendid rainbow. 
I could onli paint her with close eyes, for in dream alon can such 
colour as I need be found. for her eyes, I must have azur from sky 
untroubl by a cloud--th sky of dreamland. for her lips, rose from 
the palac of slumberland, and for her brow, snow-drift from mountain 
which tower in fantast pinnacl to the moons;--oh, much higher than our 
moon here,--th crystal moon of dreamland. she is--very--beautiful, your 
mistress." 

the word die on hi lip and hi eyelid drooped. 

the cat, too, wa asleep, her cheek turn up upon her wast flank, her 
paw relax and limp. 




II 

"it is fortunate," said severn, sit up and stretching, "that we have 
tide over the dinner hour, for I have noth to offer you for supper but 
what may be purchas with one silver franc." 

the cat on hi knee rose, arch her back, yawned, and look up at him. 

"what shall it be? A roast chicken with salad? no? possibl you prefer 
beef? Of course,--and I shall tri an egg and some white bread. now for the 
wines. milk for you? good. I shall take a littl water, fresh from the 
wood," with a motion toward the bucket in the sink. 

He put on hi hat and left the room. the cat follow to the door, and 
after he had close it behind him, she settl down, smell at the 
cracks, and cock one ear at everi creak from the crazi old building. 

the door below open and shut. the cat look serious, for a moment 
doubtful, and her ear flatten in nervou expectation. present she 
rose with a jerk of her tail and start on a noiseless tour of the 
studio. she sneez at a pot of turpentine, hastili retreat to the 
table, which she present mounted, and have satisfi her curios 
concern a roll of red model wax, return to the door and sat down 
with her eye on the crack over the threshold then she lift her voic in 
a thin plaint. 

when severn return he look grave, but the cat, joyou and 
demonstrative, march around him, rub her gaunt bodi against hi 
legs, drive her head enthusiast into hi hand, and pur until 
her voic mount to a squeal. 

He place a bit of meat, wrap in brown paper, upon the table, and with 
a penknif cut it into shreds. the milk he took from a bottl which had 
serv for medicine, and pour it into the saucer on the hearth. 

the cat crouch befor it, pur and lap at the same time. 

He cook hi egg and ate it with a slice of bread, watch her busi with 
the shred meat, and when he had finished, and had fill and empti a 
cup of water from the bucket in the sink, he sat down, take her into hi 
lap, where she at onc curl up and began her toilet. He began to speak 
again, touch her caressingli at time by way of emphasis. 

"cat, I have found out where your mistress lives. It is not veri far 
away;--it is here, under thi same leaki roof, but in the north wing which 
I had suppos wa uninhabited. My janitor tell me this. By chance, he is 
almost sober thi evening. the butcher on the rue de seine, where I bought 
your meat, know you, and old caban the baker identifi you with 
needless sarcasm. they tell me hard tale of your mistress which I shall 
not believe. they say she is idl and vain and pleasure-loving; they say 
she is hare-brain and reckless. the littl sculptor on the ground floor, 
who wa buy roll from old cabane, spoke to me to-night for the first 
time, although we have alway bow to each other. He said she wa veri 
good and veri beautiful. He ha onli seen her once, and doe not know her 
name. I thank him;--i don't know whi I thank him so warmly. caban 
said, 'into thi curs street of the four winds, the four wind blow all 
thing evil.' the sculptor look confused, but when he went out with hi 
rolls, he said to me, 'I am sure, monsieur, that she is as good as she is 
beautiful.'" 

the cat had finish her toilet, and now, spring softli to the floor, 
went to the door and sniffed. He knelt besid her, and unclasp the 
garter held it for a moment in hi hands. after a while he said: "there is 
a name engrav upon the silver clasp beneath the buckle. It is a pretti 
name, sylvia elven. sylvia is a woman' name, elven is the name of a town. 
In paris, in thi quarter, abov all, in thi street of the four winds, 
name are worn and put away as the fashion chang with the seasons. I 
know the littl town of elven, for there I met fate face to face and fate 
wa unkind. but do you know that in elven fate had anoth name, and that 
name wa sylvia?" 

He replac the garter and stood up look down at the cat crouch 
befor the close door. 

"the name of elven ha a charm for me. It tell me of meadow and clear 
rivers. the name of sylvia troubl me like perfum from dead flowers." 

the cat mewed. 

"yes, yes," he said soothingly, "I will take you back. your sylvia is not 
my sylvia; the world is wide and elven is not unknown. yet in the dark 
and filth of poorer paris, in the sad shadow of thi ancient house, these 
name are veri pleasant to me." 

He lift her in hi arm and strode through the silent corridor to the 
stairs. down five flight and into the moonlit court, past the littl 
sculptor' den, and then again in at the gate of the north wing and up the 
worm-eaten stair he passed, until he came to a close door. when he had 
stood knock for a long time, someth move behind the door; it open 
and he went in. the room wa dark. As he cross the threshold, the cat 
sprang from hi arm into the shadows. He listen but heard nothing. the 
silenc wa oppress and he struck a match. At hi elbow stood a tabl 
and on the tabl a candl in a gild candlestick. thi he lighted, then 
look around. the chamber wa vast, the hang heavi with embroidery. 
over the fireplac tower a carv mantel, grey with the ash of dead 
fires. In a recess by the deep-set window stood a bed, from which the 
bedclothes, soft and fine as lace, trail to the polish floor. He 
lift the candl abov hi head. A handkerchief lay at hi feet. It wa 
faintli perfumed. He turn toward the windows. In front of them wa a 
_canapé_ and over it were flung, pell-mell, a gown of silk, a heap of 
lace-lik garments, white and delic as spiders' meshes, long, crumpl 
gloves, and, on the floor beneath, the stockings, the littl point 
shoes, and one garter of rosi silk, quaintli flower and fit with a 
silver clasp. wondering, he step forward and drew the heavi curtain 
from the bed. for a moment the candl flare in hi hand; then hi eye 
met two other eyes, wide open, smiling, and the candle-flam flash over 
hair heavi as gold. 

she wa pale, but not as white as he; her eye were untroubl as a 
child's; but he stared, trembl from head to foot, while the candl 
flicker in hi hand. 

At last he whispered: "sylvia, it is i." 

again he said, "it is i." 

then, know that she wa dead, he kiss her on the mouth. and through 
the long watch of the night the cat pur on hi knee, tighten and 
relax her pad claws, until the sky pale abov the street of the 
four winds. 




the street OF the first shell 


"be of good cheer, the sullen month will die, 
and a young moon requit us by and by: 
look how the old one, meagre, bent, and wan 
with age and fast, is faint from the sky." 

the room wa alreadi dark. the high roof opposit cut off what littl 
remain of the decemb daylight. the girl drew her chair nearer the 
window, and choos a larg needle, thread it, knot the thread over 
her fingers. then she smooth the babi garment across her knees, and 
bending, bit off the thread and drew the smaller needl from where it 
rest in the hem. when she had brush away the stray thread and bit of 
lace, she laid it again over her knee caressingly. then she slip the 
thread needl from her corsag and pass it through a button, but as 
the button spun down the thread, her hand faltered, the thread snapped, 
and the button roll across the floor. she rais her head. her eye were 
fix on a strip of wane light abov the chimneys. from somewher in the 
citi came sound like the distant beat of drums, and beyond, far 
beyond, a vagu muttering, now growing, swelling, rumbl in the distanc 
like the pound of surf upon the rocks, now like the surf again, 
receding, growling, menacing. the cold had becom intense, a bitter 
pierc cold which strain and snap at joist and beam and turn the 
slush of yesterday to flint. from the street below everi sound broke sharp 
and metallic--th clatter of sabots, the rattl of shutter or the rare 
sound of a human voice. the air wa heavy, weight with the black cold as 
with a pall. To breath wa painful, to move an effort. 

In the desol sky there wa someth that wearied, in the brood 
clouds, someth that saddened. It penetr the freez citi cut by 
the freez river, the splendid citi with it tower and domes, it quay 
and bridg and it thousand spires. It enter the squares, it seiz the 
avenu and the palaces, stole across bridg and crept among the narrow 
street of the latin quarter, grey under the grey of the decemb sky. 
sadness, utter sadness. A fine ici sleet wa falling, powder the 
pavement with a tini crystallin dust. It sift against the window-pan 
and drift in heap along the sill. the light at the window had nearli 
failed, and the girl bent low over her work. present she rais her 
head, brush the curl from her eyes. 

"jack?" 

"dearest?" 

"don't forget to clean your palette." 

He said, "all right," and pick up the palette, sat down upon the floor 
in front of the stove. hi head and shoulder were in the shadow, but the 
firelight fell across hi knee and glimmer red on the blade of the 
palette-knife. full in the firelight besid him stood a colour-box. On the 
lid wa carved, 

J. trent. 
ecol de beaux arts. 
1870. 

thi inscript wa ornament with an american and a french flag. 

the sleet blew against the window-panes, cover them with star and 
diamonds, then, melt from the warmer air within, ran down and froze 
again in fern-lik traceries. 

A dog whine and the patter of small paw sound on the zinc behind the 
stove. 

"jack, dear, do you think hercul is hungry?" 

the patter of paw wa redoubl behind the stove. 

"he' whining," she continu nervously, "and if it isn't becaus he' 
hungri it is because--" 

her voic faltered. A loud hum fill the air, the window vibrated. 

"oh, jack," she cried, "another--" but her voic wa drown in the scream 
of a shell tear through the cloud overhead. 

"that is the nearest yet," she murmured. 

"oh, no," he answer cheerfully, "it probabl fell way over by 
montmartre," and as she did not answer, he said again with exagger 
unconcern, "they wouldn't take the troubl to fire at the latin quarter; 
anyway they haven't a batteri that can hurt it." 

after a while she spoke up brightly: "jack, dear, when are you go to 
take me to see monsieur west' statues?" 

"I will bet," he said, throw down hi palett and walk over to the 
window besid her, "that colett ha been here to-day." 

"why?" she asked, open her eye veri wide. then, "oh, it' too 
bad!--really, men are tiresom when they think they know everything! and I 
warn you that if monsieur west is vain enough to imagin that colette--" 

from the north anoth shell came whistl and quaver through the sky, 
pass abov them with long-drawn screech which left the window singing. 

"that," he blurt out, "wa too near for comfort." 

they were silent for a while, then he spoke again gaily: "go on, sylvia, 
and wither poor west;" but she onli sighed, "oh, dear, I can never seem to 
get use to the shells." 

He sat down on the arm of the chair besid her. 

her scissor fell jingl to the floor; she toss the unfinish frock 
after them, and put both arm about hi neck drew him down into her 
lap. 

"don't go out to-night, jack." 

He kiss her uplift face; "you know I must; don't make it hard for me." 

"but when I hear the shell and--and know you are out in the city--" 

"but they all fall in montmartre--" 

"they may all fall in the beaux arts; you said yourself that two struck 
the quai d'orsay--" 

"mere accident--" 

"jack, have piti on me! take me with you!" 

"and who will there be to get dinner?" 

she rose and flung herself on the bed. 

"oh, I can't get use to it, and I know you must go, but I beg you not to 
be late to dinner. If you knew what I suffer! i--i--cannot help it, and 
you must be patient with me, dear." 

He said, "it is as safe there as it is in our own house." 

she watch him fill for her the alcohol lamp, and when he had light it 
and had taken hi hat to go, she jump up and clung to him in silence. 
after a moment he said: "now, sylvia, rememb my courag is sustain by 
yours. come, I must go!" she did not move, and he repeated: "I must go." 
then she step back and he thought she wa go to speak and waited, 
but she onli look at him, and, a littl impatiently, he kiss her 
again, saying: "don't worry, dearest." 

when he had reach the last flight of stair on hi way to the street a 
woman hobbl out of the house-keeper' lodg wave a letter and calling: 
"monsieur jack! monsieur jack! thi wa left by monsieur fallowby!" 

He took the letter, and lean on the threshold of the lodge, read it: 

"dear jack, 

"I believ braith is dead broke and i'm sure fallowbi is. braith swear he 
isn't, and fallowbi swear he is, so you can draw your own conclusions. 
i'v got a scheme for a dinner, and if it works, I will let you fellow 
in. 

"your faithfully, 

"west. 

"p.s.--fallowbi ha shaken hartman and hi gang, thank the lord! there is 
someth rotten there,--or it may be he' onli a miser. 

"p.p.s.--i'm more desper in love than ever, but i'm sure she doe not 
care a straw for me." 

"all right," said trent, with a smile, to the concierge; "but tell me, how 
is papa cottard?" 

the old woman shook her head and point to the curtain bed in the 
lodge. 

"père cottard!" he cri cheerily, "how goe the wound to-day?" 

He walk over to the bed and drew the curtains. An old man wa lie 
among the tumbl sheets. 

"better?" smile trent. 

"better," repeat the man wearily; and, after a pause, "have you ani 
news, monsieur jack?" 

"I haven't been out to-day. I will bring you ani rumour I may hear, though 
good know i'v got enough of rumours," he mutter to himself. then 
aloud: "cheer up; you'r look better." 

"and the sortie?" 

"oh, the sortie, that' for thi week. gener trochu sent order last 
night." 

"it will be terrible." 

"it will be sickening," thought trent as he went not into the street and 
turn the corner toward the rue de seine; "slaughter, slaughter, phew! 
i'm glad i'm not going." 

the street wa almost deserted. A few women muffl in tatter militari 
cape crept along the frozen pavement, and a wretchedli clad gamin hover 
over the sewer-hol on the corner of the boulevard. A rope around hi 
waist held hi rag together. from the rope hung a rat, still warm and 
bleeding. 

"there' anoth in there," he yell at trent; "I hit him but he got 
away." 

trent cross the street and asked: "how much?" 

"two franc for a quarter of a fat one; that' what they give at the st. 
germain market." 

A violent fit of cough interrupt him, but he wipe hi face with the 
palm of hi hand and look cunningli at trent. 

"last week you could buy a rat for six francs, but," and here he swore 
vilely, "the rat have quit the rue de sein and they kill them now over 
by the new hospital. i'll let you have thi for seven francs; I can sell 
it for ten in the isl st. louis." 

"you lie," said trent, "and let me tell you that if you tri to swindl 
anybodi in thi quarter the peopl will make short work of you and your 
rats." 

He stood a moment eye the gamin, who pretend to snivel. then he 
toss him a franc, laughing. the child caught it, and thrust it into 
hi mouth wheel about to the sewer-hole. for a second he crouched, 
motionless, alert, hi eye on the bar of the drain, then leap forward 
he hurl a stone into the gutter, and trent left him to finish a fierc 
grey rat that writh squeal at the mouth of the sewer. 

"suppos braith should come to that," he thought; "poor littl chap;" and 
hurrying, he turn in the dirti passag de beaux art and enter the 
third hous to the left. 

"monsieur is at home," quaver the old concierge. 

home? A garret absolut bare, save for the iron bedstead in the corner 
and the iron basin and pitcher on the floor. 

west appear at the door, wink with much mystery, and motion trent 
to enter. braith, who wa paint in bed to keep warm, look up, 
laughed, and shook hands. 

"ani news?" 

the perfunctori question wa answer as usual by: "noth but the 
cannon." 

trent sat down on the bed. 

"where on earth did you get that?" he demanded, point to a 
half-finish chicken nestl in a wash-basin. 

west grinned. 

"are you millionaires, you two? out with it." 

braith, look a littl ashamed, began, "oh, it' one of west' 
exploits," but wa cut short by west, who said he would tell the stori 
himself. 

"you see, befor the siege, I had a letter of introduct to a '_type_' 
here, a fat banker, german-american variety. you know the species, I see. 
well, of cours I forgot to present the letter, but thi morning, judg 
it to be a favour opportunity, I call on him. 

"the villain live in comfort;--fires, my boy!--fir in the ante-rooms! 
the button final condescend to carri my letter and card up, leav me 
stand in the hallway, which I did not like, so I enter the first room 
I saw and nearli faint at the sight of a banquet on a tabl by the fire. 
down come buttons, veri insolent. no, oh, no, hi master, 'i not at 
home, and in fact is too busi to receiv letter of introduct just now; 
the siege, and mani busi difficulties--' 

"I deliv a kick to buttons, pick up thi chicken from the table, toss my 
card on to the empti plate, and address button as a speci of 
prussian pig, march out with the honour of war." 

trent shook hi head. 

"I forgot to say that hartman often dine there, and I draw my own 
conclusions," continu west. "now about thi chicken, half of it is for 
braith and myself, and half for colette, but of cours you will help me 
eat my part becaus i'm not hungry." 

"neither am i," began braith, but trent, with a smile at the pinch face 
befor him, shook hi head saying, "what nonsense! you know i'm never 
hungry!" 

west hesitated, reddened, and then slice off braith' portion, but not 
eat ani himself, said good-night, and hurri away to number 470 rue 
serpente, where live a pretti girl name colette, orphan after sedan, and 
heaven alon knew where she got the rose in her cheeks, for the sieg 
came hard on the poor. 

"that chicken will delight her, but I realli believ she' in love with 
west," said trent. then walk over to the bed: "see here, old man, no 
dodging, you know, how much have you left?" 

the other hesit and flushed. 

"come, old chap," insist trent. 

braith drew a purs from beneath hi bolster, and hand it to hi friend 
with a simplic that touch him. 

"seven sons," he counted; "you make me tired! whi on earth don't you come 
to me? I take it d----d ill, braith! how mani time must I go over the same 
thing and explain to you that becaus I have money it is my duti to share 
it, and your duti and the duti of everi american to share it with me? you 
can't get a cent, the city' blockaded, and the american minist ha hi 
hand full with all the german riff-raff and deuc know what! whi don't 
you act sensibly?" 

"i--i will, trent, but it' an oblig that perhap I can never even in 
part repay, i'm poor and--" 

"of cours you'll pay me! If I were a usur I would take your talent for 
security. when you are rich and famous--" 

"don't, trent--" 

"all right, onli no more monkey business." 

He slip a dozen gold piec into the purse, and tuck it again under 
the mattress smile at braith. 

"how old are you?" he demanded. 

"sixteen." 

trent laid hi hand lightli on hi friend' shoulder. "i'm twenty-two, and 
I have the right of a grandfath as far as you are concerned. you'll do 
as I say until you'r twenty-one." 

"the sièg will be over then, I hope," said braith, tri to laugh, but 
the prayer in their hearts: "how long, O lord, how long!" wa answer by 
the swift scream of a shell soar among the storm-cloud of that 
decemb night. 




II 

west, stand in the doorway of a hous in the rue serpentine, wa 
speak angrily. He said he didn't care whether hartman like it or not; 
he wa tell him, not argu with him. 

"you call yourself an american!" he sneered; "berlin and hell are full of 
that kind of american. you come loaf about colett with your pocket 
stuf with white bread and beef, and a bottl of wine at thirti franc 
and you can't realli afford to give a dollar to the american ambul and 
public assistance, which braith does, and he' half starved!" 

hartman retreat to the curbstone, but west follow him, hi face like a 
thunder-cloud. "don't you dare to call yourself a countryman of mine," he 
growled,--"no,--nor an artist either! artist don't worm themselv into 
the servic of the public defenc where they do noth but feed like rat 
on the people' food! and i'll tell you now," he continu drop hi 
voice, for hartman had start as though stung, "you might better keep 
away from that alsatian brasseri and the smug-fac thiev who haunt it. 
you know what they do with suspects!" 

"you lie, you hound!" scream hartman, and flung the bottl in hi hand 
straight at west' face. west had him by the throat in a second, and 
forc him against the dead wall shook him wickedly. 

"now you listen to me," he muttered, through hi clench teeth. "you are 
alreadi a suspect and--i swear--i believ you are a paid spy! It isn't my 
busi to detect such vermin, and I don't intend to denounc you, but 
understand this! colett don't like you and I can't stand you, and if I 
catch you in thi street again i'll make it somewhat unpleasant. get out, 
you sleek prussian!" 

hartman had manag to drag a knife from hi pocket, but west tore it from 
him and hurl him into the gutter. A gamin who had seen thi burst into a 
peal of laughter, which rattl harshli in the silent street. then 
everywher window were rais and row of haggard face appear 
demand to know whi peopl should laugh in the starv city. 

"i it a victory?" murmur one. 

"look at that," cri west as hartman pick himself up from the pavement, 
"look! you miser! look at those faces!" but hartman gave _him_ a look 
which he never forgot, and walk away without a word. trent, who suddenli 
appear at the corner, glanc curious at west, who mere nod 
toward hi door saying, "come in; fallowby' upstairs." 

"what are you do with that knife?" demand fallowby, as he and trent 
enter the studio. 

west look at hi wound hand, which still clutch the knife, but 
saying, "cut myself by accident," toss it into a corner and wash the 
blood from hi fingers. 

fallowby, fat and lazy, watch him without comment, but trent, half 
divin how thing had turned, walk over to fallowbi smiling. 

"i'v a bone to pick with you!" he said. 

"where is it? i'm hungry," repli fallowbi with affect eagerness, but 
trent, frowning, told him to listen. 

"how much did I advanc you a week ago?" 

"three hundr and eighti francs," repli the other, with a squirm of 
contrition. 

"where is it?" 

fallowbi began a seri of intric explanations, which were soon cut 
short by trent. 

"I know; you blew it in;--you alway blow it in. I don't care a rap what 
you did befor the siege: I know you are rich and have a right to dispos 
of your money as you wish to, and I also know that, gener speaking, it 
is none of my business. but _now_ it is my business, as I have to suppli 
the fund until you get some more, which you won't until the sieg is 
end one way or another. I wish to share what I have, but I won't see it 
thrown out of the window. oh, yes, of cours I know you will reimburs me, 
but that isn't the question; and, anyway, it' the opinion of your 
friends, old man, that you will not be wors off for a littl abstin 
from fleshli pleasures. you are posit a freak in thi famine-curs 
citi of skeletons!" 

"I _am_ rather stout," he admitted. 

"i it true you are out of money?" demand trent. 

"yes, I am," sigh the other. 

"that roast suck pig on the rue st. honoré,--i it there yet?" 
continu trent. 

"wh--at?" stammer the feebl one. 

"ah--i thought so! I caught you in ecstasi befor that suck pig at 
least a dozen times!" 

then laughing, he present fallowbi with a roll of twenti franc piec 
saying: "if these go for luxuri you must live on your own flesh," and 
went over to aid west, who sat besid the wash-basin bind up hi hand. 

west suffer him to tie the knot, and then said: "you remember, 
yesterday, when I left you and braith to take the chicken to colette." 

"chicken! good heavens!" moan fallowby. 

"chicken," repeat west, enjoy fallowby' grief;--"i--that is, I must 
explain that thing are changed. colett and i--ar to be married--" 

"what--what about the chicken?" groan fallowby. 

"shut up!" laugh trent, and slip hi arm through west's, walk to 
the stairway. 

"the poor littl thing," said west, "just think, not a splinter of 
firewood for a week and wouldn't tell me becaus she thought I need 
it for my clay figure. whew! when I heard it I smash that smirk 
clay nymph to pieces, and the rest can freez and be hanged!" after a 
moment he ad timidly: "won't you call on your way down and say _bon 
soir_? it' no. 17." 

"yes," said trent, and he went out softli close the door behind. 

He stop on the third landing, light a match, scan the number over 
the row of dingi doors, and knock at no. 17. 

"c'est toi georges?" the door opened. 

"oh, pardon, monsieur jack, I thought it wa monsieur west," then blush 
furiously, "oh, I see you have heard! oh, thank you so much for your 
wishes, and i'm sure we love each other veri much,--and i'm die to see 
sylvia and tell her and--" 

"and what?" laugh trent. 

"I am veri happy," she sighed. 

"he' pure gold," return trent, and then gaily: "I want you and georg 
to come and dine with us to-night. it' a littl treat,--you see to-morrow 
is sylvia' _fête_. she will be nineteen. I have written to thorne, and 
the guernalec will come with their cousin odile. fallowbi ha engag not 
to bring anybodi but himself." 

the girl accept shyly, charg him with load of love messag to 
sylvia, and he said good-night. 

He start up the street, walk swiftly, for it wa bitter cold, and 
cut across the rue de la lune he enter the rue de seine. the earli 
winter night had fallen, almost without warning, but the sky wa clear and 
myriad of star glitter in the heavens. the bombard had becom 
furious--a steadi roll thunder from the prussian cannon punctuat by 
the heavi shock from mont valérien. 

the shell stream across the sky leav trail like shoot stars, and 
now, as he turn to look back, rocket blue and red flare abov the 
horizon from the fort of issy, and the fortress of the north flame like a 
bonfire. 

"good news!" a man shout over by the boulevard st. germain. As if by 
magic the street were fill with people,--shivering, chatter peopl 
with shrunken eyes. 

"jacques!" cri one. "the armi of the loire!" 

"eh! _mon vieux_, it ha come then at last! I told thee! I told thee! 
to-morrow--to-night--who knows?" 

"i it true? Is it a sortie?" 

some one said: "oh, god--a sortie--and my son?" anoth cried: "to the 
seine? they say one can see the signal of the armi of the loir from the 
pont neuf." 

there wa a child stand near trent who kept repeating: "mamma, mamma, 
then to-morrow we may eat white bread?" and besid him, an old man 
swaying, stumbling, hi shrivel hand crush to hi breast, mutter 
as if insane. 

"could it be true? who ha heard the news? the shoemak on the rue de 
buci had it from a mobil who had heard a franctireur repeat it to a 
captain of the nation guard." 

trent follow the throng surg through the rue de sein to the river. 

rocket after rocket clove the sky, and now, from montmartre, the cannon 
clanged, and the batteri on montparnass join in with a crash. the 
bridg wa pack with people. 

trent asked: "who ha seen the signal of the armi of the loire?" 

"we are wait for them," wa the reply. 

He look toward the north. suddenli the huge silhouett of the arc de 
triomph sprang into black relief against the flash of a cannon. the boom 
of the gun roll along the quay and the old bridg vibrated. 

again over by the point du jour a flash and heavi explos shook the 
bridge, and then the whole eastern bastion of the fortif blaze 
and crackled, send a red flame into the sky. 

"ha ani one seen the signal yet?" he ask again. 

"we are waiting," wa the reply. 

"yes, waiting," murmur a man behind him, "waiting, sick, starved, 
freezing, but waiting. Is it a sortie? they go gladly. Is it to starve? 
they starve. they have no time to think of surrender. are they 
heroes,--thes parisians? answer me, trent!" 

the american ambul surgeon turn about and scan the parapet of 
the bridge. 

"ani news, doctor," ask trent mechanically. 

"news?" said the doctor; "I don't know any;--i haven't time to know any. 
what are these peopl after?" 

"they say that the armi of the loir ha signal mont valérien." 

"poor devils." the doctor glanc about him for an instant, and then: "i'm 
so harri and worri that I don't know what to do. after the last sorti 
we had the work of fifti ambul on our poor littl corps. to-morrow 
there' anoth sortie, and I wish you fellow could come over to 
headquarters. We may need volunteers. how is madame?" he ad abruptly. 

"well," repli trent, "but she seem to grow more nervou everi day. I 
ought to be with her now." 

"take care of her," said the doctor, then with a sharp look at the people: 
"I can't stop now--goodnight!" and he hurri away muttering, "poor 
devils!" 

trent lean over the parapet and blink at the black river surg 
through the arches. dark objects, carri swiftli on the breast of the 
current, struck with a grind tear nois against the stone piers, 
spun around for an instant, and hurri away into the darkness. the ice 
from the marne. 

As he stood stare into the water, a hand wa laid on hi shoulder. 
"hello, southwark!" he cried, turn around; "thi is a queer place for 
you!" 

"trent, I have someth to tell you. don't stay here,--don't believ in 
the armi of the loire:" and the _attaché_ of the american legat slip 
hi arm through trent' and drew him toward the louvre. 

"then it' anoth lie!" said trent bitterly. 

"worse--w know at the legation--i can't speak of it. but that' not what 
I have to say. someth happen thi afternoon. the alsatian brasseri 
wa visit and an american name hartman ha been arrested. Do you know 
him?" 

"I know a german who call himself an american;--hi name is hartman." 

"well, he wa arrest about two hour ago. they mean to shoot him." 

"what!" 

"of cours we at the legat can't allow them to shoot him off-hand, but 
the evid seem conclusive." 

"i he a spy?" 

"well, the paper seiz in hi room are pretti damn proofs, and 
besid he wa caught, they say, swindl the public food committee. He 
drew ration for fifty, how, I don't know. He claim to be an american 
artist here, and we have been oblig to take notic of it at the 
legation. it' a nasti affair." 

"to cheat the peopl at such a time is wors than rob the poor-box," 
cri trent angrily. "let them shoot him!" 

"he' an american citizen." 

"yes, oh yes," said the other with bitterness. "american citizenship is a 
preciou privileg when everi goggle-ey german--" hi anger choke him. 

southwark shook hand with him warmly. "it can't be helped, we must own 
the carrion. I am afraid you may be call upon to identifi him as an 
american artist," he said with a ghost of a smile on hi deep-lin face; 
and walk away through the cour la reine. 

trent swore silent for a moment and then drew out hi watch. seven 
o'clock. "sylvia will be anxious," he thought, and hurri back to the 
river. the crowd still huddl shiver on the bridge, a sombr piti 
congregation, peer out into the night for the signal of the armi of 
the loire: and their heart beat time to the pound of the guns, their 
eye light with each flash from the bastions, and hope rose with the 
drift rockets. 

A black cloud hung over the fortifications. from horizon to horizon the 
cannon smoke stretch in waver bands, now cap the spire and dome 
with cloud, now blow in streamer and shred along the streets, now 
descend from the housetops, envelop quays, bridges, and river, in a 
sulphur mist. and through the smoke pall the lightn of the cannon 
played, while from time to time a rift abov show a fathomless black 
vault set with stars. 

He turn again into the rue de seine, that sad abandon street, with it 
row of close shutter and desol rank of unlight lamps. He wa a 
littl nervou and wish onc or twice for a revolver, but the slink 
form which pass him in the dark were too weak with hunger to be 
dangerous, he thought, and he pass on unmolest to hi doorway. but 
there somebodi sprang at hi throat. over and over the ici pavement he 
roll with hi assailant, tear at the noos about hi neck, and then 
with a wrench sprang to hi feet. 

"get up," he cri to the other. 

slowli and with great deliberation, a small gamin pick himself out of 
the gutter and survey trent with disgust. 

"that' a nice clean trick," said trent; "a whelp of your age! you'll 
finish against a dead wall! give me that cord!" 

the urchin hand him the noos without a word. 

trent struck a match and look at hi assailant. It wa the rat-kil of 
the day before. 

"h'm! I thought so," he muttered. 

"tiens, c'est toi?" said the gamin tranquilly. 

the impudence, the overpow audac of the ragamuffin took trent' 
breath away. 

"do you know, you young strangler," he gasped, "that they shoot thiev of 
your age?" 

the child turn a passionless face to trent. "shoot, then." 

that wa too much, and he turn on hi heel and enter hi hotel. 

grope up the unlight stairway, he at last reach hi own land and 
felt about in the dark for the door. from hi studio came the sound of 
voices, west' hearti laugh and fallowby' chuckle, and at last he found 
the knob and, push back the door, stood a moment confus by the light. 

"hello, jack!" cri west, "you'r a pleasant creature, invit peopl to 
dine and let them wait. here' fallowbi weep with hunger--" 

"shut up," observ the latter, "perhap he' been out to buy a turkey." 

"he' been out garroting, look at hi noose!" laugh guernalec. 

"so now we know where you get your cash!" ad west; "vive le coup du 
père françois!" 

trent shook hand with everybodi and laugh at sylvia' pale face. 

"I didn't mean to be late; I stop on the bridg a moment to watch the 
bombardment. were you anxious, sylvia?" 

she smile and murmured, "oh, no!" but her hand drop into hi and 
tighten convulsively. 

"to the table!" shout fallowby, and utter a joyou whoop. 

"take it easy," observ thorne, with a remnant of manners; "you are not 
the host, you know." 

mari guernalec, who had been chatter with colette, jump up and took 
thorne' arm and monsieur guernalec drew odile' arm through his. 

trent, bow gravely, offer hi own arm to colette, west took in 
sylvia, and fallowbi hover anxious in the rear. 

"you march around the tabl three time sing the marseillaise," 
explain sylvia, "and monsieur fallowbi pound on the tabl and beat 
time." 

fallowbi suggest that they could sing after dinner, but hi protest wa 
drown in the ring chorus-- 

"aux armes! 
formez vo bataillons!" 

around the room they march singing, 

"marchons! marchons!" 

with all their might, while fallowbi with veri bad grace, hammer on the 
table, consol himself a littl with the hope that the exercis would 
increas hi appetite. hercules, the black and tan, fled under the bed, 
from which retreat he yap and whine until drag out by guernalec and 
place in odile' lap. 

"and now," said trent gravely, when everybodi wa seated, "listen!" and he 
read the menu. 

beef soup à la sièg de paris. 

fish. 
sardin à la père lachaise. 
(white wine). 

rôti (red wine). 
fresh beef à la sortie. 

vegetables. 
can bean à la chasse-pot, 
can pea gravelotte, 
potato irlandaises, 
miscellaneous. 

cold corn beef à la thieis, 
stew prune à la garibaldi. 

dessert. 
dri prunes--whit bread, 
currant jelly, 
tea--café, 
liqueurs, 
pipe and cigarettes. 

fallowbi applaud frantically, and sylvia serv the soup. 

"isn't it delicious?" sigh odile. 

mari guernalec sip her soup in rapture. 

"not at all like horse, and I don't care what they say, hors doesn't 
tast like beef," whisper colett to west. fallowby, who had finished, 
began to caress hi chin and eye the tureen. 

"have some more, old chap?" inquir trent. 

"monsieur fallowbi cannot have ani more," announc sylvia; "I am save 
thi for the concierge." fallowbi transfer hi eye to the fish. 

the sardines, hot from the grille, were a great success. while the other 
were eat sylvia ran downstair with the soup for the old concierg and 
her husband, and when she hurri back, flush and breathless, and had 
slip into her chair with a happi smile at trent, that young man arose, 
and silenc fell over the table. for an instant he look at sylvia and 
thought he had never seen her so beautiful. 

"you all know," he began, "that to-day is my wife' nineteenth birthday--" 

fallowby, bubbl with enthusiasm, wave hi glass in circl about hi 
head to the terror of odil and colette, hi neighbours, and thorne, west 
and guernalec refil their glass three time befor the storm of 
applaus which the toast of sylvia had provoked, subsided. 

three time the glass were fill and empti to sylvia, and again to 
trent, who protested. 

"thi is irregular," he cried, "the next toast is to the twin republics, 
franc and america?" 

"to the republics! To the republics!" they cried, and the toast wa drunk 
amid shout of "vive a france! vive l'amérique! vive la nation!" 

then trent, with a smile at west, offer the toast, "to a happi pair!" 
and everybodi understood, and sylvia lean over and kiss colette, while 
trent bow to west. 

the beef wa eaten in compar calm, but when it wa finish and a 
portion of it set asid for the old peopl below, trent cried: "drink to 
paris! may she rise from her ruin and crush the invader!" and the cheer 
rang out, drown for a moment the monoton thunder of the prussian 
guns. 

pipe and cigarett were lighted, and trent listen an instant to the 
anim chatter around him, broken by rippl of laughter from the girl 
or the mellow chuckl of fallowby. then he turn to west. 

"there is go to be a sorti to-night," he said. "I saw the american 
ambul surgeon just befor I came in and he ask me to speak to you 
fellows. ani aid we can give him will not come amiss." 

then drop hi voic and speak in english, "a for me, I shall go 
out with the ambul to-morrow morning. there is of cours no danger, 
but it' just as well to keep it from sylvia." 

west nodded. thorn and guernalec, who had heard, broke in and offer 
assistance, and fallowbi volunt with a groan. 

"all right," said trent rapidly,--"no more now, but meet me at ambul 
headquart to-morrow morn at eight." 

sylvia and colette, who were becom uneasi at the convers in 
english, now demand to know what they were talk about. 

"what doe a sculptor usual talk about?" cri west, with a laugh. 

odil glanc reproach at thorne, her _fiancé_. 

"you are not french, you know, and it is none of your business, thi war," 
said odil with much dignity. 

thorn look meek, but west assum an air of outrag virtue. 

"it seems," he said to fallowby, "that a fellow cannot discuss the 
beauti of greek sculptur in hi mother tongue, without be openli 
suspected." 

colett place her hand over hi mouth and turn to sylvia, murmured, 
"they are horridli untruthful, these men." 

"I believ the word for ambul is the same in both languages," said 
mari guernalec saucily; "sylvia, don't trust monsieur trent." 

"jack," whisper sylvia, "promis me--" 

A knock at the studio door interrupt her. 

"come in!" cri fallowby, but trent sprang up, and open the door, 
look out. then with a hasti excus to the rest, he step into the 
hall-way and close the door. 

when he return he wa grumbling. 

"what is it, jack?" cri west. 

"what is it?" repeat trent savagely; "i'll tell you what it is. I have 
receiv a dispatch from the american minist to go at onc and identifi 
and claim, as a fellow-countryman and a brother artist, a rascal thief 
and a german spy!" 

"don't go," suggest fallowby. 

"if I don't they'll shoot him at once." 

"let them," growl thorne. 

"do you fellow know who it is?" 

"hartman!" shout west, inspired. 

sylvia sprang up deathli white, but odil slip her arm around her and 
support her to a chair, say calmly, "sylvia ha fainted,--it' the 
hot room,--br some water." 

trent brought it at once. 

sylvia open her eyes, and after a moment rose, and support by mari 
guernalec and trent, pass into the bedroom. 

It wa the signal for break up, and everybodi came and shook hand with 
trent, say they hope sylvia would sleep it off and that it would be 
nothing. 

when mari guernalec took leav of him, she avoid hi eyes, but he spoke 
to her cordial and thank her for her aid. 

"anyth I can do, jack?" inquir west, lingering, and then hurri 
downstair to catch up with the rest. 

trent lean over the banisters, listen to their footstep and chatter, 
and then the lower door bang and the hous wa silent. He lingered, 
stare down into the blackness, bite hi lips; then with an impati 
movement, "I am crazy!" he muttered, and light a candle, went into the 
bedroom. sylvia wa lie on the bed. He bent over her, smooth the 
curli hair on her forehead. 

"are you better, dear sylvia?" 

she did not answer, but rais her eye to his. for an instant he met her 
gaze, but what he read there sent a chill to hi heart and he sat down 
cover hi face with hi hands. 

At last she spoke in a voice, chang and strained,--a voic which he had 
never heard, and he drop hi hand and listened, bolt upright in hi 
chair. 

"jack, it ha come at last. I have fear it and trembled,--ah! how often 
have I lain awak at night with thi on my heart and pray that I might 
die befor you should ever know of it! for I love you, jack, and if you go 
away I cannot live. I have deceiv you;--it happen befor I knew you, 
but sinc that first day when you found me weep in the luxembourg and 
spoke to me, jack, I have been faith to you in everi thought and deed. 
I love you from the first, and did not dare to tell you this--fear 
that you would go away; and sinc then my love ha grown--grown--and oh! I 
suffered!--but I dare not tell you. and now you know, but you do not know 
the worst. for him--now--what do I care? He wa cruel--oh, so cruel!" 

she hid her face in her arms. 

"must I go on? must I tell you--can you not imagine, oh! jack--" 

He did not stir; hi eye seem dead. 

"i--i wa so young, I knew nothing, and he said--said that he love me--" 

trent rose and struck the candl with hi clench fist, and the room wa 
dark. 

the bell of st. sulpic toll the hour, and she start up, speak 
with feverish haste,--"i must finish! when you told me you love 
me--you--y ask me nothing; but then, even then, it wa too late, and 
_that other life_ which bind me to him, must stand for ever between you 
and me! for there _i another_ whom he ha claimed, and is good to. He 
must not die,--they cannot shoot him, for that _other's_ sake!" 

trent sat motionless, but hi thought ran on in an intermin whirl. 

sylvia, littl sylvia, who share with him hi student life,--who bore 
with him the dreari desol of the sieg without complaint,--thi 
slender blue-ey girl whom he wa so quietli fond of, whom he teas or 
caress as the whim suited, who sometim made him the least bit 
impati with her passion devot to him,--could thi be the same 
sylvia who lay weep there in the darkness? 

then he clinch hi teeth. "let him die! let him die!"--but then,--for 
sylvia' sake, and,--for that _other's_ sake,--yes, he would go,--h 
_must_ go,--hi duti wa plain befor him. but sylvia,--h could not be 
what he had been to her, and yet a vagu terror seiz him, now all wa 
said. trembling, he struck a light. 

she lay there, her curli hair tumbl about her face, her small white 
hand press to her breast. 

He could not leav her, and he could not stay. He never knew befor that 
he love her. she had been a mere comrade, thi girl wife of his. ah! he 
love her now with all hi heart and soul, and he knew it, onli when it 
wa too late. too late? why? then he thought of that _other_ one, bind 
her, link her forev to the creature, who stood in danger of hi life. 
with an oath he sprang to the door, but the door would not open,--or wa 
it that he press it back,--lock it,--and flung himself on hi knee 
besid the bed, know that he dare not for hi life' sake leav what 
wa hi all in life. 




iii 

It wa four in the morn when he came out of the prison of the condemn 
with the secretari of the american legation. A knot of peopl had gather 
around the american minister' carriage, which stood in front of the 
prison, the hors stamp and paw in the ici street, the coachman 
huddl on the box, wrap in furs. southwark help the secretari into 
the carriage, and shook hand with trent, thank him for coming. 

"how the scoundrel did stare," he said; "your evid wa wors than a 
kick, but it save hi skin for the moment at least,--and prevent 
complications." 

the secretari sighed. "we have done our part. now let them prove him a spi 
and we wash our hand of him. jump in, captain! come along, trent!" 

"I have a word to say to captain southwark, I won't detain him," said 
trent hastily, and drop hi voice, "southwark, help _me_ now. you know 
the stori from the blackguard. you know the--th child is at hi rooms. 
get it, and take it to my own apartment, and if he is shot, I will provid 
a home for it." 

"I understand," said the captain gravely. 

"will you do thi at once?" 

"at once," he replied. 

their hand met in a warm clasp, and then captain southwark climb into 
the carriage, motion trent to follow; but he shook hi head saying, 
"good-bye!" and the carriag roll away. 

He watch the carriag to the end of the street, then start toward hi 
own quarter, but after a step or two hesitated, stopped, and final 
turn away in the opposit direction. something--perhap it wa the sight 
of the prison he had so recent confront nauseat him. He felt the 
need of solitud and quiet to collect hi thoughts. the event of the 
even had shaken him terribly, but he would walk it off, forget, buri 
everything, and then go back to sylvia. He start on swiftly, and for a 
time the bitter thought seem to fade, but when he paus at last, 
breathless, under the arc de triomphe, the bitter and the wretched 
of the whole thing--yes, of hi whole misspent life came back with a pang. 
then the face of the prisoner, stamp with the horribl grimac of fear, 
grew in the shadow befor hi eyes. 

sick at heart he wander up and down under the great arc, strive to 
occupi hi mind, peer up at the sculptur cornic to read the name 
of the hero and battl which he knew were engrav there, but alway 
the ashen face of hartman follow him, grin with terror!--or wa it 
terror?--wa it not triumph?--at the thought he leap like a man who 
feel a knife at hi throat, but after a savag tramp around the square, 
came back again and sat down to battl with hi misery. 

the air wa cold, but hi cheek were burn with angri shame. shame? 
why? wa it becaus he had marri a girl whom chanc had made a mother? 
_did_ he love her? wa thi miser bohemian existence, then, hi end 
and aim in life? He turn hi eye upon the secret of hi heart, and 
read an evil story,--th stori of the past, and he cover hi face for 
shame, while, keep time to the dull pain throb in hi head, hi 
heart beat out the stori for the future. shame and disgrace. 

rous at last from a lethargi which had begun to numb the bitter of 
hi thoughts, he rais hi head and look about. A sudden fog had 
settl in the streets; the arch of the arc were choke with it. He 
would go home. A great horror of be alon seiz him. _but he wa not 
alone._ the fog wa peopl with phantoms. all around him in the mist they 
moved, drift through the arch in lengthen lines, and vanished, 
while from the fog other rose up, swept past and were engulfed. He wa 
not alone, for even at hi side they crowded, touch him, swarm befor 
him, besid him, behind him, press him back, seized, and bore him with 
them through the mist. down a dim avenue, through lane and alley white 
with fog, they moved, and if they spoke their voic were dull as the 
vapour which shroud them. At last in front, a bank of masonri and earth 
cut by a massiv iron bar gate tower up in the fog. slowli and more 
slowli they glided, shoulder to shoulder and thigh to thigh. then all 
movement ceased. A sudden breez stir the fog. It waver and eddied. 
object becam more distinct. A pallor crept abov the horizon, touch 
the edg of the wateri clouds, and drew dull spark from a thousand 
bayonets. bayonets--they were everywhere, cleav the fog or flow 
beneath it in river of steel. high on the wall of masonri and earth a 
great gun loomed, and around it figur move in silhouettes. below, a 
broad torrent of bayonet swept through the iron bar gateway, out into 
the shadowi plain. It becam lighter. face grew more distinct among the 
march mass and he recogn one. 

"you, philippe!" 

the figur turn it head. 

trent cried, "i there room for me?" but the other onli wave hi arm in a 
vagu adieu and wa gone with the rest. present the cavalri began to 
pass, squadron on squadron, crowd out into the darkness; then mani 
cannon, then an ambulance, then again the endless line of bayonets. 
besid him a cuirassi sat on hi steam horse, and in front, among a 
group of mount offic he saw a general, with the astrakan collar of 
hi dolman turn up about hi bloodless face. 

some women were weep near him and one wa struggl to forc a loaf of 
black bread into a soldier' haversack. the soldier tri to aid her, but 
the sack wa fastened, and hi rifl bother him, so trent held it, while 
the woman unbutton the sack and forc in the bread, now all wet with 
her tears. the rifl wa not heavy. trent found it wonder manageable. 
wa the bayonet sharp? He tri it. then a sudden longing, a fierce, 
imper desir took possess of him. 

"_chouette!_" cri a gamin, cling to the bar gate, "_encor toi mon 
vieux_?" 

trent look up, and the rat-kil laugh in hi face. but when the 
soldier had taken the rifl again, and thank him, ran hard to catch hi 
battalion, he plung into the throng about the gateway. 

"are you going?" he cri to a marin who sat in the gutter bandag hi 
foot. 

"yes." 

then a girl--a mere child--caught him by the hand and led him into the 
café which face the gate. the room wa crowd with soldiers, some, white 
and silent, sit on the floor, other groan on the leather-cov 
settees. the air wa sour and suffocating. 

"choose!" said the girl with a littl gestur of pity; "they can't go!" 

In a heap of cloth on the floor he found a capot and képi. 

she help him buckl hi knapsack, cartridge-box, and belt, and show 
him how to load the chasse-pot rifle, hold it on her knees. 

when he thank her she start to her feet. 

"you are a foreigner!" 

"american," he said, move toward the door, but the child bar hi way. 

"I am a bretonne. My father is up there with the cannon of the marine. He 
will shoot you if you are a spy." 

they face each other for a moment. then sighing, he bent over and kiss 
the child. "pray for france, littl one," he murmured, and she repeat 
with a pale smile: "for franc and you, beau monsieur." 

He ran across the street and through the gateway. onc outside, he edg 
into line and shoulder hi way along the road. A corpor passed, look 
at him, repassed, and final call an officer. "you belong to the 60th," 
growl the corpor look at the number on hi képi. 

"we have no use for franc-tireurs," ad the officer, catch sight of 
hi black trousers. 

"I wish to volunt in place of a comrade," said trent, and the offic 
shrug hi shoulder and pass on. 

nobodi paid much attent to him, one or two mere glanc at hi 
trousers. the road wa deep with slush and mud-plough and torn by wheel 
and hoofs. A soldier in front of him wrench hi foot in an ici rut and 
drag himself to the edg of the embank groaning. the plain on 
either side of them wa grey with melt snow. here and there behind 
dismantl hedge-row stood wagons, bear white flag with red crosses. 
sometim the driver wa a priest in rusti hat and gown, sometim a 
crippl mobile. onc they pass a wagon driven by a sister of charity. 
silent empti hous with great rent in their walls, and everi window 
blank, huddl along the road. further on, within the zone of danger, 
noth of human habit remain except here and there a pile of 
frozen brick or a blacken cellar choke with snow. 

for some time trent had been annoy by the man behind him, who kept 
tread on hi heels. convinc at last that it wa intentional, he 
turn to remonstr and found himself face to face with a fellow-stud 
from the beaux arts. trent stared. 

"I thought you were in the hospital!" 

the other shook hi head, point to hi bandag jaw. 

"I see, you can't speak. can I do anything?" 

the wound man rummag in hi haversack and produc a crust of black 
bread. 

"he can't eat it, hi jaw is smashed, and he want you to chew it for 
him," said the soldier next to him. 

trent took the crust, and grind it in hi teeth morsel by morsel, 
pass it back to the starv man. 

from time to time mount orderli sped to the front, cover them with 
slush. It wa a chilly, silent march through sodden meadow wreath in 
fog. along the railroad embank across the ditch, anoth column move 
parallel to their own. trent watch it, a sombr mass, now distinct, now 
vague, now blot out in a puff of fog. onc for half-an-hour he lost it, 
but when again it came into view, he notic a thin line detach itself 
from the flank, and, belli in the middle, swing rapidli to the west. At 
the same moment a prolong crackl broke out in the fog in front. other 
line began to slough off from the column, swing east and west, and the 
crackl becam continuous. A batteri pass at full gallop, and he drew 
back with hi comrad to give it way. It went into action a littl to the 
right of hi battalion, and as the shot from the first rifl piec boom 
through the mist, the cannon from the fortif open with a mighti 
roar. An offic gallop by shout someth which trent did not catch, 
but he saw the rank in front suddenli part compani with hi own, and 
disappear in the twilight. more offic rode up and stood besid him 
peer into the fog. away in front the crackl had becom one prolong 
crash. It wa dreari waiting. trent chew some bread for the man behind, 
who tri to swallow it, and after a while shook hi head, motion trent 
to eat the rest himself. A corpor offer him a littl brandi and he 
drank it, but when he turn around to return the flask, the corpor wa 
lie on the ground. alarmed, he look at the soldier next to him, who 
shrug hi shoulder and open hi mouth to speak, but someth struck 
him and he roll over and over into the ditch below. At that moment the 
hors of one of the offic gave a bound and back into the battalion, 
lash out with hi heels. one man wa ridden down; anoth wa kick in 
the chest and hurl through the ranks. the offic sank hi spur into 
the hors and forc him to the front again, where he stood trembling. the 
cannonad seem to draw nearer. A staff-officer, ride slowli up and 
down the battalion suddenli collaps in hi saddl and clung to hi 
horse' mane. one of hi boot dangled, crimson and dripping, from the 
stirrup. then out of the mist in front men came running. the roads, the 
fields, the ditch were full of them, and mani of them fell. for an 
instant he imagin he saw horsemen ride about like ghost in the 
vapour beyond, and a man behind him curs horribly, declar he too had 
seen them, and that they were uhlans; but the battalion stood inactive, 
and the mist fell again over the meadows. 

the colonel sat heavili upon hi horse, hi bullet-shap head buri in 
the astrakan collar of hi dolman, hi fat leg stick straight out in 
the stirrups. 

the bugler cluster about him with bugl poised, and behind him a 
staff-offic in a pale blue jacket smoke a cigarett and chat with a 
captain of hussars. from the road in front came the sound of furiou 
gallop and an orderli rein up besid the colonel, who motion him to 
the rear without turn hi head. then on the left a confus murmur 
aros which end in a shout. A hussar pass like the wind, follow by 
anoth and another, and then squadron after squadron whirl by them into 
the sheet mists. At that instant the colonel rear in hi saddle, the 
bugl clanged, and the whole battalion scrambl down the embankment, 
over the ditch and start across the soggi meadow. almost at onc trent 
lost hi cap. someth snatch it from hi head, he thought it wa a 
tree branch. A good mani of hi comrad roll over in the slush and ice, 
and he imagin that they had slipped. one pitch right across hi path 
and he stop to help him up, but the man scream when he touch him 
and an offic shouted, "forward! forward!" so he ran on again. It wa a 
long jog through the mist, and he wa often oblig to shift hi rifle. 
when at last they lay pant behind the railroad embankment, he look 
about him. He had felt the need of action, of a desper physic 
struggle, of kill and crushing. He had been seiz with a desir to 
fling himself among mass and tear right and left. He long to fire, to 
use the thin sharp bayonet on hi chassepot. He had not expect this. He 
wish to becom exhausted, to struggl and cut until incap of lift 
hi arm. then he had intend to go home. He heard a man say that half the 
battalion had gone down in the charge, and he saw anoth examin a 
corps under the embankment. the body, still warm, wa cloth in a 
strang uniform, but even when he notic the spike helmet lie a few 
inch further away, he did not realiz what had happened. 

the colonel sat on hi hors a few feet to the left, hi eye sparkl 
under the crimson képi. trent heard him repli to an officer: "I can hold 
it, but anoth charge, and I won't have enough men left to sound a 
bugle." 

"were the prussian here?" trent ask of a soldier who sat wipe the 
blood trickl from hi hair. 

"yes. the hussar clean them out. We caught their cross fire." 

"we are support a batteri on the embankment," said another. 

then the battalion crawl over the embank and move along the line 
of twist rails. trent roll up hi trouser and tuck them into hi 
woollen socks: but they halt again, and some of the men sat down on the 
dismantl railroad track. trent look for hi wound comrad from the 
beaux arts. He wa stand in hi place, veri pale. the cannonad had 
becom terrific. for a moment the mist lifted. He caught a glimps of the 
first battalion motionless on the railroad track in front, of regiment on 
either flank, and then, as the fog settl again, the drum beat and the 
music of the bugl began away on the extrem left. A restless movement 
pass among the troops, the colonel threw up hi arm, the drum rolled, 
and the battalion move off through the fog. they were near the front now 
for the battalion wa fire as it advanced. ambul gallop along the 
base of the embank to the rear, and the hussar pass and repass 
like phantoms. they were in the front at last, for all about them wa 
movement and turmoil, while from the fog, close at hand, came cri and 
groan and crash volleys. shell fell everywhere, burst along the 
embankment, splash them with frozen slush. trent wa frightened. He 
began to dread the unknown, which lay there crackl and flame in 
obscurity. the shock of the cannon sicken him. He could even see the fog 
light up with a dull orang as the thunder shook the earth. It wa near, 
he felt certain, for the colonel shout "forward!" and the first 
battalion wa hasten into it. He felt it breath, he trembled, but 
hurri on. A fear discharg in front terrifi him. somewher in the 
fog men were cheering, and the colonel' horse, stream with blood 
plung about in the smoke. 

anoth blast and shock, right in hi face, almost stun him, and he 
faltered. all the men to the right were down. hi head swam; the fog and 
smoke stupefi him. He put out hi hand for a support and caught 
something. It wa the wheel of a gun-carriage, and a man sprang from 
behind it, aim a blow at hi head with a rammer, but stumbl back 
shriek with a bayonet through hi neck, and trent knew that he had 
killed. mechan he stoop to pick up hi rifle, but the bayonet wa 
still in the man, who lay, beat with red hand against the sod. It 
sicken him and he lean on the cannon. men were fight all around him 
now, and the air wa foul with smoke and sweat. somebodi seiz him from 
behind and anoth in front, but other in turn seiz them or struck them 
solid blows. the click! click! click! of bayonet infuri him, and he 
grasp the rammer and struck out blindli until it wa shiver to pieces. 

A man threw hi arm around hi neck and bore him to the ground, but he 
throttl him and rais himself on hi knees. He saw a comrad seiz the 
cannon, and fall across it with hi skull crush in; he saw the colonel 
tumbl clean out of hi saddl into the mud; then conscious fled. 

when he came to himself, he wa lie on the embank among the twist 
rails. On everi side huddl men who cri out and curs and fled away 
into the fog, and he stagger to hi feet and follow them. onc he 
stop to help a comrad with a bandag jaw, who could not speak but 
clung to hi arm for a time and then fell dead in the freez mire; and 
again he aid another, who groaned: "trent, c'est moi--philippe," until a 
sudden volley in the midst reliev him of hi charge. 

An ici wind swept down from the heights, cut the fog into shreds. for 
an instant, with an evil leer the sun peer through the nake wood of 
vincennes, sank like a blood-clot in the batteri smoke, lower, lower, into 
the blood-soak plain. 




IV 

when midnight sound from the belfri of st. sulpic the gate of pari 
were still choke with fragment of what had onc been an army. 

they enter with the night, a sullen horde, spatter with slime, faint 
with hunger and exhaustion. there wa littl disord at first, and the 
throng at the gate part silent as the troop tramp along the 
freez streets. confus came as the hour passed. swiftli and more 
swiftly, crowd squadron after squadron and batteri on battery, hors 
plung and caisson jolting, the remnant from the front surg through 
the gates, a chao of cavalri and artilleri struggl for the right of 
way. close upon them stumbl the infantry; here a skeleton of a regiment 
march with a desper attempt at order, there a riotou mob of mobil 
crush their way to the streets, then a turmoil of horsemen, cannon, 
troop without, officers, offic without men, then again a line of 
ambulances, the wheel groan under their heavi loads. 

dumb with miseri the crowd look on. 

all through the day the ambul had been arriving, and all day long the 
rag throng whimper and shiver by the barriers. At noon the crowd 
wa increas ten-fold, fill the squar about the gates, and swarm 
over the inner fortifications. 

At four o'clock in the afternoon the german batteri suddenli wreath 
themselv in smoke, and the shell fell fast on montparnasse. At twenti 
minut after four two projectil struck a hous in the rue de bac, and a 
moment later the first shell fell in the latin quarter. 

braith wa paint in bed when west came in veri much scared. 

"I wish you would come down; our hous ha been knock into a cock hat, 
and i'm afraid that some of the pillag may take it into their head to 
pay us a visit to-night." 

braith jump out of bed and bundl himself into a garment which had onc 
been an overcoat. 

"anybodi hurt?" he inquired, struggl with a sleev full of dilapid 
lining. 

"no. colett is barricad in the cellar, and the concierg ran away to 
the fortifications. there will be a rough gang there if the bombard 
keep up. you might help us--" 

"of course," said braith; but it wa not until they had reach the rue 
serpent and had turn in the passag which led to west' cellar, that 
the latter cried: "have you seen jack trent, to-day?" 

"no," repli braith, look troubled, "he wa not at ambul 
headquarters." 

"he stay to take care of sylvia, I suppose." 

A bomb came crash through the roof of a hous at the end of the alley 
and burst in the basement, shower the street with slate and plaster. A 
second struck a chimney and plung into the garden, follow by an 
avalanch of bricks, and anoth explod with a deafen report in the 
next street. 

they hurri along the passag to the step which led to the cellar. here 
again braith stopped. 

"don't you think I had better run up to see if jack and sylvia are well 
entrenched? I can get back befor dark." 

"no. Go in and find colette, and i'll go." 

"no, no, let me go, there' no danger." 

"I know it," repli west calmly; and, drag braith into the alley, 
point to the cellar steps. the iron door wa barred. 

"colette! colette!" he called. the door swung inward, and the girl sprang 
up the stair to meet them. At that instant, braith, glanc behind him, 
gave a startl cry, and push the two befor him into the cellar, 
jump down after them and slam the iron door. A few second later a 
heavi jar from the outsid shook the hinges. 

"they are here," mutter west, veri pale. 

"that door," observ colett calmly, "will hold for ever." 

braith examin the low iron structure, now trembl with the blow 
rain on it from without. west glanc anxious at colette, who 
display no agitation, and thi comfort him. 

"I don't believ they will spend much time here," said braith; "they onli 
rummag in cellar for spirits, I imagine." 

"unless they hear that valuabl are buri there." 

"but sure noth is buri here?" exclaim braith uneasily. 

"unfortun there is," growl west. "that miserli landlord of mine--" 

A crash from the outside, follow by a yell, cut him short; then blow 
after blow shook the doors, until there came a sharp snap, a clink of 
metal and a triangular bit of iron fell inwards, leav a hole through 
which struggl a ray of light. 

instantli west knelt, and shove hi revolv through the apertur fire 
everi cartridge. for a moment the alley resound with the racket of the 
revolver, then absolut silenc followed. 

present a singl question blow fell upon the door, and a moment later 
anoth and another, and then a sudden crack zigzag across the iron 
plate. 

"here," said west, seiz colett by the wrist, "you follow me, braith!" 
and he ran swiftli toward a circular spot of light at the further end of 
the cellar. the spot of light came from a bar man-hol above. west 
motion braith to mount on hi shoulders. 

"push it over. you _must_!" 

with littl effort braith lift the bar cover, scrambl out on hi 
stomach, and easili rais colett from west' shoulders. 

"quick, old chap!" cri the latter. 

braith twist hi leg around a fence-chain and lean down again. the 
cellar wa flood with a yellow light, and the air reek with the stench 
of petroleum torches. the iron door still held, but a whole plate of metal 
wa gone, and now as they look a figur came creep through, hold a 
torch. 

"quick!" whisper braith. "jump!" and west hung dangl until colett 
grasp him by the collar, and he wa drag out. then her nerv gave 
way and she wept hysterically, but west threw hi arm around her and led 
her across the garden into the next street, where braith, after replac 
the man-hol cover and pile some stone slab from the wall over it, 
rejoin them. It wa almost dark. they hurri through the street, now 
onli light by burn buildings, or the swift glare of the shells. they 
gave wide berth to the fires, but at a distanc saw the flit form of 
pillag among the _débris_. sometim they pass a femal furi craze 
with drink shriek anathema upon the world, or some slouch lout 
whose blacken face and hand betray hi share in the work of 
destruction. At last they reach the sein and pass the bridge, and 
then braith said: "I must go back. I am not sure of jack and sylvia." As 
he spoke, he made way for a crowd which came trampl across the bridge, 
and along the river wall by the d'orsay barracks. In the midst of it west 
caught the measur tread of a platoon. A lantern passed, a file of 
bayonets, then anoth lantern which glimmer on a deathli face behind, 
and colett gasped, "hartman!" and he wa gone. they peer fear 
across the embankment, hold their breath. there wa a shuffl of feet 
on the quay, and the gate of the barrack slammed. A lantern shone for a 
moment at the postern, the crowd press to the grille, then came the 
clang of the volley from the stone parade. 

one by one the petroleum torch flare up along the embankment, and now 
the whole squar wa in motion. down from the champ elysé and across 
the place de la concord straggl the fragment of the battle, a compani 
here, and a mob there. they pour in from everi street follow by women 
and children, and a great murmur, born on the ici wind, swept through the 
arc de triomph and down the dark avenue,--"perdus! perdus!" 

A rag end of a battalion wa press past, the spectr of 
annihilation. west groaned. then a figur sprang from the shadowi rank 
and call west' name, and when he saw it wa trent he cri out. trent 
seiz him, white with terror. 

"sylvia?" 

west stare speechless, but colett moaned, "oh, sylvia! sylvia!--and they 
are shell the quarter!" 

"trent!" shout braith; but he wa gone, and they could not overtak 
them. 

the bombard ceas as trent cross the boulevard st. germain, but the 
entranc to the rue de sein wa block by a heap of smoke bricks. 
everywher the shell had torn great hole in the pavement. the café wa a 
wreck of splinter and glass, the book-stor tottered, rip from roof to 
basement, and the littl bakery, long sinc closed, bulg outward abov a 
mass of slate and tin. 

He climb over the steam brick and hurri into the rue de tournon. 
On the corner a fire blazed, light up hi own street, and on the bank 
wall, beneath a shatter ga lamp, a child wa write with a bit of 
cinder. 

"here fell the first shell." 

the letter stare him in the face. the rat-kil finish and step 
back to view hi work, but catch sight of trent' bayonet, scream and 
fled, and as trent stagger across the shatter street, from hole and 
cranni in the ruin fierc women fled from their work of pillage, 
curs him. 

At first he could not find hi house, for the tear blind him, but he 
felt along the wall and reach the door. A lantern burn in the 
concierge' lodg and the old man lay dead besid it. faint with fright he 
lean a moment on hi rifle, then, snatch the lantern, sprang up the 
stairs. He tri to call, but hi tongu hardli moved. On the second floor 
he saw plaster on the stairway, and on the third the floor wa torn and 
the concierg lay in a pool of blood across the landing. the next floor 
wa his, _theirs_. the door hung from it hinges, the wall gaped. He 
crept in and sank down by the bed, and there two arm were flung around 
hi neck, and a tear-stain face sought hi own. 

"sylvia!" 

"O jack! jack! jack!" 

from the tumbl pillow besid them a child wailed. 

"they brought it; it is mine," she sobbed. 

"ours," he whispered, with hi arm around them both. 

then from the stair below came braith' anxiou voice. 

"trent! Is all well?" 




the street OF our ladi OF the field 

"et tout le jour passé dan la tristess 
nou sont compté comm de jour heureux!" 


I 

the street is not fashionable, neither is it shabby. It is a pariah among 
streets--a street without a quarter. It is gener understood to lie 
outsid the pale of the aristocrat avenu de l'observatoire. the 
student of the montparnass quarter consid it swell and will have none 
of it. the latin quarter, from the luxembourg, it northern frontier, 
sneer at it respect and regard with disfavour the correctli 
costum student who haunt it. few stranger go into it. At times, 
however, the latin quarter student use it as a thoroughfar between the 
rue de renn and the bullier, but except for that and the weekli 
afternoon visit of parent and guardian to the convent near the rue 
vavin, the street of our ladi of the field is as quiet as a passi 
boulevard. perhap the most respect portion lie between the rue de la 
grand chaumièr and the rue vavin, at least thi wa the conclus 
arriv at by the reverend joel byram, as he rambl through it with 
hast in charge. To hast the street look pleasant in the bright 
june weather, and he had begun to hope for it select when the reverend 
byram shi violent at the cross on the convent opposite. 

"jesuits," he muttered. 

"well," said hast wearily, "I imagin we won't find anyth better. 
you say yourself that vice is triumphant in paris, and it seem to me that 
in everi street we find jesuit or someth worse." 

after a moment he repeated, "or someth worse, which of cours I would 
not notic except for your kind in warn me." 

dr. byram suck in hi lip and look about him. He wa impress by the 
evid respect of the surroundings. then frown at the convent 
he took hastings' arm and shuffl across the street to an iron gateway 
which bore the number 201 _bis_ paint in white on a blue ground. below 
thi wa a notic print in english: 

1. for porter pleas oppress once. 
2. for servant pleas oppress twice. 
3. for parlour pleas oppress thrice. 

hast touch the electr button three times, and they were usher 
through the garden and into the parlour by a trim maid. the dining-room 
door, just beyond, wa open, and from the tabl in plain view a stout 
woman hastili aros and came toward them. hast caught a glimps of a 
young man with a big head and sever snuffi old gentlemen at breakfast, 
befor the door close and the stout woman waddl into the room, bring 
with her an aroma of coffe and a black poodle." 

"it ee a plaisir to you receive!" she cried. "monsieur is anglish? no? 
americain? off course. My pension it ee for americain surtout. here all 
spik angleesh, c'est à dire, ze personnel; ze sairvant do spik, plu ou 
moins, a little. I am happi to have you comm pensionnaires--" 

"madame," began dr. byram, but wa cut short again. 

"ah, yess, I know, ah! mon dieu! you do not spik frainch but you have come 
to lairne! My husband doe spik frainch wiss ze pensionnaires. We have at 
ze moment a famili americain who learn of my husband frainch--" 

here the poodl growl at dr. byram and wa promptli cuf by hi 
mistress. 

"veux tu!" she cried, with a slap, "veux tu! oh! le vilain, oh! le 
vilain!" 

"mais, madame," said hastings, smiling, "il n'a pa l'air trè féroce." 

the poodl fled, and hi mistress cried, "ah, ze accent charming! He doe 
spik alreadi frainch like a parisien young gentleman!" 

then dr. byram manag to get in a word or two and gather more or less 
inform with regard to prices. 

"it ee a pension serieux; my clientèl ee of ze best, inde a pension 
de famil where one ee at 'ome." 

then they went upstair to examin hastings' futur quarters, test the 
bed-spr and arrang for the weekli towel allowance. dr. byram appear 
satisfied. 

madam marott accompani them to the door and rang for the maid, but as 
hast step out into the gravel walk, hi guid and mentor paus a 
moment and fix madam with hi wateri eyes. 

"you understand," he said, "that he is a youth of most care bring 
up, and hi charact and moral are without a stain. He is young and ha 
never been abroad, never even seen a larg city, and hi parent have 
request me, as an old famili friend live in paris, to see that he is 
place under good influences. He is to studi art, but on no account would 
hi parent wish him to live in the latin quarter if they knew of the 
immor which is rife there." 

A sound like the click of a latch interrupt him and he rais hi eyes, 
but not in time to see the maid slap the big-head young man behind the 
parlour-door. 

madam coughed, cast a deadli glanc behind her and then beam on dr. 
byram. 

"it ee well zat he come here. the pension more serious, il n'en exist 
pas, eet ee not any!" she announc with conviction. 

so, as there wa noth more to add, dr. byram join hast at the 
gate. 

"I trust," he said, eye the convent, "that you will make no 
acquaint among jesuits!" 

hast look at the convent until a pretti girl pass befor the gray 
façade, and then he look at her. A young fellow with a paint-box and 
canva came swing along, stop befor the pretti girl, said someth 
dure a brief but vigor handshak at which they both laughed, and he 
went hi way, call back, "À demain valentine!" as in the same breath 
she cried, "À demain!" 

"valentine," thought hastings, "what a quaint name;" and he start to 
follow the reverend joel byram, who wa shuffl toward the nearest 
tramway station. 




II 

"an' you are plea wiz paris, monsieur' astang?" demand madam marott 
the next morn as hast came into the breakfast-room of the pension, 
rosi from hi plung in the limit bath above. 

"I am sure I shall like it," he replied, wonder at hi own depress 
of spirits. 

the maid brought him coffe and rolls. He return the vacant glanc of 
the big-head young man and acknowledg diffid the salut of the 
snuffi old gentlemen. He did not tri to finish hi coffee, and sat 
crumbl a roll, unconsci of the sympathet glanc of madam 
marotte, who had tact enough not to bother him. 

present a maid enter with a tray on which were balanc two bowl of 
chocolate, and the snuffi old gentlemen leer at her ankles. the maid 
deposit the chocol at a tabl near the window and smile at hastings. 
then a thin young lady, follow by her counterpart in all except years, 
march into the room and took the tabl near the window. they were 
evid american, but hastings, if he expect ani sign of recognition, 
wa disappointed. To be ignor by compatriot intensifi hi depression. 
He fumbl with hi knife and look at hi plate. 

the thin young ladi wa talk enough. she wa quit awar of hastings' 
presence, readi to be flatter if he look at her, but on the other hand 
she felt her superiority, for she had been three week in pari and he, it 
wa easi to see, had not yet unpack hi steamer-trunk. 

her convers wa complacent. she argu with her mother upon the 
rel merit of the louvr and the bon marché, but her mother' part of 
the discuss wa mostli confin to the observation, "why, susie!" 

the snuffi old gentlemen had left the room in a body, outwardli polit and 
inwardli raging. they could not endur the americans, who fill the room 
with their chatter. 

the big-head young man look after them with a know cough, 
murmuring, "gay old birds!" 

"they look like bad old men, mr. bladen," said the girl. 

To thi mr. bladen smile and said, "they'v had their day," in a tone 
which impli that he wa now have his. 

"and that' whi they all have baggi eyes," cri the girl. "I think it' a 
shame for young gentlemen--" 

"why, susie!" said the mother, and the convers lagged. 

after a while mr. bladen threw down the _petit journal_, which he daili 
studi at the expens of the house, and turn to hastings, start to 
make himself agreeable. He began by saying, "I see you are american." 

To thi brilliant and origin opening, hastings, deadli homesick, repli 
gratefully, and the convers wa judici nourish by observ 
from miss susi byng distinctli address to mr. bladen. In the cours of 
event miss susie, forget to address herself exclus to mr. 
bladen, and hast repli to her gener question, the _entent 
cordiale_ wa established, and susi and her mother extend a 
protector over what wa clearli neutral territory. 

"mr. hastings, you must not desert the pension everi even as mr. bladen 
does. pari is an aw place for young gentlemen, and mr. bladen is a 
horrid cynic." 

mr. bladen look gratified. 

hast answered, "I shall be at the studio all day, and I imagin I 
shall be glad enough to come back at night." 

mr. bladen, who, at a salari of fifteen dollar a week, act as agent for 
the pewli manufactur compani of troy, n.y., smile a sceptic smile 
and withdrew to keep an appoint with a custom on the boulevard 
magenta. 

hast walk into the garden with mrs. byng and susie, and, at their 
invitation, sat down in the shade befor the iron gate. 

the chestnut tree still bore their fragrant spike of pink and white, and 
the bee hum among the roses, trellis on the white-wal house. 

A faint fresh wa in the air. the water cart move up and down the 
street, and a clear stream bubbl over the spotless gutter of the rue de 
la grand chaumière. the sparrow were merri along the curb-stones, take 
bath after bath in the water and ruffl their feather with delight. In 
a wall garden across the street a pair of blackbird whistl among the 
almond trees. 

hast swallow the lump in hi throat, for the song of the bird and 
the rippl of water in a pari gutter brought back to him the sunni 
meadow of millbrook. 

"that' a blackbird," observ miss byng; "see him there on the bush with 
pink blossoms. he' all black except hi bill, and that look as if it had 
been dip in an omelet, as some frenchman says--" 

"why, susie!" said mrs. byng. 

"that garden belong to a studio inhabit by two americans," continu 
the girl serenely, "and I often see them pass. they seem to need a great 
mani models, mostli young and feminine--" 

"why, susie!" 

"perhap they prefer paint that kind, but I don't see whi they should 
invit five, with three more young gentlemen, and all get into two cab 
and drive away singing. thi street," she continued, "i dull. there is 
noth to see except the garden and a glimps of the boulevard 
montparnass through the rue de la grand chaumière. No one ever pass 
except a policeman. there is a convent on the corner." 

"I thought it wa a jesuit college," began hastings, but wa at onc 
overwhelm with a baedeck descript of the place, end with, "on 
one side stand the palati hotel of jean paul lauren and guillaum 
bouguereau, and opposite, in the littl passag stanislas, carolu duran 
paint the masterpiec which charm the world." 

the blackbird burst into a rippl of golden throati notes, and from some 
distant green spot in the citi an unknown wild-bird answer with a frenzi 
of liquid trill until the sparrow paus in their ablut to look up 
with restless chirps. 

then a butterfli came and sat on a cluster of heliotrop and wave hi 
crimson-band wing in the hot sunshine. hast knew him for a friend, 
and befor hi eye there came a vision of tall mullein and scent 
milkwe aliv with paint wings, a vision of a white hous and 
woodbine-cov piazza,--a glimps of a man read and a woman lean 
over the pansi bed,--and hi heart wa full. He wa startl a moment 
later by miss byng. 

"I believ you are homesick!" hast blushed. miss byng look at him 
with a sympathet sigh and continued: "whenev I felt homesick at first 
I use to go with mamma and walk in the luxembourg gardens. I don't know 
whi it is, but those old-fashion garden seem to bring me nearer home 
than anyth in thi artifici city." 

"but they are full of marbl statues," said mrs. byng mildly; "I don't see 
the resembl myself." 

"where is the luxembourg?" inquir hast after a silence. 

"come with me to the gate," said miss byng. He rose and follow her, and 
she point out the rue vavin at the foot of the street. 

"you pass by the convent to the right," she smiled; and hast went. 




iii 

the luxembourg wa a blaze of flowers. He walk slowli through the long 
avenu of trees, past mossi marbl and old-tim columns, and thread 
the grove by the bronz lion, came upon the tree-crown terrac abov the 
fountain. below lay the basin shine in the sunlight. flower almond 
encircl the terrace, and, in a greater spiral, grove of chestnut wound 
in and out and down among the moist thicket by the western palac wing. 
At one end of the avenu of tree the observatori rose, it white dome 
pile up like an eastern mosque; at the other end stood the heavi palace, 
with everi window-pan ablaz in the fierc sun of june. 

around the fountain, children and white-cap nurs arm with bamboo 
pole were push toy boats, whose sail hung limp in the sunshine. A 
dark policeman, wear red epaulett and a dress sword, watch them for 
a while and then went away to remonstr with a young man who had 
unchain hi dog. the dog wa pleasantli occupi in rub grass and 
dirt into hi back while hi leg wave into the air. 

the policeman point at the dog. He wa speechless with indignation. 

"well, captain," smile the young fellow. 

"well, monsieur student," growl the policeman. 

"what do you come and complain to me for?" 

"if you don't chain him i'll take him," shout the policeman. 

"what' that to me, mon capitaine?" 

"wha--t! isn't that bull-dog yours?" 

"if it was, don't you suppos i'd chain him?" 

the offic glare for a moment in silence, then decid that as he wa a 
student he wa wicked, grab at the dog, who promptli dodged. around and 
around the flower-b they raced, and when the offic came too near for 
comfort, the bull-dog cut across a flower-bed, which perhap wa not 
play fair. 

the young man wa amused, and the dog also seem to enjoy the exercise. 

the policeman notic thi and decid to strike at the fountain-head of 
the evil. He storm up to the student and said, "a the owner of thi 
public nuisanc I arrest you!" 

"but," object the other, "I disclaim the dog." 

that wa a poser. It wa useless to attempt to catch the dog until three 
garden lent a hand, but then the dog simpli ran away and disappear in 
the rue de medici. 

the policeman shambl off to find consol among the white-cap 
nurses, and the student, look at hi watch, stood up yawning. then 
catch sight of hastings, he smile and bowed. hast walk over to 
the marble, laughing. 

"why, clifford," he said, "I didn't recogn you." 

"it' my moustache," sigh the other. "I sacrif it to humour a whim 
of--of--a friend. what do you think of my dog?" 

"then he is yours?" cri hastings. 

"of course. it' a pleasant chang for him, thi play tag with 
policemen, but he is known now and i'll have to stop it. he' gone home. 
He alway doe when the garden take a hand. it' a pity; he' fond of 
roll on lawns." then they chat for a moment of hastings' prospects, 
and clifford polit offer to stand hi sponsor at the studio. 

"you see, old tabby, I mean dr. byram, told me about you befor I met 
you," explain clifford, "and elliott and I will be glad to do anyth 
we can." then look at hi watch again, he muttered, "I have just ten 
minut to catch the versail train; au revoir," and start to go, but 
catch sight of a girl advanc by the fountain, took off hi hat with 
a confus smile. 

"whi are you not at versailles?" she said, with an almost impercept 
acknowledg of hastings' presence. 

"i--i'm going," murmur clifford. 

for a moment they face each other, and then clifford, veri red, 
stammered, "with your permiss I have the honour of present to you my 
friend, monsieur hastings." 

hast bow low. she smile veri sweetly, but there wa someth of 
malic in the quiet inclin of her small parisienn head. 

"I could have wished," she said, "that monsieur clifford might spare me 
more time when he bring with him so charm an american." 

"must--must I go, valentine?" began clifford. 

"certainly," she replied. 

clifford took hi leav with veri bad grace, wincing, when she added, "and 
give my dearest love to cécile!" As he disappear in the rue d'assas, the 
girl turn as if to go, but then suddenli rememb hastings, look at 
him and shook her head. 

"monsieur clifford is so perfectli harebrained," she smiled, "it is 
embarrass sometimes. you have heard, of course, all about hi success 
at the salon?" 

He look puzzl and she notic it. 

"you have been to the salon, of course?" 

"why, no," he answered, "I onli arriv in pari three day ago." 

she seem to pay littl heed to hi explanation, but continued: "nobodi 
imagin he had the energi to do anyth good, but on varnish day the 
salon wa astonish by the entranc of monsieur clifford, who stroll 
about as bland as you pleas with an orchid in hi buttonhole, and a 
beauti pictur on the line." 

she smile to herself at the reminiscence, and look at the fountain. 

"monsieur bouguereau told me that monsieur julian wa so astonish that 
he onli shook hand with monsieur clifford in a daze manner, and actual 
forgot to pat him on the back! fancy," she continu with much merriment, 
"fanci papa julian forget to pat one on the back." 

hastings, wonder at her acquaint with the great bouguereau, look 
at her with respect. "may I ask," he said diffidently, "whether you are a 
pupil of bouguereau?" 

"i?" she said in some surprise. then she look at him curiously. wa he 
permit himself the liberti of joke on such short acquaintance? 

hi pleasant seriou face question hers. 

"tiens," she thought, "what a droll man!" 

"you sure studi art?" he said. 

she lean back on the crook stick of her parasol, and look at him. 
"whi do you think so?" 

"becaus you speak as if you did." 

"you are make fun of me," she said, "and it is not good taste." 

she stopped, confused, as he colour to the root of hi hair. 

"how long have you been in paris?" she said at length. 

"three days," he repli gravely. 

"but--but--sur you are not a nouveau! you speak french too well!" 

then after a pause, "realli are you a nouveau?" 

"I am," he said. 

she sat down on the marbl bench late occupi by clifford, and tilt 
her parasol over her small head look at him. 

"I don't believ it." 

He felt the compliment, and for a moment hesit to declar himself one 
of the despised. then muster up hi courage, he told her how new and 
green he was, and all with a frank which made her blue eye open veri 
wide and her lip part in the sweetest of smiles. 

"you have never seen a studio?" 

"never." 

"nor a model?" 

"no." 

"how funny," she said solemnly. then they both laughed. 

"and you," he said, "have seen studios?" 

"hundreds." 

"and models?" 

"millions." 

"and you know bouguereau?" 

"yes, and henner, and constant and laurens, and puvi de chavann and 
dagnan and courtois, and--and all the rest of them!" 

"and yet you say you are not an artist." 

"pardon," she said gravely, "did I say I wa not?" 

"won't you tell me?" he hesitated. 

At first she look at him, shake her head and smiling, then of a sudden 
her eye fell and she began trace figur with her parasol in the gravel 
at her feet. hast had taken a place on the seat, and now, with hi 
elbow on hi knees, sat watch the spray drift abov the fountain 
jet. A small boy, dress as a sailor, stood poke hi yacht and crying, 
"I won't go home! I won't go home!" hi nurs rais her hand to heaven. 

"just like a littl american boy," thought hastings, and a pang of 
homesick shot through him. 

present the nurs captur the boat, and the small boy stood at bay. 

"monsieur rené, when you decid to come here you may have your boat." 

the boy back away scowling. 

"give me my boat, I say," he cried, "and don't call me rené, for my 
name' randal and you know it!" 

"hello!" said hastings,--"randall?--that' english." 

"I am american," announc the boy in perfectli good english, turn to 
look at hastings, "and she' such a fool she call me rené becaus mamma 
call me ranny--" 

here he dodg the exasper nurs and took up hi station behind 
hastings, who laughed, and catch him around the waist lift him into 
hi lap. 

"one of my countrymen," he said to the girl besid him. He smile while he 
spoke, but there wa a queer feel in hi throat. 

"don't you see the star and stripe on my yacht?" demand randall. sure 
enough, the american colour hung limpli under the nurse' arm. 

"oh," cri the girl, "he is charming," and impuls stoop to kiss 
him, but the infant randal wriggl out of hastings' arms, and hi nurs 
pounc upon him with an angri glanc at the girl. 

she redden and then bit her lip as the nurse, with eye still fix on 
her, drag the child away and ostentati wipe hi lip with her 
handkerchief. 

then she stole a look at hast and bit her lip again. 

"what an ill-temp woman!" he said. "in america, most nurs are 
flatter when peopl kiss their children." 

for an instant she tip the parasol to hide her face, then close it 
with a snap and look at him defiantly. 

"do you think it strang that she objected?" 

"whi not?" he said in surprise. 

again she look at him with quick search eyes. 

hi eye were clear and bright, and he smile back, repeating, "whi not?" 

"you _are_ droll," she murmured, bend her head. 

"why?" 

but she made no answer, and sat silent, trace curv and circl in the 
dust with her parasol. after a while he said--"i am glad to see that young 
peopl have so much liberti here. I understood that the french were not at 
all like us. you know in america--or at least where I live in milbrook, 
girl have everi liberty,--go out alon and receiv their friend alone, 
and I wa afraid I should miss it here. but I see how it is now, and I am 
glad I wa mistaken." 

she rais her eye to hi and kept them there. 

He continu pleasantly--"sinc I have sat here I have seen a lot of 
pretti girl walk alon on the terrac there,--and then _you_ are alon 
too. tell me, for I do not know french customs,--do you have the liberti 
of go to the theatr without a chaperone?" 

for a long time she studi hi face, and then with a trembl smile 
said, "whi do you ask me?" 

"becaus you must know, of course," he said gaily. 

"yes," she repli indifferently, "I know." 

He wait for an answer, but get none, decid that perhap she had 
misunderstood him. 

"I hope you don't think I mean to presum on our short acquaintance," he 
began,--"in fact it is veri odd but I don't know your name. when mr. 
clifford present me he onli mention mine. Is that the custom in 
france?" 

"it is the custom in the latin quarter," she said with a queer light in 
her eyes. then suddenli she began talk almost feverishly. 

"you must know, monsieur hastings, that we are all _un peu san gêne_ here 
in the latin quarter. We are veri bohemian, and etiquett and ceremoni are 
out of place. It wa for that monsieur clifford present you to me with 
small ceremony, and left us togeth with less,--onli for that, and I am 
hi friend, and I have mani friend in the latin quarter, and we all know 
each other veri well--and I am not studi art, but--but--" 

"but what?" he said, bewildered. 

"I shall not tell you,--it is a secret," she said with an uncertain smile. 
On both cheek a pink spot wa burning, and her eye were veri bright. 

then in a moment her face fell. "do you know monsieur clifford veri 
intimately?" 

"not very." 

after a while she turn to him, grave and a littl pale. 

"mi name is valentine--valentin tissot. might--might I ask a servic of 
you on such veri short acquaintance?" 

"oh," he cried, "I should be honoured." 

"it is onli this," she said gently, "it is not much. promis me not to 
speak to monsieur clifford about me. promis me that you will speak to no 
one about me." 

"I promise," he said, greatli puzzled. 

she laugh nervously. "I wish to remain a mystery. It is a caprice." 

"but," he began, "I had wished, I had hope that you might give monsieur 
clifford permiss to bring me, to present me at your house." 

"my--mi house!" she repeated. 

"I mean, where you live, in fact, to present me to your family." 

the chang in the girl' face shock him. 

"I beg your pardon," he cried, "I have hurt you." 

and as quick as a flash she understood him becaus she wa a woman. 

"mi parent are dead," she said. 

present he began again, veri gently. 

"would it displeas you if I beg you to receiv me? It is the custom?" 

"I cannot," she answered. then glanc up at him, "I am sorry; I should 
like to; but believ me. I cannot." 

He bow serious and look vagu uneasy. 

"it isn't becaus I don't wish to. i--i like you; you are veri kind to 
me." 

"kind?" he cried, surpris and puzzled. 

"I like you," she said slowly, "and we will see each other sometim if 
you will." 

"at friends' houses." 

"no, not at friends' houses." 

"where?" 

"here," she said with defiant eyes. 

"why," he cried, "in pari you are much more liber in your view than we 
are." 

she look at him curiously. 

"yes, we are veri bohemian." 

"I think it is charming," he declared. 

"you see, we shall be in the best of society," she ventur timidly, with 
a pretti gestur toward the statu of the dead queens, rang in state 
rank abov the terrace. 

He look at her, delighted, and she brighten at the success of her 
innoc littl pleasantry. 

"indeed," she smiled, "I shall be well chaperoned, becaus you see we are 
under the protect of the god themselves; look, there are apollo, and 
juno, and venus, on their pedestals," count them on her small glove 
fingers, "and ceres, hercules, and--but I can't make out--" 

hast turn to look up at the wing god under whose shadow they were 
seated. 

"why, it' love," he said. 




IV 

"there is a nouveau here," drawl laffat, lean around hi easel and 
address hi friend bowles, "there is a nouveau here who is so tender 
and green and appet that heaven help him if he should fall into a 
salad bowl." 

"hayseed?" inquir bowles, plaster in a background with a broken 
palette-knif and squint at the effect with approval. 

"yes, squeedunk or oshkosh, and how he ever grew up among the daisi and 
escap the cows, heaven alon knows!" 

bowl rub hi thumb across the outlin of hi studi to "throw in a 
littl atmosphere," as he said, glare at the model, pull at hi pipe 
and find it out struck a match on hi neighbour' back to relight it. 

"hi name," continu laffat, hurl a bit of bread at the hat-rack, "hi 
name is hastings. He _is_ a berry. He know no more about the world,"--and 
here mr. laffat' face spoke volum for hi own knowledg of that 
planet,--"than a maiden cat on it first moonlight stroll." 

bowl now have succeed in light hi pipe, repeat the thumb touch 
on the other edg of the studi and said, "ah!" 

"yes," continu hi friend, "and would you imagin it, he seem to think 
that everyth here goe on as it doe in hi d----d littl backwood 
ranch at home; talk about the pretti girl who walk alon in the street; 
say how sensibl it is; and how french parent are misrepres in 
america; say that for hi part he find french girls,--and he confess 
to onli know one,--a jolli as american girls. I tri to set him 
right, tri to give him a pointer as to what sort of ladi walk about 
alon or with students, and he wa either too stupid or too innoc to 
catch on. then I gave it to him straight, and he said I wa a vile-mind 
fool and march off." 

"did you assist him with your shoe?" inquir bowles, languidli 
interested. 

"well, no." 

"he call you a vile-mind fool." 

"he wa correct," said clifford from hi easel in front. 

"what--what do you mean?" demand laffat, turn red. 

"_that_," repli clifford. 

"who spoke to you? Is thi your business?" sneer bowles, but nearli lost 
hi balanc as clifford swung about and eye him. 

"yes," he said slowly, "it' my business." 

No one spoke for some time. 

then clifford sang out, "I say, hastings!" 

and when hast left hi easel and came around, he nod toward the 
astonish laffat. 

"thi man ha been disagre to you, and I want to tell you that ani 
time you feel inclin to kick him, why, I will hold the other creature." 

hastings, embarrassed, said, "whi no, I don't agre with hi ideas, 
noth more." 

clifford said "naturally," and slip hi arm through hastings', 
stroll about with him, and introduc him to sever of hi own friends, 
at which all the nouveaux open their eye with envy, and the studio were 
given to understand that hastings, although prepar to do menial work as 
the latest nouveau, wa alreadi within the charm circl of the old, 
respect and feared, the truli great. 

the rest finished, the model resum hi place, and work went on in a 
choru of song and yell and everi ear-split nois which the art 
student utter when studi the beautiful. 

five o'clock struck,--th model yawned, stretch and climb into hi 
trousers, and the noisi content of six studio crowd through the hall 
and down into the street. ten minut later, hast found himself on top 
of a montroug tram, and shortli afterward wa join by clifford. 

they climb down at the rue gay lussac. 

"I alway stop here," observ clifford, "I like the walk through the 
luxembourg." 

"bi the way," said hastings, "how can I call on you when I don't know 
where you live?" 

"why, I live opposit you." 

"what--th studio in the garden where the almond tree are and the 
blackbirds--" 

"exactly," said clifford. "i'm with my friend elliott." 

hast thought of the descript of the two american artist which he 
had heard from miss susi byng, and look blank. 

clifford continued, "perhap you had better let me know when you think of 
come so,--so that I will be sure to--to be there," he end rather 
lamely. 

"I shouldn't care to meet ani of your model friend there," said hastings, 
smiling. "you know--mi idea are rather straitlaced,--i suppos you would 
say, puritanical. I shouldn't enjoy it and wouldn't know how to behave." 

"oh, I understand," said clifford, but ad with great cordiality,--"i'm 
sure we'll be friend although you may not approv of me and my set, but 
you will like severn and selbi because--because, well, they are like 
yourself, old chap." 

after a moment he continued, "there is someth I want to speak about. 
you see, when I introduc you, last week, in the luxembourg, to 
valentine--" 

"not a word!" cri hastings, smiling; "you must not tell me a word of 
her!" 

"why--" 

"no--not a word!" he said gaily. "I insist,--promis me upon your honour 
you will not speak of her until I give you permission; promise!" 

"I promise," said clifford, amazed. 

"she is a charm girl,--w had such a delight chat after you left, 
and I thank you for present me, but not anoth word about her until I 
give you permission." 

"oh," murmur clifford. 

"rememb your promise," he smiled, as he turn into hi gateway. 

clifford stroll across the street and, travers the ivy-cov alley, 
enter hi garden. 

He felt for hi studio key, muttering, "I wonder--i wonder,--but of cours 
he doesn't!" 

He enter the hallway, and fit the key into the door, stood stare 
at the two card tack over the panels. 

foxhal clifford 

richard osborn elliott 

"whi the devil doesn't he want me to speak of her?" 

He open the door, and, discourag the caress of two brindl 
bull-dogs, sank down on the sofa. 

elliott sat smoke and sketch with a piec of charcoal by the window. 

"hello," he said without look around. 

clifford gaze absent at the back of hi head, murmuring, "i'm afraid, 
i'm afraid that man is too innocent. I say, elliott," he said, at last, 
"hastings,--y know the chap that old tabbi byram came around here to 
tell us about--th day you had to hide colett in the armoire--" 

"yes, what' up?" 

"oh, nothing. he' a brick." 

"yes," said elliott, without enthusiasm. 

"don't you think so?" demand clifford. 

"whi yes, but he is go to have a tough time when some of hi illus 
are dispelled." 

"more shame to those who dispel 'em!" 

"yes,--wait until he come to pay hi call on us, unexpectedly, of 
course--" 

clifford look virtuou and light a cigar. 

"I wa just go to say," he observed, "that I have ask him not to come 
without let us know, so I can postpon ani orgi you may have 
intended--" 

"ah!" cri elliott indignantly, "I suppos you put it to him in that 
way." 

"not exactly," grin clifford. then more seriously, "I don't want 
anyth to occur here to bother him. he' a brick, and it' a piti we 
can't be more like him." 

"I am," observ elliott complacently, "onli live with you--" 

"listen!" cri the other. "I have manag to put my foot in it in great 
style. Do you know what i'v done? well--th first time I met him in the 
street,--or rather, it wa in the luxembourg, I introduc him to 
valentine!" 

"did he object?" 

"believ me," said clifford, solemnly, "thi rustic hast ha no more 
idea that valentin is--is--in fact is valentine, than he ha that he 
himself is a beauti exampl of moral decenc in a quarter where moral 
are as rare as elephants. I heard enough in a convers between that 
blackguard loffat and the littl immor eruption, bowles, to open my 
eyes. I tell you hast is a trump! he' a healthy, clean-mind young 
fellow, bred in a small countri village, brought up with the idea that 
saloon are way-stat to hell--and as for women--" 

"well?" demand elliott 

"well," said clifford, "hi idea of the danger woman is probabl a 
paint jezabel." 

"probably," repli the other. 

"he' a trump!" said clifford, "and if he swear the world is as good and 
pure as hi own heart, i'll swear he' right." 

elliott rub hi charcoal on hi file to get a point and turn to hi 
sketch saying, "he will never hear ani pessim from richard osborn e." 

"he' a lesson to me," said clifford. then he unfold a small perfum 
note, written on rose-colour paper, which had been lie on the tabl 
befor him. 

He read it, smiled, whistl a bar or two from "miss helyett," and sat 
down to answer it on hi best cream-laid note-paper. when it wa written 
and sealed, he pick up hi stick and march up and down the studio two 
or three times, whistling. 

"go out?" inquir the other, without turning. 

"yes," he said, but linger a moment over elliott' shoulder, watch 
him pick out the light in hi sketch with a bit of bread. 

"to-morrow is sunday," he observ after a moment' silence. 

"well?" inquir elliott. 

"have you seen colette?" 

"no, I will to-night. she and rowden and jacquelin are come to 
boulant's. I suppos you and, cécile will be there?" 

"well, no," repli clifford. "cécile dine at home to-night, and i--i had 
an idea of go to mignon's." 

elliott look at him with disapproval. 

"you can make all the arrang for La roch without me," he continued, 
avoid elliott' eyes. 

"what are you up to now?" 

"nothing," protest clifford. 

"don't tell me," repli hi chum, with scorn; "fellow don't rush off to 
mignon' when the set dine at boulant's. who is it now?--but no, I won't 
ask that,--what' the use!" then he lift up hi voic in complaint and 
beat upon the tabl with hi pipe. "what' the use of ever tri to keep 
track of you? what will cécile say,--oh, yes, what will she say? it' a 
piti you can't be constant two months, yes, by jove! and the quarter is 
indulgent, but you abus it good natur and mine too!" 

present he arose, and jam hi hat on hi head, march to the door. 

"heaven alon know whi ani one put up with your antics, but they all do 
and so do I. If I were cécile or ani of the other pretti fool after whom 
you have toddl and will, in all human probabilities, continu to toddle, 
I say, if I were cécile i'd spank you! now i'm go to boulant's, and as 
usual I shall make excus for you and arrang the affair, and I don't 
care a continent where you are going, but, by the skull of the studio 
skeleton! if you don't turn up to-morrow with your sketching-kit under one 
arm and cécile under the other,--if you don't turn up in good shape, i'm 
done with you, and the rest can think what they please. good-night." 

clifford said good-night with as pleasant a smile as he could muster, and 
then sat down with hi eye on the door. He took out hi watch and gave 
elliott ten minut to vanish, then rang the concierge' call, murmuring, 
"oh dear, oh dear, whi the devil do I do it?" 

"alfred," he said, as that gimlet-ey person answer the call, "make 
yourself clean and proper, alfred, and replac your sabot with a pair of 
shoes. then put on your best hat and take thi letter to the big white 
hous in the rue de dragon. there is no answer, _mon petit_ alfred." 

the concierg depart with a snort in which unwilling for the errand 
and affect for M. clifford were blended. then with great care the young 
fellow array himself in all the beauti of hi and elliott' wardrobe. 
He took hi time about it, and occasion interrupt hi toilet to play 
hi banjo or make pleas divers for the bull-dog by gambl about 
on all fours. "i'v got two hour befor me," he thought, and borrow a 
pair of elliott' silken foot-gear, with which he and the dog play ball 
until he decid to put them on. then he light a cigarett and inspect 
hi dress-coat. when he had empti it of four handkerchiefs, a fan, and a 
pair of crumpl glove as long as hi arm, he decid it wa not suit 
to add _éclat_ to hi charm and cast about in hi mind for a substitute. 
elliott wa too thin, and, anyway, hi coat were now under lock and key. 
rowden probabl wa as badli off as himself. hastings! hast wa the 
man! but when he threw on a smoking-jacket and saunter over to hastings' 
house, he wa inform that he had been gone over an hour. 

"now, where in the name of all that' reason could he have gone!" 
mutter clifford, look down the street. 

the maid didn't know, so he bestow upon her a fascin smile and 
loung back to the studio. 

hast wa not far away. the luxembourg is within five minutes' walk of 
the rue notr dame de champs, and there he sat under the shadow of a 
wing god, and there he had sat for an hour, poke hole in the dust and 
watch the step which lead from the northern terrac to the fountain. 
the sun hung, a purpl globe, abov the misti hill of meudon. long 
streamer of cloud touch with rose swept low on the western sky, and 
the dome of the distant invalid burn like an opal through the haze. 
behind the palac the smoke from a high chimney mount straight into the 
air, purpl until it cross the sun, where it chang to a bar of 
smoulder fire. high abov the darken foliag of the chestnut the 
twin tower of st. sulpic rose, an ever-deepen silhouette. 

A sleepi blackbird wa carol in some near thicket, and pigeon pass 
and repass with the whisper of soft wind in their wings. the light on 
the palac window had die away, and the dome of the pantheon swam aglow 
abov the northern terrace, a fieri valhalla in the sky; while below in 
grim array, along the terrac ranged, the marbl rank of queen look 
out into the west. 

from the end of the long walk by the northern façad of the palac came 
the nois of omnibus and the cri of the street. hast look at the 
palac clock. six, and as hi own watch agre with it, he fell to poke 
hole in the gravel again. A constant stream of peopl pass between the 
odéon and the fountain. priest in black, with silver-buckl shoes; line 
soldiers, slouchi and rakish; neat girl without hat bear milliners' 
boxes, student with black portfolio and high hats, student with béret 
and big canes, nervous, quick-step officers, symphoni in turquois 
and silver; ponder jangl cavalrymen all over dust, pastri cooks' 
boy skip along with utter disregard for the safeti of the basket 
balanc on the impish head, and then the lean outcast, the shambl 
pari tramp, slouch with shoulder bent and littl eye furtiv 
scan the ground for smokers' refuse;--al these move in a steadi 
stream across the fountain circl and out into the citi by the odeon, 
whose long arcad were now begin to flicker with gas-jets. the 
melancholi bell of St sulpic struck the hour and the clock-tow of the 
palac light up. then hurri step sound across the gravel and 
hast rais hi head. 

"how late you are," he said, but hi voic wa hoars and onli hi flush 
face told how long had seem the waiting. 

she said, "I wa kept--indeed, I wa so much annoyed--and--and I may onli 
stay a moment." 

she sat down besid him, cast a furtiv glanc over her shoulder at the 
god upon hi pedestal. 

"what a nuisance, that intrud cupid still there?" 

"wing and arrow too," said hastings, unheed her motion to be seated. 

"wings," she murmured, "oh, yes--to fli away with when he' tire of hi 
play. Of cours it wa a man who conceiv the idea of wings, otherwis 
cupid would have been insupportable." 

"do you think so?" 

"_ma foi_, it' what men think." 

"and women?" 

"oh," she said, with a toss of her small head, "I realli forget what we 
were speak of." 

"we were speak of love," said hastings. 

"_i_ wa not," said the girl. then look up at the marbl god, "I don't 
care for thi one at all. I don't believ he know how to shoot hi 
arrows--no, indeed, he is a coward;--h creep up like an assassin in the 
twilight. I don't approv of cowardice," she announced, and turn her 
back on the statue. 

"I think," said hast quietly, "that he doe shoot fairly--yes, and 
even give one warning." 

"i it your experience, monsieur hastings?" 

He look straight into her eye and said, "he is warn me." 

"heed the warn then," she cried, with a nervou laugh. As she spoke she 
strip off her gloves, and then care proceed to draw them on 
again. when thi wa accomplish she glanc at the palac clock, saying, 
"oh dear, how late it is!" furl her umbrella, then unfurl it, and 
final look at him. 

"no," he said, "I shall not heed hi warning." 

"oh dear," she sigh again, "still talk about that tiresom statue!" 
then steal a glanc at hi face, "I suppose--i suppos you are in 
love." 

"I don't know," he muttered, "I suppos I am." 

she rais her head with a quick gesture. "you seem delight at the 
idea," she said, but bit her lip and trembl as hi eye met hers. then 
sudden fear came over her and she sprang up, stare into the gather 
shadows. 

"are you cold?" he said. 

but she onli answered, "oh dear, oh dear, it is late--so late! I must 
go--good-night." 

she gave him her glove hand a moment and then withdrew it with a start. 

"what is it?" he insisted. "are you frightened?" 

she look at him strangely. 

"no--no--not frightened,--y are veri good to me--" 

"bi jove!" he burst out, "what do you mean by say i'm good to you? 
that' at least the third time, and I don't understand!" 

the sound of a drum from the guard-hous at the palac cut him short. 
"listen," she whispered, "they are go to close. it' late, oh, so 
late!" 

the roll of the drum came nearer and nearer, and then the silhouett of 
the drummer cut the sky abov the eastern terrace. the fade light 
linger a moment on hi belt and bayonet, then he pass into the 
shadows, drum the echo awake. the roll becam fainter along the 
eastern terrace, then grew and grew and rattl with increas sharp 
when he pass the avenu by the bronz lion and turn down the western 
terrac walk. louder and louder the drum sounded, and the echo struck 
back the note from the grey palac wall; and now the drummer loom up 
befor them--hi red trouser a dull spot in the gather gloom, the 
brass of hi drum and bayonet touch with a pale spark, hi epaulett 
toss on hi shoulders. He pass leav the crash of the drum in their 
ears, and far into the alley of tree they saw hi littl tin cup shine 
on hi haversack. then the sentinel began the monoton cry: "on ferme! 
on ferme!" and the bugl blew from the barrack in the rue de tournon. 

"on ferme! on ferme!" 

"good-night," she whispered, "I must return alon to-night." 

He watch her until she reach the northern terrace, and then sat down 
on the marbl seat until a hand on hi shoulder and a glimmer of bayonet 
warn him away. 

she pass on through the grove, and turn into the rue de medici, 
travers it to the boulevard. At the corner she bought a bunch of violet 
and walk on along the boulevard to the rue de écoles. A cab wa drawn 
up befor boulant's, and a pretti girl aid by elliott jump out. 

"valentine!" cri the girl, "come with us!" 

"I can't," she said, stop a moment--"i have a rendezv at mignon's." 

"not victor?" cri the girl, laughing, but she pass with a littl 
shiver, nod good-night, then turn into the boulevard st. germain, 
she walk a tittl faster to escap a gay parti sit befor the café 
cluni who call to her to join them. At the door of the restaur mignon 
stood a coal-black negro in buttons. He took off hi peak cap as she 
mount the carpet stairs. 

"send eugen to me," she said at the office, and pass through the 
hallway to the right of the dining-room stop befor a row of panel 
doors. A waiter pass and she repeat her demand for eugene, who 
present appeared, noiselessli skipping, and bow murmuring, "madame." 

"who is here?" 

"no one in the cabinets, madame; in the half madam madelon and monsieur 
gay, monsieur de clamart, monsieur clisson, madam mari and their set." 
then he look around and bow again murmured, "monsieur await madam 
sinc half an hour," and he knock at one of the panel door bear 
the number six. 

clifford open the door and the girl entered. 

the garçon bow her in, and whispering, "will monsieur have the good 
to ring?" vanished. 

He help her off with her jacket and took her hat and umbrella. when she 
wa seat at the littl tabl with clifford opposit she smile and 
lean forward on both elbow look him in the face. 

"what are you do here?" she demanded. 

"waiting," he replied, in accent of adoration. 

for an instant she turn and examin herself in the glass. the wide blue 
eyes, the curl hair, the straight nose and short curl lip flash in 
the mirror an instant only, and then it depth reflect her pretti neck 
and back. "thu do I turn my back on vanity," she said, and then lean 
forward again, "what are you do here?" 

"wait for you," repeat clifford, slightli troubled. 

"and cécile." 

"now don't, valentine--" 

"do you know," she said calmly, "I dislik your conduct?" 

He wa a littl disconcerted, and rang for eugen to cover hi confusion. 

the soup wa bisque, and the wine pommery, and the cours follow each 
other with the usual regular until eugen brought coffee, and there wa 
noth left on the tabl but a small silver lamp. 

"valentine," said clifford, after have obtain permiss to smoke, "i 
it the vaudevil or the eldorado--or both, or the nouveau cirque, or--" 

"it is here," said valentine. 

"well," he said, greatli flattered, "i'm afraid I couldn't amus you--" 

"oh, yes, you are funnier than the eldorado." 

"now see here, don't guy me, valentine. you alway do, and, and,--you know 
what they say,--a good laugh kills--" 

"what?" 

"er--er--lov and all that." 

she laugh until her eye were moist with tears. "tiens," she cried, "he 
is dead, then!" 

clifford eye her with grow alarm. 

"do you know whi I came?" she said. 

"no," he repli uneasily, "I don't." 

"how long have you made love to me?" 

"well," he admitted, somewhat startled,--"i should say,--for about a 
year." 

"it is a year, I think. are you not tired?" 

He did not answer. 

"don't you know that I like you too well to--to ever fall in love with 
you?" she said. "don't you know that we are too good comrades,--too old 
friend for that? and were we not,--do you think that I do not know your 
history, monsieur clifford?" 

"don't be--don't be so sarcastic," he urged; "don't be unkind, valentine." 

"i'm not. i'm kind. i'm veri kind,--to you and to cécile." 

"cécile is tire of me." 

"I hope she is," said the girl, "for she deserv a better fate. tiens, do 
you know your reput in the quarter? Of the inconstant, the most 
inconstant,--utterli incorrig and no more seriou than a gnat on a 
summer night. poor cécile!" 

clifford look so uncomfort that she spoke more kindly. 

"I like you. you know that. everybodi does. you are a spoil child here. 
everyth is permit you and everi one make allowance, but everi one 
cannot be a victim to caprice." 

"caprice!" he cried. "bi jove, if the girl of the latin quarter are not 
capricious--" 

"never mind,--nev mind about that! you must not sit in judgment--y of 
all men. whi are you here to-night? oh," she cried, "I will tell you why! 
monsieur receiv a littl note; he send a littl answer; he dress in 
hi conquer raiment--" 

"I don't," said clifford, veri red. 

"you do, and it becom you," she retort with a faint smile. then again, 
veri quietly, "I am in your power, but I know I am in the power of a 
friend. I have come to acknowledg it to you here,--and it is becaus of 
that that I am here to beg of you--a--a favour." 

clifford open hi eyes, but said nothing. 

"I am in--great distress of mind. It is monsieur hastings." 

"well?" said clifford, in some astonishment. 

"I want to ask you," she continu in a low voice, "I want to ask you 
to--to--in case you should speak of me befor him,--not to say,--not to 
say,--" 

"I shall not speak of you to him," he said quietly. 

"can--can you prevent others?" 

"I might if I wa present. may I ask why?" 

"that is not fair," she murmured; "you know how--how he consid me,--a 
he consid everi woman. you know how differ he is from you and the 
rest. I have never seen a man,--such a man as monsieur hastings." 

He let hi cigarett go out unnoticed. 

"I am almost afraid of him--afraid he should know--what we all are in the 
quarter. oh, I do not wish him to know! I do not wish him to--to turn from 
me--to ceas from speak to me as he does! you--you and the rest cannot 
know what it ha been to me. I could not believ him,--i could not believ 
he wa so good and--and noble. I do not wish him to know--so soon. He will 
find out--soon or later, he will find out for himself, and then he will 
turn away from me. why!" she cri passionately, "whi should he turn from 
me and not from _you_?" 

clifford, much embarrassed, eye hi cigarette. 

the girl rose, veri white. "he is your friend--you have a right to warn 
him." 

"he is my friend," he said at length. 

they look at each other in silence. 

then she cried, "bi all that I hold to me most sacred, you need not warn 
him!" 

"I shall trust your word," he said pleasantly. 




V 

the month pass quickli for hastings, and left few definit impress 
after it. It did leav some, however. one wa a pain impress of 
meet mr. bladen on the boulevard de capucin in compani with a veri 
pronounc young person whose laugh dismay him, and when at last he 
escap from the café where mr. bladen had haul him to join them in a 
_bock_ he felt as if the whole boulevard wa look at him, and judg 
him by hi company. later, an instinct convict regard the young 
person with mr. bladen sent the hot blood into hi cheek, and he return 
to the pension in such a miser state of mind that miss byng wa 
alarm and advis him to conquer hi homesick at once. 

anoth impress wa equal vivid. one saturday morning, feel 
lonely, hi wander about the citi brought him to the gare st. lazare. 
It wa earli for breakfast, but he enter the hôtel terminu and took a 
tabl near the window. As he wheel about to give hi order, a man 
pass rapidli along the aisl collid with hi head, and look up to 
receiv the expect apology, he wa met instead by a slap on the shoulder 
and a hearty, "what the deuc are you do here, old chap?" It wa 
rowden, who seiz him and told him to come along. so, mildli protesting, 
he wa usher into a privat dining-room where clifford, rather red, 
jump up from the tabl and welcom him with a startl air which wa 
soften by the unaffect glee of rowden and the extrem courtesi of 
elliott. the latter present him to three bewitch girl who welcom 
him so charmingli and second rowden in hi demand that hast should 
make one of the party, that he consent at once. while elliott briefli 
outlin the project excurs to La roche, hast delightedli ate hi 
omelet, and return the smile of encourag from cécile and colett 
and jacqueline. meantim clifford in a bland whisper wa tell rowden 
what an ass he was. poor rowden look miser until elliott, divin 
how affair were turning, frown on clifford and found a moment to let 
rowden know that they were all go to make the best of it. 

"you shut up," he observ to clifford, "it' fate, and that settl it." 

"it' rowden, and that settl it," murmur clifford, conceal a grin. 
for after all he wa not hastings' wet nurse. So it came about that the 
train which left the gare st. lazar at 9.15 a.m. stop a moment in it 
career toward havr and deposit at the red-roof station of La roch a 
merri party, arm with sunshades, trout-rods, and one cane, carri by 
the non-combatant, hastings. then, when they had establish their camp in 
a grove of sycamor which border the littl river ept, clifford, the 
acknowledg master of all that pertain to sportsmanship, took command. 

"you, rowden," he said, "divid your fli with elliott and keep an eye on 
him or els he'll be tri to put on a float and sinker. prevent him by 
forc from grub about for worms." 

elliott protested, but wa forc to smile in the gener laugh. 

"you make me ill," he asserted; "do you think thi is my first trout?" 

"I shall be delight to see your first trout," said clifford, and dodg 
a fli hook, hurl with intent to hit, proceed to sort and equip three 
slender rod destin to bring joy and fish to cécil, colette, and 
jacqueline. with perfect graviti he ornament each line with four split 
shot, a small hook, and a brilliant quill float. 

"_i_ shall never touch the worms," announc cécile with a shudder. 

jacquelin and colett hasten to sustain her, and hast pleasantli 
offer to act in the capac of gener baiter and taker-off of fish. 
but cécile, doubtless fascin by the gaudi fli in clifford' book, 
decid to accept lesson from him in the true art, and present 
disappear up the ept with clifford in tow. 

elliott look doubt at colette. 

"I prefer gudgeons," said that damsel with decision, "and you and monsieur 
rowden may go away when you please; may they not, jacqueline?" 

"certainly," respond jacqueline. 

elliott, undecided, examin hi rod and reel. 

"you'v got your reel on wrong side up," observ rowden. 

elliott wavered, and stole a glanc at colette. 

"i--i--hav almost decid to--er--not to flip the fli about just now," 
he began. "there' the pole that cécile left--" 

"don't call it a pole," correct rowden. 

"_rod_, then," continu elliott, and start off in the wake of the two 
girls, but wa promptli collar by rowden. 

"no, you don't! fanci a man fish with a float and sinker when he ha a 
fli rod in hi hand! you come along!" 

where the placid littl ept flow down between it thicket to the seine, 
a grassi bank shadow the haunt of the gudgeon, and on thi bank sat 
colett and jacquelin and chatter and laugh and watch the swerv 
of the scarlet quills, while hastings, hi hat over hi eyes, hi head on 
a bank of moss, listen to their soft voic and gallantli unhook the 
small and indign gudgeon when a flash of a rod and a half-suppress 
scream announc a catch. the sunlight filter through the leafi thicket 
awak to song the forest birds. magpi in spotless black and white 
flirt past, alight near by with a hop and bound and twitch of the 
tail. blue and white jay with rosi breast shriek through the trees, 
and a low-sail hawk wheel among the field of ripen wheat, put 
to flight flock of twitter hedg birds. 

across the sein a gull drop on the water like a plume. the air wa 
pure and still. scarc a leaf moved. sound from a distant farm came 
faintly, the shrill cock-crow and dull baying. now and then a steam-tug 
with big rake smoke-pipe, bear the name "guêp 27," plough up the 
river drag it intermin train of barges, or a sailboat drop 
down with the current toward sleepi rouen. 

A faint fresh odour of earth and water hung in the air, and through the 
sunlight, orange-tip butterfli danc abov the marsh grass, soft 
velveti butterfli flap through the mossi woods. 

hast wa think of valentine. It wa two o'clock when elliott 
stroll back, and frankli admit that he had elud rowden, sat down 
besid colett and prepar to doze with satisfaction. 

"where are your trout?" said colett severely. 

"they still live," murmur elliott, and went fast asleep. 

rowden return shortli after, and cast a scorn glanc at the 
slumber one, display three crimson-fleck trout. 

"and that," smile hast lazily, "that is the holi end to which the 
faith plod,--th slaughter of these small fish with a bit of silk and 
feather." 

rowden disdain to answer him. colett caught anoth gudgeon and awok 
elliott, who protest and gaze about for the lunch baskets, as clifford 
and cécile came up demand instant refreshment. cécile' skirt were 
soaked, and her glove torn, but she wa happy, and clifford, drag out 
a two-pound trout, stood still to receiv the applaus of the company. 

"where the deuc did you get that?" demand elliott. 

cécile, wet and enthusiastic, recount the battle, and then clifford 
eulog her power with the fly, and, in proof, produc from hi creel 
a defunct chub, which, he observed, just miss be a trout. 

they were all veri happi at luncheon, and hast wa vote "charming." 
He enjoy it immensely,--onli it seem to him at moment that flirtat 
went further in franc than in millbrook, connecticut, and he thought that 
cécile might be a littl less enthusiast about clifford, that perhap it 
would be quit as well if jacquelin sat further away from rowden, and 
that possibl colett could have, for a moment at least, taken her eye 
from elliott' face. still he enjoy it--except when hi thought drift 
to valentine, and then he felt that he wa veri far away from her. La 
roch is at least an hour and a half from paris. It is also true that he 
felt a happiness, a quick heart-beat when, at eight o'clock that night the 
train which bore them from La roch roll into the gare st. lazar and he 
wa onc more in the citi of valentine. 

"good-night," they said, press around him. "you must come with us next 
time!" 

He promised, and watch them, two by two, drift into the darken city, 
and stood so long that, when again he rais hi eyes, the vast boulevard 
wa twinkl with gas-jet through which the electr light stare like 
moons. 




VI 

It wa with anoth quick heart-beat that he awok next morning, for hi 
first thought wa of valentine. 

the sun alreadi gild the tower of notr dame, the clatter of workmen' 
sabot awok sharp echo in the street below, and across the way a 
blackbird in a pink almond tree wa go into an ecstasi of trills. 

He determin to awak clifford for a brisk walk in the country, hope 
later to beguil that gentleman into the american church for hi soul' 
sake. He found alfr the gimlet-ey wash the asphalt walk which led 
to the studio. 

"monsieur elliott?" he repli to the perfunctori inquiry, "_je ne sai 
pas_." 

"and monsieur clifford," began hastings, somewhat astonished. 

"monsieur clifford," said the concierg with fine irony, "will be pleas 
to see you, as he retir early; in fact he ha just come in." 

hast hesit while the concierg pronounc a fine eulog on peopl 
who never stay out all night and then came batter at the lodg gate 
dure hour which even a gendarm held sacr to sleep. He also 
discours eloqu upon the beauti of temperance, and took an 
ostentati draught from the fountain in the court. 

"I do not think I will come in," said hastings. 

"pardon, monsieur," growl the concierge, "perhap it would be well to 
see monsieur clifford. He possibl need aid. Me he drive forth with 
hair-brush and boots. It is a merci if he ha not set fire to someth 
with hi candle." 

hast hesit for an instant, but swallow hi dislik of such a 
mission, walk slowli through the ivy-cov alley and across the inner 
garden to the studio. He knocked. perfect silence. then he knock again, 
and thi time someth struck the door from within with a crash. 

"that," said the concierge, "wa a boot." He fit hi duplic key into 
the lock and usher hast in. clifford, in disord even dress, 
sat on the rug in the middl of the room. He held in hi hand a shoe, and 
did not appear astonish to see hastings. 

"good-morning, do you use pears' soap?" he inquir with a vagu wave of 
hi hand and a vaguer smile. 

hastings' heart sank. "for heaven' sake," he said, "clifford, go to bed." 

"not while that--that alfr poke hi shaggi head in here an' I have a 
shoe left." 

hast blew out the candle, pick up clifford' hat and cane, and said, 
with an emot he could not conceal, "thi is terrible, 
clifford,--i--nev knew you did thi sort of thing." 

"well, I do," said clifford. 

"where is elliott?" 

"ole chap," return clifford, becom maudlin, "provid which 
feeds--feeds--er--sparrow an' that sort of thing watcheth over the 
intemper wanderer--" 

"where is elliott?" 

but clifford onli wag hi head and wave hi arm about. "he' out 
there,--somewher about." then suddenli feel a desir to see hi 
miss chum, lift up hi voic and howl for him. 

hastings, thoroughli shocked, sat down on the loung without a word. 
presently, after shed sever scald tears, clifford brighten up 
and rose with great precaution. 

"ole chap," he observed, "do you want to see er--er miracle? well, here 
goes. i'm goin' to begin." 

He paused, beam at vacancy. 

"er miracle," he repeated. 

hast suppos he wa allud to the miracl of hi keep hi 
balance, and said nothing. 

"i'm goin' to bed," he announced, "poor ole clifford' goin' to bed, an' 
that' er miracle!" 

and he did with a nice calcul of distanc and equilibrium which would 
have rung enthusiast yell of applaus from elliott had he been there to 
assist _en connaisseur_. but he wa not. He had not yet reach the 
studio. He wa on hi way, however, and smile with magnific 
condescens on hastings, who, half an hour later, found him reclin 
upon a bench in the luxembourg. He permit himself to be aroused, dust 
and escort to the gate. here, however, he refus all further 
assistance, and bestow a patron bow upon hastings, steer a 
toler true cours for the rue vavin. 

hast watch him out of sight, and then slowli retrac hi step 
toward the fountain. At first he felt gloomi and depressed, but gradual 
the clear air of the morn lift the pressur from hi heart, and he 
sat down on the marbl seat under the shadow of the wing god. 

the air wa fresh and sweet with perfum from the orang flowers. 
everywher pigeon were bathing, dash the water over their iris-hu 
breasts, flash in and out of the spray or nestl almost to the neck 
along the polish basin. the sparrows, too, were abroad in force, soak 
their dust-colour feather in the limpid pool and chirp with might 
and main. under the sycamor which surround the duck-pond opposit the 
fountain of mari de medici, the water-fowl crop the herbage, or 
waddl in row down the bank to embark on some solemn aimless cruise. 

butterflies, somewhat lame from a chilli night' repos under the lilac 
leaves, crawl over and over the white phlox, or took a rheumat flight 
toward some sun-warm shrub. the bee were alreadi busi among the 
heliotrope, and one or two grey fli with brick-colour eye sat in a 
spot of sunlight besid the marbl seat, or chase each other about, onli 
to return again to the spot of sunshin and rub their fore-legs, exulting. 

the sentri pace briskli befor the paint boxes, paus at time to 
look toward the guard-hous for their relief. 

they came at last, with a shuffl of feet and click of bayonets, the word 
wa passed, the relief fell out, and away they went, crunch, crunch, 
across the gravel. 

A mellow chime float from the clock-tow of the palace, the deep bell 
of st. sulpic echo the stroke. hast sat dream in the shadow of 
the god, and while he muse somebodi came and sat down besid him. At 
first he did not rais hi head. It wa onli when she spoke that he sprang 
up. 

"you! At thi hour?" 

"I wa restless, I could not sleep." then in a low, happi voice--"and 
_you!_ at thi hour?" 

"i--i slept, but the sun awok me." 

"_i_ could not sleep," she said, and her eye seemed, for a moment, 
touch with an indefin shadow. then, smiling, "I am so glad--i seem 
to know you were coming. don't laugh, I believ in dreams." 

"did you realli dream of,--of my be here?" 

"I think I wa awak when I dream it," she admitted. then for a time 
they were mute, acknowledg by silenc the happi of be together. 
and after all their silenc wa eloquent, for faint smiles, and glanc 
born of their thoughts, cross and recrossed, until lip move and word 
were formed, which seem almost superfluous. what they said wa not veri 
profound. perhap the most valuabl jewel that fell from hastings' lip 
bore direct refer to breakfast. 

"I have not yet had my chocolate," she confessed, "but what a materi man 
you are." 

"valentine," he said impulsively, "I wish,--i do wish that you 
would,--just for thi once,--g me the whole day,--just for thi once." 

"oh dear," she smiled, "not onli material, but selfish!" 

"not selfish, hungry," he said, look at her. 

"A cannib too; oh dear!" 

"will you, valentine?" 

"but my chocolate--" 

"take it with me." 

"but _déjeuner_--" 

"together, at st. cloud." 

"but I can't--" 

"together,--al day,--al day long; will you, valentine?" 

she wa silent. 

"onli for thi once." 

again that indefin shadow fell across her eyes, and when it wa gone 
she sighed. "yes,--together, onli for thi once." 

"all day?" he said, doubt hi happiness. 

"all day," she smiled; "and oh, I am so hungry!" 

He laughed, enchanted. 

"what a materi young ladi it is." 

On the boulevard st. michel there is a crémeri paint white and blue 
outside, and neat and clean as a whistl inside. the auburn-hair young 
woman who speak french like a native, and rejoic in the name of murphy, 
smile at them as they entered, and toss a fresh napkin over the zinc 
_tête-à-tête_ table, whisk befor them two cup of chocol and a 
basket full of crisp, fresh croissons. 

the primrose-colour pat of butter, each stamp with a shamrock in 
relief, seem satur with the fragranc of normandi pastures. 

"how delicious!" they said in the same breath, and then laugh at the 
coincidence. 

"with but a singl thought," he began. 

"how absurd!" she cri with cheek all rosy. "i'm think i'd like a 
croisson." 

"so am i," he repli triumphant, "that prove it." 

then they had a quarrel; she accus him of behaviour unworthi of a child 
in arms, and he deni it, and bring counter charges, until 
mademoisel murphi laugh in sympathy, and the last croisson wa eaten 
under a flag of truce. then they rose, and she took hi arm with a bright 
nod to mile. murphy, who cri them a merry: "_bonjour, madame! bonjour, 
monsieur_!" and watch them hail a pass cab and drive away. "_dieu! 
qu'il est beau_," she sighed, ad after a moment, "do they be married, 
I dunno,--_ma foi il ont bien l'air_." 

the cab swung around the rue de medici, turn into the rue de vaugirard, 
follow it to where it cross the rue de rennes, and take that noisi 
thoroughfare, drew up befor the gare montparnasse. they were just in time 
for a train and scamper up the stairway and out to the car as the last 
note from the starting-gong rang through the arch station. the guard 
slam the door of their compartment, a whistl sounded, answer by a 
screech from the locomotive, and the long train glide from the station, 
faster, faster, and sped out into the morn sunshine. the summer wind 
blew in their face from the open window, and sent the soft hair danc 
on the girl' forehead. 

"we have the compart to ourselves," said hastings. 

she lean against the cushion window-seat, her eye bright and wide 
open, her lip parted. the wind lift her hat, and flutter the ribbon 
under her chin. with a quick movement she unti them, and, draw a long 
hat-pin from her hat, laid it down on the seat besid her. the train wa 
flying. 

the colour surg in her cheeks, and, with each quick-drawn breath, her 
breath rose and fell under the cluster of lili at her throat. trees, 
houses, ponds, danc past, cut by a mist of telegraph poles. 

"faster! faster!" she cried. 

hi eye never left her, but hers, wide open, and blue as the summer sky, 
seem fix on someth far ahead,--someth which came no nearer, but 
fled befor them as they fled. 

wa it the horizon, cut now by the grim fortress on the hill, now by the 
cross of a countri chapel? wa it the summer moon, ghost-like, slip 
through the vaguer blue above? 

"faster! faster!" she cried. 

her part lip burn scarlet. 

the car shook and shivered, and the field stream by like an emerald 
torrent. He caught the excitement, and hi face glowed. 

"oh," she cried, and with an unconsci movement caught hi hand, draw 
him to the window besid her. "look! lean out with me!" 

He onli saw her lip move; her voic wa drown in the roar of a trestle, 
but hi hand close in her and he clung to the sill. the wind whistl in 
their ears. "not so far out, valentine, take care!" he gasped. 

below, through the tie of the trestle, a broad river flash into view 
and out again, as the train thunder along a tunnel, and away onc more 
through the freshest of green fields. the wind roar about them. the girl 
wa lean far out from the window, and he caught her by the waist, 
crying, "not too far!" but she onli murmured, "faster! faster! away out of 
the city, out of the land, faster, faster! away out of the world!" 

"what are you say all to yourself?" he said, but hi voic wa broken, 
and the wind whirl it back into hi throat. 

she heard him, and, turn from the window look down at hi arm about 
her. then she rais her eye to his. the car shook and the window 
rattled. they were dash through a forest now, and the sun swept the 
dewi branch with run flash of fire. He look into her troubl 
eyes; he drew her to him and kiss the half-part lips, and she cri 
out, a bitter, hopeless cry, "not that--not that!" 

but he held her close and strong, whisper word of honest love and 
passion, and when she sobbed--"not that--not that--i have promised! you 
must--you must know--i am--not--worthy--" In the puriti of hi own heart 
her word were, to him, meaningless then, meaningless for ever after. 
present her voic ceased, and her head rest on hi breast. He lean 
against the window, hi ear swept by the furiou wind, hi heart in a 
joyou tumult. the forest wa passed, and the sun slip from behind the 
trees, flood the earth again with brightness. she rais her eye and 
look out into the world from the window. then she began to speak, but 
her voic wa faint, and he bent hi head close to her and listened. "I 
cannot turn from you; I am too weak. you were long ago my master--mast 
of my heart and soul. I have broken my word to one who trust me, but I 
have told you all;--what matter the rest?" He smile at her innoc and 
she worship his. she spoke again: "take me or cast me away;--what 
matter it? now with a word you can kill me, and it might be easier to die 
than to look upon happi as great as mine." 

He took her in hi arms, "hush, what are you saying? look,--look out at 
the sunlight, the meadow and the streams. We shall be veri happi in so 
bright a world." 

she turn to the sunlight. from the window, the world below seem veri 
fair to her. 

trembl with happiness, she sighed: "i thi the world? then I have 
never known it." 

"nor have I, god forgiv me," he murmured. 

perhap it wa our gentl ladi of the field who forgav them both. 




rue barré 

"for let philosoph and doctor preach 
Of what they will and what they will not,--each 
Is but one link in an etern chain 
that none can slip nor break nor over-reach." 

"crimson nor yellow rose nor 
the savour of the mount sea 
are worth the perfum I ador 
that cling to thee. 
the languid-head lili tire, 
the changeless water weari me; 
I ach with passion desir 
Of thine and thee. 
there are but these thing in the world-- 
thi mouth of fire, 
thi breasts, thi hands, thi hair upcurl 
and my desire." 


I 

one morn at julian's, a student said to selby, "that is foxhal 
clifford," point with hi brush at a young man who sat befor an 
easel, do nothing. 

selby, shi and nervous, walk over and began: "mi name is selby,--i have 
just arriv in paris, and bring a letter of introduction--" hi voic wa 
lost in the crash of a fall easel, the owner of which promptli 
assault hi neighbour, and for a time the nois of battl roll through 
the studio of mm. boulang and lefebvre, present subsid into a 
scuffl on the stair outside. selby, apprehens as to hi own recept 
in the studio, look at clifford, who sat seren watch the fight. 

"it' a littl noisi here," said clifford, "but you will like the fellow 
when you know them." hi unaffect manner delight selby. then with a 
simplic that won hi heart, he present him to half a dozen student 
of as mani nationalities. some were cordial, all were polite. even the 
majest creatur who held the posit of massier, unbent enough to say: 
"mi friend, when a man speak french as well as you do, and is also a 
friend of monsieur clifford, he will have no troubl in thi studio. you 
expect, of course, to fill the stove until the next new man comes?" 

"of course." 

"and you don't mind chaff?" 

"no," repli selby, who hate it. 

clifford, much amused, put on hi hat, saying, "you must expect lot of it 
at first." 

selbi place hi own hat on hi head and follow him to the door. 

As they pass the model stand there wa a furiou cri of "chapeau! 
chapeau!" and a student sprang from hi easel menac selby, who redden 
but look at clifford. 

"take off your hat for them," said the latter, laughing. 

A littl embarrassed, he turn and salut the studio. 

"et moi?" cri the model. 

"you are charming," repli selby, astonish at hi own audacity, but the 
studio rose as one man, shouting: "he ha done well! he' all right!" 
while the model, laughing, kiss her hand to him and cried: "À demain 
beau jeun homme!" 

all that week selbi work at the studio unmolested. the french student 
christen him "l'enfant prodigue," which wa freeli translated, "the 
prodigi infant," "the kid," "kid selby," and "kidby." but the diseas 
soon ran it cours from "kidby" to "kidney," and then natur to 
"tidbits," where it wa arrest by clifford' author and ultim 
relaps to "kid." 

wednesday came, and with it M. boulanger. for three hour the student 
writh under hi bite sarcasms,--among the other clifford, who wa 
inform that he knew even less about a work of art than he did about the 
art of work. selbi wa more fortunate. the professor examin hi draw 
in silence, look at him sharply, and pass on with a non-committ 
gesture. He present depart arm in arm with bouguereau, to the relief 
of clifford, who wa then at liberti to jam hi hat on hi head and 
depart. 

the next day he did not appear, and selby, who had count on see him 
at the studio, a thing which he learn later it wa vaniti to count on, 
wander back to the latin quarter alone. 

pari wa still strang and new to him. He wa vagu troubl by it 
splendour. No tender memori stir hi american bosom at the place du 
châtelet, nor even by notr dame. the palai de justic with it clock and 
turret and stalk sentinel in blue and vermilion, the place st. michel 
with it jumbl of omnibus and ugli water-spit griffins, the hill of 
the boulevard st. michel, the toot trams, the policemen dawdl two by 
two, and the table-lin terrac of the café vacehett were noth to 
him, as yet, nor did he even know, when he step from the stone of the 
place st. michel to the asphalt of the boulevard, that he had cross the 
frontier and enter the student zone,--th famou latin quarter. 

A cabman hail him as "bourgeois," and urg the superior of drive 
over walking. A gamin, with an appear of great concern, request the 
latest telegraph news from london, and then, stand on hi head, 
invit selbi to feat of strength. A pretti girl gave him a glanc from a 
pair of violet eyes. He did not see her, but she, catch her own 
reflect in a window, wonder at the colour burn in her cheeks. 
turn to resum her course, she met foxhal clifford, and hurri on. 
clifford, open-mouthed, follow her with hi eyes; then he look after 
selby, who had turn into the boulevard st. germain toward the rue de 
seine. then he examin himself in the shop window. the result seem to 
be unsatisfactory. 

"i'm not a beauty," he mused, "but neither am I a hobgoblin. what doe she 
mean by blush at selby? I never befor saw her look at a fellow in my 
life,--neith ha ani one in the quarter. anyway, I can swear she never 
look at me, and good know I have done all that respect ador 
can do." 

He sighed, and murmur a propheci concern the salvat of hi 
immort soul swung into that grace loung which at all time 
character clifford. with no appar exertion, he overtook selbi at 
the corner, and togeth they cross the sunlit boulevard and sat down 
under the awn of the café du cercle. clifford bow to everybodi on the 
terrace, saying, "you shall meet them all later, but now let me present 
you to two of the sight of paris, mr. richard elliott and mr. stanley 
rowden." 

the "sights" look amiable, and took vermouth. 

"you cut the studio to-day," said elliott, suddenli turn on clifford, 
who avoid hi eyes. 

"to commun with nature?" observ rowden. 

"what' her name thi time?" ask elliott, and rowden answer promptly, 
"name, yvette; nationality, breton--" 

"wrong," repli clifford blandly, "it' rue barrée." 

the subject chang instantly, and selbi listen in surpris to name 
which were new to him, and eulog on the latest prix de rome winner. He 
wa delight to hear opinion boldli express and point honestli 
debated, although the vehicl wa mostli slang, both english and french. 
He long for the time when he too should be plung into the strife for 
fame. 

the bell of st. sulpic struck the hour, and the palac of the luxembourg 
answer chime on chime. with a glanc at the sun, dip low in the 
golden dust behind the palai bourbon, they rose, and turn to the east, 
cross the boulevard st. germain and saunter toward the école de 
médecine. At the corner a girl pass them, walk hurriedly. clifford 
smirked, elliot and rowden were agitated, but they all bowed, and, without 
rais her eyes, she return their salute. but selby, who had lag 
behind, fascin by some gay shop window, look up to meet two of the 
bluest eye he had ever seen. the eye were drop in an instant, and the 
young fellow hasten to overtak the others. 

"bi jove," he said, "do you fellow know I have just seen the prettiest 
girl--" An exclam broke from the trio, gloomy, foreboding, like the 
choru in a greek play. 

"rue barrée!" 

"what!" cri selby, bewildered. 

the onli answer wa a vagu gestur from clifford. 

two hour later, dure dinner, clifford turn to selbi and said, "you 
want to ask me something; I can tell by the way you fidget about." 

"yes, I do," he said, innoc enough; "it' about that girl. who is 
she?" 

In rowden' smile there wa pity, in elliott' bitterness. 

"her name," said clifford solemnly, "i unknown to ani one, at least," he 
ad with much conscientiousness, "a far as I can learn. everi fellow in 
the quarter bow to her and she return the salut gravely, but no man ha 
ever been known to obtain more than that. her profession, judg from her 
music-roll, is that of a pianist. her resid is in a small and humbl 
street which is kept in a perpetu process of repair by the citi 
authorities, and from the black letter paint on the barrier which 
defend the street from traffic, she ha taken the name by which we know 
her,--ru barrée. mr. rowden, in hi imperfect knowledg of the french 
tongue, call our attent to it as roo barry--" 

"I didn't," said rowden hotly. 

"and roo barry, or rue barrée, is to-day an object of ador to everi 
rapin in the quarter--" 

"we are not rapins," correct elliott. 

"_i_ am not," return clifford, "and I beg to call to your attention, 
selby, that these two gentlemen have at variou and appar unfortun 
moments, offer to lay down life and limb at the feet of rue barrée. the 
ladi possess a chill smile which she use on such occas and," 
here he becam gloomili impressive, "I have been forc to believ that 
neither the scholarli grace of my friend elliott nor the buxom beauti of 
my friend rowden have touch that heart of ice." 

elliott and rowden, boil with indignation, cri out, "and you!" 

"i," said clifford blandly, "do fear to tread where you rush in." 




II 

twenty-four hour later selbi had complet forgotten rue barrée. dure 
the week he work with might and main at the studio, and saturday night 
found him so tire that he went to bed befor dinner and had a nightmar 
about a river of yellow ochr in which he wa drowning. sunday morning, 
apropo of noth at all, he thought of rue barrée, and ten second 
afterward he saw her. It wa at the flower-market on the marbl bridge. 
she wa examin a pot of pansies. the garden had evid thrown 
heart and soul into the transaction, but rue barré shook her head. 

It is a question whether selbi would have stop then and there to 
inspect a cabbage-ros had not clifford unwound for him the yarn of the 
previou tuesday. It is possibl that hi curios wa piqued, for with 
the except of a hen-turkey, a boy of nineteen is the most openli 
curiou bipe alive. from twenti until death he tri to conceal it. but, 
to be fair to selby, it is also true that the market wa attractive. under 
a cloudless sky the flower were pack and heap along the marbl bridg 
to the parapet. the air wa soft, the sun spun a shadowi lacework among 
the palm and glow in the heart of a thousand roses. spring had 
come,--wa in full tide. the water cart and sprinkler spread 
fresh over the boulevard, the sparrow had becom vulgarli obtrusive, 
and the credul sein angler anxious follow hi gaudi quill float 
among the soapsud of the lavoirs. the white-spik chestnut clad in 
tender green vibrat with the hum of bees. shoddi butterfli flaunt 
their winter rag among the heliotrope. there wa a smell of fresh earth 
in the air, an echo of the woodland brook in the rippl of the seine, and 
swallow soar and skim among the anchor river craft. somewher in a 
window a cage bird wa sing it heart out to the sky. 

selbi look at the cabbage-ros and then at the sky. someth in the 
song of the cage bird may have move him, or perhap it wa that 
danger sweet in the air of may. 

At first he wa hardli consciou that he had stop then he wa scarc 
consciou whi he had stopped, then he thought he would move on, then he 
thought he wouldn't, then he look at rue barrée. 

the garden said, "mademoiselle, thi is undoubtedli a fine pot of 
pansies." 

rue barré shook her head. 

the garden smiled. she evid did not want the pansies. she had 
bought mani pot of pansi there, two or three everi spring, and never 
argued. what did she want then? the pansi were evid a feeler toward 
a more import transaction. the garden rub hi hand and gaze 
about him. 

"these tulip are magnificent," he observed, "and these hyacinths--" He 
fell into a tranc at the mere sight of the scent thickets. 

"that," murmur rue, point to a splendid rose-bush with her furl 
parasol, but in spite of her, her voic trembl a little. selbi notic 
it, more shame to him that he wa listening, and the garden notic it, 
and, buri hi nose in the roses, scent a bargain. still, to do him 
justice, he did not add a centim to the honest valu of the plant, for 
after all, rue wa probabl poor, and ani one could see she wa charming. 

"fifti francs, mademoiselle." 

the gardener' tone wa grave. rue felt that argument would be wasted. 
they both stood silent for a moment. the garden did not eulog hi 
prize,--th rose-tre wa gorgeou and ani one could see it. 

"I will take the pansies," said the girl, and drew two franc from a worn 
purse. then she look up. A tear-drop stood in the way refract the 
light like a diamond, but as it roll into a littl corner by her nose a 
vision of selbi replac it, and when a brush of the handkerchief had 
clear the startl blue eyes, selbi himself appeared, veri much 
embarrassed. He instantli look up into the sky, appar devour with 
a thirst for astronom research, and as he continu hi investig 
for fulli five minutes, the garden look up too, and so did a 
policeman. then selbi look at the tip of hi boots, the garden look 
at him and the policeman slouch on. rue barré had been gone some time. 

"what," said the gardener, "may I offer monsieur?" 

selbi never knew why, but he suddenli began to buy flowers. the garden 
wa electrified. never befor had he sold so mani flowers, never at such 
satisfi prices, and never, never with such absolut unanim of 
opinion with a customer. but he miss the bargaining, the arguing, the 
call of heaven to witness. the transact lack spice. 

"these tulip are magnificent!" 

"they are!" cri selbi warmly. 

"but alas, they are dear." 

"I will take them." 

"dieu!" murmur the garden in a perspiration, "he' madder than most 
englishmen." 

"thi cactus--" 

"i gorgeous!" 

"alas--" 

"send it with the rest." 

the garden brace himself against the river wall. 

"that splendid rose-bush," he began faintly. 

"that is a beauty. I believ it is fifti francs--" 

He stopped, veri red. the garden relish hi confusion. then a sudden 
cool self-possess took the place of hi momentari confus and he held 
the garden with hi eye, and bulli him. 

"i'll take that bush. whi did not the young ladi buy it?" 

"mademoisel is not wealthy." 

"how do you know?" 

"_dame_, I sell her mani pansies; pansi are not expensive." 

"those are the pansi she bought?" 

"these, monsieur, the blue and gold." 

"then you intend to send them to her?" 

"at mid-day after the market." 

"take thi rose-bush with them, and"--her he glare at the 
gardener--"don't you dare say from whom they came." the gardener' eye 
were like saucers, but selby, calm and victorious, said: "send the other 
to the hôtel du sénat, 7 rue de tournon. I will leav direct with the 
concierge." 

then he button hi glove with much digniti and stalk off, but when 
well around the corner and hidden from the gardener' view, the convict 
that he wa an idiot came home to him in a furiou blush. ten minut 
later he sat in hi room in the hôtel du sénat repeat with an imbecil 
smile: "what an ass I am, what an ass!" 

An hour later found him in the same chair, in the same position, hi hat 
and glove still on, hi stick in hi hand, but he wa silent, appar 
lost in contempl of hi boot toes, and hi smile wa less imbecil 
and even a bit retrospective. 




iii 

about five o'clock that afternoon, the littl sad-ey woman who fill the 
posit of concierg at the hôtel du sénat held up her hand in amaz 
to see a wagon-load of flower-bear shrub draw up befor the doorway. 
she call joseph, the intemper garçon, who, while calcul the 
valu of the flower in _petit verres_, gloomili disclaim ani knowledg 
as to their destination. 

"_voyons_," said the littl concierge, "_cherchon la femme_!" 

"you?" he suggested. 

the littl woman stood a moment pensiv and then sighed. joseph caress 
hi nose, a nose which for gaudi could vie with ani floral display. 

then the garden came in, hat in hand, and a few minut later selbi 
stood in the middl of hi room, hi coat off, hi shirt-sleev roll 
up. the chamber origin contained, besid the furniture, about two 
squar feet of walk room, and now thi wa occupi by a cactus. the 
bed groan under crate of pansies, lili and heliotrope, the loung wa 
cover with hyacinth and tulips, and the washstand support a speci 
of young tree warrant to bear flower at some time or other. 

clifford came in a littl later, fell over a box of sweet peas, swore a 
little, apologized, and then, as the full splendour of the floral _fête_ 
burst upon him, sat down in astonish upon a geranium. the geranium wa 
a wreck, but selbi said, "don't mind," and glare at the cactus. 

"are you go to give a ball?" demand clifford. 

"n--no,--i'm veri fond of flowers," said selby, but the statement lack 
enthusiasm. 

"I should imagin so." then, after a silence, "that' a fine cactus." 

selbi contempl the cactus, touch it with the air of a connoisseur, 
and prick hi thumb. 

clifford poke a pansi with hi stick. then joseph came in with the bill, 
announc the sum total in a loud voice, partli to impress clifford, 
partli to intimid selbi into disgorg a _pourboire_ which he would 
share, if he chose, with the gardener. clifford tri to pretend that he 
had not heard, while selbi paid bill and tribut without a murmur. then he 
loung back into the room with an attempt at indiffer which fail 
entir when he tore hi trouser on the cactus. 

clifford made some commonplac remark, light a cigarett and look out 
of the window to give selbi a chance. selbi tri to take it, but get 
as far as--"yes, spring is here at last," froze solid. He look at the 
back of clifford' head. It express volumes. those littl perked-up ear 
seem tingl with suppress glee. He made a desper effort to master 
the situation, and jump up to reach for some russian cigarett as an 
incent to conversation, but wa foil by the cactus, to whom again he 
fell a prey. the last straw wa added. 

"damn the cactus." thi observ wa wrung from selbi against hi 
will,--against hi own instinct of self-preservation, but the thorn on 
the cactu were long and sharp, and at their repeat prick hi pent-up 
wrath escaped. It wa too late now; it wa done, and clifford had wheel 
around. 

"see here, selby, whi the deuc did you buy those flowers?" 

"i'm fond of them," said selby. 

"what are you go to do with them? you can't sleep here." 

"I could, if you'd help me take the pansi off the bed." 

"where can you put them?" 

"couldn't I give them to the concierge?" 

As soon as he said it he regret it. what in heaven' name would 
clifford think of him! He had heard the amount of the bill. would he 
believ that he had invest in these luxuri as a timid declar to 
hi concierge? and would the latin quarter comment upon it in their own 
brutal fashion? He dread ridicul and he knew clifford' reputation. 

then somebodi knocked. 

selbi look at clifford with a hunt express which touch that young 
man' heart. It wa a confess and at the same time a supplication. 
clifford jump up, thread hi way through the floral labyrinth, and 
put an eye to the crack of the door, said, "who the devil is it?" 

thi grace style of recept is indigen to the quarter. 

"it' elliott," he said, look back, "and rowden too, and their 
bulldogs." then he address them through the crack. 

"sit down on the stairs; selbi and I are come out directly." 

discret is a virtue. the latin quarter possess few, and discret 
seldom figur on the list. they sat down and began to whistle. 

present rowden call out, "I smell flowers. they feast within!" 

"you ought to know selbi better than that," growl clifford behind the 
door, while the other hurriedli exchang hi torn trouser for others. 

"_we_ know selby," said elliott with emphasis. 

"yes," said rowden, "he give recept with floral decor and 
invit clifford, while we sit on the stairs." 

"yes, while the youth and beauti of the quarter revel," suggest rowden; 
then, with sudden misgiving; "i odett there?" 

"see here," demand elliott, "i colett there?" 

then he rais hi voic in a plaintiv howl, "are you there, colette, 
while i'm kick my heel on these tiles?" 

"clifford is capabl of anything," said rowden; "hi natur is sour 
sinc rue barré sat on him." 

elliott rais hi voice: "I say, you fellows, we saw some flower carri 
into rue barrée' hous at noon." 

"posi and roses," specifi rowden. 

"probabl for her," ad elliott, caress hi bulldog. 

clifford turn with sudden suspicion upon selby. the latter hum a 
tune, select a pair of glove and, choos a dozen cigarettes, place 
them in a case. then walk over to the cactus, he deliber detach 
a blossom, drew it through hi buttonhole, and pick up hat and stick, 
smile upon clifford, at which the latter wa mightili troubled. 




IV 

monday morn at julian's, student fought for places; student with 
prior claim drove away other who had been anxious squat on covet 
tabouret sinc the door wa open in hope of appropri them at 
roll-call; student squabbl over palettes, brushes, portfolios, or rent 
the air with demand for ciceri and bread. the former, a dirti ex-model, 
who had in palmier day pose as judas, now dispens stale bread at one 
sou and made enough to keep himself in cigarettes. monsieur julian walk 
in, smile a fatherli smile and walk out. hi disappear wa follow 
by the apparit of the clerk, a foxi creatur who flit through the 
battl hord in search of prey. 

three men who had not paid due were caught and summoned. A fourth wa 
scented, followed, outflanked, hi retreat toward the door cut off, and 
final captur behind the stove. about that time, the revolut 
assum an acut form, howl rose for "jules!" 

jule came, umpir two fight with a sad resign in hi big brown 
eyes, shook hand with everybodi and melt away in the throng, leav an 
atmospher of peac and good-will. the lion sat down with the lambs, the 
massier mark the best place for themselv and friends, and, mount 
the model stands, open the roll-calls. 

the word wa passed, "they begin with C thi week." 

they did. 

"clisson!" 

clisson jump like a flash and mark hi name on the floor in chalk 
befor a front seat. 

"caron!" 

caron gallop away to secur hi place. bang! went an easel. "_nom de 
dieu_!" in french,--"wher in h--l are you goin'!" in english. crash! a 
paintbox fell with brush and all on board. "_dieu de dieu de_--" spat! A 
blow, a short rush, a clinch and scuffle, and the voic of the massier, 
stern and reproachful: 

"cochon!" 

then the roll-cal wa resumed. 

"clifford!" 

the massier paus and look up, one finger between the leav of the 
ledger. 

"clifford!" 

clifford wa not there. He wa about three mile away in a direct line and 
everi instant increas the distance. not that he wa walk fast,--on 
the contrary, he wa stroll with that leisur gait peculiar to 
himself. elliott wa besid him and two bulldog cover the rear. elliott 
wa read the "gil blas," from which he seem to extract amusement, but 
deem boister mirth unsuit to clifford' state of mind, subdu 
hi amus to a seri of discreet smiles. the latter, moodili awar of 
this, said nothing, but lead the way into the luxembourg garden 
instal himself upon a bench by the northern terrac and survey the 
landscap with disfavour. elliott, accord to the luxembourg 
regulations, tie the two dog and then, with an interrog glanc 
toward hi friend, resum the "gil blas" and the discreet smiles. 

the day wa perfect. the sun hung over notr dame, set the citi in a 
glitter. the tender foliag of the chestnut cast a shadow over the 
terrac and fleck the path and walk with traceri so blue that clifford 
might here have found encourag for hi violent "impressions" had he 
but looked; but as usual in thi period of hi career, hi thought were 
anywher except in hi profession. around about, the sparrow quarrel 
and chatter their courtship songs, the big rosi pigeon sail from tree 
to tree, the fli whirl in the sunbeam and the flower exhal a 
thousand perfum which stir clifford with languor wistfulness. 
under thi influenc he spoke. 

"elliott, you are a true friend--" 

"you make me ill," repli the latter, fold hi paper. "it' just as I 
thought,--you are tag after some new petticoat again. and," he 
continu wrathfully, "if thi is what you'v kept me away from julian' 
for,--if it' to fill me up with the perfect of some littl idiot--" 

"not idiot," remonstr clifford gently. 

"see here," cri elliott, "have you the nerv to tri to tell me that you 
are in love again?" 

"again?" 

"yes, again and again and again and--bi georg have you?" 

"this," observ clifford sadly, "i serious." 

for a moment elliott would have laid hand on him, then he laugh from 
sheer helplessness. "oh, go on, go on; let' see, there' clémenc and 
mari tellec and cosett and fifine, colette, mari verdier--" 

"all of whom are charming, most charming, but I never wa serious--" 

"so help me, moses," said elliott, solemnly, "each and everi one of those 
name have separ and in turn torn your heart with anguish and have 
also made me lose my place at julian' in thi same manner; each and everi 
one, separ and in turn. Do you deni it?" 

"what you say may be found on facts--in a way--but give me the credit of 
be faith to one at a time--" 

"until the next came along." 

"but this,--thi is realli veri different. elliott, believ me, I am all 
broken up." 

then there be noth els to do, elliott gnash hi teeth and 
listened. 

"it's--it' rue barrée." 

"well," observ elliott, with scorn, "if you are mope and moan over 
_that_ girl,--th girl who ha given you and myself everi reason to wish 
that the ground would open and engulf us,--well, go on!" 

"i'm go on,--i don't care; timid ha fled--" 

"yes, your nativ timidity." 

"i'm desperate, elliott. Am I in love? never, never did I feel so d--n 
miserable. I can't sleep; honestly, i'm incap of eat properly." 

"same symptom notic in the case of colette." 

"listen, will you?" 

"hold on a moment, I know the rest by heart. now let me ask you something. 
Is it your belief that rue barré is a pure girl?" 

"yes," said clifford, turn red. 

"do you love her,--not as you dangl and tipto after everi pretti 
inanity--i mean, do you honestli love her?" 

"yes," said the other doggedly, "I would--" 

"hold on a moment; would you marri her?" 

clifford turn scarlet. "yes," he muttered. 

"pleasant news for your family," growl elliott in suppress fury. 
"'dear father, I have just marri a charm grisett whom i'm sure 
you'll welcom with open arms, in compani with her mother, a most 
estim and cleanli washlady.' good heavens! thi seem to have gone a 
littl further than the rest. thank your stars, young man, that my head is 
level enough for us both. still, in thi case, I have no fear. rue barré 
sat on your aspir in a manner unmistak final." 

"rue barrée," began clifford, draw himself up, but he suddenli ceased, 
for there where the dappl sunlight glow in spot of gold, along the 
sun-fleck path, trip rue barrée. her gown wa spotless, and her big 
straw hat, tip a littl from the white forehead, threw a shadow across 
her eyes. 

elliott stood up and bowed. clifford remov hi head-cov with an air 
so plaintive, so appealing, so utterli humbl that rue barré smiled. 

the smile wa delici and when clifford, incap of sustain himself 
on hi leg from sheer astonishment, toppl slightly, she smile again in 
spite of herself. A few moment later she took a chair on the terrac and 
draw a book from her music-roll, turn the pages, found the place, and 
then place it open downward in her lap, sigh a little, smile a 
little, and look out over the city. she had entir forgotten foxhal 
clifford. 

after a while she took up her book again, but instead of read began to 
adjust a rose in her corsage. the rose wa big and red. It glow like 
fire there over her heart, and like fire it warm her heart, now 
flutter under the silken petals. rue barré sigh again. she wa veri 
happy. the sky wa so blue, the air so soft and perfumed, the sunshin so 
caressing, and her heart sang within her, sang to the rose in her breast. 
thi is what it sang: "out of the throng of passers-by, out of the world 
of yesterday, out of the million passing, one ha turn asid to me." 

So her heart sang under hi rose on her breast. then two big 
mouse-colour pigeon came whistl by and alight on the terrace, 
where they bow and strut and bob and turn until rue barré 
laugh in delight, and look up beheld clifford befor her. hi hat wa 
in hi hand and hi face wa wreath in a seri of appeal smile 
which would have touch the heart of a bengal tiger. 

for an instant rue barré frowned, then she look curious at clifford, 
then when she saw the resembl between hi bow and the bob 
pigeons, in spite of herself, her lip part in the most bewitch 
laugh. wa thi rue barrée? So changed, so chang that she did not know 
herself; but oh! that song in her heart which drown all else, which 
trembl on her lips, struggl for utterance, which rippl forth in a 
laugh at nothing,--at a strut pigeon,--and mr. clifford. 

"and you think, becaus I return the salut of the student in the 
quarter, that you may be receiv in particular as a friend? I do not know 
you, monsieur, but vaniti is man' other name;--b content, monsieur 
vanity, I shall be punctilious--oh, most punctili in return your 
salute." 

"but I beg--i implor you to let me render you that homag which ha so 
long--" 

"oh dear; I don't care for homage." 

"let me onli be permit to speak to you now and then,--occasionally--veri 
occasionally." 

"and if _you_, whi not another?" 

"not at all,--i will be discret itself." 

"discretion--why?" 

her eye were veri clear, and clifford winc for a moment, but onli for a 
moment. then the devil of reckless seiz him, he sat down and 
offer himself, soul and body, good and chattels. and all the time he 
knew he wa a fool and that infatu is not love, and that each word he 
utter bound him in honour from which there wa no escape. and all the 
time elliott wa scowl down on the fountain plaza and savag check 
both bulldog from their desir to rush to clifford' rescue,--for even 
they felt there wa someth wrong, as elliott storm within himself and 
growl maledictions. 

when clifford finished, he finish in a glow of excitement, but rue 
barrée' respons wa long in come and hi ardour cool while the 
situat slowli assum it just proportions. then regret began to creep 
in, but he put that asid and broke out again in protestations. At the 
first word rue barré check him. 

"I thank you," she said, speak veri gravely. "no man ha ever befor 
offer me marriage." she turn and look out over the city. after a 
while she spoke again. "you offer me a great deal. I am alone, I have 
nothing, I am nothing." she turn again and look at paris, brilliant, 
fair, in the sunshin of a perfect day. He follow her eyes. 

"oh," she murmured, "it is hard,--hard to work always--alway alon with 
never a friend you can have in honour, and the love that is offer mean 
the streets, the boulevard--when passion is dead. I know it,--_we_ know 
it,--w other who have nothing,--hav no one, and who give ourselves, 
unquestioning--when we love,--yes, unquestioning--heart and soul, know 
the end." 

she touch the rose at her breast. for a moment she seem to forget him, 
then quietly--"i thank you, I am veri grateful." she open the book and, 
pluck a petal from the rose, drop it between the leaves. then 
look up she said gently, "I cannot accept." 




V 

It took clifford a month to entir recover, although at the end of the 
first week he wa pronounc convalesc by elliott, who wa an 
authority, and hi convalesc wa aid by the cordial with which 
rue barré acknowledg hi solemn salutes. forti time a day he bless 
rue barré for her refusal, and thank hi lucki stars, and at the same 
time, oh, wondrou heart of ours!--h suffer the tortur of the 
blighted. 

elliott wa annoyed, partli by clifford' reticence, partli by the 
unexplain thaw in the frigid of rue barrée. At their frequent 
encounters, when she, trip along the rue de seine, with music-rol and 
big straw hat would pass clifford and hi familiar steer an easterli 
cours to the café vachette, and at the respect uncov of the band 
would colour and smile at clifford, elliott' slumber suspicion awoke. 
but he never found out anything, and final gave it up as beyond hi 
comprehension, mere qualifi clifford as an idiot and reserv hi 
opinion of rue barrée. and all thi time selbi wa jealous. At first he 
refus to acknowledg it to himself, and cut the studio for a day in the 
country, but the wood and field of cours aggrav hi case, and the 
brook babbl of rue barré and the mower call to each other across 
the meadow end in a quaver "rue bar-rée-e!" that day spent in the 
countri made him angri for a week, and he work sulkili at julian's, all 
the time torment by a desir to know where clifford wa and what he 
might be doing. thi culmin in an errat stroll on sunday which end 
at the flower-market on the pont au change, began again, wa gloomili 
extend to the morgue, and again end at the marbl bridge. It would 
never do, and selbi felt it, so he went to see clifford, who wa 
convalesc on mint julep in hi garden. 

they sat down togeth and discuss moral and human happiness, and each 
found the other most entertaining, onli selbi fail to pump clifford, to 
the other' unfeign amusement. but the julep spread balm on the sting 
of jealousy, and trickl hope to the blighted, and when selbi said he 
must go, clifford went too, and when selby, not to be outdone, insist on 
accompani clifford back to hi door, clifford determin to see selbi 
back half way, and then find it hard to part, they decid to dine 
togeth and "flit." To flit, a verb appli to clifford' nocturn 
prowls, expressed, perhaps, as well as anything, the gaieti proposed. 
dinner wa order at mignon's, and while selbi interview the chef, 
clifford kept a fatherli eye on the butler. the dinner wa a success, or 
wa of the sort gener term a success. toward the dessert selbi heard 
some one say as at a great distance, "kid selby, drunk as a lord." 

A group of men pass near them; it seem to him that he shook hand and 
laugh a great deal, and that everybodi wa veri witty. there wa 
clifford opposit swear undi confid in hi chum selby, and there 
seem to be other there, either seat besid them or continu 
pass with the swish of skirt on the polish floor. the perfum of 
roses, the rustl of fans, the touch of round arm and the laughter grew 
vaguer and vaguer. the room seem envelop in mist. then, all in a 
moment each object stood out pain distinct, onli form and visag 
were distort and voic piercing. He drew himself up, calm, grave, for 
the moment master of himself, but veri drunk. He knew he wa drunk, and 
wa as guard and alert, as keenli suspici of himself as he would have 
been of a thief at hi elbow. hi self-command enabl clifford to hold 
hi head safe under some run water, and repair to the street 
consider the wors for wear, but never suspect that hi companion 
wa drunk. for a time he kept hi self-command. hi face wa onli a bit 
paler, a bit tighter than usual; he wa onli a trifl slower and more 
fastidi in hi speech. It wa midnight when he left clifford peac 
slumber in somebody' arm-chair, with a long sued glove dangl in 
hi hand and a plumi boa twist about hi neck to protect hi throat from 
drafts. He walk through the hall and down the stairs, and found himself 
on the sidewalk in a quarter he did not know. mechan he look up at 
the name of the street. the name wa not familiar. He turn and steer 
hi cours toward some light cluster at the end of the street. they 
prove farther away than he had anticipated, and after a long quest he 
came to the conclus that hi eye had been mysteri remov from 
their proper place and had been reset on either side of hi head like 
those of a bird. It griev him to think of the inconveni thi 
transform might occas him, and he attempt to cock up hi head, 
hen-like, to test the mobil of hi neck. then an immens despair stole 
over him,--tear gather in the tear-ducts, hi heart melted, and he 
collid with a tree. thi shock him into comprehension; he stifl the 
violent tender in hi breast, pick up hi hat and move on more 
briskly. hi mouth wa white and drawn, hi teeth tightli clinched. He 
held hi cours pretti well and stray but little, and after an 
appar intermin length of time found himself pass a line of 
cabs. the brilliant lamps, red, yellow, and green annoy him, and he felt 
it might be pleasant to demolish them with hi cane, but master thi 
impuls he pass on. later an idea struck him that it would save fatigu 
to take a cab, and he start back with that intention, but the cab 
seem alreadi so far away and the lantern were so bright and confus 
that he gave it up, and pull himself togeth look around. 

A shadow, a mass, huge, undefined, rose to hi right. He recogn the 
arc de triomph and grave shook hi cane at it. it size annoy him. He 
felt it wa too big. then he heard someth fall clatter to the 
pavement and thought probabl it wa hi cane but it didn't much matter. 
when he had master himself and regain control of hi right leg, which 
betray symptom of insubordination, he found himself travers the 
place de la concord at a pace which threaten to land him at the 
madeleine. thi would never do. He turn sharpli to the right and 
cross the bridg pass the palai bourbon at a trot and wheel into 
the boulevard st. germain. He got on well enough although the size of the 
war offic struck him as a person insult, and he miss hi cane, which 
it would have been pleasant to drag along the iron rail as he passed. 
It occur to him, however, to substitut hi hat, but when he found it 
he forgot what he want it for and replac it upon hi head with 
gravity. then he wa oblig to battl with a violent inclin to sit 
down and weep. thi last until he came to the rue de rennes, but there 
he becam absorb in contempl the dragon on the balconi overhang 
the cour du dragon, and time slip away until he rememb vagu that 
he had no busi there, and march off again. It wa slow work. the 
inclin to sit down and weep had given place to a desir for solitari 
and deep reflection. here hi right leg forgot it obedi and attack 
the left, outflank it and brought him up against a wooden board which 
seem to bar hi path. He tri to walk around it, but found the street 
closed. He tri to push it over, and found he couldn't. then he notic a 
red lantern stand on a pile of paving-ston insid the barrier. thi 
wa pleasant. how wa he to get home if the boulevard wa blocked? but he 
wa not on the boulevard. hi treacher right leg had beguil him into 
a detour, for there, behind him lay the boulevard with it endless line of 
lamps,--and here, what wa thi narrow dilapid street pile up with 
earth and mortar and heap of stone? He look up. written in stare 
black letter on the barrier wa 

rue barrée. 

He sat down. two policemen whom he knew came by and advis him to get up, 
but he argu the question from a standpoint of person taste, and they 
pass on, laughing. for he wa at that moment absorb in a problem. It 
was, how to see rue barrée. she wa somewher or other in that big hous 
with the iron balconies, and the door wa locked, but what of that? the 
simpl idea struck him to shout until she came. thi idea wa replac by 
anoth equal lucid,--to hammer on the door until she came; but final 
reject both of these as too uncertain, he decid to climb into the 
balcony, and open a window polit inquir for rue barrée. there wa 
but one light window in the hous that he could see. It wa on the 
second floor, and toward thi he cast hi eyes. then mount the wooden 
barrier and clamber over the pile of stones, he reach the sidewalk 
and look up at the façad for a foothold. It seem impossible. but a 
sudden furi seiz him, a blind, drunken obstinacy, and the blood rush 
to hi head, leaping, beat in hi ear like the dull thunder of an 
ocean. He set hi teeth, and spring at a window-sill, drag himself 
up and hung to the iron bars. then reason fled; there surg in hi brain 
the sound of mani voices, hi heart leap up beat a mad tattoo, and 
grip at cornic and ledg he work hi way along the façade, clung to 
pipe and shutters, and drag himself up, over and into the balconi by 
the light window. hi hat fell off and roll against the pane. for a 
moment he lean breathless against the railing--then the window wa 
slowli open from within. 

they stare at each other for some time. present the girl took two 
unsteadi step back into the room. He saw her face,--al crimson 
now,--h saw her sink into a chair by the lamplit table, and without a 
word he follow her into the room, close the big door-lik pane behind 
him. then they look at each other in silence. 

the room wa small and white; everyth wa white about it,--th 
curtain bed, the littl wash-stand in the corner, the bare walls, the 
china lamp,--and hi own face,--had he known it, but the face and neck of 
rue were surg in the colour that dy the blossom rose-tre there on 
the hearth besid her. It did not occur to him to speak. she seem not to 
expect it. hi mind wa struggl with the impress of the room. the 
whiteness, the extrem puriti of everyth occupi him--began to troubl 
him. As hi eye becam accustom to the light, other object grew from 
the surround and took their place in the circl of lamplight. there 
wa a piano and a coal-scuttl and a littl iron trunk and a bath-tub. 
then there wa a row of wooden peg against the door, with a white chintz 
curtain cover the cloth underneath. On the bed lay an umbrella and a 
big straw hat, and on the table, a music-rol unfurled, an ink-stand, and 
sheet of rule paper. behind him stood a wardrob face with a mirror, 
but somehow he did not care to see hi own face just then. He wa 
sobering. 

the girl sat look at him without a word. her face wa expressionless, 
yet the lip at time trembl almost imperceptibly. her eyes, so 
wonder blue in the daylight, seem dark and soft as velvet, and the 
colour on her neck deepen and whiten with everi breath. she seem 
smaller and more slender than when he had seen her in the street, and 
there wa now someth in the curv of her cheek almost infantine. when 
at last he turn and caught hi own reflect in the mirror behind him, 
a shock pass through him as though he had seen a shame thing, and hi 
cloud mind and hi cloud thought grew clearer. for a moment their 
eye met then hi sought the floor, hi lip tightened, and the struggl 
within him bow hi head and strain everi nerv to the breaking. and 
now it wa over, for the voic within had spoken. He listened, dulli 
interest but alreadi know the end,--inde it littl mattered;--th 
end would alway be the same for him;--h understood now--alway the same 
for him, and he listened, dulli interested, to a voic which grew within 
him. after a while he stood up, and she rose at once, one small hand 
rest on the table. present he open the window, pick up hi hat, 
and shut it again. then he went over to the rosebush and touch the 
blossom with hi face. one wa stand in a glass of water on the tabl 
and mechan the girl drew it out, press it with her lip and laid 
it on the tabl besid him. He took it without a word and cross the 
room, open the door. the land wa dark and silent, but the girl 
lift the lamp and glide past him slip down the polish stair to 
the hallway. then unchain the bolts, she drew open the iron wicket. 

through thi he pass with hi rose. 










end of project gutenberg' the king in yellow, by robert W. chamber 

*** end OF thi project gutenberg ebook the king IN yellow *** 

***** thi file should be name 8492-8.txt or 8492-8.zip ***** 
thi and all associ file of variou format will be found in: 
http://www.gutenberg.org/8/4/9/8492/ 

produc by suzann shell, beth trapaga, charl franks, 
and the onlin distribut proofread team 


updat edit will replac the previou one--th old edit 
will be renamed. 

creat the work from public domain print edit mean that no 
one own a unit state copyright in these works, so the foundat 
(and you!) can copi and distribut it in the unit state without 
permiss and without pay copyright royalties. special rules, 
set forth in the gener term of use part of thi license, appli to 
copi and distribut project gutenberg-tm electron work to 
protect the project gutenberg-tm concept and trademark. project 
gutenberg is a regist trademark, and may not be use if you 
charg for the ebooks, unless you receiv specif permission. If you 
do not charg anyth for copi of thi ebook, compli with the 
rule is veri easy. you may use thi ebook for nearli ani purpos 
such as creation of deriv works, reports, perform and 
research. they may be modifi and print and given away--y may do 
practic anyth with public domain ebooks. redistribut is 
subject to the trademark license, especi commerci 
redistribution. 



*** start: full licens *** 

the full project gutenberg licens 
pleas read thi befor you distribut OR use thi work 

To protect the project gutenberg-tm mission of promot the free 
distribut of electron works, by use or distribut thi work 
(or ani other work associ in ani way with the phrase "project 
gutenberg"), you agre to compli with all the term of the full project 
gutenberg-tm licens avail with thi file or onlin at 
www.gutenberg.org/license. 


section 1. gener term of use and redistribut project gutenberg-tm 
electron work 

1.a. By read or use ani part of thi project gutenberg-tm 
electron work, you indic that you have read, understand, agre to 
and accept all the term of thi licens and intellectu properti 
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agre to abid by all 
the term of thi agreement, you must ceas use and return or destroy 
all copi of project gutenberg-tm electron work in your possession. 
If you paid a fee for obtain a copi of or access to a project 
gutenberg-tm electron work and you do not agre to be bound by the 
term of thi agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or 
entiti to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.e.8. 

1.b. "project gutenberg" is a regist trademark. It may onli be 
use on or associ in ani way with an electron work by peopl who 
agre to be bound by the term of thi agreement. there are a few 
thing that you can do with most project gutenberg-tm electron work 
even without compli with the full term of thi agreement. see 
paragraph 1.c below. there are a lot of thing you can do with project 
gutenberg-tm electron work if you follow the term of thi agreement 
and help preserv free futur access to project gutenberg-tm electron 
works. see paragraph 1.e below. 

1.c. the project gutenberg literari archiv foundat ("the foundation" 
or pglaf), own a compil copyright in the collect of project 
gutenberg-tm electron works. nearli all the individu work in the 
collect are in the public domain in the unit states. If an 
individu work is in the public domain in the unit state and you are 
locat in the unit states, we do not claim a right to prevent you from 
copying, distributing, performing, display or creat deriv 
work base on the work as long as all refer to project gutenberg 
are removed. Of course, we hope that you will support the project 
gutenberg-tm mission of promot free access to electron work by 
freeli share project gutenberg-tm work in complianc with the term of 
thi agreement for keep the project gutenberg-tm name associ with 
the work. you can easili compli with the term of thi agreement by 
keep thi work in the same format with it attach full project 
gutenberg-tm licens when you share it without charg with others. 

1.d. the copyright law of the place where you are locat also govern 
what you can do with thi work. copyright law in most countri are in 
a constant state of change. If you are outsid the unit states, check 
the law of your countri in addit to the term of thi agreement 
befor downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distribut or 
creat deriv work base on thi work or ani other project 
gutenberg-tm work. the foundat make no represent concern 
the copyright statu of ani work in ani countri outsid the unit 
states. 

1.e. unless you have remov all refer to project gutenberg: 

1.e.1. the follow sentence, with activ link to, or other immedi 
access to, the full project gutenberg-tm licens must appear promin 
whenev ani copi of a project gutenberg-tm work (ani work on which the 
phrase "project gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "project 
gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed, 
copi or distributed: 

thi ebook is for the use of anyon anywher at no cost and with 
almost no restrict whatsoever. you may copi it, give it away or 
re-us it under the term of the project gutenberg licens includ 
with thi ebook or onlin at www.gutenberg.org 

1.e.2. If an individu project gutenberg-tm electron work is deriv 
from the public domain (doe not contain a notic indic that it is 
post with permiss of the copyright holder), the work can be copi 
and distribut to anyon in the unit state without pay ani fee 
or charges. If you are redistribut or provid access to a work 
with the phrase "project gutenberg" associ with or appear on the 
work, you must compli either with the requir of paragraph 1.e.1 
through 1.e.7 or obtain permiss for the use of the work and the 
project gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraph 1.e.8 or 
1.e.9. 

1.e.3. If an individu project gutenberg-tm electron work is post 
with the permiss of the copyright holder, your use and distribut 
must compli with both paragraph 1.e.1 through 1.e.7 and ani addit 
term impos by the copyright holder. addit term will be link 
to the project gutenberg-tm licens for all work post with the 
permiss of the copyright holder found at the begin of thi work. 

1.e.4. Do not unlink or detach or remov the full project gutenberg-tm 
licens term from thi work, or ani file contain a part of thi 
work or ani other work associ with project gutenberg-tm. 

1.e.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribut or redistribut thi 
electron work, or ani part of thi electron work, without 
promin display the sentenc set forth in paragraph 1.e.1 with 
activ link or immedi access to the full term of the project 
gutenberg-tm license. 

1.e.6. you may convert to and distribut thi work in ani binary, 
compressed, mark up, nonproprietari or proprietari form, includ ani 
word process or hypertext form. however, if you provid access to or 
distribut copi of a project gutenberg-tm work in a format other than 
"plain vanilla ascii" or other format use in the offici version 
post on the offici project gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org), 
you must, at no addit cost, fee or expens to the user, provid a 
copy, a mean of export a copy, or a mean of obtain a copi upon 
request, of the work in it origin "plain vanilla ascii" or other 
form. ani altern format must includ the full project gutenberg-tm 
licens as specifi in paragraph 1.e.1. 

1.e.7. Do not charg a fee for access to, viewing, displaying, 
performing, copi or distribut ani project gutenberg-tm work 
unless you compli with paragraph 1.e.8 or 1.e.9. 

1.e.8. you may charg a reason fee for copi of or provid 
access to or distribut project gutenberg-tm electron work provid 
that 

- you pay a royalti fee of 20% of the gross profit you deriv from 
the use of project gutenberg-tm work calcul use the method 
you alreadi use to calcul your applic taxes. the fee is 
owe to the owner of the project gutenberg-tm trademark, but he 
ha agre to donat royalti under thi paragraph to the 
project gutenberg literari archiv foundation. royalti payment 
must be paid within 60 day follow each date on which you 
prepar (or are legal requir to prepare) your period tax 
returns. royalti payment should be clearli mark as such and 
sent to the project gutenberg literari archiv foundat at the 
address specifi in section 4, "inform about donat to 
the project gutenberg literari archiv foundation." 

- you provid a full refund of ani money paid by a user who notifi 
you in write (or by e-mail) within 30 day of receipt that s/he 
doe not agre to the term of the full project gutenberg-tm 
license. you must requir such a user to return or 
destroy all copi of the work possess in a physic medium 
and discontinu all use of and all access to other copi of 
project gutenberg-tm works. 

- you provide, in accord with paragraph 1.f.3, a full refund of ani 
money paid for a work or a replac copy, if a defect in the 
electron work is discov and report to you within 90 day 
of receipt of the work. 

- you compli with all other term of thi agreement for free 
distribut of project gutenberg-tm works. 

1.e.9. If you wish to charg a fee or distribut a project gutenberg-tm 
electron work or group of work on differ term than are set 
forth in thi agreement, you must obtain permiss in write from 
both the project gutenberg literari archiv foundat and michael 
hart, the owner of the project gutenberg-tm trademark. contact the 
foundat as set forth in section 3 below. 

1.f. 

1.f.1. project gutenberg volunt and employe expend consider 
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcrib and proofread 
public domain work in creat the project gutenberg-tm 
collection. despit these efforts, project gutenberg-tm electron 
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain 
"defects," such as, but not limit to, incomplete, inaccur or 
corrupt data, transcript errors, a copyright or other intellectu 
properti infringement, a defect or damag disk or other medium, a 
comput virus, or comput code that damag or cannot be read by 
your equipment. 

1.f.2. limit warranty, disclaim OF damag - except for the "right 
of replac or refund" describ in paragraph 1.f.3, the project 
gutenberg literari archiv foundation, the owner of the project 
gutenberg-tm trademark, and ani other parti distribut a project 
gutenberg-tm electron work under thi agreement, disclaim all 
liabil to you for damages, cost and expenses, includ legal 
fees. you agre that you have NO remedi for negligence, strict 
liability, breach OF warranti OR breach OF contract except those 
provid IN paragraph 1.f.3. you agre that the foundation, the 
trademark owner, and ani distributor under thi agreement will not BE 
liabl TO you for actual, direct, indirect, consequential, punit OR 
incident damag even IF you give notic OF the possibl OF such 
damage. 

1.f.3. limit right OF replac OR refund - If you discov a 
defect in thi electron work within 90 day of receiv it, you can 
receiv a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by send a 
written explan to the person you receiv the work from. If you 
receiv the work on a physic medium, you must return the medium with 
your written explanation. the person or entiti that provid you with 
the defect work may elect to provid a replac copi in lieu of a 
refund. If you receiv the work electronically, the person or entiti 
provid it to you may choos to give you a second opportun to 
receiv the work electron in lieu of a refund. If the second copi 
is also defective, you may demand a refund in write without further 
opportun to fix the problem. 

1.f.4. except for the limit right of replac or refund set forth 
in paragraph 1.f.3, thi work is provid to you 'as-is', with NO other 
warranti OF ani kind, express OR implied, includ but not limit TO 
warranti OF merchant OR fit for ani purpose. 

1.f.5. some state do not allow disclaim of certain impli 
warranti or the exclus or limit of certain type of damages. 
If ani disclaim or limit set forth in thi agreement violat the 
law of the state applic to thi agreement, the agreement shall be 
interpret to make the maximum disclaim or limit permit by 
the applic state law. the invalid or unenforc of ani 
provis of thi agreement shall not void the remain provisions. 

1.f.6. indemn - you agre to indemnifi and hold the foundation, the 
trademark owner, ani agent or employe of the foundation, anyon 
provid copi of project gutenberg-tm electron work in accord 
with thi agreement, and ani volunt associ with the production, 
promot and distribut of project gutenberg-tm electron works, 
harmless from all liability, cost and expenses, includ legal fees, 
that aris directli or indirectli from ani of the follow which you do 
or caus to occur: (a) distribut of thi or ani project gutenberg-tm 
work, (b) alteration, modification, or addit or delet to ani 
project gutenberg-tm work, and (c) ani defect you cause. 


section 2. inform about the mission of project gutenberg-tm 

project gutenberg-tm is synonym with the free distribut of 
electron work in format readabl by the widest varieti of comput 
includ obsolete, old, middle-ag and new computers. It exist 
becaus of the effort of hundr of volunt and donat from 
peopl in all walk of life. 

volunt and financi support to provid volunt with the 
assist they need are critic to reach project gutenberg-tm' 
goal and ensur that the project gutenberg-tm collect will 
remain freeli avail for gener to come. In 2001, the project 
gutenberg literari archiv foundat wa creat to provid a secur 
and perman futur for project gutenberg-tm and futur generations. 
To learn more about the project gutenberg literari archiv foundat 
and how your effort and donat can help, see section 3 and 4 
and the foundat inform page at www.gutenberg.org 


section 3. inform about the project gutenberg literari archiv 
foundat 

the project gutenberg literari archiv foundat is a non profit 
501(c)(3) educ corpor organ under the law of the 
state of mississippi and grant tax exempt statu by the intern 
revenu service. the foundation' ein or feder tax identif 
number is 64-6221541. contribut to the project gutenberg 
literari archiv foundat are tax deduct to the full extent 
permit by u.s. feder law and your state' laws. 

the foundation' princip offic is locat at 4557 melan dr. S. 
fairbanks, ak, 99712., but it volunt and employe are scatter 
throughout numer locations. it busi offic is locat at 809 
north 1500 west, salt lake city, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. email 
contact link and up to date contact inform can be found at the 
foundation' web site and offici page at www.gutenberg.org/contact 

for addit contact information: 
dr. gregori B. newbi 
chief execut and director 
gbnewby@pglaf.org 

section 4. inform about donat to the project gutenberg 
literari archiv foundat 

project gutenberg-tm depend upon and cannot surviv without wide 
spread public support and donat to carri out it mission of 
increas the number of public domain and licens work that can be 
freeli distribut in machin readabl form access by the widest 
array of equip includ outdat equipment. mani small donat 
($1 to $5,000) are particularli import to maintain tax exempt 
statu with the irs. 

the foundat is commit to compli with the law regul 
chariti and charit donat in all 50 state of the unit 
states. complianc requir are not uniform and it take a 
consider effort, much paperwork and mani fee to meet and keep up 
with these requirements. We do not solicit donat in locat 
where we have not receiv written confirm of compliance. To 
send donat or determin the statu of complianc for ani 
particular state visit www.gutenberg.org/don 

while we cannot and do not solicit contribut from state where we 
have not met the solicit requirements, we know of no prohibit 
against accept unsolicit donat from donor in such state who 
approach us with offer to donate. 

intern donat are grate accepted, but we cannot make 
ani statement concern tax treatment of donat receiv from 
outsid the unit states. u.s. law alon swamp our small staff. 

pleas check the project gutenberg web page for current donat 
method and addresses. donat are accept in a number of other 
way includ checks, onlin payment and credit card donations. 
To donate, pleas visit: www.gutenberg.org/don 


section 5. gener inform about project gutenberg-tm electron 
works. 

professor michael S. hart wa the origin of the project gutenberg-tm 
concept of a librari of electron work that could be freeli share 
with anyone. for forti years, he produc and distribut project 
gutenberg-tm ebook with onli a loos network of volunt support. 

project gutenberg-tm ebook are often creat from sever print 
editions, all of which are confirm as public domain in the u.s. 
unless a copyright notic is included. thus, we do not necessarili 
keep ebook in complianc with ani particular paper edition. 

most peopl start at our web site which ha the main PG search facility: 

www.gutenberg.org 

thi web site includ inform about project gutenberg-tm, 
includ how to make donat to the project gutenberg literari 
archiv foundation, how to help produc our new ebooks, and how to 
subscrib to our email newslett to hear about new ebooks. 
