the project gutenberg ebook of carmilla, by J. sheridan lefanu 

thi ebook is for the use of anyon anywher at no cost and with 
almost no restrict whatsoever. you may copi it, give it away or 
re-us it under the term of the project gutenberg licens includ 
with thi ebook or onlin at www.gutenberg.net 


title: carmilla 

author: J. sheridan lefanu 

releas date: novemb 7, 2003 [ebook #10007] 
[date last updated: decemb 1, 2004] 

language: english 


*** start OF thi project gutenberg ebook carmilla *** 




produc by suzann shell, sjaani and PG distribut proofread 




carmilla 

J. sheridan lefanu 

1872 



prologu 
prefac 
_upon a paper attach to the narr which follows, doctor hesseliu 
ha written a rather elabor note, which he accompani with a 
refer to hi essay on the strang subject which the ms. illuminates. 

thi mysteri subject he treats, in that essay, with hi usual 
learn and acumen, and with remark direct and condensation. It 
will form but one volum of the seri of that extraordinari man' 
collect papers. 

As I publish the case, in thi volume, simpli to interest the "laity," I 
shall forestal the intellig lady, who relat it, in nothing; and 
after due consideration, I have determined, therefore, to abstain from 
present ani préci of the learn doctor' reasoning, or extract from 
hi statement on a subject which he describ as "involving, not 
improbably, some of the profoundest arcana of our dual existence, and 
it intermediates." 

I wa anxiou on discov thi paper, to reopen the correspond 
commenc by doctor hesselius, so mani year before, with a person so 
clever and care as hi inform seem to have been. much to my 
regret, however, I found that she had die in the interval. 

she, probably, could have ad littl to the narr _which she 
commun in the follow pages, with, so far as I can pronounce, 
such conscienti particularity_. 



I 

_an earli fright_ 

In styria, we, though by no mean magnific people, inhabit a castle, 
or schloss. A small income, in that part of the world, goe a great way. 
eight or nine hundr a year doe wonders. scantili enough our would 
have answer among wealthi peopl at home. My father is english, and I 
bear an english name, although I never saw england. but here, in thi 
lone and primit place, where everyth is so marvel cheap, I 
realli don't see how ever so much more money would at all materi add 
to our comforts, or even luxuries. 

My father wa in the austrian service, and retir upon a pension and 
hi patrimony, and purchas thi feudal residence, and the small estat 
on which it stands, a bargain. 

noth can be more picturesqu or solitary. It stand on a slight 
emin in a forest. the road, veri old and narrow, pass in front of 
it drawbridge, never rais in my time, and it moat, stock with 
perch, and sail over by mani swans, and float on it surfac white 
fleet of water lilies. 

over all thi the schloss show it many-window front; it towers, 
and it gothic chapel. 

the forest open in an irregular and veri picturesqu glade befor it 
gate, and at the right a steep gothic bridg carri the road over a 
stream that wind in deep shadow through the wood. I have said that thi 
is a veri lone place. judg whether I say truth. look from the hall 
door toward the road, the forest in which our castl stand extend 
fifteen mile to the right, and twelv to the left. the nearest 
inhabit villag is about seven of your english mile to the left. the 
nearest inhabit schloss of ani histor associations, is that of old 
gener spielsdorf, nearli twenti mile away to the right. 

I have said "the nearest _inhabited_ village," becaus there is, onli 
three mile westward, that is to say in the direct of gener 
spielsdorf' schloss, a ruin village, with it quaint littl church, 
now roofless, in the aisl of which are the molder tomb of the proud 
famili of karnstein, now extinct, who onc own the equal desol 
chateau which, in the thick of the forest, overlook the silent ruin 
of the town. 

respect the caus of the desert of thi strike and melancholi 
spot, there is a legend which I shall relat to you anoth time. 

I must tell you now, how veri small is the parti who constitut the 
inhabit of our castle. I don't includ servants, or those depend 
who occupi room in the build attach to the schloss. listen, and 
wonder! My father, who is the kindest man on earth, but grow old; and 
I, at the date of my story, onli nineteen. eight year have pass 
sinc then. 

I and my father constitut the famili at the schloss. My mother, a 
styrian lady, die in my infancy, but I had a good-natur governess, 
who had been with me from, I might almost say, my infancy. I could not 
rememb the time when her fat, benign face wa not a familiar 
pictur in my memory. 

thi wa madam perrodon, a nativ of berne, whose care and good natur 
now in part suppli to me the loss of my mother, whom I do not even 
remember, so earli I lost her. she made a third at our littl dinner 
party. there wa a fourth, mademoisel De lafontaine, a ladi such as 
you term, I believe, a "finish governess." she spoke french and 
german, madam perrodon french and broken english, to which my father 
and I ad english, which, partli to prevent it becom a lost 
languag among us, and partli from patriot motives, we spoke everi 
day. the consequ wa a babel, at which stranger use to laugh, and 
which I shall make no attempt to reproduc in thi narrative. and there 
were two or three young ladi friend besides, pretti nearli of my own 
age, who were occasion visitors, for longer or shorter terms; and 
these visit I sometim returned. 

these were our regular social resources; but of cours there were chanc 
visit from "neighbors" of onli five or six leagu distance. My life 
was, notwithstanding, rather a solitari one, I can assur you. 

My gouvernant had just so much control over me as you might conjectur 
such sage person would have in the case of a rather spoil girl, whose 
onli parent allow her pretti nearli her own way in everything. 

the first occurr in my existence, which produc a terribl 
impress upon my mind, which, in fact, never ha been effaced, wa one 
of the veri earliest incid of my life which I can recollect. some 
peopl will think it so trifl that it should not be record here. 
you will see, however, by-and-by, whi I mention it. the nursery, as it 
wa called, though I had it all to myself, wa a larg room in the upper 
stori of the castle, with a steep oak roof. I can't have been more than 
six year old, when one night I awoke, and look round the room from 
my bed, fail to see the nurseri maid. neither wa my nurs there; and 
I thought myself alone. I wa not frightened, for I wa one of those 
happi children who are studious kept in ignor of ghost stories, of 
fairi tales, and of all such lore as make us cover up our head when 
the door crack suddenly, or the flicker of an expir candl make the 
shadow of a bedpost danc upon the wall, nearer to our faces. I wa 
vex and insult at find myself, as I conceived, neglected, and I 
began to whimper, preparatori to a hearti bout of roaring; when to my 
surprise, I saw a solemn, but veri pretti face look at me from the 
side of the bed. It wa that of a young ladi who wa kneeling, with her 
hand under the coverlet. I look at her with a kind of pleas wonder, 
and ceas whimpering. she caress me with her hands, and lay down 
besid me on the bed, and drew me toward her, smiling; I felt 
immedi delight soothed, and fell asleep again. I wa waken 
by a sensat as if two needl ran into my breast veri deep at the 
same moment, and I cri loudly. the ladi start back, with her eye 
fix on me, and then slip down upon the floor, and, as I thought, 
hid herself under the bed. 

I wa now for the first time frightened, and I yell with all my might 
and main. nurse, nurseri maid, housekeeper, all came run in, and 
hear my story, they made light of it, sooth me all they could 
meanwhile. but, child as I was, I could perceiv that their face were 
pale with an unwont look of anxiety, and I saw them look under the 
bed, and about the room, and peep under tabl and pluck open cupboards; 
and the housekeep whisper to the nurse: "lay your hand along that 
hollow in the bed; someon _did_ lie there, so sure as you did not; the 
place is still warm." 

I rememb the nurseri maid pet me, and all three examin my 
chest, where I told them I felt the puncture, and pronounc that there 
wa no sign visibl that ani such thing had happen to me. 

the housekeep and the two other servant who were in charg of the 
nursery, remain sit up all night; and from that time a servant 
alway sat up in the nurseri until I wa about fourteen. 

I wa veri nervou for a long time after this. A doctor wa call in, 
he wa pallid and elderly. how well I rememb hi long saturnin face, 
slightli pit with smallpox, and hi chestnut wig. for a good while, 
everi second day, he came and gave me medicine, which of cours I hated. 

the morn after I saw thi apparit I wa in a state of terror, and 
could not bear to be left alone, daylight though it was, for a moment. 

I rememb my father come up and stand at the bedside, and talk 
cheerfully, and ask the nurs a number of questions, and laugh 
veri heartili at one of the answers; and pat me on the shoulder, and 
kiss me, and tell me not to be frightened, that it wa noth but 
a dream and could not hurt me. 

but I wa not comforted, for I knew the visit of the strang woman wa 
_not_ a dream; and I wa _awfully_ frightened. 

I wa a littl consol by the nurseri maid' assur me that it wa 
she who had come and look at me, and lain down besid me in the bed, 
and that I must have been half-dream not to have known her face. but 
this, though support by the nurse, did not quit satisfi me. 

I remembered, in the cours of that day, a vener old man, in a black 
cassock, come into the room with the nurs and housekeeper, and 
talk a littl to them, and veri kindli to me; hi face wa veri sweet 
and gentle, and he told me they were go to pray, and join my hand 
together, and desir me to say, softly, while they were praying, "lord 
hear all good prayer for us, for jesus' sake." I think these were the 
veri words, for I often repeat them to myself, and my nurs use for 
year to make me say them in my prayers. 

I rememb so well the thought sweet face of that white-hair old 
man, in hi black cassock, as he stood in that rude, lofty, brown room, 
with the clumsi furnitur of a fashion three hundr year old about 
him, and the scanti light enter it shadowi atmospher through the 
small lattice. He kneeled, and the three women with him, and he pray 
aloud with an earnest quaver voic for, what appear to me, a long 
time. I forget all my life preced that event, and for some time after 
it is all obscur also, but the scene I have just describ stand out 
vivid as the isol pictur of the phantasmagoria surround 
by darkness. 



II 

_A guest_ 

I am now go to tell you someth so strang that it will requir all 
your faith in my verac to believ my story. It is not onli true, 
nevertheless, but truth of which I have been an eyewitness. 

It wa a sweet summer evening, and my father ask me, as he sometim 
did, to take a littl rambl with him along that beauti forest vista 
which I have mention as lie in front of the schloss. 

"gener spielsdorf cannot come to us so soon as I had hoped," said my 
father, as we pursu our walk. 

He wa to have paid us a visit of some weeks, and we had expect hi 
arriv next day. He wa to have brought with him a young lady, hi 
niec and ward, mademoisel rheinfeldt, whom I had never seen, but whom 
I had heard describ as a veri charm girl, and in whose societi I 
had promis myself mani happi days. I wa more disappoint than a 
young ladi live in a town, or a bustl neighborhood can possibl 
imagine. thi visit, and the new acquaint it promised, had furnish 
my day dream for mani weeks. 

"and how soon doe he come?" I asked. 

"not till autumn. not for two months, I dare say," he answered. "and I 
am veri glad now, dear, that you never knew mademoisel rheinfeldt." 

"and why?" I asked, both mortifi and curious. 

"becaus the poor young ladi is dead," he replied. "I quit forgot I had 
not told you, but you were not in the room when I receiv the general' 
letter thi evening." 

I wa veri much shocked. gener spielsdorf had mention in hi first 
letter, six or seven week before, that she wa not so well as he would 
wish her, but there wa noth to suggest the remotest suspicion 
of danger. 

"here is the general' letter," he said, hand it to me. "I am afraid 
he is in great affliction; the letter appear to me to have been written 
veri nearli in distraction." 

We sat down on a rude bench, under a group of magnific lime trees. 
the sun wa set with all it melancholi splendor behind the sylvan 
horizon, and the stream that flow besid our home, and pass under the 
steep old bridg I have mentioned, wound through mani a group of nobl 
trees, almost at our feet, reflect in it current the fade crimson 
of the sky. gener spielsdorf' letter wa so extraordinary, so 
vehement, and in some place so self-contradictory, that I read it twice 
over--th second time aloud to my father--and wa still unabl to 
account for it, except by suppos that grief had unsettl hi mind. 

It said "I have lost my darl daughter, for as such I love her. 
dure the last day of dear bertha' ill I wa not abl to write 
to you. 

"befor then I had no idea of her danger. I have lost her, and now learn 
_all_, too late. she die in the peac of innocence, and in the gloriou 
hope of a bless futurity. the fiend who betray our infatu 
hospit ha done it all. I thought I wa receiv into my hous 
innocence, gaiety, a charm companion for my lost bertha. heavens! 
what a fool have I been! 

"I thank god my child die without a suspicion of the caus of her 
sufferings. she is gone without so much as conjectur the natur of 
her illness, and the accurs passion of the agent of all thi misery. I 
devot my remain day to track and extinguish a monster. I am 
told I may hope to accomplish my righteou and merci purpose. At 
present there is scarc a gleam of light to guid me. I curs my 
conceit incredulity, my despic affect of superiority, my 
blindness, my obstinacy--all--too late. I cannot write or talk 
collectedli now. I am distracted. So soon as I shall have a littl 
recovered, I mean to devot myself for a time to enquiry, which may 
possibl lead me as far as vienna. some time in the autumn, two month 
hence, or earlier if I live, I will see you--that is, if you permit me; 
I will then tell you all that I scarc dare put upon paper now. 
farewell. pray for me, dear friend." 

In these term end thi strang letter. though I had never seen bertha 
rheinfeldt my eye fill with tear at the sudden intelligence; I wa 
startled, as well as profoundli disappointed. 

the sun had now set, and it wa twilight by the time I had return the 
general' letter to my father. 

It wa a soft clear evening, and we loitered, specul upon the 
possibl mean of the violent and incoher sentenc which I had 
just been reading. We had nearli a mile to walk befor reach the road 
that pass the schloss in front, and by that time the moon wa shine 
brilliantly. At the drawbridg we met madam perrodon and mademoisel 
De lafontaine, who had come out, without their bonnets, to enjoy the 
exquisit moonlight. 

We heard their voic gabbl in anim dialogu as we approached. We 
join them at the drawbridge, and turn about to admir with them the 
beauti scene. 

the glade through which we had just walk lay befor us. At our left 
the narrow road wound away under clump of lordli trees, and wa lost to 
sight amid the thicken forest. At the right the same road cross the 
steep and picturesqu bridge, near which stand a ruin tower which 
onc guard that pass; and beyond the bridg an abrupt emin rises, 
cover with trees, and show in the shadow some grey 
ivy-clust rocks. 

over the sward and low ground a thin film of mist wa steal like 
smoke, mark the distanc with a transpar veil; and here and there 
we could see the river faintli flash in the moonlight. 

No softer, sweeter scene could be imagined. the news I had just heard 
made it melancholy; but noth could disturb it charact of profound 
serenity, and the enchant glori and vagu of the prospect. 

My father, who enjoy the picturesque, and I, stood look in silenc 
over the expans beneath us. the two good governesses, stand a littl 
way behind us, discours upon the scene, and were eloqu upon 
the moon. 

madam perrodon wa fat, middle-aged, and romantic, and talk and 
sigh poetically. mademoisel De lafontaine--in right of her father 
who wa a german, assum to be psychological, metaphysical, and 
someth of a mystic--now declar that when the moon shone with a 
light so intens it wa well known that it indic a special spiritu 
activity. the effect of the full moon in such a state of brillianc wa 
manifold. It act on dreams, it act on lunacy, it act on nervou 
people, it had marvel physic influenc connect with life. 
mademoisel relat that her cousin, who wa mate of a merchant ship, 
have taken a nap on deck on such a night, lie on hi back, with hi 
face full in the light on the moon, had wakened, after a dream of an old 
woman claw him by the cheek, with hi featur horribl drawn to one 
side; and hi counten had never quit recov it equilibrium. 

"the moon, thi night," she said, "i full of idyl and magnet 
influence--and see, when you look behind you at the front of the schloss 
how all it window flash and twinkl with that silveri splendor, as if 
unseen hand had light up the room to receiv fairi guests." 

there are indol style of the spirit in which, indispos to talk 
ourselves, the talk of other is pleasant to our listless ears; and I 
gaze on, pleas with the tinkl of the ladies' conversation. 

"I have got into one of my mope mood tonight," said my father, after 
a silence, and quot shakespeare, whom, by way of keep up our 
english, he use to read aloud, he said: 

"'in truth I know not whi I am so sad. 
It weari me: you say it weari you; 
but how I got it--cam by it.' 

"I forget the rest. but I feel as if some great misfortun were hang 
over us. I suppos the poor general' afflict letter ha had someth 
to do with it." 

At thi moment the unwont sound of carriag wheel and mani hoof upon 
the road, arrest our attention. 

they seem to be approach from the high ground overlook the 
bridge, and veri soon the equipag emerg from that point. two horsemen 
first cross the bridge, then came a carriag drawn by four horses, and 
two men rode behind. 

It seem to be the travel carriag of a person of rank; and we were 
all immedi absorb in watch that veri unusu spectacle. It 
became, in a few moments, greatli more interesting, for just as the 
carriag had pass the summit of the steep bridge, one of the leaders, 
take fright, commun hi panic to the rest, and after a plung or 
two, the whole team broke into a wild gallop together, and dash 
between the horsemen who rode in front, came thunder along the road 
toward us with the speed of a hurricane. 

the excit of the scene wa made more pain by the clear, 
long-drawn scream of a femal voic from the carriag window. 

We all advanc in curios and horror; me rather in silence, the rest 
with variou ejacul of terror. 

our suspens did not last long. just befor you reach the castl 
drawbridge, on the rout they were coming, there stand by the roadsid 
a magnific lime tree, on the other stand an ancient stone cross, at 
sight of which the horses, now go at a pace that wa perfectli 
frightful, swerv so as to bring the wheel over the project root 
of the tree. 

I knew what wa coming. I cover my eyes, unabl to see it out, and 
turn my head away; at the same moment I heard a cri from my ladi 
friends, who had gone on a little. 

curios open my eyes, and I saw a scene of utter confusion. two of 
the hors were on the ground, the carriag lay upon it side with two 
wheel in the air; the men were busi remov the traces, and a ladi 
with a command air and figur had got out, and stood with clasp 
hands, rais the handkerchief that wa in them everi now and then 
to her eyes. 

through the carriag door wa now lift a young lady, who appear to 
be lifeless. My dear old father wa alreadi besid the elder lady, with 
hi hat in hi hand, evid tender hi aid and the resourc of 
hi schloss. the ladi did not appear to hear him, or to have eye for 
anyth but the slender girl who wa be place against the slope 
of the bank. 

I approached; the young ladi wa appar stunned, but she wa 
certainli not dead. My father, who piqu himself on be someth of 
a physician, had just had hi finger on her wrist and assur the lady, 
who declar herself her mother, that her pulse, though faint and 
irregular, wa undoubtedli still distinguishable. the ladi clasp her 
hand and look upward, as if in a momentari transport of gratitude; 
but immedi she broke out again in that theatric way which is, I 
believe, natur to some people. 

she wa what is call a fine look woman for her time of life, and 
must have been handsome; she wa tall, but not thin, and dress in 
black velvet, and look rather pale, but with a proud and command 
countenance, though now agit strangely. 

"who wa ever be so born to calamity?" I heard her say, with clasp 
hands, as I came up. "here am I, on a journey of life and death, in 
prosecut which to lose an hour is possibl to lose all. My child will 
not have recov suffici to resum her rout for who can say how 
long. I must leav her: I cannot, dare not, delay. how far on, sir, can 
you tell, is the nearest village? I must leav her there; and shall not 
see my darling, or even hear of her till my return, three month hence." 

I pluck my father by the coat, and whisper earnestli in hi ear: 
"oh! papa, pray ask her to let her stay with us--it would be so 
delightful. do, pray." 

"if madam will entrust her child to the care of my daughter, and of her 
good gouvernante, madam perrodon, and permit her to remain as our 
guest, under my charge, until her return, it will confer a distinct 
and an oblig upon us, and we shall treat her with all the care and 
devot which so sacr a trust deserves." 

"I cannot do that, sir, it would be to task your kind and chivalri 
too cruelly," said the lady, distractedly. 

"it would, on the contrary, be to confer on us a veri great kind at 
the moment when we most need it. My daughter ha just been disappoint 
by a cruel misfortune, in a visit from which she had long anticip a 
great deal of happiness. If you confid thi young ladi to our care it 
will be her best consolation. the nearest villag on your rout is 
distant, and afford no such inn as you could think of place your 
daughter at; you cannot allow her to continu her journey for ani 
consider distanc without danger. if, as you say, you cannot suspend 
your journey, you must part with her tonight, and nowher could you do 
so with more honest assur of care and tender than here." 

there wa someth in thi lady' air and appear so distinguish 
and even imposing, and in her manner so engaging, as to impress one, 
quit apart from the digniti of her equipage, with a convict that she 
wa a person of consequence. 

By thi time the carriag wa replac in it upright position, and the 
horses, quit tractable, in the trace again. 

the ladi threw on her daughter a glanc which I fanci wa not quit so 
affection as one might have anticip from the begin of the 
scene; then she beckon slightli to my father, and withdrew two or 
three step with him out of hearing; and talk to him with a fix and 
stern countenance, not at all like that with which she had 
hitherto spoken. 

I wa fill with wonder that my father did not seem to perceiv the 
change, and also unspeak curiou to learn what it could be that she 
wa speaking, almost in hi ear, with so much earnest and rapidity. 

two or three minut at most I think she remain thu employed, then 
she turned, and a few step brought her to where her daughter lay, 
support by madam perrodon. she kneel besid her for a moment and 
whispered, as madam supposed, a littl benedict in her ear; then 
hastili kiss her she step into her carriage, the door wa closed, 
the footmen in state liveri jump up behind, the outrid spur 
on, the postilion crack their whips, the hors plung and broke 
suddenli into a furiou canter that threaten soon again to becom a 
gallop, and the carriag whirl away, follow at the same rapid pace 
by the two horsemen in the rear. 



iii 

_we compar notes_ 

We follow the _cortege_ with our eye until it wa swiftli lost to 
sight in the misti wood; and the veri sound of the hoof and the wheel 
die away in the silent night air. 

noth remain to assur us that the adventur had not been an 
illus of a moment but the young lady, who just at that moment open 
her eyes. I could not see, for her face wa turn from me, but she 
rais her head, evid look about her, and I heard a veri sweet 
voic ask complainingly, "where is mamma?" 

our good madam perrodon answer tenderly, and ad some comfort 
assurances. 

I then heard her ask: 

"where am I? what is thi place?" and after that she said, "I don't see 
the carriage; and matska, where is she?" 

madam answer all her question in so far as she understood them; and 
gradual the young ladi rememb how the misadventur came about, and 
wa glad to hear that no one in, or in attend on, the carriag wa 
hurt; and on learn that her mamma had left her here, till her return 
in about three months, she wept. 

I wa go to add my consol to those of madam perrodon when 
mademoisel De lafontain place her hand upon my arm, saying: 

"don't approach, one at a time is as much as she can at present convers 
with; a veri littl excit would possibl overpow her now." 

As soon as she is comfort in bed, I thought, I will run up to her 
room and see her. 

My father in the meantim had sent a servant on horseback for the 
physician, who live about two leagu away; and a bedroom wa be 
prepar for the young lady' reception. 

the stranger now rose, and lean on madame' arm, walk slowli over 
the drawbridg and into the castl gate. 

In the hall, servant wait to receiv her, and she wa conduct 
forthwith to her room. the room we usual sat in as our draw room is 
long, have four windows, that look over the moat and drawbridge, 
upon the forest scene I have just described. 

It is furnish in old carv oak, with larg carv cabinets, and the 
chair are cushion with crimson utrecht velvet. the wall are cover 
with tapestry, and surround with great gold frames, the figur be 
as larg as life, in ancient and veri curiou costume, and the subject 
repres are hunting, hawking, and gener festive. It is not too 
state to be extrem comfortable; and here we had our tea, for with 
hi usual patriot lean he insist that the nation beverag 
should make it appear regularli with our coffe and chocolate. 

We sat here thi night, and with candl lighted, were talk over the 
adventur of the evening. 

madam perrodon and mademoisel De lafontain were both of our party. 
the young stranger had hardli lain down in her bed when she sank into a 
deep sleep; and those ladi had left her in the care of a servant. 

"how do you like our guest?" I asked, as soon as madam entered. "tell 
me all about her?" 

"I like her extremely," answer madame, "she is, I almost think, the 
prettiest creatur I ever saw; about your age, and so gentl and nice." 

"she is absolut beautiful," threw in mademoiselle, who had peep for 
a moment into the stranger' room. 

"and such a sweet voice!" ad madam perrodon. 

"did you remark a woman in the carriage, after it wa set up again, who 
did not get out," inquir mademoiselle, "but onli look from 
the window?" 

"no, we had not seen her." 

then she describ a hideou black woman, with a sort of color turban 
on her head, and who wa gaze all the time from the carriag window, 
nod and grin deris toward the ladies, with gleam eye 
and larg white eyeballs, and her teeth set as if in fury. 

"did you remark what an ill-look pack of men the servant were?" 
ask madame. 

"yes," said my father, who had just come in, "ugly, hang-dog look 
fellow as ever I beheld in my life. I hope they mayn't rob the poor 
ladi in the forest. they are clever rogues, however; they got everyth 
to right in a minute." 

"I dare say they are worn out with too long traveling," said madame. 

"besid look wicked, their face were so strang lean, and dark, 
and sullen. I am veri curious, I own; but I dare say the young ladi will 
tell you all about it tomorrow, if she is suffici recovered." 

"I don't think she will," said my father, with a mysteri smile, and a 
littl nod of hi head, as if he knew more about it than he care 
to tell us. 

thi made us all the more inquisit as to what had pass between him 
and the ladi in the black velvet, in the brief but earnest interview 
that had immedi preced her departure. 

We were scarc alone, when I entreat him to tell me. He did not need 
much pressing. 

"there is no particular reason whi I should not tell you. she express 
a reluct to troubl us with the care of her daughter, say she wa 
in delic health, and nervous, but not subject to ani kind of 
seizure--sh volunt that--nor to ani illusion; being, in fact, 
perfectli sane." 

"how veri odd to say all that!" I interpolated. "it wa so unnecessary." 

"at all event it _was_ said," he laughed, "and as you wish to know all 
that passed, which wa inde veri little, I tell you. she then said, 'I 
am make a long journey of _vital_ importance--sh emphas the 
word--rapid and secret; I shall return for my child in three months; in 
the meantime, she will be silent as to who we are, whenc we come, and 
whither we are traveling.' that is all she said. she spoke veri pure 
french. when she said the word 'secret,' she paus for a few seconds, 
look sternly, her eye fix on mine. I fanci she make a great point 
of that. you saw how quickli she wa gone. I hope I have not done a veri 
foolish thing, in take charg of the young lady." 

for my part, I wa delighted. I wa long to see and talk to her; and 
onli wait till the doctor should give me leave. you, who live in 
towns, can have no idea how great an event the introduct of a new 
friend is, in such a solitud as surround us. 

the doctor did not arriv till nearli one o'clock; but I could no more 
have gone to my bed and slept, than I could have overtaken, on foot, the 
carriag in which the princess in black velvet had driven away. 

when the physician came down to the draw room, it wa to report veri 
favor upon hi patient. she wa now sit up, her puls quit 
regular, appar perfectli well. she had sustain no injury, and the 
littl shock to her nerv had pass away quit harmlessly. there could 
be no harm certainli in my see her, if we both wish it; and, with 
thi permiss I sent, forthwith, to know whether she would allow me to 
visit her for a few minut in her room. 

the servant return immedi to say that she desir noth more. 

you may be sure I wa not long in avail myself of thi permission. 

our visitor lay in one of the handsomest room in the schloss. It was, 
perhaps, a littl stately. there wa a somber piec of tapestri opposit 
the foot of the bed, repres cleopatra with the asp to her bosom; 
and other solemn classic scene were displayed, a littl faded, upon the 
other walls. but there wa gold carving, and rich and vari color 
enough in the other decor of the room, to more than redeem the 
gloom of the old tapestry. 

there were candl at the bedside. she wa sit up; her slender 
pretti figur envelop in the soft silk dress gown, embroid with 
flowers, and line with thick quilt silk, which her mother had thrown 
over her feet as she lay upon the ground. 

what wa it that, as I reach the bedsid and had just begun my littl 
greeting, struck me dumb in a moment, and made me recoil a step or two 
from befor her? I will tell you. 

I saw the veri face which had visit me in my childhood at night, which 
remain so fix in my memory, and on which I had for so mani year so 
often rumin with horror, when no one suspect of what I 
wa thinking. 

It wa pretty, even beautiful; and when I first beheld it, wore the 
same melancholi expression. 

but thi almost instantli light into a strang fix smile of 
recognition. 

there wa a silenc of fulli a minute, and then at length she spoke; I 
could not. 

"how wonderful!" she exclaimed. "twelv year ago, I saw your face in a 
dream, and it ha haunt me ever since." 

"wonder indeed!" I repeated, overcom with an effort the horror 
that had for a time suspend my utterances. "twelv year ago, in 
vision or reality, I certainli saw you. I could not forget your face. It 
ha remain befor my eye ever since." 

her smile had softened. whatev I had fanci strang in it, wa gone, 
and it and her dimpl cheek were now delight pretti and 
intelligent. 

I felt reassured, and continu more in the vein which hospit 
indicated, to bid her welcome, and to tell her how much pleasur her 
accident arriv had given us all, and especi what a happi it 
wa to me. 

I took her hand as I spoke. I wa a littl shy, as lone peopl are, 
but the situat made me eloquent, and even bold. she press my hand, 
she laid her upon it, and her eye glowed, as, look hastili into 
mine, she smile again, and blushed. 

she answer my welcom veri prettily. I sat down besid her, still 
wondering; and she said: 

"I must tell you my vision about you; it is so veri strang that you and 
I should have had, each of the other so vivid a dream, that each should 
have seen, I you and you me, look as we do now, when of cours we 
both were mere children. I wa a child, about six year old, and I awok 
from a confus and troubl dream, and found myself in a room, unlik 
my nursery, wainscot clumsili in some dark wood, and with cupboard 
and bedsteads, and chairs, and bench place about it. the bed were, 
I thought, all empty, and the room itself without anyon but myself in 
it; and I, after look about me for some time, and admir especi 
an iron candlestick with two branches, which I should certainli know 
again, crept under one of the bed to reach the window; but as I got 
from under the bed, I heard someon crying; and look up, while I wa 
still upon my knees, I saw you--most assuredli you--a I see you now; a 
beauti young lady, with golden hair and larg blue eyes, and 
lips--your lips--you as you are here. 

"your look won me; I climb on the bed and put my arm about you, and 
I think we both fell asleep. I wa arous by a scream; you were sit 
up screaming. I wa frightened, and slip down upon the ground, and, 
it seem to me, lost conscious for a moment; and when I came to 
myself, I wa again in my nurseri at home. your face I have never 
forgotten since. I could not be misl by mere resemblance. _you are_ 
the ladi whom I saw then." 

It wa now my turn to relat my correspond vision, which I did, to 
the undisguis wonder of my new acquaintance. 

"I don't know which should be most afraid of the other," she said, again 
smiling--"if you were less pretti I think I should be veri much afraid 
of you, but be as you are, and you and I both so young, I feel onli 
that I have made your acquaint twelv year ago, and have alreadi a 
right to your intimacy; at all event it doe seem as if we were 
destined, from our earliest childhood, to be friends. I wonder whether 
you feel as strang drawn toward me as I do to you; I have never had 
a friend--shal I find one now?" she sighed, and her fine dark eye 
gaze passion on me. 

now the truth is, I felt rather unaccount toward the beauti 
stranger. I did feel, as she said, "drawn toward her," but there wa 
also someth of repulsion. In thi ambigu feeling, however, the 
sens of attract immens prevailed. she interest and won me; she 
wa so beauti and so indescrib engaging. 

I perceiv now someth of languor and exhaust steal over her, 
and hasten to bid her good night. 

"the doctor thinks," I added, "that you ought to have a maid to sit up 
with you tonight; one of our is waiting, and you will find her a veri 
use and quiet creature." 

"how kind of you, but I could not sleep, I never could with an attend 
in the room. I shan't requir ani assistance--and, shall I confess my 
weakness, I am haunt with a terror of robbers. our hous wa rob 
once, and two servant murdered, so I alway lock my door. It ha becom 
a habit--and you look so kind I know you will forgiv me. I see there is 
a key in the lock." 

she held me close in her pretti arm for a moment and whisper in my 
ear, "good night, darling, it is veri hard to part with you, but good 
night; tomorrow, but not early, I shall see you again." 

she sank back on the pillow with a sigh, and her fine eye follow me 
with a fond and melancholi gaze, and she murmur again "good night, 
dear friend." 

young peopl like, and even love, on impulse. I wa flatter by the 
evident, though as yet undeserved, fond she show me. I like the 
confid with which she at onc receiv me. she wa determin that 
we should be veri near friends. 

next day came and we met again. I wa delight with my companion; that 
is to say, in mani respects. 

her look lost noth in daylight--sh wa certainli the most beauti 
creatur I had ever seen, and the unpleas remembr of the face 
present in my earli dream, had lost the effect of the first unexpect 
recognition. 

she confess that she had experienc a similar shock on see me, and 
precis the same faint antipathi that had mingl with my admir 
of her. We now laugh togeth over our momentari horrors. 



IV 

_her habits--a saunter_ 

I told you that I wa charm with her in most particulars. 

there were some that did not pleas me so well. 

she wa abov the middl height of women. I shall begin by describ 
her. 

she wa slender, and wonder graceful. except that her movement 
were languid--veri languid--indeed, there wa noth in her appear 
to indic an invalid. her complexion wa rich and brilliant; her 
featur were small and beauti formed; her eye large, dark, and 
lustrous; her hair wa quit wonderful, I never saw hair so 
magnific thick and long when it wa down about her shoulders; I 
have often place my hand under it, and laugh with wonder at it 
weight. It wa exquisit fine and soft, and in color a rich veri dark 
brown, with someth of gold. I love to let it down, tumbl with it 
own weight, as, in her room, she lay back in her chair talk in her 
sweet low voice, I use to fold and braid it, and spread it out and 
play with it. heavens! If I had but known all! 

I said there were particular which did not pleas me. I have told you 
that her confid won me the first night I saw her; but I found that 
she exercis with respect to herself, her mother, her history, 
everyth in fact connect with her life, plans, and people, an ever 
wake reserve. I dare say I wa unreasonable, perhap I wa wrong; I 
dare say I ought to have respect the solemn injunct laid upon my 
father by the state ladi in black velvet. but curios is a restless 
and unscrupul passion, and no one girl can endure, with patience, 
that her should be baffl by another. what harm could it do anyon to 
tell me what I so ardent desir to know? had she no trust in my good 
sens or honor? whi would she not believ me when I assur her, so 
solemnly, that I would not divulg one syllabl of what she told me to 
ani mortal breathing. 

there wa a coldness, it seem to me, beyond her years, in her smile 
melancholi persist refus to afford me the least ray of light. 

I cannot say we quarrel upon thi point, for she would not quarrel 
upon any. It was, of course, veri unfair of me to press her, veri 
ill-bred, but I realli could not help it; and I might just as well have 
let it alone. 

what she did tell me amounted, in my unconscion estimation--to 
nothing. 

It wa all sum up in three veri vagu disclosures: 

first--her name wa carmilla. 

second--h famili wa veri ancient and noble. 

third--her home lay in the direct of the west. 

she would not tell me the name of her family, nor their armori 
bearings, nor the name of their estate, nor even that of the countri 
they live in. 

you are not to suppos that I worri her incessantli on these subjects. 
I watch opportunity, and rather insinu than urg my inquiries. 
onc or twice, indeed, I did attack her more directly. but no matter 
what my tactics, utter failur wa invari the result. reproach and 
caress were all lost upon her. but I must add this, that her evas 
wa conduct with so pretti a melancholi and deprecation, with so many, 
and even passion declar of her like for me, and trust in my 
honor, and with so mani promis that I should at last know all, that I 
could not find it in my heart long to be offend with her. 

she use to place her pretti arm about my neck, draw me to her, and 
lay her cheek to mine, murmur with her lip near my ear, "dearest, 
your littl heart is wounded; think me not cruel becaus I obey the 
irresist law of my strength and weakness; if your dear heart is 
wounded, my wild heart bleed with yours. In the raptur of my enorm 
humili I live in your warm life, and you shall die--die, sweetli 
die--into mine. I cannot help it; as I draw near to you, you, in your 
turn, will draw near to others, and learn the raptur of that cruelty, 
which yet is love; so, for a while, seek to know no more of me and mine, 
but trust me with all your love spirit." 

and when she had spoken such a rhapsody, she would press me more close 
in her trembl embrace, and her lip in soft kiss gentli glow 
upon my cheek. 

her agit and her languag were unintellig to me. 

from these foolish embraces, which were not of veri frequent occurrence, 
I must allow, I use to wish to extric myself; but my energi seem 
to fail me. her murmur word sound like a lullabi in my ear, and 
sooth my resist into a trance, from which I onli seem to recov 
myself when she withdrew her arms. 

In these mysteri mood I did not like her. I experienc a strang 
tumultu excit that wa pleasurable, ever and anon, mingl with 
a vagu sens of fear and disgust. I had no distinct thought about her 
while such scene lasted, but I wa consciou of a love grow into 
adoration, and also of abhorrence. thi I know is paradox, but I can 
make no other attempt to explain the feeling. 

I now write, after an interv of more than ten years, with a trembl 
hand, with a confus and horribl recollect of certain occurr 
and situations, in the ordeal through which I wa unconsci passing; 
though with a vivid and veri sharp remembr of the main current of 
my story. 

but, I suspect, in all live there are certain emot scenes, those 
in which our passion have been most wildli and terribl roused, that 
are of all other the most vagu and dimli remembered. 

sometim after an hour of apathy, my strang and beauti companion 
would take my hand and hold it with a fond pressure, renew again and 
again; blush softly, gaze in my face with languid and burn eyes, 
and breath so fast that her dress rose and fell with the tumultu 
respiration. It wa like the ardor of a lover; it embarrass me; it wa 
hate and yet over-powering; and with gloat eye she drew me to 
her, and her hot lip travel along my cheek in kisses; and she would 
whisper, almost in sobs, "you are mine, you _shall_ be mine, you and I 
are one for ever." then she had thrown herself back in her chair, with 
her small hand over her eyes, leav me trembling. 

"are we related," I use to ask; "what can you mean by all this? I 
remind you perhap of someon whom you love; but you must not, I hate 
it; I don't know you--i don't know myself when you look so and talk so." 

she use to sigh at my vehemence, then turn away and drop my hand. 

respect these veri extraordinari manifest I strove in vain to 
form ani satisfactori theory--i could not refer them to affect or 
trick. It wa unmistak the momentari break out of suppress 
instinct and emotion. wa she, notwithstand her mother' volunt 
denial, subject to brief visit of insanity; or wa there here a 
disguis and a romance? I had read in old storybook of such things. 
what if a boyish lover had found hi way into the house, and sought to 
prosecut hi suit in masquerade, with the assist of a clever old 
adventuress. but there were mani thing against thi hypothesis, highli 
interest as it wa to my vanity. 

I could boast of no littl attent such as masculin gallantri 
delight to offer. between these passion moment there were long 
interv of commonplace, of gaiety, of brood melancholy, dure 
which, except that I detect her eye so full of melancholi fire, 
follow me, at time I might have been as noth to her. except in 
these brief period of mysteri excit her way were girlish; and 
there wa alway a languor about her, quit incompat with a 
masculin system in a state of health. 

In some respect her habit were odd. perhap not so singular in the 
opinion of a town ladi like you, as they appear to us rustic people. 
she use to come down veri late, gener not till one o'clock, she 
would then take a cup of chocolate, but eat nothing; we then went out 
for a walk, which wa a mere saunter, and she seemed, almost 
immediately, exhausted, and either return to the schloss or sat on one 
of the bench that were placed, here and there, among the trees. thi 
wa a bodili languor in which her mind did not sympathize. she wa 
alway an anim talker, and veri intelligent. 

she sometim allud for a moment to her own home, or mention an 
adventur or situation, or an earli recollection, which indic a 
peopl of strang manners, and describ custom of which we knew 
nothing. I gather from these chanc hint that her nativ countri wa 
much more remot than I had at first fancied. 

As we sat thu one afternoon under the tree a funer pass us by. It 
wa that of a pretti young girl, whom I had often seen, the daughter of 
one of the ranger of the forest. the poor man wa walk behind the 
coffin of hi darling; she wa hi onli child, and he look quit 
heartbroken. 

peasant walk two-and-two came behind, they were sing a funer 
hymn. 

I rose to mark my respect as they passed, and join in the hymn they 
were veri sweetli singing. 

My companion shook me a littl roughly, and I turn surprised. 

she said brusquely, "don't you perceiv how discord that is?" 

"I think it veri sweet, on the contrary," I answered, vex at the 
interruption, and veri uncomfortable, lest the peopl who compos the 
littl process should observ and resent what wa passing. 

I resumed, therefore, instantly, and wa again interrupted. "you pierc 
my ears," said carmilla, almost angrily, and stop her ear with her 
tini fingers. "besides, how can you tell that your religion and mine are 
the same; your form wound me, and I hate funerals. what a fuss! whi you 
must die--_everyone_ must die; and all are happier when they do. 
come home." 

"mi father ha gone on with the clergyman to the churchyard. I thought 
you knew she wa to be buri today." 

"she? I don't troubl my head about peasants. I don't know who she is," 
answer carmilla, with a flash from her fine eyes. 

"she is the poor girl who fanci she saw a ghost a fortnight ago, and 
ha been die ever since, till yesterday, when she expired." 

"tell me noth about ghosts. I shan't sleep tonight if you do." 

"I hope there is no plagu or fever coming; all thi look veri like 
it," I continued. "the swineherd' young wife die onli a week ago, and 
she thought someth seiz her by the throat as she lay in her bed, 
and nearli strangl her. papa say such horribl fanci do accompani 
some form of fever. she wa quit well the day before. she sank 
afterwards, and die befor a week." 

"well, _her_ funer is over, I hope, and _her_ hymn sung; and our ear 
shan't be tortur with that discord and jargon. It ha made me nervous. 
sit down here, besid me; sit close; hold my hand; press it 
hard-hard-harder." 

We had move a littl back, and had come to anoth seat. 

she sat down. her face underw a chang that alarm and even 
terrifi me for a moment. It darkened, and becam horribl livid; her 
teeth and hand were clenched, and she frown and compress her lips, 
while she stare down upon the ground at her feet, and trembl all over 
with a continu shudder as irrepress as ague. all her energi 
seem strain to suppress a fit, with which she wa then breathlessli 
tugging; and at length a low convuls cri of suffer broke from her, 
and gradual the hysteria subsided. "there! that come of strangl 
peopl with hymns!" she said at last. "hold me, hold me still. It is 
pass away." 

and so gradual it did; and perhap to dissip the somber impress 
which the spectacl had left upon me, she becam unusu anim and 
chatty; and so we got home. 

thi wa the first time I had seen her exhibit ani defin symptom of 
that delicaci of health which her mother had spoken of. It wa the first 
time, also, I had seen her exhibit anyth like temper. 

both pass away like a summer cloud; and never but onc afterward did 
I wit on her part a momentari sign of anger. I will tell you how 
it happened. 

she and I were look out of one of the long draw room windows, when 
there enter the courtyard, over the drawbridge, a figur of a wander 
whom I knew veri well. He use to visit the schloss gener twice 
a year. 

It wa the figur of a hunchback, with the sharp lean featur that 
gener accompani deformity. He wore a point black beard, and he wa 
smile from ear to ear, show hi white fangs. He wa dress in 
buff, black, and scarlet, and cross with more strap and belt than I 
could count, from which hung all manner of things. behind, he carri a 
magic lantern, and two boxes, which I well knew, in one of which wa a 
salamander, and in the other a mandrake. these monster use to make my 
father laugh. they were compound of part of monkeys, parrots, 
squirrels, fish, and hedgehogs, dri and stitch togeth with great 
neat and startl effect. He had a fiddle, a box of conjur 
apparatus, a pair of foil and mask attach to hi belt, sever other 
mysteri case dangl about him, and a black staff with copper 
ferrul in hi hand. hi companion wa a rough spare dog, that follow 
at hi heels, but stop short, suspici at the drawbridge, and in 
a littl while began to howl dismally. 

In the meantime, the mountebank, stand in the midst of the courtyard, 
rais hi grotesqu hat, and made us a veri ceremoni bow, pay hi 
compliment veri volubl in execr french, and german not 
much better. 

then, disengag hi fiddle, he began to scrape a live air to which 
he sang with a merri discord, danc with ludicr air and activity, 
that made me laugh, in spite of the dog' howling. 

then he advanc to the window with mani smile and salutations, and 
hi hat in hi left hand, hi fiddl under hi arm, and with a fluenci 
that never took breath, he gabbl a long advertis of all hi 
accomplishments, and the resourc of the variou art which he place 
at our service, and the curios and entertain which it wa in 
hi power, at our bidding, to display. 

"will your ladyship be pleas to buy an amulet against the oupire, 
which is go like the wolf, I hear, through these woods," he said 
drop hi hat on the pavement. "they are die of it right and left 
and here is a charm that never fails; onli pin to the pillow, and you 
may laugh in hi face." 

these charm consist of oblong slip of vellum, with cabalist 
cipher and diagram upon them. 

carmilla instantli purchas one, and so did I. 

He wa look up, and we were smile down upon him, amused; at least, 
I can answer for myself. hi pierc black eye, as he look up in our 
faces, seem to detect someth that fix for a moment hi curiosity. 
In an instant he unrol a leather case, full of all manner of odd 
littl steel instruments. 

"see here, my lady," he said, display it, and address me, "I 
profess, among other thing less useful, the art of dentistry. plagu 
take the dog!" he interpolated. "silence, beast! He howl so that your 
ladyship can scarc hear a word. your nobl friend, the young ladi at 
your right, ha the sharpest tooth,--long, thin, pointed, like an awl, 
like a needle; ha, ha! with my sharp and long sight, as I look up, I 
have seen it distinctly; now if it happen to hurt the young lady, and I 
think it must, here am I, here are my file, my punch, my nippers; I will 
make it round and blunt, if her ladyship pleases; no longer the tooth of 
a fish, but of a beauti young ladi as she is. hey? Is the young ladi 
displeased? have I been too bold? have I offend her?" 

the young lady, indeed, look veri angri as she drew back from the 
window. 

"how dare that mountebank insult us so? where is your father? I shall 
demand redress from him. My father would have had the wretch tie up to 
the pump, and flog with a cart whip, and burnt to the bone with the 
cattl brand!" 

she retir from the window a step or two, and sat down, and had hardli 
lost sight of the offender, when her wrath subsid as suddenli as it 
had risen, and she gradual recov her usual tone, and seem to 
forget the littl hunchback and hi follies. 

My father wa out of spirit that evening. On come in he told us that 
there had been anoth case veri similar to the two fatal one which had 
late occurred. the sister of a young peasant on hi estate, onli a 
mile away, wa veri ill, had been, as she describ it, attack veri 
nearli in the same way, and wa now slowli but steadili sinking. 

"all this," said my father, "i strictli refer to natur causes. 
these poor peopl infect one anoth with their superstitions, and so 
repeat in imagin the imag of terror that have infest their 
neighbors." 

"but that veri circumst frighten one horribly," said carmilla. 

"how so?" inquir my father. 

"I am so afraid of fanci I see such things; I think it would be as 
bad as reality." 

"we are in god' hands: noth can happen without hi permission, and 
all will end well for those who love him. He is our faith creator; He 
ha made us all, and will take care of us." 

"creator! _nature!_" said the young ladi in answer to my gentl father. 
"and thi diseas that invad the countri is natural. nature. all 
thing proceed from nature--don't they? all thing in the heaven, in the 
earth, and under the earth, act and live as natur ordains? I 
think so." 

"the doctor said he would come here today," said my father, after a 
silence. "I want to know what he think about it, and what he think we 
had better do." 

"doctor never did me ani good," said carmilla. 

"then you have been ill?" I asked. 

"more ill than ever you were," she answered. 

"long ago?" 

"yes, a long time. I suffer from thi veri illness; but I forget all 
but my pain and weakness, and they were not so bad as are suffer in 
other diseases." 

"you were veri young then?" 

"I dare say, let us talk no more of it. you would not wound a friend?" 

she look languidli in my eyes, and pass her arm round my waist 
lovingly, and led me out of the room. My father wa busi over some 
paper near the window. 

"whi doe your papa like to frighten us?" said the pretti girl with a 
sigh and a littl shudder. 

"he doesn't, dear carmilla, it is the veri furthest thing from hi 
mind." 

"are you afraid, dearest?" 

"I should be veri much if I fanci there wa ani real danger of my 
be attack as those poor peopl were." 

"you are afraid to die?" 

"yes, everi one is." 

"but to die as lover may--to die together, so that they may live 
together. 

"girl are caterpillar while they live in the world, to be final 
butterfli when the summer comes; but in the meantim there are grub 
and larvae, don't you see--each with their peculiar propensities, 
necess and structure. So say monsieur buffon, in hi big book, in 
the next room." 

later in the day the doctor came, and wa closet with papa for some 
time. 

He wa a skil man, of sixti and upwards, he wore powder, and shave 
hi pale face as smooth as a pumpkin. He and papa emerg from the room 
together, and I heard papa laugh, and say as they came out: 

"well, I do wonder at a wise man like you. what do you say to 
hippogriff and dragons?" 

the doctor wa smiling, and made answer, shake hi head-- 

"nevertheless life and death are mysteri states, and we know littl 
of the resourc of either." 

and so they walk on, and I heard no more. I did not then know what the 
doctor had been broaching, but I think I guess it now. 



V 

_A wonder likeness_ 

thi even there arriv from gratz the grave, dark-fac son of the 
pictur cleaner, with a hors and cart laden with two larg pack 
cases, have mani pictur in each. It wa a journey of ten leagues, 
and whenev a messeng arriv at the schloss from our littl capit 
of gratz, we use to crowd about him in the hall, to hear the news. 

thi arriv creat in our seclud quarter quit a sensation. the 
case remain in the hall, and the messeng wa taken charg of by the 
servant till he had eaten hi supper. then with assistants, and arm 
with hammer, rip chisel, and turnscrew, he met us in the hall, where 
we had assembl to wit the unpack of the cases. 

carmilla sat look listlessli on, while one after the other the old 
pictures, nearli all portraits, which had undergon the process of 
renovation, were brought to light. My mother wa of an old hungarian 
family, and most of these pictures, which were about to be restor to 
their places, had come to us through her. 

My father had a list in hi hand, from which he read, as the artist 
rummag out the correspond numbers. I don't know that the pictur 
were veri good, but they were, undoubtedly, veri old, and some of them 
veri curiou also. they had, for the most part, the merit of be now 
seen by me, I may say, for the first time; for the smoke and dust of 
time had all but obliter them. 

"there is a pictur that I have not seen yet," said my father. "in one 
corner, at the top of it, is the name, as well as I could read, 'marcia 
karnstein,' and the date '1698'; and I am curiou to see how it ha 
turn out." 

I rememb it; it wa a small picture, about a foot and a half high, 
and nearli square, without a frame; but it wa so blacken by age that 
I could not make it out. 

the artist now produc it, with evid pride. It wa quit beautiful; 
it wa startling; it seem to live. It wa the effigi of carmilla! 

"carmilla, dear, here is an absolut miracle. here you are, living, 
smiling, readi to speak, in thi picture. isn't it beautiful, papa? and 
see, even the littl mole on her throat." 

My father laughed, and said "certainli it is a wonder likeness," but 
he look away, and to my surpris seem but littl struck by it, and 
went on talk to the pictur cleaner, who wa also someth of an 
artist, and discours with intellig about the portrait or other 
works, which hi art had just brought into light and color, while I wa 
more and more lost in wonder the more I look at the picture. 

"will you let me hang thi pictur in my room, papa?" I asked. 

"certainly, dear," said he, smiling, "i'm veri glad you think it so 
like. It must be prettier even than I thought it, if it is." 

the young ladi did not acknowledg thi pretti speech, did not seem to 
hear it. she wa lean back in her seat, her fine eye under their 
long lash gaze on me in contemplation, and she smile in a kind 
of rapture. 

"and now you can read quit plainli the name that is written in the 
corner. It is not marcia; it look as if it wa done in gold. the name 
is mircalla, countess karnstein, and thi is a littl coronet over and 
underneath a.d. 1698. I am descend from the karnsteins; that is, 
mamma was." 

"ah!" said the lady, languidly, "so am I, I think, a veri long descent, 
veri ancient. are there ani karnstein live now?" 

"none who bear the name, I believe. the famili were ruined, I believe, 
in some civil wars, long ago, but the ruin of the castl are onli about 
three mile away." 

"how interesting!" she said, languidly. "but see what beauti 
moonlight!" she glanc through the hall door, which stood a littl 
open. "suppos you take a littl rambl round the court, and look down 
at the road and river." 

"it is so like the night you came to us," I said. 

she sighed; smiling. 

she rose, and each with her arm about the other' waist, we walk out 
upon the pavement. 

In silence, slowli we walk down to the drawbridge, where the beauti 
landscap open befor us. 

"and so you were think of the night I came here?" she almost 
whispered. 

"are you glad I came?" 

"delighted, dear carmilla," I answered. 

"and you ask for the pictur you think like me, to hang in your room," 
she murmur with a sigh, as she drew her arm closer about my waist, and 
let her pretti head sink upon my shoulder. "how romant you are, 
carmilla," I said. "whenev you tell me your story, it will be made up 
chiefli of some one great romance." 

she kiss me silently. 

"I am sure, carmilla, you have been in love; that there is, at thi 
moment, an affair of the heart go on." 

"I have been in love with no one, and never shall," she whispered, 
"unless it should be with you." 

how beauti she look in the moonlight! 

shi and strang wa the look with which she quickli hid her face in my 
neck and hair, with tumultu sighs, that seem almost to sob, and 
press in mine a hand that trembled. 

her soft cheek wa glow against mine. "darling, darling," she 
murmured, "I live in you; and you would die for me, I love you so." 

I start from her. 

she wa gaze on me with eye from which all fire, all mean had 
flown, and a face colorless and apathetic. 

"i there a chill in the air, dear?" she said drowsily. "I almost 
shiver; have I been dreaming? let us come in. come; come; come in." 

"you look ill, carmilla; a littl faint. you certainli must take some 
wine," I said. 

"yes. I will. i'm better now. I shall be quit well in a few minutes. 
yes, do give me a littl wine," answer carmilla, as we approach 
the door. 

"let us look again for a moment; it is the last time, perhaps, I shall 
see the moonlight with you." 

"how do you feel now, dear carmilla? are you realli better?" I asked. 

I wa begin to take alarm, lest she should have been stricken with 
the strang epidem that they said had invad the countri about us. 

"papa would be griev beyond measure," I added, "if he thought you were 
ever so littl ill, without immedi let us know. We have a veri 
skil doctor near us, the physician who wa with papa today." 

"i'm sure he is. I know how kind you all are; but, dear child, I am 
quit well again. there is noth ever wrong with me, but a 
littl weakness. 

"peopl say I am languid; I am incap of exertion; I can scarc walk 
as far as a child of three year old: and everi now and then the littl 
strength I have falters, and I becom as you have just seen me. but 
after all I am veri easili set up again; in a moment I am perfectli 
myself. see how I have recovered." 

so, indeed, she had; and she and I talk a great deal, and veri 
anim she was; and the remaind of that even pass without ani 
recurr of what I call her infatuations. I mean her crazi talk and 
looks, which embarrassed, and even frighten me. 

but there occur that night an event which gave my thought quit a 
new turn, and seem to startl even carmilla' languid natur into 
momentari energy. 



VI 

_A veri strang agony_ 

when we got into the draw room, and had sat down to our coffe and 
chocolate, although carmilla did not take any, she seem quit herself 
again, and madame, and mademoisel De lafontaine, join us, and made a 
littl card party, in the cours of which papa came in for what he 
call hi "dish of tea." 

when the game wa over he sat down besid carmilla on the sofa, and 
ask her, a littl anxiously, whether she had heard from her mother 
sinc her arrival. 

she answer "no." 

He then ask whether she knew where a letter would reach her at 
present. 

"I cannot tell," she answer ambiguously, "but I have been think of 
leav you; you have been alreadi too hospit and too kind to me. I 
have given you an infin of trouble, and I should wish to take a 
carriag tomorrow, and post in pursuit of her; I know where I shall 
ultim find her, although I dare not yet tell you." 

"but you must not dream of ani such thing," exclaim my father, to my 
great relief. "we can't afford to lose you so, and I won't consent to 
your leav us, except under the care of your mother, who wa so good 
as to consent to your remain with us till she should herself return. 
I should be quit happi if I knew that you heard from her: but thi 
even the account of the progress of the mysteri diseas that ha 
invad our neighborhood, grow even more alarming; and my beauti 
guest, I do feel the responsibility, unaid by advic from your mother, 
veri much. but I shall do my best; and one thing is certain, that you 
must not think of leav us without her distinct direct to that 
effect. We should suffer too much in part from you to consent to 
it easily." 

"thank you, sir, a thousand time for your hospitality," she answered, 
smile bashfully. "you have all been too kind to me; I have seldom been 
so happi in all my life before, as in your beauti chateau, under your 
care, and in the societi of your dear daughter." 

So he gallantly, in hi old-fashion way, kiss her hand, smile and 
pleas at her littl speech. 

I accompani carmilla as usual to her room, and sat and chat with 
her while she wa prepar for bed. 

"do you think," I said at length, "that you will ever confid fulli in 
me?" 

she turn round smiling, but made no answer, onli continu to smile on 
me. 

"you won't answer that?" I said. "you can't answer pleasantly; I ought 
not to have ask you." 

"you were quit right to ask me that, or anything. you do not know how 
dear you are to me, or you could not think ani confid too great to 
look for. but I am under vows, no nun half so awfully, and I dare not 
tell my stori yet, even to you. the time is veri near when you shall 
know everything. you will think me cruel, veri selfish, but love is 
alway selfish; the more ardent the more selfish. how jealou I am you 
cannot know. you must come with me, love me, to death; or els hate me 
and still come with me, and _hating_ me through death and after. there 
is no such word as indiffer in my apathet nature." 

"now, carmilla, you are go to talk your wild nonsens again," I said 
hastily. 

"not I, silli littl fool as I am, and full of whim and fancies; for 
your sake i'll talk like a sage. were you ever at a ball?" 

"no; how you do run on. what is it like? how charm it must be." 

"I almost forget, it is year ago." 

I laughed. 

"you are not so old. your first ball can hardli be forgotten yet." 

"I rememb everyth about it--with an effort. I see it all, as diver 
see what is go on abov them, through a medium, dense, rippling, but 
transparent. there occur that night what ha confus the picture, 
and made it colour faint. I wa all but assassin in my bed, 
wound here," she touch her breast, "and never wa the same since." 

"were you near dying?" 

"yes, very--a cruel love--strang love, that would have taken my life. 
love will have it sacrifices. No sacrific without blood. let us go to 
sleep now; I feel so lazy. how can I get up just now and lock my door?" 

she wa lie with her tini hand buri in her rich wavi hair, under 
her cheek, her littl head upon the pillow, and her glitter eye 
follow me wherev I moved, with a kind of shi smile that I could 
not decipher. 

I bid her good night, and crept from the room with an uncomfort 
sensation. 

I often wonder whether our pretti guest ever said her prayers. I 
certainli had never seen her upon her knees. In the morn she never 
came down until long after our famili prayer were over, and at night 
she never left the draw room to attend our brief even prayer 
in the hall. 

If it had not been that it had casual come out in one of our careless 
talk that she had been baptised, I should have doubt her be a 
christian. religion wa a subject on which I had never heard her speak a 
word. If I had known the world better, thi particular neglect or 
antipathi would not have so much surpris me. 

the precaut of nervou peopl are infectious, and person of a like 
tempera are pretti sure, after a time, to imit them. I had 
adopt carmilla' habit of lock her bedroom door, have taken into 
my head all her whimsic alarm about midnight invad and prowl 
assassins. I had also adopt her precaut of make a brief search 
through her room, to satisfi herself that no lurk assassin or robber 
wa "ensconced." 

these wise measur taken, I got into my bed and fell asleep. A light 
wa burn in my room. thi wa an old habit, of veri earli date, and 
which noth could have tempt me to dispens with. 

thu fortifi I might take my rest in peace. but dream come through 
stone walls, light up dark rooms, or darken light ones, and their 
person make their exit and their entranc as they please, and laugh 
at locksmiths. 

I had a dream that night that wa the begin of a veri strang agony. 

I cannot call it a nightmare, for I wa quit consciou of be asleep. 

but I wa equal consciou of be in my room, and lie in bed, 
precis as I actual was. I saw, or fanci I saw, the room and it 
furnitur just as I had seen it last, except that it wa veri dark, and 
I saw someth move round the foot of the bed, which at first I 
could not accur distinguish. but I soon saw that it wa a 
sooty-black anim that resembl a monstrou cat. It appear to me 
about four or five feet long for it measur fulli the length of the 
hearthrug as it pass over it; and it continu to-e and fro-e with 
the lithe, sinist restless of a beast in a cage. I could not cri 
out, although as you may suppose, I wa terrified. it pace wa grow 
faster, and the room rapidli darker and darker, and at length so dark 
that I could no longer see anyth of it but it eyes. I felt it spring 
lightli on the bed. the two broad eye approach my face, and suddenli 
I felt a sting pain as if two larg needl darted, an inch or two 
apart, deep into my breast. I wake with a scream. the room wa light 
by the candl that burnt there all through the night, and I saw a femal 
figur stand at the foot of the bed, a littl at the right side. It 
wa in a dark loos dress, and it hair wa down and cover it 
shoulders. A block of stone could not have been more still. there wa 
not the slightest stir of respiration. As I stare at it, the figur 
appear to have chang it place, and wa now nearer the door; then, 
close to it, the door opened, and it pass out. 

I wa now relieved, and abl to breath and move. My first thought wa 
that carmilla had been play me a trick, and that I had forgotten to 
secur my door. I hasten to it, and found it lock as usual on the 
inside. I wa afraid to open it--i wa horrified. I sprang into my bed 
and cover my head up in the bedclothes, and lay there more dead than 
aliv till morning. 



vii 

_descending_ 

It would be vain my attempt to tell you the horror with which, even 
now, I recal the occurr of that night. It wa no such transitori 
terror as a dream leav behind it. It seem to deepen by time, and 
commun itself to the room and the veri furnitur that had 
encompass the apparition. 

I could not bear next day to be alon for a moment. I should have told 
papa, but for two opposit reasons. At one time I thought he would laugh 
at my story, and I could not bear it be treat as a jest; and at 
anoth I thought he might fanci that I had been attack by the 
mysteri complaint which had invad our neighborhood. I had myself no 
misgiv of the kind, and as he had been rather an invalid for some 
time, I wa afraid of alarm him. 

I wa comfort enough with my good-natur companions, madam 
perrodon, and the vivaci mademoisel lafontaine. they both perceiv 
that I wa out of spirit and nervous, and at length I told them what 
lay so heavi at my heart. 

mademoisel laughed, but I fanci that madam perrodon look anxious. 

"by-the-by," said mademoiselle, laughing, "the long lime tree walk, 
behind carmilla' bedroom window, is haunted!" 

"nonsense!" exclaim madame, who probabl thought the theme rather 
inopportune, "and who tell that story, my dear?" 

"martin say that he came up twice, when the old yard gate wa be 
repaired, befor sunrise, and twice saw the same femal figur walk 
down the lime tree avenue." 

"so he well might, as long as there are cow to milk in the river 
fields," said madame. 

"I daresay; but martin choos to be frightened, and never did I see 
fool more frightened." 

"you must not say a word about it to carmilla, becaus she can see down 
that walk from her room window," I interposed, "and she is, if possible, 
a greater coward than i." 

carmilla came down rather later than usual that day. 

"I wa so frighten last night," she said, so soon as were together, 
"and I am sure I should have seen someth dread if it had not been 
for that charm I bought from the poor littl hunchback whom I call 
such hard names. I had a dream of someth black come round my bed, 
and I awok in a perfect horror, and I realli thought, for some seconds, 
I saw a dark figur near the chimney-piece, but I felt under my pillow 
for my charm, and the moment my finger touch it, the figur 
disappeared, and I felt quit certain, onli that I had it by me, that 
someth fright would have made it appearance, and, perhaps, 
throttl me, as it did those poor peopl we heard of. 

"well, listen to me," I began, and recount my adventure, at the 
recit of which she appear horrified. 

"and had you the charm near you?" she asked, earnestly. 

"no, I had drop it into a china vase in the draw room, but I shall 
certainli take it with me tonight, as you have so much faith in it." 

At thi distanc of time I cannot tell you, or even understand, how I 
overcam my horror so effectu as to lie alon in my room that night. 
I rememb distinctli that I pin the charm to my pillow. I fell 
asleep almost immediately, and slept even more soundli than usual 
all night. 

next night I pass as well. My sleep wa delight deep and 
dreamless. 

but I waken with a sens of lassitud and melancholy, which, however, 
did not exceed a degre that wa almost luxurious. 

"well, I told you so," said carmilla, when I describ my quiet sleep, 
"I had such delight sleep myself last night; I pin the charm to 
the breast of my nightdress. It wa too far away the night before. I am 
quit sure it wa all fancy, except the dreams. I use to think that 
evil spirit made dreams, but our doctor told me it is no such thing. 
onli a fever pass by, or some other malady, as they often do, he 
said, knock at the door, and not be abl to get in, pass on, with 
that alarm." 

"and what do you think the charm is?" said I. 

"it ha been fumig or immers in some drug, and is an antidot 
against the malaria," she answered. 

"then it act onli on the body?" 

"certainly; you don't suppos that evil spirit are frighten by bit 
of ribbon, or the perfum of a druggist' shop? no, these complaints, 
wander in the air, begin by tri the nerves, and so infect the 
brain, but befor they can seiz upon you, the antidot repel them. 
that I am sure is what the charm ha done for us. It is noth magical, 
it is simpli natural." 

I should have been happier if I could have quit agre with carmilla, 
but I did my best, and the impress wa a littl lose it force. 

for some night I slept profoundly; but still everi morn I felt the 
same lassitude, and a languor weigh upon me all day. I felt myself a 
chang girl. A strang melancholi wa steal over me, a melancholi 
that I would not have interrupted. dim thought of death began to open, 
and an idea that I wa slowli sink took gentle, and, somehow, not 
unwelcome, possess of me. If it wa sad, the tone of mind which thi 
induc wa also sweet. 

whatev it might be, my soul acquiesc in it. 

I would not admit that I wa ill, I would not consent to tell my papa, 
or to have the doctor sent for. 

carmilla becam more devot to me than ever, and her strang paroxysm 
of languid ador more frequent. she use to gloat on me with 
increas ardor the more my strength and spirit waned. thi alway 
shock me like a momentari glare of insanity. 

without know it, I wa now in a pretti advanc stage of the 
strangest ill under which mortal ever suffered. there wa an 
unaccount fascin in it earlier symptom that more than 
reconcil me to the incapacit effect of that stage of the malady. 
thi fascin increas for a time, until it reach a certain point, 
when gradual a sens of the horribl mingl itself with it, 
deepening, as you shall hear, until it discolor and pervert the 
whole state of my life. 

the first chang I experienc wa rather agreeable. It wa veri near 
the turn point from which began the descent of avernus. 

certain vagu and strang sensat visit me in my sleep. the 
prevail one wa of that pleasant, peculiar cold thrill which we feel 
in bathing, when we move against the current of a river. thi wa soon 
accompani by dream that seem interminable, and were so vagu that 
I could never recollect their sceneri and persons, or ani one connect 
portion of their action. but they left an aw impression, and a sens 
of exhaustion, as if I had pass through a long period of great mental 
exert and danger. 

after all these dream there remain on wake a remembr of have 
been in a place veri nearli dark, and of have spoken to peopl whom I 
could not see; and especi of one clear voice, of a female's, veri 
deep, that spoke as if at a distance, slowly, and produc alway the 
same sensat of indescrib solemn and fear. sometim there came 
a sensat as if a hand wa drawn softli along my cheek and neck. 
sometim it wa as if warm lip kiss me, and longer and longer and 
more lovingli as they reach my throat, but there the caress fix 
itself. My heart beat faster, my breath rose and fell rapidli and 
full drawn; a sobbing, that rose into a sens of strangulation, 
supervened, and turn into a dread convulsion, in which my sens 
left me and I becam unconscious. 

It wa now three week sinc the commenc of thi unaccount 
state. 

My suffer had, dure the last week, told upon my appearance. I had 
grown pale, my eye were dilat and darken underneath, and the 
languor which I had long felt began to display itself in my countenance. 

My father ask me often whether I wa ill; but, with an obstinaci which 
now seem to me unaccountable, I persist in assur him that I wa 
quit well. 

In a sens thi wa true. I had no pain, I could complain of no bodili 
derangement. My complaint seem to be one of the imagination, or the 
nerves, and, horribl as my suffer were, I kept them, with a morbid 
reserve, veri nearli to myself. 

It could not be that terribl complaint which the peasant call the 
oupire, for I had now been suffer for three weeks, and they were 
seldom ill for much more than three days, when death put an end to 
their miseries. 

carmilla complain of dream and feverish sensations, but by no mean 
of so alarm a kind as mine. I say that mine were extrem alarming. 
had I been capabl of comprehend my condition, I would have invok 
aid and advic on my knees. the narcot of an unsuspect influenc wa 
act upon me, and my percept were benumbed. 

I am go to tell you now of a dream that led immedi to an odd 
discovery. 

one night, instead of the voic I wa accustom to hear in the dark, I 
heard one, sweet and tender, and at the same time terrible, which said, 
"your mother warn you to bewar of the assassin." At the same time a 
light unexpectedli sprang up, and I saw carmilla, standing, near the 
foot of my bed, in her white nightdress, bathed, from her chin to her 
feet, in one great stain of blood. 

I waken with a shriek, possess with the one idea that carmilla wa 
be murdered. I rememb spring from my bed, and my next 
recollect is that of stand on the lobby, cri for help. 

madam and mademoisel came scurri out of their room in alarm; a 
lamp burn alway on the lobby, and see me, they soon learn the 
caus of my terror. 

I insist on our knock at carmilla' door. our knock wa 
unanswered. 

It soon becam a pound and an uproar. We shriek her name, but all 
wa vain. 

We all grew frightened, for the door wa locked. We hurri back, in 
panic, to my room. there we rang the bell long and furiously. If my 
father' room had been at that side of the house, we would have call 
him up at onc to our aid. but, alas! he wa quit out of hearing, and 
to reach him involv an excurs for which we none of us had courage. 

servants, however, soon came run up the stairs; I had got on my 
dress gown and slipper meanwhile, and my companion were alreadi 
similarli furnished. recogn the voic of the servant on the 
lobby, we salli out together; and have renewed, as fruitlessly, our 
summon at carmilla' door, I order the men to forc the lock. they 
did so, and we stood, hold our light aloft, in the doorway, and so 
stare into the room. 

We call her by name; but there wa still no reply. We look round the 
room. everyth wa undisturbed. It wa exactli in the state in which I 
had left it on bid her good night. but carmilla wa gone. 



viii 

_search_ 

At sight of the room, perfectli undisturb except for our violent 
entrance, we began to cool a little, and soon recov our sens 
suffici to dismiss the men. It had struck mademoisel that 
possibl carmilla had been waken by the uproar at her door, and in her 
first panic had jump from her bed, and hid herself in a press, or 
behind a curtain, from which she could not, of course, emerg until the 
majordomo and hi myrmidon had withdrawn. We now recommenc our 
search, and began to call her name again. 

It wa all to no purpose. our perplex and agit increased. We 
examin the windows, but they were secured. I implor of carmilla, if 
she had conceal herself, to play thi cruel trick no longer--to come 
out and to end our anxieties. It wa all useless. I wa by thi time 
convinc that she wa not in the room, nor in the dress room, the 
door of which wa still lock on thi side. she could not have pass 
it. I wa utterli puzzled. had carmilla discov one of those secret 
passag which the old housekeep said were known to exist in the 
schloss, although the tradit of their exact situat had been lost? 
A littl time would, no doubt, explain all--utterli perplex as, for 
the present, we were. 

It wa past four o'clock, and I prefer pass the remain hour of 
dark in madame' room. daylight brought no solut of the 
difficulty. 

the whole household, with my father at it head, wa in a state of 
agit next morning. everi part of the chateau wa searched. the 
ground were explored. No trace of the miss ladi could be discovered. 
the stream wa about to be dragged; my father wa in distraction; what a 
tale to have to tell the poor girl' mother on her return. I, too, wa 
almost besid myself, though my grief wa quit of a differ kind. 

the morn wa pass in alarm and excitement. It wa now one o'clock, 
and still no tidings. I ran up to carmilla' room, and found her 
stand at her dress table. I wa astounded. I could not believ my 
eyes. she beckon me to her with her pretti finger, in silence. her 
face express extrem fear. 

I ran to her in an ecstasi of joy; I kiss and embrac her again and 
again. I ran to the bell and rang it vehemently, to bring other to the 
spot who might at onc reliev my father' anxiety. 

"dear carmilla, what ha becom of you all thi time? We have been in 
agoni of anxieti about you," I exclaimed. "where have you been? how 
did you come back?" 

"last night ha been a night of wonders," she said. 

"for mercy' sake, explain all you can." 

"it wa past two last night," she said, "when I went to sleep as usual 
in my bed, with my door locked, that of the dress room, and that 
open upon the gallery. My sleep wa uninterrupted, and, so far as I 
know, dreamless; but I woke just now on the sofa in the dress room 
there, and I found the door between the room open, and the other door 
forced. how could all thi have happen without my be wakened? It 
must have been accompani with a great deal of noise, and I am 
particularli easili wakened; and how could I have been carri out of my 
bed without my sleep have been interrupted, I whom the slightest stir 
startles?" 

By thi time, madame, mademoiselle, my father, and a number of the 
servant were in the room. carmilla was, of course, overwhelm with 
inquiries, congratulations, and welcomes. she had but one stori to tell, 
and seem the least abl of all the parti to suggest ani way of 
account for what had happened. 

My father took a turn up and down the room, thinking. I saw carmilla' 
eye follow him for a moment with a sly, dark glance. 

when my father had sent the servant away, mademoisel have gone in 
search of a littl bottl of valerian and salvolatile, and there be 
no one now in the room with carmilla, except my father, madame, and 
myself, he came to her thoughtfully, took her hand veri kindly, led her 
to the sofa, and sat down besid her. 

"will you forgiv me, my dear, if I risk a conjecture, and ask a 
question?" 

"who can have a better right?" she said. "ask what you please, and I 
will tell you everything. but my stori is simpli one of bewilder and 
darkness. I know absolut nothing. put ani question you please, but 
you know, of course, the limit mamma ha place me under." 

"perfectly, my dear child. I need not approach the topic on which she 
desir our silence. now, the marvel of last night consist in your 
have been remov from your bed and your room, without be wakened, 
and thi remov have occur appar while the window were still 
secured, and the two door lock upon the inside. I will tell you my 
theori and ask you a question." 

carmilla wa lean on her hand dejectedly; madam and I were 
listen breathlessly. 

"now, my question is this. have you ever been suspect of walk in 
your sleep?" 

"never, sinc I wa veri young indeed." 

"but you did walk in your sleep when you were young?" 

"yes; I know I did. I have been told so often by my old nurse." 

My father smile and nodded. 

"well, what ha happen is this. you got up in your sleep, unlock the 
door, not leav the key, as usual, in the lock, but take it out and 
lock it on the outside; you again took the key out, and carri it 
away with you to some one of the five-and-twenti room on thi floor, or 
perhap upstair or downstairs. there are so mani room and closets, so 
much heavi furniture, and such accumul of lumber, that it would 
requir a week to search thi old hous thoroughly. Do you see, now, 
what I mean?" 

"I do, but not all," she answered. 

"and how, papa, do you account for her find herself on the sofa in 
the dress room, which we had search so carefully?" 

"she came there after you had search it, still in her sleep, and at 
last awok spontaneously, and wa as much surpris to find herself 
where she wa as ani one else. I wish all mysteri were as easili and 
innoc explain as yours, carmilla," he said, laughing. "and so we 
may congratul ourselv on the certainti that the most natur 
explan of the occurr is one that involv no drugging, no 
tamper with locks, no burglars, or poisoners, or witches--noth 
that need alarm carmilla, or anyon else, for our safety." 

carmilla wa look charmingly. noth could be more beauti than 
her tints. her beauti was, I think, enhanc by that grace languor 
that wa peculiar to her. I think my father wa silent contrast her 
look with mine, for he said: 

"I wish my poor laura wa look more like herself"; and he sighed. 

So our alarm were happili ended, and carmilla restor to her friends. 



IX 

_the doctor_ 

As carmilla would not hear of an attend sleep in her room, my 
father arrang that a servant should sleep outsid her door, so that 
she would not attempt to make anoth such excurs without be 
arrest at her own door. 

that night pass quietly; and next morn early, the doctor, whom my 
father had sent for without tell me a word about it, arriv to 
see me. 

madam accompani me to the library; and there the grave littl doctor, 
with white hair and spectacles, whom I mention before, wa wait to 
receiv me. 

I told him my story, and as I proceed he grew graver and graver. 

We were standing, he and I, in the recess of one of the windows, face 
one another. when my statement wa over, he lean with hi shoulder 
against the wall, and with hi eye fix on me earnestly, with an 
interest in which wa a dash of horror. 

after a minute' reflection, he ask madam if he could see my father. 

He wa sent for accordingly, and as he entered, smiling, he said: 

"I dare say, doctor, you are go to tell me that I am an old fool for 
have brought you here; I hope I am." 

but hi smile fade into shadow as the doctor, with a veri grave face, 
beckon him to him. 

He and the doctor talk for some time in the same recess where I had 
just confer with the physician. It seem an earnest and 
argument conversation. the room is veri large, and I and madam 
stood together, burn with curiosity, at the farther end. not a word 
could we hear, however, for they spoke in a veri low tone, and the deep 
recess of the window quit conceal the doctor from view, and veri 
nearli my father, whose foot, arm, and shoulder onli could we see; and 
the voic were, I suppose, all the less audibl for the sort of closet 
which the thick wall and window formed. 

after a time my father' face look into the room; it wa pale, 
thoughtful, and, I fancied, agitated. 

"laura, dear, come here for a moment. madame, we shan't troubl you, the 
doctor says, at present." 

accordingli I approached, for the first time a littl alarmed; for, 
although I felt veri weak, I did not feel ill; and strength, one alway 
fancies, is a thing that may be pick up when we please. 

My father held out hi hand to me, as I drew near, but he wa look at 
the doctor, and he said: 

"it certainli is veri odd; I don't understand it quite. laura, come 
here, dear; now attend to doctor spielsberg, and recollect yourself." 

"you mention a sensat like that of two needl pierc the skin, 
somewher about your neck, on the night when you experienc your first 
horribl dream. Is there still ani soreness?" 

"none at all," I answered. 

"can you indic with your finger about the point at which you think 
thi occurred?" 

"veri littl below my throat--here," I answered. 

I wore a morn dress, which cover the place I point to. 

"now you can satisfi yourself," said the doctor. "you won't mind your 
papa' lower your dress a veri little. It is necessary, to detect a 
symptom of the complaint under which you have been suffering." 

I acquiesced. It wa onli an inch or two below the edg of my collar. 

"god bless me!--so it is," exclaim my father, grow pale. 

"you see it now with your own eyes," said the doctor, with a gloomi 
triumph. 

"what is it?" I exclaimed, begin to be frightened. 

"nothing, my dear young lady, but a small blue spot, about the size of 
the tip of your littl finger; and now," he continued, turn to papa, 
"the question is what is best to be done?" 

"i there ani danger?" I urged, in great trepidation. 

"I trust not, my dear," answer the doctor. "I don't see whi you should 
not recover. I don't see whi you should not begin immedi to get 
better. that is the point at which the sens of strangul begins?" 

"yes," I answered. 

"and--recollect as well as you can--th same point wa a kind of center 
of that thrill which you describ just now, like the current of a cold 
stream run against you?" 

"it may have been; I think it was." 

"ay, you see?" he added, turn to my father. "shall I say a word to 
madame?" 

"certainly," said my father. 

He call madam to him, and said: 

"I find my young friend here far from well. It won't be of ani great 
consequence, I hope; but it will be necessari that some step be taken, 
which I will explain by-and-by; but in the meantime, madame, you will 
be so good as not to let miss laura be alon for one moment. that is the 
onli direct I need give for the present. It is indispensable." 

"we may reli upon your kindness, madame, I know," ad my father. 

madam satisfi him eagerly. 

"and you, dear laura, I know you will observ the doctor' direction." 

"I shall have to ask your opinion upon anoth patient, whose symptom 
slightli resembl those of my daughter, that have just been detail to 
you--veri much milder in degree, but I believ quit of the same sort. 
she is a young lady--our guest; but as you say you will be pass thi 
way again thi evening, you can't do better than take your supper here, 
and you can then see her. she doe not come down till the afternoon." 

"I thank you," said the doctor. "I shall be with you, then, at about 
seven thi evening." 

and then they repeat their direct to me and to madame, and with 
thi part charg my father left us, and walk out with the doctor; 
and I saw them pace togeth up and down between the road and the 
moat, on the grassi platform in front of the castle, evid absorb 
in earnest conversation. 

the doctor did not return. I saw him mount hi hors there, take hi 
leave, and ride away eastward through the forest. 

nearli at the same time I saw the man arriv from dranfield with the 
letters, and dismount and hand the bag to my father. 

In the meantime, madam and I were both busy, lost in conjectur as to 
the reason of the singular and earnest direct which the doctor and 
my father had concur in imposing. madame, as she afterward told me, 
wa afraid the doctor apprehend a sudden seizure, and that, without 
prompt assistance, I might either lose my life in a fit, or at least be 
serious hurt. 

the interpret did not strike me; and I fancied, perhap luckili for 
my nerves, that the arrang wa prescrib simpli to secur a 
companion, who would prevent my take too much exercise, or eat 
unrip fruit, or do ani of the fifti foolish thing to which young 
peopl are suppos to be prone. 

about half an hour after my father came in--h had a letter in hi 
hand--and said: 

"thi letter had been delayed; it is from gener spielsdorf. He might 
have been here yesterday, he may not come till tomorrow or he may be 
here today." 

He put the open letter into my hand; but he did not look pleased, as he 
use when a guest, especi one so much love as the general, 
wa coming. 

On the contrary, he look as if he wish him at the bottom of the red 
sea. there wa plainli someth on hi mind which he did not choos 
to divulge. 

"papa, darling, will you tell me this?" said I, suddenli lay my hand 
on hi arm, and looking, I am sure, imploringli in hi face. 

"perhaps," he answered, smooth my hair caressingli over my eyes. 

"doe the doctor think me veri ill?" 

"no, dear; he thinks, if right step are taken, you will be quit well 
again, at least, on the high road to a complet recovery, in a day or 
two," he answered, a littl dryly. "I wish our good friend, the general, 
had chosen ani other time; that is, I wish you had been perfectli well 
to receiv him." 

"but do tell me, papa," I insisted, "what doe he think is the matter 
with me?" 

"nothing; you must not plagu me with questions," he answered, with more 
irrit than I ever rememb him to have display before; and see 
that I look wounded, I suppose, he kiss me, and added, "you shall 
know all about it in a day or two; that is, all that I know. In the 
meantim you are not to troubl your head about it." 

He turn and left the room, but came back befor I had done wonder 
and puzzl over the odditi of all this; it wa mere to say that he 
wa go to karnstein, and had order the carriag to be readi at 
twelve, and that I and madam should accompani him; he wa go to see the 
priest who live near those picturesqu grounds, upon business, and as 
carmilla had never seen them, she could follow, when she came down, with 
mademoiselle, who would bring materi for what you call a picnic, 
which might be laid for us in the ruin castle. 

At twelv o'clock, accordingly, I wa ready, and not long after, my 
father, madam and I set out upon our project drive. 

pass the drawbridg we turn to the right, and follow the road over 
the steep gothic bridge, westward, to reach the desert villag and 
ruin castl of karnstein. 

No sylvan drive can be fanci prettier. the ground break into gentl 
hill and hollows, all cloth with beauti wood, total destitut of 
the compar formal which artifici plant and earli cultur 
and prune impart. 

the irregular of the ground often lead the road out of it course, 
and caus it to wind beauti round the side of broken hollow and 
the steeper side of the hills, among varieti of ground almost 
inexhaustible. 

turn one of these points, we suddenli encount our old friend, the 
general, ride toward us, attend by a mount servant. hi 
portmanteau were follow in a hire wagon, such as we term a cart. 

the gener dismount as we pull up, and, after the usual greetings, 
wa easili persuad to accept the vacant seat in the carriag and send 
hi hors on with hi servant to the schloss. 



X 

_bereaved_ 

It wa about ten month sinc we had last seen him: but that time had 
suffic to make an alter of year in hi appearance. He had grown 
thinner; someth of gloom and anxieti had taken the place of that 
cordial seren which use to character hi features. hi dark blue 
eyes, alway penetrating, now gleam with a sterner light from under 
hi shaggi grey eyebrows. It wa not such a chang as grief alon 
usual induces, and angrier passion seem to have had their share in 
bring it about. 

We had not long resum our drive, when the gener began to talk, with 
hi usual soldierli directness, of the bereavement, as he term it, 
which he had sustain in the death of hi belov niec and ward; and 
he then broke out in a tone of intens bitter and fury, inveigh 
against the "hellish arts" to which she had fallen a victim, and 
expressing, with more exasper than piety, hi wonder that heaven 
should toler so monstrou an indulg of the lust and malign 
of hell. 

My father, who saw at onc that someth veri extraordinari had 
befallen, ask him, if not too pain to him, to detail the 
circumst which he thought justifi the strong term in which he 
express himself. 

"I should tell you all with pleasure," said the general, "but you would 
not believ me." 

"whi should I not?" he asked. 

"because," he answer testily, "you believ in noth but what 
consist with your own prejudic and illusions. I rememb when I wa 
like you, but I have learn better." 

"tri me," said my father; "I am not such a dogmatist as you suppose. 
besid which, I veri well know that you gener requir proof for 
what you believe, and am, therefore, veri strongli predispos to 
respect your conclusions." 

"you are right in suppos that I have not been led lightli into a 
belief in the marvelous--for what I have experienc is marvelous--and I 
have been forc by extraordinari evid to credit that which ran 
counter, diametrically, to all my theories. I have been made the dupe of 
a preternatur conspiracy." 

notwithstand hi profess of confid in the general' 
penetration, I saw my father, at thi point, glanc at the general, 
with, as I thought, a mark suspicion of hi sanity. 

the gener did not see it, luckily. He wa look gloomili and 
curious into the glade and vista of the wood that were open 
befor us. 

"you are go to the ruin of karnstein?" he said. "yes, it is a lucki 
coincidence; do you know I wa go to ask you to bring me there to 
inspect them. I have a special object in exploring. there is a ruin 
chapel, ain't there, with a great mani tomb of that extinct family?" 

"so there are--highli interesting," said my father. "I hope you are 
think of claim the titl and estates?" 

My father said thi gaily, but the gener did not recollect the laugh, 
or even the smile, which courtesi exact for a friend' joke; on the 
contrary, he look grave and even fierce, rumin on a matter that 
stir hi anger and horror. 

"someth veri different," he said, gruffly. "I mean to unearth some of 
those fine people. I hope, by god' blessing, to accomplish a piou 
sacrileg here, which will reliev our earth of certain monsters, and 
enabl honest peopl to sleep in their bed without be assail by 
murderers. I have strang thing to tell you, my dear friend, such as I 
myself would have scout as incred a few month since." 

My father look at him again, but thi time not with a glanc of 
suspicion--with an eye, rather, of keen intellig and alarm. 

"the hous of karnstein," he said, "ha been long extinct: a hundr 
year at least. My dear wife wa matern descend from the 
karnsteins. but the name and titl have long ceas to exist. the castl 
is a ruin; the veri villag is deserted; it is fifti year sinc the 
smoke of a chimney wa seen there; not a roof left." 

"quit true. I have heard a great deal about that sinc I last saw you; 
a great deal that will astonish you. but I had better relat everyth 
in the order in which it occurred," said the general. "you saw my dear 
ward--mi child, I may call her. No creatur could have been more 
beautiful, and onli three month ago none more blooming." 

"yes, poor thing! when I saw her last she certainli wa quit lovely," 
said my father. "I wa griev and shock more than I can tell you, my 
dear friend; I knew what a blow it wa to you." 

He took the general' hand, and they exchang a kind pressure. tear 
gather in the old soldier' eyes. He did not seek to conceal them. 
He said: 

"we have been veri old friends; I knew you would feel for me, childless 
as I am. she had becom an object of veri near interest to me, and 
repaid my care by an affect that cheer my home and made my life 
happy. that is all gone. the year that remain to me on earth may not be 
veri long; but by god' merci I hope to accomplish a servic to mankind 
befor I die, and to subserv the vengeanc of heaven upon the fiend 
who have murder my poor child in the spring of her hope and beauty!" 

"you said, just now, that you intend relat everyth as it 
occurred," said my father. "pray do; I assur you that it is not mere 
curios that prompt me." 

By thi time we had reach the point at which the drunstal road, by 
which the gener had come, diverg from the road which we were 
travel to karnstein. 

"how far is it to the ruins?" inquir the general, look anxious 
forward. 

"about half a league," answer my father. "pray let us hear the stori 
you were so good as to promise." 



XI 

_the story_ 

"with all my heart," said the general, with an effort; and after a short 
paus in which to arrang hi subject, he commenc one of the strangest 
narr I ever heard. 

"mi dear child wa look forward with great pleasur to the visit you 
had been so good as to arrang for her to your charm daughter." here 
he made me a gallant but melancholi bow. "in the meantim we had an 
invit to my old friend the count carlsfeld, whose schloss is about 
six leagu to the other side of karnstein. It wa to attend the seri 
of fete which, you remember, were given by him in honor of hi 
illustri visitor, the grand duke charles." 

"yes; and veri splendid, I believe, they were," said my father. 

"princely! but then hi hospit are quit regal. He ha aladdin' 
lamp. the night from which my sorrow date wa devot to a magnific 
masquerade. the ground were thrown open, the tree hung with color 
lamps. there wa such a display of firework as pari itself had never 
witnessed. and such music--music, you know, is my weakness--such 
ravish music! the finest instrument band, perhaps, in the world, 
and the finest singer who could be collect from all the great opera 
in europe. As you wander through these fantast illumin 
grounds, the moon-light chateau throw a rosi light from it long 
row of windows, you would suddenli hear these ravish voic steal 
from the silenc of some grove, or rise from boat upon the lake. I 
felt myself, as I look and listened, carri back into the romanc and 
poetri of my earli youth. 

"when the firework were ended, and the ball beginning, we return to 
the nobl suit of room that were thrown open to the dancers. A mask 
ball, you know, is a beauti sight; but so brilliant a spectacl of 
the kind I never saw before. 

"it wa a veri aristocrat assembly. I wa myself almost the onli 
'nobody' present. 

"mi dear child wa look quit beautiful. she wore no mask. her 
excit and delight ad an unspeak charm to her features, 
alway lovely. I remark a young lady, dress magnificently, but 
wear a mask, who appear to me to be observ my ward with 
extraordinari interest. I had seen her, earlier in the evening, in the 
great hall, and again, for a few minutes, walk near us, on the 
terrac under the castl windows, similarli employed. A lady, also 
masked, richli and grave dressed, and with a state air, like a 
person of rank, accompani her as a chaperon. 

"had the young ladi not worn a mask, I could, of course, have been much 
more certain upon the question whether she wa realli watch my 
poor darling. 

"I am now well assur that she was. 

"we were now in one of the salons. My poor dear child had been dancing, 
and wa rest a littl in one of the chair near the door; I wa 
stand near. the two ladi I have mention had approach and the 
younger took the chair next my ward; while her companion stood besid 
me, and for a littl time address herself, in a low tone, to 
her charge. 

"avail herself of the privileg of her mask, she turn to me, and in 
the tone of an old friend, and call me by my name, open a 
convers with me, which piqu my curios a good deal. she 
refer to mani scene where she had met me--at court, and at 
distinguish houses. she allud to littl incid which I had long 
ceas to think of, but which, I found, had onli lain in abey in my 
memory, for they instantli start into life at her touch. 

"I becam more and more curiou to ascertain who she was, everi moment. 
she parri my attempt to discov veri adroitli and pleasantly. the 
knowledg she show of mani passag in my life seem to me all but 
unaccountable; and she appear to take a not unnatur pleasur in 
foil my curiosity, and in see me flounder in my eager perplexity, 
from one conjectur to another. 

"in the meantim the young lady, whom her mother call by the odd name 
of millarca, when she onc or twice address her, had, with the same 
eas and grace, got into convers with my ward. 

"she introduc herself by say that her mother wa a veri old 
acquaint of mine. she spoke of the agreeabl audac which a mask 
render practicable; she talk like a friend; she admir her dress, 
and insinu veri prettili her admir of her beauty. she amus 
her with laugh critic upon the peopl who crowd the ballroom, 
and laugh at my poor child' fun. she wa veri witti and live when 
she pleased, and after a time they had grown veri good friends, and the 
young stranger lower her mask, display a remark beauti face. 
I had never seen it before, neither had my dear child. but though it wa 
new to us, the featur were so engaging, as well as lovely, that it 
wa imposs not to feel the attract powerfully. My poor girl did 
so. I never saw anyon more taken with anoth at first sight, unless, 
indeed, it wa the stranger herself, who seem quit to have lost her 
heart to her. 

"in the meantime, avail myself of the licens of a masquerade, I put 
not a few question to the elder lady. 

"'you have puzzl me utterly,' I said, laughing. 'i that not enough? 
won't you, now, consent to stand on equal terms, and do me the kind 
to remov your mask?' 

"'can ani request be more unreasonable?' she replied. 'ask a ladi to 
yield an advantage! beside, how do you know you should recogn me? 
year make changes.' 

"'a you see,' I said, with a bow, and, I suppose, a rather melancholi 
littl laugh. 

"'a philosoph tell us,' she said; 'and how do you know that a sight 
of my face would help you?' 

"'i should take chanc for that,' I answered. 'it is vain tri to make 
yourself out an old woman; your figur betray you.' 

"'years, nevertheless, have pass sinc I saw you, rather sinc you saw 
me, for that is what I am considering. millarca, there, is my daughter; 
I cannot then be young, even in the opinion of peopl whom time ha 
taught to be indulgent, and I may not like to be compar with what you 
rememb me. you have no mask to remove. you can offer me noth in 
exchange.' 

"'mi petit is to your pity, to remov it.' 

"'and mine to yours, to let it stay where it is,' she replied. 

"'well, then, at least you will tell me whether you are french or 
german; you speak both languag so perfectly.' 

"'i don't think I shall tell you that, general; you intend a surprise, 
and are medit the particular point of attack.' 

"'at all events, you won't deni this,' I said, 'that be honor by 
your permiss to converse, I ought to know how to address you. shall I 
say madam la comtesse?' 

"she laughed, and she would, no doubt, have met me with anoth 
evasion--if, indeed, I can treat ani occurr in an interview everi 
circumst of which wa prearranged, as I now believe, with the 
profoundest cunning, as liabl to be modifi by accident. 

"'a to that,' she began; but she wa interrupted, almost as she open 
her lips, by a gentleman, dress in black, who look particularli 
eleg and distinguished, with thi drawback, that hi face wa the 
most deadli pale I ever saw, except in death. He wa in no 
masquerade--in the plain even dress of a gentleman; and he said, 
without a smile, but with a courtli and unusu low bow:-- 

"'will madam la comtess permit me to say a veri few word which may 
interest her?' 

"the ladi turn quickli to him, and touch her lip in token of 
silence; she then said to me, 'keep my place for me, general; I shall 
return when I have said a few words.' 

"and with thi injunction, play given, she walk a littl asid 
with the gentleman in black, and talk for some minutes, appar 
veri earnestly. they then walk away slowli togeth in the crowd, and 
I lost them for some minutes. 

"I spent the interv in cudgel my brain for a conjectur as to the 
ident of the ladi who seem to rememb me so kindly, and I wa 
think of turn about and join in the convers between my 
pretti ward and the countess' daughter, and tri whether, by the time 
she returned, I might not have a surpris in store for her, by have 
her name, title, chateau, and estat at my fingers' ends. but at thi 
moment she returned, accompani by the pale man in black, who said: 

"'i shall return and inform madam la comtess when her carriag is at 
the door.' 

"he withdrew with a bow." 



xii 

_A petition_ 

"'then we are to lose madam la comtesse, but I hope onli for a few 
hours,' I said, with a low bow. 

"'it may be that only, or it may be a few weeks. It wa veri unlucki hi 
speak to me just now as he did. Do you now know me?' 

"I assur her I did not. 

"'you shall know me,' she said, 'but not at present. We are older and 
better friend than, perhaps, you suspect. I cannot yet declar myself. 
I shall in three week pass your beauti schloss, about which I have 
been make enquiries. I shall then look in upon you for an hour or two, 
and renew a friendship which I never think of without a thousand 
pleasant recollections. thi moment a piec of news ha reach me like 
a thunderbolt. I must set out now, and travel by a deviou route, nearli 
a hundr miles, with all the dispatch I can possibl make. My 
perplex multiply. I am onli deter by the compulsori reserv I 
practic as to my name from make a veri singular request of you. My 
poor child ha not quit recov her strength. her hors fell with 
her, at a hunt which she had ridden out to witness, her nerv have not 
yet recov the shock, and our physician say that she must on no 
account exert herself for some time to come. We came here, in 
consequence, by veri easi stages--hardli six leagu a day. I must now 
travel day and night, on a mission of life and death--a mission the 
critic and moment natur of which I shall be abl to explain to you 
when we meet, as I hope we shall, in a few weeks, without the necess 
of ani concealment.' 

"she went on to make her petition, and it wa in the tone of a person 
from whom such a request amount to conferring, rather than seek 
a favor. 

"thi wa onli in manner, and, as it seemed, quit unconsciously. than 
the term in which it wa expressed, noth could be more deprecatory. 
It wa simpli that I would consent to take charg of her daughter dure 
her absence. 

"thi was, all thing considered, a strange, not to say, an audaci 
request. she in some sort disarm me, by state and admit 
everyth that could be urg against it, and throw herself entir 
upon my chivalry. At the same moment, by a fatal that seem to have 
predetermin all that happened, my poor child came to my side, and, in 
an undertone, besought me to invit her new friend, millarca, to pay us 
a visit. she had just been sound her, and thought, if her mamma would 
allow her, she would like it extremely. 

"at anoth time I should have told her to wait a little, until, at 
least, we knew who they were. but I had not a moment to think in. the 
two ladi assail me together, and I must confess the refin and 
beauti face of the young lady, about which there wa someth 
extrem engaging, as well as the eleg and fire of high birth, 
determin me; and, quit overpowered, I submitted, and undertook, too 
easily, the care of the young lady, whom her mother call millarca. 

"the countess beckon to her daughter, who listen with grave 
attent while she told her, in gener terms, how suddenli and 
peremptorili she had been summoned, and also of the arrang she had 
made for her under my care, ad that I wa one of her earliest and 
most valu friends. 

"I made, of course, such speech as the case seem to call for, and 
found myself, on reflection, in a posit which I did not half like. 

"the gentleman in black returned, and veri ceremoni conduct the 
ladi from the room. 

"the demeanor of thi gentleman wa such as to impress me with the 
convict that the countess wa a ladi of veri much more import 
than her modest titl alon might have led me to assume. 

"her last charg to me wa that no attempt wa to be made to learn more 
about her than I might have alreadi guessed, until her return. our 
distinguish host, whose guest she was, knew her reasons. 

"'but here,' she said, 'neither I nor my daughter could safe remain 
for more than a day. I remov my mask imprud for a moment, about 
an hour ago, and, too late, I fanci you saw me. So I resolv to seek 
an opportun of talk a littl to you. had I found that you had seen 
me, I would have thrown myself on your high sens of honor to keep my 
secret some weeks. As it is, I am satisfi that you did not see me; but 
if you now suspect, or, on reflection, should suspect, who I am, I 
commit myself, in like manner, entir to your honor. My daughter will 
observ the same secrecy, and I well know that you will, from time to 
time, remind her, lest she should thoughtlessli disclos it.' 

"she whisper a few word to her daughter, kiss her hurriedli twice, 
and went away, accompani by the pale gentleman in black, and 
disappear in the crowd. 

"'in the next room,' said millarca, 'there is a window that look upon 
the hall door. I should like to see the last of mamma, and to kiss my 
hand to her.' 

"we assented, of course, and accompani her to the window. We look 
out, and saw a handsom old-fashion carriage, with a troop of courier 
and footmen. We saw the slim figur of the pale gentleman in black, as 
he held a thick velvet cloak, and place it about her shoulder and 
threw the hood over her head. she nod to him, and just touch hi 
hand with hers. He bow low repeatedli as the door closed, and the 
carriag began to move. 

"'she is gone,' said millarca, with a sigh. 

"'she is gone,' I repeat to myself, for the first time--in the hurri 
moment that had elaps sinc my consent--reflect upon the folli 
of my act. 

"'she did not look up,' said the young lady, plaintively. 

"'the countess had taken off her mask, perhaps, and did not care to show 
her face,' I said; 'and she could not know that you were in the window.' 

"she sighed, and look in my face. she wa so beauti that I 
relented. I wa sorri I had for a moment repent of my hospitality, and 
I determin to make her amend for the unavow churlish of my 
reception. 

"the young lady, replac her mask, join my ward in persuad me to 
return to the grounds, where the concert wa soon to be renewed. We did 
so, and walk up and down the terrac that lie under the 
castl windows. 

"millarca becam veri intim with us, and amus us with live 
descript and stori of most of the great peopl whom we saw upon 
the terrace. I like her more and more everi minute. her gossip without 
be ill-natured, wa extrem divert to me, who had been so long 
out of the great world. I thought what life she would give to our 
sometim lone even at home. 

"thi ball wa not over until the morn sun had almost reach the 
horizon. It pleas the grand duke to danc till then, so loyal peopl 
could not go away, or think of bed. 

"we had just got through a crowd saloon, when my ward ask me what 
had becom of millarca. I thought she had been by her side, and she 
fanci she wa by mine. the fact was, we had lost her. 

"all my effort to find her were vain. I fear that she had mistaken, 
in the confus of a momentari separ from us, other peopl for her 
new friends, and had, possibly, pursu and lost them in the extens 
ground which were thrown open to us. 

"now, in it full force, I recogn a new folli in my have 
undertaken the charg of a young ladi without so much as know her 
name; and fetter as I wa by promises, of the reason for impos 
which I knew nothing, I could not even point my inquiri by say that 
the miss young ladi wa the daughter of the countess who had taken 
her departur a few hour before. 

"morn broke. It wa clear daylight befor I gave up my search. It wa 
not till near two o'clock next day that we heard anyth of my 
miss charge. 

"at about that time a servant knock at my niece' door, to say that he 
had been earnestli request by a young lady, who appear to be in 
great distress, to make out where she could find the gener baron 
spielsdorf and the young ladi hi daughter, in whose charg she had been 
left by her mother. 

"there could be no doubt, notwithstand the slight inaccuracy, that 
our young friend had turn up; and so she had. would to heaven we 
had lost her! 

"she told my poor child a stori to account for her have fail to 
recov us for so long. veri late, she said, she had got to the 
housekeeper' bedroom in despair of find us, and had then fallen 
into a deep sleep which, long as it was, had hardli suffic to recruit 
her strength after the fatigu of the ball. 

"that day millarca came home with us. I wa onli too happy, after all, 
to have secur so charm a companion for my dear girl." 



xiii 

_the woodman_ 

"there soon, however, appear some drawbacks. In the first place, 
millarca complain of extrem languor--th weak that remain after 
her late illness--and she never emerg from her room till the afternoon 
wa pretti far advanced. In the next place, it wa accident 
discovered, although she alway lock her door on the inside, and never 
disturb the key from it place till she admit the maid to assist at 
her toilet, that she wa undoubtedli sometim absent from her room in 
the veri earli morning, and at variou time later in the day, befor 
she wish it to be understood that she wa stirring. she wa repeatedli 
seen from the window of the schloss, in the first faint grey of the 
morning, walk through the trees, in an easterli direction, and 
look like a person in a trance. thi convinc me that she walk in 
her sleep. but thi hypothesi did not solv the puzzle. how did she 
pass out from her room, leav the door lock on the inside? how did 
she escap from the hous without unbar door or window? 

"in the midst of my perplexities, an anxieti of a far more urgent kind 
present itself. 

"mi dear child began to lose her look and health, and that in a manner 
so mysterious, and even horrible, that I becam thoroughli frightened. 

"she wa at first visit by appal dreams; then, as she fancied, by 
a specter, sometim resembl millarca, sometim in the shape of a 
beast, indistinctli seen, walk round the foot of her bed, from 
side to side. 

"lastli came sensations. one, not unpleasant, but veri peculiar, she 
said, resembl the flow of an ici stream against her breast. At a later 
time, she felt someth like a pair of larg needl pierc her, a 
littl below the throat, with a veri sharp pain. A few night after, 
follow a gradual and convuls sens of strangulation; then came 
unconsciousness." 

I could hear distinctli everi word the kind old gener wa saying, 
becaus by thi time we were drive upon the short grass that spread 
on either side of the road as you approach the roofless villag which 
had not shown the smoke of a chimney for more than half a century. 

you may guess how strang I felt as I heard my own symptom so exactli 
describ in those which had been experienc by the poor girl who, but 
for the catastroph which followed, would have been at that moment a 
visitor at my father' chateau. you may suppose, also, how I felt as I 
heard him detail habit and mysteri peculiar which were, in 
fact, those of our beauti guest, carmilla! 

A vista open in the forest; we were on a sudden under the chimney and 
gabl of the ruin village, and the tower and battlement of the 
dismantl castle, round which gigant tree are grouped, overhung us 
from a slight eminence. 

In a frighten dream I got down from the carriage, and in silence, for 
we had each abund matter for thinking; we soon mount the ascent, 
and were among the spaciou chambers, wind stairs, and dark 
corridor of the castle. 

"and thi wa onc the palati resid of the karnsteins!" said the 
old gener at length, as from a great window he look out across the 
village, and saw the wide, undul expans of forest. "it wa a bad 
family, and here it bloodstain annal were written," he continued. 
"it is hard that they should, after death, continu to plagu the human 
race with their atroci lusts. that is the chapel of the karnsteins, 
down there." 

He point down to the grey wall of the gothic build partli visibl 
through the foliage, a littl way down the steep. "and I hear the axe of 
a woodman," he added, "busi among the tree that surround it; he 
possibl may give us the inform of which I am in search, and point 
out the grave of mircalla, countess of karnstein. these rustic preserv 
the local tradit of great families, whose stori die out among the 
rich and titl so soon as the famili themselv becom extinct." 

"we have a portrait, at home, of mircalla, the countess karnstein; 
should you like to see it?" ask my father. 

"time enough, dear friend," repli the general. "I believ that I have 
seen the original; and one motiv which ha led me to you earlier than I 
at first intended, wa to explor the chapel which we are now 
approaching." 

"what! see the countess mircalla," exclaim my father; "why, she ha 
been dead more than a century!" 

"not so dead as you fancy, I am told," answer the general. 

"I confess, general, you puzzl me utterly," repli my father, look 
at him, I fancied, for a moment with a return of the suspicion I 
detect before. but although there wa anger and detestation, at times, 
in the old general' manner, there wa noth flighty. 

"there remain to me," he said, as we pass under the heavi arch of 
the gothic church--for it dimens would have justifi it be so 
styled--"but one object which can interest me dure the few year that 
remain to me on earth, and that is to wreak on her the vengeanc which, 
I thank god, may still be accomplish by a mortal arm." 

"what vengeanc can you mean?" ask my father, in increas amazement. 

"I mean, to decapit the monster," he answered, with a fierc flush, 
and a stamp that echo mourn through the hollow ruin, and hi 
clench hand wa at the same moment raised, as if it grasp the handl 
of an axe, while he shook it feroci in the air. 

"what?" exclaim my father, more than ever bewildered. 

"to strike her head off." 

"cut her head off!" 

"aye, with a hatchet, with a spade, or with anyth that can cleav 
through her murder throat. you shall hear," he answered, trembl 
with rage. and hurri forward he said: 

"that beam will answer for a seat; your dear child is fatigued; let her 
be seated, and I will, in a few sentences, close my dread story." 

the squar block of wood, which lay on the grass-grown pavement of the 
chapel, form a bench on which I wa veri glad to seat myself, and in 
the meantim the gener call to the woodman, who had been remov 
some bough which lean upon the old walls; and, axe in hand, the hardi 
old fellow stood befor us. 

He could not tell us anyth of these monuments; but there wa an old 
man, he said, a ranger of thi forest, at present sojourn in the 
hous of the priest, about two mile away, who could point out everi 
monument of the old karnstein family; and, for a trifle, he undertook 
to bring him back with him, if we would lend him one of our horses, in 
littl more than half an hour. 

"have you been long employ about thi forest?" ask my father of the 
old man. 

"I have been a woodman here," he answer in hi patois, "under the 
forester, all my days; so ha my father befor me, and so on, as mani 
gener as I can count up. I could show you the veri hous in the 
villag here, in which my ancestor lived." 

"how came the villag to be deserted?" ask the general. 

"it wa troubl by revenants, sir; sever were track to their 
graves, there detect by the usual tests, and extinguish in the usual 
way, by decapitation, by the stake, and by burning; but not until mani 
of the villag were killed. 

"but after all these proceed accord to law," he continued--"so 
mani grave opened, and so mani vampir depriv of their horribl 
animation--th villag wa not relieved. but a moravian nobleman, who 
happen to be travel thi way, heard how matter were, and be 
skilled--a mani peopl are in hi country--in such affairs, he offer 
to deliv the villag from it tormentor. He did so thus: there be a 
bright moon that night, he ascended, shortli after sunset, the tower of 
the chapel here, from whenc he could distinctli see the churchyard 
beneath him; you can see it from that window. from thi point he watch 
until he saw the vampir come out of hi grave, and place near it the 
linen cloth in which he had been folded, and then glide away toward 
the villag to plagu it inhabitants. 

"the stranger, have seen all this, came down from the steeple, took 
the linen wrap of the vampire, and carri them up to the top of 
the tower, which he again mounted. when the vampir return from hi 
prowl and miss hi clothes, he cri furious to the moravian, 
whom he saw at the summit of the tower, and who, in reply, beckon him 
to ascend and take them. whereupon the vampire, accept hi 
invitation, began to climb the steeple, and so soon as he had reach 
the battlements, the moravian, with a stroke of hi sword, clove hi 
skull in twain, hurl him down to the churchyard, whither, descend 
by the wind stairs, the stranger follow and cut hi head off, and 
next day deliv it and the bodi to the villagers, who duli impal 
and burnt them. 

"thi moravian nobleman had author from the then head of the famili 
to remov the tomb of mircalla, countess karnstein, which he did 
effectually, so that in a littl while it site wa quit forgotten." 

"can you point out where it stood?" ask the general, eagerly. 

the forest shook hi head, and smiled. 

"not a soul live could tell you that now," he said; "besides, they say 
her bodi wa removed; but no one is sure of that either." 

have thu spoken, as time pressed, he drop hi axe and departed, 
leav us to hear the remaind of the general' strang story. 



xiv 

_the meeting_ 

"mi belov child," he resumed, "wa now grow rapidli worse. the 
physician who attend her had fail to produc the slightest 
impress on her disease, for such I then suppos it to be. He saw my 
alarm, and suggest a consultation. I call in an abler physician, 
from gratz. 

"sever day elaps befor he arrived. He wa a good and pious, as well 
as a learn man. have seen my poor ward together, they withdrew to my 
librari to confer and discuss. I, from the adjoin room, where I 
await their summons, heard these two gentlemen' voic rais in 
someth sharper than a strictli philosoph discussion. I knock at 
the door and entered. I found the old physician from gratz maintain 
hi theory. hi rival wa combat it with undisguis ridicule, 
accompani with burst of laughter. thi unseemli manifest 
subsid and the alterc end on my entrance. 

"'sir,' said my first physician, 'mi learn brother seem to think that 
you want a conjuror, and not a doctor.' 

"'pardon me,' said the old physician from gratz, look displeased, 'I 
shall state my own view of the case in my own way anoth time. I 
grieve, monsieur le general, that by my skill and scienc I can be of no 
use. befor I go I shall do myself the honor to suggest someth to 
you.' 

"he seem thoughtful, and sat down at a tabl and began to write. 

"profoundli disappointed, I made my bow, and as I turn to go, the other 
doctor point over hi shoulder to hi companion who wa writing, and 
then, with a shrug, significantli touch hi forehead. 

"thi consultation, then, left me precis where I was. I walk out 
into the grounds, all but distracted. the doctor from gratz, in ten or 
fifteen minutes, overtook me. He apolog for have follow me, but 
said that he could not conscienti take hi leav without a few 
word more. He told me that he could not be mistaken; no natur diseas 
exhibit the same symptoms; and that death wa alreadi veri near. there 
remained, however, a day, or possibl two, of life. If the fatal seizur 
were at onc arrested, with great care and skill her strength might 
possibl return. but all hung now upon the confin of the irrevocable. 
one more assault might extinguish the last spark of vital which is, 
everi moment, readi to die. 

"'and what is the natur of the seizur you speak of?' I entreated. 

"'i have state all fulli in thi note, which I place in your hand upon 
the distinct condit that you send for the nearest clergyman, and open 
my letter in hi presence, and on no account read it till he is with 
you; you would despis it else, and it is a matter of life and death. 
should the priest fail you, then, indeed, you may read it.' 

"he ask me, befor take hi leav finally, whether I would wish to 
see a man curious learn upon the veri subject, which, after I had 
read hi letter, would probabl interest me abov all others, and he 
urg me earnestli to invit him to visit him there; and so took 
hi leave. 

"the ecclesiast wa absent, and I read the letter by myself. At 
anoth time, or in anoth case, it might have excit my ridicule. but 
into what quackeri will not peopl rush for a last chance, where all 
accustom mean have failed, and the life of a belov object is 
at stake? 

"nothing, you will say, could be more absurd than the learn man' 
letter. 

"it wa monstrou enough to have consign him to a madhouse. He said 
that the patient wa suffer from the visit of a vampire! the 
punctur which she describ as have occur near the throat, were, 
he insisted, the insert of those two long, thin, and sharp teeth 
which, it is well known, are peculiar to vampires; and there could be no 
doubt, he added, as to the well-defin presenc of the small livid mark 
which all concur in describ as that induc by the demon' lips, 
and everi symptom describ by the suffer wa in exact conform with 
those record in everi case of a similar visitation. 

"be myself wholli skeptic as to the exist of ani such portent 
as the vampire, the supernatur theori of the good doctor furnished, in 
my opinion, but anoth instanc of learn and intellig oddli 
associ with some one hallucination. I wa so miserable, however, 
that, rather than tri nothing, I act upon the instruct of 
the letter. 

"I conceal myself in the dark dress room, that open upon the poor 
patient' room, in which a candl wa burning, and watch there till 
she wa fast asleep. I stood at the door, peep through the small 
crevice, my sword laid on the tabl besid me, as my direct 
prescribed, until, a littl after one, I saw a larg black object, veri 
ill-defined, crawl, as it seem to me, over the foot of the bed, and 
swiftli spread itself up to the poor girl' throat, where it swelled, in 
a moment, into a great, palpit mass. 

"for a few moment I had stood petrified. I now sprang forward, with my 
sword in my hand. the black creatur suddenli contract toward the 
foot of the bed, glide over it, and, stand on the floor about a yard 
below the foot of the bed, with a glare of skulk feroc and horror 
fix on me, I saw millarca. specul I know not what, I struck at 
her instantli with my sword; but I saw her stand near the door, 
unscathed. horrified, I pursued, and struck again. she wa gone; and my 
sword flew to shiver against the door. 

"I can't describ to you all that pass on that horribl night. the 
whole hous wa up and stirring. the specter millarca wa gone. but her 
victim wa sink fast, and befor the morn dawned, she died." 

the old gener wa agitated. We did not speak to him. My father walk 
to some littl distance, and began read the inscript on the 
tombstones; and thu occupied, he stroll into the door of a side 
chapel to prosecut hi researches. the gener lean against the wall, 
dri hi eyes, and sigh heavily. I wa reliev on hear the voic 
of carmilla and madame, who were at that moment approaching. the voic 
die away. 

In thi solitude, have just listen to so strang a story, connected, 
as it was, with the great and titl dead, whose monument were 
molder among the dust and ivi round us, and everi incid of which 
bore so aw upon my own mysteri case--in thi haunt spot, 
darken by the tower foliag that rose on everi side, dens and high 
abov it noiseless walls--a horror began to steal over me, and my heart 
sank as I thought that my friend were, after all, not about to enter 
and disturb thi trist and omin scene. 

the old general' eye were fix on the ground, as he lean with hi 
hand upon the basement of a shatter monument. 

under a narrow, arch doorway, surmount by one of those demoniac 
grotesqu in which the cynic and ghastli fanci of old gothic carv 
delights, I saw veri gladli the beauti face and figur of carmilla 
enter the shadowi chapel. 

I wa just about to rise and speak, and nod smiling, in answer to her 
peculiarli engag smile; when with a cry, the old man by my side 
caught up the woodman' hatchet, and start forward. On see him a 
brutal chang came over her features. It wa an instantan and 
horribl transformation, as she made a crouch step backwards. befor 
I could utter a scream, he struck at her with all hi force, but she 
dive under hi blow, and unscathed, caught him in her tini grasp by the 
wrist. He struggl for a moment to releas hi arm, but hi hand 
opened, the axe fell to the ground, and the girl wa gone. 

He stagger against the wall. hi grey hair stood upon hi head, and a 
moistur shone over hi face, as if he were at the point of death. 

the fright scene had pass in a moment. the first thing I recollect 
after, is madam stand befor me, and impati repeat again and 
again, the question, "where is mademoisel carmilla?" 

I answer at length, "I don't know--i can't tell--sh went there," and 
I point to the door through which madam had just entered; "onli a 
minut or two since." 

"but I have been stand there, in the passage, ever sinc mademoisel 
carmilla entered; and she did not return." 

she then began to call "carmilla," through everi door and passag and 
from the windows, but no answer came. 

"she call herself carmilla?" ask the general, still agitated. 

"carmilla, yes," I answered. 

"aye," he said; "that is millarca. that is the same person who long ago 
wa call mircalla, countess karnstein. depart from thi accurs 
ground, my poor child, as quickli as you can. drive to the clergyman' 
house, and stay there till we come. begone! may you never behold 
carmilla more; you will not find her here." 



XV 

_ordeal and execution_ 

As he spoke one of the strangest look men I ever beheld enter the 
chapel at the door through which carmilla had made her entranc and her 
exit. He wa tall, narrow-chested, stooping, with high shoulders, and 
dress in black. hi face wa brown and dri in with deep furrows; he 
wore an oddly-shap hat with a broad leaf. hi hair, long and grizzled, 
hung on hi shoulders. He wore a pair of gold spectacles, and walk 
slowly, with an odd shambl gait, with hi face sometim turn up to 
the sky, and sometim bow down toward the ground, seem to wear a 
perpetu smile; hi long thin arm were swinging, and hi lank hands, 
in old black glove ever so much too wide for them, wave and 
gesticul in utter abstraction. 

"the veri man!" exclaim the general, advanc with manifest delight. 
"mi dear baron, how happi I am to see you, I had no hope of meet you 
so soon." He sign to my father, who had by thi time returned, and 
lead the fantast old gentleman, whom he call the baron to meet 
him. He introduc him formally, and they at onc enter into earnest 
conversation. the stranger took a roll of paper from hi pocket, and 
spread it on the worn surfac of a tomb that stood by. He had a pencil 
case in hi fingers, with which he trace imaginari line from point to 
point on the paper, which from their often glanc from it, together, 
at certain point of the building, I conclud to be a plan of the 
chapel. He accompanied, what I may term, hi lecture, with occasion 
read from a dirti littl book, whose yellow leav were close 
written over. 

they saunter togeth down the side aisle, opposit to the spot where 
I wa standing, convers as they went; then they began measur 
distanc by paces, and final they all stood together, face a piec 
of the sidewall, which they began to examin with great minuteness; 
pull off the ivi that clung over it, and rap the plaster with the 
end of their sticks, scrape here, and knock there. At length they 
ascertain the exist of a broad marbl tablet, with letter carv 
in relief upon it. 

with the assist of the woodman, who soon returned, a monument 
inscription, and carv escutcheon, were disclosed. they prove to be 
those of the long lost monument of mircalla, countess karnstein. 

the old general, though not I fear given to the pray mood, rais hi 
hand and eye to heaven, in mute thanksgiv for some moments. 

"tomorrow," I heard him say; "the commission will be here, and the 
inquisit will be held accord to law." 

then turn to the old man with the gold spectacles, whom I have 
described, he shook him warmli by both hand and said: 

"baron, how can I thank you? how can we all thank you? you will have 
deliv thi region from a plagu that ha scourg it inhabit 
for more than a century. the horribl enemy, thank god, is at 
last tracked." 

My father led the stranger aside, and the gener followed. I know that 
he had led them out of hearing, that he might relat my case, and I saw 
them glanc often quickli at me, as the discuss proceeded. 

My father came to me, kiss me again and again, and lead me from the 
chapel, said: 

"it is time to return, but befor we go home, we must add to our parti 
the good priest, who live but a littl way from this; and persuad him 
to accompani us to the schloss." 

In thi quest we were successful: and I wa glad, be unspeak 
fatigu when we reach home. but my satisfact wa chang to 
dismay, on discov that there were no tide of carmilla. Of the 
scene that had occur in the ruin chapel, no explan wa offer 
to me, and it wa clear that it wa a secret which my father for the 
present determin to keep from me. 

the sinist absenc of carmilla made the remembr of the scene more 
horribl to me. the arrang for the night were singular. two 
servants, and madam were to sit up in my room that night; and the 
ecclesiast with my father kept watch in the adjoin dress room. 

the priest had perform certain solemn rite that night, the purport of 
which I did not understand ani more than I comprehend the reason of 
thi extraordinari precaut taken for my safeti dure sleep. 

I saw all clearli a few day later. 

the disappear of carmilla wa follow by the discontinu of my 
nightli sufferings. 

you have heard, no doubt, of the appal superstit that prevail in 
upper and lower styria, in moravia, silesia, in turkish serbia, in 
poland, even in russia; the superstition, so we must call it, of 
the vampire. 

If human testimony, taken with everi care and solemnity, judicially, 
befor commiss innumerable, each consist of mani members, all 
chosen for integr and intelligence, and constitut report more 
volumin perhap than exist upon ani one other class of cases, is 
worth anything, it is difficult to deny, or even to doubt the exist 
of such a phenomenon as the vampire. 

for my part I have heard no theori by which to explain what I myself 
have wit and experienced, other than that suppli by the ancient 
and well-attest belief of the country. 

the next day the formal proceed took place in the chapel of 
karnstein. 

the grave of the countess mircalla wa opened; and the gener and my 
father recogn each hi perfidi and beauti guest, in the face 
now disclos to view. the features, though a hundr and fifti year 
had pass sinc her funeral, were tint with the warmth of life. her 
eye were open; no cadaver smell exhal from the coffin. the two 
medic men, one offici present, the other on the part of the 
promot of the inquiry, attest the marvel fact that there wa a 
faint but appreci respiration, and a correspond action of the 
heart. the limb were perfectli flexible, the flesh elastic; and the 
leaden coffin float with blood, in which to a depth of seven inches, 
the bodi lay immersed. 

here then, were all the admit sign and proof of vampirism. the 
body, therefore, in accord with the ancient practice, wa raised, 
and a sharp stake driven through the heart of the vampire, who utter a 
pierc shriek at the moment, in all respect such as might escap from 
a live person in the last agony. then the head wa struck off, and a 
torrent of blood flow from the sever neck. the bodi and head wa 
next place on a pile of wood, and reduc to ashes, which were thrown 
upon the river and born away, and that territori ha never sinc been 
plagu by the visit of a vampire. 

My father ha a copi of the report of the imperi commission, with the 
signatur of all who were present at these proceedings, attach in 
verif of the statement. It is from thi offici paper that I 
have summar my account of thi last shock scene. 



xvi 

_conclusion_ 

I write all thi you suppos with composure. but far from it; I cannot 
think of it without agitation. noth but your earnest desir so 
repeatedli expressed, could have induc me to sit down to a task that 
ha unstrung my nerv for month to come, and reinduc a shadow of the 
unspeak horror which year after my deliver continu to make my 
day and night dreadful, and solitud insupport terrific. 

let me add a word or two about that quaint baron vordenburg, to whose 
curiou lore we were indebt for the discoveri of the countess 
mircalla' grave. 

He had taken up hi abod in gratz, where, live upon a mere pittance, 
which wa all that remain to him of the onc princ estat of hi 
family, in upper styria, he devot himself to the minut and labori 
investig of the marvel authent tradit of vampirism. 
He had at hi fingers' end all the great and littl work upon 
the subject. 

"magia posthuma," "phlegon de mirabilibus," "augustinu de cura pro 
mortuis," "philosophica et christiana cogitation de vampiris," by 
john christof herenberg; and a thousand others, among which I 
rememb onli a few of those which he lent to my father. He had a 
volumin digest of all the judici cases, from which he had extract 
a system of principl that appear to govern--som always, and other 
occasion only--th condit of the vampire. I may mention, in 
passing, that the deadli pallor attribut to that sort of revenants, is 
a mere melodramat fiction. they present, in the grave, and when they 
show themselv in human society, the appear of healthi life. when 
disclos to light in their coffins, they exhibit all the symptom that 
are enumer as those which prove the vampire-lif of the long-dead 
countess karnstein. 

how they escap from their grave and return to them for certain hour 
everi day, without displac the clay or leav ani trace of 
disturb in the state of the coffin or the cerements, ha alway been 
admit to be utterli inexplicable. the amphibi exist of the 
vampir is sustain by daili renew slumber in the grave. it horribl 
lust for live blood suppli the vigor of it wake existence. the 
vampir is prone to be fascin with an engross vehemence, 
resembl the passion of love, by particular persons. In pursuit of 
these it will exercis inexhaust patienc and stratagem, for access 
to a particular object may be obstruct in a hundr ways. It will 
never desist until it ha satiat it passion, and drain the veri 
life of it covet victim. but it will, in these cases, husband and 
protract it murder enjoy with the refin of an epicure, and 
heighten it by the gradual approach of an art courtship. In these 
case it seem to yearn for someth like sympathi and consent. In 
ordinari one it goe direct to it object, overpow with violence, 
and strangl and exhaust often at a singl feast. 

the vampir is, apparently, subject, in certain situations, to special 
conditions. In the particular instanc of which I have given you a 
relation, mircalla seem to be limit to a name which, if not her real 
one, should at least reproduce, without the omiss or addit of a 
singl letter, those, as we say, anagrammatically, which compos it. 

carmilla did this; so did millarca. 

My father relat to the baron vordenburg, who remain with us for two 
or three week after the expuls of carmilla, the stori about the 
moravian nobleman and the vampir at karnstein churchyard, and then he 
ask the baron how he had discov the exact posit of the 
long-conc tomb of the countess mircalla? the baron' grotesqu 
featur pucker up into a mysteri smile; he look down, still 
smile on hi worn spectacl case and fumbl with it. then look 
up, he said: 

"I have mani journals, and other papers, written by that remark man; 
the most curiou among them is one treat of the visit of which you 
speak, to karnstein. the tradition, of course, discolor and distort a 
little. He might have been term a moravian nobleman, for he had 
chang hi abod to that territory, and was, beside, a noble. but he 
was, in truth, a nativ of upper styria. It is enough to say that in 
veri earli youth he had been a passion and favor lover of the 
beauti mircalla, countess karnstein. her earli death plung him into 
inconsol grief. It is the natur of vampir to increas and 
multiply, but accord to an ascertain and ghostli law. 

"assume, at starting, a territori perfectli free from that pest. how 
doe it begin, and how doe it multipli itself? I will tell you. A 
person, more or less wicked, put an end to himself. A suicide, under 
certain circumstances, becom a vampire. that specter visit live 
peopl in their slumbers; they die, and almost invariably, in the grave, 
develop into vampires. thi happen in the case of the beauti 
mircalla, who wa haunt by one of those demons. My ancestor, 
vordenburg, whose titl I still bear, soon discov this, and in the 
cours of the studi to which he devot himself, learn a great 
deal more. 

"among other things, he conclud that suspicion of vampir would 
probabl fall, sooner or later, upon the dead countess, who in life had 
been hi idol. He conceiv a horror, be she what she might, of her 
remain be profan by the outrag of a posthum execution. He ha 
left a curiou paper to prove that the vampire, on it expuls from 
it amphibi existence, is project into a far more horribl life; 
and he resolv to save hi onc belov mircalla from this. 

"he adopt the stratagem of a journey here, a pretend remov of her 
remains, and a real obliter of her monument. when age had stolen 
upon him, and from the vale of years, he look back on the scene he 
wa leaving, he considered, in a differ spirit, what he had done, and 
a horror took possess of him. He made the trace and note which 
have guid me to the veri spot, and drew up a confess of the 
decept that he had practiced. If he had intend ani further action 
in thi matter, death prevent him; and the hand of a remot descend 
has, too late for many, direct the pursuit to the lair of the beast." 

We talk a littl more, and among other thing he said wa this: 

"one sign of the vampir is the power of the hand. the slender hand of 
mircalla close like a vice of steel on the general' wrist when he 
rais the hatchet to strike. but it power is not confin to it 
grasp; it leav a numb in the limb it seizes, which is slowly, if 
ever, recov from." 

the follow spring my father took me a tour through italy. We remain 
away for more than a year. It wa long befor the terror of recent 
event subsided; and to thi hour the imag of carmilla return to 
memori with ambigu alternations--sometim the playful, languid, 
beauti girl; sometim the writh fiend I saw in the ruin church; 
and often from a reveri I have started, fanci I heard the light step 
of carmilla at the draw room door. 

* * * * * 

other book by J. sheridan lefanu 

the cock and anchor 
torlogh o'brien 
the hous by the churchyard 
uncl sila 
checkmat 
carmilla 
the wyvern mysteri 
guy deverel 
ghost stori and tale of mysteri 
the chronicl of golden friar 
In a glass darkli 
the purcel paper 
the watcher and other weird stori 
A chronicl of golden friar and other stori 
madam growl' ghost and other tale of mysteri 
green tea and other stori 
sheridan lefanu: the diabol geniu 
best ghost stori of j.s. lefanu 
the best horror stori 
the vampir lover and other stori 
ghost stori and mysteri 
the hour after midnight 
j.s. lefanu: ghost stori and mysteri 
ghost and horror stori 
green tea and other ghost stone 
carmilla and other classic tale of mysteri 





end of the project gutenberg ebook of carmilla, by J. sheridan lefanu 

*** end OF thi project gutenberg ebook carmilla *** 

***** thi file should be name 10007-8.txt or 10007-8.zip ***** 
thi and all associ file of variou format will be found in: 
http://www.gutenberg.net/1/0/0/0/10007/ 

produc by suzann shell, sjaani and PG distribut proofread 

updat edit will replac the previou one--th old edit 
will be renamed. 

creat the work from public domain print edit mean that no 
one own a unit state copyright in these works, so the foundat 
(and you!) can copi and distribut it in the unit state without 
permiss and without pay copyright royalties. special rules, 
set forth in the gener term of use part of thi license, appli to 
copi and distribut project gutenberg-tm electron work to 
protect the project gutenberg-tm concept and trademark. project 
gutenberg is a regist trademark, and may not be use if you 
charg for the ebooks, unless you receiv specif permission. If you 
do not charg anyth for copi of thi ebook, compli with the 
rule is veri easy. you may use thi ebook for nearli ani purpos 
such as creation of deriv works, reports, perform and 
research. they may be modifi and print and given away--y may do 
practic anyth with public domain ebooks. redistribut is 
subject to the trademark license, especi commerci 
redistribution. 



*** start: full licens *** 

the full project gutenberg licens 
pleas read thi befor you distribut OR use thi work 

To protect the project gutenberg-tm mission of promot the free 
distribut of electron works, by use or distribut thi work 
(or ani other work associ in ani way with the phrase "project 
gutenberg"), you agre to compli with all the term of the full project 
gutenberg-tm licens (avail with thi file or onlin at 
http://gutenberg.net/license). 


section 1. gener term of use & redistribut project gutenberg-tm 
electron work 

1.a. By read or use ani part of thi project gutenberg-tm 
electron work, you indic that you have read, understand, agre to 
and accept all the term of thi licens and intellectu properti 
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agre to abid by all 
the term of thi agreement, you must ceas use and return or destroy 
all copi of project gutenberg-tm electron work in your possession. 
If you paid a fee for obtain a copi of or access to a project 
gutenberg-tm electron work and you do not agre to be bound by the 
term of thi agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or 
entiti to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.e.8. 

1.b. "project gutenberg" is a regist trademark. It may onli be 
use on or associ in ani way with an electron work by peopl who 
agre to be bound by the term of thi agreement. there are a few 
thing that you can do with most project gutenberg-tm electron work 
even without compli with the full term of thi agreement. see 
paragraph 1.c below. there are a lot of thing you can do with project 
gutenberg-tm electron work if you follow the term of thi agreement 
and help preserv free futur access to project gutenberg-tm electron 
works. see paragraph 1.e below. 

1.c. the project gutenberg literari archiv foundat ("the foundation" 
or pglaf), own a compil copyright in the collect of project 
gutenberg-tm electron works. nearli all the individu work in the 
collect are in the public domain in the unit states. If an 
individu work is in the public domain in the unit state and you are 
locat in the unit states, we do not claim a right to prevent you from 
copying, distributing, performing, display or creat deriv 
work base on the work as long as all refer to project gutenberg 
are removed. Of course, we hope that you will support the project 
gutenberg-tm mission of promot free access to electron work by 
freeli share project gutenberg-tm work in complianc with the term of 
thi agreement for keep the project gutenberg-tm name associ with 
the work. you can easili compli with the term of thi agreement by 
keep thi work in the same format with it attach full project 
gutenberg-tm licens when you share it without charg with others. 

1.d. the copyright law of the place where you are locat also govern 
what you can do with thi work. copyright law in most countri are in 
a constant state of change. If you are outsid the unit states, check 
the law of your countri in addit to the term of thi agreement 
befor downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distribut or 
creat deriv work base on thi work or ani other project 
gutenberg-tm work. the foundat make no represent concern 
the copyright statu of ani work in ani countri outsid the unit 
states. 

1.e. unless you have remov all refer to project gutenberg: 

1.e.1. the follow sentence, with activ link to, or other immedi 
access to, the full project gutenberg-tm licens must appear promin 
whenev ani copi of a project gutenberg-tm work (ani work on which the 
phrase "project gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "project 
gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed, 
copi or distributed: 

thi ebook is for the use of anyon anywher at no cost and with 
almost no restrict whatsoever. you may copi it, give it away or 
re-us it under the term of the project gutenberg licens includ 
with thi ebook or onlin at www.gutenberg.net 

1.e.2. If an individu project gutenberg-tm electron work is deriv 
from the public domain (doe not contain a notic indic that it is 
post with permiss of the copyright holder), the work can be copi 
and distribut to anyon in the unit state without pay ani fee 
or charges. If you are redistribut or provid access to a work 
with the phrase "project gutenberg" associ with or appear on the 
work, you must compli either with the requir of paragraph 1.e.1 
through 1.e.7 or obtain permiss for the use of the work and the 
project gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraph 1.e.8 or 
1.e.9. 

1.e.3. If an individu project gutenberg-tm electron work is post 
with the permiss of the copyright holder, your use and distribut 
must compli with both paragraph 1.e.1 through 1.e.7 and ani addit 
term impos by the copyright holder. addit term will be link 
to the project gutenberg-tm licens for all work post with the 
permiss of the copyright holder found at the begin of thi work. 

1.e.4. Do not unlink or detach or remov the full project gutenberg-tm 
licens term from thi work, or ani file contain a part of thi 
work or ani other work associ with project gutenberg-tm. 

1.e.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribut or redistribut thi 
electron work, or ani part of thi electron work, without 
promin display the sentenc set forth in paragraph 1.e.1 with 
activ link or immedi access to the full term of the project 
gutenberg-tm license. 

1.e.6. you may convert to and distribut thi work in ani binary, 
compressed, mark up, nonproprietari or proprietari form, includ ani 
word process or hypertext form. however, if you provid access to or 
distribut copi of a project gutenberg-tm work in a format other than 
"plain vanilla ascii" or other format use in the offici version 
post on the offici project gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net), 
you must, at no addit cost, fee or expens to the user, provid a 
copy, a mean of export a copy, or a mean of obtain a copi upon 
request, of the work in it origin "plain vanilla ascii" or other 
form. ani altern format must includ the full project gutenberg-tm 
licens as specifi in paragraph 1.e.1. 

1.e.7. Do not charg a fee for access to, viewing, displaying, 
performing, copi or distribut ani project gutenberg-tm work 
unless you compli with paragraph 1.e.8 or 1.e.9. 

1.e.8. you may charg a reason fee for copi of or provid 
access to or distribut project gutenberg-tm electron work provid 
that 

- you pay a royalti fee of 20% of the gross profit you deriv from 
the use of project gutenberg-tm work calcul use the method 
you alreadi use to calcul your applic taxes. the fee is 
owe to the owner of the project gutenberg-tm trademark, but he 
ha agre to donat royalti under thi paragraph to the 
project gutenberg literari archiv foundation. royalti payment 
must be paid within 60 day follow each date on which you 
prepar (or are legal requir to prepare) your period tax 
returns. royalti payment should be clearli mark as such and 
sent to the project gutenberg literari archiv foundat at the 
address specifi in section 4, "inform about donat to 
the project gutenberg literari archiv foundation." 

- you provid a full refund of ani money paid by a user who notifi 
you in write (or by e-mail) within 30 day of receipt that s/he 
doe not agre to the term of the full project gutenberg-tm 
license. you must requir such a user to return or 
destroy all copi of the work possess in a physic medium 
and discontinu all use of and all access to other copi of 
project gutenberg-tm works. 

- you provide, in accord with paragraph 1.f.3, a full refund of ani 
money paid for a work or a replac copy, if a defect in the 
electron work is discov and report to you within 90 day 
of receipt of the work. 

- you compli with all other term of thi agreement for free 
distribut of project gutenberg-tm works. 

1.e.9. If you wish to charg a fee or distribut a project gutenberg-tm 
electron work or group of work on differ term than are set 
forth in thi agreement, you must obtain permiss in write from 
both the project gutenberg literari archiv foundat and michael 
hart, the owner of the project gutenberg-tm trademark. contact the 
foundat as set forth in section 3 below. 

1.f. 

1.f.1. project gutenberg volunt and employe expend consider 
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcrib and proofread 
public domain work in creat the project gutenberg-tm 
collection. despit these efforts, project gutenberg-tm electron 
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain 
"defects," such as, but not limit to, incomplete, inaccur or 
corrupt data, transcript errors, a copyright or other intellectu 
properti infringement, a defect or damag disk or other medium, a 
comput virus, or comput code that damag or cannot be read by 
your equipment. 

1.f.2. limit warranty, disclaim OF damag - except for the "right 
of replac or refund" describ in paragraph 1.f.3, the project 
gutenberg literari archiv foundation, the owner of the project 
gutenberg-tm trademark, and ani other parti distribut a project 
gutenberg-tm electron work under thi agreement, disclaim all 
liabil to you for damages, cost and expenses, includ legal 
fees. you agre that you have NO remedi for negligence, strict 
liability, breach OF warranti OR breach OF contract except those 
provid IN paragraph f3. you agre that the foundation, the 
trademark owner, and ani distributor under thi agreement will not BE 
liabl TO you for actual, direct, indirect, consequential, punit OR 
incident damag even IF you give notic OF the possibl OF such 
damage. 

1.f.3. limit right OF replac OR refund - If you discov a 
defect in thi electron work within 90 day of receiv it, you can 
receiv a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by send a 
written explan to the person you receiv the work from. If you 
receiv the work on a physic medium, you must return the medium with 
your written explanation. the person or entiti that provid you with 
the defect work may elect to provid a replac copi in lieu of a 
refund. If you receiv the work electronically, the person or entiti 
provid it to you may choos to give you a second opportun to 
receiv the work electron in lieu of a refund. If the second copi 
is also defective, you may demand a refund in write without further 
opportun to fix the problem. 

1.f.4. except for the limit right of replac or refund set forth 
in paragraph 1.f.3, thi work is provid to you 'as-is," with NO other 
warranti OF ani kind, express OR implied, includ but not limit TO 
warranti OF merchant OR fit for ani purpose. 

1.f.5. some state do not allow disclaim of certain impli 
warranti or the exclus or limit of certain type of damages. 
If ani disclaim or limit set forth in thi agreement violat the 
law of the state applic to thi agreement, the agreement shall be 
interpret to make the maximum disclaim or limit permit by 
the applic state law. the invalid or unenforc of ani 
provis of thi agreement shall not void the remain provisions. 

1.f.6. indemn - you agre to indemnifi and hold the foundation, the 
trademark owner, ani agent or employe of the foundation, anyon 
provid copi of project gutenberg-tm electron work in accord 
with thi agreement, and ani volunt associ with the production, 
promot and distribut of project gutenberg-tm electron works, 
harmless from all liability, cost and expenses, includ legal fees, 
that aris directli or indirectli from ani of the follow which you do 
or caus to occur: (a) distribut of thi or ani project gutenberg-tm 
work, (b) alteration, modification, or addit or delet to ani 
project gutenberg-tm work, and (c) ani defect you cause. 


section 2. inform about the mission of project gutenberg-tm 

project gutenberg-tm is synonym with the free distribut of 
electron work in format readabl by the widest varieti of comput 
includ obsolete, old, middle-ag and new computers. It exist 
becaus of the effort of hundr of volunt and donat from 
peopl in all walk of life. 

volunt and financi support to provid volunt with the 
assist they need, is critic to reach project gutenberg-tm' 
goal and ensur that the project gutenberg-tm collect will 
remain freeli avail for gener to come. In 2001, the project 
gutenberg literari archiv foundat wa creat to provid a secur 
and perman futur for project gutenberg-tm and futur generations. 
To learn more about the project gutenberg literari archiv foundat 
and how your effort and donat can help, see section 3 and 4 
and the foundat web page at http://www.pglaf.org. 


section 3. inform about the project gutenberg literari archiv 
foundat 

the project gutenberg literari archiv foundat is a non profit 
501(c)(3) educ corpor organ under the law of the 
state of mississippi and grant tax exempt statu by the intern 
revenu service. the foundation' ein or feder tax identif 
number is 64-6221541. it 501(c)(3) letter is post at 
http://pglaf.org/fundraising. contribut to the project gutenberg 
literari archiv foundat are tax deduct to the full extent 
permit by u.s. feder law and your state' laws. 

the foundation' princip offic is locat at 4557 melan dr. S. 
fairbanks, ak, 99712., but it volunt and employe are scatter 
throughout numer locations. it busi offic is locat at 
809 north 1500 west, salt lake city, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email 
business@pglaf.org. email contact link and up to date contact 
inform can be found at the foundation' web site and offici 
page at http://pglaf.org 

for addit contact information: 
dr. gregori B. newbi 
chief execut and director 
gbnewby@pglaf.org 

section 4. inform about donat to the project gutenberg 
literari archiv foundat 

project gutenberg-tm depend upon and cannot surviv without wide 
spread public support and donat to carri out it mission of 
increas the number of public domain and licens work that can be 
freeli distribut in machin readabl form access by the widest 
array of equip includ outdat equipment. mani small donat 
($1 to $5,000) are particularli import to maintain tax exempt 
statu with the irs. 

the foundat is commit to compli with the law regul 
chariti and charit donat in all 50 state of the unit 
states. complianc requir are not uniform and it take a 
consider effort, much paperwork and mani fee to meet and keep up 
with these requirements. We do not solicit donat in locat 
where we have not receiv written confirm of compliance. To 
send donat or determin the statu of complianc for ani 
particular state visit http://pglaf.org 

while we cannot and do not solicit contribut from state where we 
have not met the solicit requirements, we know of no prohibit 
against accept unsolicit donat from donor in such state who 
approach us with offer to donate. 

intern donat are grate accepted, but we cannot make 
ani statement concern tax treatment of donat receiv from 
outsid the unit states. u.s. law alon swamp our small staff. 

pleas check the project gutenberg web page for current donat 
method and addresses. donat are accept in a number of other 
way includ includ checks, onlin payment and credit card 
donations. To donate, pleas visit: http://pglaf.org/don 


section 5. gener inform about project gutenberg-tm electron 
works. 

professor michael S. hart is the origin of the project gutenberg-tm 
concept of a librari of electron work that could be freeli share 
with anyone. for thirti years, he produc and distribut project 
gutenberg-tm ebook with onli a loos network of volunt support. 

project gutenberg-tm ebook are often creat from sever print 
editions, all of which are confirm as public domain in the u.s. 
unless a copyright notic is included. thus, we do not necessarili 
keep ebook in complianc with ani particular paper edition. 

each ebook is in a subdirectori of the same number as the ebook' 
ebook number, often in sever format includ plain vanilla ascii, 
compress (zipped), html and others. 

correct edit of our ebook replac the old file and take over 
the old filenam and etext number. the replac older file is renamed. 
version base on separ sourc are treat as new ebook receiv 
new filenam and etext numbers. 

most peopl start at our web site which ha the main PG search facility: 

http://www.gutenberg.net 

thi web site includ inform about project gutenberg-tm, 
includ how to make donat to the project gutenberg literari 
archiv foundation, how to help produc our new ebooks, and how to 
subscrib to our email newslett to hear about new ebooks. 

ebook post prior to novemb 2003, with ebook number below #10000, 
are file in directori base on their releas date. If you want to 
download ani of these ebook directly, rather than use the regular 
search system you may util the follow address and just 
download by the etext year. 

http://www.ibiblio.org/gutenberg/etext06 

(or /etext 05, 04, 03, 02, 01, 00, 99, 
98, 97, 96, 95, 94, 93, 92, 92, 91 or 90) 

ebook post sinc novemb 2003, with etext number over #10000, are 
file in a differ way. the year of a releas date is no longer part 
of the directori path. the path is base on the etext number (which is 
ident to the filename). the path to the file is made up of singl 
digit correspond to all but the last digit in the filename. for 
exampl an ebook of filenam 10234 would be found at: 

http://www.gutenberg.net/1/0/2/3/10234 

or filenam 24689 would be found at: 
http://www.gutenberg.net/2/4/6/8/24689 

An altern method of locat ebooks: 
http://www.gutenberg.net/gutindex.al 

