the project gutenberg ebook of the vampyre; A tale, by john william polidori 

thi ebook is for the use of anyon anywher at no cost and with 
almost no restrict whatsoever. you may copi it, give it away or 
re-us it under the term of the project gutenberg licens includ 
with thi ebook or onlin at www.gutenberg.net 


title: the vampyre; A tale 

author: john william polidori 

post date: octob 21, 2009 [ebook #6087] 
releas date: july, 2004 
first posted: novemb 3, 2002 
[last updated: may 26, 2012] 

language: english 


*** start OF thi project gutenberg ebook the vampyre; A tale *** 




produc by an anonym project gutenberg volunteer. 









the 

vampyre; 

A tale. 

By john william polidori 



london 

print for sherwood, neely, and jone 

paternost row 


1819 

[enter at stationers' hall, march 27, 1819] 

gillet, printer, crown court, fleet street, london. 







extract OF A letter 

from geneva. 
______________ 
prefac 
"I breath freeli in the neighbourhood of thi lake; the ground upon 
which I tread ha been subdu from the earliest ages; the princip 
object which immedi strike my eye, bring to my recollect 
scenes, in which man act the hero and wa the chief object of 
interest. not to look back to earlier time of battl and sieges, 
here is the bust of rousseau--her is a hous with an inscript 
denot that the genevan philosoph first drew breath under it 
roof. A littl out of the town is ferney, the resid of voltaire; 
where that wonderful, though certainli in mani respect contemptible, 
character, received, like the hermit of old, the visit of pilgrims, 
not onli from hi own nation, but from the farthest boundari of 
europe. here too is bonnet' abode, and, a few step beyond, the hous 
of that astonish woman madam de stael: perhap the first of her 
sex, who ha realli prove it often claim equal with, the nobler 
man. We have befor had women who have written interest novel and 
poems, in which their tact at observ drawing-room charact ha 
avail them; but never sinc the day of helois have those faculti 
which are peculiar to man, been develop as the possibl inherit 
of woman. though even here, as in the case of heloise, our sex have 
not been backward in alledg the exist of an abeilard in the 
person of M. schlegel as the inspir of her works. but to proceed: 
upon the same side of the lake, gibbon, bonnivard, bradshaw, and 
other mark, as it were, the stage for our progress; whilst upon the 
other side there is one house, built by diodati, the friend of milton, 
which ha contain within it walls, for sever months, that poet 
whom we have so often read together, and who--if human passion remain 
the same, and human feelings, like chords, on be swept by nature' 
impuls shall vibrat as before--wil be place by poster in the 
first rank of our english poets. you must have heard, or the third 
canto of child harold will have inform you, that lord byron resid 
mani month in thi neighbourhood. I went with some friend a few day 
ago, after have seen ferney, to view thi mansion. I trod the floor 
with the same feel of awe and respect as we did, together, those 
of shakespeare' dwell at stratford. I sat down in a chair of the 
saloon, and satisfi myself that I wa rest on what he had made 
hi constant seat. I found a servant there who had live with him; 
she, however, gave me but littl information. she point out hi 
bed-chamb upon the same level as the saloon and dining-room, and 
inform me that he retir to rest at three, got up at two, and 
employ himself a long time over hi toilette; that he never went to 
sleep without a pair of pistol and a dagger by hi side, and that he 
never ate anim food. He appar spent some part of everi day upon 
the lake in an english boat. there is a balconi from the saloon which 
look upon the lake and the mountain jura; and I imagine, that it must 
have been hence, he contempl the storm so magnific describ 
in the third canto; for you have from here a most extens view of 
all the point he ha therein depicted. I can fanci him like the 
scath pine, whilst all around wa sunk to repose, still wake to 
observe, what gave but a weak imag of the storm which had desol 
hi own breast. 

the sky is changed!--and such a change; oh, night! 
and storm and darkness, ye are wond'rou strong, 
yet love in your strength, as is the light 
Of a dark eye in woman! far along 
from peak to peak, the rattl crag among, 
leap the lire thunder! not from one lone cloud, 
but everi mountain now hath found a tongue, 
and jura answer thro' her misti shroud, 
back to the joyou alp who call to her aloud! 

and thi is in the night:--most gloriou night! 
thou wer't not sent for slumber! let me be 
A sharer in thi far and fierc delight,-- 
A portion of the tempest and of me! 
how the lit lake shine a phosphor sea, 
and the big rain comet danc to the earth! 
and now again 'ti black,--and now the glee 
Of the loud hill shake with it mountain mirth, 
As if they did rejoic o'er a young; earthquake' birth, 

now where the swift rhine cleav hi way between 
height which appear, as lover who have part 
In haste, whose mine depth so intervene, 
that they can meet no more, tho' broken hearted; 
tho' in their soul which thu each other thwarted, 
love wa the veri root of the fond rage 
which blight their life' bloom, and then departed-- 
itself expired, but leaving; them an age 
Of year all winter--war within themselv to wage. 

I went down to the littl port, if I may use the expression, wherein 
hi vessel use to lay, and convers with the cottager, who had the 
care of it. you may smile, but I have my pleasur in thu help my 
personif of the individu I admire, by attain to the 
knowledg of those circumst which were daili around him. I have 
made numer enquiri in the town concern him, but can learn 
nothing. He onli went into societi there once, when M. pictet took him 
to the hous of a ladi to spend the evening. they say he is a veri 
singular man, and seem to think him veri uncivil. amongst other thing 
they relate, that have invit M. pictet and bonstetten to dinner, 
he went on the lake to chillon, leav a gentleman who travel with 
him to receiv them and make hi apologies. anoth evening, be 
invit to the hous of ladi d---- h----, he promis to attend, 
but upon approach the window of her ladyship' villa, and 
perceiv the room to be full of company, he set down hi friend, 
desir him to plead hi excuse, and immedi return home. thi 
will serv as a contradict to the report which you tell me is 
current in england, of hi have been avoid by hi countrymen on 
the continent. the case happen to be directli the reverse, as he ha 
been gener sought by them, though on most occasions, appar 
without success. It is said, indeed, that upon pay hi first visit 
at coppet, follow the servant who had announc hi name, he wa 
surpris to meet a ladi carri out fainting; but befor he had been 
seat mani minutes, the same lady, who had been so affect at the 
sound of hi name, return and convers with him a consider 
time--such is femal curios and affectation! He visit coppet 
frequently, and of cours associ there with sever of hi 
countrymen, who evinc no reluct to meet him whom hi enemi 
alon would repres as an outcast. 

though I have been so unsuccess in thi town, I have been more 
fortun in my enquiri elsewhere. there is a societi three or four 
mile from geneva, the centr of which is the countess of breuss, a 
russian lady, well acquaint with the agrémen de la société, and who 
ha collect them round herself at her mansion. It wa chiefli here, 
I find, that the gentleman who travel with lord byron, as 
physician, sought for society. He use almost everi day to cross the 
lake by himself, in one of their flat-bottom boats, and return after 
pass the even with hi friends, about eleven or twelv at night, 
often whilst the storm were rage in the circl summit of the 
mountain around. As he becam intimate, from long acquaintance, with 
sever of the famili in thi neighbourhood, I have gather from 
their account some excel trait of hi lordship' character, 
which I will relat to you at some futur opportunity. I must, 
however, free him from one imput attach to him--of have in 
hi hous two sister as the partak of hi revels. thi is, like 
mani other charg which have been brought against hi lordship, 
entir destitut of truth. hi onli companion wa the physician I 
have alreadi mentioned. the report origin from the follow 
circumstance: mr. perci byssh shelly, a gentleman well known for 
extravag of doctrine, and for hi daring, in their profession, 
even to sign himself with the titl of atheo in the album at 
chamouny, have taken a hous below, in which he resid with miss M. 
W. godwin and miss clermont, (the daughter of the celebr mr. 
godwin) they were frequent visitor at diodati, and were often seen 
upon the lake with hi lordship, which gave rise to the report, the 
truth of which is here posit denied. 

among other thing which the lady, from whom I procur these 
anecdotes, relat to me, she mention the outlin of a ghost stori 
by lord byron. It appear that one even lord b., mr. P. B. shelly, 
the two ladi and the gentleman befor allud to, after have 
perus a german work, which wa entitl phantasmagoriana, began 
relat ghost stories; when hi lordship have recit the begin 
of christabel, then unpublished, the whole took so strong a hold of 
mr. shelly' mind, that he suddenli start up and ran out of the 
room. the physician and lord byron followed, and discov him 
lean against a mantle-piece, with cold drop of perspir 
trickl down hi face. after have given him someth to refresh 
him, upon enquir into the caus of hi alarm, they found that hi 
wild imagin have pictur to him the bosom of one of the ladi 
with eye (which wa report of a ladi in the neighbourhood where he 
lived) he wa oblig to leav the room in order to destroy the 
impression. It wa afterward proposed, in the cours of conversation, 
that each of the compani present should write a tale depend upon 
some supernatur agency, which wa undertaken by lord b., the 
physician, and miss M. W. godwin.[1] My friend, the ladi abov 
refer to, had in her possess the outlin of each of these 
stories; I obtain them as a great favour, and herewith forward them 
to you, as I wa assur you would feel as much curios as myself, 
to perus the ebauch of so great a genius, and those immedi 
under hi influence." 



[1] sinc publish under the titl of "frankenstein; or, the modern 
prometheus." 




the vampyre. 
________________________________________________________________ 

introduction. 
__________ 

the superstit upon which thi tale is found is veri gener in 
the east. among the arabian it appear to be common: it did not, 
however, extend itself to the greek until after the establish of 
christianity; and it ha onli assum it present form sinc the 
divis of the latin and greek churches; at which time, the idea 
becom prevalent, that a latin bodi could not corrupt if buri in 
their territory, it gradual increased, and form the subject of 
mani wonder stories, still extant, of the dead rise from their 
graves, and feed upon the blood of the young and beautiful. In the 
west it spread, with some slight variation, all over hungary, poland, 
austria, and lorraine, where the belief existed, that vampyr nightli 
imbib a certain portion of the blood of their victims, who becam 
emaciated, lost their strength, and speedili die of consumptions; 
whilst these human blood-suck fattened--and their vein becam 
distend to such a state of repletion, as to caus the blood to flow 
from all the passag of their bodies, and even from the veri pore of 
their skins. 

In the london journal, of march, 1732, is a curious, and, of course, 
credibl account of a particular case of vampyrism, which is state to 
have occur at madreyga, in hungary. It appears, that upon an 
examin of the commander-in-chief and magistr of the place, 
they posit and unanim affirmed, that, about five year 
before, a certain heyduke, name arnold paul, had been heard to say, 
that, at cassovia, on the frontier of the turkish servia, he had been 
torment by a vampyre, but had found a way to rid himself of the 
evil, by eat some of the earth out of the vampyre' grave, and 
rub himself with hi blood. thi precaution, however, did not 
prevent him from becom a vampyre[2] himself; for, about twenti or 
thirti day after hi death and burial, mani person complain of 
have been torment by him, and a deposit wa made, that four 
person had been depriv of life by hi attacks. To prevent further 
mischief, the inhabit have consult their hadagni,[3] took up 
the body, and found it (a is suppos to be usual in case of 
vampyrism) fresh, and entir free from corruption, and emit at 
the mouth, nose, and ears, pure and florid blood. proof have been 
thu obtained, they resort to the accustom remedy. A stake wa 
driven entir through the heart and bodi of arnold paul, at which he 
is report to have cri out as dread as if he had been alive. 
thi done, they cut off hi head, burn hi body, and threw the ash 
into hi grave. the same measur were adopt with the cors of 
those person who had previous die from vampyrism, lest they 
should, in their turn, becom agent upon other who surviv them. 



[2] the univers belief is, that a person suck by a vampyr becom a 
vampyr himself, and suck in hi turn. 

[3] chief bailiff. 



thi monstrou rodomontad is here related, becaus it seem better 
adapt to illustr the subject of the present observ than ani 
other instanc which could be adduced. In mani part of greec it is 
consid as a sort of punish after death, for some heinou crime 
commit whilst in existence, that the deceas is not onli doom to 
vampyrise, but compel to confin hi infern visit sole to 
those be he love most while upon earth--thos to whom he wa bound 
by tie of kindr and affection.--a supposit allud to in the 
"giaour." 

but first on earth, as vampyr sent, 
thi cors shall from it tomb be rent; 
then ghastli haunt the nativ place, 
and suck the blood of all thi race; 
there from thi daughter, sister, wife, 
At midnight drain the stream of life; 
yet loath the banquet which perforc 
must feed thi livid live corse, 
thi victims, ere they yet expire, 
shall know the demon for their sire; 
As curs thee, thou curs them, 
thi flower are wither on the stem. 
but one that for thi crime must fall, 
the youngest, best belov of all, 
shall bless thee with a father' name-- 
that word shall wrap thi heart in flame! 
yet thou must end thi task and mark 
her cheek' last tinge--h eye' last spark, 
and the last glassi glanc must view 
which freez o'er it lifeless blue; 
then with unhallow hand shall tear 
the tress of her yellow hair, 
Of which, in life a lock when shorn 
affection' fondest pledg wa worn-- 
but now is born away by thee 
memori of thine agony! 
yet with thine own best blood shall drip; 
thi gnash tooth, and haggard lip; 
then stalk to thi sullen grave, 
go--and with goul and afrit rave, 
till these in horror shrink away 
from spectr more accurs than they. 

mr. southey ha also introduc in hi wild but beauti poem of 
"thalaba," the vampyr cors of the arabian maid oneiza, who is 
repres as have return from the grave for the purpos of 
torment him she best love whilst in existence. but thi cannot be 
suppos to have result from the sin of her life, she be 
pourtray throughout the whole of the tale as a complet type of 
puriti and innocence. the veraci tournefort give a long account in 
hi travel of sever astonish case of vampyrism, to which he 
pretend to have been an eyewitness; and calmet, in hi great work 
upon thi subject, besid a varieti of anecdotes, and traditionari 
narr illustr of it effects, ha put forth some learn 
dissertations, tend to prove it to be a classical, as well as 
barbarian error. 

mani curiou and interest notic on thi singularli horribl 
superstit might be added; though the present may suffic for the 
limit of a note, necessarili devot to explanation, and which may 
now be conclud by mere remarking, that though the term vampyr is 
the one in most gener acceptation, there are sever other 
synonym with it, made use of in variou part of the world: as 
vroucolocha, vardoulacha, goul, broucoloka, &c. 


________________________________________________________________ 

the vampyre. 
__________ 

IT happen that in the midst of the dissip attend upon a 
london winter, there appear at the variou parti of the leader of 
the ton a nobleman, more remark for hi singularities, than hi 
rank. He gaze upon the mirth around him, as if he could not 
particip therein. apparently, the light laughter of the fair onli 
attract hi attention, that he might by a look quell it, and throw 
fear into those breast where thoughtless reigned. those who felt 
thi sensat of awe, could not explain whenc it arose: some 
attribut it to the dead grey eye, which, fix upon the object' 
face, did not seem to penetrate, and at one glanc to pierc through 
to the inward work of the heart; but fell upon the cheek with a 
leaden ray that weigh upon the skin it could not pass. hi 
peculiar caus him to be invit to everi house; all wish to 
see him, and those who had been accustom to violent excitement, and 
now felt the weight of ennui, were pleas at have someth in 
their presenc capabl of engag their attention. In spite of the 
deadli hue of hi face, which never gain a warmer tint, either from 
the blush of modesty, or from the strong emot of passion, though 
it form and outlin were beautiful, mani of the femal hunter after 
notorieti attempt to win hi attentions, and gain, at least, some 
mark of what they might term affection: ladi mercer, who had been the 
mockeri of everi monster shewn in drawing-room sinc her marriage, 
threw herself in hi way, and did all but put on the dress of a 
mountebank, to attract hi notice:--though in vain:--when she 
stood befor him, though hi eye were appar fix upon her's, 
still it seem as if they were unperceived;--even her unappal 
impud wa baffled, and she left the field. but though the common 
adultress could not influenc even the guidanc of hi eyes, it wa 
not that the femal sex wa indiffer to him: yet such wa the 
appar caution with which he spoke to the virtuou wife and innoc 
daughter, that few knew he ever address himself to females. He had, 
however, the reput of a win tongue; and whether it wa that 
it even overcam the dread of hi singular character, or that they 
were move by hi appar hatr of vice, he wa as often among those 
femal who form the boast of their sex from their domest virtues, 
as among those who sulli it by their vices. 

about the same time, there came to london a young gentleman of the 
name of aubrey: he wa an orphan left with an onli sister in the 
possess of great wealth, by parent who die while he wa yet in 
childhood. left also to himself by guardians, who thought it their 
duti mere to take care of hi fortune, while they relinquish the 
more import charg of hi mind to the care of mercenari subalterns, 
he cultiv more hi imagin than hi judgment. He had, hence, 
that high romant feel of honour and candour, which daili ruin so 
mani milliners' apprentices. He believ all to sympathis with 
virtue, and thought that vice wa thrown in by provid mere for 
the picturesqu effect of the scene, as we see in romances: he thought 
that the miseri of a cottag mere consist in the vest of 
clothes, which were as warm, but which were better adapt to the 
painter' eye by their irregular fold and variou colour patches. 
He thought, in fine, that the dream of poet were the realiti of 
life. He wa handsome, frank, and rich: for these reasons, upon hi 
enter into the gay circles, mani mother surround him, strive 
which should describ with least truth their languish or romp 
favourites: the daughter at the same time, by their brighten 
counten when he approached, and by their sparkl eyes, when he 
open hi lips, soon led him into fals notion of hi talent and 
hi merit. attach as he wa to the romanc of hi solitari hours, 
he wa startl at finding, that, except in the tallow and wax candl 
that flickered, not from the presenc of a ghost, but from want of 
snuffing, there wa no foundat in real life for ani of that 
congeri of pleas pictur and descript contain in those 
volumes, from which he had form hi study. finding, however, some 
compens in hi gratifi vanity, he wa about to relinquish hi 
dreams, when the extraordinari be we have abov described, cross 
him in hi career. 

He watch him; and the veri imposs of form an idea of the 
charact of a man entir absorb in himself, who gave few other 
sign of hi observ of extern objects, than the tacit assent to 
their existence, impli by the avoid of their contact: allow 
hi imagin to pictur everi thing that flatter it propens 
to extravag ideas, he soon form thi object into the hero of a 
romance, and determin to observ the offspr of hi fancy, rather 
than the person befor him. He becam acquaint with him, paid him 
attentions, and so far advanc upon hi notice, that hi presenc wa 
alway recognised. He gradual learnt that lord ruthven' affair 
were embarrassed, and soon found, from the note of prepar in 
---- street, that he wa about to travel. desir of gain some 
inform respect thi singular character, who, till now, had 
onli whet hi curiosity, he hint to hi guardians, that it wa 
time for him to perform the tour, which for mani gener ha been 
thought necessari to enabl the young to take some rapid step in the 
career of vice toward put themselv upon an equal with the 
aged, and not allow them to appear as if fallen from the skies, 
whenev scandal intrigu are mention as the subject of 
pleasantri or of praise, accord to the degre of skill shewn in 
carri them on. they consented: and aubrey immedi mention 
hi intent to lord ruthven, wa surpris to receiv from him a 
propos to join him. flatter by such a mark of esteem from him, 
who, apparently, had noth in common with other men, he gladli 
accept it, and in a few day they had pass the circl waters. 

hitherto, aubrey had had no opportun of studi lord ruthven' 
character, and now he found, that, though mani more of hi action 
were expos to hi view, the result offer differ conclus 
from the appar motiv to hi conduct. hi companion wa profus 
in hi liberality;--th idle, the vagabond, and the beggar, receiv 
from hi hand more than enough to reliev their immedi wants. but 
aubrey could not avoid remarking, that it wa not upon the virtuous, 
reduc to indig by the misfortun attend even upon virtue, 
that he bestow hi alms;--thes were sent from the door with 
hardli suppress sneers; but when the proflig came to ask 
something, not to reliev hi wants, but to allow him to wallow in hi 
lust, or to sink him still deeper in hi iniquity, he wa sent away 
with rich charity. thi was, however, attribut by him to the greater 
importun of the vicious, which gener prevail over the retir 
bash of the virtuou indigent. there wa one circumst about 
the chariti of hi lordship, which wa still more impress upon hi 
mind: all those upon whom it wa bestowed, inevit found that there 
wa a curs upon it, for they were all either led to the scaffold, or 
sunk to the lowest and the most abject misery. At brussel and other 
town through which they passed, aubrey wa surpriz at the appar 
eager with which hi companion sought for the centr of all 
fashion vice; there he enter into all the spirit of the faro 
table: he betted, and alway gambl with success, except where the 
known sharper wa hi antagonist, and then he lost even more than he 
gained; but it wa alway with the same unchang face, with which he 
gener watch the societi around: it wa not, however, so when he 
encount the rash youth novice, or the luckless father of a 
numer family; then hi veri wish seem fortune' law--thi 
appar abstracted of mind wa laid aside, and hi eye sparkl 
with more fire than that of the cat whilst dalli with the 
half-dead mouse. In everi town, he left the formerli affluent youth, 
torn from the circl he adorned, cursing, in the solitud of a 
dungeon, the fate that had drawn him within the reach of thi fiend; 
whilst mani a father sat frantic, amidst the speak look of mute 
hungri children, without a singl farth of hi late immens wealth, 
wherewith to buy even suffici to satisfi their present craving. yet 
he took no money from the gambl table; but immedi lost, to the 
ruiner of many, the last gilder he had just snatch from the 
convuls grasp of the innocent: thi might but be the result of a 
certain degre of knowledge, which wa not, however, capabl of 
combat the cun of the more experienced. aubrey often wish to 
repres thi to hi friend, and beg him to resign that chariti and 
pleasur which prove the ruin of all, and did not tend to hi own 
profit;--but he delay it--for each day he hope hi friend would 
give him some opportun of speak frankli and openli to him; 
however, thi never occurred. lord ruthven in hi carriage, and amidst 
the variou wild and rich scene of nature, wa alway the same: hi 
eye spoke less than hi lip; and though aubrey wa near the object of 
hi curiosity, he obtain no greater gratif from it than the 
constant excit of vainli wish to break that mystery, which to 
hi exalt imagin began to assum the appear of someth 
supernatural. 

they soon arriv at rome, and aubrey for a time lost sight of hi 
companion; he left him in daili attend upon the morn circl of 
an italian countess, whilst he went in search of the memori of 
anoth almost desert city. whilst he wa thu engaged, letter 
arriv from england, which he open with eager impatience; the first 
wa from hi sister, breath noth but affection; the other were 
from hi guardians, the latter astonish him; if it had befor 
enter into hi imagin that there wa an evil power resid in 
hi companion, these seem to give him suffici reason for the 
belief. hi guardian insist upon hi immedi leav hi 
friend, and urged, that hi charact wa dread vicious, for that 
the possess of irresist power of seduction, render hi 
licenti habit more danger to society. It had been discovered, 
that hi contempt for the adultress had not origin in hatr of 
her character; but that he had required, to enhanc hi gratification, 
that hi victim, the partner of hi guilt, should be hurl from the 
pinnacl of unsulli virtue, down to the lowest abyss of infami and 
degradation: in fine, that all those femal whom he had sought, 
appar on account of their virtue, had, sinc hi departure, 
thrown even the mask aside, and had not scrupl to expos the whole 
deform of their vice to the public gaze. 

aubrey determin upon leav one, whose charact had not yet shown 
a singl bright point on which to rest the eye. He resolv to invent 
some plausibl pretext for abandon him altogether, purposing, in 
the mean while, to watch him more closely, and to let no slight 
circumst pass by unnoticed. He enter into the same circle, and 
soon perceived, that hi lordship wa endeavour to work upon the 
inexperi of the daughter of the ladi whose hous he chiefli 
frequented. In italy, it is seldom that an unmarri femal is met 
with in society; he wa therefor oblig to carri on hi plan in 
secret; but aubrey' eye follow him in all hi windings, and soon 
discov that an assign had been appointed, which would most 
like end in the ruin of an innocent, though thoughtless girl. lose 
no time, he enter the apart of lord ruthven, and abruptli ask 
him hi intent with respect to the lady, inform him at the same 
time that he wa awar of hi be about to meet her that veri night. 
lord ruthven answered, that hi intent were such as he suppos 
all would have upon such an occasion; and upon be press whether 
he intend to marri her, mere laughed. aubrey retired; and, 
immedi write a note, to say, that from that moment he must 
declin accompani hi lordship in the remaind of their propos 
tour, he order hi servant to seek other apartments, and call 
upon the mother of the lady, inform her of all he knew, not onli 
with regard to her daughter, but also concern the charact of hi 
lordship. the assign wa prevented. lord ruthven next day mere 
sent hi servant to notifi hi complet assent to a separation; but 
did not hint ani suspicion of hi plan have been foil by aubrey' 
interposition. 

have left rome, aubrey direct hi step toward greece, and 
cross the peninsula, soon found himself at athens. He then fix 
hi resid in the hous of a greek; and soon occupi himself in 
trace the fade record of ancient glori upon monument that 
apparently, asham of chronicl the deed of freemen onli befor 
slaves, had hidden themselv beneath the shelter soil or mani 
colour lichen. under the same roof as himself, exist a being, so 
beauti and delicate, that she might have form the model for a 
painter wish to pourtray on canvass the promis hope of the 
faith in mahomet' paradise, save that her eye spoke too much mind 
for ani one to think she could belong to those who had no souls. As 
she danc upon the plain, or trip along the mountain' side, one 
would have thought the gazel a poor type of her beauties; for who 
would have exchang her eye, appar the eye of anim nature, 
for that sleepi luxuri look of the anim suit but to the tast 
of an epicure. the light step of ianth often accompani aubrey in 
hi search after antiquities, and often would the unconsci girl, 
engag in the pursuit of a kashmer butterfly, show the whole beauti 
of her form, float as it were upon the wind, to the eager gaze of 
him, who forgot the letter he had just decyph upon an almost 
effac tablet, in the contempl of her sylph-lik figure. often 
would her tress falling, as she flit around, exhibit in the sun' 
ray such delic brilliant and swiftli fade hues, it might well 
excus the forget of the antiquary, who let escap from hi 
mind the veri object he had befor thought of vital import to the 
proper interpret of a passag in pausanias. but whi attempt to 
describ charm which all feel, but none can appreciate?--it wa 
innocence, youth, and beauty, unaffect by crowd drawing-room and 
stifl balls. whilst he drew those remain of which he wish to 
preserv a memori for hi futur hours, she would stand by, and 
watch the magic effect of hi pencil, in trace the scene of her 
nativ place; she would then describ to him the circl danc upon 
the open plain, would paint, to him in all the glow colour of 
youth memory, the marriag pomp she rememb view in her 
infancy; and then, turn to subject that had evid made a 
greater impress upon her mind, would tell him all the supernatur 
tale of her nurse. her earnest and appar belief of what she 
narrated, excit the interest even of aubrey; and often as she told 
him the tale of the live vampyre, who had pass year amidst hi 
friends, and dearest ties, forc everi year, by feed upon the life 
of a love femal to prolong hi exist for the ensu months, 
hi blood would run cold, whilst he attempt to laugh her out of such 
idl and horribl fantasies; but ianth cite to him the name of old 
men, who had at last detect one live among themselves, after 
sever of their near rel and children had been found mark 
with the stamp of the fiend' appetite; and when she found him so 
incredulous, she beg of him to believ her, for it had been, 
remarked, that those who had dare to question their existence, alway 
had some proof given, which oblig them, with grief and 
heartbreaking, to confess it wa true. she detail to him the 
tradit appear of these monsters, and hi horror wa 
increased, by hear a pretti accur descript of lord ruthven; 
he, however, still persist in persuad her, that there could be no 
truth in her fears, though at the same time he wonder at the mani 
coincid which had all tend to excit a belief in the 
supernatur power of lord ruthven. 

aubrey began to attach himself more and more to ianthe; her innocence, 
so contrast with all the affect virtu of the women among whom he 
had sought for hi vision of romance, won hi heart; and while he 
ridicul the idea of a young man of english habits, marri an 
uneduc greek girl, still he found himself more and more attach 
to the almost fairi form befor him. He would tear himself at time 
from her, and, form a plan for some antiquarian research, he would 
depart, determin not to return until hi object wa attained; but he 
alway found it imposs to fix hi attent upon the ruin around 
him, whilst in hi mind he retain an imag that seem alon the 
right possessor of hi thoughts. ianth wa unconsci of hi 
love, and wa ever the same frank infantil be he had first known. 
she alway seem to part from him with reluctance; but it wa becaus 
she had no longer ani one with whom she could visit her favourit 
haunts, whilst her guardian wa occupi in sketch or uncov 
some fragment which had yet escap the destruct hand of time. she 
had appeal to her parent on the subject of vampyres, and they both, 
with sever present, affirm their existence, pale with horror at 
the veri name. soon after, aubrey determin to proceed upon one of 
hi excursions, which wa to detain him for a few hours; when they 
heard the name of the place, they all at onc beg of him not to 
return at night, as he must necessarili pass through a wood, where no 
greek would ever remain, after the day had closed, upon ani 
consideration. they describ it as the resort of the vampyr in 
their nocturn orgies, and denounc the most heavi evil as 
impend upon him who dare to cross their path. aubrey made light of 
their representations, and tri to laugh them out of the idea; but 
when he saw them shudder at hi dare thu to mock a superior, 
infern power, the veri name of which appar made their blood 
freeze, he wa silent. 

next morn aubrey set off upon hi excurs unattended; he wa 
surpris to observ the melancholi face of hi host, and wa 
concern to find that hi words, mock the belief of those horribl 
fiends, had inspir them with such terror. when he wa about to 
depart, ianth came to the side of hi horse, and earnestli beg of 
him to return, ere night allow the power of these be to be put 
in action;--h promised. He was, however, so occupi in hi 
research, that he did not perceiv that day-light would soon end, and 
that in the horizon there wa one of those speck which, in the warmer 
climates, so rapidli gather into a tremend mass, and pour all their 
rage upon the devot country.--h at last, however, mount hi 
horse, determin to make up by speed for hi delay: but it wa too 
late. twilight, in these southern climates, is almost unknown; 
immedi the sun sets, night begins: and ere he had advanc far, 
the power of the storm wa above--it echo thunder had scarc 
an interv of rest--it thick heavi rain forc it way through the 
canopi foliage, whilst the blue fork lightn seem to fall and 
radiat at hi veri feet. suddenli hi hors took fright, and he wa 
carri with dread rapid through the entangl forest. the 
anim at last, through fatigue, stopped, and he found, by the glare 
of lightning, that he wa in the neighbourhood of a hovel that hardli 
lift itself up from the mass of dead leav and brushwood which 
surround it. dismounting, he approached, hope to find some one to 
guid him to the town, or at least trust to obtain shelter from the 
pelt of the storm. As he approached, the thunders, for a moment 
silent, allow him to hear the dread shriek of a woman mingl 
with the stifled, exult mockeri of a laugh, continu in one almost 
unbroken sound;--h wa startled: but, rous by the thunder which 
again roll over hi head, he, with a sudden effort, forc open the 
door of the hut. He found himself in utter darkness: the sound, 
however, guid him. He wa appar unperceived; for, though he 
called, still the sound continued, and no notic wa taken of him. He 
found himself in contact with some one, whom he immedi seized; 
when a voic cried, "again baffled!" to which a loud laugh succeeded; 
and he felt himself grappl by one whose strength seem superhuman: 
determin to sell hi life as dearli as he could, he struggled; but 
it wa in vain: he wa lift from hi feet and hurl with enorm 
forc against the ground:--hi enemi threw himself upon him, and 
kneel upon hi breast, had place hi hand upon hi throat--when 
the glare of mani torch penetr through the hole that gave 
light in the day, disturb him;--h instantli rose, and, leav hi 
prey, rush through the door, and in a moment the crash of the 
branches, as he broke through the wood, wa no longer heard. the storm 
wa now still; and aubrey, incap of moving, wa soon heard by 
those without. they entered; the light of their torch fell upon the 
mud walls, and the thatch load on everi individu straw with heavi 
flake of soot. At the desir of aubrey they search for her who had 
attract him by her cries; he wa again left in darkness; but what 
wa hi horror, when the light of the torch onc more burst upon 
him, to perceiv the airi form of hi fair conductress brought in a 
lifeless corse. He shut hi eyes, hope that it wa but a vision 
aris from hi disturb imagination; but he again saw the same 
form, when he unclos them, stretch by hi side. there wa no 
colour upon her cheek, not even upon her lip; yet there wa a 
still about her face that seem almost as attach as the life 
that onc dwelt there:--upon her neck and breast wa blood, and upon 
her throat were the mark of teeth have open the vein:--to thi 
the men pointed, crying, simultan struck with horror, "A 
vampyre! a vampyre!" A litter wa quickli formed, and aubrey wa laid 
by the side of her who had late been to him the object of so mani 
bright and fairi visions, now fallen with the flower of life that had 
die within her. He knew not what hi thought were--hi mind wa 
benumb and seem to shun reflection, and take refug in 
vacancy--h held almost unconsci in hi hand a nake dagger of a 
particular construction, which had been found in the hut. they were 
soon met by differ parti who had been engag in the search of 
her whom a mother had missed. their lament cries, as they 
approach the city, forewarn the parent of some dread 
catastrophe. --to describ their grief would be impossible; but when 
they ascertain the caus of their child' death, they look at 
aubrey, and point to the corse. they were inconsolable; both die 
broken-hearted. 

aubrey be put to bed wa seiz with a most violent fever, and wa 
often delirious; in these interv he would call upon lord ruthven 
and upon ianthe--bi some unaccount combin he seem to beg 
of hi former companion to spare the be he loved. At other time he 
would imprec maledict upon hi head, and curs him as her 
destroyer. lord ruthven, chanc at thi time to arriv at athens, 
and, from whatev motive, upon hear of the state of aubrey, 
immedi place himself in the same house, and becam hi constant 
attendant. when the latter recov from hi delirium, he wa 
horrifi and startl at the sight of him whose imag he had now 
combin with that of a vampyre; but lord ruthven, by hi kind words, 
impli almost repent for the fault that had caus their 
separation, and still more by the attention, anxiety, and care which 
he showed, soon reconcil him to hi presence. hi lordship seem 
quit changed; he no longer appear that apathet be who had so 
astonish aubrey; but as soon as hi convalesc began to be rapid, 
he again gradual retir into the same state of mind, and aubrey 
perceiv no differ from the former man, except that at time he 
wa surpris to meet hi gaze fix intent upon him, with a smile 
of malici exult play upon hi lips: he knew not why, but 
thi smile haunt him. dure the last stage of the invalid' 
recovery, lord ruthven wa appar engag in watch the tideless 
wave rais by the cool breeze, or in mark the progress of 
those orbs, circling, like our world, the moveless sun;--indeed, he 
appear to wish to avoid the eye of all. 

aubrey' mind, by thi shock, wa much weakened, and that elast 
of spirit which had onc so distinguish him now seem to have fled 
for ever. He wa now as much a lover of solitud and silenc as lord 
ruthven; but much as he wish for solitude, hi mind could not find 
it in the neighbourhood of athens; if he sought it amidst the ruin he 
had formerli frequented, ianthe' form stood by hi side--if he 
sought it in the woods, her light step would appear wander amidst 
the underwood, in quest of the modest violet; then suddenli turn 
round, would show, to hi wild imagination, her pale face and wound 
throat, with a meek smile upon her lips. He determin to fli scenes, 
everi featur of which creat such bitter associ in hi mind. 
He propos to lord ruthven, to whom he held himself bound by the 
tender care he had taken of him dure hi illness, that they should 
visit those part of greec neither had yet seen. they travel in 
everi direction, and sought everi spot to which a recollect could 
be attached: but though they thu hasten from place to place, yet 
they seem not to heed what they gaze upon. they heard much of 
robbers, but they gradual began to slight these reports, which they 
imagin were onli the invent of individuals, whose interest it wa 
to excit the generos of those whom they defend from pretend 
dangers. In consequ of thu neglect the advic of the 
inhabitants, on one occas they travel with onli a few guards, 
more to serv as guid than as a defence. upon entering, however, a 
narrow defile, at the bottom of which wa the bed of a torrent, with 
larg mass of rock brought down from the neighbour precipices, 
they had reason to repent their negligence; for scarc were the 
whole of the parti engag in the narrow pass, when they were startl 
by the whistl of bullet close to their heads, and by the echo 
report of sever guns. In an instant their guard had left them, and, 
place themselv behind rocks, had begun to fire in the direct 
whenc the report came. lord ruthven and aubrey, imit their 
example, retir for a moment behind the shelter turn of the 
defile: but asham of be thu detain by a foe, who with 
insult shout bade them advance, and be expos to unresist 
slaughter, if ani of the robber should climb abov and take them in 
the rear, they determin at onc to rush forward in search of the 
enemy. hardli had they lost the shelter of the rock, when lord ruthven 
receiv a shot in the shoulder, which brought him to the ground. 
aubrey hasten to hi assistance; and, no longer heed the contest 
or hi own peril, wa soon surpris by see the robbers' face 
around him--hi guard having, upon lord ruthven' be wounded, 
immedi thrown up their arm and surrendered. 

By promis of great reward, aubrey soon induc them to convey hi 
wound friend to a neighbour cabin; and have agre upon a 
ransom, he wa no more disturb by their presence--they be 
content mere to guard the entranc till their comrad should return 
with the promis sum, for which he had an order. lord ruthven' 
strength rapidli decreased; in two day mortif ensued, and 
death seem advanc with hasti steps. hi conduct and appear 
had not changed; he seem as unconsci of pain as he had been of 
the object about him: but toward the close of the last evening, hi 
mind becam appar uneasy, and hi eye often fix upon aubrey, 
who wa induc to offer hi assist with more than usual 
earnestness--"assist me! you may save me--you may do more than 
that--i mean not my life, I heed the death of my exist as littl 
as that of the pass day; but you may save my honour, your friend' 
honour."--"how? tell me how? I would do ani thing," repli aubrey.--"i 
need but little--mi life ebb apace--i cannot explain the 
whole--but if you would conceal all you know of me, my honour were 
free from stain in the world' mouth--and if my death were unknown 
for some time in england--i--i--but life."--"it shall not be 
known."--"swear!" cri the die man, rais himself with exult 
violence, "swear by all your soul reveres, by all your natur fears, 
swear that, for a year and a day you will not impart your knowledg of 
my crime or death to ani live be in ani way, whatev may 
happen, or whatev you may see. "--hi eye seem burst from 
their sockets: "I swear!" said aubrey; he sunk laugh upon hi 
pillow, and breath no more. 

aubrey retir to rest, but did not sleep; the mani circumst 
attend hi acquaint with thi man rose upon hi mind, and he 
knew not why; when he rememb hi oath a cold shiver came over 
him, as if from the presenti of someth horribl await him. 
rise earli in the morning, he wa about to enter the hovel in which 
he had left the corpse, when a robber met him, and inform him that 
it wa no longer there, have been convey by himself and comrades, 
upon hi retiring, to the pinnacl of a neighbour mount, accord 
to a promis they had given hi lordship, that it should be expos to 
the first cold ray of the moon that rose after hi death. aubrey 
astonished, and take sever of the men, determin to go and buri 
it upon the spot where it lay. but, when he had mount to the summit 
he found no trace of either the corps or the clothes, though the 
robber swore they point out the ident rock on which they had 
laid the body. for a time hi mind wa bewild in conjectures, but 
he at last returned, convinc that they had buri the corps for the 
sake of the clothes. 

weari of a countri in which he had met with such terribl misfortunes, 
and in which all appar conspir to heighten that superstiti 
melancholi that had seiz upon hi mind, he resolv to leav it, and 
soon arriv at smyrna. while wait for a vessel to convey him to 
otranto, or to naples, he occupi himself in arrang those effect 
he had with him belong to lord ruthven. amongst other thing there 
wa a case contain sever weapon of offence, more or less adapt 
to ensur the death of the victim. there were sever dagger and 
ataghans. whilst turn them over, and examin their curiou forms, 
what wa hi surpris at find a sheath appar ornament in the 
same style as the dagger discov in the fatal hut--h 
shuddered--hasten to gain further proof, he found the weapon, and 
hi horror may be imagin when he discov that it fitted, though 
peculiarli shaped, the sheath he held in hi hand. hi eye seem to 
need no further certainty--they seem gaze to be bound to the 
dagger; yet still he wish to disbelieve; but the particular form, 
the same vari tint upon the haft and sheath were alik in 
splendour on both, and left no room for doubt; there were also drop 
of blood on each. 

He left smyrna, and on hi way home, at rome, hi first inquiri were 
concern the ladi he had attempt to snatch from lord ruthven' 
seduct arts. her parent were in distress, their fortun ruined, 
and she had not been heard of sinc the departur of hi lordship. 
aubrey' mind becam almost broken under so mani repeat horrors; he 
wa afraid that thi ladi had fallen a victim to the destroy of 
ianthe. He becam moros and silent; and hi onli occup consist 
in urg the speed of the postilions, as if he were go to save the 
life of some one he held dear. He arriv at calais; a breeze, which 
seem obedi to hi will, soon waft him to the english shores; 
and he hasten to the mansion of hi fathers, and there, for a 
moment, appear to lose, in the embrac and caress of hi sister, 
all memori of the past. If she before, by her infantin caresses, had 
gain hi affection, now that the woman began to appear, she wa 
still more attach as a companion. 

miss aubrey had not that win grace which gain the gaze and 
applaus of the drawing-room assemblies. there wa none of that light 
brillianc which onli exist in the heat atmospher of a crowd 
apartment. her blue eye wa never lit up by the leviti of the mind 
beneath. there wa a melancholi charm about it which did not seem to 
aris from misfortune, but from some feel within, that appear to 
indic a soul consciou of a brighter realm. her step wa not that 
light footing, which stray where' a butterfli or a colour may 
attract--it wa sedat and pensive. when alone, her face wa never 
brighten by the smile of joy; but when her brother breath to her 
hi affection, and would in her presenc forget those grief she knew 
destroy hi rest, who would have exchang her smile for that of the 
voluptuary? It seem as if those eyes,--that face were then play 
in the light of their own nativ sphere. she wa yet onli eighteen, 
and had not been present to the world, it have been thought by her 
guardian more fit that her present should be delay until her 
brother' return from the continent, when he might be her protector. 
It wa now, therefore, resolv that the next drawing-room, which wa 
fast approaching, should be the epoch of her entri into the "busi 
scene." aubrey would rather have remain in the mansion of hi 
fathers, and fed upon the melancholi which overpow him. He could 
not feel interest about the frivol of fashion strangers, when 
hi mind had been so torn by the event he had witnessed; but he 
determin to sacrific hi own comfort to the protect of hi 
sister. they soon arriv in town, and prepar for the next day, 
which had been announc as a drawing-room. 

the crowd wa excessive--a drawing-room had not been held for a long 
time, and all who were anxiou to bask in the smile of royalty, 
hasten thither. aubrey wa there with hi sister. while he wa 
stand in a corner by himself, heedless of all around him, engag 
in the remembr that the first time he had seen lord ruthven wa in 
that veri place--h felt himself suddenli seiz by the arm, and a 
voic he recogn too well, sound in hi ear--"rememb your 
oath." He had hardli courag to turn, fear of see a spectr 
that would blast him, when he perceived, at a littl distance, the 
same figur which had attract hi notic on thi spot upon hi first 
entri into society. He gaze till hi limb almost refus to bear 
their weight, he wa oblig to take the arm of a friend, and forc 
a passag through the crowd, he threw himself into hi carriage, and 
wa driven home. He pace the room with hurri steps, and fix hi 
hand upon hi head, as if he were afraid hi thought were burst 
from hi brain. lord ruthven again befor him--circumst start 
up in dread array--th dagger--hi oath.--h rous himself, he 
could not believ it possible--th dead rise again!--h thought hi 
imagin had conjur up the imag hi mind wa rest upon. It 
wa imposs that it could be real--h determined, therefore, to 
go again into society; for though he attempt to ask concern lord 
ruthven, the name hung upon hi lips, and he could not succeed in 
gain information. He went a few night after with hi sister to the 
assembl of a near relation. leav her under the protect of a 
matron, he retir into a recess, and there gave himself up to hi own 
devour thoughts. perceiving, at last, that mani were leaving, he 
rous himself, and enter anoth room, found hi sister surround 
by several, appar in earnest conversation; he attempt to pass 
and get near her, when one, whom he request to move, turn round, 
and reveal to him those featur he most abhorred. He sprang 
forward, seiz hi sister' arm, and, with hurri step, forc her 
toward the street: at the door he found himself imped by the crowd 
of servant who were wait for their lords; and while he wa engag 
in pass them, he again heard that voic whisper close to 
him--"rememb your oath!"--h did not dare to turn, but, hurri hi 
sister, soon reach home. 

aubrey becam almost distracted. If befor hi mind had been absorb 
by one subject, how much more complet wa it engrossed, now that 
the certainti of the monster' live again press upon hi thoughts. 
hi sister' attent were now unheeded, and it wa in vain that she 
intreat him to explain to her what had caus hi abrupt conduct. He 
onli utter a few words, and those terrifi her. the more he 
thought, the more he wa bewildered. hi oath startl him;--wa he 
then to allow thi monster to roam, bear ruin upon hi breath, 
amidst all he held dear, and not avert it progress? hi veri sister 
might have been touch by him. but even if he were to break hi oath, 
and disclos hi suspicions, who would believ him? He thought of 
employ hi own hand to free the world from such a wretch; but 
death, he remembered, had been alreadi mocked. for day he remain in 
thi state; shut up in hi room, he saw no one, and ate onli when hi 
sister came, who, with eye stream with tears, besought him, for 
her sake, to support nature. At last, no longer capabl of bear 
still and solitude, he left hi house, roam from street to 
street, anxiou to fli that imag which haunt him. hi dress becam 
neglected, and he wandered, as often expos to the noon-day sun as to 
the midnight damps. He wa no longer to be recognized; at first he 
return with the even to the house; but at last he laid him down 
to rest wherev fatigu overtook him. hi sister, anxiou for hi 
safety, employ peopl to follow him; but they were soon distanc by 
him who fled from a pursuer swifter than any--from thought. hi 
conduct, however, suddenli changed. struck with the idea that he left 
by hi absenc the whole of hi friends, with a fiend amongst them, of 
whose presenc they were unconscious, he determin to enter again 
into society, and watch him closely, anxiou to forewarn, in spite of 
hi oath, all whom lord ruthven approach with intimacy. but when he 
enter into a room, hi haggard and suspici look were so 
striking, hi inward shudder so visible, that hi sister wa at 
last oblig to beg of him to abstain from seeking, for her sake, a 
societi which affect him so strongly. when, however, remonstr 
prove unavailing, the guardian thought proper to interpose, and, 
fear that hi mind wa becom alienated, they thought it high 
time to resum again that trust which had been befor impos upon 
them by aubrey' parents. 

desir of save him from the injuri and suffer he had daili 
encount in hi wanderings, and of prevent him from expos to 
the gener eye those mark of what they consid folly, they 
engag a physician to resid in the house, and take constant care of 
him. He hardli appear to notic it, so complet wa hi mind 
absorb by one terribl subject. hi incoher becam at last so 
great, that he wa confin to hi chamber. there he would often lie 
for days, incap of be roused. He had becom emaciated, hi eye 
had attain a glassi lustre;--th onli sign of affect and 
recollect remain display itself upon the entri of hi sister; 
then he would sometim start, and, seiz her hands, with look that 
sever afflict her, he would desir her not to touch him. "oh, do 
not touch him--if your love for me is aught, do not go near him!" 
when, however, she inquir to whom he referred, hi onli answer was, 
"true! true!" and again he sank into a state, whenc not even she could 
rous him. thi last mani months: gradually, however, as the year 
wa passing, hi incoher becam less frequent, and hi mind threw 
off a portion of it gloom, whilst hi guardian observed, that 
sever time in the day he would count upon hi finger a definit 
number, and then smile. 

the time had nearli elapsed, when, upon the last day of the year, one 
of hi guardian enter hi room, began to convers with hi 
physician upon the melancholi circumst of aubrey' be in so 
aw a situation, when hi sister wa go next day to be married. 
instantli aubrey' attent wa attracted; he ask anxious to 
whom. glad of thi mark of return intellect, of which they fear 
he had been deprived, they mention the name of the earl of marsden. 
think thi wa a young earl whom he had met with in society, aubrey 
seem pleased, and astonish them still more by hi express hi 
intent to be present at the nuptials, and desir to see hi 
sister. they answer not, but in a few minut hi sister wa with 
him. He wa appar again capabl of be affect by the 
influenc of her love smile; for he press her to hi breast, and 
kiss her cheek, wet with tears, flow at the thought of her 
brother' be onc more aliv to the feel of affection. He began 
to speak with all hi wont warmth, and to congratul her upon her 
marriag with a person so distinguish for rank and everi 
accomplishment; when he suddenli perceiv a locket upon her breast; 
open it, what wa hi surpris at behold the featur of the 
monster who had so long influenc hi life. He seiz the portrait in 
a paroxysm of rage, and trampl it under foot. upon her ask him 
whi he thu destroy the resembl of her futur husband, he look 
as if he did not understand her--then seiz her hands, and gaze 
on her with a frantic express of countenance, he bade her swear 
that she would never wed thi monster, for he---- but he could not 
advance--it seem as if that voic again bade him rememb hi 
oath--h turn suddenli round, think lord ruthven wa near him 
but saw no one. In the meantim the guardian and physician, who had 
heard the whole, and thought thi wa but a return of hi disorder, 
entered, and forc him from miss aubrey, desir her to leav him. 
He fell upon hi knee to them, he implored, he beg of them to 
delay but for one day. they, attribut thi to the insan they 
imagin had taken possess of hi mind, endeavour to pacifi him, 
and retired. 

lord ruthven had call the morn after the drawing-room, and had 
been refus with everi one else. when he heard of aubrey' ill 
health, he readili understood himself to be the caus of it; but when 
he learn that he wa deem insane, hi exult and pleasur 
could hardli be conceal from those among whom he had gain thi 
information. He hasten to the hous of hi former companion, and, by 
constant attendance, and the pretenc of great affect for the 
brother and interest in hi fate, he gradual won the ear of miss 
aubrey. who could resist hi power? hi tongu had danger and toil 
to recount--could speak of himself as of an individu have no 
sympathi with ani be on the crowd earth, save with her to whom he 
address himself;--could tell how, sinc he knew her, hi existence, 
had begun to seem worthi of preservation, if it were mere that he 
might listen to her sooth accents;--in fine, he knew so well how to 
use the serpent' art, or such wa the will of fate, that he gain 
her affections. the titl of the elder branch fall at length to 
him, he obtain an import embassy, which serv as an excus for 
hasten the marriage, (in spite of her brother' derang state,) 
which wa to take place the veri day befor hi departur for the 
continent. 

aubrey, when he wa left by the physician and hi guardians, attempt 
to bribe the servants, but in vain. He ask for pen and paper; it wa 
given him; he wrote a letter to hi sister, conjur her, as she 
valu her own happiness, her own honour, and the honour of those now 
in the grave, who onc held her in their arm as their hope and the 
hope of their house, to delay but for a few hour that marriage, on 
which he denounc the most heavi curses. the servant promis they 
would deliv it; but give it to the physician, he thought it better 
not to harass ani more the mind of miss aubrey by, what he considered, 
the rave of a maniac. night pass on without rest to the busi 
inmat of the house; and aubrey heard, with a horror that may more 
easili be conceiv than described, the note of busi preparation. 
morn came, and the sound of carriag broke upon hi ear. aubrey 
grew almost frantic. the curios of the servant at last overcam 
their vigilance, they gradual stole away, leav him in the custodi 
of an helpless old woman. He seiz the opportunity, with one bound 
wa out of the room, and in a moment found himself in the apart 
where all were nearli assembled. lord ruthven wa the first to 
perceiv him: he immedi approached, and, take hi arm by 
force, hurri him from the room, speechless with rage. when on the 
staircase, lord ruthven whisper in hi ear--"rememb your oath, 
and know, if not my bride to day, your sister is dishonoured. women 
are frail!" So saying, he push him toward hi attendants, who, 
rous by the old woman, had come in search of him. aubrey could no 
longer support himself; hi rage not find vent, had broken a 
blood-vessel, and he wa convey to bed. thi wa not mention to 
hi sister, who wa not present when he entered, as the physician wa 
afraid of agit her. the marriag wa solemnized, and the bride 
and bridegroom left london. 

aubrey' weak increased; the effus of blood produc symptom 
of the near approach of death. He desir hi sister' guardian might 
be called, and when the midnight hour had struck, he relat 
composedli what the reader ha perused--h die immedi after. 

the guardian hasten to protect miss aubrey; but when they arrived, 
it wa too late. lord ruthven had disappeared, and aubrey' sister had 
glut the thirst of a vampyre! 


________________________________________________________________ 

extract OF A letter, 

contain AN account 

OF 

lord byron' resid 

IN the 

island OF mitylene. 
________________________________________________________________ 

account 

OF 

lord byron' residence, &c. 
______________ 

"the world wa all befor him, where to choos hi place of rest, and 
provid hi guide." 

IN sail through the grecian archipelago, on board one of hi 
majesty' vessels, in the year 1812, we put into the harbour of 
mitylene, in the island of that name. the beauti of thi place, and 
the certain suppli of cattl and veget alway to be had there, 
induc mani british vessel to visit it--both men of war and 
merchantmen; and though it lie rather out of the track for ship 
bound to smyrna, it bounti ampli repay for the deviat of a 
voyage. We landed; as usual, at the bottom of the bay, and whilst the 
men were employ in watering, and the purser bargain for cattl 
with the natives, the clergyman and myself took a rambl to the cave 
call homer' school, and other places, where we had been before. On 
the brow of mount ida (a small monticul so named) we met with and 
engag a young greek as our guide, who told us he had come from scio 
with an english lord, who left the island four day previou to our 
arriv in hi felucca. "he engag me as a pilot," said the greek, 
"and would have taken me with him; but I did not choos to quit 
mitylene, where I am like to get married. He wa an odd, but a veri 
good man. the cottag over the hill, face the river, belong to him, 
and he ha left an old man in charg of it: he gave dominick, the 
wine-trader, six hundr zechin for it, (about l250 english 
currency,) and ha resid there about fourteen months, though not 
constantly; for he sail in hi felucca veri often to the differ 
islands." 

thi account excit our curios veri much, and we lost no time in 
hasten to the hous where our countryman had resided. We were 
kindli receiv by an old man, who conduct us over the mansion. It 
consist of four apart on the ground-floor--an entranc hall, a 
drawing-room, a sit parlour, and a bed-room, with a spaciou 
closet annexed. they were all simpli decorated: plain green-stain 
walls, marbl tabl on either side, a larg myrtl in the centre, and 
a small fountain beneath, which could be made to play through the 
branch by move a spring fix in the side of a small bronz venu 
in a lean posture; a larg couch or sofa complet the furniture. 
In the hall stood half a dozen english cane chairs, and an empti 
book-case: there were no mirrors, nor a singl painting. the 
bedchamb had mere a larg mattress spread on the floor, with two 
stuf cotton quilt and a pillow--th common bed throughout greece. 
In the sitting-room we observ a marbl recess, formerly, the old man 
told us, fill with book and papers, which were then in a larg 
seaman' chest in the closet: it wa open, but we did not think 
ourselv justifi in examin the contents. On the tablet of the 
recess lay voltaire's, shakspeare's, boileau's, and rousseau' work 
complete; volney' ruin of empires; zimmerman, in the german 
language; klopstock' messiah; kotzebue' novels; schiller' play of 
the robbers; milton' paradis lost, an italian edition, print at 
parma in 1810; sever small pamphlet from the greek press at 
constantinople, much torn, but no english book of ani description. 
most of these book were fill with margin notes, written with a 
pencil, in italian and latin. the messiah wa liter scribbl all 
over, and mark with slip of paper, on which also were remarks. 

the old man said: "the lord had been read these book the even 
befor he sailed, and forgot to place them with the others; but," 
said he, "there they must lie until hi return; for he is so 
particular, that were I to move one thing without orders, he would 
frown upon me for a week together; he is otherway veri good. I onc 
did him a service; and I have the produc of thi farm for the troubl 
of take care of it, except twenti zechin which I pay to an age 
armenian who resid in a small cottag in the wood, and whom the lord 
brought here from adrianople; I don't know for what reason." 

the appear of the hous extern wa pleasing. the portico in 
front wa fifti pace long and fourteen broad, and the flute marbl 
pillar with black plinth and fret-work cornices, (a it is now 
customari in grecian architecture,) were consider higher than the 
roof. the roof, surround by a light stone balustrade, wa cover by 
a fine turkey carpet, beneath an awn of strong coars linen. most 
of the house-top are thu furnished, as upon them the greek pass 
their even in smoking, drink light wines, such as "lachryma 
christi," eat fruit, and enjoy the even breeze. 

On the left hand as we enter the house, a small streamlet glide 
away, grapes, orang and lime were cluster togeth on it 
borders, and under the shade of two larg myrtl bushes, a marbl seat 
with an ornament wooden back wa placed, on which we were told, the 
lord pass mani of hi even and night till twelv o'clock, 
reading, writing, and talk to himself. "I suppose," said the old 
man, "praying" for he wa veri devout, "and alway attend our church 
twice a week, besid sundays." 

the view from thi seat wa what may be term "a bird's-ey view." 
A line of rich vineyard led the eye to mount calcla, cover with 
oliv and myrtl tree in bloom, and on the summit of which an ancient 
greek templ appear in majest decay. A small stream issu from 
the ruin descend in broken cascades, until it wa lost in the wood 
near the mountain' base. the sea smooth as glass, and an horizon 
unshadow by a singl cloud, termin the view in front; and a 
littl on the left, through a vista of lofti chesnut and palm-trees, 
sever small island were distinctli observed, stud the light 
blue wave with spot of emerald green. I seldom enjoy a view more 
than I did this; but our enquiri were fruitless as to the name of 
the person who had resid in thi romant solitude: none knew hi 
name but dominick, hi banker, who had gone to candia. "the armenian," 
said our conductor, "could tell, but I am sure he will not,"--"and 
cannot you tell, old friend?" said i--"if I can," said he, "I dare 
not." We had not time to visit the armenian, but on our return to the 
town we learnt sever particular of the isol lord. He had 
portion eight young girl when he wa last upon the island, and even 
danc with them at the nuptial feast. He gave a cow to one man, 
hors to others, and cotton and silk to the girl who live by weav 
these articles. He also bought a new boat for a fisherman who had lost 
hi own in a gale, and he often gave greek testament to the poor 
children. In short, he appear to us, from all we collected, to have 
been a veri eccentr and benevol character. one circumst we 
learnt, which our old friend at the cottag thought proper not to 
disclose. He had a most beauti daughter, with whom the lord wa 
often seen walk on the sea-shore, and he had bought her a 
piano-forte, and taught her himself the use of it. 

such wa the inform with which we depart from the peac isl 
of mitylene; our imagin all on the rack, guess who thi 
rambler in greec could be. He had money it wa evident: he had 
philanthropi of disposition, and all those eccentr which mark 
peculiar genius. arriv at palermo, all our doubt were dispelled. 
fall in compani with mr. foster, the architect, a pupil of wyatt's, 
who had been travel in egypt and greece, "the individual," said 
he, "about whom you are so anxious, is lord byron; I met him in my 
travel on the island of tenedos, and I also visit him at mitylene." 
We had never then heard of hi lordship' fame, as we had been some 
year from home; but "child harolde" be put into our hand we 
recogn the reclus of calcla in everi page. deepli did we regret 
not have been more curiou in our research at the cottage, but we 
consol ourselv with the idea of return to mitylen on some 
futur day; but to me that day will never return. I make thi 
statement, believ it not quit uninteresting, and in justic to hi 
lordship' good name, which ha been grossli slandered. He ha been 
describ as of an unfeel disposition, avers to associ with 
human nature, or contribut in ani way to sooth it sorrows, or add 
to it pleasures. the fact is directli the reverse, as may be plainli 
gather from these littl anecdotes. all the finer feel of the 
heart, so elegantli depict in hi lordship' poems, seem to have 
their seat in hi bosom. tenderness, sympathy, and chariti appear to 
guid all hi actions: and hi court the repos of solitud is an 
addit reason for mark him as a be on whose heart religion 
hath set her seal, and over whose head benevol hath thrown her 
mantle. No man can read the preced pleas "traits" without 
feel proud of him as a countryman. with respect to hi love or 
pleasures, I do not assum a right to give an opinion. report are 
ever to be receiv with caution, particularli when direct against 
man' moral integrity; and he who dare justifi himself befor that 
aw tribun where all must appear, alon may censur the error of 
a fellow-mortal. lord byron' charact is worthi of hi genius. To do 
good in secret, and shun the world' applause, is the surest testimoni 
of a virtuou heart and self-approv conscience. 


the end 
____________________ 

gillet, printer, crown-court, fleet-street. 








end of project gutenberg' the vampyre; A tale, by john william polidori 

*** end OF thi project gutenberg ebook the vampyre; A tale *** 

***** thi file should be name 6087-8.txt or 6087-8.zip ***** 
thi and all associ file of variou format will be found in: 
http://www.gutenberg.org/6/0/8/6087/ 

produc by an anonym project gutenberg volunteer. 

updat edit will replac the previou one--th old edit 
will be renamed. 

creat the work from public domain print edit mean that no 
one own a unit state copyright in these works, so the foundat 
(and you!) can copi and distribut it in the unit state without 
permiss and without pay copyright royalties. special rules, 
set forth in the gener term of use part of thi license, appli to 
copi and distribut project gutenberg-tm electron work to 
protect the project gutenberg-tm concept and trademark. project 
gutenberg is a regist trademark, and may not be use if you 
charg for the ebooks, unless you receiv specif permission. If you 
do not charg anyth for copi of thi ebook, compli with the 
rule is veri easy. you may use thi ebook for nearli ani purpos 
such as creation of deriv works, reports, perform and 
research. they may be modifi and print and given away--y may do 
practic anyth with public domain ebooks. redistribut is 
subject to the trademark license, especi commerci 
redistribution. 



*** start: full licens *** 

the full project gutenberg licens 
pleas read thi befor you distribut OR use thi work 

To protect the project gutenberg-tm mission of promot the free 
distribut of electron works, by use or distribut thi work 
(or ani other work associ in ani way with the phrase "project 
gutenberg"), you agre to compli with all the term of the full project 
gutenberg-tm licens (avail with thi file or onlin at 
http://gutenberg.net/license). 


section 1. gener term of use and redistribut project gutenberg-tm 
electron work 

1.a. By read or use ani part of thi project gutenberg-tm 
electron work, you indic that you have read, understand, agre to 
and accept all the term of thi licens and intellectu properti 
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agre to abid by all 
the term of thi agreement, you must ceas use and return or destroy 
all copi of project gutenberg-tm electron work in your possession. 
If you paid a fee for obtain a copi of or access to a project 
gutenberg-tm electron work and you do not agre to be bound by the 
term of thi agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or 
entiti to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.e.8. 

1.b. "project gutenberg" is a regist trademark. It may onli be 
use on or associ in ani way with an electron work by peopl who 
agre to be bound by the term of thi agreement. there are a few 
thing that you can do with most project gutenberg-tm electron work 
even without compli with the full term of thi agreement. see 
paragraph 1.c below. there are a lot of thing you can do with project 
gutenberg-tm electron work if you follow the term of thi agreement 
and help preserv free futur access to project gutenberg-tm electron 
works. see paragraph 1.e below. 

1.c. the project gutenberg literari archiv foundat ("the foundation" 
or pglaf), own a compil copyright in the collect of project 
gutenberg-tm electron works. nearli all the individu work in the 
collect are in the public domain in the unit states. If an 
individu work is in the public domain in the unit state and you are 
locat in the unit states, we do not claim a right to prevent you from 
copying, distributing, performing, display or creat deriv 
work base on the work as long as all refer to project gutenberg 
are removed. Of course, we hope that you will support the project 
gutenberg-tm mission of promot free access to electron work by 
freeli share project gutenberg-tm work in complianc with the term of 
thi agreement for keep the project gutenberg-tm name associ with 
the work. you can easili compli with the term of thi agreement by 
keep thi work in the same format with it attach full project 
gutenberg-tm licens when you share it without charg with others. 

1.d. the copyright law of the place where you are locat also govern 
what you can do with thi work. copyright law in most countri are in 
a constant state of change. If you are outsid the unit states, check 
the law of your countri in addit to the term of thi agreement 
befor downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distribut or 
creat deriv work base on thi work or ani other project 
gutenberg-tm work. the foundat make no represent concern 
the copyright statu of ani work in ani countri outsid the unit 
states. 

1.e. unless you have remov all refer to project gutenberg: 

1.e.1. the follow sentence, with activ link to, or other immedi 
access to, the full project gutenberg-tm licens must appear promin 
whenev ani copi of a project gutenberg-tm work (ani work on which the 
phrase "project gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "project 
gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed, 
copi or distributed: 

thi ebook is for the use of anyon anywher at no cost and with 
almost no restrict whatsoever. you may copi it, give it away or 
re-us it under the term of the project gutenberg licens includ 
with thi ebook or onlin at www.gutenberg.net 

1.e.2. If an individu project gutenberg-tm electron work is deriv 
from the public domain (doe not contain a notic indic that it is 
post with permiss of the copyright holder), the work can be copi 
and distribut to anyon in the unit state without pay ani fee 
or charges. If you are redistribut or provid access to a work 
with the phrase "project gutenberg" associ with or appear on the 
work, you must compli either with the requir of paragraph 1.e.1 
through 1.e.7 or obtain permiss for the use of the work and the 
project gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraph 1.e.8 or 
1.e.9. 

1.e.3. If an individu project gutenberg-tm electron work is post 
with the permiss of the copyright holder, your use and distribut 
must compli with both paragraph 1.e.1 through 1.e.7 and ani addit 
term impos by the copyright holder. addit term will be link 
to the project gutenberg-tm licens for all work post with the 
permiss of the copyright holder found at the begin of thi work. 

1.e.4. Do not unlink or detach or remov the full project gutenberg-tm 
licens term from thi work, or ani file contain a part of thi 
work or ani other work associ with project gutenberg-tm. 

1.e.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribut or redistribut thi 
electron work, or ani part of thi electron work, without 
promin display the sentenc set forth in paragraph 1.e.1 with 
activ link or immedi access to the full term of the project 
gutenberg-tm license. 

1.e.6. you may convert to and distribut thi work in ani binary, 
compressed, mark up, nonproprietari or proprietari form, includ ani 
word process or hypertext form. however, if you provid access to or 
distribut copi of a project gutenberg-tm work in a format other than 
"plain vanilla ascii" or other format use in the offici version 
post on the offici project gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net), 
you must, at no addit cost, fee or expens to the user, provid a 
copy, a mean of export a copy, or a mean of obtain a copi upon 
request, of the work in it origin "plain vanilla ascii" or other 
form. ani altern format must includ the full project gutenberg-tm 
licens as specifi in paragraph 1.e.1. 

1.e.7. Do not charg a fee for access to, viewing, displaying, 
performing, copi or distribut ani project gutenberg-tm work 
unless you compli with paragraph 1.e.8 or 1.e.9. 

1.e.8. you may charg a reason fee for copi of or provid 
access to or distribut project gutenberg-tm electron work provid 
that 

- you pay a royalti fee of 20% of the gross profit you deriv from 
the use of project gutenberg-tm work calcul use the method 
you alreadi use to calcul your applic taxes. the fee is 
owe to the owner of the project gutenberg-tm trademark, but he 
ha agre to donat royalti under thi paragraph to the 
project gutenberg literari archiv foundation. royalti payment 
must be paid within 60 day follow each date on which you 
prepar (or are legal requir to prepare) your period tax 
returns. royalti payment should be clearli mark as such and 
sent to the project gutenberg literari archiv foundat at the 
address specifi in section 4, "inform about donat to 
the project gutenberg literari archiv foundation." 

- you provid a full refund of ani money paid by a user who notifi 
you in write (or by e-mail) within 30 day of receipt that s/he 
doe not agre to the term of the full project gutenberg-tm 
license. you must requir such a user to return or 
destroy all copi of the work possess in a physic medium 
and discontinu all use of and all access to other copi of 
project gutenberg-tm works. 

- you provide, in accord with paragraph 1.f.3, a full refund of ani 
money paid for a work or a replac copy, if a defect in the 
electron work is discov and report to you within 90 day 
of receipt of the work. 

- you compli with all other term of thi agreement for free 
distribut of project gutenberg-tm works. 

1.e.9. If you wish to charg a fee or distribut a project gutenberg-tm 
electron work or group of work on differ term than are set 
forth in thi agreement, you must obtain permiss in write from 
both the project gutenberg literari archiv foundat and michael 
hart, the owner of the project gutenberg-tm trademark. contact the 
foundat as set forth in section 3 below. 

1.f. 

1.f.1. project gutenberg volunt and employe expend consider 
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcrib and proofread 
public domain work in creat the project gutenberg-tm 
collection. despit these efforts, project gutenberg-tm electron 
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain 
"defects," such as, but not limit to, incomplete, inaccur or 
corrupt data, transcript errors, a copyright or other intellectu 
properti infringement, a defect or damag disk or other medium, a 
comput virus, or comput code that damag or cannot be read by 
your equipment. 

1.f.2. limit warranty, disclaim OF damag - except for the "right 
of replac or refund" describ in paragraph 1.f.3, the project 
gutenberg literari archiv foundation, the owner of the project 
gutenberg-tm trademark, and ani other parti distribut a project 
gutenberg-tm electron work under thi agreement, disclaim all 
liabil to you for damages, cost and expenses, includ legal 
fees. you agre that you have NO remedi for negligence, strict 
liability, breach OF warranti OR breach OF contract except those 
provid IN paragraph f3. you agre that the foundation, the 
trademark owner, and ani distributor under thi agreement will not BE 
liabl TO you for actual, direct, indirect, consequential, punit OR 
incident damag even IF you give notic OF the possibl OF such 
damage. 

1.f.3. limit right OF replac OR refund - If you discov a 
defect in thi electron work within 90 day of receiv it, you can 
receiv a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by send a 
written explan to the person you receiv the work from. If you 
receiv the work on a physic medium, you must return the medium with 
your written explanation. the person or entiti that provid you with 
the defect work may elect to provid a replac copi in lieu of a 
refund. If you receiv the work electronically, the person or entiti 
provid it to you may choos to give you a second opportun to 
receiv the work electron in lieu of a refund. If the second copi 
is also defective, you may demand a refund in write without further 
opportun to fix the problem. 

1.f.4. except for the limit right of replac or refund set forth 
in paragraph 1.f.3, thi work is provid to you 'as-is' with NO other 
warranti OF ani kind, express OR implied, includ but not limit TO 
warranti OF merchant OR fit for ani purpose. 

1.f.5. some state do not allow disclaim of certain impli 
warranti or the exclus or limit of certain type of damages. 
If ani disclaim or limit set forth in thi agreement violat the 
law of the state applic to thi agreement, the agreement shall be 
interpret to make the maximum disclaim or limit permit by 
the applic state law. the invalid or unenforc of ani 
provis of thi agreement shall not void the remain provisions. 

1.f.6. indemn - you agre to indemnifi and hold the foundation, the 
trademark owner, ani agent or employe of the foundation, anyon 
provid copi of project gutenberg-tm electron work in accord 
with thi agreement, and ani volunt associ with the production, 
promot and distribut of project gutenberg-tm electron works, 
harmless from all liability, cost and expenses, includ legal fees, 
that aris directli or indirectli from ani of the follow which you do 
or caus to occur: (a) distribut of thi or ani project gutenberg-tm 
work, (b) alteration, modification, or addit or delet to ani 
project gutenberg-tm work, and (c) ani defect you cause. 


section 2. inform about the mission of project gutenberg-tm 

project gutenberg-tm is synonym with the free distribut of 
electron work in format readabl by the widest varieti of comput 
includ obsolete, old, middle-ag and new computers. It exist 
becaus of the effort of hundr of volunt and donat from 
peopl in all walk of life. 

volunt and financi support to provid volunt with the 
assist they need are critic to reach project gutenberg-tm' 
goal and ensur that the project gutenberg-tm collect will 
remain freeli avail for gener to come. In 2001, the project 
gutenberg literari archiv foundat wa creat to provid a secur 
and perman futur for project gutenberg-tm and futur generations. 
To learn more about the project gutenberg literari archiv foundat 
and how your effort and donat can help, see section 3 and 4 
and the foundat web page at http://www.pglaf.org. 


section 3. inform about the project gutenberg literari archiv 
foundat 

the project gutenberg literari archiv foundat is a non profit 
501(c)(3) educ corpor organ under the law of the 
state of mississippi and grant tax exempt statu by the intern 
revenu service. the foundation' ein or feder tax identif 
number is 64-6221541. it 501(c)(3) letter is post at 
http://pglaf.org/fundraising. contribut to the project gutenberg 
literari archiv foundat are tax deduct to the full extent 
permit by u.s. feder law and your state' laws. 

the foundation' princip offic is locat at 4557 melan dr. S. 
fairbanks, ak, 99712., but it volunt and employe are scatter 
throughout numer locations. it busi offic is locat at 
809 north 1500 west, salt lake city, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email 
business@pglaf.org. email contact link and up to date contact 
inform can be found at the foundation' web site and offici 
page at http://pglaf.org 

for addit contact information: 
dr. gregori B. newbi 
chief execut and director 
gbnewby@pglaf.org 


section 4. inform about donat to the project gutenberg 
literari archiv foundat 

project gutenberg-tm depend upon and cannot surviv without wide 
spread public support and donat to carri out it mission of 
increas the number of public domain and licens work that can be 
freeli distribut in machin readabl form access by the widest 
array of equip includ outdat equipment. mani small donat 
($1 to $5,000) are particularli import to maintain tax exempt 
statu with the irs. 

the foundat is commit to compli with the law regul 
chariti and charit donat in all 50 state of the unit 
states. complianc requir are not uniform and it take a 
consider effort, much paperwork and mani fee to meet and keep up 
with these requirements. We do not solicit donat in locat 
where we have not receiv written confirm of compliance. To 
send donat or determin the statu of complianc for ani 
particular state visit http://pglaf.org 

while we cannot and do not solicit contribut from state where we 
have not met the solicit requirements, we know of no prohibit 
against accept unsolicit donat from donor in such state who 
approach us with offer to donate. 

intern donat are grate accepted, but we cannot make 
ani statement concern tax treatment of donat receiv from 
outsid the unit states. u.s. law alon swamp our small staff. 

pleas check the project gutenberg web page for current donat 
method and addresses. donat are accept in a number of other 
way includ includ checks, onlin payment and credit card 
donations. To donate, pleas visit: http://pglaf.org/don 


section 5. gener inform about project gutenberg-tm electron 
works. 

professor michael S. hart is the origin of the project gutenberg-tm 
concept of a librari of electron work that could be freeli share 
with anyone. for thirti years, he produc and distribut project 
gutenberg-tm ebook with onli a loos network of volunt support. 


project gutenberg-tm ebook are often creat from sever print 
editions, all of which are confirm as public domain in the u.s. 
unless a copyright notic is included. thus, we do not necessarili 
keep ebook in complianc with ani particular paper edition. 


most peopl start at our web site which ha the main PG search facility: 

http://www.gutenberg.net 

thi web site includ inform about project gutenberg-tm, 
includ how to make donat to the project gutenberg literari 
archiv foundation, how to help produc our new ebooks, and how to 
subscrib to our email newslett to hear about new ebooks. 
