project gutenberg' the fall of the hous of usher, by edgar allan poe 

thi ebook is for the use of anyon anywher at no cost and with 
almost no restrict whatsoever. you may copi it, give it away or 
re-us it under the term of the project gutenberg licens includ 
with thi ebook or onlin at www.gutenberg.net 


title: the fall of the hous of usher 

author: edgar allan poe 

post date: decemb 15, 2010 [ebook #932] 
releas date: june, 1997 

language: english 


*** start OF thi project gutenberg ebook the fall OF the hous OF usher *** 




produc by levent kurnaz and jose menendez 









the fall of the hous of usher 


son coeur est un luth suspendu; 
sitot qu'on le touch il resonne. 
DE beranger. 


prefac 
dure the whole of a dull, dark, and soundless day in the 
autumn of the year, when the cloud hung oppress low in the 
heavens, I had been pass alone, on horseback, through a 
singularli dreari tract of country; and at length found myself, 
as the shade of the even drew on, within view of the 
melancholi hous of usher. I know not how it was--but, with the 
first glimps of the building, a sens of insuffer gloom 
pervad my spirit. I say insufferable; for the feel wa 
unreliev by ani of that half-pleasureable, becaus poetic, 
sentiment, with which the mind usual receiv even the sternest 
natur imag of the desol or terrible. I look upon the 
scene befor me--upon the mere house, and the simpl landscap 
featur of the domain--upon the bleak walls--upon the vacant 
eye-lik windows--upon a few rank sedges--and upon a few white 
trunk of decay trees--with an utter depress of soul which I 
can compar to no earthli sensat more properli than to the 
after-dream of the revel upon opium--th bitter laps into 
everyday life--th hideou drop off of the veil. there wa 
an iciness, a sinking, a sicken of the heart--an unredeem 
dreari of thought which no goad of the imagin could 
tortur into aught of the sublime. what wa it--i paus to 
think--what wa it that so unnerv me in the contempl of 
the hous of usher? It wa a mysteri all insoluble; nor could I 
grappl with the shadowi fanci that crowd upon me as I 
pondered. I wa forc to fall back upon the unsatisfactori 
conclusion, that while, beyond doubt, there are combin 
of veri simpl natur object which have the power of thu 
affect us, still the analysi of thi power lie among 
consider beyond our depth. It wa possible, I reflected, 
that a mere differ arrang of the particular of the 
scene, of the detail of the picture, would be suffici to 
modify, or perhap to annihil it capac for sorrow 
impression; and, act upon thi idea, I rein my hors 
to the precipit brink of a black and lurid tarn that lay in 
unruffl lustr by the dwelling, and gaze down--but with a 
shudder even more thrill than before--upon the remodel and 
invert imag of the grey sedge, and the ghastli tree-stems, 
and the vacant and eye-lik windows. 

nevertheless, in thi mansion of gloom I now propos to 
myself a sojourn of some weeks. it proprietor, roderick usher, 
had been one of my boon companion in boyhood; but mani year had 
elaps sinc our last meeting. A letter, however, had late 
reach me in a distant part of the country--a letter from 
him--which, in it wildli importun nature, had admit of no 
other than a person reply. the MS gave evid of nervou 
agitation. the writer spoke of acut bodili illness--of a mental 
disord which oppress him--and of an earnest desir to see me, 
as hi best, and inde hi onli person friend, with a view of 
attempting, by the cheer of my society, some allevi 
of hi malady. It wa the manner in which all this, and much 
more, wa said--it wa the appar heart that went with hi 
request--which allow me no room for hesitation; and I 
accordingli obey forthwith what I still consid a veri 
singular summons. 

although, as boys, we had been even intim associates, yet 
I realli knew littl of my friend. hi reserv had been alway 
excess and habitual. I wa aware, however, that hi veri 
ancient famili had been noted, time out of mind, for a peculiar 
sensibl of temperament, display itself, through long ages, 
in mani work of exalt art, and manifested, of late, in 
repeat deed of munific yet unobtrus charity, as well as 
in a passion devot to the intricacies, perhap even more 
than to the orthodox and easili recognis beauti of music 
science. I had learned, too, the veri remark fact, that the 
stem of the usher race, all time-honour as it was, had put 
forth, at no period, ani endur branch; in other words, that 
the entir famili lay in the direct line of descent, and had 
always, with veri trifl and veri temporari variation, so lain. 
It wa thi deficiency, I considered, while run over in 
thought the perfect keep of the charact of the premis with 
the accredit charact of the people, and while specul 
upon the possibl influenc which the one, in the long 
laps of centuries, might have exercis upon the other--it wa 
thi deficiency, perhaps, of collater issue, and the consequ 
undevi transmission, from sire to son, of the patrimoni with 
the name, which had, at length, so identifi the two as to merg 
the origin titl of the estat in the quaint and equivoc 
appel of the "hous of usher"--an appel which seem 
to include, in the mind of the peasantri who use it, both the 
famili and the famili mansion. 

I have said that the sole effect of my somewhat childish 
experiment--that of look down within the tarn--had been to 
deepen the first singular impression. there can be no doubt that 
the conscious of the rapid increas of my superstition--for 
whi should I not so term it?--serv mainli to acceler the 
increas itself. such, I have long known, is the paradox law 
of all sentiment have terror as a basis. and it might have 
been for thi reason only, that, when I again uplift my eye to 
the hous itself, from it imag in the pool, there grew in my 
mind a strang fancy--a fanci so ridiculous, indeed, that I but 
mention it to show the vivid forc of the sensat which 
oppress me. I had so work upon my imagin as realli to 
believ that about the whole mansion and domain there hung an 
atmospher peculiar to themselv and their immedi vicinity--an 
atmospher which had no affin with the air of heaven, but 
which had reek up from the decay trees, and the grey wall, 
and the silent tarn--a pestil and mystic vapour, dull, 
sluggish, faintli discernible, and leaden-hued. 

shake off from my spirit what must have been a dream, 
I scan more narrowli the real aspect of the building. it 
princip featur seem to be that of an excess antiquity. 
the discolor of age had been great. minut fungi 
overspread the whole exterior, hang in a fine tangl web-work 
from the eaves. yet all thi wa apart from ani extraordinari 
dilapidation. No portion of the masonri had fallen; and there 
appear to be a wild inconsist between it still perfect 
adapt of parts, and the crumbl condit of the 
individu stones. In thi there wa much that remind me of 
the speciou total of old wood-work which ha rot for long 
year in some neglect vault, with no disturb from the 
breath of the extern air. beyond thi indic of 
extens decay, however, the fabric gave littl token of 
instability. perhap the eye of a scrutin observ might 
have discov a bare percept fissure, which, extend 
from the roof of the build in front, made it way down the 
wall in a zigzag direction, until it becam lost in the sullen 
water of the tarn. 

notic these things, I rode over a short causeway to the 
house. A servant in wait took my horse, and I enter the 
gothic archway of the hall. A valet, of stealthi step, thenc 
conduct me, in silence, through mani dark and intric 
passag in my progress to the studio of hi master. much 
that I encount on the way contributed, I know not how, to 
heighten the vagu sentiment of which I have alreadi spoken. 
while the object around me--whil the carv of the ceilings, 
the sombr tapestri of the walls, the eboni black of the 
floors, and the phantasmagor armori trophi which rattl as 
I strode, were but matter to which, or to such as which, I had 
been accustom from my infancy--whil I hesit not to 
acknowledg how familiar wa all this--i still wonder to find 
how unfamiliar were the fanci which ordinari imag were 
stir up. On one of the staircases, I met the physician of 
the family. hi countenance, I thought, wore a mingl 
express of low cun and perplexity. He accost me with 
trepid and pass on. the valet now threw open a door and 
usher me into the presenc of hi master. 

the room in which I found myself wa veri larg and lofty. 
the window were long, narrow, and pointed, and at so vast a 
distanc from the black oaken floor as to be altogeth inaccess 
from within. feebl gleam of encrimson light made their way 
through the trellis panes, and serv to render suffici 
distinct the more promin object around; the eye, however, 
struggl in vain to reach the remot angl of the chamber, or 
the recess of the vault and fret ceiling. dark draperi 
hung upon the walls. the gener furnitur wa profuse, 
comfortless, antique, and tattered. mani book and music 
instrument lay scatter about, but fail to give ani vital 
to the scene. I felt that I breath an atmospher of sorrow. 
An air of stern, deep, and irredeem gloom hung over and 
pervad all. 

upon my entrance, usher rose from a sofa on which he had 
been lie at full length, and greet me with a vivaci warmth 
which had much in it, I at first thought, of an overdon 
cordiality--of the constrain effort of the ennuy man of 
the world. A glance, however, at hi countenance, convinc me 
of hi perfect sincerity. We sat down; and for some moments, 
while he spoke not, I gaze upon him with a feel half of pity, 
half of awe. surely, man had never befor so terribl altered, 
in so brief a period, as had roderick usher! It wa with 
difficulti that I could bring myself to admit the ident of the 
man be befor me with the companion of my earli boyhood. yet 
the charact of hi face had been at all time remarkable. A 
cadaver of complexion; an eye large, liquid, and lumin 
beyond comparison; lip somewhat thin and veri pallid, but of a 
surpassingli beauti curve; a nose of a delic hebrew model, 
but with a breadth of nostril unusu in similar formations; a 
finely-mould chin, speaking, in it want of prominence, of a 
want of moral energy; hair of a more than web-lik soft and 
tenuity; these features, with an inordin expans abov the 
region of the temple, made up altogeth a counten not 
easili to be forgotten. and now in the mere exagger of the 
prevail charact of these features, and of the express 
they were wont to convey, lay so much of chang that I doubt to 
whom I spoke. the now ghastli pallor of the skin, and the now 
miracul lustr of the eye, abov all thing startl and even 
awe me. the silken hair, too, had been suffer to grow all 
unheeded, and as, in it wild gossam texture, it float rather 
than fell about the face, I could not, even with effort, connect 
it arabesqu express with ani idea of simpl humanity. 

In the manner of my friend I wa at onc struck with an 
incoherence--an inconsistency; and I soon found thi to aris 
from a seri of feebl and futil struggl to overcom an 
habitu trepidancy--an excess nervou agitation. for 
someth of thi natur I had inde been prepared, no less by 
hi letter, than by reminisc of certain boyish traits, and 
by conclus deduc from hi peculiar physic conform 
and temperament. hi action wa altern vivaci and 
sullen. hi voic vari rapidli from a tremul indecis 
(when the anim spirit seem utterli in abeyance) to 
that speci of energet concision--that abrupt, weighty, 
unhurried, and hollow-sound enunciation--that leaden, 
self-balanc and perfectli modul guttur utterance, which may 
be observ in the lost drunkard, or the irreclaim eater of 
opium, dure the period of hi most intens excitement. 

It wa thu that he spoke of the object of my visit, of hi 
earnest desir to see me, and of the solac he expect me to 
afford him. He entered, at some length, into what he conceiv 
to be the natur of hi malady. It was, he said, a 
constitut and a famili evil, and one for which he despair 
to find a remedy--a mere nervou affection, he immedi added, 
which would undoubtedli soon pass off. It display itself in a 
host of unnatur sensations. some of these, as he detail 
them, interest and bewild me; although, perhaps, the terms, 
and the gener manner of the narrat had their weight. He 
suffer much from a morbid acut of the senses; the most 
insipid food wa alon endurable; he could wear onli garment of 
certain texture; the odour of all flower were oppressive; hi 
eye were tortur by even a faint light; and there were but 
peculiar sounds, and these from string instruments, which did 
not inspir him with horror. 

To an anomal speci of terror I found him a bounden 
slave. "I shall perish," said he, "I must perish in thi 
deplor folly. thus, thus, and not otherwise, shall I be 
lost. I dread the event of the future, not in themselves, but 
in their results. I shudder at the thought of any, even the most 
trivial, incident, which may oper upon thi intoler 
agit of soul. I have, indeed, no abhorr of danger, 
except in it absolut effect--in terror. In thi unnerved--in 
thi pitiabl condition--i feel that the period will sooner or 
later arriv when I must abandon life and reason together, in 
some struggl with the grim phantasm, fear." 

I learned, moreover, at intervals, and through broken and 
equivoc hints, anoth singular featur of hi mental 
condition. He wa enchain by certain superstiti impress 
in regard to the dwell which he tenanted, and whence, for mani 
years, he had never ventur forth--in regard to an influenc 
whose supposititi forc wa convey in term too shadowi here 
to be re-stated--an influenc which some peculiar in the 
mere form and substanc of hi famili mansion, had, by 
dint of long sufferance, he said, obtain over hi spirit--an 
effect which the physiqu of the grey wall and turrets, and 
of the dim tarn into which they all look down, had, at length, 
brought about upon the moral of hi existence. 

He admitted, however, although with hesitation, that much of 
the peculiar gloom which thu afflict him could be trace to a 
more natur and far more palpabl origin--to the sever and 
long-continu illness--inde to the evid approach 
dissolution--of a tenderli belov sister--hi sole companion for 
long years--hi last and onli rel on earth. "her decease," 
he said, with a bitter which I can never forget, "would leav 
him (him the hopeless and the frail) the last of the ancient race 
of the ushers." while he spoke, the ladi madelin (for so wa 
she called) pass slowli through a remot portion of the 
apartment, and, without have notic my presence, disappeared. 
I regard her with an utter astonish not unmingl with 
dread--and yet I found it imposs to account for such 
feelings. A sensat of stupor oppress me, as my eye 
follow her retreat steps. when a door, at length, close 
upon her, my glanc sought instinct and eagerli the 
counten of the brother--but he had buri hi face in hi 
hands, and I could onli perceiv that a far more than ordinari 
wan had overspread the emaci finger through which 
trickl mani passion tears. 

the diseas of the ladi madelin had long baffl the skill 
of her physicians. A settl apathy, a gradual wast away of 
the person, and frequent although transient affect of a 
partial catalept character, were the unusu diagnosis. 
hitherto she had steadili born up against the pressur of her 
malady, and had not betaken herself final to bed; but, on the 
close in of the even of my arriv at the house, she 
succumb (a her brother told me at night with inexpress 
agitation) to the prostrat power of the destroyer; and I 
learn that the glimps I had obtain of her person would thu 
probabl be the last I should obtain--that the lady, at least 
while living, would be seen by me no more. 

for sever day ensuing, her name wa unment by either 
usher or myself: and dure thi period I wa busi in earnest 
endeavour to allevi the melancholi of my friend. We 
paint and read together; or I listened, as if in a dream, to 
the wild improvis of hi speak guitar. and thus, as a 
closer and still closer intimaci admit me more unreservedli 
into the recess of hi spirit, the more bitterli did I perceiv 
the futil of all attempt at cheer a mind from which 
darkness, as if an inher posit quality, pour forth upon 
all object of the moral and physic universe, in one unceas 
radiat of gloom. 

I shall ever bear about me a memori of the mani solemn hour 
I thu spent alon with the master of the hous of usher. yet I 
should fail in ani attempt to convey an idea of the exact 
charact of the studies, or of the occupations, in which he 
involv me, or led me the way. An excit and highli 
distemp ideal threw a sulphur lustr over all. hi 
long improvis dirg will ring for ever in my ears. among 
other things, I hold pain in mind a certain singular 
pervers and amplif of the wild air of the last waltz of 
von weber. from the paint over which hi elabor fanci 
brooded, and which grew, touch by touch, into vagu at which 
I shudder the more thrillingly, becaus I shudder know not 
why;--from these paint (vivid as their imag now are befor 
me) I would in vain endeavour to educ more than a small portion 
which should lie within the compass of mere written words. By 
the utter simplicity, by the naked of hi designs, he 
arrest and overaw attention. If ever mortal paint an idea, 
that mortal wa roderick usher. for me at least--in the 
circumst then surround me--ther aros out of the pure 
abstract which the hypochondriac contriv to throw upon hi 
canvas, an intens of intoler awe, no shadow of which felt 
I ever yet in the contempl of the certainli glow yet too 
concret reveri of fuseli. 

one of the phantasmagor concept of my friend, 
partak not so rigidli of the spirit of abstraction, may be 
shadow forth, although feebly, in words. A small pictur 
present the interior of an immens long and rectangular vault 
or tunnel, with low walls, smooth, white, and without 
interrupt or device. certain accessori point of the design 
serv well to convey the idea that thi excav lay at an 
exceed depth below the surfac of the earth. No outlet wa 
observ in ani portion of it vast extent, and no torch, 
or other artifici sourc of light wa discernible; yet a flood 
of intens ray roll throughout, and bath the whole in a 
ghastli and inappropri splendour. 

I have just spoken of that morbid condit of the auditori 
nerv which render all music intoler to the sufferer, with 
the except of certain effect of string instruments. It 
was, perhaps, the narrow limit to which he thu confin himself 
upon the guitar, which gave birth, in great measure, to the 
fantast charact of the performances. but the fervid 
facil of hi impromptu could not be so account for. 
they must have been, and were, in the notes, as well as in the 
word of hi wild fantasia (for he not unfrequ accompani 
himself with rhyme verbal improvisations), the result of that 
intens mental collected and concentr to which I have 
previous allud as observ onli in particular moment of 
the highest artifici excitement. the word of one of these 
rhapsodi I have easili remembered. I was, perhaps, the more 
forcibl impress with it, as he gave it, because, in the under 
or mystic current of it meaning, I fanci that I perceived, and 
for the first time, a full conscious on the part of usher, of 
the totter of hi lofti reason upon her throne. the verses, 
which were entitl "the haunt palace," ran veri nearly, if not 
accurately, thus: 


I. 

In the greenest of our valleys, 
By good angel tenanted, 
onc a fair and state palace-- 
radiant palace--rear it head. 
In the monarch thought' dominion-- 
It stood there! 
never seraph spread a pinion 
over fabric half so fair. 


ii. 

banner yellow, glorious, golden, 
On it roof did float and flow; 
(this--al this--wa in the olden 
time long ago) 
and everi gentl air that dallied, 
In that sweet day, 
along the rampart plume and pallid, 
A wing odour went away. 


iii. 

wander in that happi valley 
through two lumin window saw 
spirit move music 
To a lute' well tune law, 
round about a throne, where sit 
(porphyrogene!) 
In state hi glori well befitting, 
the ruler of the realm wa seen. 


iv. 

and all with pearl and rubi glow 
wa the fair palac door, 
through which came flowing, flowing, flow 
and sparkl evermore, 
A troop of echo whose sweet duti 
wa but to sing, 
In voic of surpass beauty, 
the wit and wisdom of their king. 


V. 

but evil things, in robe of sorrow, 
assail the monarch' high estate; 
(ah, let us mourn, for never morrow 
shall dawn upon him, desolate!) 
and, round about hi home, the glori 
that blush and bloom 
Is but a dim-rememb story, 
Of the old time entombed. 


vi. 

and travel now within that valley, 
through the red-litten windows, see 
vast form that move fantast 
To a discord melody; 
while, like a rapid ghastli river, 
through the pale door, 
A hideou throng rush out forever, 
and laugh--but smile no more. 


I well rememb that suggest aris from thi ballad, 
led us into a train of thought wherein there becam manifest an 
opinion of usher' which I mention not so much on account of it 
novelti (for other men* have thought thus,) as on account of the 
pertinac with which he maintain it. thi opinion, in it 
gener form, wa that of the sentienc of all veget things. 
but, in hi disord fancy, the idea had assum a more dare 
character, and trespassed, under certain conditions, upon the 
kingdom of inorganization. I lack word to express the full 
extent, or the earnest abandon of hi persuasion. the 
belief, however, wa connect (a I have previous hinted) with 
the gray stone of the home of hi forefathers. the condit 
of the sentienc had been here, he imagined, fulfil in the 
method of colloc of these stones--in the order of their 
arrangement, as well as in that of the mani fungi which 
overspread them, and of the decay tree which stood around--abov 
all, in the long undisturb endur of thi arrangement, 
and in it redupl in the still water of the tarn. it 
evidence--th evid of the sentience--wa to be seen, he said, 
(and I here start as he spoke,) in the gradual yet certain 
condens of an atmospher of their own about the water and 
the walls. the result wa discoverable, he added, in that 
silent, yet importun and terribl influenc which for 
centuri had mould the destini of hi family, and which made 
him what I now saw him--what he was. such opinion need no 
comment, and I will make none. 

our books--th book which, for years, had form no small 
portion of the mental exist of the invalid--were, as might be 
supposed, in strict keep with thi charact of phantasm. We 
pore togeth over such work as the ververt et chartreus 
of gresset; the belphegor of machiavelli; the heaven and 
hell of swedenborg; the subterranean voyag of nichola klimm by 
holberg; the chirom of robert flud, of jean d'indagine, 
and of De la chambre; the journey into the blue distanc of 
tieck; and the citi of the sun by campanella. one favourit 
volum wa a small octavo edit of the directorium 
inquisitorum, by the dominican eymer de gironne; and there 
were passag in pomponiu mela, about the old african satyr 
and oegipans, over which usher would sit dream for hours. hi 
chief delight, however, wa found in the perus of an 
exceedingli rare and curiou book in quarto gothic--th manual of 
a forgotten church--th vigilia mortuorum secundum chorum ecclesia 
maguntinae. 

I could not help think of the wild ritual of thi work, 
and of it probabl influenc upon the hypochondriac, when, one 
evening, have inform me abruptli that the ladi madelin wa 
no more, he state hi intent of preserv her corps for a 
fortnight, (previous to it final interment), in one of the 
numer vault within the main wall of the building. the 
worldli reason, however, assign for thi singular proceeding, 
wa one which I did not feel at liberti to dispute. the brother 
had been led to hi resolut (so he told me) by consider 
of the unusu charact of the maladi of the deceased, of 
certain obtrus and eager inquiri on the part of her medic 
men, and of the remot and expos situat of the burial-ground 
of the family. I will not deni that when I call to mind the 
sinist counten of the person whom I met upon the staircase, 
on the day of my arriv at the house, I had no desir to oppos 
what I regard as at best but a harmless, and by no mean an 
unnatural, precaution. 

At the request of usher, I person aid him in the 
arrang for the temporari entombment. the bodi have been 
encoffined, we two alon bore it to it rest. the vault in which 
we place it (and which had been so long unopen that our 
torches, half smother in it oppress atmosphere, gave us 
littl opportun for investigation) wa small, damp, and 
entir without mean of admiss for light; lying, at great 
depth, immedi beneath that portion of the build in which 
wa my own sleep apartment. It had been used, apparently, in 
remot feudal times, for the worst purpos of a donjon-keep, and, 
in later days, as a place of deposit for powder, or some other 
highli combust substance, as a portion of it floor, 
and the whole interior of a long archway through which we reach 
it, were care sheath with copper. the door, of massiv 
iron, had been, also, similarli protected. it immens weight 
caus an unusu sharp grate sound, as it move upon it hinges. 

have deposit our mourn burden upon tressel within 
thi region of horror, we partial turn asid the yet 
unscrew lid of the coffin, and look upon the face of the 
tenant. A strike similitud between the brother and sister now 
first arrest my attention; and usher, divining, perhaps, my 
thoughts, murmur out some few word from which I learn that 
the deceas and himself had been twins, and that sympathi of a 
scarc intellig natur had alway exist between them. 
our glances, however, rest not long upon the dead--for we could 
not regard her unawed. the diseas which had thu entomb the 
ladi in the matur of youth, had left, as usual in all maladi 
of a strictli catalept character, the mockeri of a faint 
blush upon the bosom and the face, and that suspici 
linger smile upon the lip which is so terribl in death. We 
replac and screw down the lid, and, have secur the door 
of iron, made our way, with toil, into the scarc less gloomi 
apart of the upper portion of the house. 

and now, some day of bitter grief have elapsed, an 
observ chang came over the featur of the mental disord 
of my friend. hi ordinari manner had vanished. hi ordinari 
occup were neglect or forgotten. He roam from chamber 
to chamber with hurried, unequal, and objectless step. the 
pallor of hi counten had assumed, if possible, a more 
ghastli hue--but the lumin of hi eye had utterli gone 
out. the onc occasion huski of hi tone wa heard no 
more; and a tremul quaver, as if of extrem terror, habitu 
character hi utterance. there were times, indeed, when I 
thought hi unceasingli agit mind wa labour with some 
oppress secret, to divulg which he struggl for the 
necessari courage. At times, again, I wa oblig to resolv all 
into the mere inexplic vagari of madness, for I beheld him 
gaze upon vacanc for long hours, in an attitud of the 
profoundest attention, as if listen to some imaginari 
sound. It wa no wonder that hi condit terrified--that it 
infect me. I felt creep upon me, by slow yet certain 
degrees, the wild influenc of hi own fantast yet impress 
superstitions. 

It was, especially, upon retir to bed late in the night 
of the seventh or eighth day after the place of the ladi 
madelin within the donjon, that I experienc the full power of 
such feelings. sleep came not near my couch--whil the hour 
wane and wane away. I struggl to reason off the nervous 
which had dominion over me. I endeavour to believ that much, 
if not all of what I felt, wa due to the bewild influenc 
of the gloomi furnitur of the room--of the dark and tatter 
draperies, which, tortur into motion by the breath of a rise 
tempest, sway fit to and fro upon the walls, and rustl 
uneasili about the decor of the bed. but my effort were 
fruitless. An irrepress tremor gradual pervad my frame; 
and, at length, there sat upon my veri heart an incubu of 
utterli causeless alarm. shake thi off with a gasp and a 
struggle, I uplift myself upon the pillows, and, peer 
earnestli within the intens dark of the chamber, hearkened--i 
know not why, except that an instinct spirit prompt me--to 
certain low and indefinit sound which came, through the paus 
of the storm, at long intervals, I knew not whence. overpow 
by an intens sentiment of horror, unaccount yet unendurable, 
I threw on my cloth with hast (for I felt that I should sleep 
no more dure the night,) and endeavour to arous myself from 
the pitiabl condit into which I had fallen, by pace rapidli 
to and fro through the apartment. 

I had taken but few turn in thi manner, when a light step 
on an adjoin staircas arrest my attention. I present 
recogn it as that of usher. In an instant afterward he 
rapped, with a gentl touch, at my door, and entered, bear a 
lamp. hi counten was, as usual, cadaver wan--but, 
moreover, there wa a speci of mad hilar in hi eyes--an 
evid restrain hysteria in hi whole demeanour. hi 
air appal me--but anyth wa prefer to the solitud 
which I had so long endured, and I even welcom hi presenc as 
a relief. 

"and you have not seen it?" he said abruptly, after have 
stare about him for some moment in silence--"y have 
not then seen it?--but, stay! you shall." thu speaking, and 
have care shade hi lamp, he hurri to one of the 
casements, and threw it freeli open to the storm. 

the impetu furi of the enter gust nearli lift us 
from our feet. It was, indeed, a tempestu yet sternli 
beauti night, and one wildli singular in it terror and it 
beauty. A whirlwind had appar collect it forc in our 
vicinity; for there were frequent and violent alter in the 
direct of the wind; and the exceed densiti of the cloud 
(which hung so low as to press upon the turret of the house) did 
not prevent our perceiv the lifelik veloc with which they 
flew career from all point against each other, without 
pass away into the distance. I say that even their exceed 
densiti did not prevent our perceiv this--yet we had no 
glimps of the moon or stars--nor wa there ani flash forth of 
the lightning. but the under surfac of the huge mass of 
agit vapor, as well as all terrestri object immedi 
around us, were glow in the unnatur light of a faintli 
lumin and distinctli visibl gaseou exhal which hung 
about and enshroud the mansion. 

"you must not--you shall not behold this!" said I, 
shudderingly, to usher, as I led him, with a gentl violence, 
from the window to a seat. "these appearances, which bewild 
you, are mere electr phenomena not uncommon--or it may be 
that they have their ghastli origin in the rank miasma of the 
tarn. let us close thi casement;--th air is chill and 
danger to your frame. here is one of your favourit romances. 
I will read, and you shall listen;--and so we will pass away thi 
terribl night together." 

the antiqu volum which I had taken up wa the "mad 
trist" of sir launcelot canning; but I had call it a favourit 
of usher' more in sad jest than in earnest; for, in truth, there 
is littl in it uncouth and unimagin prolix which could 
have had interest for the lofti and spiritu ideal of my 
friend. It was, however, the onli book immedi at hand; and 
I indulg a vagu hope that the excit which now agit 
the hypochondriac, might find relief (for the histori of mental 
disord is full of similar anomalies) even in the extrem of 
the folli which I should read. could I have judged, indeed, by 
the wild overstrain air of vivac with which he 
hearkened, or appar hearkened, to the word of the tale, I 
might well have congratul myself upon the success of my 
design. 

I had arriv at that well-known portion of the stori where 
ethelred, the hero of the trist, have sought in vain for 
peaceabl admiss into the dwell of the hermit, proce to 
make good an entranc by force. here, it will be remembered, the 
word of the narr run thus: 

"and ethelred, who wa by natur of a doughti heart, and who 
wa now mighti withal, on account of the power of the wine 
which he had drunken, wait no longer to hold parley with the 
hermit, who, in sooth, wa of an obstin and malic turn, 
but, feel the rain upon hi shoulders, and fear the rise 
of the tempest, uplift hi mace outright, and, with blows, made 
quickli room in the plank of the door for hi gauntlet 
hand; and now pull therewith sturdily, he so cracked, and 
ripped, and tore all asunder, that the nois of the dri and 
hollow-sound wood alarm and reverber throughout the 
forest." 

At the termin of thi sentenc I started, and for a 
moment, paused; for it appear to me (although I at onc 
conclud that my excit fanci had deceiv me)--it appear to 
me that, from some veri remot portion of the mansion, there 
came, indistinctly, to my ears, what might have been, in it 
exact similar of character, the echo (but a stifl and dull 
one certainly) of the veri crack and rip sound which sir 
launcelot had so particularli described. It was, beyond doubt, 
the coincid alon which had arrest my attention; for, amid 
the rattl of the sash of the casements, and the ordinari 
commingl nois of the still increas storm, the sound, in 
itself, had nothing, surely, which should have interest or 
disturb me. I continu the story: 

"but the good champion ethelred, now enter within the 
door, wa sore enrag and amaz to perceiv no signal of the 
malic hermit; but, in the stead thereof, a dragon of a scali 
and prodigi demeanour, and of a fieri tongue, which sat in 
guard befor a palac of gold, with a floor of silver; and upon 
the wall there hung a shield of shine brass with thi legend 
enwritten-- 

who entereth herein, a conquer hath bin; 
who slayeth the dragon, the shield he shall win; 

and ethelr uplift hi mace, and struck upon the head of the 
dragon, which fell befor him, and gave up hi pesti breath, with 
a shriek so horrid and harsh, and withal so piercing, that 
ethelr had fain to close hi ear with hi hand against the 
dread nois of it, the like whereof wa never befor heard." 

here again I paus abruptly, and now with a feel of wild 
amazement--for there could be no doubt whatev that, in thi 
instance, I did actual hear (although from what direct it 
proceed I found it imposs to say) a low and appar 
distant, but harsh, protracted, and most unusu scream or 
grate sound--th exact counterpart of what my fanci had alreadi 
conjur up for the dragon' unnatur shriek as describ by the 
romancer. 

oppressed, as I certainli was, upon the occurr of the 
second and most extraordinari coincidence, by a thousand 
conflict sensations, in which wonder and extrem terror were 
predominant, I still retain suffici presenc of mind to 
avoid exciting, by ani observation, the sensit nervous of 
my companion. I wa by no mean certain that he had notic the 
sound in question; although, assuredly, a strang alter 
had, dure the last few minutes, taken place in hi demeanour. 
from a posit front my own, he had gradual brought round 
hi chair, so as to sit with hi face to the door of the chamber; 
and thu I could but partial perceiv hi features, although I 
saw that hi lip trembl as if he were murmur inaudibly. 
hi head had drop upon hi breast--yet I knew that he wa not 
asleep, from the wide and rigid open of the eye as I caught a 
glanc of it in profile. the motion of hi body, too, wa at 
varianc with thi idea--for he rock from side to side with a 
gentl yet constant and uniform sway. have rapidli taken 
notic of all this, I resum the narr of sir launcelot, 
which thu proceeded: 

"and now, the champion, have escap from the terribl 
furi of the dragon, bethink himself of the brazen shield, and 
of the break up of the enchant which wa upon it, remov 
the carcass from out of the way befor him, and approach 
valor over the silver pavement of the castl to where 
the shield wa upon the wall; which in sooth tarri not for hi 
full coming, but fell down at hi feet upon the silver floor, 
with a mighti great and terribl ring sound." 

No sooner had these syllabl pass my lips, than--a if a 
shield of brass had indeed, at the moment, fallen heavili upon a 
floor of silver--i becam awar of a distinct, hollow, metallic, 
and clangorous, yet appar muffl reverberation. complet 
unnerved, I leap to my feet; but the measur rock movement 
of usher wa undisturbed. I rush to the chair in which he sat. 
hi eye were bent fixedli befor him, and throughout hi whole 
counten there reign a stoni rigidity. but, as I place my 
hand upon hi shoulder, there came a strong shudder over hi 
whole person; a sickli smile quiver about hi lips; and I saw 
that he spoke in a low, hurried, and gibber murmur, as if 
unconsci of my presence. bend close over him, I at 
length drank in the hideou import of hi words. 

"not hear it?--yes, I hear it, and have heard it. 
long--long--long--mani minutes, mani hours, mani days, have I heard 
it--yet I dare not--oh, piti me, miser wretch that I am!--i 
dare not--i dare not speak! We have put her live in 
the tomb! said I not that my sens were acute? I now tell 
you that I heard her first feebl movement in the hollow coffin. 
I heard them--many, mani day ago--yet I dare not--i dare 
not speak! and now--to-night--ethelred--ha! ha!--th break 
of the hermit' door, and the death-cri of the dragon, and the 
clangour of the shield!--say, rather, the rend of her coffin, 
and the grate of the iron hing of her prison, and her 
struggl within the copper archway of the vault! Oh whither 
shall I fly? will she not be here anon? Is she not hurri to 
upbraid me for my haste? have I not heard her footstep on the 
stair? Do I not distinguish that heavi and horribl beat of 
her heart? madman!" here he sprang furious to hi feet, and 
shriek out hi syllables, as if in the effort he were give up 
hi soul--"madman! I tell you that she now stand without the 
door!" 

As if in the superhuman energi of hi utter there had 
been found the potenc of a spell--th huge antiqu panel to 
which the speaker pointed, threw slowli back, upon the instant, 
their ponder and eboni jaws. It wa the work of the 
rush gust--but then without those door there did stand the 
lofti and enshroud figur of the ladi madelin of usher. there 
wa blood upon her white robes, and the evid of some bitter 
struggl upon everi portion of her emaci frame. for a moment 
she remain trembl and reel to and fro upon the threshold,--then, 
with a low moan cry, fell heavili inward upon the person 
of her brother, and in her violent and now final death-agonies, 
bore him to the floor a corpse, and a victim to the terror he 
had anticipated. 

from that chamber, and from that mansion, I fled aghast. 
the storm wa still abroad in all it wrath as I found myself 
cross the old causeway. suddenli there shot along the path a 
wild light, and I turn to see whenc a gleam so unusu could 
have issued; for the vast hous and it shadow were alon behind 
me. the radianc wa that of the full, setting, and blood-r 
moon which now shone vividli through that onc barely-discern 
fissur of which I have befor spoken as extend from the roof 
of the building, in a zigzag direction, to the base. while I 
gazed, thi fissur rapidli widened--ther came a fierc breath 
of the whirlwind--th entir orb of the satellit burst at onc 
upon my sight--mi brain reel as I saw the mighti wall rush 
asunder--ther wa a long tumultu shout sound like the 
voic of a thousand waters--and the deep and dank tarn at my feet 
close sullenli and silent over the fragment of the "hous of 
usher". 


* watson, Dr percival, spallanzani, and especi the bishop of landaff. 









end of project gutenberg' the fall of the hous of usher, by edgar allan poe 

*** end OF thi project gutenberg ebook the fall OF the hous OF usher *** 

***** thi file should be name 932.txt or 932.zip ***** 
thi and all associ file of variou format will be found in: 
http://www.gutenberg.org/9/3/932/ 

produc by levent kurnaz and jose menendez 

updat edit will replac the previou one--th old edit 
will be renamed. 

creat the work from public domain print edit mean that no 
one own a unit state copyright in these works, so the foundat 
(and you!) can copi and distribut it in the unit state without 
permiss and without pay copyright royalties. special rules, 
set forth in the gener term of use part of thi license, appli to 
copi and distribut project gutenberg-tm electron work to 
protect the project gutenberg-tm concept and trademark. project 
gutenberg is a regist trademark, and may not be use if you 
charg for the ebooks, unless you receiv specif permission. If you 
do not charg anyth for copi of thi ebook, compli with the 
rule is veri easy. you may use thi ebook for nearli ani purpos 
such as creation of deriv works, reports, perform and 
research. they may be modifi and print and given away--y may do 
practic anyth with public domain ebooks. redistribut is 
subject to the trademark license, especi commerci 
redistribution. 



*** start: full licens *** 

the full project gutenberg licens 
pleas read thi befor you distribut OR use thi work 

To protect the project gutenberg-tm mission of promot the free 
distribut of electron works, by use or distribut thi work 
(or ani other work associ in ani way with the phrase "project 
gutenberg"), you agre to compli with all the term of the full project 
gutenberg-tm licens (avail with thi file or onlin at 
http://gutenberg.net/license). 


section 1. gener term of use and redistribut project gutenberg-tm 
electron work 

1.a. By read or use ani part of thi project gutenberg-tm 
electron work, you indic that you have read, understand, agre to 
and accept all the term of thi licens and intellectu properti 
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agre to abid by all 
the term of thi agreement, you must ceas use and return or destroy 
all copi of project gutenberg-tm electron work in your possession. 
If you paid a fee for obtain a copi of or access to a project 
gutenberg-tm electron work and you do not agre to be bound by the 
term of thi agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or 
entiti to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.e.8. 

1.b. "project gutenberg" is a regist trademark. It may onli be 
use on or associ in ani way with an electron work by peopl who 
agre to be bound by the term of thi agreement. there are a few 
thing that you can do with most project gutenberg-tm electron work 
even without compli with the full term of thi agreement. see 
paragraph 1.c below. there are a lot of thing you can do with project 
gutenberg-tm electron work if you follow the term of thi agreement 
and help preserv free futur access to project gutenberg-tm electron 
works. see paragraph 1.e below. 

1.c. the project gutenberg literari archiv foundat ("the foundation" 
or pglaf), own a compil copyright in the collect of project 
gutenberg-tm electron works. nearli all the individu work in the 
collect are in the public domain in the unit states. If an 
individu work is in the public domain in the unit state and you are 
locat in the unit states, we do not claim a right to prevent you from 
copying, distributing, performing, display or creat deriv 
work base on the work as long as all refer to project gutenberg 
are removed. Of course, we hope that you will support the project 
gutenberg-tm mission of promot free access to electron work by 
freeli share project gutenberg-tm work in complianc with the term of 
thi agreement for keep the project gutenberg-tm name associ with 
the work. you can easili compli with the term of thi agreement by 
keep thi work in the same format with it attach full project 
gutenberg-tm licens when you share it without charg with others. 

1.d. the copyright law of the place where you are locat also govern 
what you can do with thi work. copyright law in most countri are in 
a constant state of change. If you are outsid the unit states, check 
the law of your countri in addit to the term of thi agreement 
befor downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distribut or 
creat deriv work base on thi work or ani other project 
gutenberg-tm work. the foundat make no represent concern 
the copyright statu of ani work in ani countri outsid the unit 
states. 

1.e. unless you have remov all refer to project gutenberg: 

1.e.1. the follow sentence, with activ link to, or other immedi 
access to, the full project gutenberg-tm licens must appear promin 
whenev ani copi of a project gutenberg-tm work (ani work on which the 
phrase "project gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "project 
gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed, 
copi or distributed: 

thi ebook is for the use of anyon anywher at no cost and with 
almost no restrict whatsoever. you may copi it, give it away or 
re-us it under the term of the project gutenberg licens includ 
with thi ebook or onlin at www.gutenberg.net 

1.e.2. If an individu project gutenberg-tm electron work is deriv 
from the public domain (doe not contain a notic indic that it is 
post with permiss of the copyright holder), the work can be copi 
and distribut to anyon in the unit state without pay ani fee 
or charges. If you are redistribut or provid access to a work 
with the phrase "project gutenberg" associ with or appear on the 
work, you must compli either with the requir of paragraph 1.e.1 
through 1.e.7 or obtain permiss for the use of the work and the 
project gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraph 1.e.8 or 
1.e.9. 

1.e.3. If an individu project gutenberg-tm electron work is post 
with the permiss of the copyright holder, your use and distribut 
must compli with both paragraph 1.e.1 through 1.e.7 and ani addit 
term impos by the copyright holder. addit term will be link 
to the project gutenberg-tm licens for all work post with the 
permiss of the copyright holder found at the begin of thi work. 

1.e.4. Do not unlink or detach or remov the full project gutenberg-tm 
licens term from thi work, or ani file contain a part of thi 
work or ani other work associ with project gutenberg-tm. 

1.e.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribut or redistribut thi 
electron work, or ani part of thi electron work, without 
promin display the sentenc set forth in paragraph 1.e.1 with 
activ link or immedi access to the full term of the project 
gutenberg-tm license. 

1.e.6. you may convert to and distribut thi work in ani binary, 
compressed, mark up, nonproprietari or proprietari form, includ ani 
word process or hypertext form. however, if you provid access to or 
distribut copi of a project gutenberg-tm work in a format other than 
"plain vanilla ascii" or other format use in the offici version 
post on the offici project gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net), 
you must, at no addit cost, fee or expens to the user, provid a 
copy, a mean of export a copy, or a mean of obtain a copi upon 
request, of the work in it origin "plain vanilla ascii" or other 
form. ani altern format must includ the full project gutenberg-tm 
licens as specifi in paragraph 1.e.1. 

1.e.7. Do not charg a fee for access to, viewing, displaying, 
performing, copi or distribut ani project gutenberg-tm work 
unless you compli with paragraph 1.e.8 or 1.e.9. 

1.e.8. you may charg a reason fee for copi of or provid 
access to or distribut project gutenberg-tm electron work provid 
that 

- you pay a royalti fee of 20% of the gross profit you deriv from 
the use of project gutenberg-tm work calcul use the method 
you alreadi use to calcul your applic taxes. the fee is 
owe to the owner of the project gutenberg-tm trademark, but he 
ha agre to donat royalti under thi paragraph to the 
project gutenberg literari archiv foundation. royalti payment 
must be paid within 60 day follow each date on which you 
prepar (or are legal requir to prepare) your period tax 
returns. royalti payment should be clearli mark as such and 
sent to the project gutenberg literari archiv foundat at the 
address specifi in section 4, "inform about donat to 
the project gutenberg literari archiv foundation." 

- you provid a full refund of ani money paid by a user who notifi 
you in write (or by e-mail) within 30 day of receipt that s/he 
doe not agre to the term of the full project gutenberg-tm 
license. you must requir such a user to return or 
destroy all copi of the work possess in a physic medium 
and discontinu all use of and all access to other copi of 
project gutenberg-tm works. 

- you provide, in accord with paragraph 1.f.3, a full refund of ani 
money paid for a work or a replac copy, if a defect in the 
electron work is discov and report to you within 90 day 
of receipt of the work. 

- you compli with all other term of thi agreement for free 
distribut of project gutenberg-tm works. 

1.e.9. If you wish to charg a fee or distribut a project gutenberg-tm 
electron work or group of work on differ term than are set 
forth in thi agreement, you must obtain permiss in write from 
both the project gutenberg literari archiv foundat and michael 
hart, the owner of the project gutenberg-tm trademark. contact the 
foundat as set forth in section 3 below. 

1.f. 

1.f.1. project gutenberg volunt and employe expend consider 
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcrib and proofread 
public domain work in creat the project gutenberg-tm 
collection. despit these efforts, project gutenberg-tm electron 
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain 
"defects," such as, but not limit to, incomplete, inaccur or 
corrupt data, transcript errors, a copyright or other intellectu 
properti infringement, a defect or damag disk or other medium, a 
comput virus, or comput code that damag or cannot be read by 
your equipment. 

1.f.2. limit warranty, disclaim OF damag - except for the "right 
of replac or refund" describ in paragraph 1.f.3, the project 
gutenberg literari archiv foundation, the owner of the project 
gutenberg-tm trademark, and ani other parti distribut a project 
gutenberg-tm electron work under thi agreement, disclaim all 
liabil to you for damages, cost and expenses, includ legal 
fees. you agre that you have NO remedi for negligence, strict 
liability, breach OF warranti OR breach OF contract except those 
provid IN paragraph 1.f.3. you agre that the foundation, the 
trademark owner, and ani distributor under thi agreement will not BE 
liabl TO you for actual, direct, indirect, consequential, punit OR 
incident damag even IF you give notic OF the possibl OF such 
damage. 

1.f.3. limit right OF replac OR refund - If you discov a 
defect in thi electron work within 90 day of receiv it, you can 
receiv a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by send a 
written explan to the person you receiv the work from. If you 
receiv the work on a physic medium, you must return the medium with 
your written explanation. the person or entiti that provid you with 
the defect work may elect to provid a replac copi in lieu of a 
refund. If you receiv the work electronically, the person or entiti 
provid it to you may choos to give you a second opportun to 
receiv the work electron in lieu of a refund. If the second copi 
is also defective, you may demand a refund in write without further 
opportun to fix the problem. 

1.f.4. except for the limit right of replac or refund set forth 
in paragraph 1.f.3, thi work is provid to you 'as-is' with NO other 
warranti OF ani kind, express OR implied, includ but not limit TO 
warranti OF merchant OR fit for ani purpose. 

1.f.5. some state do not allow disclaim of certain impli 
warranti or the exclus or limit of certain type of damages. 
If ani disclaim or limit set forth in thi agreement violat the 
law of the state applic to thi agreement, the agreement shall be 
interpret to make the maximum disclaim or limit permit by 
the applic state law. the invalid or unenforc of ani 
provis of thi agreement shall not void the remain provisions. 

1.f.6. indemn - you agre to indemnifi and hold the foundation, the 
trademark owner, ani agent or employe of the foundation, anyon 
provid copi of project gutenberg-tm electron work in accord 
with thi agreement, and ani volunt associ with the production, 
promot and distribut of project gutenberg-tm electron works, 
harmless from all liability, cost and expenses, includ legal fees, 
that aris directli or indirectli from ani of the follow which you do 
or caus to occur: (a) distribut of thi or ani project gutenberg-tm 
work, (b) alteration, modification, or addit or delet to ani 
project gutenberg-tm work, and (c) ani defect you cause. 


section 2. inform about the mission of project gutenberg-tm 

project gutenberg-tm is synonym with the free distribut of 
electron work in format readabl by the widest varieti of comput 
includ obsolete, old, middle-ag and new computers. It exist 
becaus of the effort of hundr of volunt and donat from 
peopl in all walk of life. 

volunt and financi support to provid volunt with the 
assist they need are critic to reach project gutenberg-tm' 
goal and ensur that the project gutenberg-tm collect will 
remain freeli avail for gener to come. In 2001, the project 
gutenberg literari archiv foundat wa creat to provid a secur 
and perman futur for project gutenberg-tm and futur generations. 
To learn more about the project gutenberg literari archiv foundat 
and how your effort and donat can help, see section 3 and 4 
and the foundat web page at http://www.pglaf.org. 


section 3. inform about the project gutenberg literari archiv 
foundat 

the project gutenberg literari archiv foundat is a non profit 
501(c)(3) educ corpor organ under the law of the 
state of mississippi and grant tax exempt statu by the intern 
revenu service. the foundation' ein or feder tax identif 
number is 64-6221541. it 501(c)(3) letter is post at 
http://pglaf.org/fundraising. contribut to the project gutenberg 
literari archiv foundat are tax deduct to the full extent 
permit by u.s. feder law and your state' laws. 

the foundation' princip offic is locat at 4557 melan dr. S. 
fairbanks, ak, 99712., but it volunt and employe are scatter 
throughout numer locations. it busi offic is locat at 
809 north 1500 west, salt lake city, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email 
business@pglaf.org. email contact link and up to date contact 
inform can be found at the foundation' web site and offici 
page at http://pglaf.org 

for addit contact information: 
dr. gregori B. newbi 
chief execut and director 
gbnewby@pglaf.org 


section 4. inform about donat to the project gutenberg 
literari archiv foundat 

project gutenberg-tm depend upon and cannot surviv without wide 
spread public support and donat to carri out it mission of 
increas the number of public domain and licens work that can be 
freeli distribut in machin readabl form access by the widest 
array of equip includ outdat equipment. mani small donat 
($1 to $5,000) are particularli import to maintain tax exempt 
statu with the irs. 

the foundat is commit to compli with the law regul 
chariti and charit donat in all 50 state of the unit 
states. complianc requir are not uniform and it take a 
consider effort, much paperwork and mani fee to meet and keep up 
with these requirements. We do not solicit donat in locat 
where we have not receiv written confirm of compliance. To 
send donat or determin the statu of complianc for ani 
particular state visit http://pglaf.org 

while we cannot and do not solicit contribut from state where we 
have not met the solicit requirements, we know of no prohibit 
against accept unsolicit donat from donor in such state who 
approach us with offer to donate. 

intern donat are grate accepted, but we cannot make 
ani statement concern tax treatment of donat receiv from 
outsid the unit states. u.s. law alon swamp our small staff. 

pleas check the project gutenberg web page for current donat 
method and addresses. donat are accept in a number of other 
way includ includ checks, onlin payment and credit card 
donations. To donate, pleas visit: http://pglaf.org/don 


section 5. gener inform about project gutenberg-tm electron 
works. 

professor michael S. hart is the origin of the project gutenberg-tm 
concept of a librari of electron work that could be freeli share 
with anyone. for thirti years, he produc and distribut project 
gutenberg-tm ebook with onli a loos network of volunt support. 


project gutenberg-tm ebook are often creat from sever print 
editions, all of which are confirm as public domain in the u.s. 
unless a copyright notic is included. thus, we do not necessarili 
keep ebook in complianc with ani particular paper edition. 


most peopl start at our web site which ha the main PG search facility: 

http://www.gutenberg.net 

thi web site includ inform about project gutenberg-tm, 
includ how to make donat to the project gutenberg literari 
archiv foundation, how to help produc our new ebooks, and how to 
subscrib to our email newslett to hear about new ebooks. 
