the project gutenberg ebook, dracula' guest, by bram stoker 


thi ebook is for the use of anyon anywher at no cost and with 
almost no restrict whatsoever. you may copi it, give it away or 
re-us it under the term of the project gutenberg licens includ 
with thi ebook or onlin at www.gutenberg.org 





title: dracula' guest 


author: bram stoker 



releas date: novemb 20, 2003 [ebook #10150] 
thi revis releas novemb 7, 2006. 
most recent updated: novemb 10, 2014 

language: english 


***start OF the project gutenberg ebook dracula' guest*** 


e-text prepar by bill keir, susan woodring, and the project gutenberg 
onlin distribut proofread team and revis by jeanni hows 



+------------------------------------------------------+ 
| transcriber' note: | 
| | 
| inconsist hyphen and unusu spell in the | 
| origin document have been preserved. | 
| | 
+------------------------------------------------------+ 





dracula' guest 

by 

bram stoker 

first publish 1914 







To 

MY son 




content 


dracula' guest 9 
the judge' hous 26 
the squaw 50 
the secret of the grow gold 67 
the gipsi propheci 84 
the come of abel behenna 96 
the burial of the rat 120 
A dream of red hand 152 
crooken sand 165 




prefac 


A few month befor the lament death of my husband--i might say even 
as the shadow of death wa over him--h plan three seri of short 
stori for publication, and the present volum is one of them. To hi 
origin list of stori in thi book, I have ad an hitherto 
unpublish episod from _dracula_. It wa origin excis owe to 
the length of the book, and may prove of interest to the mani reader 
of what is consid my husband' most remark work. the other 
stori have alreadi been publish in english and american 
periodicals. had my husband live longer, he might have seen fit to 
revis thi work, which is mainli from the earlier year of hi 
strenuou life. but, as fate ha entrust to me the issu of it, I 
consid it fit and proper to let it go forth practic as it 
wa left by him. 

florenc bram stoker 




dracula' guest 


when we start for our drive the sun wa shine brightli on munich, 
and the air wa full of the joyous of earli summer. just as we 
were about to depart, herr delbrück (the maîtr d'hôtel of the quatr 
saisons, where I wa staying) came down, bareheaded, to the carriag 
and, after wish me a pleasant drive, said to the coachman, still 
hold hi hand on the handl of the carriag door: 

'rememb you are back by nightfall. the sky look bright but there is 
a shiver in the north wind that say there may be a sudden storm. but 
I am sure you will not be late.' here he smiled, and added, 'for you 
know what night it is.' 

johann answer with an emphatic, 'ja, mein herr,' and, touch hi 
hat, drove off quickly. when we had clear the town, I said, after 
signal to him to stop: 

'tell me, johann, what is tonight?' 

He cross himself, as he answer laconically: 'walpurgi nacht.' 
then he took out hi watch, a great, old-fashion german silver thing 
as big as a turnip, and look at it, with hi eyebrow gather 
togeth and a littl impati shrug of hi shoulders. I realis 
that thi wa hi way of respect protest against the 
unnecessari delay, and sank back in the carriage, mere motion 
him to proceed. He start off rapidly, as if to make up for lost 
time. everi now and then the hors seem to throw up their head and 
snif the air suspiciously. On such occas I often look round 
in alarm. the road wa pretti bleak, for we were travers a sort of 
high, wind-swept plateau. As we drove, I saw a road that look but 
littl used, and which seem to dip through a little, wind valley. 
It look so invit that, even at the risk of offend him, I 
call johann to stop--and when he had pull up, I told him I would 
like to drive down that road. He made all sort of excuses, and 
frequent cross himself as he spoke. thi somewhat piqu my 
curiosity, so I ask him variou questions. He answer fencingly, 
and repeatedli look at hi watch in protest. final I said: 

'well, johann, I want to go down thi road. I shall not ask you to 
come unless you like; but tell me whi you do not like to go, that is 
all I ask.' for answer he seem to throw himself off the box, so 
quickli did he reach the ground. then he stretch out hi hand 
appealingli to me, and implor me not to go. there wa just enough of 
english mix with the german for me to understand the drift of hi 
talk. He seem alway just about to tell me something--th veri idea 
of which evid frighten him; but each time he pull himself up, 
saying, as he cross himself: 'walpurgis-nacht!' 

I tri to argu with him, but it wa difficult to argu with a man 
when I did not know hi language. the advantag certainli rest with 
him, for although he began to speak in english, of a veri crude and 
broken kind, he alway got excit and broke into hi nativ 
tongue--and everi time he did so, he look at hi watch. then the 
hors becam restless and snif the air. At thi he grew veri pale, 
and, look around in a frighten way, he suddenli jump forward, 
took them by the bridl and led them on some twenti feet. I followed, 
and ask whi he had done this. for answer he cross himself, point 
to the spot we had left and drew hi carriag in the direct of the 
other road, indic a cross, and said, first in german, then in 
english: 'buri him--him what kill themselves.' 

I rememb the old custom of buri suicid at cross-roads: 'ah! I 
see, a suicide. how interesting!' but for the life of me I could not 
make out whi the hors were frightened. 

whilst we were talking, we heard a sort of sound between a yelp and a 
bark. It wa far away; but the hors got veri restless, and it took 
johann all hi time to quiet them. He wa pale, and said, 'it sound 
like a wolf--but yet there are no wolv here now.' 

'no?' I said, question him; 'isn't it long sinc the wolv were so 
near the city?' 

'long, long,' he answered, 'in the spring and summer; but with the 
snow the wolv have been here not so long.' 

whilst he wa pet the hors and tri to quiet them, dark cloud 
drift rapidli across the sky. the sunshin pass away, and a breath 
of cold wind seem to drift past us. It wa onli a breath, however, 
and more in the natur of a warn than a fact, for the sun came out 
brightli again. johann look under hi lift hand at the horizon and 
said: 

'the storm of snow, he come befor long time.' then he look at hi 
watch again, and, straightway hold hi rein firmly--for the hors 
were still paw the ground restlessli and shake their heads--h 
climb to hi box as though the time had come for proceed on our 
journey. 

I felt a littl obstin and did not at onc get into the carriage. 

'tell me,' I said, 'about thi place where the road leads,' and I 
point down. 

again he cross himself and mumbl a prayer, befor he answered, 'it 
is unholy.' 

'what is unholy?' I enquired. 

'the village.' 

'then there is a village?' 

'no, no. No one live there hundr of years.' My curios wa 
piqued, 'but you said there wa a village.' 

'there was.' 

'where is it now?' 

whereupon he burst out into a long stori in german and english, so 
mix up that I could not quit understand exactli what he said, but 
roughli I gather that long ago, hundr of years, men had die 
there and been buri in their graves; and sound were heard under the 
clay, and when the grave were opened, men and women were found rosi 
with life, and their mouth red with blood. and so, in hast to save 
their live (aye, and their souls!--and here he cross himself) those 
who were left fled away to other places, where the live lived, and 
the dead were dead and not--not something. He wa evid afraid to 
speak the last words. As he proceed with hi narration, he grew more 
and more excited. It seem as if hi imagin had got hold of him, 
and he end in a perfect paroxysm of fear--white-faced, perspiring, 
trembl and look round him, as if expect that some dread 
presenc would manifest itself there in the bright sunshin on the 
open plain. finally, in an agoni of desperation, he cried: 

'walpurgi nacht!' and point to the carriag for me to get in. all 
my english blood rose at this, and, stand back, I said: 

'you are afraid, johann--y are afraid. Go home; I shall return 
alone; the walk will do me good.' the carriag door wa open. I took 
from the seat my oak walking-stick--which I alway carri on my holiday 
excursions--and close the door, point back to munich, and said, 
'go home, johann--walpurgis-nacht doesn't concern englishmen.' 

the hors were now more restiv than ever, and johann wa tri to 
hold them in, while excitedli implor me not to do anyth so 
foolish. I piti the poor fellow, he wa deepli in earnest; but all 
the same I could not help laughing. hi english wa quit gone now. In 
hi anxieti he had forgotten that hi onli mean of make me 
understand wa to talk my language, so he jabber away in hi nativ 
german. It began to be a littl tedious. after give the direction, 
'home!' I turn to go down the cross-road into the valley. 

with a despair gesture, johann turn hi hors toward munich. I 
lean on my stick and look after him. He went slowli along the road 
for a while: then there came over the crest of the hill a man tall and 
thin. I could see so much in the distance. when he drew near the 
horses, they began to jump and kick about, then to scream with terror. 
johann could not hold them in; they bolt down the road, run away 
madly. I watch them out of sight, then look for the stranger, but 
I found that he, too, wa gone. 

with a light heart I turn down the side road through the deepen 
valley to which johann had objected. there wa not the slightest 
reason, that I could see, for hi objection; and I daresay I tramp 
for a coupl of hour without think of time or distance, and 
certainli without see a person or a house. So far as the place wa 
concerned, it wa desol itself. but I did not notic thi 
particularli till, on turn a bend in the road, I came upon a 
scatter fring of wood; then I recognis that I had been impress 
unconsci by the desol of the region through which I had 
passed. 

I sat down to rest myself, and began to look around. It struck me that 
it wa consider colder than it had been at the commenc of my 
walk--a sort of sigh sound seem to be around me, with, now and 
then, high overhead, a sort of muffl roar. look upward I notic 
that great thick cloud were drift rapidli across the sky from 
north to south at a great height. there were sign of come storm in 
some lofti stratum of the air. I wa a littl chilly, and, think 
that it wa the sit still after the exercis of walking, I resum 
my journey. 

the ground I pass over wa now much more picturesque. there were no 
strike object that the eye might singl out; but in all there wa a 
charm of beauty. I took littl heed of time and it wa onli when the 
deepen twilight forc itself upon me that I began to think of how 
I should find my way home. the bright of the day had gone. the air 
wa cold, and the drift of cloud high overhead wa more marked. 
they were accompani by a sort of far-away rush sound, through 
which seem to come at interv that mysteri cri which the driver 
had said came from a wolf. for a while I hesitated. I had said I would 
see the desert village, so on I went, and present came on a wide 
stretch of open country, shut in by hill all around. their side were 
cover with tree which spread down to the plain, dotting, in clumps, 
the gentler slope and hollow which show here and there. I follow 
with my eye the wind of the road, and saw that it curv close to 
one of the densest of these clump and wa lost behind it. 

As I look there came a cold shiver in the air, and the snow began to 
fall. I thought of the mile and mile of bleak countri I had passed, 
and then hurri on to seek the shelter of the wood in front. darker 
and darker grew the sky, and faster and heavier fell the snow, till 
the earth befor and around me wa a glisten white carpet the 
further edg of which wa lost in misti vagueness. the road wa here 
but crude, and when on the level it boundari were not so marked, as 
when it pass through the cuttings; and in a littl while I found 
that I must have stray from it, for I miss underfoot the hard 
surface, and my feet sank deeper in the grass and moss. then the wind 
grew stronger and blew with ever increas force, till I wa fain to 
run befor it. the air becam icy-cold, and in spite of my exercis I 
began to suffer. the snow wa now fall so thickli and whirl 
around me in such rapid eddi that I could hardli keep my eye open. 
everi now and then the heaven were torn asund by vivid lightning, 
and in the flash I could see ahead of me a great mass of trees, 
chiefli yew and cypress all heavili coat with snow. 

I wa soon amongst the shelter of the trees, and there, in compar 
silence, I could hear the rush of the wind high overhead. present 
the black of the storm had becom merg in the dark of the 
night. by-and-bi the storm seem to be pass away: it now onli came 
in fierc puff or blasts. At such moment the weird sound of the 
wolf appear to be echo by mani similar sound around me. 

now and again, through the black mass of drift cloud, came a 
straggl ray of moonlight, which lit up the expanse, and show me 
that I wa at the edg of a dens mass of cypress and yew trees. As 
the snow had ceas to fall, I walk out from the shelter and began 
to investig more closely. It appear to me that, amongst so mani 
old foundat as I had passed, there might be still stand a hous 
in which, though in ruins, I could find some sort of shelter for a 
while. As I skirt the edg of the copse, I found that a low wall 
encircl it, and follow thi I present found an opening. here 
the cypress form an alley lead up to a squar mass of some kind 
of building. just as I caught sight of this, however, the drift 
cloud obscur the moon, and I pass up the path in darkness. the 
wind must have grown colder, for I felt myself shiver as I walked; but 
there wa hope of shelter, and I grope my way blindli on. 

I stopped, for there wa a sudden stillness. the storm had passed; 
and, perhap in sympathi with nature' silence, my heart seem to 
ceas to beat. but thi wa onli momentarily; for suddenli the 
moonlight broke through the clouds, show me that I wa in a 
graveyard, and that the squar object befor me wa a great massiv 
tomb of marble, as white as the snow that lay on and all around it. 
with the moonlight there came a fierc sigh of the storm, which 
appear to resum it cours with a long, low howl, as of mani dog 
or wolves. I wa awe and shocked, and felt the cold percept grow 
upon me till it seem to grip me by the heart. then while the flood 
of moonlight still fell on the marbl tomb, the storm gave further 
evid of renewing, as though it wa return on it track. 
impel by some sort of fascination, I approach the sepulchr to 
see what it was, and whi such a thing stood alon in such a place. I 
walk around it, and read, over the doric door, in german: 

countess dolingen OF gratz 
IN styria 
sought and found death 
1801 

On the top of the tomb, seemingli driven through the solid marble--for 
the structur wa compos of a few vast block of stone--wa a great 
iron spike or stake. On go to the back I saw, graven in great 
russian letters: 

'the dead travel fast.' 

there wa someth so weird and uncanni about the whole thing that it 
gave me a turn and made me feel quit faint. I began to wish, for the 
first time, that I had taken johann' advice. here a thought struck 
me, which came under almost mysteri circumst and with a 
terribl shock. thi wa walpurgi night! 

walpurgi night, when, accord to the belief of million of people, 
the devil wa abroad--when the grave were open and the dead came 
forth and walked. when all evil thing of earth and air and water held 
revel. thi veri place the driver had special shunned. thi wa the 
depopul villag of centuri ago. thi wa where the suicid lay; 
and thi wa the place where I wa alone--unmanned, shiver with 
cold in a shroud of snow with a wild storm gather again upon me! It 
took all my philosophy, all the religion I had been taught, all my 
courage, not to collaps in a paroxysm of fright. 

and now a perfect tornado burst upon me. the ground shook as though 
thousand of hors thunder across it; and thi time the storm bore 
on it ici wings, not snow, but great hailston which drove with such 
violenc that they might have come from the thong of balear 
slingers--hailston that beat down leaf and branch and made the 
shelter of the cypress of no more avail than though their stem were 
standing-corn. At the first I had rush to the nearest tree; but I 
wa soon fain to leav it and seek the onli spot that seem to afford 
refuge, the deep doric doorway of the marbl tomb. there, crouch 
against the massiv bronz door, I gain a certain amount of 
protect from the beat of the hailstones, for now they onli drove 
against me as they ricochet from the ground and the side of the 
marble. 

As I lean against the door, it move slightli and open inwards. 
the shelter of even a tomb wa welcom in that pitiless tempest, and I 
wa about to enter it when there came a flash of forked-lightn that 
lit up the whole expans of the heavens. In the instant, as I am a 
live man, I saw, as my eye were turn into the dark of the 
tomb, a beauti woman, with round cheek and red lips, seemingli 
sleep on a bier. As the thunder broke overhead, I wa grasp as by 
the hand of a giant and hurl out into the storm. the whole thing wa 
so sudden that, befor I could realis the shock, moral as well as 
physical, I found the hailston beat me down. At the same time I 
had a strange, domin feel that I wa not alone. I look 
toward the tomb. just then there came anoth blind flash, which 
seem to strike the iron stake that surmount the tomb and to pour 
through to the earth, blast and crumbl the marble, as in a burst 
of flame. the dead woman rose for a moment of agony, while she wa 
lap in the flame, and her bitter scream of pain wa drown in the 
thundercrash. the last thing I heard wa thi mingl of dread 
sound, as again I wa seiz in the giant-grasp and drag away, 
while the hailston beat on me, and the air around seem reverber 
with the howl of wolves. the last sight that I rememb wa a 
vague, white, move mass, as if all the grave around me had sent out 
the phantom of their sheeted-dead, and that they were close in on 
me through the white cloudi of the drive hail. 

* * * * * 

gradual there came a sort of vagu begin of consciousness; then 
a sens of weari that wa dreadful. for a time I rememb 
nothing; but slowli my sens returned. My feet seem posit 
rack with pain, yet I could not move them. they seem to be numbed. 
there wa an ici feel at the back of my neck and all down my spine, 
and my ears, like my feet, were dead, yet in torment; but there wa in 
my breast a sens of warmth which was, by comparison, delicious. It 
wa as a nightmare--a physic nightmare, if one may use such an 
expression; for some heavi weight on my chest made it difficult for me 
to breathe. 

thi period of semi-lethargi seem to remain a long time, and as it 
fade away I must have slept or swooned. then came a sort of loathing, 
like the first stage of sea-sickness, and a wild desir to be free 
from something--i knew not what. A vast still envelop me, as 
though all the world were asleep or dead--onli broken by the low 
pant as of some anim close to me. I felt a warm rasp at my 
throat, then came a conscious of the aw truth, which chill me 
to the heart and sent the blood surg up through my brain. some 
great anim wa lie on me and now lick my throat. I fear to 
stir, for some instinct of prudenc bade me lie still; but the brute 
seem to realis that there wa now some chang in me, for it rais 
it head. through my eyelash I saw abov me the two great flame 
eye of a gigant wolf. it sharp white teeth gleam in the gape 
red mouth, and I could feel it hot breath fierc and acrid upon me. 

for anoth spell of time I rememb no more. then I becam 
consciou of a low growl, follow by a yelp, renew again and again. 
then, seemingli veri far away, I heard a 'holloa! holloa!' as of mani 
voic call in unison. cautious I rais my head and look in 
the direct whenc the sound came; but the cemeteri block my view. 
the wolf still continu to yelp in a strang way, and a red glare 
began to move round the grove of cypresses, as though follow the 
sound. As the voic drew closer, the wolf yelp faster and louder. I 
fear to make either sound or motion. nearer came the red glow, over 
the white pall which stretch into the dark around me. then all 
at onc from beyond the tree there came at a trot a troop of horsemen 
bear torches. the wolf rose from my breast and made for the 
cemetery. I saw one of the horsemen (soldier by their cap and their 
long militari cloaks) rais hi carbin and take aim. A companion 
knock up hi arm, and I heard the ball whizz over my head. He had 
evid taken my bodi for that of the wolf. anoth sight the 
anim as it slunk away, and a shot followed. then, at a gallop, the 
troop rode forward--som toward me, other follow the wolf as it 
disappear amongst the snow-clad cypresses. 

As they drew nearer I tri to move, but wa powerless, although I 
could see and hear all that went on around me. two or three of the 
soldier jump from their hors and knelt besid me. one of them 
rais my head, and place hi hand over my heart. 

'good news, comrades!' he cried. 'hi heart still beats!' 

then some brandi wa pour down my throat; it put vigour into me, and 
I wa abl to open my eye fulli and look around. light and shadow 
were move among the trees, and I heard men call to one another. they 
drew together, utter frighten exclamations; and the light 
flash as the other came pour out of the cemeteri pell-mell, like 
men possessed. when the further one came close to us, those who were 
around me ask them eagerly: 

'well, have you found him?' 

the repli rang out hurriedly: 

'no! no! come away quick--quick! thi is no place to stay, and on thi 
of all nights!' 

'what wa it?' wa the question, ask in all manner of keys. the 
answer came various and all indefinit as though the men were 
move by some common impuls to speak, yet were restrain by some 
common fear from give their thoughts. 

'it--it--indeed!' gibber one, whose wit had plainli given out for 
the moment. 

'A wolf--and yet not a wolf!' anoth put in shudderingly. 

'no use tri for him without the sacr bullet,' a third remark in 
a more ordinari manner. 

'serv us right for come out on thi night! truli we have earn 
our thousand marks!' were the ejacul of a fourth. 

'there wa blood on the broken marble,' anoth said after a 
pause--'th lightn never brought that there. and for him--i he 
safe? look at hi throat! see, comrades, the wolf ha been lie on 
him and keep hi blood warm.' 

the offic look at my throat and replied: 

'he is all right; the skin is not pierced. what doe it all mean? We 
should never have found him but for the yelp of the wolf.' 

'what becam of it?' ask the man who wa hold up my head, and who 
seem the least panic-stricken of the party, for hi hand were 
steadi and without tremor. On hi sleev wa the chevron of a petti 
officer. 

'it went to it home,' answer the man, whose long face wa pallid, 
and who actual shook with terror as he glanc around him fearfully. 
'there are grave enough there in which it may lie. come, 
comrades--com quickly! let us leav thi curs spot.' 

the offic rais me to a sit posture, as he utter a word of 
command; then sever men place me upon a horse. He sprang to the 
saddl behind me, took me in hi arms, gave the word to advance; and, 
turn our face away from the cypresses, we rode away in swift, 
militari order. 

As yet my tongu refus it office, and I wa perforc silent. I must 
have fallen asleep; for the next thing I rememb wa find myself 
stand up, support by a soldier on each side of me. It wa almost 
broad daylight, and to the north a red streak of sunlight wa 
reflected, like a path of blood, over the wast of snow. the offic 
wa tell the men to say noth of what they had seen, except that 
they found an english stranger, guard by a larg dog. 

'dog! that wa no dog,' cut in the man who had exhibit such fear. 'I 
think I know a wolf when I see one.' 

the young offic answer calmly: 'I said a dog.' 

'dog!' reiter the other ironically. It wa evid that hi 
courag wa rise with the sun; and, point to me, he said, 'look 
at hi throat. Is that the work of a dog, master?' 

instinct I rais my hand to my throat, and as I touch it I 
cri out in pain. the men crowd round to look, some stoop down 
from their saddles; and again there came the calm voic of the young 
officer: 

'A dog, as I said. If aught els were said we should onli be laugh 
at.' 

I wa then mount behind a trooper, and we rode on into the suburb 
of munich. here we came across a stray carriage, into which I wa 
lifted, and it wa driven off to the quatr saisons--th young offic 
accompani me, whilst a trooper follow with hi horse, and the 
other rode off to their barracks. 

when we arrived, herr delbrück rush so quickli down the step to 
meet me, that it wa appar he had been watch within. take me 
by both hand he solicit led me in. the offic salut me and 
wa turn to withdraw, when I recognis hi purpose, and insist 
that he should come to my rooms. over a glass of wine I warmli thank 
him and hi brave comrad for save me. He repli simpli that he 
wa more than glad, and that herr delbrück had at the first taken 
step to make all the search parti pleased; at which ambigu 
utter the maîtr d'hôtel smiled, while the offic plead duti 
and withdrew. 

'but herr delbrück,' I enquired, 'how and whi wa it that the soldier 
search for me?' 

He shrug hi shoulders, as if in depreci of hi own deed, as 
he replied: 

'I wa so fortun as to obtain leav from the command of the 
regiment in which I served, to ask for volunteers.' 

'but how did you know I wa lost?' I asked. 

'the driver came hither with the remain of hi carriage, which had 
been upset when the hors ran away.' 

'but sure you would not send a search-parti of soldier mere on 
thi account?' 

'oh, no!' he answered; 'but even befor the coachman arrived, I had 
thi telegram from the boyar whose guest you are,' and he took from 
hi pocket a telegram which he hand to me, and I read: 


_bistritz_. 

Be care of my guest--hi safeti is most preciou to me. 
should aught happen to him, or if he be missed, spare noth 
to find him and ensur hi safety. He is english and therefor 
adventurous. there are often danger from snow and wolv and 
night. lose not a moment if you suspect harm to him. I answer 
your zeal with my fortune.--_dracula_. 

As I held the telegram in my hand, the room seem to whirl around me; 
and, if the attent maîtr d'hôtel had not caught me, I think I 
should have fallen. there wa someth so strang in all this, 
someth so weird and imposs to imagine, that there grew on me a 
sens of my be in some way the sport of opposit forces--th mere 
vagu idea of which seem in a way to paralys me. I wa certainli 
under some form of mysteri protection. from a distant countri had 
come, in the veri nick of time, a messag that took me out of the 
danger of the snow-sleep and the jaw of the wolf. 




the judge' hous 


when the time for hi examin drew near malcolm malcolmson made up 
hi mind to go somewher to read by himself. He fear the attract 
of the seaside, and also he fear complet rural isolation, for of 
old he knew it charms, and so he determin to find some unpretenti 
littl town where there would be noth to distract him. He refrain 
from ask suggest from ani of hi friends, for he argu that 
each would recommend some place of which he had knowledge, and where 
he had alreadi acquaintances. As malcolmson wish to avoid friend he 
had no wish to encumb himself with the attent of friends' 
friends, and so he determin to look out for a place for himself. He 
pack a portmanteau with some cloth and all the book he required, 
and then took ticket for the first name on the local time-t which 
he did not know. 

when at the end of three hours' journey he alight at benchurch, he 
felt satisfi that he had so far obliter hi track as to be sure 
of have a peac opportun of pursu hi studies. He went 
straight to the one inn which the sleepi littl place contained, and 
put up for the night. benchurch wa a market town, and onc in three 
week wa crowd to excess, but for the remaind of the twenty-on 
day it wa as attract as a desert. malcolmson look around the 
day after hi arriv to tri to find quarter more isol than even 
so quiet an inn as 'the good traveller' afforded. there wa onli one 
place which took hi fancy, and it certainli satisfi hi wildest 
idea regard quiet; in fact, quiet wa not the proper word to appli 
to it--desol wa the onli term convey ani suitabl idea of it 
isolation. It wa an old rambling, heavy-built hous of the jacobean 
style, with heavi gabl and windows, unusu small, and set higher 
than wa customari in such houses, and wa surround with a high 
brick wall massiv built. indeed, on examination, it look more 
like a fortifi hous than an ordinari dwelling. but all these thing 
pleas malcolmson. 'here,' he thought, 'i the veri spot I have been 
look for, and if I can get opportun of use it I shall be 
happy.' hi joy wa increas when he realis beyond doubt that it 
wa not at present inhabited. 

from the post-offic he got the name of the agent, who wa rare 
surpris at the applic to rent a part of the old house. mr. 
carnford, the local lawyer and agent, wa a genial old gentleman, and 
frankli confess hi delight at anyon be will to live in the 
house. 

'to tell you the truth,' said he, 'I should be onli too happy, on 
behalf of the owners, to let anyon have the hous rent free for a 
term of year if onli to accustom the peopl here to see it inhabited. 
It ha been so long empti that some kind of absurd prejudic ha grown 
up about it, and thi can be best put down by it occupation--if 
only,' he ad with a sli glanc at malcolmson, 'bi a scholar like 
yourself, who want it quiet for a time.' 

malcolmson thought it needless to ask the agent about the 'absurd 
prejudice'; he knew he would get more information, if he should 
requir it, on that subject from other quarters. He paid hi three 
months' rent, got a receipt, and the name of an old woman who would 
probabl undertak to 'do' for him, and came away with the key in hi 
pocket. He then went to the landladi of the inn, who wa a cheer 
and most kindli person, and ask her advic as to such store and 
provis as he would be like to require. she threw up her hand in 
amaz when he told her where he wa go to settl himself. 

'not in the judge' house!' she said, and grew pale as she spoke. He 
explain the local of the house, say that he did not know it 
name. when he had finish she answered: 

'aye, sure enough--sur enough the veri place! It is the judge' hous 
sure enough.' He ask her to tell him about the place, whi so called, 
and what there wa against it. she told him that it wa so call 
local becaus it had been mani year before--how long she could not 
say, as she wa herself from anoth part of the country, but she 
thought it must have been a hundr year or more--th abod of a 
judg who wa held in great terror on account of hi harsh sentenc 
and hi hostil to prison at assizes. As to what there wa 
against the hous itself she could not tell. she had often asked, but 
no one could inform her; but there wa a gener feel that there 
wa _something_, and for her own part she would not take all the money 
in drinkwater' bank and stay in the hous an hour by herself. then 
she apologis to malcolmson for her disturb talk. 

'it is too bad of me, sir, and you--and a young gentlemen, too--if you 
will pardon me say it, go to live there all alone. If you were 
my boy--and you'll excus me for say it--you wouldn't sleep there a 
night, not if I had to go there myself and pull the big alarm bell 
that' on the roof!' the good creatur wa so manifestli in earnest, 
and wa so kindli in her intentions, that malcolmson, although amused, 
wa touched. He told her kindli how much he appreci her interest 
in him, and added: 

'but, my dear mrs. witham, inde you need not be concern about me! 
A man who is read for the mathemat tripo ha too much to think 
of to be disturb by ani of these mysteri "somethings", and hi 
work is of too exact and prosaic a kind to allow of hi have ani 
corner in hi mind for mysteri of ani kind. harmon progression, 
permut and combinations, and ellipt function have suffici 
mysteri for me!' mrs. witham kindli undertook to see after hi 
commissions, and he went himself to look for the old woman who had 
been recommend to him. when he return to the judge' hous with 
her, after an interv of a coupl of hours, he found mrs. witham 
herself wait with sever men and boy carri parcels, and an 
upholsterer' man with a bed in a car, for she said, though tabl and 
chair might be all veri well, a bed that hadn't been air for mayhap 
fifti year wa not proper for young bone to lie on. she wa 
evid curiou to see the insid of the house; and though 
manifestli so afraid of the 'somethings' that at the slightest sound 
she clutch on to malcolmson, whom she never left for a moment, went 
over the whole place. 

after hi examin of the house, malcolmson decid to take up hi 
abod in the great dining-room, which wa big enough to serv for all 
hi requirements; and mrs. witham, with the aid of the charwoman, 
mrs. dempster, proceed to arrang matters. when the hamper were 
brought in and unpacked, malcolmson saw that with much kind 
forethought she had sent from her own kitchen suffici provis to 
last for a few days. befor go she express all sort of kind 
wishes; and at the door turn and said: 

'and perhaps, sir, as the room is big and draughti it might be well to 
have one of those big screen put round your bed at night--though, 
truth to tell, I would die myself if I were to be so shut in with all 
kind of--of "things", that put their head round the sides, or over 
the top, and look on me!' the imag which she had call up wa too 
much for her nerves, and she fled incontinently. 

mrs. dempster snif in a superior manner as the landladi 
disappeared, and remark that for her own part she wasn't afraid of 
all the bogi in the kingdom. 

'i'll tell you what it is, sir,' she said; 'bogi is all kind and 
sort of things--except bogies! rat and mice, and beetles; and creaki 
doors, and loos slates, and broken panes, and stiff drawer handles, 
that stay out when you pull them and then fall down in the middl of 
the night. look at the wainscot of the room! It is old--hundr of 
year old! Do you think there' no rat and beetl there! and do you 
imagine, sir, that you won't see none of them? rat is bogies, I tell 
you, and bogi is rats; and don't you get to think anyth else!' 

'mrs. dempster,' said malcolmson gravely, make her a polit bow, 
'you know more than a senior wrangler! and let me say, that, as a mark 
of esteem for your indubit sound of head and heart, I shall, 
when I go, give you possess of thi house, and let you stay here by 
yourself for the last two month of my tenancy, for four week will 
serv my purpose.' 

'thank you kindly, sir!' she answered, 'but I couldn't sleep away 
from home a night. I am in greenhow' charity, and if I slept a night 
away from my room I should lose all I have got to live on. the rule 
is veri strict; and there' too mani watch for a vacanc for me to 
run ani risk in the matter. onli for that, sir, i'd gladli come here 
and attend on you altogeth dure your stay.' 

'mi good woman,' said malcolmson hastily, 'I have come here on purpos 
to obtain solitude; and believ me that I am grate to the late 
greenhow for have so organis hi admir charity--whatev it 
is--that I am perforc deni the opportun of suffer from such a 
form of temptation! saint anthoni himself could not be more rigid on 
the point!' 

the old woman laugh harshly. 'ah, you young gentlemen,' she said, 
'you don't fear for naught; and belik you'll get all the solitud you 
want here.' she set to work with her cleaning; and by nightfall, when 
malcolmson return from hi walk--h alway had one of hi book to 
studi as he walked--h found the room swept and tidied, a fire burn 
in the old hearth, the lamp lit, and the tabl spread for supper with 
mrs. witham' excel fare. 'thi is comfort, indeed,' he said, as 
he rub hi hands. 

when he had finish hi supper, and lift the tray to the other end 
of the great oak dining-table, he got out hi book again, put fresh 
wood on the fire, trim hi lamp, and set himself down to a spell of 
real hard work. He went on without paus till about eleven o'clock, 
when he knock off for a bit to fix hi fire and lamp, and to make 
himself a cup of tea. He had alway been a tea-drinker, and dure hi 
colleg life had sat late at work and had taken tea late. the rest 
wa a great luxuri to him, and he enjoy it with a sens of 
delicious, voluptu ease. the renew fire leap and sparkled, and 
threw quaint shadow through the great old room; and as he sip hi 
hot tea he revel in the sens of isol from hi kind. then it 
wa that he began to notic for the first time what a nois the rat 
were making. 

'surely,' he thought, 'they cannot have been at it all the time I wa 
reading. had they been, I must have notic it!' presently, when the 
nois increased, he satisfi himself that it wa realli new. It wa 
evid that at first the rat had been frighten at the presenc of 
a stranger, and the light of fire and lamp; but that as the time went 
on they had grown bolder and were now disport themselv as wa 
their wont. 

how busi they were! and hark to the strang noises! Up and down behind 
the old wainscot, over the ceil and under the floor they raced, and 
gnawed, and scratched! malcolmson smile to himself as he recal to 
mind the say of mrs. dempster, 'bogi is rats, and rat is 
bogies!' the tea began to have it effect of intellectu and nervou 
stimulus, he saw with joy anoth long spell of work to be done befor 
the night wa past, and in the sens of secur which it gave him, he 
allow himself the luxuri of a good look round the room. He took hi 
lamp in one hand, and went all around, wonder that so quaint and 
beauti an old hous had been so long neglected. the carv of the 
oak on the panel of the wainscot wa fine, and on and round the door 
and window it wa beauti and of rare merit. there were some old 
pictur on the walls, but they were coat so thick with dust and 
dirt that he could not distinguish ani detail of them, though he held 
hi lamp as high as he could over hi head. here and there as he went 
round he saw some crack or hole block for a moment by the face of a 
rat with it bright eye glitter in the light, but in an instant it 
wa gone, and a squeak and a scamper followed. the thing that most 
struck him, however, wa the rope of the great alarm bell on the roof, 
which hung down in a corner of the room on the right-hand side of the 
fireplace. He pull up close to the hearth a great high-back carv 
oak chair, and sat down to hi last cup of tea. when thi wa done he 
made up the fire, and went back to hi work, sit at the corner of 
the table, have the fire to hi left. for a littl while the rat 
disturb him somewhat with their perpetu scampering, but he got 
accustom to the nois as one doe to the tick of a clock or to 
the roar of move water; and he becam so immers in hi work that 
everyth in the world, except the problem which he wa tri to 
solve, pass away from him. 

He suddenli look up, hi problem wa still unsolved, and there wa 
in the air that sens of the hour befor the dawn, which is so dread 
to doubt life. the nois of the rat had ceased. inde it seem 
to him that it must have ceas but late and that it wa the sudden 
cessat which had disturb him. the fire had fallen low, but still 
it threw out a deep red glow. As he look he start in spite of hi 
_sang froid_. 

there on the great high-back carv oak chair by the right side of 
the fireplac sat an enorm rat, steadili glare at him with 
bale eyes. He made a motion to it as though to hunt it away, but it 
did not stir. then he made the motion of throw something. still it 
did not stir, but show it great white teeth angrily, and it cruel 
eye shone in the lamplight with an ad vindictiveness. 

malcolmson felt amazed, and seiz the poker from the hearth ran at 
it to kill it. before, however, he could strike it, the rat, with a 
squeak that sound like the concentr of hate, jump upon the 
floor, and, run up the rope of the alarm bell, disappear in the 
dark beyond the rang of the green-shad lamp. instantly, strang 
to say, the noisi scamper of the rat in the wainscot began again. 

By thi time malcolmson' mind wa quit off the problem; and as a 
shrill cock-crow outsid told him of the approach of morning, he went 
to bed and to sleep. 

He slept so sound that he wa not even wake by mrs. dempster come 
in to make up hi room. It wa onli when she had tidi up the place 
and got hi breakfast readi and tap on the screen which close in 
hi bed that he woke. He wa a littl tire still after hi night' 
hard work, but a strong cup of tea soon freshen him up and, take 
hi book, he went out for hi morn walk, bring with him a few 
sandwich lest he should not care to return till dinner time. He 
found a quiet walk between high elm some way outsid the town, and 
here he spent the greater part of the day studi hi laplace. On hi 
return he look in to see mrs. witham and to thank her for her 
kindness. when she saw him come through the diamond-pan bay window 
of her sanctum she came out to meet him and ask him in. she look 
at him searchingli and shook her head as she said: 

'you must not overdo it, sir. you are paler thi morn than you 
should be. too late hour and too hard work on the brain isn't good 
for ani man! but tell me, sir, how did you pass the night? well, I 
hope? but my heart! sir, I wa glad when mrs. dempster told me thi 
morn that you were all right and sleep sound when she went in.' 

'oh, I wa all right,' he answer smiling, 'the "somethings" didn't 
worri me, as yet. onli the rats; and they had a circus, I tell you, 
all over the place. there wa one wick look old devil that sat up 
on my own chair by the fire, and wouldn't go till I took the poker to 
him, and then he ran up the rope of the alarm bell and got to 
somewher up the wall or the ceiling--i couldn't see where, it wa so 
dark.' 

'merci on us,' said mrs. witham, 'an old devil, and sit on a chair 
by the fireside! take care, sir! take care! there' mani a true word 
spoken in jest.' 

'how do you mean? pon my word I don't understand.' 

'an old devil! the old devil, perhaps. there! sir, you needn't laugh,' 
for malcolmson had broken into a hearti peal. 'you young folk think 
it easi to laugh at thing that make older one shudder. never mind, 
sir! never mind! pleas god, you'll laugh all the time. it' what I 
wish you myself!' and the good ladi beam all over in sympathi with 
hi enjoyment, her fear gone for a moment. 

'oh, forgiv me!' said malcolmson presently. 'don't think me rude; but 
the idea wa too much for me--that the old devil himself wa on the 
chair last night!' and at the thought he laugh again. then he went 
home to dinner. 

thi even the scamper of the rat began earlier; inde it had 
been go on befor hi arrival, and onli ceas whilst hi presenc 
by it fresh disturb them. after dinner he sat by the fire for a 
while and had a smoke; and then, have clear hi table, began to 
work as before. tonight the rat disturb him more than they had done 
on the previou night. how they scamper up and down and under and 
over! how they squeaked, and scratched, and gnawed! how they, get 
bolder by degrees, came to the mouth of their hole and to the chink 
and crack and cranni in the wainscot till their eye shone like 
tini lamp as the firelight rose and fell. but to him, now doubtless 
accustom to them, their eye were not wicked; onli their play 
touch him. sometim the boldest of them made salli out on the 
floor or along the mould of the wainscot. now and again as they 
disturb him malcolmson made a sound to frighten them, smite the 
tabl with hi hand or give a fierc 'hsh, hsh,' so that they fled 
straightway to their holes. 

and so the earli part of the night wore on; and despit the nois 
malcolmson got more and more immers in hi work. 

all at onc he stopped, as on the previou night, be overcom by a 
sudden sens of silence. there wa not the faintest sound of gnaw, or 
scratch, or squeak. the silenc wa as of the grave. He rememb the 
odd occurr of the previou night, and instinct he look at 
the chair stand close by the fireside. and then a veri odd 
sensat thrill through him. 

there, on the great old high-back carv oak chair besid the 
fireplac sat the same enorm rat, steadili glare at him with 
bale eyes. 

instinct he took the nearest thing to hi hand, a book of 
logarithms, and flung it at it. the book wa badli aim and the rat 
did not stir, so again the poker perform of the previou night wa 
repeated; and again the rat, be close pursued, fled up the rope 
of the alarm bell. strang too, the departur of thi rat wa 
instantli follow by the renew of the nois made by the gener rat 
community. On thi occasion, as on the previou one, malcolmson could 
not see at what part of the room the rat disappeared, for the green 
shade of hi lamp left the upper part of the room in darkness, and the 
fire had burn low. 

On look at hi watch he found it wa close on midnight; and, not 
sorri for the _divertissement_, he made up hi fire and made himself 
hi nightli pot of tea. He had got through a good spell of work, and 
thought himself entitl to a cigarette; and so he sat on the great 
oak chair befor the fire and enjoy it. whilst smoke he began to 
think that he would like to know where the rat disappear to, for he 
had certain idea for the morrow not entir disconnect with a 
rat-trap. accordingli he lit anoth lamp and place it so that it 
would shine well into the right-hand corner of the wall by the 
fireplace. then he got all the book he had with him, and place them 
handi to throw at the vermin. final he lift the rope of the alarm 
bell and place the end of it on the table, fix the extrem end 
under the lamp. As he handl it he could not help notic how 
pliabl it was, especi for so strong a rope, and one not in use. 
'you could hang a man with it,' he thought to himself. when hi 
prepar were made he look around, and said complacently: 

'there now, my friend, I think we shall learn someth of you thi 
time!' He began hi work again, and though as befor somewhat 
disturb at first by the nois of the rats, soon lost himself in hi 
proposit and problems. 

again he wa call to hi immedi surround suddenly. thi time 
it might not have been the sudden silenc onli which took hi 
attention; there wa a slight movement of the rope, and the lamp 
moved. without stirring, he look to see if hi pile of book wa 
within range, and then cast hi eye along the rope. As he look he 
saw the great rat drop from the rope on the oak arm-chair and sit 
there glare at him. He rais a book in hi right hand, and take 
care aim, flung it at the rat. the latter, with a quick movement, 
sprang asid and dodg the missile. He then took anoth book, and a 
third, and flung them one after anoth at the rat, but each time 
unsuccessfully. At last, as he stood with a book pois in hi hand to 
throw, the rat squeak and seem afraid. thi made malcolmson more 
than ever eager to strike, and the book flew and struck the rat a 
resound blow. It gave a terrifi squeak, and turn on hi 
pursuer a look of terribl malevolence, ran up the chair-back and made 
a great jump to the rope of the alarm bell and ran up it like 
lightning. the lamp rock under the sudden strain, but it wa a heavi 
one and did not toppl over. malcolmson kept hi eye on the rat, and 
saw it by the light of the second lamp leap to a mould of the 
wainscot and disappear through a hole in one of the great pictur 
which hung on the wall, obscur and invis through it coat of 
dirt and dust. 

'I shall look up my friend' habit in the morning,' said the 
student, as he went over to collect hi books. 'the third pictur from 
the fireplace; I shall not forget.' He pick up the book one by one, 
comment on them as he lift them. '_conic sections_ he doe not 
mind, nor _cycloid oscillations_, nor the _principia_, nor 
_quaternions_, nor _thermodynamics_. now for the book that fetch 
him!' malcolmson took it up and look at it. As he did so he started, 
and a sudden pallor overspread hi face. He look round uneasili and 
shiver slightly, as he murmur to himself: 

'the bibl my mother gave me! what an odd coincidence.' He sat down to 
work again, and the rat in the wainscot renew their gambols. they 
did not disturb him, however; somehow their presenc gave him a sens 
of companionship. but he could not attend to hi work, and after 
strive to master the subject on which he wa engag gave it up in 
despair, and went to bed as the first streak of dawn stole in through 
the eastern window. 

He slept heavili but uneasily, and dream much; and when mrs. 
dempster woke him late in the morn he seem ill at ease, and for a 
few minut did not seem to realis exactli where he was. hi first 
request rather surpris the servant. 

'mrs. dempster, when I am out to-day I wish you would get the step 
and dust or wash those pictures--speci that one the third from the 
fireplace--i want to see what they are.' 

late in the afternoon malcolmson work at hi book in the shade 
walk, and the cheer of the previou day came back to him as the 
day wore on, and he found that hi read wa progress well. He 
had work out to a satisfactori conclus all the problem which had 
as yet baffl him, and it wa in a state of jubil that he paid a 
visit to mrs. witham at 'the good traveller'. He found a stranger in 
the cosi sitting-room with the landlady, who wa introduc to him as 
dr. thornhill. she wa not quit at ease, and this, combin with the 
doctor' plung at onc into a seri of questions, made malcolmson 
come to the conclus that hi presenc wa not an accident, so 
without preliminari he said: 

'dr. thornhill, I shall with pleasur answer you ani question you may 
choos to ask me if you will answer me one question first.' 

the doctor seem surprised, but he smile and answer at once, 
'done! what is it?' 

'did mrs. witham ask you to come here and see me and advis me?' 

dr. thornhil for a moment wa taken aback, and mrs. witham got fieri 
red and turn away; but the doctor wa a frank and readi man, and he 
answer at onc and openly. 

'she did: but she didn't intend you to know it. I suppos it wa my 
clumsi hast that made you suspect. she told me that she did not like 
the idea of your be in that hous all by yourself, and that she 
thought you took too much strong tea. In fact, she want me to advis 
you if possibl to give up the tea and the veri late hours. I wa a 
keen student in my time, so I suppos I may take the liberti of a 
colleg man, and without offence, advis you not quit as a stranger.' 

malcolmson with a bright smile held out hi hand. 'shake! as they say 
in america,' he said. 'I must thank you for your kind and mrs. 
witham too, and your kind deserv a return on my part. I promis 
to take no more strong tea--no tea at all till you let me--and I shall 
go to bed tonight at one o'clock at latest. will that do?' 

'capital,' said the doctor. 'now tell us all that you notic in the 
old house,' and so malcolmson then and there told in minut detail all 
that had happen in the last two nights. He wa interrupt everi now 
and then by some exclam from mrs. witham, till final when he 
told of the episod of the bibl the landlady' pent-up emot found 
vent in a shriek; and it wa not till a stiff glass of brandi and 
water had been administ that she grew compos again. dr. 
thornhil listen with a face of grow gravity, and when the 
narr wa complet and mrs. witham had been restor he asked: 

'the rat alway went up the rope of the alarm bell?' 

'always.' 

'I suppos you know,' said the doctor after a pause, 'what the rope 
is?' 

'no!' 

'it is,' said the doctor slowly, 'the veri rope which the hangman use 
for all the victim of the judge' judici rancour!' here he wa 
interrupt by anoth scream from mrs. witham, and step had to be 
taken for her recovery. malcolmson have look at hi watch, and 
found that it wa close to hi dinner hour, had gone home befor her 
complet recovery. 

when mrs. witham wa herself again she almost assail the doctor with 
angri question as to what he meant by put such horribl idea 
into the poor young man' mind. 'he ha quit enough there alreadi to 
upset him,' she added. dr. thornhil replied: 

'mi dear madam, I had a distinct purpos in it! I want to draw hi 
attent to the bell rope, and to fix it there. It may be that he is 
in a highli overwrought state, and ha been studi too much, 
although I am bound to say that he seem as sound and healthi a young 
man, mental and bodily, as ever I saw--but then the rats--and that 
suggest of the devil.' the doctor shook hi head and went on. 'I 
would have offer to go and stay the first night with him but that I 
felt sure it would have been a caus of offence. He may get in the 
night some strang fright or hallucination; and if he doe I want him 
to pull that rope. all alon as he is it will give us warning, and we 
may reach him in time to be of service. I shall be sit up pretti 
late tonight and shall keep my ear open. Do not be alarm if 
benchurch get a surpris befor morning.' 

'oh, doctor, what do you mean? what do you mean?' 

'I mean this; that possibly--nay, more probably--w shall hear the 
great alarm bell from the judge' hous tonight,' and the doctor made 
about as effect an exit as could be thought of. 

when malcolmson arriv home he found that it wa a littl after hi 
usual time, and mrs. dempster had gone away--th rule of greenhow' 
chariti were not to be neglected. He wa glad to see that the place 
wa bright and tidi with a cheer fire and a well-trim lamp. the 
even wa colder than might have been expect in april, and a heavi 
wind wa blow with such rapidly-increas strength that there wa 
everi promis of a storm dure the night. for a few minut after hi 
entranc the nois of the rat ceased; but so soon as they becam 
accustom to hi presenc they began again. He wa glad to hear them, 
for he felt onc more the feel of companionship in their noise, and 
hi mind ran back to the strang fact that they onli ceas to 
manifest themselv when that other--th great rat with the bale 
eyes--cam upon the scene. the reading-lamp onli wa lit and it green 
shade kept the ceil and the upper part of the room in darkness, so 
that the cheer light from the hearth spread over the floor and 
shine on the white cloth laid over the end of the tabl wa warm and 
cheery. malcolmson sat down to hi dinner with a good appetit and a 
buoyant spirit. after hi dinner and a cigarett he sat steadili down 
to work, determin not to let anyth disturb him, for he rememb 
hi promis to the doctor, and made up hi mind to make the best of 
the time at hi disposal. 

for an hour or so he work all right, and then hi thought began to 
wander from hi books. the actual circumst around him, the call 
on hi physic attention, and hi nervou suscept were not to 
be denied. By thi time the wind had becom a gale, and the gale a 
storm. the old house, solid though it was, seem to shake to it 
foundations, and the storm roar and rage through it mani chimney 
and it queer old gables, produc strange, unearthli sound in the 
empti room and corridors. even the great alarm bell on the roof must 
have felt the forc of the wind, for the rope rose and fell slightly, 
as though the bell were move a littl from time to time and the 
limber rope fell on the oak floor with a hard and hollow sound. 

As malcolmson listen to it he bethought himself of the doctor' 
words, 'it is the rope which the hangman use for the victim of the 
judge' judici rancour,' and he went over to the corner of the 
fireplac and took it in hi hand to look at it. there seem a sort 
of deadli interest in it, and as he stood there he lost himself for a 
moment in specul as to who these victim were, and the grim wish 
of the judg to have such a ghastli relic ever under hi eyes. As he 
stood there the sway of the bell on the roof still lift the rope 
now and again; but present there came a new sensation--a sort of 
tremor in the rope, as though someth wa move along it. 

look up instinct malcolmson saw the great rat come slowli 
down toward him, glare at him steadily. He drop the rope and 
start back with a mutter curse, and the rat turn ran up the 
rope again and disappeared, and at the same instant malcolmson becam 
consciou that the nois of the rats, which had ceas for a while, 
began again. 

all thi set him thinking, and it occur to him that he had not 
investig the lair of the rat or look at the pictures, as he had 
intended. He lit the other lamp without the shade, and, hold it up 
went and stood opposit the third pictur from the fireplac on the 
right-hand side where he had seen the rat disappear on the previou 
night. 

At the first glanc he start back so suddenli that he almost drop 
the lamp, and a deadli pallor overspread hi face. hi knee shook, 
and heavi drop of sweat came on hi forehead, and he trembl like an 
aspen. but he wa young and plucky, and pull himself together, and 
after the paus of a few second step forward again, rais the 
lamp, and examin the pictur which had been dust and washed, and 
now stood out clearly. 

It wa of a judg dress in hi robe of scarlet and ermine. hi face 
wa strong and merciless, evil, crafty, and vindictive, with a sensual 
mouth, hook nose of ruddi colour, and shape like the beak of a bird 
of prey. the rest of the face wa of a cadaver colour. the eye 
were of peculiar brillianc and with a terribl malign expression. 
As he look at them, malcolmson grew cold, for he saw there the veri 
counterpart of the eye of the great rat. the lamp almost fell from 
hi hand, he saw the rat with it bale eye peer out through the 
hole in the corner of the picture, and note the sudden cessat of 
the nois of the other rats. however, he pull himself together, and 
went on with hi examin of the picture. 

the judg wa seat in a great high-back carv oak chair, on the 
right-hand side of a great stone fireplac where, in the corner, a 
rope hung down from the ceiling, it end lie coil on the floor. 
with a feel of someth like horror, malcolmson recognis the 
scene of the room as it stood, and gaze around him in an awestruck 
manner as though he expect to find some strang presenc behind him. 
then he look over to the corner of the fireplace--and with a loud 
cri he let the lamp fall from hi hand. 

there, in the judge' arm-chair, with the rope hang behind, sat the 
rat with the judge' bale eyes, now intensifi and with a fiendish 
leer. save for the howl of the storm without there wa silence. 

the fallen lamp recal malcolmson to himself. fortun it wa of 
metal, and so the oil wa not spilt. however, the practic need of 
attend to it settl at onc hi nervou apprehensions. when he had 
turn it out, he wipe hi brow and thought for a moment. 

'thi will not do,' he said to himself. 'if I go on like thi I shall 
becom a crazi fool. thi must stop! I promis the doctor I would not 
take tea. faith, he wa pretti right! My nerv must have been get 
into a queer state. funni I did not notic it. I never felt better in 
my life. however, it is all right now, and I shall not be such a fool 
again.' 

then he mix himself a good stiff glass of brandi and water and 
resolut sat down to hi work. 

It wa nearli an hour when he look up from hi book, disturb by 
the sudden stillness. without, the wind howl and roar louder than 
ever, and the rain drove in sheet against the windows, beat like 
hail on the glass; but within there wa no sound whatev save the 
echo of the wind as it roar in the great chimney, and now and then a 
hiss as a few raindrop found their way down the chimney in a lull of 
the storm. the fire had fallen low and had ceas to flame, though it 
threw out a red glow. malcolmson listen attentively, and present 
heard a thin, squeak noise, veri faint. It came from the corner of 
the room where the rope hung down, and he thought it wa the creak 
of the rope on the floor as the sway of the bell rais and lower 
it. look up, however, he saw in the dim light the great rat 
cling to the rope and gnaw it. the rope wa alreadi nearli 
gnaw through--h could see the lighter colour where the strand were 
laid bare. As he look the job wa completed, and the sever end of 
the rope fell clatter on the oaken floor, whilst for an instant the 
great rat remain like a knob or tassel at the end of the rope, which 
now began to sway to and fro. malcolmson felt for a moment anoth 
pang of terror as he thought that now the possibl of call the 
outer world to hi assist wa cut off, but an intens anger took 
it place, and seiz the book he wa read he hurl it at the 
rat. the blow wa well aimed, but befor the missil could reach him 
the rat drop off and struck the floor with a soft thud. malcolmson 
instantli rush over toward him, but it dart away and disappear 
in the dark of the shadow of the room. malcolmson felt that hi 
work wa over for the night, and determin then and there to vari the 
monotoni of the proceed by a hunt for the rat, and took off the 
green shade of the lamp so as to insur a wider spread light. As he 
did so the gloom of the upper part of the room wa relieved, and in 
the new flood of light, great by comparison with the previou 
darkness, the pictur on the wall stood out boldly. from where he 
stood, malcolmson saw right opposit to him the third pictur on the 
wall from the right of the fireplace. He rub hi eye in surprise, 
and then a great fear began to come upon him. 

In the centr of the pictur wa a great irregular patch of brown 
canvas, as fresh as when it wa stretch on the frame. the background 
wa as before, with chair and chimney-corn and rope, but the figur 
of the judg had disappeared. 

malcolmson, almost in a chill of horror, turn slowli round, and then 
he began to shake and trembl like a man in a palsy. hi strength 
seem to have left him, and he wa incap of action or movement, 
hardli even of thought. He could onli see and hear. 

there, on the great high-back carv oak chair sat the judg in hi 
robe of scarlet and ermine, with hi bale eye glare 
vindictively, and a smile of triumph on the resolute, cruel mouth, as 
he lift with hi hand a _black cap_. malcolmson felt as if the 
blood wa run from hi heart, as one doe in moment of prolong 
suspense. there wa a sing in hi ears. without, he could hear the 
roar and howl of the tempest, and through it, swept on the storm, came 
the strike of midnight by the great chime in the market place. He 
stood for a space of time that seem to him endless still as a 
statue, and with wide-open, horror-struck eyes, breathless. As the 
clock struck, so the smile of triumph on the judge' face intensified, 
and at the last stroke of midnight he place the black cap on hi 
head. 

slowli and deliber the judg rose from hi chair and pick up 
the piec of the rope of the alarm bell which lay on the floor, drew 
it through hi hand as if he enjoy it touch, and then deliber 
began to knot one end of it, fashion it into a noose. thi he 
tighten and test with hi foot, pull hard at it till he wa 
satisfi and then make a run noos of it, which he held in hi 
hand. then he began to move along the tabl on the opposit side to 
malcolmson keep hi eye on him until he had pass him, when with 
a quick movement he stood in front of the door. malcolmson then began 
to feel that he wa trapped, and tri to think of what he should do. 
there wa some fascin in the judge' eyes, which he never took 
off him, and he had, perforce, to look. He saw the judg 
approach--stil keep between him and the door--and rais the noos 
and throw it toward him as if to entangl him. with a great effort he 
made a quick movement to one side, and saw the rope fall besid him, 
and heard it strike the oaken floor. again the judg rais the noos 
and tri to ensnar him, ever keep hi bale eye fix on him, 
and each time by a mighti effort the student just manag to evad it. 
So thi went on for mani times, the judg seem never discourag 
nor discompos at failure, but play as a cat doe with a mouse. At 
last in despair, which had reach it climax, malcolmson cast a quick 
glanc round him. the lamp seem to have blaze up, and there wa a 
fairli good light in the room. At the mani rat-hol and in the chink 
and cranni of the wainscot he saw the rats' eyes; and thi aspect, 
that wa pure physical, gave him a gleam of comfort. He look 
around and saw that the rope of the great alarm bell wa laden with 
rats. everi inch of it wa cover with them, and more and more were 
pour through the small circular hole in the ceil whenc it 
emerged, so that with their weight the bell wa begin to sway. 

hark! it had sway till the clapper had touch the bell. the sound 
wa but a tini one, but the bell wa onli begin to sway, and it 
would increase. 

At the sound the judge, who had been keep hi eye fix on 
malcolmson, look up, and a scowl of diabol anger overspread hi 
face. hi eye fairli glow like hot coals, and he stamp hi foot 
with a sound that seem to make the hous shake. A dread peal of 
thunder broke overhead as he rais the rope again, whilst the rat 
kept run up and down the rope as though work against time. thi 
time, instead of throw it, he drew close to hi victim, and held 
open the noos as he approached. As he came closer there seem 
someth paralys in hi veri presence, and malcolmson stood rigid 
as a corpse. He felt the judge' ici finger touch hi throat as he 
adjust the rope. the noos tightened--tightened. then the judge, 
take the rigid form of the student in hi arms, carri him over and 
place him stand in the oak chair, and step up besid him, put 
hi hand up and caught the end of the sway rope of the alarm bell. 
As he rais hi hand the rat fled squeaking, and disappear through 
the hole in the ceiling. take the end of the noos which wa round 
malcolmson' neck he tie it to the hanging-bel rope, and then 
descend pull away the chair. 

* * * * * 

when the alarm bell of the judge' hous began to sound a crowd soon 
assembled. light and torch of variou kind appeared, and soon a 
silent crowd wa hurri to the spot. they knock loudli at the 
door, but there wa no reply. then they burst in the door, and pour 
into the great dining-room, the doctor at the head. 

there at the end of the rope of the great alarm bell hung the bodi of 
the student, and on the face of the judg in the pictur wa a 
malign smile. 




the squaw 


nurnberg at the time wa not so much exploit as it ha been sinc 
then. irv had not been play _faust_, and the veri name of the 
old town wa hardli known to the great bulk of the travel public. 
My wife and I be in the second week of our honeymoon, natur 
want someon els to join our party, so that when the cheeri 
stranger, elia P. hutcheson, hail from isthmian city, bleed 
gulch, mapl tree county, neb. turn up at the station at frankfort, 
and casual remark that he wa go on to see the most all-fir 
old methuselah of a town in yurrup, and that he guess that so much 
travel alon wa enough to send an intelligent, activ citizen 
into the melancholi ward of a daft house, we took the pretti broad 
hint and suggest that we should join forces. We found, on compar 
note afterwards, that we had each intend to speak with some 
diffid or hesit so as not to appear too eager, such not be 
a good compliment to the success of our marri life; but the effect 
wa entir mar by our both begin to speak at the same 
instant--stop simultan and then go on togeth again. 
anyhow, no matter how, it wa done; and elia P. hutcheson becam one 
of our party. straightway amelia and I found the pleasant benefit; 
instead of quarrelling, as we had been doing, we found that the 
restrain influenc of a third parti wa such that we now took everi 
opportun of spoon in odd corners. amelia declar that ever 
sinc she has, as the result of that experience, advis all her 
friend to take a friend on the honeymoon. well, we 'did' nurnberg 
together, and much enjoy the raci remark of our transatlant 
friend, who, from hi quaint speech and hi wonder stock of 
adventures, might have step out of a novel. We kept for the last 
object of interest in the citi to be visit the burg, and on the day 
appoint for the visit stroll round the outer wall of the citi by 
the eastern side. 

the burg is seat on a rock domin the town and an immens deep 
foss guard it on the northern side. nurnberg ha been happi in that 
it wa never sacked; had it been it would certainli not be so spick 
and span perfect as it is at present. the ditch ha not been use for 
centuries, and now it base is spread with tea-garden and orchards, 
of which some of the tree are of quit respect growth. As we 
wander round the wall, dawdl in the hot juli sunshine, we often 
paus to admir the view spread befor us, and in especi the great 
plain cover with town and villag and bound with a blue line of 
hills, like a landscap of claud lorraine. from thi we alway turn 
with new delight to the citi itself, with it myriad of quaint old 
gabl and acre-wid red roof dot with dormer windows, tier upon 
tier. A littl to our right rose the tower of the burg, and nearer 
still, stand grim, the tortur tower, which was, and is, perhaps, 
the most interest place in the city. for centuri the tradit of 
the iron virgin of nurnberg ha been hand down as an instanc of 
the horror of cruelti of which man is capable; we had long look 
forward to see it; and here at last wa it home. 

In one of our paus we lean over the wall of the moat and look 
down. the garden seem quit fifti or sixti feet below us, and the 
sun pour into it with an intense, moveless heat like that of an 
oven. beyond rose the grey, grim wall seemingli of endless height, and 
lose itself right and left in the angl of bastion and 
counterscarp. tree and bush crown the wall, and abov again 
tower the lofti hous on whose massiv beauti time ha onli set the 
hand of approval. the sun wa hot and we were lazy; time wa our own, 
and we lingered, lean on the wall. just below us wa a pretti 
sight--a great black cat lie stretch in the sun, whilst round her 
gambol prettili a tini black kitten. the mother would wave her tail 
for the kitten to play with, or would rais her feet and push away the 
littl one as an encourag to further play. they were just at the 
foot of the wall, and elia P. hutcheson, in order to help the play, 
stoop and took from the walk a moder size pebble. 

'see!' he said, 'I will drop it near the kitten, and they will both 
wonder where it came from.' 

'oh, be careful,' said my wife; 'you might hit the dear littl thing!' 

'not me, ma'am,' said elia P. 'why, i'm as tender as a main 
cherry-tree. lor, bless ye. I wouldn't hurt the poor pooti littl 
critter more'n i'd scalp a baby. an' you may bet your varieg sock 
on that! see, i'll drop it fur away on the outsid so' not to go near 
her!' thu saying, he lean over and held hi arm out at full length 
and drop the stone. It may be that there is some attract forc 
which draw lesser matter to greater; or more probabl that the wall 
wa not plump but slope to it base--w not notic the inclin 
from above; but the stone fell with a sicken thud that came up to 
us through the hot air, right on the kitten' head, and shatter out 
it littl brain then and there. the black cat cast a swift upward 
glance, and we saw her eye like green fire fix an instant on elia 
P. hutcheson; and then her attent wa given to the kitten, which 
lay still with just a quiver of her tini limbs, whilst a thin red 
stream trickl from a gape wound. with a muffl cry, such as a 
human be might give, she bent over the kitten lick it wound 
and moaning. suddenli she seem to realis that it wa dead, and 
again threw her eye up at us. I shall never forget the sight, for she 
look the perfect incarn of hate. her green eye blaze with 
lurid fire, and the white, sharp teeth seem to almost shine through 
the blood which dabbl her mouth and whiskers. she gnash her teeth, 
and her claw stood out stark and at full length on everi paw. then 
she made a wild rush up the wall as if to reach us, but when the 
momentum end fell back, and further ad to her horribl appear 
for she fell on the kitten, and rose with her black fur smear with 
it brain and blood. amelia turn quit faint, and I had to lift her 
back from the wall. there wa a seat close by in shade of a spread 
plane-tree, and here I place her whilst she compos herself. then I 
went back to hutcheson, who stood without moving, look down on the 
angri cat below. 

As I join him, he said: 

'wall, I guess that air the savagest beast I ever see--'cept onc when 
an apach squaw had an edg on a half-bre what they nicknam 
"splinters" 'co of the way he fix up her papoos which he stole on 
a raid just to show that he appreci the way they had given hi 
mother the fire torture. she got that kinder look so set on her face 
that it jest seem to grow there. she follow splinter mor'n three 
year till at last the brave got him and hand him over to her. they 
did say that no man, white or injun, had ever been so long a-di 
under the tortur of the apaches. the onli time I ever see her smile 
wa when I wipe her out. I kem on the camp just in time to see 
splinter pass in hi checks, and he wasn't sorri to go either. He wa 
a hard citizen, and though I never could shake with him after that 
papoos business--for it wa bitter bad, and he should have been a 
white man, for he look like one--i see he had got paid out in full. 
durn me, but I took a piec of hi hide from one of hi skinnin' post 
an' had it made into a pocket-book. it' here now!' and he slap the 
breast pocket of hi coat. 

whilst he wa speak the cat wa continu her frantic effort to 
get up the wall. she would take a run back and then charg up, 
sometim reach an incred height. she did not seem to mind the 
heavi fall which she got each time but start with renew vigour; 
and at everi tumbl her appear becam more horrible. hutcheson wa 
a kind-heart man--mi wife and I had both notic littl act of 
kind to anim as well as to persons--and he seem concern at 
the state of furi to which the cat had wrought herself. 

'wall, now!' he said, 'I du declar that that poor critter seem quit 
desperate. there! there! poor thing, it wa all an accident--though 
that won't bring back your littl one to you. say! I wouldn't have had 
such a thing happen for a thousand! just show what a clumsi fool of a 
man can do when he tri to play! seem i'm too darn slipperhand 
to even play with a cat. say colonel!' it wa a pleasant way he had to 
bestow titl freely--'i hope your wife don't hold no grudg against 
me on account of thi unpleasantness? why, I wouldn't have had it 
occur on no account.' 

He came over to amelia and apologis profusely, and she with her 
usual kind of heart hasten to assur him that she quit 
understood that it wa an accident. then we all went again to the wall 
and look over. 

the cat miss hutcheson' face had drawn back across the moat, and 
wa sit on her haunch as though readi to spring. indeed, the 
veri instant she saw him she did spring, and with a blind unreason 
fury, which would have been grotesque, onli that it wa so fright 
real. she did not tri to run up the wall, but simpli launch herself 
at him as though hate and furi could lend her wing to pass straight 
through the great distanc between them. amelia, womanlike, got quit 
concerned, and said to elia P. in a warn voice: 

'oh! you must be veri careful. that anim would tri to kill you if 
she were here; her eye look like posit murder.' 

He laugh out jovially. 'excus me, ma'am,' he said, 'but I can't 
help laughin'. fanci a man that ha fought grizzli an' injun bein' 
care of bein' murder by a cat!' 

when the cat heard him laugh, her whole demeanour seem to change. 
she no longer tri to jump or run up the wall, but went quietli over, 
and sit again besid the dead kitten began to lick and fondl it 
as though it were alive. 

'see!' said I, 'the effect of a realli strong man. even that anim 
in the midst of her furi recognis the voic of a master, and bow to 
him!' 

'like a squaw!' wa the onli comment of elia P. hutcheson, as we 
move on our way round the citi fosse. everi now and then we look 
over the wall and each time saw the cat follow us. At first she had 
kept go back to the dead kitten, and then as the distanc grew 
greater took it in her mouth and so followed. after a while, however, 
she abandon this, for we saw her follow all alone; she had 
evid hidden the bodi somewhere. amelia' alarm grew at the cat' 
persistence, and more than onc she repeat her warning; but the 
american alway laugh with amusement, till finally, see that she 
wa begin to be worried, he said: 

'I say, ma'am, you needn't be skeer over that cat. I go heeled, I 
du!' here he slap hi pistol pocket at the back of hi lumbar 
region. 'whi sooner'n have you worried, i'll shoot the critter, right 
here, an' risk the polic interferin' with a citizen of the unit 
state for carryin' arm contrairi to reg'lations!' As he spoke he 
look over the wall, but the cat on see him, retreated, with a 
growl, into a bed of tall flowers, and wa hidden. He went on: 'blest 
if that ar critter ain't got more sens of what' good for her than 
most christians. I guess we'v seen the last of her! you bet, she'll 
go back now to that bust kitten and have a privat funer of it, 
all to herself!' 

amelia did not like to say more, lest he might, in mistaken kind 
to her, fulfil hi threat of shoot the cat: and so we went on and 
cross the littl wooden bridg lead to the gateway whenc ran the 
steep pave roadway between the burg and the pentagon tortur tower. 
As we cross the bridg we saw the cat again down below us. when she 
saw us her furi seem to return, and she made frantic effort to get 
up the steep wall. hutcheson laugh as he look down at her, and 
said: 

'goodbye, old girl. sorri I injur your feelin's, but you'll get over 
it in time! So long!' and then we pass through the long, dim archway 
and came to the gate of the burg. 

when we came out again after our survey of thi most beauti old 
place which not even the well-intent effort of the gothic 
restor of forti year ago have been abl to spoil--though their 
restor wa then glare white--w seem to have quit forgotten 
the unpleas episod of the morning. the old lime tree with it 
great trunk gnarl with the pass of nearli nine centuries, the 
deep well cut through the heart of the rock by those captiv of old, 
and the love view from the citi wall whenc we heard, spread over 
almost a full quarter of an hour, the multitudin chime of the 
city, had all help to wipe out from our mind the incid of the 
slain kitten. 

We were the onli visitor who had enter the tortur tower that 
morning--so at least said the old custodian--and as we had the place 
all to ourselv were abl to make a minut and more satisfactori 
survey than would have otherwis been possible. the custodian, look 
to us as the sole sourc of hi gain for the day, wa will to meet 
our wish in ani way. the tortur tower is truli a grim place, even 
now when mani thousand of visitor have sent a stream of life, and 
the joy that follow life, into the place; but at the time I mention 
it wore it grimmest and most gruesom aspect. the dust of age seem 
to have settl on it, and the dark and the horror of it memori 
seem to have becom sentient in a way that would have satisfi the 
pantheist soul of philo or spinoza. the lower chamber where we 
enter wa seemingly, in it normal state, fill with incarn 
darkness; even the hot sunlight stream in through the door seem 
to be lost in the vast thick of the walls, and onli show the 
masonri rough as when the builder' scaffold had come down, but 
coat with dust and mark here and there with patch of dark stain 
which, if wall could speak, could have given their own dread memori 
of fear and pain. We were glad to pass up the dusti wooden staircase, 
the custodian leav the outer door open to light us somewhat on our 
way; for to our eye the one long-wick'd, evil-smel candl stuck 
in a sconc on the wall gave an inadequ light. when we came up 
through the open trap in the corner of the chamber overhead, amelia 
held on to me so tightli that I could actual feel her heart beat. I 
must say for my own part that I wa not surpris at her fear, for 
thi room wa even more gruesom than that below. here there wa 
certainli more light, but onli just suffici to realis the horribl 
surround of the place. the builder of the tower had evid 
intend that onli they who should gain the top should have ani of the 
joy of light and prospect. there, as we had notic from below, were 
rang of windows, albeit of mediaev smallness, but elsewher in the 
tower were onli a veri few narrow slit such as were habitu in 
place of mediaev defence. A few of these onli lit the chamber, and 
these so high up in the wall that from no part could the sky be seen 
through the thick of the walls. In racks, and lean in disord 
against the walls, were a number of headsmen' swords, great 
double-hand weapon with broad blade and keen edge. hard by were 
sever block whereon the neck of the victim had lain, with here 
and there deep notch where the steel had bitten through the guard of 
flesh and shore into the wood. round the chamber, place in all sort 
of irregular ways, were mani implement of tortur which made one' 
heart ach to see--chair full of spike which gave instant and 
excruci pain; chair and couch with dull knob whose tortur 
wa seemingli less, but which, though slower, were equal 
efficacious; racks, belts, boots, gloves, collars, all made for 
compress at will; steel basket in which the head could be slowli 
crush into a pulp if necessary; watchmen' hook with long handl 
and knife that cut at resistance--thi a special of the old 
nurnberg polic system; and many, mani other devic for man' injuri 
to man. amelia grew quit pale with the horror of the things, but 
fortun did not faint, for be a littl overcom she sat down on 
a tortur chair, but jump up again with a shriek, all tendenc to 
faint gone. We both pretend that it wa the injuri done to her dress 
by the dust of the chair, and the rusti spike which had upset her, 
and mr. hutcheson acquiesc in accept the explan with a 
kind-heart laugh. 

but the central object in the whole of thi chamber of horror wa the 
engin known as the iron virgin, which stood near the centr of the 
room. It wa a rudely-shap figur of a woman, someth of the bell 
order, or, to make a closer comparison, of the figur of mrs. noah in 
the children' ark, but without that slim of waist and perfect 
_rondeur_ of hip which mark the aesthet type of the noah family. 
one would hardli have recognis it as intend for a human figur at 
all had not the founder shape on the forehead a rude semblanc of a 
woman' face. thi machin wa coat with rust without, and cover 
with dust; a rope wa fasten to a ring in the front of the figure, 
about where the waist should have been, and wa drawn through a 
pulley, fasten on the wooden pillar which sustain the floor 
above. the custodian pull thi rope show that a section of the 
front wa hing like a door at one side; we then saw that the engin 
wa of consider thickness, leav just room enough insid for a 
man to be placed. the door wa of equal thick and of great weight, 
for it took the custodian all hi strength, aid though he wa by the 
contriv of the pulley, to open it. thi weight wa partli due to 
the fact that the door wa of manifest purpos hung so as to throw it 
weight downwards, so that it might shut of it own accord when the 
strain wa released. the insid wa honeycomb with rust--nay more, 
the rust alon that come through time would hardli have eaten so deep 
into the iron walls; the rust of the cruel stain wa deep indeed! It 
wa only, however, when we came to look at the insid of the door that 
the diabol intent wa manifest to the full. here were sever 
long spikes, squar and massive, broad at the base and sharp at the 
points, place in such a posit that when the door should close the 
upper one would pierc the eye of the victim, and the lower one hi 
heart and vitals. the sight wa too much for poor amelia, and thi 
time she faint dead off, and I had to carri her down the stairs, and 
place her on a bench outsid till she recovered. that she felt it to 
the quick wa afterward shown by the fact that my eldest son bear to 
thi day a rude birthmark on hi breast, which has, by famili 
consent, been accept as repres the nurnberg virgin. 

when we got back to the chamber we found hutcheson still opposit the 
iron virgin; he had been evid philosophising, and now gave us the 
benefit of hi thought in the shape of a sort of exordium. 

'wall, I guess i'v been learnin' somethin' here while madam ha been 
gettin' over her faint. 'pear to me that we'r a long way behind the 
time on our side of the big drink. We uster think out on the plain 
that the injun could give us point in tryin' to make a man 
uncomfortable; but I guess your old mediaev law-and-ord parti 
could rais him everi time. splinter wa pretti good in hi bluff on 
the squaw, but thi here young miss held a straight flush all high on 
him. the point of them spike air sharp enough still, though even the 
edg air eaten out by what uster be on them. it'd be a good thing for 
our indian section to get some specimen of thi here play-toy to send 
round to the reserv jest to knock the stuffin' out of the bucks, 
and the squaw too, by show them as how old civilis lay over 
them at their best. guess but i'll get in that box a minut jest to 
see how it feels!' 

'oh no! no!' said amelia. 'it is too terrible!' 

'guess, ma'am, nothin' too terribl to the explorin' mind. i'v been 
in some queer place in my time. spent a night insid a dead hors 
while a prairi fire swept over me in montana territory--an' anoth 
time slept insid a dead buffler when the comanch wa on the war 
path an' I didn't keer to leav my kyard on them. i'v been two day 
in a caved-in tunnel in the billi broncho gold mine in new mexico, an' 
wa one of the four shut up for three part of a day in the caisson 
what slid over on her side when we wa settin' the foundat of the 
buffalo bridge. i'v not funk an odd experi yet, an' I don't 
propos to begin now!' 

We saw that he wa set on the experiment, so I said: 'well, hurri up, 
old man, and get through it quick!' 

'all right, general,' said he, 'but I calcul we ain't quit readi 
yet. the gentlemen, my predecessors, what stood in that thar canister, 
didn't volunt for the office--not much! and I guess there wa some 
ornament tyin' up befor the big stroke wa made. I want to go into 
thi thing fair and square, so I must get fix up proper first. I 
dare say thi old galoot can rise some string and tie me up accordin' 
to sample?' 

thi wa said interrog to the old custodian, but the latter, 
who understood the drift of hi speech, though perhap not 
appreci to the full the niceti of dialect and imagery, shook 
hi head. hi protest was, however, onli formal and made to be 
overcome. the american thrust a gold piec into hi hand, saying: 
'take it, pard! it' your pot; and don't be skeer'd. thi ain't no 
neckti parti that you'r ask to assist in!' He produc some thin 
fray rope and proceed to bind our companion with suffici 
strict for the purpose. when the upper part of hi bodi wa bound, 
hutcheson said: 

'hold on a moment, judge. guess i'm too heavi for you to tote into the 
canister. you jest let me walk in, and then you can wash up regardin' 
my legs!' 

whilst speak he had back himself into the open which wa just 
enough to hold him. It wa a close fit and no mistake. amelia look 
on with fear in her eyes, but she evid did not like to say 
anything. then the custodian complet hi task by tie the 
american' feet togeth so that he wa now absolut helpless and 
fix in hi voluntari prison. He seem to realli enjoy it, and the 
incipi smile which wa habitu to hi face blossom into 
actual as he said: 

'guess thi here eve wa made out of the rib of a dwarf! there ain't 
much room for a full-grown citizen of the unit state to hustle. We 
uster make our coffin more roomier in idaho territory. now, judge, 
you jest begin to let thi door down, slow, on to me. I want to feel 
the same pleasur as the other jay had when those spike began to 
move toward their eyes!' 

'oh no! no! no!' broke in amelia hysterically. 'it is too terrible! I 
can't bear to see it!--i can't! I can't!' but the american wa 
obdurate. 'say, colonel,' said he, 'whi not take madam for a littl 
promenade? I wouldn't hurt her feelin' for the world; but now that I 
am here, havin' kem eight thousand miles, wouldn't it be too hard to 
give up the veri experi i'v been pinin' an' pantin' fur? A man 
can't get to feel like can good everi time! Me and the judg 
here'l fix up thi thing in no time, an' then you'll come back, an' 
we'll all laugh together!' 

onc more the resolut that is born of curios triumphed, and 
amelia stay hold tight to my arm and shiver whilst the 
custodian began to slacken slowli inch by inch the rope that held back 
the iron door. hutcheson' face wa posit radiant as hi eye 
follow the first movement of the spikes. 

'wall!' he said, 'I guess i'v not had enjoy like thi sinc I 
left noo york. bar a scrap with a french sailor at wapping--an' that 
warn't much of a picnic neither--i'v not had a show fur real pleasur 
in thi dod-rot continent, where there ain't no b'ar nor no 
injuns, an' wheer nari man goe heeled. slow there, judge! don't you 
rush thi business! I want a show for my money thi game--i du!' 

the custodian must have had in him some of the blood of hi 
predecessor in that ghastli tower, for he work the engin with a 
deliber and excruci slow which after five minutes, in 
which the outer edg of the door had not move half as mani inches, 
began to overcom amelia. I saw her lip whiten, and felt her hold 
upon my arm relax. I look around an instant for a place whereon to 
lay her, and when I look at her again found that her eye had becom 
fix on the side of the virgin. follow it direct I saw the 
black cat crouch out of sight. her green eye shone like danger 
lamp in the gloom of the place, and their colour wa heighten by 
the blood which still smear her coat and redden her mouth. I cri 
out: 

'the cat! look out for the cat!' for even then she sprang out befor 
the engine. At thi moment she look like a triumphant demon. her 
eye blaze with ferocity, her hair bristl out till she seem twice 
her normal size, and her tail lash about as doe a tiger' when the 
quarri is befor it. elia P. hutcheson when he saw her wa amused, 
and hi eye posit sparkl with fun as he said: 

'darn if the squaw hain't got on all her war paint! jest give her a 
shove off if she come ani of her trick on me, for i'm so fix 
everlastingli by the boss, that durn my skin if I can keep my eye 
from her if she want them! easi there, judge! don't you slack that ar 
rope or i'm euchered!' 

At thi moment amelia complet her faint, and I had to clutch hold of 
her round the waist or she would have fallen to the floor. whilst 
attend to her I saw the black cat crouch for a spring, and 
jump up to turn the creatur out. 

but at that instant, with a sort of hellish scream, she hurl 
herself, not as we expect at hutcheson, but straight at the face of 
the custodian. her claw seem to be tear wildli as one see in 
the chines draw of the dragon rampant, and as I look I saw one 
of them light on the poor man' eye, and actual tear through it and 
down hi cheek, leav a wide band of red where the blood seem to 
spurt from everi vein. 

with a yell of sheer terror which came quicker than even hi sens of 
pain, the man leap back, drop as he did so the rope which held 
back the iron door. I jump for it, but wa too late, for the cord 
ran like lightn through the pulley-block, and the heavi mass fell 
forward from it own weight. 

As the door close I caught a glimps of our poor companion' face. He 
seem frozen with terror. hi eye stare with a horribl anguish as 
if dazed, and no sound came from hi lips. 

and then the spike did their work. happili the end wa quick, for 
when I wrench open the door they had pierc so deep that they had 
lock in the bone of the skull through which they had crushed, and 
actual tore him--it--out of hi iron prison till, bound as he was, 
he fell at full length with a sickli thud upon the floor, the face 
turn upward as he fell. 

I rush to my wife, lift her up and carri her out, for I fear 
for her veri reason if she should wake from her faint to such a scene. 
I laid her on the bench outsid and ran back. lean against the 
wooden column wa the custodian moan in pain whilst he held hi 
redden handkerchief to hi eyes. and sit on the head of the 
poor american wa the cat, pur loudli as she lick the blood 
which trickl through the gash socket of hi eyes. 

I think no one will call me cruel becaus I seiz one of the old 
executioner' sword and shore her in two as she sat. 




the secret of the grow gold 


when margaret delandr went to live at brent' rock the whole 
neighbourhood awok to the pleasur of an entir new scandal. 
scandal in connect with either the delandr famili or the brent 
of brent' rock, were not few; and if the secret histori of the counti 
had been written in full both name would have been found well 
represented. It is true that the statu of each wa so differ that 
they might have belong to differ continents--or to differ 
world for the matter of that--for hitherto their orbit had never 
crossed. the brent were accord by the whole section of the countri 
a uniqu social dominance, and had ever held themselv as high abov 
the yeoman class to which margaret delandr belonged, as a 
blue-blood spanish hidalgo out-top hi peasant tenantry. 

the delandr had an ancient record and were proud of it in their way 
as the brent were of theirs. but the famili had never risen abov 
yeomanry; and although they had been onc well-to-do in the good old 
time of foreign war and protection, their fortun had wither 
under the scorch of the free trade sun and the 'pipe time of 
peace.' they had, as the elder member use to assert, 'stuck to the 
land', with the result that they had taken root in it, bodi and soul. 
In fact, they, have chosen the life of vegetables, had flourish 
as veget does--blossom and thrive in the good season and 
suffer in the bad. their holding, dander' croft, seem to have 
been work out, and to be typic of the famili which had inhabit 
it. the latter had declin gener after generation, send out 
now and again some abort shoot of unsatisfi energi in the shape 
of a soldier or sailor, who had work hi way to the minor grade of 
the servic and had there stopped, cut short either from unheed 
gallantri in action or from that destroy caus to men without 
breed or youth care--th recognit of a posit abov them 
which they feel unfit to fill. so, littl by little, the famili 
drop lower and lower, the men brood and dissatisfied, and 
drink themselv into the grave, the women drudg at home, or 
marri beneath them--or worse. In process of time all disappeared, 
leav onli two in the croft, wykham delandr and hi sister 
margaret. the man and woman seem to have inherit in masculin and 
feminin form respect the evil tendenc of their race, share in 
common the principles, though manifest them in differ ways, of 
sullen passion, voluptu and recklessness. 

the histori of the brent had been someth similar, but show the 
caus of decad in their aristocrat and not their plebeian 
forms. they, too, had sent their shoot to the wars; but their 
posit had been differ and they had often attain honour--for 
without flaw they were gallant, and brave deed were done by them 
befor the selfish dissip which mark them had sap their 
vigour. 

the present head of the family--if famili it could now be call when 
one remain of the direct line--wa geoffrey brent. He wa almost a 
type of worn out race, manifest in some way it most brilliant 
qualities, and in other it utter degradation. He might be fairli 
compar with some of those antiqu italian nobl whom the painter 
have preserv to us with their courage, their unscrupulousness, their 
refin of lust and cruelty--th voluptuari actual with the fiend 
potential. He wa certainli handsome, with that dark, aquiline, 
command beauti which women so gener recognis as dominant. with 
men he wa distant and cold; but such a bear never deter 
womankind. the inscrut law of sex have so arrang that even a 
timid woman is not afraid of a fierc and haughti man. and so it wa 
that there wa hardli a woman of ani kind or degree, who live within 
view of brent' rock, who did not cherish some form of secret 
admir for the handsom wastrel. the categori wa a wide one, for 
brent' rock rose up steepli from the midst of a level region and for 
a circuit of a hundr mile it lay on the horizon, with it high old 
tower and steep roof cut the level edg of wood and hamlet, and 
far-scatt mansions. 

So long as geoffrey brent confin hi dissip to london and 
pari and vienna--anywher out of sight and sound of hi home--opinion 
wa silent. It is easi to listen to far off echo unmoved, and we can 
treat them with disbelief, or scorn, or disdain, or whatev attitud 
of cold may suit our purpose. but when the scandal came close home 
it wa anoth matter; and the feel of independ and integr 
which is in peopl of everi commun which is not utterli spoiled, 
assert itself and demand that condemn should be expressed. 
still there wa a certain retic in all, and no more notic wa 
taken of the exist fact than wa absolut necessary. margaret 
delandr bore herself so fearlessli and so openly--sh accept her 
posit as the justifi companion of geoffrey brent so natur 
that peopl came to believ that she wa secretli marri to him, and 
therefor thought it wiser to hold their tongu lest time should 
justifi her and also make her an activ enemy. 

the one person who, by hi interference, could have settl all doubt 
wa debar by circumst from interf in the matter. wykham 
delandr had quarrel with hi sister--or perhap it wa that she 
had quarrel with him--and they were on term not mere of arm 
neutral but of bitter hatred. the quarrel had been anteced to 
margaret go to brent' rock. she and wykham had almost come to 
blows. there had certainli been threat on one side and on the other; 
and in the end wykham, overcom with passion, had order hi sister 
to leav hi house. she had risen straightway, and, without wait to 
pack up even her own person belongings, had walk out of the house. 
On the threshold she had paus for a moment to hurl a bitter threat 
at wykham that he would rue in shame and despair to the last hour of 
hi life hi act of that day. some week had sinc passed; and it wa 
understood in the neighbourhood that margaret had gone to london, when 
she suddenli appear drive out with geoffrey brent, and the entir 
neighbourhood knew befor nightfal that she had taken up her abod at 
the rock. It wa no subject of surpris that brent had come back 
unexpectedly, for such wa hi usual custom. even hi own servant 
never knew when to expect him, for there wa a privat door, of which 
he alon had the key, by which he sometim enter without anyon in 
the hous be awar of hi coming. thi wa hi usual method of 
appear after a long absence. 

wykham delandr wa furiou at the news. He vow vengeance--and to 
keep hi mind level with hi passion drank deeper than ever. He tri 
sever time to see hi sister, but she contemptu refus to 
meet him. He tri to have an interview with brent and wa refus by 
him also. then he tri to stop him in the road, but without avail, 
for geoffrey wa not a man to be stop against hi will. sever 
actual encount took place between the two men, and mani more were 
threaten and avoided. At last wykham delandr settl down to a 
morose, veng accept of the situation. 

neither margaret nor geoffrey wa of a pacif temperament, and it wa 
not long befor there began to be quarrel between them. one thing 
would lead to another, and wine flow freeli at brent' rock. now and 
again the quarrel would assum a bitter aspect, and threat would be 
exchang in uncompromis languag that fairli awe the listen 
servants. but such quarrel gener end where domest 
alterc do, in reconciliation, and in a mutual respect for the 
fight qualiti proportion to their manifestation. fight for 
it own sake is found by a certain class of persons, all the world 
over, to be a matter of absorb interest, and there is no reason to 
believ that domest condit minimis it potency. geoffrey and 
margaret made occasion absenc from brent' rock, and on each of 
these occas wykham delandr also absent himself; but as he 
gener heard of the absenc too late to be of ani service, he 
return home each time in a more bitter and discont frame of 
mind than before. 

At last there came a time when the absenc from brent' rock becam 
longer than before. onli a few day earlier there had been a quarrel, 
exceed in bitter anyth which had gone before; but this, too, 
had been made up, and a trip on the contin had been mention 
befor the servants. after a few day wykham delandr also went away, 
and it wa some week befor he returned. It wa notic that he wa 
full of some new importance--satisfaction, exaltation--they hardli 
knew how to call it. He went straightway to brent' rock, and demand 
to see geoffrey brent, and on be told that he had not yet returned, 
said, with a grim decis which the servant noted: 

'I shall come again. My news is solid--it can wait!' and turn away. 
week after week went by, and month after month; and then there came a 
rumour, certifi later on, that an accid had occur in the 
zermatt valley. whilst cross a danger pass the carriag 
contain an english ladi and the driver had fallen over a precipice, 
the gentleman of the party, mr. geoffrey brent, have been 
fortun save as he had been walk up the hill to eas the 
horses. He gave information, and search wa made. the broken rail, the 
excori roadway, the mark where the hors had struggl on the 
declin befor final pitch over into the torrent--al told the 
sad tale. It wa a wet season, and there had been much snow in the 
winter, so that the river wa swollen beyond it usual volume, and the 
eddi of the stream were pack with ice. all search wa made, and 
final the wreck of the carriag and the bodi of one hors were found 
in an eddi of the river. later on the bodi of the driver wa found on 
the sandy, torrent-swept wast near täsch; but the bodi of the lady, 
like that of the other horse, had quit disappeared, and was--what 
wa left of it by that time--whirl amongst the eddi of the rhone 
on it way down to the lake of geneva. 

wykham delandr made all the enquiri possible, but could not find 
ani trace of the miss woman. He found, however, in the book of the 
variou hotel the name of 'mr. and mrs. geoffrey brent'. and he had a 
stone erect at zermatt to hi sister' memory, under her marri 
name, and a tablet put up in the church at bretten, the parish in 
which both brent' rock and dander' croft were situated. 

there wa a laps of nearli a year, after the excit of the matter 
had worn away, and the whole neighbourhood had gone on it accustom 
way. brent wa still absent, and delandr more drunken, more morose, 
and more reveng than before. 

then there wa a new excitement. brent' rock wa be made readi for 
a new mistress. It wa offici announc by geoffrey himself in a 
letter to the vicar, that he had been marri some month befor to an 
italian lady, and that they were then on their way home. then a small 
armi of workmen invad the house; and hammer and plane sounded, and a 
gener air of size and paint pervad the atmosphere. one wing of the 
old house, the south, wa entir re-done; and then the great bodi of 
the workmen departed, leav onli materi for the do of the old 
hall when geoffrey brent should have returned, for he had direct 
that the decor wa onli to be done under hi own eyes. He had 
brought with him accur draw of a hall in the hous of hi 
bride' father, for he wish to reproduc for her the place to which 
she had been accustomed. As the mould had all to be re-done, some 
scaffold pole and board were brought in and laid on one side of 
the great hall, and also a great wooden tank or box for mix the 
lime, which wa laid in bag besid it. 

when the new mistress of brent' rock arriv the bell of the church 
rang out, and there wa a gener jubilation. she wa a beauti 
creature, full of the poetri and fire and passion of the south; and 
the few english word which she had learn were spoken in such a 
sweet and pretti broken way that she won the heart of the peopl 
almost as much by the music of her voic as by the melt beauti of 
her dark eyes. 

geoffrey brent seem more happi than he had ever befor appeared; but 
there wa a dark, anxiou look on hi face that wa new to those who 
knew him of old, and he start at time as though at some nois that 
wa unheard by others. 

and so month pass and the whisper grew that at last brent' rock 
wa to have an heir. geoffrey wa veri tender to hi wife, and the new 
bond between them seem to soften him. He took more interest in hi 
tenant and their need than he had ever done; and work of chariti on 
hi part as well as on hi sweet young wife' were not lacking. He 
seem to have set all hi hope on the child that wa coming, and as 
he look deeper into the futur the dark shadow that had come over 
hi face seem to die gradual away. 

all the time wykham delandr nurs hi revenge. deep in hi heart had 
grown up a purpos of vengeanc which onli wait an opportun to 
crystallis and take a definit shape. hi vagu idea wa somehow 
centr in the wife of brent, for he knew that he could strike him 
best through those he loved, and the come time seem to hold in it 
womb the opportun for which he longed. one night he sat alon in 
the living-room of hi house. It had onc been a handsom room in it 
way, but time and neglect had done their work and it wa now littl 
better than a ruin, without digniti or picturesqu of ani kind. He 
had been drink heavili for some time and wa more than half 
stupefied. He thought he heard a nois as of someon at the door and 
look up. then he call half savag to come in; but there wa no 
response. with a mutter blasphemi he renew hi potations. 
present he forgot all around him, sank into a daze, but suddenli 
awok to see stand befor him someon or someth like a battered, 
ghostli edit of hi sister. for a few moment there came upon him a 
sort of fear. the woman befor him, with distort featur and 
burn eye seem hardli human, and the onli thing that seem a 
realiti of hi sister, as she had been, wa her wealth of golden hair, 
and thi wa now streak with grey. she eye her brother with a long, 
cold stare; and he, too, as he look and began to realis the 
actual of her presence, found the hatr of her which he had had, 
onc again surg up in hi heart. all the brood passion of the 
past year seem to find a voic at onc as he ask her: 

'whi are you here? you'r dead and buried.' 

'I am here, wykham delandre, for no love of you, but becaus I hate 
anoth even more than I do you!' A great passion blaze in her eyes. 

'him?' he asked, in so fierc a whisper that even the woman wa for an 
instant startl till she regain her calm. 

'yes, him!' she answered. 'but make no mistake, my reveng is my own; 
and I mere use you to help me to it.' wykham ask suddenly: 

'did he marri you?' 

the woman' distort face broaden out in a ghastli attempt at a 
smile. It wa a hideou mockery, for the broken featur and seam 
scar took strang shape and strang colours, and queer line of 
white show out as the strain muscl press on the old 
cicatrices. 

'so you would like to know! It would pleas your pride to feel that 
your sister wa truli married! well, you shall not know. that wa my 
reveng on you, and I do not mean to chang it by a hair' breadth. I 
have come here tonight simpli to let you know that I am alive, so that 
if ani violenc be done me where I am go there may be a witness.' 

'where are you going?' demand her brother. 

'that is my affair! and I have not the least intent of let you 
know!' wykham stood up, but the drink wa on him and he reel and 
fell. As he lay on the floor he announc hi intent of follow 
hi sister; and with an outburst of splenet humour told her that he 
would follow her through the dark by the light of her hair, and of 
her beauty. At thi she turn on him, and said that there were other 
besid him that would rue her hair and her beauti too. 'a he will,' 
she hissed; 'for the hair remain though the beauti be gone. when he 
withdrew the lynch-pin and sent us over the precipic into the 
torrent, he had littl thought of my beauty. perhap hi beauti would 
be scar like mine were he whirled, as I was, among the rock of the 
visp, and frozen on the ice pack in the drift of the river. but let 
him beware! hi time is coming!' and with a fierc gestur she flung 
open the door and pass out into the night. 

* * * * * 

later on that night, mrs. brent, who wa but half-asleep, becam 
suddenli awak and spoke to her husband: 

'geoffrey, wa not that the click of a lock somewher below our 
window?' 

but geoffrey--though she thought that he, too, had start at the 
noise--seem sound asleep, and breath heavily. again mrs. brent 
dozed; but thi time awok to the fact that her husband had arisen and 
wa partial dressed. He wa deadli pale, and when the light of the 
lamp which he had in hi hand fell on hi face, she wa frighten at 
the look in hi eyes. 

'what is it, geoffrey? what dost thou?' she asked. 

'hush! littl one,' he answered, in a strange, hoars voice. 'go to 
sleep. I am restless, and wish to finish some work I left undone.' 

'bring it here, my husband,' she said; 'I am lone and I fear when 
thou art away.' 

for repli he mere kiss her and went out, close the door behind 
him. she lay awak for awhile, and then natur assert itself, and 
she slept. 

suddenli she start broad awak with the memori in her ear of a 
smother cri from somewher not far off. she jump up and ran to the 
door and listened, but there wa no sound. she grew alarm for her 
husband, and call out: 'geoffrey! geoffrey!' 

after a few moment the door of the great hall opened, and geoffrey 
appear at it, but without hi lamp. 

'hush!' he said, in a sort of whisper, and hi voic wa harsh and 
stern. 'hush! get to bed! I am working, and must not be disturbed. Go 
to sleep, and do not wake the house!' 

with a chill in her heart--for the harsh of her husband' voic 
wa new to her--sh crept back to bed and lay there trembling, too 
frighten to cry, and listen to everi sound. there wa a long paus 
of silence, and then the sound of some iron implement strike muffl 
blows! then there came a clang of a heavi stone falling, follow by a 
muffl curse. then a drag sound, and then more nois of stone on 
stone. she lay all the while in an agoni of fear, and her heart beat 
dreadfully. she heard a curiou sort of scrape sound; and then there 
wa silence. present the door open gently, and geoffrey appeared. 
hi wife pretend to be asleep; but through her eyelash she saw him 
wash from hi hand someth white that look like lime. 

In the morn he made no allus to the previou night, and she wa 
afraid to ask ani question. 

from that day there seem some shadow over geoffrey brent. He neither 
ate nor slept as he had been accustomed, and hi former habit of 
turn suddenli as though someon were speak from behind him 
revived. the old hall seem to have some kind of fascin for him. 
He use to go there mani time in the day, but grew impati if 
anyone, even hi wife, enter it. when the builder' foreman came to 
inquir about continu hi work geoffrey wa out driving; the man 
went into the hall, and when geoffrey return the servant told him of 
hi arriv and where he was. with a fright oath he push the 
servant asid and hurri up to the old hall. the workman met him 
almost at the door; and as geoffrey burst into the room he ran against 
him. the man apologised: 

'beg pardon, sir, but I wa just go out to make some enquiries. I 
direct twelv sack of lime to be sent here, but I see there are 
onli ten.' 

'damn the ten sack and the twelv too!' wa the ungraci and 
incomprehens rejoinder. 

the workman look surprised, and tri to turn the conversation. 

'I see, sir, there is a littl matter which our peopl must have done; 
but the governor will of cours see it set right at hi own cost.' 

'what do you mean?' 

'that 'ere 'arth-stone, sir: some idiot must have put a scaffold pole 
on it and crack it right down the middle, and it' thick enough 
you'd think to stand hanythink.' geoffrey wa silent for quit a 
minute, and then said in a constrain voic and with much gentler 
manner: 

'tell your peopl that I am not go on with the work in the hall at 
present. I want to leav it as it is for a while longer.' 

'all right sir. i'll send up a few of our chap to take away these 
pole and lime bag and tidi the place up a bit.' 

'no! no!' said geoffrey, 'leav them where they are. I shall send and 
tell you when you are to get on with the work.' So the foreman went 
away, and hi comment to hi master was: 

'i'd send in the bill, sir, for the work alreadi done. 'pear to me 
that money' a littl shaki in that quarter.' 

onc or twice delandr tri to stop brent on the road, and, at last, 
find that he could not attain hi object rode after the carriage, 
call out: 

'what ha becom of my sister, your wife?' geoffrey lash hi hors 
into a gallop, and the other, see from hi white face and from hi 
wife' collaps almost into a faint that hi object wa attained, rode 
away with a scowl and a laugh. 

that night when geoffrey went into the hall he pass over to the 
great fireplace, and all at onc start back with a smother cry. 
then with an effort he pull himself togeth and went away, 
return with a light. He bent down over the broken hearth-ston to 
see if the moonlight fall through the stori window had in ani way 
deceiv him. then with a groan of anguish he sank to hi knees. 

there, sure enough, through the crack in the broken stone were 
protrud a multitud of thread of golden hair just ting with 
grey! 

He wa disturb by a nois at the door, and look round, saw hi 
wife stand in the doorway. In the desper of the moment he took 
action to prevent discovery, and light a match at the lamp, stoop 
down and burn away the hair that rose through the broken stone. then 
rise nonchalantli as he could, he pretend surpris at see hi 
wife besid him. 

for the next week he live in an agony; for, whether by accid or 
design, he could not find himself alon in the hall for ani length of 
time. At each visit the hair had grown afresh through the crack, and 
he had to watch it care lest hi terribl secret should be 
discovered. He tri to find a receptacl for the bodi of the murder 
woman outsid the house, but someon alway interrupt him; and once, 
when he wa come out of the privat doorway, he wa met by hi wife, 
who began to question him about it, and manifest surpris that she 
should not have befor notic the key which he now reluctantli show 
her. geoffrey dearli and passion love hi wife, so that ani 
possibl of her discov hi dread secrets, or even of doubt 
him, fill him with anguish; and after a coupl of day had passed, 
he could not help come to the conclus that, at least, she 
suspect something. 

that veri even she came into the hall after her drive and found him 
there sit moodili by the desert fireplace. she spoke to him 
directly. 

'geoffrey, I have been spoken to by that fellow delandre, and he say 
horribl things. He tell to me that a week ago hi sister return to 
hi house, the wreck and ruin of her former self, with onli her golden 
hair as of old, and announc some fell intention. He ask me where 
she is--and oh, geoffrey, she is dead, she is dead! So how can she 
have returned? oh! I am in dread, and I know not where to turn!' 

for answer, geoffrey burst into a torrent of blasphemi which made her 
shudder. He curs delandr and hi sister and all their kind, and in 
especi he hurl curs after curs on her golden hair. 

'oh, hush! hush!' she said, and wa then silent, for she fear her 
husband when she saw the evil effect of hi humour. geoffrey in the 
torrent of hi anger stood up and move away from the hearth; but 
suddenli stop as he saw a new look of terror in hi wife' eyes. He 
follow their glance, and then he too, shuddered--for there on the 
broken hearth-ston lay a golden streak as the point of the hair rose 
though the crack. 

'look, look!' she shrieked. 'i it some ghost of the dead! come 
away--com away!' and seiz her husband by the wrist with the frenzi 
of madness, she pull him from the room. 

that night she wa in a rage fever. the doctor of the district 
attend her at once, and special aid wa telegraph for to london. 
geoffrey wa in despair, and in hi anguish at the danger of hi young 
wife almost forgot hi own crime and it consequences. In the even 
the doctor had to leav to attend to others; but he left geoffrey in 
charg of hi wife. hi last word were: 

'remember, you must humour her till I come in the morning, or till 
some other doctor ha her case in hand. what you have to dread is 
anoth attack of emotion. see that she is kept warm. noth more can 
be done.' 

late in the evening, when the rest of the household had retired, 
geoffrey' wife got up from her bed and call to her husband. 

'come!' she said. 'come to the old hall! I know where the gold come 
from! I want to see it grow!' 

geoffrey would fain have stop her, but he fear for her life or 
reason on the one hand, and lest in a paroxysm she should shriek out 
her terribl suspicion, and see that it wa useless to tri to 
prevent her, wrap a warm rug around her and went with her to the 
old hall. when they entered, she turn and shut the door and lock 
it. 

'we want no stranger amongst us three tonight!' she whisper with a 
wan smile. 

'we three! nay we are but two,' said geoffrey with a shudder; he 
fear to say more. 

'sit here,' said hi wife as she put out the light. 'sit here by the 
hearth and watch the gold growing. the silver moonlight is jealous! 
see, it steal along the floor toward the gold--our gold!' geoffrey 
look with grow horror, and saw that dure the hour that had 
pass the golden hair had protrud further through the broken 
hearth-stone. He tri to hide it by place hi feet over the broken 
place; and hi wife, draw her chair besid him, leant over and 
laid her head on hi shoulder. 

'now do not stir, dear,' she said; 'let us sit still and watch. We 
shall find the secret of the grow gold!' He pass hi arm round 
her and sat silent; and as the moonlight stole along the floor she 
sank to sleep. 

He fear to wake her; and so sat silent and miser as the hour 
stole away. 

befor hi horror-struck eye the golden-hair from the broken stone 
grew and grew; and as it increased, so hi heart got colder and 
colder, till at last he had not power to stir, and sat with eye full 
of terror watch hi doom. 

* * * * * 

In the morn when the london doctor came, neither geoffrey nor hi 
wife could be found. search wa made in all the rooms, but without 
avail. As a last resourc the great door of the old hall wa broken 
open, and those who enter saw a grim and sorri sight. 

there by the desert hearth geoffrey brent and hi young wife sat 
cold and white and dead. her face wa peaceful, and her eye were 
close in sleep; but hi face wa a sight that made all who saw it 
shudder, for there wa on it a look of unutter horror. the eye 
were open and stare glassili at hi feet, which were twine with 
tress of golden hair, streak with grey, which came through the 
broken hearth-stone. 




the gipsi propheci 


'I realli think,' said the doctor, 'that, at ani rate, one of us 
should go and tri whether or not the thing is an imposture.' 

'good!' said considine. 'after dinner we will take our cigar and 
stroll over to the camp.' 

accordingly, when the dinner wa over, and the _la tour_ finished, 
joshua considin and hi friend, Dr burleigh, went over to the east 
side of the moor, where the gipsi encamp lay. As they were 
leaving, mari considine, who had walk as far as the end of the 
garden where it open into the laneway, call after her husband: 

'mind, joshua, you are to give them a fair chance, but don't give them 
ani clue to a fortune--and don't you get flirt with ani of the 
gipsi maidens--and take care to keep gerald out of harm.' 

for answer considin held up hi hand, as if take a stage oath, and 
whistl the air of the old song, 'the gipsi countess.' gerald join 
in the strain, and then, break into merri laughter, the two men 
pass along the laneway to the common, turn now and then to wave 
their hand to mary, who lean over the gate, in the twilight, 
look after them. 

It wa a love even in the summer; the veri air wa full of rest 
and quiet happiness, as though an outward type of the peac and 
joy which made a heaven of the home of the young marri folk. 
considine' life had not been an event one. the onli disturb 
element which he had ever known wa in hi woo of mari winston, and 
the long-continu object of her ambiti parents, who expect a 
brilliant match for their onli daughter. when mr. and mrs. winston had 
discov the attach of the young barrister, they had tri to 
keep the young peopl apart by send their daughter away for a long 
round of visits, have made her promis not to correspond with her 
lover dure her absence. love, however, had stood the test. neither 
absenc nor neglect seem to cool the passion of the young man, and 
jealousi seem a thing unknown to hi sanguin nature; so, after a 
long period of waiting, the parent had given in, and the young folk 
were married. 

they had been live in the cottag a few months, and were just 
begin to feel at home. gerald burleigh, joshua' old colleg chum, 
and himself a sometim victim of mary' beauty, had arriv a week 
before, to stay with them for as long a time as he could tear himself 
away from hi work in london. 

when her husband had quit disappear mari went into the house, and, 
sit down at the piano, gave an hour to mendelssohn. 

It wa but a short walk across the common, and befor the cigar 
requir renew the two men had reach the gipsi camp. the place 
wa as picturesqu as gipsi camps--when in villag and when busi 
is good--usu are. there were some few person round the fire, 
invest their money in prophecy, and a larg number of others, 
poorer or more parsimonious, who stay just outsid the bound but 
near enough to see all that went on. 

As the two gentlemen approached, the villagers, who knew joshua, made 
way a little, and a pretty, keen-ey gipsi girl trip up and ask 
to tell their fortunes. joshua held out hi hand, but the girl, 
without seem to see it, stare at hi face in a veri odd manner. 
gerald nudg him: 

'you must cross her hand with silver,' he said. 'it is one of the most 
import part of the mystery.' joshua took from hi pocket a 
half-crown and held it out to her, but, without look at it, she 
answered: 

'you have to cross the gipsy' hand with gold.' 

gerald laughed. 'you are at a premium as a subject,' he said. joshua 
wa of the kind of man--th univers kind--who can toler be 
stare at by a pretti girl; so, with some littl deliberation, he 
answered: 

'all right; here you are, my pretti girl; but you must give me a real 
good fortun for it,' and he hand her a half sovereign, which she 
took, saying: 

'it is not for me to give good fortun or bad, but onli to read what 
the star have said.' she took hi right hand and turn it palm 
upward; but the instant her eye met it she drop it as though it 
had been red hot, and, with a startl look, glide swiftli away. 
lift the curtain of the larg tent, which occupi the centr of 
the camp, she disappear within. 

'sold again!' said the cynic gerald. joshua stood a littl amazed, 
and not altogeth satisfied. they both watch the larg tent. In a 
few moment there emerg from the open not the young girl, but a 
state look woman of middl age and command presence. 

the instant she appear the whole camp seem to stand still. the 
clamour of tongues, the laughter and nois of the work were, for a 
second or two, arrested, and everi man or woman who sat, or crouched, 
or lay, stood up and face the imperi look gipsy. 

'the queen, of course,' murmur gerald. 'we are in luck tonight.' the 
gipsi queen threw a search glanc around the camp, and then, 
without hesit an instant, came straight over and stood befor 
joshua. 

'hold out your hand,' she said in a command tone. 

again gerald spoke, _sotto voce_: 'I have not been spoken to in that 
way sinc I wa at school.' 

'your hand must be cross with gold.' 

'A hundr per cent. at thi game,' whisper gerald, as joshua laid 
anoth half sovereign on hi upturn palm. 

the gipsi look at the hand with knit brows; then suddenli look 
up into hi face, said: 

'have you a strong will--hav you a true heart that can be brave for 
one you love?' 

'I hope so; but I am afraid I have not vaniti enough to say "yes".' 

'then I will answer for you; for I read resolut in your 
face--resolut desper and determin if need be. you have a wife 
you love?' 

'yes,' emphatically. 

'then leav her at once--nev see her face again. Go from her now, 
while love is fresh and your heart is free from wick intent. Go 
quick--go far, and never see her face again!' 

joshua drew away hi hand quickly, and said, 'thank you!' stiffli but 
sarcastically, as he began to move away. 

'I say!' said gerald, 'you'r not go like that, old man; no use in 
be indign with the star or their prophet--and, moreover, your 
sovereign--what of it? At least, hear the matter out.' 

'silence, ribald!' command the queen, 'you know not what you do. let 
him go--and go ignorant, if he will not be warned.' 

joshua immedi turn back. 'at all events, we will see thi thing 
out,' he said. 'now, madam, you have given me advice, but I paid for a 
fortune.' 

'be warned!' said the gipsy. 'the star have been silent for long; let 
the mysteri still wrap them round.' 

'mi dear madam, I do not get within touch of a mysteri everi day, and 
I prefer for my money knowledg rather than ignorance. I can get the 
latter commod for noth when I want ani of it.' 

gerald echo the sentiment. 'a for me I have a larg and unsal 
stock on hand.' 

the gipsi queen eye the two men sternly, and then said: 'a you wish. 
you have chosen for yourself, and have met warn with scorn, and 
appeal with levity. On your own head be the doom!' 

'amen!' said gerald. 

with an imperi gestur the queen took joshua' hand again, and 
began to tell hi fortune. 

'I see here the flow of blood; it will flow befor long; it is 
run in my sight. It flow through the broken circl of a sever 
ring.' 

'go on!' said joshua, smiling. gerald wa silent. 

'must I speak plainer?' 

'certainly; we commonplac mortal want someth definite. the star 
are a long way off, and their word get somewhat dull in the 
message.' 

the gipsi shuddered, and then spoke impressively. 'thi is the hand of 
a murderer--th murder of hi wife!' she drop the hand and turn 
away. 

joshua laughed. 'do you know,' said he, 'I think if I were you I 
should prophesi some jurisprud into my system. for instance, you 
say "thi hand is the hand of a murderer." well, whatev it may be in 
the future--or potentially--it is at present not one. you ought to 
give your propheci in such term as "the hand which will be a 
murderer's", or, rather, "the hand of one who will be the murder of 
hi wife". the star are realli not good on technic questions.' 

the gipsi made no repli of ani kind, but, with droop head and 
despond mien, walk slowli to her tent, and, lift the curtain, 
disappeared. 

without speak the two men turn homewards, and walk across the 
moor. presently, after some littl hesitation, gerald spoke. 

'of course, old man, thi is all a joke; a ghastli one, but still a 
joke. but would it not be well to keep it to ourselves?' 

'how do you mean?' 

'well, not tell your wife. It might alarm her.' 

'alarm her! My dear gerald, what are you think of? why, she would 
not be alarm or afraid of me if all the gipsi that ever didn't 
come from bohemia agre that I wa to murder her, or even to have a 
hard thought of her, whilst so long as she wa say "jack 
robinson."' 

gerald remonstrated. 'old fellow, women are superstitious--far more 
than we men are; and, also they are blessed--or cursed--with a nervou 
system to which we are strangers. I see too much of it in my work not 
to realis it. take my advic and do not let her know, or you will 
frighten her.' 

joshua' lip unconsci harden as he answered: 'mi dear fellow, 
I would not have a secret from my wife. why, it would be the 
begin of a new order of thing between us. We have no secret from 
each other. If we ever have, then you may begin to look out for 
someth odd between us.' 

'still,' said gerald, 'at the risk of unwelcom interference, I say 
again be warn in time.' 

'the gipsy' veri words,' said joshua. 'you and she seem quit of one 
accord. tell me, old man, is thi a put-up thing? you told me of the 
gipsi camp--did you arrang it all with her majesty?' thi wa said 
with an air of banter earnestness. gerald assur him that he onli 
heard of the camp that morning; but he made fun of everi answer of hi 
friend, and, in the process of thi raillery, the time passed, and 
they enter the cottage. 

mari wa sit at the piano but not playing. the dim twilight had 
wake some veri tender feel in her breast, and her eye were full 
of gentl tears. when the men came in she stole over to her husband' 
side and kiss him. joshua struck a tragic attitude. 

'mary,' he said in a deep voice, 'befor you approach me, listen to 
the word of fate. the star have spoken and the doom is sealed.' 

'what is it, dear? tell me the fortune, but do not frighten me.' 

'not at all, my dear; but there is a truth which it is well that you 
should know. nay, it is necessari so that all your arrang can be 
made beforehand, and everyth be decent done and in order.' 

'go on, dear; I am listening.' 

'mari considine, your effigi may yet be seen at madam tussaud's. the 
juris-imprud star have announc their fell tide that thi hand 
is red with blood--your blood. mary! mary! my god!' He sprang 
forward, but too late to catch her as she fell faint on the floor. 

'I told you,' said gerald. 'you don't know them as well as I do.' 

after a littl while mari recov from her swoon, but onli to fall 
into strong hysterics, in which she laugh and wept and rave and 
cried, 'keep him from me--from me, joshua, my husband,' and mani other 
word of entreati and of fear. 

joshua considin wa in a state of mind border on agony, and when 
at last mari becam calm he knelt by her and kiss her feet and hand 
and hair and call her all the sweet name and said all the tender 
thing hi lip could frame. all that night he sat by her bedsid and 
held her hand. far through the night and up to the earli morn she 
kept wake from sleep and cri out as if in fear, till she wa 
comfort by the conscious that her husband wa watch besid 
her. 

breakfast wa late the next morning, but dure it joshua receiv a 
telegram which requir him to drive over to withering, nearli twenti 
miles. He wa loth to go; but mari would not hear of hi remaining, 
and so befor noon he drove off in hi dog-cart alone. 

when he wa gone mari retir to her room. she did not appear at 
lunch, but when afternoon tea wa serv on the lawn under the great 
weep willow, she came to join her guest. she wa look quit 
recov from her ill of the even before. after some casual 
remarks, she said to gerald: 'of cours it wa veri silli about last 
night, but I could not help feel frightened. inde I would feel so 
still if I let myself think of it. but, after all these peopl may 
onli imagin things, and I have got a test that can hardli fail to 
show that the predict is false--if inde it be false,' she ad 
sadly. 

'what is your plan?' ask gerald. 

'I shall go myself to the gipsi camp, and have my fortun told by the 
queen.' 

'capital. may I go with you?' 

'oh, no! that would spoil it. she might know you and guess at me, and 
suit her utter accordingly. I shall go alon thi afternoon.' 

when the afternoon wa gone mari considin took her way to the gipsi 
encampment. gerald went with her as far as the near edg of the 
common, and return alone. 

half-an-hour had hardli elaps when mari enter the drawing-room, 
where he lay on a sofa reading. she wa ghastli pale and wa in a 
state of extrem excitement. hardli had she pass over the threshold 
when she collaps and sank moan on the carpet. gerald rush to 
aid her, but by a great effort she control herself and motion him 
to be silent. He waited, and hi readi attent to her wish seem to 
be her best help, for, in a few minutes, she had somewhat recovered, 
and wa abl to tell him what had passed. 

'when I got to the camp,' she said, 'there did not seem to be a soul 
about, I went into the centr and stood there. suddenli a tall woman 
stood besid me. "someth told me I wa wanted!" she said. I held 
out my hand and laid a piec of silver on it. she took from her neck a 
small golden trinket and laid it there also; and then, seiz the 
two, threw them into the stream that ran by. then she took my hand in 
her and spoke: "naught but blood in thi guilti place," and turn 
away. I caught hold of her and ask her to tell me more. after some 
hesitation, she said: "alas! alas! I see you lie at your husband' 
feet, and hi hand are red with blood."' 

gerald did not feel at all at ease, and tri to laugh it off. 
'surely,' he said, 'thi woman ha a craze about murder.' 

'do not laugh,' said mary, 'I cannot bear it,' and then, as if with a 
sudden impulse, she left the room. 

not long after joshua returned, bright and cheery, and as hungri as a 
hunter after hi long drive. hi presenc cheer hi wife, who seem 
much brighter, but she did not mention the episod of the visit to the 
gipsi camp, so gerald did not mention it either. As if by tacit 
consent the subject wa not allud to dure the evening. but there 
wa a strange, settl look on mary' face, which gerald could not but 
observe. 

In the morn joshua came down to breakfast later than usual. mari 
had been up and about the hous from an earli hour; but as the time 
drew on she seem to get a littl nervou and now and again threw 
around an anxiou look. 

gerald could not help notic that none of those at breakfast could 
get on satisfactorili with their food. It wa not altogeth that the 
chop were tough, but that the knive were all so blunt. be a 
guest, he, of course, made no sign; but present saw joshua draw hi 
thumb across the edg of hi knife in an unconsci sort of way. At 
the action mari turn pale and almost fainted. 

after breakfast they all went out on the lawn. mari wa make up a 
bouquet, and said to her husband, 'get me a few of the tea-roses, 
dear.' 

joshua pull down a cluster from the front of the house. the stem 
bent, but wa too tough to break. He put hi hand in hi pocket to get 
hi knife; but in vain. 'lend me your knife, gerald,' he said. but 
gerald had not got one, so he went into the breakfast room and took 
one from the table. He came out feel it edg and grumbling. 'what 
on earth ha happen to all the knives--th edg seem all ground 
off?' mari turn away hurriedli and enter the house. 

joshua tri to sever the stalk with the blunt knife as countri cook 
sever the neck of fowl--a schoolboy cut twine. with a littl effort 
he finish the task. the cluster of rose grew thick, so he 
determin to gather a great bunch. 

He could not find a singl sharp knife in the sideboard where the 
cutleri wa kept, so he call mary, and when she came, told her the 
state of things. she look so agit and so miser that he could 
not help know the truth, and, as if astound and hurt, ask her: 

'do you mean to say that _you_ have done it?' 

she broke in, 'oh, joshua, I wa so afraid.' 

He paused, and a set, white look came over hi face. 'mary!' said he, 
'i thi all the trust you have in me? I would not have believ it.' 

'oh, joshua! joshua!' she cri entreatingly, 'forgiv me,' and wept 
bitterly. 

joshua thought a moment and then said: 'I see how it is. We shall 
better end thi or we shall all go mad.' 

He ran into the drawing-room. 

'where are you going?' almost scream mary. 

gerald saw what he meant--that he would not be tie to blunt 
instrument by the forc of a superstition, and wa not surpris when 
he saw him come out through the french window, bear in hi hand a 
larg ghourka knife, which usual lay on the centr table, and which 
hi brother had sent him from northern india. It wa one of those 
great hunting-kn which work such havoc, at close quarter with 
the enemi of the loyal ghourka dure the mutiny, of great weight 
but so evenli balanc in the hand as to seem light, and with an edg 
like a razor. with one of these knive a ghourka can cut a sheep in 
two. 

when mari saw him come out of the room with the weapon in hi hand she 
scream in an agoni of fright, and the hyster of last night were 
promptli renewed. 

joshua ran toward her, and, see her falling, threw down the knife 
and tri to catch her. 

however, he wa just a second too late, and the two men cri out in 
horror simultan as they saw her fall upon the nake blade. 

when gerald rush over he found that in fall her left hand had 
struck the blade, which lay partli upward on the grass. some of the 
small vein were cut through, and the blood gush freeli from the 
wound. As he wa tie it up he point out to joshua that the wed 
ring wa sever by the steel. 

they carri her faint to the house. when, after a while, she came 
out, with her arm in a sling, she wa peac in her mind and happy. 
she said to her husband: 

'the gipsi wa wonder near the truth; too near for the real thing 
ever to occur now, dear.' 

joshua bent over and kiss the wound hand. 




the come of abel behenna 


the littl cornish port of pencastl wa bright in the earli april, 
when the sun had seemingli come to stay after a long and bitter 
winter. boldli and blackli the rock stood out against a background of 
shade blue, where the sky fade into mist met the far horizon. the 
sea wa of true cornish hue--sapphire, save where it becam deep 
emerald green in the fathomless depth under the cliffs, where the 
seal cave open their grim jaws. On the slope the grass wa parch 
and brown. the spike of furz bush were ashi grey, but the golden 
yellow of their flower stream along the hillside, dip out in 
line as the rock crop up, and lessen into patch and dot till 
final it die away all togeth where the sea wind swept round the 
jut cliff and cut short the veget as though with an 
ever-work aerial shears. the whole hillside, with it bodi of brown 
and flash of yellow, wa just like a coloss yellow-hammer. 

the littl harbour open from the sea between tower cliffs, and 
behind a lone rock, pierc with mani cave and blow-hol through 
which the sea in storm time sent it thunder voice, togeth with a 
fountain of drift spume. hence, it wound westward in a serpentin 
course, guard at it entranc by two littl curv pier to left 
and right. these were roughli built of dark slate place endway and 
held togeth with great beam bound with iron bands. thence, it 
flow up the rocki bed of the stream whose winter torrent had of old 
cut out it way amongst the hills. thi stream wa deep at first, with 
here and there, where it widened, patch of broken rock expos at 
low water, full of hole where crab and lobster were to be found at 
the ebb of the tide. from amongst the rock rose sturdi posts, use 
for warp in the littl coast vessel which frequent the port. 
higher up, the stream still flow deeply, for the tide ran far 
inland, but alway calmli for all the forc of the wildest storm wa 
broken below. some quarter mile inland the stream wa deep at high 
water, but at low tide there were at each side patch of the same 
broken rock as lower down, through the chink of which the sweet water 
of the natur stream trickl and murmur after the tide had eb 
away. here, too, rose moor post for the fishermen' boats. At 
either side of the river wa a row of cottag down almost on the 
level of high tide. they were pretti cottages, strongli and snugli 
built, with trim narrow garden in front, full of old-fashion 
plants, flower currants, colour primroses, wallflower, and 
stonecrop. over the front of mani of them climb clemati and 
wisteria. the window side and door post of all were as white as 
snow, and the littl pathway to each wa pave with light colour 
stones. At some of the door were tini porches, whilst at other were 
rustic seat cut from tree trunk or from old barrels; in nearli everi 
case the window ledg were fill with box or pot of flower or 
foliag plants. 

two men live in cottag exactli opposit each other across the 
stream. two men, both young, both good-looking, both prosperous, and 
who had been companion and rival from their boyhood. abel behenna 
wa dark with the gypsi dark which the phoenician mine wander 
left in their track; eric sanson--which the local antiquarian said wa 
a corrupt of sagamanson--wa fair, with the ruddi hue which mark 
the path of the wild norseman. these two seem to have singl out 
each other from the veri begin to work and strive together, to 
fight for each other and to stand back to back in all endeavours. they 
had now put the coping-ston on their templ of uniti by fall in 
love with the same girl. sarah trefusi wa certainli the prettiest 
girl in pencastle, and there wa mani a young man who would gladli 
have tri hi fortun with her, but that there were two to contend 
against, and each of these the strongest and most resolut man in the 
port--except the other. the averag young man thought that thi wa 
veri hard, and on account of it bore no good will to either of the 
three principals: whilst the averag young woman who had, lest wors 
should befall, to put up with the grumbl of her sweetheart, and the 
sens of be onli second best which it implied, did not either, be 
sure, regard sarah with friendli eye. thu it came, in the cours of a 
year or so, for rustic courtship is a slow process, that the two men 
and woman found themselv thrown much together. they were all 
satisfied, so it did not matter, and sarah, who wa vain and someth 
frivolous, took care to have her reveng on both men and women in a 
quiet way. when a young woman in her 'walk out' can onli boast one 
not-quite-satisfi young man, it is no particular pleasur to her to 
see her escort cast sheep' eye at a better-look girl support by 
two devot swains. 

At length there came a time which sarah dreaded, and which she had 
tri to keep distant--th time when she had to make her choic 
between the two men. she like them both, and, indeed, either of them 
might have satisfi the idea of even a more exact girl. but her 
mind wa so constitut that she thought more of what she might lose, 
than of what she might gain; and whenev she thought she had made up 
her mind she becam instantli assail with doubt as to the wisdom of 
her choice. alway the man whom she had presum lost becam endow 
afresh with a newer and more bounti crop of advantag than had 
ever arisen from the possibl of hi acceptance. she promis each 
man that on her birthday she would give him hi answer, and that day, 
the 11th of april, had now arrived. the promis had been given singli 
and confidentially, but each wa given to a man who wa not like to 
forget. earli in the morn she found both men hover round her 
door. neither had taken the other into hi confidence, and each wa 
simpli seek an earli opportun of get hi answer, and 
advanc hi suit if necessary. damon, as a rule, doe not take 
pythia with him when make a proposal; and in the heart of each man 
hi own affair had a claim far abov ani requir of friendship. 
so, throughout the day, they kept see each other out. the posit 
wa doubtless somewhat embarrass to sarah, and though the 
satisfact of her vaniti that she should be thu ador wa veri 
pleasing, yet there were moment when she wa annoy with both men 
for be so persistent. her onli consol at such moment wa that 
she saw, through the elabor smile of the other girl when in 
pass they notic her door thu doubli guarded, the jealousi which 
fill their hearts. sarah' mother wa a person of commonplac and 
sordid ideas, and, see all along the state of affairs, her one 
intention, persist express to her daughter in the plainest 
words, wa to so arrang matter that sarah should get all that wa 
possibl out of both men. with thi purpos she had cunningli kept 
herself as far as possibl in the background in the matter of her 
daughter' wooings, and watch in silence. At first sarah had been 
indign with her for her sordid views; but, as usual, her weak 
natur gave way befor persistence, and she had now got to the stage 
of acceptance. she wa not surpris when her mother whisper to her 
in the littl yard behind the house:-- 

'go up the hillsid for a while; I want to talk to these two. they'r 
both red-hot for ye, and now' the time to get thing fixed!' sarah 
began a feebl remonstrance, but her mother cut her short. 

'I tell ye, girl, that my mind is made up! both these men want ye, and 
onli one can have ye, but befor ye choos it'll be so arrang that 
ye'll have all that both have got! don't argy, child! Go up the 
hillside, and when ye come back i'll have it fixed--i see a way quit 
easy!' So sarah went up the hillsid through the narrow path between 
the golden furze, and mrs. trefusi join the two men in the 
living-room of the littl house. 

she open the attack with the desper courag which is in all 
mother when they think for their children, howsoev mean the 
thought may be. 

'ye two men, ye'r both in love with my sarah!' 

their bash silenc gave consent to the barefac proposition. she 
went on. 

'neither of ye ha much!' again they tacitli acquiesc in the soft 
impeachment. 

'I don't know that either of ye could keep a wife!' though neither 
said a word their look and bear express distinct dissent. mrs. 
trefusi went on: 

'but if ye'd put what ye both have togeth ye'd make a comfort 
home for one of ye--and sarah!' she eye the men keenly, with her 
cun eye half shut, as she spoke; then satisfi from her scrutini 
that the idea wa accept she went on quickly, as if to prevent 
argument: 

'the girl like ye both, and mayhap it' hard for her to choose. whi 
don't ye toss up for her? first put your money together--ye'v each 
got a bit put by, I know. let the lucki man take the lot and trade 
with it a bit, and then come home and marri her. neither of ye' 
afraid, I suppose! and neither of ye'll say that he won't do that much 
for the girl that ye both say ye love!' 

abel broke the silence: 

'it don't seem the squar thing to toss for the girl! she wouldn't 
like it herself, and it doesn't seem--seem respect like to her--' 
eric interrupted. He wa consciou that hi chanc wa not so good as 
abel' in case sarah should wish to choos between them: 

'are ye afraid of the hazard?' 

'not me!' said abel, boldly. mrs. trefusis, see that her idea wa 
begin to work, follow up the advantage. 

'it is settl that ye put yer money togeth to make a home for her, 
whether ye toss for her or leav it for her to choose?' 

'yes,' said eric quickly, and abel agre with equal sturdiness. mrs. 
trefusis' littl cun eye twinkled. she heard sarah' step in the 
yard, and said: 

'well! here she comes, and I leav it to her.' and she went out. 

dure her brief walk on the hillsid sarah had been tri to make up 
her mind. she wa feel almost angri with both men for be the 
caus of her difficulty, and as she came into the room said shortly: 

'I want to have a word with you both--com to the flagstaff rock, 
where we can be alone.' she took her hat and went out of the hous up 
the wind path to the steep rock crown with a high flagstaff, 
where onc the wreckers' fire basket use to burn. thi wa the rock 
which form the northern jaw of the littl harbour. there wa onli 
room on the path for two abreast, and it mark the state of thing 
pretti well when, by a sort of impli arrangement, sarah went first, 
and the two men followed, walk abreast and keep step. By thi 
time, each man' heart wa boil with jealousy. when they came to 
the top of the rock, sarah stood against the flagstaff, and the two 
young men stood opposit her. she had chosen her posit with 
knowledg and intention, for there wa no room for anyon to stand 
besid her. they were all silent for a while; then sarah began to 
laugh and said:-- 

'I promis the both of you to give you an answer to-day. i'v been 
think and think and thinking, till I began to get angri with you 
both for plagu me so; and even now I don't seem ani nearer than 
ever I wa to make up my mind.' eric said suddenly: 

'let us toss for it, lass!' sarah show no indign whatev at 
the proposition; her mother' etern suggest had school her to 
the accept of someth of the kind, and her weak natur made it 
easi to her to grasp at ani way out of the difficulty. she stood with 
downcast eye idli pick at the sleev of her dress, seem to 
have tacitli acquiesc in the proposal. both men instinct 
realis thi pull each a coin from hi pocket, spun it in the air, 
and drop hi other hand over the palm on which it lay. for a few 
second they remain thus, all silent; then abel, who wa the more 
thought of the men, spoke: 

'sarah! is thi good?' As he spoke he remov the upper hand from the 
coin and place the latter back in hi pocket. sarah wa nettled. 

'good or bad, it' good enough for me! take it or leav it as you 
like,' she said, to which he repli quickly: 

'nay lass! aught that concern you is good enow for me. I did but 
think of you lest you might have pain or disappoint hereafter. If 
you love eric better nor me, in god' name say so, and I think i'm man 
enow to stand aside. likewise, if i'm the one, don't make us both 
miser for life!' face to face with a difficulty, sarah' weak 
natur proclaim itself; she put her hand befor her face and began 
to cry, saying-- 

'it wa my mother. she keep tell me!' the silenc which follow 
wa broken by eric, who said hotli to abel: 

'let the lass alone, can't you? If she want to choos thi way, let 
her. it' good enough for me--and for you, too! she' said it now, and 
must abid by it!' hereupon sarah turn upon him in sudden fury, and 
cried: 

'hold your tongue! what is it to you, at ani rate?' and she resum 
her crying. eric wa so flabbergast that he had not a word to say, 
but stood look particularli foolish, with hi mouth open and hi 
hand held out with the coin still between them. all were silent till 
sarah, take her hand from her face laugh hyster and said: 

'a you two can't make up your minds, i'm go home!' and she turn 
to go. 

'stop,' said abel, in an authorit voice. 'eric, you hold the 
coin, and i'll cry. now, befor we settl it, let us clearli 
understand: the man who win take all the money that we both have 
got, bring it to bristol and ship on a voyag and trade with it. 
then he come back and marri sarah, and they two keep all, whatev 
there may be, as the result of the trading. Is thi what we 
understand?' 

'yes,' said eric. 

'i'll marri him on my next birthday,' said sarah. have said it the 
intoler mercenari spirit of her action seem to strike her, and 
impuls she turn away with a bright blush. fire seem to 
sparkl in the eye of both men. said eric: 'A year so be! the man 
that win is to have one year.' 

'toss!' cri abel, and the coin spun in the air. eric caught it, and 
again held it between hi outstretch hands. 

'heads!' cri abel, a pallor sweep over hi face as he spoke. As 
he lean forward to look sarah lean forward too, and their head 
almost touched. He could feel her hair blow on hi cheek, and it 
thrill through him like fire. eric lift hi upper hand; the coin 
lay with it head up. abel step forward and took sarah in hi arms. 
with a curs eric hurl the coin far into the sea. then he lean 
against the flagstaff and scowl at the other with hi hand thrust 
deep into hi pockets. abel whisper wild word of passion and 
delight into sarah' ears, and as she listen she began to believ 
that fortun had rightli interpret the wish of her secret heart, 
and that she love abel best. 

present abel look up and caught sight of eric' face as the last 
ray of sunset struck it. the red light intensifi the natur 
ruddi of hi complexion, and he look as though he were steep 
in blood. abel did not mind hi scowl, for now that hi own heart wa 
at rest he could feel unalloy piti for hi friend. He step over 
mean to comfort him, and held out hi hand, saying: 

'it wa my chance, old lad. don't grudg it me. i'll tri to make sarah 
a happi woman, and you shall be a brother to us both!' 

'brother be damned!' wa all the answer eric made, as he turn away. 
when he had gone a few step down the rocki path he turn and came 
back. stand befor abel and sarah, who had their arm round each 
other, he said: 

'you have a year. make the most of it! and be sure you'r in time to 
claim your wife! Be back to have your bann up in time to be marri 
on the 11th april. If you'r not, I tell you I shall have my bann up, 
and you may get back too late.' 

'what do you mean, eric? you are mad!' 

'no more mad than you are, abel behenna. you go, that' your chance! I 
stay, that' mine! I don't mean to let the grass grow under my feet. 
sarah care no more for you than for me five minut ago, and she may 
come back to that five minut after you'r gone! you won by a point 
only--th game may change.' 

'the game won't change!' said abel shortly. 'sarah, you'll be true to 
me? you won't marri till I return?' 

'for a year!' ad eric, quickly, 'that' the bargain.' 

'I promis for the year,' said sarah. A dark look came over abel' 
face, and he wa about to speak, but he master himself and smiled. 

'I mustn't be too hard or get angri tonight! come, eric! we play and 
fought together. I won fairly. I play fairli all the game of our 
wooing! you know that as well as I do; and now when I am go away, I 
shall look to my old and true comrad to help me when I am gone!' 

'i'll help you none,' said eric, 'so help me god!' 

'it wa god help me,' said abel simply. 

'then let him go on help you,' said eric angrily. 'the devil is 
good enough for me!' and without anoth word he rush down the steep 
path and disappear behind the rocks. 

when he had gone abel hope for some tender passag with sarah, but 
the first remark she made chill him. 

'how lone it all seem without eric!' and thi note sound till he 
had left her at home--and after. 

earli on the next morn abel heard a nois at hi door, and on go 
out saw eric walk rapidli away: a small canva bag full of gold and 
silver lay on the threshold; on a small slip of paper pin to it wa 
written: 

'take the money and go. I stay. god for you! the devil for me! 
rememb the 11th of april.--er sanson.' that afternoon abel went 
off to bristol, and a week later sail on the _star of the sea_ bound 
for pahang. hi money--includ that which had been eric's--wa on 
board in the shape of a ventur of cheap toys. He had been advis by 
a shrewd old marin of bristol whom he knew, and who knew the way of 
the chersonese, who predict that everi penni invest would be 
return with a shill to boot. 

As the year wore on sarah becam more and more disturb in her mind. 
eric wa alway at hand to make love to her in hi own persistent, 
master manner, and to thi she did not object. onli one letter came 
from abel, to say that hi ventur had prove successful, and that he 
had sent some two hundr pound to the bank at bristol, and wa 
trade with fifti pound still remain in good for china, whither 
the _star of the sea_ wa bound and whenc she would return to 
bristol. He suggest that eric' share of the ventur should be 
return to him with hi share of the profits. thi proposit wa 
treat with anger by eric, and as simpli childish by sarah' mother. 

more than six month had sinc then elapsed, but no other letter had 
come, and eric' hope which had been dash down by the letter from 
pahang, began to rise again. He perpetu assail sarah with an 
'if!' If abel did not return, would she then marri him? If the 11th 
april went by without abel be in the port, would she give him over? 
If abel had taken hi fortune, and marri anoth girl on the head of 
it, would she marri him, eric, as soon as the truth were known? and so 
on in an endless varieti of possibilities. the power of the strong 
will and the determin purpos over the woman' weaker natur becam 
in time manifest. sarah began to lose her faith in abel and to regard 
eric as a possibl husband; and a possibl husband is in a woman' eye 
differ to all other men. A new affect for him began to aris in 
her breast, and the daili familiar of permit courtship 
further the grow affection. sarah began to regard abel as rather 
a rock in the road of her life, and had it not been for her mother' 
constantli remind her of the good fortun alreadi laid by in the 
bristol bank she would have tri to have shut her eye altogeth to 
the fact of abel' existence. 

the 11th april wa saturday, so that in order to have the marriag on 
that day it would be necessari that the bann should be call on 
sunday, 22nd march. from the begin of that month eric kept 
perpetu on the subject of abel' absence, and hi outspoken 
opinion that the latter wa either dead or marri began to becom a 
realiti to the woman' mind. As the first half of the month wore on 
eric becam more jubilant, and after church on the 15th he took sarah 
for a walk to the flagstaff rock. there he assert himself strongly: 

'I told abel, and you too, that if he wa not here to put up hi bann 
in time for the eleventh, I would put up mine for the twelfth. now the 
time ha come when I mean to do it. He hasn't kept hi word'--her 
sarah struck in out of her weak and indecision: 

'he hasn't broken it yet!' eric ground hi teeth with anger. 

'if you mean to stick up for him,' he said, as he smote hi hand 
savag on the flagstaff, which sent forth a shiver murmur, 'well 
and good. i'll keep my part of the bargain. On sunday I shall give 
notic of the banns, and you can deni them in the church if you will. 
If abel is in pencastl on the eleventh, he can have them cancelled, 
and hi own put up; but till then, I take my course, and woe to anyon 
who stand in my way!' with that he flung himself down the rocki 
pathway, and sarah could not but admir hi vike strength and 
spirit, as, cross the hill, he strode away along the cliff toward 
bude. 

dure the week no news wa heard of abel, and on saturday eric gave 
notic of the bann of marriag between himself and sarah trefusis. 
the clergyman would have remonstr with him, for although noth 
formal had been told to the neighbours, it had been understood sinc 
abel' departur that on hi return he wa to marri sarah; but eric 
would not discuss the question. 

'it is a pain subject, sir,' he said with a firm which the 
parson, who wa a veri young man, could not but be sway by. 'sure 
there is noth against sarah or me. whi should there be ani bone 
made about the matter?' the parson said no more, and on the next day 
he read out the bann for the first time amidst an audibl buzz from 
the congregation. sarah wa present, contrari to custom, and though 
she blush furious enjoy her triumph over the other girl whose 
bann had not yet come. befor the week wa over she began to make her 
wed dress. eric use to come and look at her at work and the sight 
thrill through him. He use to say all sort of pretti thing to her 
at such times, and there were to both delici moment of 
love-making. 

the bann were read a second time on the 29th, and eric' hope grew 
more and more fix though there were to him moment of acut despair 
when he realis that the cup of happi might be dash from hi 
lip at ani moment, right up to the last. At such time he wa full of 
passion--desper and remorseless--and he ground hi teeth and 
clench hi hand in a wild way as though some taint of the old 
berserk furi of hi ancestor still linger in hi blood. On the 
thursday of that week he look in on sarah and found her, amid a 
flood of sunshine, put finish touch to her white wed 
gown. hi own heart wa full of gaiety, and the sight of the woman who 
wa so soon to be hi own so occupied, fill him with a joy 
unspeakable, and he felt faint with languor ecstasy. bend over 
he kiss sarah on the mouth, and then whisper in her rosi ear-- 

'your wed dress, sarah! and for me!' As he drew back to admir her 
she look up saucily, and said to him-- 

'perhap not for you. there is more than a week yet for abel!' and 
then cri out in dismay, for with a wild gestur and a fierc oath 
eric dash out of the house, bang the door behind him. the 
incid disturb sarah more than she could have thought possible, 
for it awok all her fear and doubt and indecis afresh. she cri 
a little, and put by her dress, and to sooth herself went out to sit 
for a while on the summit of the flagstaff rock. when she arriv she 
found there a littl group anxious discuss the weather. the sea 
wa calm and the sun bright, but across the sea were strang line of 
dark and light, and close in to shore the rock were fring with 
foam, which spread out in great white curv and circl as the 
current drifted. the wind had backed, and came in sharp, cold puffs. 
the blow-hole, which ran under the flagstaff rock, from the rocki bay 
without to the harbour within, wa boom at intervals, and the 
seagul were scream ceaselessli as they wheel about the entranc 
of the port. 

'it look bad,' she heard an old fisherman say to the coastguard. 'I 
seen it just like thi onc before, when the east indiaman 
_coromandel_ went to piec in dizzard bay!' sarah did not wait to 
hear more. she wa of a timid natur where danger wa concerned, and 
could not bear to hear of wreck and disasters. she went home and 
resum the complet of her dress, secretli determin to appeas 
eric when she should meet him with a sweet apology--and to take the 
earliest opportun of be even with him after her marriage. the 
old fisherman' weather propheci wa justified. that night at dusk a 
wild storm came on. the sea rose and lash the western coast from 
skye to scilli and left a tale of disast everywhere. the sailor and 
fishermen of pencastl all turn out on the rock and cliff and 
watch eagerly. presently, by a flash of lightning, a 'ketch' wa 
seen drift under onli a jib about half-a-mil outsid the port. all 
eye and all glass were concentr on her, wait for the next 
flash, and when it came a choru went up that it wa the _love 
alice_, trade between bristol and penzance, and touch at all the 
littl port between. 'god help them!' said the harbour-master, 'for 
noth in thi world can save them when they are between bude and 
tintagel and the wind on shore!' the coastguard exert themselves, 
and, aid by brave heart and will hands, they brought the rocket 
apparatu up on the summit of the flagstaff rock. then they burn 
blue light so that those on board might see the harbour open in 
case they could make ani effort to reach it. they work gallantli 
enough on board; but no skill or strength of man could avail. befor 
mani minut were over the _love alice_ rush to her doom on the 
great island rock that guard the mouth of the port. the scream of 
those on board were faintli born on the tempest as they flung 
themselv into the sea in a last chanc for life. the blue light 
were kept burning, and eager eye peer into the depth of the water 
in case ani face could be seen; and rope were held readi to fling out 
in aid. but never a face wa seen, and the will arm rest idle. 
eric wa there amongst hi fellows. hi old iceland origin wa 
never more appar than in that wild hour. He took a rope, and 
shout in the ear of the harbour-master: 

'I shall go down on the rock over the seal cave. the tide is run 
up, and someon may drift in there!' 

'keep back, man!' came the answer. 'are you mad? one slip on that rock 
and you are lost: and no man could keep hi feet in the dark on such a 
place in such a tempest!' 

'not a bit,' came the reply. 'you rememb how abel behenna save me 
there on a night like thi when my boat went on the gull rock. He 
drag me up from the deep water in the seal cave, and now someon 
may drift in there again as I did,' and he wa gone into the darkness. 
the project rock hid the light on the flagstaff rock, but he knew 
hi way too well to miss it. hi bold and sure of foot 
stand to him, he shortli stood on the great round-top rock cut 
away beneath by the action of the wave over the entranc of the seal 
cave, where the water wa fathomless. there he stood in compar 
safety, for the concav shape of the rock beat back the wave with 
their own force, and though the water below him seem to boil like a 
seeth cauldron, just beyond the spot there wa a space of almost 
calm. the rock, too, seem here to shut off the sound of the gale, 
and he listen as well as watched. As he stood there ready, with hi 
coil of rope pois to throw, he thought he heard below him, just 
beyond the whirl of the water, a faint, despair cry. He echo it 
with a shout that rang into the night. then he wait for the flash of 
lightning, and as it pass flung hi rope out into the dark where 
he had seen a face rise through the swirl of the foam. the rope wa 
caught, for he felt a pull on it, and he shout again in hi mighti 
voice: 

'tie it round your waist, and I shall pull you up.' then when he felt 
that it wa fast he move along the rock to the far side of the sea 
cave, where the deep water wa someth stiller, and where he could 
get foothold secur enough to drag the rescu man on the overhang 
rock. He began to pull, and shortli he knew from the rope taken in 
that the man he wa now rescu must soon be close to the top of the 
rock. He steadi himself for a moment, and drew a long breath, that 
he might at the next effort complet the rescue. He had just bent hi 
back to the work when a flash of lightn reveal to each other the 
two men--th rescuer and the rescued. 

eric sanson and abel behenna were face to face--and none knew of the 
meet save themselves; and god. 

On the instant a wave of passion swept through eric' heart. all hi 
hope were shattered, and with the hatr of cain hi eye look out. 
He saw in the instant of recognit the joy in abel' face that hi 
wa the hand to succour him, and thi intensifi hi hate. whilst the 
passion wa on him he start back, and the rope ran out between hi 
hands. hi moment of hate wa follow by an impuls of hi better 
manhood, but it wa too late. 

befor he could recov himself, abel encumb with the rope that 
should have aid him, wa plung with a despair cri back into the 
dark of the devour sea. 

then, feel all the mad and the doom of cain upon him, eric 
rush back over the rocks, heedless of the danger and eager onli for 
one thing--to be amongst other peopl whose live nois would shut 
out that last cri which seem to ring still in hi ears. when he 
regain the flagstaff rock the men surround him, and through the 
furi of the storm he heard the harbour-mast say:-- 

'we fear you were lost when we heard a cry! how white you are! where 
is your rope? wa there anyon drift in?' 

'no one,' he shout in answer, for he felt that he could never 
explain that he had let hi old comrad slip back into the sea, and at 
the veri place and under the veri circumst in which that comrad 
had save hi own life. He hope by one bold lie to set the matter at 
rest for ever. there wa no one to bear witness--and if he should have 
to carri that still white face in hi eye and that despair cri in 
hi ear for evermore--at least none should know of it. 'no one,' he 
cried, more loudli still. 'I slip on the rock, and the rope fell 
into the sea!' So say he left them, and, rush down the steep 
path, gain hi own cottag and lock himself within. 

the remaind of that night he pass lie on hi bed--dress and 
motionless--star upwards, and seem to see through the dark a 
pale face gleam wet in the lightning, with it glad recognit 
turn to ghastli despair, and to hear a cri which never ceas to 
echo in hi soul. 

In the morn the storm wa over and all wa smile again, except 
that the sea wa still boister with it unspent fury. great piec 
of wreck drift into the port, and the sea around the island rock wa 
strewn with others. two bodi also drift into the harbour--on the 
master of the wreck ketch, the other a strang seaman whom no one 
knew. 

sarah saw noth of eric till the evening, and then he onli look 
in for a minute. He did not come into the house, but simpli put hi 
head in through the open window. 

'well, sarah,' he call out in a loud voice, though to her it did not 
ring truly, 'i the wed dress done? sunday week, mind! sunday 
week!' 

sarah wa glad to have the reconcili so easy; but, womanlike, 
when she saw the storm wa over and her own fear groundless, she at 
onc repeat the caus of offence. 

'sunday so be it,' she said without look up, 'if abel isn't there 
on saturday!' then she look up saucily, though her heart wa full of 
fear of anoth outburst on the part of her impetu lover. but the 
window wa empty; eric had taken himself off, and with a pout she 
resum her work. she saw eric no more till sunday afternoon, after 
the bann had been call the third time, when he came up to her 
befor all the peopl with an air of proprietorship which half-pleas 
and half-annoy her. 

'not yet, mister!' she said, push him away, as the other girl 
giggled. 'wait till sunday next, if you please--th day after 
saturday!' she added, look at him saucily. the girl giggl again, 
and the young men guffawed. they thought it wa the snub that touch 
him so that he becam as white as a sheet as he turn away. but 
sarah, who knew more than they did, laughed, for she saw triumph 
through the spasm of pain that overspread hi face. 

the week pass uneventfully; however, as saturday drew nigh sarah had 
occasion moment of anxiety, and as to eric he went about at 
night-tim like a man possessed. He restrain himself when other 
were by, but now and again he went down amongst the rock and cave 
and shout aloud. thi seem to reliev him somewhat, and he wa 
better abl to restrain himself for some time after. all saturday he 
stay in hi own hous and never left it. As he wa to be marri on 
the morrow, the neighbour thought it wa shyness on hi part, and did 
not troubl or notic him. onli onc wa he disturbed, and that wa 
when the chief boatman came to him and sat down, and after a paus 
said: 

'eric, I wa over in bristol yesterday. I wa in the ropemaker' 
get a coil to replac the one you lost the night of the storm, and 
there I saw michael heaven of thi place, who is a salesman there. He 
told me that abel behenna had come home the week ere last on the _star 
of the sea_ from canton, and that he had lodg a sight of money in 
the bristol bank in the name of sarah behenna. He told michael so 
himself--and that he had taken passag on the _love alice_ to 
pencastle. 'bear up, man,' for eric had with a groan drop hi head 
on hi knees, with hi face between hi hands. 'he wa your old 
comrade, I know, but you couldn't help him. He must have gone down 
with the rest that aw night. I thought i'd better tell you, lest it 
might come some other way, and you might keep sarah trefusi from 
be frightened. they were good friend once, and women take these 
thing to heart. It would not do to let her be pain with such a 
thing on her wed day!' then he rose and went away, leav eric 
still sit disconsol with hi head on hi knees. 

'poor fellow!' murmur the chief boatman to himself; 'he take it to 
heart. well, well! right enough! they were true comrad once, and 
abel save him!' 

the afternoon of that day, when the children had left school, they 
stray as usual on half-holiday along' the quay and the path by the 
cliffs. present some of them came run in a state of great 
excit to the harbour, where a few men were unload a coal 
ketch, and a great mani were superintend the operation. one of the 
children call out: 

'there is a porpois in the harbour mouth! We saw it come through the 
blow-hole! It had a long tail, and wa deep under the water!' 

'it wa no porpoise,' said another; 'it wa a seal; but it had a long 
tail! It came out of the seal cave!' the other children bore variou 
testimony, but on two point they were unanimous--it, whatev 'it' 
was, had come through the blow-hol deep under the water, and had a 
long, thin tail--a tail so long that they could not see the end of it. 
there wa much unmerci chaf of the children by the men on thi 
point, but as it wa evid that they had seen something, quit a 
number of persons, young and old, male and female, went along the high 
path on either side of the harbour mouth to catch a glimps of thi 
new addit to the fauna of the sea, a long-tail porpois or seal. 
the tide wa now come in. there wa a slight breeze, and the surfac 
of the water wa rippl so that it wa onli at moment that anyon 
could see clearli into the deep water. after a spell of watch a 
woman call out that she saw someth move up the channel, just 
below where she wa standing. there wa a stamped to the spot, but by 
the time the crowd had gather the breez had freshened, and it wa 
imposs to see with ani distinct below the surfac of the 
water. On be question the woman describ what she had seen, but 
in such an incoher way that the whole thing wa put down as an 
effect of imagination; had it not been for the children' report she 
would not have been credit at all. her semi-hyster statement 
that what she saw wa 'like a pig with the entrail out' wa onli 
thought anyth of by an old coastguard, who shook hi head but did 
not make ani remark. for the remaind of the daylight thi man wa 
seen alway on the bank, look into the water, but alway with 
disappoint manifest on hi face. 

eric aros earli on the next morning--h had not slept all night, and 
it wa a relief to him to move about in the light. He shave himself 
with a hand that did not tremble, and dress himself in hi wed 
clothes. there wa a haggard look on hi face, and he seem as though 
he had grown year older in the last few days. still there wa a wild, 
uneasi light of triumph in hi eyes, and he kept murmur to himself 
over and over again: 

'thi is my wedding-day! abel cannot claim her now--liv or 
dead!--liv or dead! live or dead!' He sat in hi arm-chair, 
wait with an uncanni quiet for the church hour to arrive. when 
the bell began to ring he aros and pass out of hi house, close 
the door behind him. He look at the river and saw the tide had just 
turned. In the church he sat with sarah and her mother, hold 
sarah' hand tightli in hi all the time, as though he fear to lose 
her. when the servic wa over they stood up together, and were 
marri in the presenc of the entir congregation; for no one left 
the church. both made the respons clearly--eric' be even on the 
defiant side. when the wed wa over sarah took her husband' arm, 
and they walk away together, the boy and younger girl be cuf 
by their elder into a decor behaviour, for they would fain have 
follow close behind their heels. 

the way from the church led down to the back of eric' cottage, a 
narrow passag be between it and that of hi next neighbour. when 
the bridal coupl had pass through thi the remaind of the 
congregation, who had follow them at a littl distance, were 
startl by a long, shrill scream from the bride. they rush through 
the passag and found her on the bank with wild eyes, point to the 
river bed opposit eric sanson' door. 

the fall tide had deposit there the bodi of abel behenna stark 
upon the broken rocks. the rope trail from it waist had been 
twist by the current round the moor post, and had held it back 
whilst the tide had eb away from it. the right elbow had fallen in 
a chink in the rock, leav the hand outstretch toward sarah, with 
the open palm upward as though it were extend to receiv hers, the 
pale droop finger open to the clasp. 

all that happen afterward wa never quit known to sarah sanson. 
whenev she would tri to recollect there would becom a buzz in 
her ear and a dim in her eyes, and all would pass away. the onli 
thing that she could rememb of it all--and thi she never 
forgot--wa eric' breath heavily, with hi face whiter than that 
of the dead man, as he mutter under hi breath: 

'devil' help! devil' faith! devil' price!' 




the burial of the rat 


leav pari by the orlean road, cross the enceinte, and, turn to 
the right, you find yourself in a somewhat wild and not at all savouri 
district. right and left, befor and behind, on everi side rise great 
heap of dust and wast accumul by the process of time. 

pari ha it night as well as it day life, and the sojourn who 
enter hi hotel in the rue de rivoli or the rue st. honor late at 
night or leav it earli in the morning, can guess, in come near 
montrouge--if he ha not done so already--th purpos of those great 
waggon that look like boiler on wheel which he find halt 
everywher as he passes. 

everi citi ha it peculiar institut creat out of it own needs; 
and one of the most notabl institut of pari is it rag-pick 
population. In the earli morning--and parisian life commenc at an 
earli hour--may be seen in most street stand on the pathway 
opposit everi court and alley and between everi few houses, as still 
in some american cities, even in part of new york, larg wooden box 
into which the domest or tenement-hold empti the accumul 
dust of the past day. round these box gather and pass on, when the 
work is done, to fresh field of labour and pastur new, squalid 
hungry-look men and women, the implement of whose craft consist 
of a coars bag or basket slung over the shoulder and a littl rake 
with which they turn over and probe and examin in the minutest manner 
the dustbins. they pick up and deposit in their baskets, by aid of 
their rakes, whatev they may find, with the same facil as a 
chinaman use hi chopsticks. 

pari is a citi of centralisation--and centralis and 
classif are close allied. In the earli times, when 
centralis is becom a fact, it forerunn is classification. 
all thing which are similar or analog becom group together, and 
from the group of group rise one whole or central point. We see 
radiat mani long arm with innumer tentaculae, and in the 
centr rise a gigant head with a comprehens brain and keen eye 
to look on everi side and ear sensit to hear--and a voraci 
mouth to swallow. 

other citi resembl all the bird and beast and fish whose 
appetit and digest are normal. pari alon is the analog 
apotheosi of the octopus. product of centralis carri to an _ad 
absurdum_, it fairli repres the devil fish; and in no respect is 
the resembl more curiou than in the similar of the digest 
apparatus. 

those intellig tourist who, have surrend their individu 
into the hand of messrs. cook or gaze, 'do' pari in three days, are 
often puzzl to know how it is that the dinner which in london would 
cost about six shillings, can be had for three franc in a café in the 
palai royal. they need have no more wonder if they will but consid 
the classif which is a theoret special of parisian life, 
and adopt all round the fact from which the chiffoni ha hi 
genesis. 

the pari of 1850 wa not like the pari of to-day, and those who see 
the pari of napoleon and baron hausseman can hardli realis the 
exist of the state of thing forty-f year ago. 

amongst other things, however, which have not chang are those 
district where the wast is gathered. dust is dust all the world 
over, in everi age, and the famili like of dust-heap is perfect. 
the traveller, therefore, who visit the environ of montroug can go 
go back in fanci without difficulti to the year 1850. 

In thi year I wa make a prolong stay in paris. I wa veri much 
in love with a young ladi who, though she return my passion, so far 
yield to the wish of her parent that she had promis not to see 
me or to correspond with me for a year. I, too, had been compel to 
acced to these condit under a vagu hope of parent approval. 
dure the term of probat I had promis to remain out of the 
countri and not to write to my dear one until the expir of the 
year. 

natur the time went heavili with me. there wa not one of my own 
famili or circl who could tell me of alice, and none of her own folk 
had, I am sorri to say, suffici generos to send me even an 
occasion word of comfort regard her health and well-being. I 
spent six month wander about europe, but as I could find no 
satisfactori distract in travel, I determin to come to paris, 
where, at least, I would be within easi hail of london in case ani 
good fortun should call me thither befor the appoint time. that 
'hope defer maketh the heart sick' wa never better exemplifi 
than in my case, for in addit to the perpetu long to see the 
face I love there wa alway with me a harrow anxieti lest some 
accid should prevent me show alic in due time that I had, 
throughout the long period of probation, been faith to her trust 
and my own love. thus, everi adventur which I undertook had a fierc 
pleasur of it own, for it wa fraught with possibl consequ 
greater than it would have ordinarili borne. 

like all travel I exhaust the place of most interest in the 
first month of my stay, and wa driven in the second month to look for 
amus whithersoev I might. have made sundri journey to the 
better-known suburbs, I began to see that there wa a _terra 
incognita_, in so far as the guid book wa concerned, in the social 
wilder lie between these attract points. accordingli I began 
to systematis my researches, and each day took up the thread of my 
explor at the place where I had on the previou day drop it. 

In the process of time my wander led me near montrouge, and I saw 
that hereabout lay the ultima thule of social exploration--a countri 
as littl known as that round the sourc of the white nile. and so I 
determin to investig philosoph the chiffonier--hi habitat, 
hi life, and hi mean of life. 

the job wa an unsavouri one, difficult of accomplishment, and with 
littl hope of adequ reward. however, despit reason, obstinaci 
prevailed, and I enter into my new investig with a keener 
energi than I could have summon to aid me in ani investig 
lead to ani end, valuabl or worthy. 

one day, late in a fine afternoon, toward the end of september, I 
enter the holi of holi of the citi of dust. the place wa 
evid the recognis abod of a number of chiffoniers, for some 
sort of arrang wa manifest in the format of the dust heap 
near the road. I pass amongst these heaps, which stood like orderli 
sentries, determin to penetr further and trace dust to it 
ultim location. 

As I pass along I saw behind the dust heap a few form that flit 
to and fro, evid watch with interest the advent of ani 
stranger to such a place. the district wa like a small switzerland, 
and as I went forward my tortuou cours shut out the path behind me. 

present I got into what seem a small citi or commun of 
chiffoniers. there were a number of shanti or huts, such as may be 
met with in the remot part of the bog of allan--rud place with 
wattl walls, plaster with mud and roof of rude thatch made from 
stabl refuse--such place as one would not like to enter for ani 
consideration, and which even in water-colour could onli look 
picturesqu if judici treated. In the midst of these hut wa one 
of the strangest adaptations--i cannot say habitations--i had ever 
seen. An immens old wardrobe, the coloss remnant of some boudoir of 
charl vii, or henri ii, had been convert into a dwelling-house. 
the doubl door lay open, so that the entir ménage wa open to 
public view. In the open half of the wardrob wa a common 
sitting-room of some four feet by six, in which sat, smoke their 
pipe round a charcoal brazier, no fewer than six old soldier of the 
first republic, with their uniform torn and worn threadbare. 
evid they were of the _mauvai sujet_ class; their bleari eye 
and limp jaw told plainli of a common love of absinthe; and their 
eye had that haggard, worn look of slumber feroc which follow 
hard in the wake of drink. the other side stood as of old, with it 
shelv intact, save that they were cut to half their depth, and in 
each shelf of which there were six, wa a bed made with rag and 
straw. the half-dozen of worthi who inhabit thi structur look 
at me curious as I passed; and when I look back after go a 
littl way I saw their head togeth in a whisper conference. I did 
not like the look of thi at all, for the place wa veri lonely, and 
the men look very, veri villainous. however, I did not see ani caus 
for fear, and went on my way, penetr further and further into the 
sahara. the way wa tortuou to a degree, and from go round in a 
seri of semi-circles, as one goe in skate with the dutch roll, I 
got rather confus with regard to the point of the compass. 

when I had penetr a littl way I saw, as I turn the corner of a 
half-mad heap, sit on a heap of straw an old soldier with 
threadbar coat. 

'hallo!' said I to myself; 'the first republ is well repres 
here in it soldiery.' 

As I pass him the old man never even look up at me, but gaze on 
the ground with stolid persistency. again I remark to myself: 'see 
what a life of rude warfar can do! thi old man' curios is a 
thing of the past.' 

when I had gone a few steps, however, I look back suddenly, and saw 
that curios wa not dead, for the veteran had rais hi head and 
wa regard me with a veri queer expression. He seem to me to look 
veri like one of the six worthi in the press. when he saw me look 
he drop hi head; and without think further of him I went on my 
way, satisfi that there wa a strang like between these old 
warriors. 

present I met anoth old soldier in a similar manner. he, too, did 
not notic me whilst I wa passing. 

By thi time it wa get late in the afternoon, and I began to 
think of retrac my steps. accordingli I turn to go back, but 
could see a number of track lead between differ mound and 
could not ascertain which of them I should take. In my perplex I 
want to see someon of whom to ask the way, but could see no one. I 
determin to go on a few mound further and so tri to see 
someone--not a veteran. 

I gain my object, for after go a coupl of hundr yard I saw 
befor me a singl shanti such as I had seen before--with, however, 
the differ that thi wa not one for live in, but mere a roof 
with three wall open in front. from the evid which the 
neighbourhood exhibit I took it to be a place for sorting. within it 
wa an old woman wrinkl and bent with age; I approach her to ask 
the way. 

she rose as I came close and I ask her my way. she immedi 
commenc a conversation; and it occur to me that here in the veri 
centr of the kingdom of dust wa the place to gather detail of the 
histori of parisian rag-picking--particularli as I could do so from 
the lip of one who look like the oldest inhabitant. 

I began my inquiries, and the old woman gave me most interest 
answers--sh had been one of the ceteuc who sat daili befor the 
guillotin and had taken an activ part among the women who signalis 
themselv by their violenc in the revolution. while we were talk 
she said suddenly: 'but m'sieur must be tire standing,' and dust a 
ricketi old stool for me to sit down. I hardli like to do so for mani 
reasons; but the poor old woman wa so civil that I did not like to 
run the risk of hurt her by refusing, and moreov the convers 
of one who had been at the take of the bastil wa so interest 
that I sat down and so our convers went on. 

while we were talk an old man--old and more bent and wrinkl 
even than the woman--appear from behind the shanty. 'here is 
pierre,' said she. 'm'sieur can hear stori now if he wishes, for 
pierr wa in everything, from the bastil to waterloo.' the old man 
took anoth stool at my request and we plung into a sea of 
revolutionari reminiscences. thi old man, albeit cloth like a 
scarecrow, wa like ani one of the six veterans. 

I wa now sit in the centr of the low hut with the woman on my 
left hand and the man on my right, each of them be somewhat in 
front of me. the place wa full of all sort of curiou object of 
lumber, and of mani thing that I wish far away. In one corner wa a 
heap of rag which seem to move from the number of vermin it 
contained, and in the other a heap of bone whose odour wa someth 
shocking. everi now and then, glanc at the heaps, I could see the 
gleam eye of some of the rat which infest the place. these 
loathsom object were bad enough, but what look even more dread 
wa an old butcher' axe with an iron handl stain with clot of 
blood lean up against the wall on the right hand side. still, these 
thing did not give me much concern. the talk of the two old peopl 
wa so fascin that I stay on and on, till the even came and 
the dust heap threw dark shadow over the vale between them. 

after a time I began to grow uneasy. I could not tell how or why, but 
somehow I did not feel satisfied. uneasi is an instinct and mean 
warning. the psychic faculti are often the sentri of the 
intellect, and when they sound alarm the reason begin to act, 
although perhap not consciously. 

thi wa so with me. I began to bethink me where I wa and by what 
surrounded, and to wonder how I should fare in case I should be 
attacked; and then the thought suddenli burst upon me, although 
without ani overt cause, that I wa in danger. prudenc whispered: 'be 
still and make no sign,' and so I wa still and made no sign, for I 
knew that four cun eye were on me. 'four eyes--if not more.' My 
god, what a horribl thought! the whole shanti might be surround on 
three side with villains! I might be in the midst of a band of such 
desperado as onli half a centuri of period revolut can produce. 

with a sens of danger my intellect and observ quickened, and I 
grew more watch than wa my wont. I notic that the old woman' 
eye were constantli wander toward my hands. I look at them too, 
and saw the cause--mi rings. On my left littl finger I had a larg 
signet and on the right a good diamond. 

I thought that if there wa ani danger my first care wa to avert 
suspicion. accordingli I began to work the convers round to 
rag-picking--to the drains--of the thing found there; and so by easi 
stage to jewels. then, seiz a favour opportunity, I ask the 
old woman if she knew anyth of such things. she answer that she 
did, a little. I held out my right hand, and, show her the diamond, 
ask her what she thought of that. she answer that her eye were 
bad, and stoop over my hand. I said as nonchalantli as I could: 
'pardon me! you will see better thus!' and take it off hand it to 
her. An unholi light came into her wither old face, as she touch 
it. she stole one glanc at me swift and keen as a flash of lightning. 

she bent over the ring for a moment, her face quit conceal as 
though examin it. the old man look straight out of the front of 
the shanti befor him, at the same time fumbl in hi pocket and 
produc a screw of tobacco in a paper and a pipe, which he proceed 
to fill. I took advantag of the paus and the momentari rest from the 
search eye on my face to look care round the place, now dim 
and shadowi in the gloaming. there still lay all the heap of vari 
reek foulness; there the terribl blood-stain axe lean against 
the wall in the right hand corner, and everywhere, despit the gloom, 
the bale glitter of the eye of the rats. I could see them even 
through some of the chink of the board at the back low down close to 
the ground. but stay! these latter eye seem more than usual larg 
and bright and baleful! 

for an instant my heart stood still, and I felt in that whirl 
condit of mind in which one feel a sort of spiritu drunkenness, 
and as though the bodi is onli maintain erect in that there is no 
time for it to fall befor recovery. then, in anoth second, I wa 
calm--coldli calm, with all my energi in full vigour, with a 
self-control which I felt to be perfect and with all my feel and 
instinct alert. 

now I knew the full extent of my danger: I wa watch and surround 
by desper people! I could not even guess at how mani of them were 
lie there on the ground behind the shanty, wait for the moment to 
strike. I knew that I wa big and strong, and they knew it, too. they 
knew also, as I did, that I wa an englishman and would make a fight 
for it; and so we waited. I had, I felt, gain an advantag in the 
last few seconds, for I knew my danger and understood the situation. 
now, I thought, is the test of my courage--th endur test: the 
fight test may come later! 

the old woman rais her head and said to me in a satisfi kind of 
way: 

'A veri fine ring, indeed--a beauti ring! oh, me! I onc had such 
rings, plenti of them, and bracelet and earrings! oh! for in those 
fine day I led the town a dance! but they'v forgotten me now! 
they'v forgotten me! they? whi they never heard of me! perhap their 
grandfath rememb me, some of them!' and she laugh a harsh, 
croak laugh. and then I am bound to say that she astonish me, for 
she hand me back the ring with a certain suggest of old-fashion 
grace which wa not without it pathos. 

the old man eye her with a sort of sudden ferocity, half rise from 
hi stool, and said to me suddenli and hoarsely: 

'let me see!' 

I wa about to hand the ring when the old woman said: 

'no! no, do not give it to pierre! pierr is eccentric. He lose 
things; and such a pretti ring!' 

'cat!' said the old man, savagely. suddenli the old woman said, rather 
more loudli than wa necessary: 

'wait! I shall tell you someth about a ring.' there wa someth 
in the sound of her voic that jar upon me. perhap it wa my 
hyper-sensitiveness, wrought up as I wa to such a pitch of nervou 
excitement, but I seem to think that she wa not address me. As I 
stole a glanc round the place I saw the eye of the rat in the bone 
heaps, but miss the eye along the back. but even as I look I saw 
them again appear. the old woman' 'wait!' had given me a respit from 
attack, and the men had sunk back to their reclin posture. 

'I onc lost a ring--a beauti diamond hoop that had belong to a 
queen, and which wa given to me by a farmer of the taxes, who 
afterward cut hi throat becaus I sent him away. I thought it must 
have been stolen, and tax my people; but I could get no trace. the 
polic came and suggest that it had found it way to the drain. We 
descended--i in my fine clothes, for I would not trust them with my 
beauti ring! I know more of the drain sinc then, and of rats, 
too! but I shall never forget the horror of that place--al with 
blaze eyes, a wall of them just outsid the light of our torches. 
well, we got beneath my house. We search the outlet of the drain, 
and there in the filth found my ring, and we came out. 

'but we found someth els also befor we came! As we were come 
toward the open a lot of sewer rats--human one thi time--cam 
toward us. they told the polic that one of their number had gone 
into the drain, but had not returned. He had gone in onli shortli 
befor we had, and, if lost, could hardli be far off. they ask help 
to seek him, so we turn back. they tri to prevent me going, but I 
insisted. It wa a new excitement, and had I not recov my ring? 
not far did we go till we came on something. there wa but littl 
water, and the bottom of the drain wa rais with brick, rubbish, and 
much matter of the kind. He had made a fight for it, even when hi 
torch had gone out. but they were too mani for him! they had not been 
long about it! the bone were still warm; but they were pick clean. 
they had even eaten their own dead one and there were bone of rat 
as well as of the man. they took it cool enough those other--th human 
ones--and joke of their comrad when they found him dead, though they 
would have help him living. bah! what matter it--lif or death?' 

'and had you no fear?' I ask her. 

'fear!' she said with a laugh. 'me have fear? ask pierre! but I wa 
younger then, and, as I came through that horribl drain with it wall 
of greedi eyes, alway move with the circl of the light from the 
torches, I did not feel easy. I kept on befor the men, though! It is 
a way I have! I never let the men get it befor me. all I want is a 
chanc and a means! and they ate him up--took everi trace away except 
the bones; and no one knew it, nor no sound of him wa ever heard!' 
here she broke into a chuckl fit of the ghastliest merriment which 
it wa ever my lot to hear and see. A great poetess describ her 
heroin singing: 'oh! to see or hear her singing! scarc I know which 
is the divinest.' 

and I can appli the same idea to the old crone--in all save the 
divinity, for I scarc could tell which wa the most hellish--th 
harsh, malicious, satisfied, cruel laugh, or the leer grin, and the 
horribl squar open of the mouth like a tragic mask, and the 
yellow gleam of the few discolour teeth in the shapeless gums. In 
that laugh and with that grin and the chuckl satisfact I knew as 
well as if it had been spoken to me in word of thunder that my murder 
wa settled, and the murder onli bide the proper time for it 
accomplishment. I could read between the line of her gruesom stori 
the command to her accomplices. 'wait,' she seem to say, 'bide your 
time. I shall strike the first blow. find the weapon for me, and I 
shall make the opportunity! He shall not escape! keep him quiet, and 
then no one will be wiser. there will be no outcry, and the rat will 
do their work!' 

It wa grow darker and darker; the night wa coming. I stole a 
glanc round the shanty, still all the same! the bloodi axe in the 
corner, the heap of filth, and the eye on the bone heap and in the 
cranni of the floor. 

pierr had been still ostens fill hi pipe; he now struck a 
light and began to puff away at it. the old woman said: 

'dear heart, how dark it is! pierre, like a good lad, light the lamp!' 

pierr got up and with the light match in hi hand touch the wick 
of a lamp which hung at one side of the entranc to the shanty, and 
which had a reflector that threw the light all over the place. It wa 
evid that which wa use for their sort at night. 

'not that, stupid! not that! the lantern!' she call out to him. 

He immedi blew it out, saying: 'all right, mother i'll find it,' 
and he hustl about the left corner of the room--th old woman say 
through the darkness: 

'the lantern! the lantern! oh! that is the light that is most use to 
us poor folks. the lantern wa the friend of the revolution! It is the 
friend of the chiffonier! It help us when all els fails.' 

hardli had she said the word when there wa a kind of creak of the 
whole place, and someth wa steadili drag over the roof. 

again I seem to read between the line of her words. I knew the 
lesson of the lantern. 

'one of you get on the roof with a noos and strangl him as he pass 
out if we fail within.' 

As I look out of the open I saw the loop of a rope outlin black 
against the lurid sky. I wa now, indeed, beset! 

pierr wa not long in find the lantern. I kept my eye fix 
through the dark on the old woman. pierr struck hi light, and by 
it flash I saw the old woman rais from the ground besid her where 
it had mysteri appeared, and then hide in the fold of her gown, 
a long sharp knife or dagger. It seem to be like a butcher' 
sharpen iron fine to a keen point. 

the lantern wa lit. 

'bring it here, pierre,' she said. 'place it in the doorway where we 
can see it. see how nice it is! It shut out the dark from us; it 
is just right!' 

just right for her and her purposes! It threw all it light on my 
face, leav in gloom the face of both pierr and the woman, who sat 
outsid of me on each side. 

I felt that the time of action wa approaching, but I knew now that 
the first signal and movement would come from the woman, and so 
watch her. 

I wa all unarmed, but I had made up my mind what to do. At the first 
movement I would seiz the butcher' axe in the right-hand corner and 
fight my way out. At least, I would die hard. I stole a glanc round 
to fix it exact local so that I could not fail to seiz it at the 
first effort, for then, if ever, time and accuraci would be precious. 

good god! It wa gone! all the horror of the situat burst upon me; 
but the bitterest thought of all wa that if the issu of the terribl 
posit should be against me alic would infal suffer. either 
she would believ me false--and ani lover, or ani one who ha ever 
been one, can imagin the bitter of the thought--or els she would 
go on love long after I had been lost to her and to the world, so 
that her life would be broken and embittered, shatter with 
disappoint and despair. the veri magnitud of the pain brace me 
up and nerv me to bear the dread scrutini of the plotters. 

I think I did not betray myself. the old woman wa watch me as a 
cat doe a mouse; she had her right hand hidden in the fold of her 
gown, clutching, I knew, that long, cruel-look dagger. had she seen 
ani disappoint in my face she would, I felt, have known that the 
moment had come, and would have sprung on me like a tigress, certain 
of take me unprepared. 

I look out into the night, and there I saw new caus for danger. 
befor and around the hut were at a littl distanc some shadowi 
forms; they were quit still, but I knew that they were all alert and 
on guard. small chanc for me now in that direction. 

again I stole a glanc round the place. In moment of great excit 
and of great danger, which is excitement, the mind work veri quickly, 
and the keen of the faculti which depend on the mind grow in 
proportion. I now felt this. In an instant I took in the whole 
situation. I saw that the axe had been taken through a small hole made 
in one of the rotten boards. how rotten they must be to allow of such 
a thing be done without a particl of noise. 

the hut wa a regular murder-trap, and wa guard all around. A 
garrot lay on the roof readi to entangl me with hi noos if I 
should escap the dagger of the old hag. In front the way wa guard 
by I know not how mani watchers. and at the back wa a row of 
desper men--i had seen their eye still through the crack in the 
board of the floor, when last I looked--a they lay prone wait for 
the signal to start erect. If it wa to be ever, now for it! 

As nonchalantli as I could I turn slightli on my stool so as to get 
my right leg well under me. then with a sudden jump, turn my head, 
and guard it with my hands, and with the fight instinct of the 
knight of old, I breath my lady' name, and hurl myself against 
the back wall of the hut. 

watch as they were, the sudden of my movement surpris both 
pierr and the old woman. As I crash through the rotten timber I 
saw the old woman rise with a leap like a tiger and heard her low gasp 
of baffl rage. My feet lit on someth that moved, and as I jump 
away I knew that I had step on the back of one of the row of men 
lie on their face outsid the hut. I wa torn with nail and 
splinters, but otherwis unhurt. breathless I rush up the mound in 
front of me, hear as I went the dull crash of the shanti as it 
collaps into a mass. 

It wa a nightmar climb. the mound, though but low, wa aw 
steep, and with each step I took the mass of dust and cinder tore 
down with me and gave way under my feet. the dust rose and choke me; 
it wa sickening, foetid, awful; but my climb was, I felt, for life or 
death, and I struggl on. the second seem hours; but the few 
moment I had in starting, combin with my youth and strength, gave 
me a great advantage, and, though sever form struggl after me in 
deadli silenc which wa more dread than ani sound, I easili 
reach the top. sinc then I have climb the cone of vesuvius, and 
as I struggl up that dreari steep amid the sulphur fume the 
memori of that aw night at montroug came back to me so vividli 
that I almost grew faint. 

the mound wa one of the tallest in the region of dust, and as I 
struggl to the top, pant for breath and with my heart beat 
like a sledge-hammer, I saw away to my left the dull red gleam of the 
sky, and nearer still the flash of lights. thank god! I knew where 
I wa now and where lay the road to paris! 

for two or three second I paus and look back. My pursuer were 
still well behind me, but struggl up resolutely, and in deadli 
silence. beyond, the shanti wa a wreck--a mass of timber and move 
forms. I could see it well, for flame were alreadi burst out; the 
rag and straw had evid caught fire from the lantern. still 
silenc there! not a sound! these old wretch could die game, anyhow. 

I had no time for more than a pass glance, for as I cast an eye 
round the mound preparatori to make my descent I saw sever dark 
form rush round on either side to cut me off on my way. It wa now 
a race for life. they were tri to head me on my way to paris, and 
with the instinct of the moment I dash down to the right-hand side. 
I wa just in time, for, though I came as it seem to me down the 
steep in a few steps, the wari old men who were watch me turn 
back, and one, as I rush by into the open between the two mound 
in front, almost struck me a blow with that terribl butcher' axe. 
there could sure not be two such weapon about! 

then began a realli horribl chase. I easili ran ahead of the old men, 
and even when some younger one and a few women join in the hunt I 
easili distanc them. but I did not know the way, and I could not 
even guid myself by the light in the sky, for I wa run away from 
it. I had heard that, unless of consciou purpose, hunt men turn 
alway to the left, and so I found it now; and so, I suppose, knew 
also my pursuers, who were more anim than men, and with cun or 
instinct had found out such secret for themselves: for on finish 
a quick spurt, after which I intend to take a moment' breath 
space, I suddenli saw ahead of me two or three form swiftli pass 
behind a mound to the right. 

I wa in the spider' web now indeed! but with the thought of thi new 
danger came the resourc of the hunted, and so I dart down the next 
turn to the right. I continu in thi direct for some hundr 
yards, and then, make a turn to the left again, felt certain that I 
had, at ani rate, avoid the danger of be surrounded. 

but not of pursuit, for on came the rabbl after me, steady, dogged, 
relentless, and still in grim silence. 

In the greater dark the mound seem now to be somewhat smaller 
than before, although--for the night wa closing--they look bigger 
in proportion. I wa now well ahead of my pursuers, so I made a dart 
up the mound in front. 

Oh joy of joys! I wa close to the edg of thi inferno of dustheaps. 
away behind me the red light of pari wa in the sky, and tower up 
behind rose the height of montmarte--a dim light, with here and there 
brilliant point like stars. 

restor to vigour in a moment, I ran over the few remain mound of 
decreas size, and found myself on the level land beyond. even then, 
however, the prospect wa not inviting. all befor me wa dark and 
dismal, and I had evid come on one of those dank, low-li wast 
place which are found here and there in the neighbourhood of great 
cities. place of wast and desolation, where the space is requir 
for the ultim agglomer of all that is noxious, and the ground 
is so poor as to creat no desir of occup even in the lowest 
squatter. with eye accustom to the gloom of the evening, and away 
now from the shadow of those dread dustheaps, I could see much 
more easili than I could a littl while ago. It might have been, of 
course, that the glare in the sky of the light of paris, though the 
citi wa some mile away, wa reflect here. howsoev it was, I saw 
well enough to take bear for certainli some littl distanc around 
me. 

In front wa a bleak, flat wast that seem almost dead level, with 
here and there the dark shimmer of stagnant pools. seemingli far 
off on the right, amid a small cluster of scatter lights, rose a 
dark mass of fort montrouge, and away to the left in the dim distance, 
point with stray gleam from cottag windows, the light in the sky 
show the local of bicêtre. A moment' thought decid me to take 
to the right and tri to reach montrouge. there at least would be some 
sort of safety, and I might possibl long befor come on some of the 
cross road which I knew. somewhere, not far off, must lie the 
strateg road made to connect the outli chain of fort circl 
the city. 

then I look back. come over the mounds, and outlin black against 
the glare of the parisian horizon, I saw sever move figures, and 
still a way to the right sever more deploy out between me and my 
destination. they evid meant to cut me off in thi direction, and 
so my choic becam constricted; it lay now between go straight 
ahead or turn to the left. stoop to the ground, so as to get the 
advantag of the horizon as a line of sight, I look care in 
thi direction, but could detect no sign of my enemies. I argu that 
as they had not guard or were not tri to guard that point, there 
wa evid danger to me there already. So I made up my mind to go 
straight on befor me. 

It wa not an invit prospect, and as I went on the realiti grew 
worse. the ground becam soft and oozy, and now and again gave way 
beneath me in a sicken kind of way. I seem somehow to be go 
down, for I saw round me place seemingli more elev than where I 
was, and thi in a place which from a littl way back seem dead 
level. I look around, but could see none of my pursuers. thi wa 
strange, for all along these bird of the night had follow me 
through the dark as well as though it wa broad daylight. how I 
blame myself for come out in my light-colour tourist suit of 
tweed. the silence, and my not be abl to see my enemies, whilst I 
felt that they were watch me, grew appalling, and in the hope of 
some one not of thi ghastli crew hear me I rais my voic and 
shout sever times. there wa not the slightest response; not even 
an echo reward my efforts. for a while I stood stock still and kept 
my eye in one direction. On one of the rise place around me I saw 
someth dark move along, then another, and another. thi wa to my 
left, and seemingli move to head me off. 

I thought that again I might with my skill as a runner elud my 
enemi at thi game, and so with all my speed dart forward. 

splash! 

My feet had given way in a mass of slimi rubbish, and I had fallen 
headlong into a reeking, stagnant pool. the water and the mud in which 
my arm sank up to the elbow wa filthi and nauseou beyond 
description, and in the sudden of my fall I had actual swallow 
some of the filthi stuff, which nearli choke me, and made me gasp 
for breath. never shall I forget the moment dure which I stood 
tri to recov myself almost faint from the foetid odour of the 
filthi pool, whose white mist rose ghostlik around. worst of all, 
with the acut despair of the hunt anim when he see the pursu 
pack close on him, I saw befor my eye whilst I stood helpless the 
dark form of my pursuer move swiftli to surround me. 

It is curiou how our mind work on odd matter even when the energi 
of thought are seemingli concentr on some terribl and press 
need. I wa in momentari peril of my life: my safeti depend on my 
action, and my choic of altern come now with almost everi 
step I took, and yet I could not but think of the strang dog 
persist of these old men. their silent resolution, their 
steadfast, grim, persist even in such a caus commanded, as well 
as fear, even a measur of respect. what must they have been in the 
vigour of their youth. I could understand now that whirlwind rush on 
the bridg of arcola, that scorn exclam of the old guard at 
waterloo! unconsci cerebr ha it own pleasures, even at such 
moments; but fortun it doe not in ani way clash with the thought 
from which action springs. 

I realis at a glanc that so far I wa defeat in my object, my 
enemi as yet had won. they had succeed in surround me on three 
sides, and were bent on drive me off to the left-hand, where there 
wa alreadi some danger for me, for they had left no guard. I accept 
the alternative--it wa a case of hobson' choic and run. I had to 
keep the lower ground, for my pursuer were on the higher places. 
however, though the ooz and broken ground imped me my youth and 
train made me abl to hold my ground, and by keep a diagon 
line I not onli kept them from gain on me but even began to 
distanc them. thi gave me new heart and strength, and by thi time 
habitu train wa begin to tell and my second wind had come. 
befor me the ground rose slightly. I rush up the slope and found 
befor me a wast of wateri slime, with a low dyke or bank look 
black and grim beyond. I felt that if I could but reach that dyke in 
safeti I could there, with solid ground under my feet and some kind of 
path to guid me, find with compar eas a way out of my troubles. 
after a glanc right and left and see no one near, I kept my eye 
for a few minut to their right work of aid my feet whilst I 
cross the swamp. It wa rough, hard work, but there wa littl 
danger, mere toil; and a short time took me to the dyke. I rush up 
the slope exulting; but here again I met a new shock. On either side 
of me rose a number of crouch figures. from right and left they 
rush at me. each bodi held a rope. 

the cordon wa nearli complete. I could pass on neither side, and the 
end wa near. 

there wa onli one chance, and I took it. I hurl myself across the 
dyke, and escap out of the veri clutch of my foe threw myself 
into the stream. 

At ani other time I should have thought that water foul and filthy, 
but now it wa as welcom as the most crystal stream to the parch 
traveller. It wa a highway of safety! 

My pursuer rush after me. had onli one of them held the rope it 
would have been all up with me, for he could have entangl me befor 
I had time to swim a stroke; but the mani hand hold it embarrass 
and delay them, and when the rope struck the water I heard the 
splash well behind me. A few minutes' hard swim took me across 
the stream. refresh with the immers and encourag by the escape, 
I climb the dyke in compar gaieti of spirits. 

from the top I look back. through the dark I saw my assail 
scatter up and down along the dyke. the pursuit wa evid not 
ended, and again I had to choos my course. beyond the dyke where I 
stood wa a wild, swampi space veri similar to that which I had 
crossed. I determin to shun such a place, and thought for a moment 
whether I would take up or down the dyke. I thought I heard a 
sound--th muffl sound of oars, so I listened, and then shouted. 

No response; but the sound ceased. My enemi had evid got a boat 
of some kind. As they were on the up side of me I took the down path 
and began to run. As I pass to the left of where I had enter the 
water I heard sever splashes, soft and stealthy, like the sound a 
rat make as he plung into the stream, but vastli greater; and as I 
look I saw the dark sheen of the water broken by the rippl of 
sever advanc heads. some of my enemi were swim the stream 
also. 

and now behind me, up the stream, the silenc wa broken by the quick 
rattl and creak of oars; my enemi were in hot pursuit. I put my 
best leg foremost and ran on. after a break of a coupl of minut I 
look back, and by a gleam of light through the rag cloud I saw 
sever dark form climb the bank behind me. the wind had now begun 
to rise, and the water besid me wa ruffl and begin to break in 
tini wave on the bank. I had to keep my eye pretti well on the 
ground befor me, lest I should stumble, for I knew that to stumbl 
wa death. after a few minut I look back behind me. On the dyke 
were onli a few dark figures, but cross the waste, swampi ground 
were mani more. what new danger thi portend I did not know--could 
onli guess. then as I ran it seem to me that my track kept ever 
slope away to the right. I look up ahead and saw that the river 
wa much wider than before, and that the dyke on which I stood fell 
quit away, and beyond it wa anoth stream on whose near bank I saw 
some of the dark form now across the marsh. I wa on an island of 
some kind. 

My situat wa now inde terrible, for my enemi had hem me in 
on everi side. behind came the quicken roll of the oars, as though 
my pursuer knew that the end wa close. around me on everi side wa 
desolation; there wa not a roof or light, as far as I could see. far 
off to the right rose some dark mass, but what it wa I knew not. for 
a moment I paus to think what I should do, not for more, for my 
pursuer were draw closer. then my mind wa made up. I slip down 
the bank and took to the water. I struck out straight ahead so as to 
gain the current by clear the backwat of the island, for such I 
presum it was, when I had pass into the stream. I wait till a 
cloud came drive across the moon and leav all in darkness. then I 
took off my hat and laid it softli on the water float with the 
stream, and a second after dive to the right and struck out under 
water with all my might. I was, I suppose, half a minut under water, 
and when I rose came up as softli as I could, and turning, look 
back. there went my light brown hat float merrili away. close 
behind it came a ricketi old boat, driven furious by a pair of oars. 
the moon wa still partli obscur by the drift clouds, but in the 
partial light I could see a man in the bow hold aloft readi to 
strike what appear to me to be that same dread pole-ax which I 
had befor escaped. As I look the boat drew closer, closer, and the 
man struck savagely. the hat disappeared. the man fell forward, almost 
out of the boat. hi comrad drag him in but without the axe, and 
then as I turn with all my energi bent on reach the further 
bank, I heard the fierc whirr of the mutter 'sacre!' which mark 
the anger of my baffl pursuers. 

that wa the first sound I had heard from human lip dure all thi 
dread chase, and full as it wa of menac and danger to me it wa a 
welcom sound for it broke that aw silenc which shroud and 
appal me. It wa as though an overt sign that my oppon were men 
and not ghosts, and that with them I had, at least, the chanc of a 
man, though but one against many. 

but now that the spell of silenc wa broken the sound came thick and 
fast. from boat to shore and back from shore to boat came quick 
question and answer, all in the fiercest whispers. I look back--a 
fatal thing to do--for in the instant someon caught sight of my face, 
which show white on the dark water, and shouted. hand point to 
me, and in a moment or two the boat wa under weigh, and follow 
hard after me. I had but a littl way to go, but quicker and quicker 
came the boat after me. A few more stroke and I would be on the 
shore, but I felt the oncom of the boat, and expect each second 
to feel the crash of an oar or other weapon on my head. had I not seen 
that dread axe disappear in the water I do not think that I could 
have won the shore. I heard the mutter curs of those not row 
and the labour breath of the rowers. with one suprem effort for 
life or liberti I touch the bank and sprang up it. there wa not a 
singl second to spare, for hard behind me the boat ground and 
sever dark form sprang after me. I gain the top of the dyke, and 
keep to the left ran on again. the boat put off and follow down 
the stream. see thi I fear danger in thi direction, and quickli 
turning, ran down the dyke on the other side, and after pass a 
short stretch of marshi ground gain a wild, open flat countri and 
sped on. 

still behind me came on my relentless pursuers. far away, below me, I 
saw the same dark mass as before, but now grown closer and greater. My 
heart gave a great thrill of delight, for I knew that it must be the 
fortress of bicêtre, and with new courag I ran on. I had heard that 
between each and all of the protect fort of pari there are 
strateg ways, deep sunk road where soldier march should be 
shelter from an enemy. I knew that if I could gain thi road I would 
be safe, but in the dark I could not see ani sign of it, so, in 
blind hope of strike it, I ran on. 

present I came to the edg of a deep cut, and found that down below 
me ran a road guard on each side by a ditch of water fenc on 
either side by a straight, high wall. 

get fainter and dizzier, I ran on; the ground got more 
broken--mor and more still, till I stagger and fell, and rose 
again, and ran on in the blind anguish of the hunted. again the 
thought of alic nerv me. I would not be lost and wreck her life: I 
would fight and struggl for life to the bitter end. with a great 
effort I caught the top of the wall. as, scrambl like a catamount, 
I drew myself up, I actual felt a hand touch the sole of my foot. I 
wa now on a sort of causeway, and befor me I saw a dim light. blind 
and dizzy, I ran on, staggered, and fell, rising, cover with dust 
and blood. 

'halt la!' 

the word sound like a voic from heaven. A blaze of light seem to 
enwrap me, and I shout with joy. 

'qui va la?' the rattl of musketry, the flash of steel befor my 
eyes. instinct I stopped, though close behind me came a rush of 
my pursuers. 

anoth word or two, and out from a gateway poured, as it seem to 
me, a tide of red and blue, as the guard turn out. all around seem 
blaze with light, and the flash of steel, the clink and rattl of 
arms, and the loud, harsh voic of command. As I fell forward, 
utterli exhausted, a soldier caught me. I look back in dread 
expectation, and saw the mass of dark form disappear into the 
night. then I must have fainted. when I recov my sens I wa in 
the guard room. they gave me brandy, and after a while I wa abl to 
tell them someth of what had passed. then a commissari of polic 
appeared, appar out of the empti air, as is the way of the 
parisian polic officer. He listen attentively, and then had a 
moment' consult with the offic in command. appar they 
were agreed, for they ask me if I were readi now to come with them. 

'where to?' I asked, rise to go. 

'back to the dust heaps. We shall, perhaps, catch them yet!' 

'I shall try!' said I. 

He eye me for a moment keenly, and said suddenly: 

'would you like to wait a while or till tomorrow, young englishman?' 
thi touch me to the quick, as, perhaps, he intended, and I jump 
to my feet. 

'come now!' I said; 'now! now! An englishman is alway readi for hi 
duty!' 

the commissari wa a good fellow, as well as a shrewd one; he slap 
my shoulder kindly. 'brave garçon!' he said. 'forgiv me, but I knew 
what would do you most good. the guard is ready. come!' 

and so, pass right through the guard room, and through a long 
vault passage, we were out into the night. A few of the men in front 
had power lanterns. through courtyard and down a slope way we 
pass out through a low archway to a sunken road, the same that I had 
seen in my flight. the order wa given to get at the double, and with 
a quick, spring stride, half run, half walk, the soldier went 
swiftli along. I felt my strength renew again--such is the 
differ between hunter and hunted. A veri short distanc took us to 
a low-li pontoon bridg across the stream, and evid veri 
littl higher up than I had struck it. some effort had evid been 
made to damag it, for the rope had all been cut, and one of the 
chain had been broken. I heard the offic say to the commissary: 

'we are just in time! A few more minutes, and they would have 
destroy the bridge. forward, quicker still!' and on we went. again 
we reach a pontoon on the wind stream; as we came up we heard the 
hollow boom of the metal drum as the effort to destroy the bridg 
wa again renewed. A word of command wa given, and sever men rais 
their rifles. 

'fire!' A volley rang out. there wa a muffl cry, and the dark form 
dispersed. but the evil wa done, and we saw the far end of the 
pontoon swing into the stream. thi wa a seriou delay, and it wa 
nearli an hour befor we had renew rope and restor the bridg 
suffici to allow us to cross. 

We renew the chase. quicker, quicker we went toward the dust 
heaps. 

after a time we came to a place that I knew. there were the remain of 
a fire--a few smoulder wood ash still cast a red glow, but the 
bulk of the ash were cold. I knew the site of the hut and the hill 
behind it up which I had rushed, and in the flicker glow the eye 
of the rat still shone with a sort of phosphorescence. the commissari 
spoke a word to the officer, and he cried: 

'halt!' 

the soldier were order to spread around and watch, and then we 
commenc to examin the ruins. the commissari himself began to lift 
away the char board and rubbish. these the soldier took and pile 
together. present he start back, then bent down and rise 
beckon me. 

'see!' he said. 

It wa a gruesom sight. there lay a skeleton face downwards, a woman 
by the lines--an old woman by the coars fibr of the bone. between 
the rib rose a long spike-lik dagger made from a butcher' 
sharpen knife, it keen point buri in the spine. 

'you will observe,' said the commissari to the offic and to me as he 
took out hi note book, 'that the woman must have fallen on her 
dagger. the rat are mani here--se their eye glisten among that 
heap of bones--and you will also notice'--i shudder as he place hi 
hand on the skeleton--'that but littl time wa lost by them, for the 
bone are scarc cold!' 

there wa no other sign of ani one near, live or dead; and so 
deploy again into line the soldier pass on. present we came to 
the hut made of the old wardrobe. We approached. In five of the six 
compart wa an old man sleeping--sleep so soundli that even 
the glare of the lantern did not wake them. old and grim and grizzl 
they looked, with their gaunt, wrinkled, bronz face and their white 
moustaches. 

the offic call out harshli and loudli a word of command, and in an 
instant each one of them wa on hi feet befor us and stand at 
'attention!' 

'what do you here?' 

'we sleep,' wa the answer. 

'where are the other chiffoniers?' ask the commissary. 

'gone to work.' 

'and you?' 

'we are on guard!' 

'peste!' laugh the offic grimly, as he look at the old men one 
after the other in the face and ad with cool deliber cruelty: 
'asleep on duty! Is thi the manner of the old guard? No wonder, then, 
a waterloo!' 

By the gleam of the lantern I saw the grim old face grow deadli pale, 
and almost shudder at the look in the eye of the old men as the 
laugh of the soldier echo the grim pleasantri of the officer. 

I felt in that moment that I wa in some measur avenged. 

for a moment they look as if they would throw themselv on the 
taunter, but year of their life had school them and they remain 
still. 

'you are but five,' said the commissary; 'where is the sixth?' the 
answer came with a grim chuckle. 

'he is there!' and the speaker point to the bottom of the wardrobe. 
'he die last night. you won't find much of him. the burial of the 
rat is quick!' 

the commissari stoop and look in. then he turn to the offic 
and said calmly: 

'we may as well go back. No trace here now; noth to prove that man 
wa the one wound by your soldiers' bullets! probabl they murder 
him to cover up the trace. see!' again he stoop and place hi hand 
on the skeleton. 'the rat work quickli and they are many. these bone 
are warm!' 

I shuddered, and so did mani more of those around me. 

'form!' said the officer, and so in march order, with the lantern 
swing in front and the manacl veteran in the midst, with steadi 
tramp we took ourselv out of the dustheap and turn backward to 
the fortress of bicêtre. 

* * * * * 

My year of probat ha long sinc ended, and alic is my wife. but 
when I look back upon that tri twelvemonth one of the most vivid 
incid that memori recal is that associ with my visit to the 
citi of dust. 




A dream of red hand 


the first opinion given to me regard jacob settl wa a simpl 
descript statement, 'he' a down-in-the-mouth chap': but I found 
that it embodi the thought and idea of all hi fellow-workmen. 
there wa in the phrase a certain easi tolerance, an absenc of 
posit feel of ani kind, rather than ani complet opinion, which 
mark pretti accur the man' place in public esteem. still, 
there wa some dissimilar between thi and hi appear which 
unconsci set me thinking, and by degrees, as I saw more of the 
place and the workmen, I came to have a special interest in him. He 
was, I found, for ever do kindnesses, not involv money expens 
beyond hi humbl means, but in the manifold way of forethought and 
forbear and self-repress which are of the truer chariti of 
life. women and children trust him implicitly, though, strang 
enough, he rather shun them, except when anyon wa sick, and then 
he made hi appear to help if he could, timidli and awkwardly. He 
led a veri solitari life, keep hous by himself in a tini cottage, 
or rather hut, of one room, far on the edg of the moorland. hi 
exist seem so sad and solitari that I wish to cheer it up, and 
for the purpos took the occas when we had both been sit up 
with a child, injur by me through accident, to offer to lend him 
books. He gladli accepted, and as we part in the grey of the dawn I 
felt that someth of mutual confid had been establish between 
us. 

the book were alway most care and punctual returned, and in 
time jacob settl and I becam quit friends. onc or twice as I 
cross the moorland on sunday I look in on him; but on such 
occas he wa shi and ill at eas so that I felt diffid about 
call to see him. He would never under ani circumst come into 
my own lodgings. 

one sunday afternoon, I wa come back from a long walk beyond the 
moor, and as I pass settle' cottag stop at the door to say 'how 
do you do?' to him. As the door wa shut, I thought that he wa out, 
and mere knock for form' sake, or through habit, not expect to 
get ani answer. To my surprise, I heard a feebl voic from within, 
though what wa said I could not hear. I enter at once, and found 
jacob lie half-dress upon hi bed. He wa as pale as death, and 
the sweat wa simpli roll off hi face. hi hand were 
unconsci grip the bedcloth as a drown man hold on to 
whatev he may grasp. As I came in he half arose, with a wild, hunt 
look in hi eyes, which were wide open and staring, as though 
someth of horror had come befor him; but when he recognis me he 
sank back on the couch with a smother sob of relief and close hi 
eyes. I stood by him for a while, quit a minut or two, while he 
gasped. then he open hi eye and look at me, but with such a 
despairing, woeful express that, as I am a live man, I would have 
rather seen that frozen look of horror. I sat down besid him and 
ask after hi health. for a while he would not answer me except to 
say that he wa not ill; but then, after scrutinis me closely, he 
half aros on hi elbow and said: 

'I thank you kindly, sir, but i'm simpli tell you the truth. I am 
not ill, as men call it, though god know whether there be not wors 
sick than doctor know of. i'll tell you, as you are so kind, 
but I trust that you won't even mention such a thing to a live soul, 
for it might work me more and greater woe. I am suffer from a bad 
dream.' 

'A bad dream!' I said, hope to cheer him; 'but dream pass away with 
the light--even with waking.' there I stopped, for befor he spoke I 
saw the answer in hi desol look round the littl place. 

'no! no! that' all well for peopl that live in comfort and with 
those they love around them. It is a thousand time wors for those 
who live alon and have to do so. what cheer is there for me, wake 
here in the silenc of the night, with the wide moor around me full of 
voic and full of face that make my wake a wors dream than my 
sleep? ah, young sir, you have no past that can send it legion to 
peopl the dark and the empti space, and I pray the good god that 
you may never have!' As he spoke, there wa such an almost 
irresist graviti of convict in hi manner that I abandon my 
remonstr about hi solitari life. I felt that I wa in the 
presenc of some secret influenc which I could not fathom. To my 
relief, for I knew not what to say, he went on: 

'two night past have I dream it. It wa hard enough the first 
night, but I came through it. last night the expect wa in itself 
almost wors than the dream--until the dream came, and then it swept 
away everi remembr of lesser pain. I stay awak till just 
befor the dawn, and then it came again, and ever sinc I have been in 
such an agoni as I am sure the die feel, and with it all the dread 
of tonight.' befor he had got to the end of the sentenc my mind wa 
made up, and I felt that I could speak to him more cheerfully. 

'tri and get to sleep earli tonight--in fact, befor the even ha 
pass away. the sleep will refresh you, and I promis you there will 
not be ani bad dream after tonight.' He shook hi head hopelessly, so 
I sat a littl longer and then left him. 

when I got home I made my arrang for the night, for I had made 
up my mind to share jacob settle' lone vigil in hi cottag on the 
moor. I judg that if he got to sleep befor sunset he would wake 
well befor midnight, and so, just as the bell of the citi were 
strike eleven, I stood opposit hi door arm with a bag, in which 
were my supper, an extra larg flask, a coupl of candles, and a book. 
the moonlight wa bright, and flood the whole moor, till it wa 
almost as light as day; but ever and anon black cloud drove across 
the sky, and made a dark which by comparison seem almost 
tangible. I open the door softly, and enter without wake jacob, 
who lay asleep with hi white face upward. He wa still, and again 
bath in sweat. I tri to imagin what vision were pass befor 
those close eye which could bring with them the miseri and woe which 
were stamp on the face, but fanci fail me, and I wait for the 
awakening. It came suddenly, and in a fashion which touch me to the 
quick, for the hollow groan that broke from the man' white lip as he 
half aros and sank back wa manifestli the realis or complet 
of some train of thought which had gone before. 

'if thi be dreaming,' said I to myself, 'then it must be base on 
some veri terribl reality. what can have been that unhappi fact that 
he spoke of?' 

while I thu spoke, he realis that I wa with him. It struck me as 
strang that he had no period of that doubt as to whether dream or 
realiti surround him which commonli mark an expect environ of 
wake men. with a posit cri of joy, he seiz my hand and held it 
in hi two wet, trembl hands, as a frighten child cling on to 
someon whom it loves. I tri to sooth him: 

'there, there! it is all right. I have come to stay with you tonight, 
and togeth we will tri to fight thi evil dream.' He let go my hand 
suddenly, and sank back on hi bed and cover hi eye with hi 
hands. 

'fight it?--th evil dream! ah! no, sir, no! No mortal power can fight 
that dream, for it come from god--and is burn in here;' and he beat 
upon hi forehead. then he went on: 

'it is the same dream, ever the same, and yet it grow in it power to 
tortur me everi time it comes.' 

'what is the dream?' I asked, think that the speak of it might 
give him some relief, but he shrank away from me, and after a long 
paus said: 

'no, I had better not tell it. It may not come again.' 

there wa manifestli someth to conceal from me--someth that lay 
behind the dream, so I answered: 

'all right. I hope you have seen the last of it. but if it should come 
again, you will tell me, will you not? I ask, not out of curiosity, 
but becaus I think it may reliev you to speak.' He answer with 
what I thought wa almost an undu amount of solemnity: 

'if it come again, I shall tell you all.' 

then I tri to get hi mind away from the subject to more mundan 
things, so I produc supper, and made him share it with me, includ 
the content of the flask. after a littl he brace up, and when I lit 
my cigar, have given him another, we smoke a full hour, and talk 
of mani things. littl by littl the comfort of hi bodi stole over 
hi mind, and I could see sleep lay her gentl hand on hi 
eyelids. He felt it, too, and told me that now he felt all right, and 
I might safe leav him; but I told him that, right or wrong, I wa 
go to see in the daylight. So I lit my other candle, and began to 
read as he fell asleep. 

By degre I got interest in my book, so interest that present I 
wa startl by it drop out of my hands. I look and saw that 
jacob wa still asleep, and I wa rejoic to see that there wa on 
hi face a look of unwont happiness, while hi lip seem to move 
with unspoken words. then I turn to my work again, and again woke, 
but thi time to feel chill to my veri marrow by hear the voic 
from the bed besid me: 

'not with those red hands! never! never!' On look at him, I found 
that he wa still asleep. He woke, however, in an instant, and did not 
seem surpris to see me; there wa again that strang apathi as to 
hi surroundings. then I said: 

'settle, tell me your dream. you may speak freely, for I shall hold 
your confid sacred. while we both live I shall never mention what 
you may choos to tell me.' 

He replied: 

'I said I would; but I had better tell you first what goe befor the 
dream, that you may understand. I wa a schoolmast when I wa a veri 
young man; it wa onli a parish school in a littl villag in the 
west country. No need to mention ani names. better not. I wa engag 
to be marri to a young girl whom I love and almost reverenced. It 
wa the old story. while we were wait for the time when we could 
afford to set up hous together, anoth man came along. He wa nearli 
as young as I was, and handsome, and a gentleman, with all a 
gentleman' attract way for a woman of our class. He would go 
fishing, and she would meet him while I wa at my work in school. I 
reason with her and implor her to give him up. I offer to get 
marri at onc and go away and begin the world in a strang country; 
but she would not listen to anyth I could say, and I could see that 
she wa infatu with him. then I took it on myself to meet the man 
and ask him to deal well with the girl, for I thought he might mean 
honestli by her, so that there might be no talk or chanc of talk on 
the part of others. I went where I should meet him with none by, and 
we met!' here jacob settl had to pause, for someth seem to rise 
in hi throat, and he almost gasp for breath. then he went on: 

'sir, as god is abov us, there wa no selfish thought in my heart 
that day, I love my pretti mabel too well to be content with a part 
of her love, and I had thought of my own unhappi too often not to 
have come to realis that, whatev might come to her, my hope wa 
gone. He wa insol to me--you, sir, who are a gentleman, cannot 
know, perhaps, how gall can be the insol of one who is abov 
you in station--but I bore with that. I implor him to deal well with 
the girl, for what might be onli a pastim of an idl hour with him 
might be the break of her heart. for I never had a thought of her 
truth, or that the worst of harm could come to her--it wa onli the 
unhappi to her heart I feared. but when I ask him when he 
intend to marri her hi laughter gall me so that I lost my temper 
and told him that I would not stand by and see her life made unhappy. 
then he grew angri too, and in hi anger said such cruel thing of her 
that then and there I swore he should not live to do her harm. god 
know how it came about, for in such moment of passion it is hard to 
rememb the step from a word to a blow, but I found myself stand 
over hi dead body, with my hand crimson with the blood that well 
from hi torn throat. We were alon and he wa a stranger, with none 
of hi kin to seek for him and murder doe not alway out--not all at 
once. hi bone may be whiten still, for all I know, in the pool of 
the river where I left him. No one suspect hi absence, or whi it 
was, except my poor mabel, and she dare not speak. but it wa all in 
vain, for when I came back again after an absenc of months--for I 
could not live in the place--i learn that her shame had come and 
that she had die in it. hitherto I had been born up by the thought 
that my ill deed had save her future, but now, when I learn that I 
had been too late, and that my poor love wa smirch with that man' 
sin, I fled away with the sens of my useless guilt upon me more 
heavili than I could bear. ah! sir, you that have not done such a sin 
don't know what it is to carri it with you. you may think that custom 
make it easi to you, but it is not so. It grow and grow with everi 
hour, till it becom intolerable, and with it growing, too, the 
feel that you must for ever stand outsid heaven. you don't know 
what that means, and I pray god that you never may. ordinari men, to 
whom all thing are possible, don't often, if ever, think of heaven. 
It is a name, and noth more, and they are content to wait and let 
thing be, but to those who are doom to be shut out for ever you 
cannot think what it means, you cannot guess or measur the terribl 
endless long to see the gate opened, and to be abl to join the 
white figur within. 

'and thi bring me to my dream. It seem that the portal wa befor 
me, with great gate of massiv steel with bar of the thick of a 
mast, rise to the veri clouds, and so close that between them wa 
just a glimps of a crystal grotto, on whose shine wall were 
figur mani white-clad form with face radiant with joy. when I 
stood befor the gate my heart and my soul were so full of raptur and 
long that I forgot. and there stood at the gate two mighti angel 
with sweep wings, and, oh! so stern of countenance. they held each 
in one hand a flame sword, and in the other the latchet, which move 
to and fro at their lightest touch. nearer were figur all drape in 
black, with head cover so that onli the eye were seen, and they 
hand to each who came white garment such as the angel wear. A low 
murmur came that told that all should put on their own robes, and 
without soil, or the angel would not pass them in, but would smite 
them down with the flame swords. I wa eager to don my own garment, 
and hurriedli threw it over me and step swiftli to the gate; but it 
move not, and the angels, loos the latchet, point to my dress, I 
look down, and wa aghast, for the whole robe wa smear with 
blood. My hand were red; they glitter with the blood that drip 
from them as on that day by the river bank. and then the angel rais 
their flame sword to smite me down, and the horror wa complete--i 
awoke. again, and again, and again, that aw dream come to me. I 
never learn from the experience, I never remember, but at the 
begin the hope is ever there to make the end more appalling; and I 
know that the dream doe not come out of the common dark where the 
dream abide, but that it is sent from god as a punishment! never, 
never shall I be abl to pass the gate, for the soil on the angel 
garment must ever come from these bloodi hands!' 

I listen as in a spell as jacob settl spoke. there wa someth so 
far away in the tone of hi voice--someth so dreami and mystic in 
the eye that look as if through me at some spirit beyond--someth 
so lofti in hi veri diction and in such mark contrast to hi 
workworn cloth and hi poor surround that I wonder if the 
whole thing were not a dream. 

We were both silent for a long time. I kept look at the man befor 
me in grow wonderment. now that hi confess had been made, hi 
soul, which had been crush to the veri earth, seem to leap back 
again to upright with some resili force. I suppos I ought to 
have been horrifi with hi story, but, strang to say, I wa not. It 
certainli is not pleasant to be made the recipi of the confid 
of a murderer, but thi poor fellow seem to have had, not onli so 
much provocation, but so much self-deni purpos in hi deed of 
blood that I did not feel call upon to pass judgment upon him. My 
purpos wa to comfort, so I spoke out with what calm I could, for 
my heart wa beat fast and heavily: 

'you need not despair, jacob settle. god is veri good, and hi merci 
is great. live on and work on in the hope that some day you may feel 
that you have aton for the past.' here I paused, for I could see 
that deep, natur sleep thi time, wa creep upon him. 'go to 
sleep,' I said; 'I shall watch with you here and we shall have no more 
evil dream tonight.' 

He made an effort to pull himself together, and answered: 

'I don't know how to thank you for your good to me thi night, but 
I think you had best leav me now. i'll tri and sleep thi out; I feel 
a weight off my mind sinc I have told you all. If there' anyth of 
the man left in me, I must tri and fight out life alone.' 

'i'll go tonight, as you wish it,' I said; 'but take my advice, and do 
not live in such a solitari way. Go among men and women; live among 
them. share their joy and sorrows, and it will help you to forget. 
thi solitud will make you melancholi mad.' 

'I will!' he answered, half unconsciously, for sleep wa overmast 
him. 

I turn to go, and he look after me. when I had touch the latch I 
drop it, and, come back to the bed, held out my hand. He grasp 
it with both hi as he rose to a sit posture, and I said my 
goodnight, tri to cheer him: 

'heart, man, heart! there is work in the world for you to do, jacob 
settle. you can wear those white robe yet and pass through that gate 
of steel!' 

then I left him. 

A week after I found hi cottag deserted, and on ask at the work 
wa told that he had 'gone north', no one exactli knew whither. 

two year afterwards, I wa stay for a few day with my friend dr. 
munro in glasgow. He wa a busi man, and could not spare much time for 
go about with me, so I spent my day in excurs to the trossach 
and loch katrin and down the clyde. On the second last even of my 
stay I came back somewhat later than I had arranged, but found that 
my host wa late too. the maid told me that he had been sent for to 
the hospital--a case of accid at the gas-works, and the dinner wa 
postpon an hour; so tell her I would stroll down to find her 
master and walk back with him, I went out. At the hospit I found him 
wash hi hand preparatori to start for home. casually, I ask 
him what hi case was. 

'oh, the usual thing! A rotten rope and men' live of no account. two 
men were work in a gasometer, when the rope that held their 
scaffold broke. It must have occur just befor the dinner hour, 
for no one notic their absenc till the men had returned. there wa 
about seven feet of water in the gasometer, so they had a hard fight 
for it, poor fellows. however, one of them wa alive, just alive, but 
we have had a hard job to pull him through. It seem that he owe hi 
life to hi mate, for I have never heard of greater heroism. they swam 
togeth while their strength lasted, but at the end they were so done 
up that even the light above, and the men slung with ropes, come 
down to help them, could not keep them up. but one of them stood on 
the bottom and held up hi comrad over hi head, and those few 
breath made all the differ between life and death. they were a 
shock sight when they were taken out, for that water is like a 
purpl dye with the ga and the tar. the man upstair look as if he 
had been wash in blood. ugh!' 

'and the other?' 

'oh, he' wors still. but he must have been a veri nobl fellow. that 
struggl under the water must have been fearful; one can see that by 
the way the blood ha been drawn from the extremities. It make the 
idea of the _stigmata_ possibl to look at him. resolut like thi 
could, you would think, do anyth in the world. ay! it might almost 
unbar the gate of heaven. look here, old man, it is not a veri 
pleasant sight, especi just befor dinner, but you are a writer, 
and thi is an odd case. here is someth you would not like to miss, 
for in all human probabl you will never see anyth like it 
again.' while he wa speak he had brought me into the mortuari of 
the hospital. 

On the bier lay a bodi cover with a white sheet, which wa wrap 
close round it. 

'look like a chrysalis, don't it? I say, jack, if there be anyth 
in the old myth that a soul is typifi by a butterfly, well, then the 
one that thi chrysali sent forth wa a veri nobl specimen and took 
all the sunlight on it wings. see here!' He uncov the face. 
horrible, indeed, it looked, as though stain with blood. but I knew 
him at once, jacob settle! My friend pull the wind sheet further 
down. 

the hand were cross on the purpl breast as they had been 
rever place by some tender-heart person. As I saw them my 
heart throb with a great exultation, for the memori of hi 
harrow dream rush across my mind. there wa no stain now on those 
poor, brave hands, for they were blanch white as snow. 

and somehow as I look I felt that the evil dream wa all over. that 
nobl soul had won a way through the gate at last. the white robe had 
now no stain from the hand that had put it on. 




crooken sand 


Mr arthur fernle markam, who took what wa known as the red hous 
abov the main of crooken, wa a london merchant, and be 
essenti a cockney, thought it necessari when he went for the 
summer holiday to scotland to provid an entir rig-out as a highland 
chieftain, as manifest in chromolithograph and on the music-hal 
stage. He had onc seen in the empir the great prince--'th bounder 
king'--br down the hous by appear as 'the macslogan of that 
ilk,' and sing the celebr scotch song, 'there' naeth like 
haggi to mak a mon dry!' and he had ever sinc preserv in hi mind 
a faith imag of the picturesqu and warlik appear which he 
presented. indeed, if the true inward of mr. markam' mind on the 
subject of hi select of aberdeenshir as a summer resort were 
known, it would be found that in the foreground of the holiday 
local which hi fanci paint stalk the mani hu figur of the 
macslogan of that ilk. however, be thi as it may, a veri kind 
fortune--certainli so far as extern beauti wa concerned--l him to 
the choic of crooken bay. It is a love spot, between aberdeen and 
peterhead, just under the rock-bound headland whenc the long, 
danger reef known as the spur run out into the north sea. 
between thi and the 'main of crooken'--a villag shelter by the 
northern cliffs--li the deep bay, back with a multitud of 
bent-grown dune where the rabbit are to be found in thousands. thu 
at either end of the bay is a rocki promontory, and when the dawn or 
the sunset fall on the rock of red syenit the effect is veri 
lovely. the bay itself is floor with level sand and the tide run 
far out, leav a smooth wast of hard sand on which are dot here 
and there the stake net and bag net of the salmon fishers. At one 
end of the bay there is a littl group or cluster of rock whose head 
are rais someth abov high water, except when in rough weather 
the wave come over them green. At low tide they are expos down to 
sand level; and here is perhap the onli littl bit of danger sand 
on thi part of the eastern coast. between the rocks, which are apart 
about some fifti feet, is a small quicksand, which, like the goodwins, 
is danger onli with the incom tide. It extend outward till it 
is lost in the sea, and inward till it fade away in the hard sand of 
the upper beach. On the slope of the hill which rise beyond the 
dunes, midway between the spur and the port of crooken, is the red 
house. It rise from the midst of a clump of fir-tre which protect 
it on three sides, leav the whole sea front open. A trim 
old-fashion garden stretch down to the roadway, on cross which 
a grassi path, which can be use for light vehicles, thread a way to 
the shore, wind amongst the sand hills. 

when the markam famili arriv at the red hous after their thirty-six 
hour of pitch on the aberdeen steamer _ban righ_ from blackwall, 
with the subsequ train to yellon and drive of a dozen miles, they 
all agre that they had never seen a more delight spot. the 
gener satisfact wa more mark as at that veri time none of the 
famili were, for sever reasons, inclin to find favour anyth 
or ani place over the scottish border. though the famili wa a larg 
one, the prosper of the busi allow them all sort of person 
luxuries, amongst which wa a wide latitud in the way of dress. the 
frequenc of the markam girls' new frock wa a sourc of envi to 
their bosom friend and of joy to themselves. 

arthur fernle markam had not taken hi famili into hi confid 
regard hi new costume. He wa not quit certain that he should be 
free from ridicule, or at least from sarcasm, and as he wa sensit 
on the subject, he thought it better to be actual in the suitabl 
environ befor he allow the full splendour to burst upon them. 
He had taken some pains, to insur the complet of the highland 
costume. for the purpos he had paid mani visit to 'the scotch 
all-wool tartan cloth mart' which had been late establish in 
copthall-court by the messrs. maccallum more and roderick macdhu. He 
had anxiou consult with the head of the firm--maccallum as he 
call himself, resent ani such addit as 'mr.' or 'esquire.' 
the known stock of buckles, buttons, straps, brooch and ornament of 
all kind were examin in critic detail; and at last an eagle' 
feather of suffici magnific proport wa discovered, and 
the equip wa complete. It wa onli when he saw the finish 
costume, with the vivid hue of the tartan seemingli modifi into 
compar sobrieti by the multitud of silver fittings, the 
cairngorm brooches, the philibeg, dirk and sporran that he wa fulli 
and absolut satisfi with hi choice. At first he had thought of 
the royal stuart dress tartan, but abandon it on the maccallum 
point out that if he should happen to be in the neighbourhood of 
balmor it might lead to complications. the maccallum, who, by the 
way, spoke with a remark cockney accent, suggest other plaid in 
turn; but now that the other question of accuraci had been raised, mr. 
markam foresaw difficulti if he should by chanc find himself in the 
local of the clan whose colour he had usurped. the maccallum at 
last undertook to have, at markam' expense, a special pattern woven 
which would not be exactli the same as ani exist tartan, though 
partak of the characterist of many. It wa base on the royal 
stuart, but contain suggest as to simplic of pattern from the 
macalist and ogilvi clans, and as to neutral of colour from the 
clan of buchanan, macbeth, chief of macintosh and macleod. when the 
specimen had been shown to markam he had fear somewhat lest it 
should strike the eye of hi domest circl as gaudy; but as roderick 
macdhu fell into perfect ecstasi over it beauti he did not make ani 
object to the complet of the piece. He thought, and wisely, that 
if a genuin scotchman like macdhu like it, it must be 
right--especi as the junior partner wa a man veri much of hi own 
build and appearance. when the maccallum wa receiv hi 
cheque--which, by the way, wa a pretti stiff one--h remarked: 

'i'v taken the liberti of have some more of the stuff woven in case 
you or ani of your friend should want it.' markam wa gratified, and 
told him that he should be onli too happi if the beauti stuff which 
they had origin between them should becom a favourite, as he had 
no doubt it would in time. He might make and sell as much as he would. 

markam tri the dress on in hi offic one even after the clerk 
had all gone home. He wa pleased, though a littl frightened, at the 
result. the maccallum had done hi work thoroughly, and there wa 
noth omit that could add to the martial digniti of the wearer. 

'I shall not, of course, take the claymor and the pistol with me on 
ordinari occasions,' said markam to himself as he began to undress. He 
determin that he would wear the dress for the first time on land 
in scotland, and accordingli on the morn when the _ban righ_ wa 
hang off the girdl ness lighthouse, wait for the tide to enter 
the port of aberdeen, he emerg from hi cabin in all the gaudi 
splendour of hi new costume. the first comment he heard wa from one 
of hi own sons, who did not recognis him at first. 

'here' a guy! great scott! it' the governor!' and the boy fled 
forthwith and tri to buri hi laughter under a cushion in the 
saloon. markam wa a good sailor and had not suffer from the 
pitch of the boat, so that hi natur rubicund face wa even 
more rosi by the consciou blush which suffus hi cheek when he had 
found himself at onc the cynosur of all eyes. He could have wish 
that he had not been so bold for he knew from the cold that there wa 
a big bare spot under one side of hi jauntili worn glengarri cap. 
however, he face the group of stranger boldly. He wa not, 
outwardly, upset even when some of the comment reach hi ears. 

'he' off hi bloomin' chump,' said a cockney in a suit of exagger 
plaid. 

'there' fli on him,' said a tall thin yankee, pale with 
sea-sickness, who wa on hi way to take up hi resid for a time 
as close as he could get to the gate of balmoral. 

'happi thought! let us fill our mulls; now' the chance!' said a 
young oxford man on hi way home to inverness. but present mr. 
markam heard the voic of hi eldest daughter. 

'where is he? where is he?' and she came tear along the deck with 
her hat blow behind her. her face show sign of agitation, for 
her mother had just been tell her of her father' condition; but 
when she saw him she instantli burst into laughter so violent that it 
end in a fit of hysterics. someth of the same kind happen to 
each of the other children. when they had all had their turn mr. 
markam went to hi cabin and sent hi wife' maid to tell each member 
of the famili that he want to see them at once. they all made their 
appearance, suppress their feel as well as they could. He said 
to them veri quietly: 

'mi dears, don't I provid you all with ampl allowances?' 

'yes, father!' they all answer gravely, 'no one could be more 
generous!' 

'don't I let you dress as you please?' 

'yes, father!'--thi a littl sheepishly. 

'then, my dears, don't you think it would be nicer and kinder of you 
not to tri and make me feel uncomfortable, even if I do assum a dress 
which is ridicul in your eyes, though quit common enough in the 
countri where we are about to sojourn?' there wa no answer except 
that which appear in their hang heads. He wa a good father and 
they all knew it. He wa quit satisfi and went on: 

'there, now, run away and enjoy yourselves! We shan't have anoth 
word about it.' then he went on deck again and stood brave the fire 
of ridicul which he recognis around him, though noth more wa 
said within hi hearing. 

the astonish and the amus which hi get-up occas on the 
_ban righ_ was, however, noth to that which it creat in aberdeen. 
the boy and loafers, and women with babies, who wait at the land 
shed, follow _en masse_ as the markam parti took their way to the 
railway station; even the porter with their old-fashion knot and 
their new-fashion barrows, who await the travel at the foot of 
the gang-plank, follow in wonder delight. fortun the 
peterhead train wa just about to start, so that the martyrdom wa not 
unnecessarili prolonged. In the carriag the gloriou highland costum 
wa unseen, and as there were but few person at the station at 
yellon, all went well there. when, however, the carriag drew near the 
main of crooken and the fisher folk had run to their door to see who 
it wa that wa passing, the excit exceed all bounds. the 
children with one impuls wave their bonnet and ran shout behind 
the carriage; the men forsook their net and their bait and 
followed; the women clutch their babies, and follow also. the 
hors were tire after their long journey to yellon and back, and the 
hill wa steep, so that there wa ampl time for the crowd to gather 
and even to pass on ahead. 

mrs. markam and the elder girl would have like to make some protest 
or to do someth to reliev their feel of chagrin at the 
ridicul which they saw on all faces, but there wa a look of fix 
determin on the face of the seem highland which awe them a 
little, and they were silent. It might have been that the eagle' 
feather, even when aris abov the bald head, the cairngorm brooch 
even on the fat shoulder, and the claymore, dirk and pistols, even 
when belt round the extens paunch and protrud from the 
stock on the sturdi calf, fulfil their exist as symbol of 
martial and terrifi import! when the parti arriv at the gate of 
the red hous there await them a crowd of crooken inhabitants, 
hatless and respect silent; the remaind of the popul wa 
pain toil up the hill. the silenc wa broken by onli one 
sound, that of a man with a deep voice. 

'man! but he' forgotten the pipes!' 

the servant had arriv some day before, and all thing were in 
readiness. In the glow consequ on a good lunch after a hard journey 
all the disagre of travel and all the chagrin consequ on the 
adopt of the obnoxi costum were forgotten. 

that afternoon markam, still clad in full array, walk through the 
main of crooken. He wa all alone, for, strang to say, hi wife and 
both daughter had sick headaches, and were, as he wa told, lie 
down to rest after the fatigu of the journey. hi eldest son, who 
claim to be a young man, had gone out by himself to explor the 
surround of the place, and one of the boy could not be found. the 
other boy, on be told that hi father had sent for him to come for 
a walk, had managed--bi accident, of course--to fall into the water 
butt, and had to be dri and rig out afresh. hi cloth not 
have been as yet unpack thi wa of cours imposs without 
delay. 

mr. markam wa not quit satisfi with hi walk. He could not meet 
ani of hi neighbours. It wa not that there were not enough peopl 
about, for everi hous and cottag seem to be full; but the peopl 
when in the open were either in their doorway some distanc behind 
him, or on the roadway a long distanc in front. As he pass he 
could see the top of head and the white of eye in the window or 
round the corner of doors. the onli interview which he had wa 
anyth but a pleasant one. thi wa with an odd sort of old man who 
wa hardli ever heard to speak except to join in the 'amens' in the 
meeting-house. hi sole occup seem to be to wait at the window 
of the post-offic from eight o'clock in the morn till the arriv 
of the mail at one, when he carri the letter-bag to a neighbour 
baroni castle. the remaind of hi day wa spent on a seat in a 
draughti part of the port, where the offal of the fish, the refus of 
the bait, and the hous rubbish wa thrown, and where the duck were 
accustom to hold high revel. 

when saft tammi beheld him come he rais hi eyes, which were 
gener fix on the noth which lay on the roadway opposit hi 
seat, and, seem dazzl as if by a burst of sunshine, rub them 
and shade them with hi hand. then he start up and rais hi hand 
aloft in a denunciatori manner as he spoke:-- 

'"vaniti of vanities, saith the preacher. all is vanity." mon, be 
warn in time! "behold the lili of the field, they toil not, 
neither do they spin, yet solomon in all hi glori wa not array 
like one of these." mon! mon! thi vaniti is as the quicksand which 
swallow up all which come within it spell. bewar vanity! bewar 
the quicksand, which yawneth for thee, and which will swallow thee up! 
see thyself! learn thine own vanity! meet thyself face to face, and 
then in that moment thou shalt learn the fatal forc of thi vanity. 
learn it, know it, and repent ere the quicksand swallow thee!' then 
without anoth word he went back to hi seat and sat there immov 
and expressionless as before. 

markam could not but feel a littl upset by thi tirade. onli that it 
wa spoken by a seem madman, he would have put it down to some 
eccentr exhibit of scottish humour or impudence; but the graviti 
of the message--for it seem noth else--mad such a read 
impossible. He was, however, determin not to give in to ridicule, 
and although he had not yet seen anyth in scotland to remind him 
even of a kilt, he determin to wear hi highland dress. when he 
return home, in less than half-an-hour, he found that everi member 
of the famili was, despit the headaches, out take a walk. He took 
the opportun afford by their absenc of lock himself in hi 
dressing-room, took off the highland dress, and, put on a suit of 
flannels, lit a cigar and had a snooze. He wa awaken by the nois 
of the famili come in, and at onc don hi dress made hi 
appear in the drawing-room for tea. 

He did not go out again that afternoon; but after dinner he put on hi 
dress again--h had, of cours dress for dinner as usual--and went 
by himself for a walk on the sea-shore. He had by thi time come to 
the conclus that he would get by degre accustom to the highland 
dress befor make it hi ordinari wear. the moon wa up and he 
easili follow the path through the sand-hills, and shortli struck 
the shore. the tide wa out and the beach firm as a rock, so he 
stroll southward to nearli the end of the bay. here he wa 
attract by two isol rock some littl way out from the edg of 
the dunes, so he stroll toward them. when he reach the nearest 
one he climb it, and, sit there elev some fifteen or twenti 
feet over the wast of sand, enjoy the lovely, peac prospect. 
the moon wa rise behind the headland of pennyfold, and it light 
wa just touch the top of the furthermost rock of the spur some 
three-quart of a mile out; the rest of the rock were in dark 
shadow. As the moon rose over the headland, the rock of the spur and 
then the beach by degre becam flood with light. 

for a good while mr. markam sat and look at the rise moon and the 
grow area of light which follow it rise. then he turn and 
face eastward and sat with hi chin in hi hand look seawards, 
and revel in the peac and beauti and freedom of the scene. the 
roar of london--th dark and the strife and weari of london 
life--seem to have pass quit away, and he live at the moment a 
freer and higher life. He look at the glisten water as it stole 
it way over the flat wast of sand, come closer and closer 
insensibly--th tide had turned. present he heard a distant shout 
along the beach veri far off. 

'the fishermen call to each other,' he said to himself and look 
around. As he did so he got a horribl shock, for though just then a 
cloud sail across the moon he saw, in spite of the sudden dark 
around him, hi own image. for an instant, on the top of the opposit 
rock he could see the bald back of the head and the glengarri cap with 
the immens eagle' feather. As he stagger back hi foot slipped, 
and he began to slide down toward the sand between the two rocks. He 
took no concern as to falling, for the sand wa realli onli a few feet 
below him, and hi mind wa occupi with the figur or simulacrum of 
himself, which had alreadi disappeared. As the easiest way of reach 
_terra firma_ he prepar to jump the remaind of the distance. all 
thi had taken but a second, but the brain work quickly, and even as 
he gather himself for the spring he saw the sand below him lie so 
marbl level shake and shiver in an odd way. A sudden fear overcam 
him; hi knee failed, and instead of jump he slid miser down 
the rock, scratch hi bare leg as he went. hi feet touch the 
sand--went through it like water--and he wa down below hi knee 
befor he realis that he wa in a quicksand. wildli he grasp at 
the rock to keep himself from sink further, and fortun there 
wa a jut spur or edg which he wa abl to grasp instinctively. 
To thi he clung in grim desperation. He tri to shout, but hi 
breath would not come, till after a great effort hi voic rang out. 
again he shouted, and it seem as if the sound of hi own voic gave 
him new courage, for he wa abl to hold on to the rock for a longer 
time than he thought possible--though he held on onli in blind 
desperation. He was, however, begin to find hi grasp weakening, 
when, joy of joys! hi shout wa answer by a rough voic from just 
abov him. 

'god be thankit, i'm nae too late!' and a fisherman with great 
thigh-boot came hurriedli climb over the rock. In an instant he 
recognis the graviti of the danger, and with a cheer 'haud fast, 
mon! i'm comin'!' scrambl down till he found a firm foothold. then 
with one strong hand hold the rock above, he lean down, and 
catch markam' wrist, call out to him, 'haud to me, mon! haud to 
me wi' ither hond!' 

then he lent hi great strength, and with a steady, sturdi pull, 
drag him out of the hungri quicksand and place him safe upon the 
rock. hardli give him time to draw breath, he pull and push 
him--nev let him go for an instant--ov the rock into the firm 
sand beyond it, and final deposit him, still shake from the 
magnitud of hi danger, high upon the beach. then he began to speak: 

'mon! but I wa just in time. If I had no laucht at yon foolish lad 
and begun to rin at the first you'd a bin sinkin' doon to the bowel 
o' the airth be the noo! wulli beagri thocht you wa a ghaist, and 
tom macphail swore ye wa onli like a goblin on a puddick-steel! "na!" 
said I. "yon' but the daft englishman--th looni that had escapit 
frae the waxwarks." I wa thinkin' that bein' strang and silly--if 
not a whole-mad feel--ye'd no ken the way o' the quicksan'! I 
shout till warn ye, and then ran to drag ye aff, if need be. but god 
be thankit, be ye fule or onli half-daft wi' yer vanity, that I wa no 
that late!' and he rever lift hi cap as he spoke. 

mr. markam wa deepli touch and thank for hi escap from a 
horribl death; but the sting of the charg of vaniti thu made onc 
more against him came through hi humility. He wa about to repli 
angrily, when suddenli a great awe fell upon him as he rememb the 
warn word of the half-crazi letter-carrier: 'meet thyself face to 
face, and repent ere the quicksand shall swallow thee!' 

here, too, he rememb the imag of himself that he had seen and the 
sudden danger from the deadli quicksand that had followed. He wa 
silent a full minute, and then said: 

'mi good fellow, I owe you my life!' 

the answer came with rever from the hardi fisherman, 'na! na! Ye 
owe that to god; but, as for me, i'm onli too glad till be the humbl 
instrument o' hi mercy.' 

'but you will let me thank you,' said mr. markam, take both the 
great hand of hi deliver in hi and hold them tight. 'mi heart 
is too full as yet, and my nerv are too much shaken to let me say 
much; but, believ me, I am very, veri grateful!' It wa quit evid 
that the poor old fellow wa deepli touched, for the tear were 
run down hi cheeks. 

the fisherman said, with a rough but true courtesy: 

'ay, sir! thank me and ye will--if it'll do yer poor heart good. an' 
i'm think that if it were me i'd be thank too. but, sir, as for 
me I need no thanks. I am glad, so I am!' 

that arthur fernle markam wa realli thank and grate wa shown 
practic later on. within a week' time there sail into port 
crooken the finest fish smack that had ever been seen in the 
harbour of peterhead. she wa fulli found with sail and gear of all 
kinds, and with net of the best. her master and men went away by the 
coach, after have left with the salmon-fisher' wife the paper 
which made her over to him. 

As mr. markam and the salmon-fish walk togeth along the shore 
the former ask hi companion not to mention the fact that he had 
been in such immin danger, for that it would onli distress hi dear 
wife and children. He said that he would warn them all of the 
quicksand, and for that purpos he, then and there, ask question 
about it till he felt that hi inform on the subject wa 
complete. befor they part he ask hi companion if he had happen 
to see a second figure, dress like himself on the other rock as he 
had approach to succour him. 

'na! na!' came the answer, 'there is nae sic anoth fule in these 
parts. nor ha there been sinc the time o' jami fleeman--him that 
wa fule to the laird o' udny. why, mon! sic a heathenish dress as ye 
have on till ye ha nae been seen in these pairt within the memori o' 
mon. an' i'm thinkin' that sic a dress never wa for sittin' on the 
cauld rock, as ye done beyont. mon! but do ye no fear the rheumat 
or the lumbagi wi' floppin' doon on to the cauld stane wi' yer bare 
flesh? I wa think that it wa daft ye waur when I see ye the 
mornin' doon be the port, but it' fule or eediot ye maun be for the 
like o' thot!' mr. markam did not care to argu the point, and as they 
were now close to hi own home he ask the salmon-fish to have a 
glass of whisky--which he did--and they part for the night. He took 
good care to warn all hi famili of the quicksand, tell them that 
he had himself been in some danger from it. 

all that night he never slept. He heard the hour strike one after the 
other; but tri how he would he could not get to sleep. over and over 
again he went through the horribl episod of the quicksand, from the 
time that saft tammi had broken hi habitu silenc to preach to him 
of the sin of vaniti and to warn him. the question kept ever aris 
in hi mind: 'am I then so vain as to be in the rank of the foolish?' 
and the answer ever came in the word of the crazi prophet: '"vaniti 
of vanities! all is vanity." meet thyself face to face, and repent ere 
the quicksand shall swallow thee!' somehow a feel of doom began to 
shape itself in hi mind that he would yet perish in that same 
quicksand, for there he had alreadi met himself face to face. 

In the grey of the morn he doze off, but it wa evid that he 
continu the subject in hi dreams, for he wa fulli awaken by hi 
wife, who said: 

'do sleep quietly! that bless highland suit ha got on your brain. 
don't talk in your sleep, if you can help it!' He wa somehow 
consciou of a glad feeling, as if some terribl weight had been 
lift from him, but he did not know ani caus of it. He ask hi 
wife what he had said in hi sleep, and she answered: 

'you said it often enough, good knows, for one to rememb 
it--"not face to face! I saw the eagl plume over the bald head! there 
is hope yet! not face to face!" Go to sleep! do!' and then he did go 
to sleep, for he seem to realis that the propheci of the crazi man 
had not yet been fulfilled. He had not met himself face to face--a 
yet at all events. 

He wa awaken earli by a maid who came to tell him that there wa a 
fisherman at the door who want to see him. He dress himself as 
quickli as he could--for he wa not yet expert with the highland 
dress--and hurri down, not wish to keep the salmon-fish 
waiting. He wa surpris and not altogeth pleas to find that hi 
visitor wa none other than saft tammie, who at onc open fire on 
him: 

'I maun gang awa' t' the post; but I thocht that I would wast an hour 
on ye, and ca' roond just to see if ye waur still that fou wi' vaniti 
as on the nicht gane by. An I see that ye'v no learn the lesson. 
well! the time is comin', sure eneucht! howev I have all the time i' 
the marnin to my ain sel', so i'll aye look roond jist till see how 
ye gang yer ain gait to the quicksan', and then to the de'il! i'm aff 
till ma wark the noo!' and he went straightway, leav mr. markam 
consider vexed, for the maid within earshot were vainli tri to 
conceal their giggles. He had fairli made up hi mind to wear on that 
day ordinari clothes, but the visit of saft tammi revers hi 
decision. He would show them all that he wa not a coward, and he 
would go on as he had begun--com what might. when he came to 
breakfast in full martial panopli the children, one and all, held down 
their head and the back of their neck becam veri red indeed. as, 
however, none of them laughed--except titus, the youngest boy, who wa 
seiz with a fit of hyster choke and wa promptli banish from 
the room--h could not reprov them, but began to break hi egg with a 
sternli determin air. It wa unfortun that as hi wife wa 
hand him a cup of tea one of the button of hi sleev caught in 
the lace of her morn wrapper, with the result that the hot tea wa 
spilt over hi bare knees. not unnaturally, he made use of a swear 
word, whereupon hi wife, somewhat nettled, spoke out: 

'well, arthur, if you will make such an idiot of yourself with that 
ridicul costum what els can you expect? you are not accustom to 
it--and you never will be!' In answer he began an indign speech 
with: 'madam!' but he got no further, for now that the subject wa 
broached, mrs. markam intend to have her say out. It wa not a 
pleasant say, and, truth to tell, it wa not said in a pleasant 
manner. A wife' manner seldom is pleasant when she undertak to tell 
what she consid 'truths' to her husband. the result wa that arthur 
fernle markam undertook, then and there, that dure hi stay in 
scotland he would wear no other costum than the one she abused. 
woman-lik hi wife had the last word--given in thi case with tears: 

'veri well, arthur! Of cours you will do as you choose. make me as 
ridicul as you can, and spoil the poor girls' chanc in life. 
young men don't seem to care, as a gener rule, for an idiot 
father-in-law! but I must warn you that your vaniti will some day get 
a rude shock--if inde you are not befor then in an asylum or dead!' 

It wa manifest after a few day that mr. markam would have to take 
the major part of hi outdoor exercis by himself. the girl now and 
again took a walk with him, chiefli in the earli morn or late at 
night, or on a wet day when there would be no one about; they 
profess to be will to go out at all times, but somehow someth 
alway seem to occur to prevent it. the boy could never be found at 
all on such occasions, and as to mrs. markam she sternli refus to go 
out with him on ani consider so long as he should continu to 
make a fool of himself. On the sunday he dress himself in hi 
habitu broadcloth, for he rightli felt that church wa not a place 
for angri feelings; but on monday morn he resum hi highland 
garb. By thi time he would have given a good deal if he had never 
thought of the dress, but hi british obstinaci wa strong, and he 
would not give in. saft tammi call at hi hous everi morning, and, 
not be abl to see him nor to have ani messag taken to him, use 
to call back in the afternoon when the letter-bag had been deliv 
and watch for hi go out. On such occas he never fail to 
warn him against hi vaniti in the same word which he had use at the 
first. befor mani day were over mr. markam had come to look upon him 
as littl short of a scourge. 

By the time the week wa out the enforc partial solitude, the 
constant chagrin, and the never-end brood which wa thu 
engendered, began to make mr. markam quit ill. He wa too proud to 
take ani of hi famili into hi confid sinc they had in hi view 
treat him veri badly. then he did not sleep well at night, and when 
he did sleep he had constantli bad dreams. mere to assur himself 
that hi pluck wa not fail him he made it a practic to visit the 
quicksand at least onc everi day; he hardli ever fail to go there 
the last thing at night. It wa perhap thi habit that wrought the 
quicksand with it terribl experi so perpetu into hi dreams. 
more and more vivid these became, till on wake at time he could 
hardli realis that he had not been actual in the flesh to visit the 
fatal spot. He sometim thought that he might have been walk in 
hi sleep. 

one night hi dream wa so vivid that when he awok he could not 
believ that it had onli been a dream. He shut hi eye again and 
again, but each time the vision, if it wa a vision, or the reality, 
if it wa a reality, would rise befor him. the moon wa shine full 
and yellow over the quicksand as he approach it; he could see the 
expans of light shaken and disturb and full of black shadow as the 
liquid sand quiver and trembl and wrinkl and eddi as wa it 
wont between it paus of marbl calm. As he drew close to it anoth 
figur came toward it from the opposit side with equal footsteps. He 
saw that it wa hi own figure, hi veri self, and in silent terror, 
compel by what forc he knew not, he advanced--charm as the bird 
is by the snake, mesmeris or hypnotised--to meet thi other self. As 
he felt the yield sand close over him he awok in the agoni of 
death, trembl with fear, and, strang to say, with the silli man' 
propheci seem to sound in hi ears: '"vaniti of vanities! all is 
vanity!" see thyself and repent ere the quicksand swallow thee!' 

So convinc wa he that thi wa no dream that he arose, earli as it 
was, and dress himself without disturb hi wife took hi way to 
the shore. hi heart fell when he came across a seri of footstep on 
the sands, which he at onc recognis as hi own. there wa the same 
wide heel, the same squar toe; he had no doubt now that he had 
actual been there, and half horrified, and half in a state of dreami 
stupor, he follow the footsteps, and found them lost in the edg of 
the yield quicksand. thi gave him a terribl shock, for there were 
no return step mark on the sand, and he felt that there wa some 
dread mysteri which he could not penetrate, and the penetr of 
which would, he feared, undo him. 

In thi state of affair he took two wrong courses. firstli he kept 
hi troubl to himself, and, as none of hi famili had ani clue to it, 
everi innoc word or express which they use suppli fuel to the 
consum fire of hi imagination. secondli he began to read book 
profess to bear upon the mysteri of dream and of mental 
phenomena generally, with the result that everi wild imagin of 
everi crank or half-crazi philosoph becam a live germ of unrest 
in the fertilis soil of hi disord brain. thu neg and 
posit all thing began to work to a common end. not the least of 
hi disturb caus wa saft tammie, who had now becom at certain 
time of the day a fixtur at hi gate. after a while, be 
interest in the previou state of thi individual, he made inquiri 
regard hi past with the follow result. 

saft tammi wa popularli believ to be the son of a laird in one of 
the counti round the firth of forth. He had been partial educ 
for the ministry, but for some caus which no one ever knew threw up 
hi prospect suddenly, and, go to peterhead in it day of whale 
prosperity, had there taken servic on a whaler. here off and on he 
had remain for some years, get gradual more and more silent in 
hi habits, till final hi shipmat protest against so taciturn a 
mate, and he had found servic amongst the fish smack of the 
northern fleet. He had work for mani year at the fish with 
alway the reput of be 'a wee bit daft,' till at length he had 
gradual settl down at crooken, where the laird, doubtless know 
someth of hi famili history, had given him a job which practic 
made him a pensioner. the minist who gave the inform finish 
thus:-- 

'it is a veri strang thing, but the man seem to have some odd kind 
of gift. whether it be that "second sight" which we scotch peopl are 
so prone to believ in, or some other occult form of knowledge, I know 
not, but noth of a disastr tendenc ever occur in thi place 
but the men with whom he live are abl to quot after the event some 
say of hi which certainli appear to have foretold it. He get 
uneasi or excited--wak up, in fact--when death is in the air!' 

thi did not in ani way tend to lessen mr. markam' concern, but on 
the contrari seem to impress the propheci more deepli on hi mind. 
Of all the book which he had read on hi new subject of studi none 
interest him so much as a german one _die döppleganger_, by dr. 
heinrich von aschenberg, formerli of bonn. here he learn for the 
first time of case where men had led a doubl existence--each natur 
be quit apart from the other--th bodi be alway a realiti with 
one spirit, and a simulacrum with the other. needless to say that mr. 
markam realis thi theori as exactli suit hi own case. the 
glimps which he had of hi own back the night of hi escap from the 
quicksand--hi own footmark disappear into the quicksand with no 
return step visible--th propheci of saft tammi about hi meet 
himself and perish in the quicksand--al lent aid to the convict 
that he wa in hi own person an instanc of the döppleganger. be 
then consciou of a doubl life he took step to prove it exist 
to hi own satisfaction. To thi end on one night befor go to bed 
he wrote hi name in chalk on the sole of hi shoes. that night he 
dream of the quicksand, and of hi visit it--dream so vividli 
that on walk in the grey of the dawn he could not believ that he 
had not been there. arising, without disturb hi wife, he sought 
hi shoes. 

the chalk signatur were undisturbed! He dress himself and stole 
out softly. thi time the tide wa in, so he cross the dune and 
struck the shore on the further side of the quicksand. there, oh, 
horror of horrors! he saw hi own footprint die into the abyss! 

He went home a desper sad man. It seem incred that he, an 
elderli commerci man, who had pass a long and unev life in 
the pursuit of busi in the midst of roaring, practic london, 
should thu find himself enmesh in mysteri and horror, and that he 
should discov that he had two existences. He could not speak of hi 
troubl even to hi own wife, for well he knew that she would at onc 
requir the fullest particular of that other life--th one which she 
did not know; and that she would at the start not onli imagin but 
charg him with all manner of infidel on the head of it. and so 
hi brood grew deeper and deeper still. one evening--th tide then 
go out and the moon be at the full--h wa sit wait for 
dinner when the maid announc that saft tammi wa make a 
disturb outsid becaus he would not be let in to see him. He wa 
veri indignant, but did not like the maid to think that he had ani 
fear on the subject, and so told her to bring him in. tammi entered, 
walk more briskli than ever with hi head up and a look of vigor 
decis in the eye that were so gener cast down. As soon as he 
enter he said: 

'I have come to see ye onc again--onc again; and there ye sit, still 
just like a cockatoo on a pairch. weel, mon, I forgi ye! mind ye 
that, I forgi ye!' and without a word more he turn and walk out 
of the house, leav the master in speechless indignation. 

after dinner he determin to pay anoth visit to the quicksand--h 
would not allow even to himself that he wa afraid to go. and so, 
about nine o'clock, in full array, he march to the beach, and 
pass over the sand sat on the skirt of the nearer rock. the full 
moon wa behind him and it light lit up the bay so that it fring of 
foam, the dark outlin of the headland, and the stake of the 
salmon-net were all emphasised. In the brilliant yellow glow the 
light in the window of port crooken and in those of the distant 
castl of the laird trembl like star through the sky. for a long 
time he sat and drank in the beauti of the scene, and hi soul seem 
to feel a peac that it had not known for mani days. all the petti 
and annoy and silli fear of the past week seem blot out, 
and a new holi calm took the vacant place. In thi sweet and solemn 
mood he review hi late action calmly, and felt asham of himself 
for hi vaniti and for the obstinaci which had follow it. and then 
and there he made up hi mind that the present would be the last time 
he would wear the costum which had estrang him from those whom he 
loved, and which had caus him so mani hour and day of chagrin, 
vexation, and pain. 

but almost as soon as he arriv at thi conclus anoth voic 
seem to speak within him and mockingli to ask him if he should ever 
get the chanc to wear the suit again--that it wa too late--h had 
chosen hi cours and must now abid the issue. 

'it is not too late,' came the quick answer of hi better self; and 
full of the thought, he rose up to go home and divest himself of the 
now hate costum right away. He paus for one look at the 
beauti scene. the light lay pale and mellow, soften everi 
outlin of rock and tree and house-top, and deepen the shadow into 
velvety-black, and lighting, as with a pale flame, the incom tide, 
that now crept fringe-lik across the flat wast of sand. then he left 
the rock and step out for the shore. 

but as he did so a fright spasm of horror shook him, and for an 
instant the blood rush to hi head shut out all the light of the 
full moon. onc more he saw that fatal imag of himself move beyond 
the quicksand from the opposit rock to the shore. the shock wa all 
the greater for the contrast with the spell of peac which he had just 
enjoyed; and, almost paralys in everi sense, he stood and watch 
the fatal vision and the wrinkly, crawl quicksand that seem to 
writh and yearn for someth that lay between. there could be no 
mistak thi time, for though the moon behind threw the face into 
shadow he could see there the same shaven cheek as hi own, and the 
small stubbi moustach of a few weeks' growth. the light shone on the 
brilliant tartan, and on the eagle' plume. even the bald space at one 
side of the glengarri cap glistened, as did the cairngorm brooch on 
the shoulder and the top of the silver buttons. As he look he felt 
hi feet slightli sinking, for he wa still near the edg of the belt 
of quicksand, and he step back. As he did so the other figur 
step forward, so that the space between them wa preserved. 

So the two stood face each other, as though in some weird 
fascination; and in the rush of the blood through hi brain markam 
seem to hear the word of the prophecy: 'see thyself face to face, 
and repent ere the quicksand swallow thee.' He did stand face to face 
with himself, he had repented--and now he wa sink in the 
quicksand! the warn and propheci were come true. 

abov him the seagul screamed, circl round the fring of the 
incom tide, and the sound be entir mortal recal him to 
himself. On the instant he step back a few quick steps, for as yet 
onli hi feet were merg in the soft sand. As he did so the other 
figur step forward, and come within the deadli grip of the 
quicksand began to sink. It seem to markam that he wa look at 
himself go down to hi doom, and on the instant the anguish of hi 
soul found vent in a terribl cry. there wa at the same instant a 
terribl cri from the other figure, and as markam threw up hi hand 
the figur did the same. with horror-struck eye he saw him sink 
deeper into the quicksand; and then, impel by what power he knew 
not, he advanc again toward the sand to meet hi fate. but as hi 
more forward foot began to sink he heard again the cri of the 
seagul which seem to restor hi benumb faculties. with a mighti 
effort he drew hi foot out of the sand which seem to clutch it, 
leav hi shoe behind, and then in sheer terror he turn and ran 
from the place, never stop till hi breath and strength fail 
him, and he sank half swoon on the grassi path through the 
sandhills. 

* * * * * 

arthur markam made up hi mind not to tell hi famili of hi terribl 
adventure--until at least such time as he should be complet master of 
himself. now that the fatal double--hi other self--had been engulf 
in the quicksand he felt someth like hi old peac of mind. 

that night he slept soundli and did not dream at all; and in the 
morn wa quit hi old self. It realli seem as though hi newer 
and worser self had disappear for ever; and strang enough saft 
tammi wa absent from hi post that morn and never appear there 
again, but sat in hi old place watch nothing, as of old, with 
lack-lustr eye. In accord with hi resolut he did not wear hi 
highland suit again, but one even tie it up in a bundle, claymore, 
dirk and philibeg and all, and bring it secretli with him threw it 
into the quicksand. with a feel of intens pleasur he saw it 
suck below the sand, which close abov it into marbl smoothness. 
then he went home and announc cheerili to hi famili assembl for 
even prayers: 

'well! my dears, you will be glad to hear that I have abandon my 
idea of wear the highland dress. I see now what a vain old fool I 
wa and how ridicul I made myself! you shall never see it again!' 

'where is it, father?' ask one of the girls, wish to say 
someth so that such a self-sacrif announc as her father' 
should not be pass in absolut silence. hi answer wa so sweetli 
given that the girl rose from her seat and came and kiss him. It 
was: 

'in the quicksand, my dear! and I hope that my worser self is buri 
there along with it--for ever.' 

* * * * * 

the remaind of the summer wa pass at crooken with delight by all 
the family, and on hi return to town mr. markam had almost forgotten 
the whole of the incid of the quicksand, and all touch on it, 
when one day he got a letter from the maccallum more which caus him 
much thought, though he said noth of it to hi family, and left it, 
for certain reasons, unanswered. It ran as follows:-- 

'the maccallum more and roderick macdhu. 
'the scotch all-wool tartan cloth mart. 
copthal court, e.c., 
30th september, 1892. 

'dear sir,--i trust you will pardon the liberti which I take in 
write to you, but I am desir of make an inquiry, and I am 
inform that you have been sojourn dure the summer in 
aberdeenshir (scotland, n.b.). My partner, mr. roderick macdhu--a he 
appear for busi reason on our bill-head and in our 
advertisements, hi real name be emmanuel mose mark of 
london--w earli last month to scotland (n.b.) for a tour, but as I 
have onli onc heard from him, shortli after hi departure, I am 
anxiou lest ani misfortun may have befallen him. As I have been 
unabl to obtain ani news of him on make all inquiri in my power, 
I ventur to appeal to you. hi letter wa written in deep deject 
of spirit, and mention that he fear a judgment had come upon him 
for wish to appear as a scotchman on scottish soil, as he had one 
moonlight night shortli after hi arriv seen hi 'wraith'. He 
evid allud to the fact that befor hi departur he had 
procur for himself a highland costum similar to that which we had 
the honour to suppli to you, with which, as perhap you will remember, 
he wa much struck. He may, however, never have worn it, as he was, to 
my own knowledge, diffid about put it on, and even went so far 
as to tell me that he would at first onli ventur to wear it late at 
night or veri earli in the morning, and then onli in remot places, 
until such time as he should get accustom to it. unfortun he 
did not advis me of hi rout so that I am in complet ignor of 
hi whereabouts; and I ventur to ask if you may have seen or heard of 
a highland costum similar to your own have been seen anywher in 
the neighbourhood in which I am told you have recent purchas the 
estat which you temporarili occupied. I shall not expect an answer to 
thi letter unless you can give me some inform regard my 
friend and partner, so pray do not troubl to repli unless there be 
cause. I am encourag to think that he may have been in your 
neighbourhood as, though hi letter is not dated, the envelop is 
mark with the postmark of "yellon" which I find is in aberdeenshire, 
and not far from the main of crooken. 

'I have the honour to be, dear sir, 
'your veri respectfully, 
'joshua sheeni cohen benjamin 
'(the maccallum more.)' 



***end OF the project gutenberg ebook dracula' guest*** 


******* thi file should be name 10150-8.txt or 10150-8.zip ******* 


thi and all associ file of variou format will be found in: 
http://www.gutenberg.org/dirs/1/0/1/5/10150 



updat edit will replac the previou one--th old edit 
will be renamed. 

creat the work from public domain print edit mean that no 
one own a unit state copyright in these works, so the foundat 
(and you!) can copi and distribut it in the unit state without 
permiss and without pay copyright royalties. special rules, 
set forth in the gener term of use part of thi license, appli to 
copi and distribut project gutenberg-tm electron work to 
protect the project gutenberg-tm concept and trademark. project 
gutenberg is a regist trademark, and may not be use if you 
charg for the ebooks, unless you receiv specif permission. If you 
do not charg anyth for copi of thi ebook, compli with the 
rule is veri easy. you may use thi ebook for nearli ani purpos 
such as creation of deriv works, reports, perform and 
research. they may be modifi and print and given away--y may do 
practic anyth with public domain ebooks. redistribut is 
subject to the trademark license, especi commerci 
redistribution. 



*** start: full licens *** 

the full project gutenberg licens 
pleas read thi befor you distribut OR use thi work 

To protect the project gutenberg-tm mission of promot the free 
distribut of electron works, by use or distribut thi work 
(or ani other work associ in ani way with the phrase "project 
gutenberg"), you agre to compli with all the term of the full project 
gutenberg-tm licens (avail with thi file or onlin at 
http://www.gutenberg.org/license). 


section 1. gener term of use and redistribut project gutenberg-tm 
electron work 

1.a. By read or use ani part of thi project gutenberg-tm 
electron work, you indic that you have read, understand, agre to 
and accept all the term of thi licens and intellectu properti 
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agre to abid by all 
the term of thi agreement, you must ceas use and return or destroy 
all copi of project gutenberg-tm electron work in your possession. 
If you paid a fee for obtain a copi of or access to a project 
gutenberg-tm electron work and you do not agre to be bound by the 
term of thi agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or 
entiti to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.e.8. 

1.b. "project gutenberg" is a regist trademark. It may onli be 
use on or associ in ani way with an electron work by peopl who 
agre to be bound by the term of thi agreement. there are a few 
thing that you can do with most project gutenberg-tm electron work 
even without compli with the full term of thi agreement. see 
paragraph 1.c below. there are a lot of thing you can do with project 
gutenberg-tm electron work if you follow the term of thi agreement 
and help preserv free futur access to project gutenberg-tm electron 
works. see paragraph 1.e below. 

1.c. the project gutenberg literari archiv foundat ("the foundation" 
or pglaf), own a compil copyright in the collect of project 
gutenberg-tm electron works. nearli all the individu work in the 
collect are in the public domain in the unit states. If an 
individu work is in the public domain in the unit state and you are 
locat in the unit states, we do not claim a right to prevent you from 
copying, distributing, performing, display or creat deriv 
work base on the work as long as all refer to project gutenberg 
are removed. Of course, we hope that you will support the project 
gutenberg-tm mission of promot free access to electron work by 
freeli share project gutenberg-tm work in complianc with the term of 
thi agreement for keep the project gutenberg-tm name associ with 
the work. you can easili compli with the term of thi agreement by 
keep thi work in the same format with it attach full project 
gutenberg-tm licens when you share it without charg with others. 

1.d. the copyright law of the place where you are locat also govern 
what you can do with thi work. copyright law in most countri are in 
a constant state of change. If you are outsid the unit states, check 
the law of your countri in addit to the term of thi agreement 
befor downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distribut or 
creat deriv work base on thi work or ani other project 
gutenberg-tm work. the foundat make no represent concern 
the copyright statu of ani work in ani countri outsid the unit 
states. 

1.e. unless you have remov all refer to project gutenberg: 

1.e.1. the follow sentence, with activ link to, or other immedi 
access to, the full project gutenberg-tm licens must appear promin 
whenev ani copi of a project gutenberg-tm work (ani work on which the 
phrase "project gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "project 
gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed, 
copi or distributed: 

thi ebook is for the use of anyon anywher at no cost and with 
almost no restrict whatsoever. you may copi it, give it away or 
re-us it under the term of the project gutenberg licens includ 
with thi ebook or onlin at www.gutenberg.org 

1.e.2. If an individu project gutenberg-tm electron work is deriv 
from the public domain (doe not contain a notic indic that it is 
post with permiss of the copyright holder), the work can be copi 
and distribut to anyon in the unit state without pay ani fee 
or charges. If you are redistribut or provid access to a work 
with the phrase "project gutenberg" associ with or appear on the 
work, you must compli either with the requir of paragraph 1.e.1 
through 1.e.7 or obtain permiss for the use of the work and the 
project gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraph 1.e.8 or 
1.e.9. 

1.e.3. If an individu project gutenberg-tm electron work is post 
with the permiss of the copyright holder, your use and distribut 
must compli with both paragraph 1.e.1 through 1.e.7 and ani addit 
term impos by the copyright holder. addit term will be link 
to the project gutenberg-tm licens for all work post with the 
permiss of the copyright holder found at the begin of thi work. 

1.e.4. Do not unlink or detach or remov the full project gutenberg-tm 
licens term from thi work, or ani file contain a part of thi 
work or ani other work associ with project gutenberg-tm. 

1.e.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribut or redistribut thi 
electron work, or ani part of thi electron work, without 
promin display the sentenc set forth in paragraph 1.e.1 with 
activ link or immedi access to the full term of the project 
gutenberg-tm license. 

1.e.6. you may convert to and distribut thi work in ani binary, 
compressed, mark up, nonproprietari or proprietari form, includ ani 
word process or hypertext form. however, if you provid access to or 
distribut copi of a project gutenberg-tm work in a format other than 
"plain vanilla ascii" or other format use in the offici version 
post on the offici project gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org), 
you must, at no addit cost, fee or expens to the user, provid a 
copy, a mean of export a copy, or a mean of obtain a copi upon 
request, of the work in it origin "plain vanilla ascii" or other 
form. ani altern format must includ the full project gutenberg-tm 
licens as specifi in paragraph 1.e.1. 

1.e.7. Do not charg a fee for access to, viewing, displaying, 
performing, copi or distribut ani project gutenberg-tm work 
unless you compli with paragraph 1.e.8 or 1.e.9. 

1.e.8. you may charg a reason fee for copi of or provid 
access to or distribut project gutenberg-tm electron work provid 
that 

- you pay a royalti fee of 20% of the gross profit you deriv from 
the use of project gutenberg-tm work calcul use the method 
you alreadi use to calcul your applic taxes. the fee is 
owe to the owner of the project gutenberg-tm trademark, but he 
ha agre to donat royalti under thi paragraph to the 
project gutenberg literari archiv foundation. royalti payment 
must be paid within 60 day follow each date on which you 
prepar (or are legal requir to prepare) your period tax 
returns. royalti payment should be clearli mark as such and 
sent to the project gutenberg literari archiv foundat at the 
address specifi in section 4, "inform about donat to 
the project gutenberg literari archiv foundation." 

- you provid a full refund of ani money paid by a user who notifi 
you in write (or by e-mail) within 30 day of receipt that s/he 
doe not agre to the term of the full project gutenberg-tm 
license. you must requir such a user to return or 
destroy all copi of the work possess in a physic medium 
and discontinu all use of and all access to other copi of 
project gutenberg-tm works. 

- you provide, in accord with paragraph 1.f.3, a full refund of ani 
money paid for a work or a replac copy, if a defect in the 
electron work is discov and report to you within 90 day 
of receipt of the work. 

- you compli with all other term of thi agreement for free 
distribut of project gutenberg-tm works. 

1.e.9. If you wish to charg a fee or distribut a project gutenberg-tm 
electron work or group of work on differ term than are set 
forth in thi agreement, you must obtain permiss in write from 
both the project gutenberg literari archiv foundat and michael 
hart, the owner of the project gutenberg-tm trademark. contact the 
foundat as set forth in section 3 below. 

1.f. 

1.f.1. project gutenberg volunt and employe expend consider 
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcrib and proofread 
public domain work in creat the project gutenberg-tm 
collection. despit these efforts, project gutenberg-tm electron 
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain 
"defects," such as, but not limit to, incomplete, inaccur or 
corrupt data, transcript errors, a copyright or other intellectu 
properti infringement, a defect or damag disk or other medium, a 
comput virus, or comput code that damag or cannot be read by 
your equipment. 

1.f.2. limit warranty, disclaim OF damag - except for the "right 
of replac or refund" describ in paragraph 1.f.3, the project 
gutenberg literari archiv foundation, the owner of the project 
gutenberg-tm trademark, and ani other parti distribut a project 
gutenberg-tm electron work under thi agreement, disclaim all 
liabil to you for damages, cost and expenses, includ legal 
fees. you agre that you have NO remedi for negligence, strict 
liability, breach OF warranti OR breach OF contract except those 
provid IN paragraph f3. you agre that the foundation, the 
trademark owner, and ani distributor under thi agreement will not BE 
liabl TO you for actual, direct, indirect, consequential, punit OR 
incident damag even IF you give notic OF the possibl OF such 
damage. 

1.f.3. limit right OF replac OR refund - If you discov a 
defect in thi electron work within 90 day of receiv it, you can 
receiv a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by send a 
written explan to the person you receiv the work from. If you 
receiv the work on a physic medium, you must return the medium with 
your written explanation. the person or entiti that provid you with 
the defect work may elect to provid a replac copi in lieu of a 
refund. If you receiv the work electronically, the person or entiti 
provid it to you may choos to give you a second opportun to 
receiv the work electron in lieu of a refund. If the second copi 
is also defective, you may demand a refund in write without further 
opportun to fix the problem. 

1.f.4. except for the limit right of replac or refund set forth 
in paragraph 1.f.3, thi work is provid to you 'as-is', with NO other 
warranti OF ani kind, express OR implied, includ but not limit TO 
warranti OF merchant OR fit for ani purpose. 

1.f.5. some state do not allow disclaim of certain impli 
warranti or the exclus or limit of certain type of damages. 
If ani disclaim or limit set forth in thi agreement violat the 
law of the state applic to thi agreement, the agreement shall be 
interpret to make the maximum disclaim or limit permit by 
the applic state law. the invalid or unenforc of ani 
provis of thi agreement shall not void the remain provisions. 

1.f.6. indemn - you agre to indemnifi and hold the foundation, the 
trademark owner, ani agent or employe of the foundation, anyon 
provid copi of project gutenberg-tm electron work in accord 
with thi agreement, and ani volunt associ with the production, 
promot and distribut of project gutenberg-tm electron works, 
harmless from all liability, cost and expenses, includ legal fees, 
that aris directli or indirectli from ani of the follow which you do 
or caus to occur: (a) distribut of thi or ani project gutenberg-tm 
work, (b) alteration, modification, or addit or delet to ani 
project gutenberg-tm work, and (c) ani defect you cause. 


section 2. inform about the mission of project gutenberg-tm 

project gutenberg-tm is synonym with the free distribut of 
electron work in format readabl by the widest varieti of comput 
includ obsolete, old, middle-ag and new computers. It exist 
becaus of the effort of hundr of volunt and donat from 
peopl in all walk of life. 

volunt and financi support to provid volunt with the 
assist they need, is critic to reach project gutenberg-tm' 
goal and ensur that the project gutenberg-tm collect will 
remain freeli avail for gener to come. In 2001, the project 
gutenberg literari archiv foundat wa creat to provid a secur 
and perman futur for project gutenberg-tm and futur generations. 
To learn more about the project gutenberg literari archiv foundat 
and how your effort and donat can help, see section 3 and 4 
and the foundat web page at http://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/pglaf. 


section 3. inform about the project gutenberg literari archiv 
foundat 

the project gutenberg literari archiv foundat is a non profit 
501(c)(3) educ corpor organ under the law of the 
state of mississippi and grant tax exempt statu by the intern 
revenu service. the foundation' ein or feder tax identif 
number is 64-6221541. contribut to the project gutenberg 
literari archiv foundat are tax deduct to the full extent 
permit by u.s. feder law and your state' laws. 

the foundation' princip offic is locat at 4557 melan dr. S. 
fairbanks, ak, 99712., but it volunt and employe are scatter 
throughout numer locations. it busi offic is locat at 
809 north 1500 west, salt lake city, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email 
business@pglaf.org. email contact link and up to date contact 
inform can be found at the foundation' web site and offici 
page at http://www.gutenberg.org/about/contact 

for addit contact information: 
dr. gregori B. newbi 
chief execut and director 
gbnewby@pglaf.org 

section 4. inform about donat to the project gutenberg 
literari archiv foundat 

project gutenberg-tm depend upon and cannot surviv without wide 
spread public support and donat to carri out it mission of 
increas the number of public domain and licens work that can be 
freeli distribut in machin readabl form access by the widest 
array of equip includ outdat equipment. mani small donat 
($1 to $5,000) are particularli import to maintain tax exempt 
statu with the irs. 

the foundat is commit to compli with the law regul 
chariti and charit donat in all 50 state of the unit 
states. complianc requir are not uniform and it take a 
consider effort, much paperwork and mani fee to meet and keep up 
with these requirements. We do not solicit donat in locat 
where we have not receiv written confirm of compliance. To 
send donat or determin the statu of complianc for ani 
particular state visit http://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/don 

while we cannot and do not solicit contribut from state where we 
have not met the solicit requirements, we know of no prohibit 
against accept unsolicit donat from donor in such state who 
approach us with offer to donate. 

intern donat are grate accepted, but we cannot make 
ani statement concern tax treatment of donat receiv from 
outsid the unit states. u.s. law alon swamp our small staff. 

pleas check the project gutenberg web page for current donat 
method and addresses. donat are accept in a number of other 
way includ checks, onlin payment and credit card donations. 
To donate, pleas visit: 
http://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/don 


section 5. gener inform about project gutenberg-tm electron 
works. 

professor michael S. hart is the origin of the project gutenberg-tm 
concept of a librari of electron work that could be freeli share 
with anyone. for thirti years, he produc and distribut project 
gutenberg-tm ebook with onli a loos network of volunt support. 

project gutenberg-tm ebook are often creat from sever print 
editions, all of which are confirm as public domain in the u.s. 
unless a copyright notic is included. thus, we do not necessarili 
keep ebook in complianc with ani particular paper edition. 

most peopl start at our web site which ha the main PG search facility: 

http://www.gutenberg.org 

thi web site includ inform about project gutenberg-tm, 
includ how to make donat to the project gutenberg literari 
archiv foundation, how to help produc our new ebooks, and how to 
subscrib to our email newslett to hear about new ebooks. 
