the project gutenberg ebook of the wendigo, by algernon blackwood 

thi ebook is for the use of anyon anywher at no cost and with 
almost no restrict whatsoever. you may copi it, give it away or 
re-us it under the term of the project gutenberg licens includ 
with thi ebook or onlin at www.gutenberg.net 


title: the wendigo 

author: algernon blackwood 

releas date: januari 31, 2004 [ebook #10897] 
[last updated: march 10, 2012] 

language: english 


*** start OF thi project gutenberg ebook the wendigo *** 




produc by suzann shell, beginn projects, dave morgan and the 
onlin distribut proofread team. 





the wendigo 

algernon blackwood 

1910 




I 
prefac 

A consider number of hunt parti were out that year without 
find so much as a fresh trail; for the moos were uncommonli shy, and 
the variou nimrod return to the bosom of their respect famili 
with the best excus the fact of their imagin could suggest. dr. 
cathcart, among others, came back without a trophy; but he brought 
instead the memori of an experi which he declar wa worth all the 
bull moos that had ever been shot. but then cathcart, of aberdeen, wa 
interest in other thing besid moose--amongst them the vagari of 
the human mind. thi particular story, however, found no mention in hi 
book on collect hallucin for the simpl reason (so he confid 
onc to a fellow colleague) that he himself play too intim a part 
in it to form a compet judgment of the affair as a whole.... 

besid himself and hi guide, hank davis, there wa young simpson, hi 
nephew, a divin student destin for the "wee kirk" (then on hi 
first visit to canadian backwoods), and the latter' guide, défago. 
joseph défago wa a french "canuck," who had stray from hi nativ 
provinc of quebec year before, and had got caught in rat portag when 
the canadian pacif railway wa a-building; a man who, in addit to 
hi unparallel knowledg of wood-craft and bush-lore, could also sing 
the old _voyageur_ song and tell a capit hunt yarn into the 
bargain. He wa deepli susceptible, moreover, to that singular spell 
which the wilder lay upon certain lone natures, and he love the 
wild solitud with a kind of romant passion that amount almost to 
an obsession. the life of the backwood fascin him--whence, 
doubtless, hi surpass effici in deal with their mysteries. 

On thi particular expedit he wa hank' choice. hank knew him and 
swore by him. He also swore at him, "jest as a pal might," and sinc he 
had a vocabulari of picturesque, if utterli meaningless, oaths, the 
convers between the two stalwart and hardi woodsmen wa often of a 
rather live description. thi river of expletives, however, hank 
agre to dam a littl out of respect for hi old "hunt boss," dr. 
cathcart, whom of cours he address after the fashion of the countri 
as "doc," and also becaus he understood that young simpson wa alreadi 
a "bit of a parson." He had, however, one object to défago, and one 
only--which was, that the french canadian sometim exhibit what hank 
describ as "the output of a curs and dismal mind," mean 
appar that he sometim wa true to type, latin type, and suffer 
fit of a kind of silent moros when noth could induc him to 
utter speech. défago, that is to say, wa imagin and melancholy. 
and, as a rule, it wa too long a spell of "civilization" that induc 
the attacks, for a few day of the wilder invari cure them. 

this, then, wa the parti of four that found themselv in camp the last 
week in octob of that "shi moos year" 'way up in the wilder north 
of rat portage--a forsaken and desol country. there wa also punk, an 
indian, who had accompani dr. cathcart and hank on their hunt trip 
in previou years, and who act as cook. hi duti wa mere to stay in 
camp, catch fish, and prepar venison steak and coffe at a few 
minutes' notice. He dress in the worn-out cloth bequeath to him by 
former patrons, and, except for hi coars black hair and dark skin, he 
look in these citi garment no more like a real redskin than a stage 
negro look like a real african. for all that, however, punk had in him 
still the instinct of hi die race; hi taciturn silenc and hi 
endur survived; also hi superstition. 

the parti round the blaze fire that night were despondent, for a week 
had pass without a singl sign of recent moos discov itself. 
défago had sung hi song and plung into a story, but hank, in bad 
humor, remind him so often that "he kep' mussing-up the fac' so, that 
it wa 'most all nothin' but a petered-out lie," that the frenchman had 
final subsid into a sulki silenc which noth seem like to 
break. dr. cathcart and hi nephew were fairli done after an exhaust 
day. punk wa wash up the dishes, grunt to himself under the 
lean-to of branches, where he later also slept. No one troubl to stir 
the slowli die fire. overhead the star were brilliant in a sky quit 
wintry, and there wa so littl wind that ice wa alreadi form 
stealthili along the shore of the still lake behind them. the silenc 
of the vast listen forest stole forward and envelop them. 

hank broke in suddenli with hi nasal voice. 

"i'm in favor of break new ground tomorrow, doc," he observ with 
energy, look across at hi employer. "we don't stand a dead dago' 
chanc around here." 

"agreed," said cathcart, alway a man of few words. "think the idea' 
good." 

"sure pop, it' good," hank resum with confidence. "s'pose, now, you 
and I strike west, up garden lake way for a change! none of us ain't 
touch that quiet bit o' land yet--" 

"i'm with you." 

"and you, défago, take mr. simpson along in the small canoe, skip across 
the lake, portag over into fifti island water, and take a good squint 
down that thar southern shore. the moos 'yarded' there like hell last 
year, and for all we know they may be doin' it agin thi year jest to 
spite us." 

défago, keep hi eye on the fire, said noth by way of reply. He 
wa still offended, possibly, about hi interrupt story. 

"no one' been up that way thi year, an' i'll lay my bottom dollar on 
_that!_" hank ad with emphasis, as though he had a reason for 
knowing. He look over at hi partner sharply. "better take the littl 
silk tent and stay away a coupl o' nights," he concluded, as though the 
matter were definit settled. for hank wa recogn as gener 
organ of the hunt, and in charg of the party. 

It wa obviou to anyon that défago did not jump at the plan, but hi 
silenc seem to convey someth more than ordinari disapproval, and 
across hi sensit dark face there pass a curiou express like a 
flash of firelight--not so quickly, however, that the three men had not 
time to catch it. 

"he funk for some reason, _i_ thought," simpson said afterward in the 
tent he share with hi uncle. dr. cathcart made no immedi reply, 
although the look had interest him enough at the time for him to make 
a mental note of it. the express had caus him a pass uneasi 
he could not quit account for at the moment. 

but hank, of course, had been the first to notic it, and the odd thing 
wa that instead of becom explos or angri over the other' 
reluctance, he at onc began to humor him a bit. 

"but there ain't no _speshul_ reason whi no one' been up there thi 
year," he said with a percept hush in hi tone; "not the reason you 
mean, anyway! las' year it wa the fire that kep' folk out, and thi 
year I guess--i guess it jest happen so, that' all!" hi manner wa 
clearli meant to be encouraging. 

joseph défago rais hi eye a moment, then drop them again. A 
breath of wind stole out of the forest and stir the ember into a 
pass blaze. dr. cathcart again notic the express in the guide' 
face, and again he did not like it. but thi time the natur of the look 
betray itself. In those eyes, for an instant, he caught the gleam of a 
man scare in hi veri soul. It disquiet him more than he care to 
admit. 

"bad indian up that way?" he asked, with a laugh to eas matter a 
little, while simpson, too sleepi to notic thi subtl by-play, move 
off to bed with a prodigi yawn; "or--or anyth wrong with the 
country?" he added, when hi nephew wa out of hearing. 

hank met hi eye with someth less than hi usual frankness. 

"he' jest skeered," he repli good-humouredly. "skeer stiff about 
some ole feeri tale! that' all, ain't it, ole pard?" and he gave défago 
a friendli kick on the moccasin foot that lay nearest the fire. 

défago look up quickly, as from an interrupt reverie, a reverie, 
however, that had not prevent hi see all that went on about him. 

"skeered--_nuthin'!_" he answered, with a flush of defiance. "there' 
nuthin' in the bush that can skeer joseph défago, and don't you forget 
it!" and the natur energi with which he spoke made it imposs to 
know whether he told the whole truth or onli a part of it. 

hank turn toward the doctor. He wa just go to add someth when 
he stop abruptli and look round. A sound close behind them in the 
dark made all three start. It wa old punk, who had move up from 
hi lean-to while they talk and now stood there just beyond the circl 
of firelight--listening. 

"'nother time, doc!" hank whispered, with a wink, "when the galleri 
ain't step down into the stalls!" and, spring to hi feet, he 
slap the indian on the back and cri noisily, "come up t' the fire 
an' warm yer dirti red skin a bit." He drag him toward the blaze and 
threw more wood on. "that wa a mighti good feed you give us an hour or 
two back," he continu heartily, as though to set the man' thought on 
anoth scent, "and it ain't christian to let you stand out there 
freezin' yer ole soul to hell while we'r gettin' all good an' toasted!" 
punk move in and warm hi feet, smile darkli at the other' 
volubl which he onli half understood, but say nothing. and 
present dr. cathcart, see that further convers wa impossible, 
follow hi nephew' exampl and move off to the tent, leav the 
three men smoke over the now blaze fire. 

It is not easi to undress in a small tent without wake one' 
companion, and cathcart, harden and warm-blood as he wa in spite of 
hi fifti odd years, did what hank would have describ as "consider 
of hi twilight" in the open. He noticed, dure the process, that punk 
had meanwhil gone back to hi lean-to, and that hank and défago were 
at it hammer and tongs, or, rather, hammer and anvil, the littl french 
canadian be the anvil. It wa all veri like the convent stage 
pictur of western melodrama: the fire light up their face with 
patch of altern red and black; défago, in slouch hat and moccasin 
in the part of the "badlands" villain; hank, open-fac and hatless, 
with that reckless fling of hi shoulders, the honest and deceiv hero; 
and old punk, eavesdrop in the background, suppli the atmospher 
of mystery. the doctor smile as he notic the details; but at the same 
time someth deep within him--h hardli knew what--shrank a little, as 
though an almost impercept breath of warn had touch the surfac 
of hi soul and wa gone again befor he could seiz it. probabl it wa 
traceabl to that "scare expression" he had seen in the eye of défago; 
"probably"--for thi hint of fugit emot otherwis escap hi 
usual so keen analysis. défago, he wa vagu aware, might caus 
troubl somehow ...he wa not as steadi a guid as hank, for 
instanc ... further than that he could not get ... 

He watch the men a moment longer befor dive into the stuffi tent 
where simpson alreadi slept soundly. hank, he saw, wa swear like a 
mad african in a new york nigger saloon; but it wa the swear of 
"affection." the ridicul oath flew freeli now that the caus of 
their obstruct wa asleep. present he put hi arm almost tenderli 
upon hi comrade' shoulder, and they move off togeth into the 
shadow where their tent stood faintli glimmering. punk, too, a moment 
later follow their exampl and disappear between hi odor 
blanket in the opposit direction. 

dr. cathcart then likewis turn in, weari and sleep still fight 
in hi mind with an obscur curios to know what it wa that had 
scare défago about the countri up fifti island water way,--wondering, 
too, whi punk' presenc had prevent the complet of what hank had 
to say. then sleep overtook him. He would know tomorrow. hank would tell 
him the stori while they trudg after the elus moose. 

deep silenc fell about the littl camp, plant there so audaci in 
the jaw of the wilderness. the lake gleam like a sheet of black glass 
beneath the stars. the cold air pricked. In the draught of night that 
pour their silent tide from the depth of the forest, with messag 
from distant ridg and from lake just begin to freeze, there lay 
alreadi the faint, bleak odor of come winter. white men, with their 
dull scent, might never have divin them; the fragranc of the wood 
fire would have conceal from them these almost electr hint of 
moss and bark and harden swamp a hundr mile away. even hank and 
défago, subtli in leagu with the soul of the wood as they were, would 
probabl have spread their delic nostril in vain.... 

but an hour later, when all slept like the dead, old punk crept from hi 
blanket and went down to the shore of the lake like a shadow--silently, 
as onli indian blood can move. He rais hi head and look about him. 
the thick dark render sight of small avail, but, like the animals, 
he possess other sens that dark could not mute. He 
listened--then snif the air. motionless as a hemlock stem he stood 
there. after five minut again he lift hi head and sniffed, and yet 
onc again. A tingl of the wonder nerv that betray itself by 
no outer sign, ran through him as he tast the keen air. then, merg 
hi figur into the surround black in a way that onli wild men 
and anim understand, he turned, still move like a shadow, and went 
stealthili back to hi lean-to and hi bed. 

and soon after he slept, the chang of wind he had divin stir 
gentli the reflect of the star within the lake. rise among the far 
ridg of the countri beyond fifti island water, it came from the 
direct in which he had stared, and it pass over the sleep camp 
with a faint and sigh murmur through the top of the big tree that 
wa almost too delic to be audible. with it, down the desert path of 
night, though too faint, too high even for the indian' hair-lik 
nerves, there pass a curious, thin odor, strang disquieting, an 
odor of someth that seem unfamiliar--utterli unknown. 

the french canadian and the man of indian blood each stir uneasili in 
hi sleep just about thi time, though neither of them woke. then the 
ghost of that unforgett strang odor pass away and wa lost among 
the leagu of tenantless forest beyond. 




II 


In the morn the camp wa astir befor the sun. there had been a 
light fall of snow dure the night and the air wa sharp. punk had done 
hi duti betimes, for the odor of coffe and fri bacon reach everi 
tent. all were in good spirits. 

"wind' shifted!" cri hank vigorously, watch simpson and hi guid 
alreadi load the small canoe. "it' across the lake--dead right for 
you fellers. and the snow'll make bulli trails! If there' ani moos 
muss around up thar, they'll not get so much as a tail-end scent of 
you with the wind as it is. good luck, monsieur défago!" he added, 
faceti give the name it french pronunci for once, "_bonn 
chance!_" 

défago return the good wishes, appar in the best of spirits, the 
silent mood gone. befor eight o'clock old punk had the camp to 
himself, cathcart and hank were far along the trail that led westwards, 
while the cano that carri défago and simpson, with silk tent and grub 
for two days, wa alreadi a dark speck bob on the bosom of the lake, 
go due east. 

the wintri sharp of the air wa temper now by a sun that top 
the wood ridg and blaze with a luxuri warmth upon the world of 
lake and forest below; loon flew skim through the sparkl spray 
that the wind lifted; diver shook their drip head to the sun and 
pop smartli out of sight again; and as far as eye could reach rose 
the leagu of endless, crowd bush, desol in it lone sweep and 
grandeur, untrodden by foot of man, and stretch it mighti and 
unbroken carpet right up to the frozen shore of hudson bay. 

simpson, who saw it all for the first time as he paddl hard in the 
bow of the danc canoe, wa enchant by it auster beauty. hi 
heart drank in the sens of freedom and great space just as hi lung 
drank in the cool and perfum wind. behind him in the stern seat, 
sing fragment of hi nativ chanties, défago steer the craft of 
birch bark like a thing of life, answer cheer all hi 
companion' questions. both were gay and light-hearted. On such 
occas men lose the superficial, worldli distinctions; they becom 
human be work togeth for a common end. simpson, the employer, 
and défago the employed, among these primit forces, were simply--two 
men, the "guider" and the "guided." superior knowledge, of course, 
assum control, and the younger man fell without a second thought into 
the quasi-subordin position. He never dream of object when 
défago drop the "mr.," and address him as "say, simpson," or 
"simpson, boss," which wa invari the case befor they reach the 
farther shore after a stiff paddl of twelv mile against a head wind. 
He onli laughed, and like it; then ceas to notic it at all. 

for thi "divin student" wa a young man of part and character, 
though as yet, of course, untraveled; and on thi trip--th first time 
he had seen ani countri but hi own and littl switzerland--th huge 
scale of thing somewhat bewild him. It wa one thing, he realized, 
to hear about primev forests, but quit anoth to see them. while to 
dwell in them and seek acquaint with their wild life was, again, an 
initi that no intellig man could undergo without a certain 
shift of person valu hitherto held for perman and sacred. 

simpson knew the first faint indic of thi emot when he held the 
new. 303 rifl in hi hand and look along it pair of faultless, 
gleam barrels. the three days' journey to their headquarters, by lake 
and portage, had carri the process a stage farther. and now that he 
wa about to plung beyond even the fring of wilder where they were 
camp into the virgin heart of uninhabit region as vast as europ 
itself, the true natur of the situat stole upon him with an effect 
of delight and awe that hi imagin wa fulli capabl of 
appreciating. It wa himself and défago against a multitude--at least, 
against a titan! 

the bleak splendor of these remot and lone forest rather 
overwhelm him with the sens of hi own littleness. that stern qualiti 
of the tangl backwood which can onli be describ as merciless and 
terrible, rose out of these far blue wood swim upon the horizon, 
and reveal itself. He understood the silent warning. He realiz hi 
own utter helplessness. onli défago, as a symbol of a distant 
civil where man wa master, stood between him and a pitiless 
death by exhaust and starvation. 

It wa thrill to him, therefore, to watch défago turn over the cano 
upon the shore, pack the paddl care underneath, and then proceed 
to "blaze" the spruce stem for some distanc on either side of an 
almost invis trail, with the careless remark thrown in, "say, 
simpson, if anyth happen to me, you'll find the cano all correc' by 
these marks;--then strike doo west into the sun to hit the home camp 
agin, see?" 

It wa the most natur thing in the world to say, and he said it 
without ani notic inflexion of the voice, onli it happen to 
express the youth' emot at the moment with an utter that wa 
symbol of the situat and of hi own helpless as a factor in it. 
He wa alon with défago in a primit world: that wa all. the canoe, 
anoth symbol of man' ascendancy, wa now to be left behind. those 
small yellow patches, made on the tree by the axe, were the onli 
indic of it hide place. 

meanwhile, shoulder the pack between them, each man carri hi own 
rifle, they follow the slender trail over rock and fallen trunk and 
across half-frozen swamps; skirt numer lake that fairli gem 
the forest, their border fring with mist; and toward five o'clock 
found themselv suddenli on the edg of the woods, look out across a 
larg sheet of water in front of them, dot with pine-clad island of 
all describ shape and sizes. 

"fifti island water," announc défago wearily, "and the sun jest goin' 
to dip hi bald old head into it!" he added, with unconsci poetry; 
and immedi they set about pitch camp for the night. 

In a veri few minutes, under those skil hand that never made a 
movement too much or a movement too little, the silk tent stood taut and 
cozy, the bed of balsam bough readi laid, and a brisk cook fire 
burn with the minimum of smoke. while the young scotchman clean the 
fish they had caught troll behind the canoe, défago "guessed" he 
would "jest as soon" take a turn through the bush for indic of 
moose. "_may_ come across a trunk where they bin and rub horns," he 
said, as he move off, "or feedin' on the last of the mapl leaves"--and 
he wa gone. 

hi small figur melt away like a shadow in the dusk, while simpson 
note with a kind of admir how easili the forest absorb him into 
herself. A few steps, it seemed, and he wa no longer visible. 

yet there wa littl underbrush hereabouts; the tree stood somewhat 
apart, well spaced; and in the clear grew silver birch and maple, 
spearlik and slender, against the immens stem of spruce and hemlock. 
but for occasion prostrat monsters, and the boulder of grey rock 
that thrust uncouth shoulder here and there out of the ground, it might 
well have been a bit of park in the old country. almost, one might have 
seen in it the hand of man. A littl to the right, however, began the 
great burnt section, mile in extent, proclaim it real 
character--_brulé_, as it is called, where the fire of the previou 
year had rage for weeks, and the blacken stump now rose gaunt and 
ugly, bereft of branches, like gigant match head stuck into the 
ground, savag and desol beyond words. the perfum of charcoal and 
rain-soak ash still hung faintli about it. 

the dusk rapidli deepened; the glade grew dark; the crackl of the 
fire and the wash of littl wave along the rocki lake shore were the 
onli sound audible. the wind had drop with the sun, and in all that 
vast world of branch noth stirred. ani moment, it seemed, the 
woodland gods, who are to be worship in silenc and loneliness, might 
stretch their mighti and terrif outlin among the trees. In front, 
through doorway pillar by huge straight stems, lay the stretch of 
fifti island water, a crescent-shap lake some fifteen mile from tip 
to tip, and perhap five mile across where they were camped. A sky of 
rose and saffron, more clear than ani atmospher simpson had ever 
known, still drop it pale stream fire across the waves, where 
the islands--a hundred, surely, rather than fifty--flo like the 
fairi barqu of some enchant fleet. fring with pines, whose crest 
finger most delic the sky, they almost seem to move upward as 
the light faded--about to weigh anchor and navig the pathway of the 
heaven instead of the current of their nativ and desol lake. 

and strip of color cloud, like flaunt pennons, signal their 
departur to the stars.... 

the beauti of the scene wa strang uplifting. simpson smoke the fish 
and burnt hi finger into the bargain in hi effort to enjoy it and at 
the same time tend the fri pan and the fire. yet, ever at the back of 
hi thoughts, lay that other aspect of the wilderness: the indiffer 
to human life, the merciless spirit of desol which took no note of 
man. the sens of hi utter loneliness, now that even défago had gone, 
came close as he look about him and listen for the sound of hi 
companion' return footsteps. 

there wa pleasur in the sensation, yet with it a perfectli 
comprehens alarm. and instinct the thought stir in him: 
"what should i--_could_ I, do--if anyth happen and he did not come 
back--?" 

they enjoy their well-earn supper, eat untold quantiti of fish, 
and drink unmilk tea strong enough to kill men who had not cover 
thirti mile of hard "going," eat littl on the way. and when it wa 
over, they smoke and told stori round the blaze fire, laughing, 
stretch weari limbs, and discuss plan for the morrow. défago wa 
in excel spirits, though disappoint at have no sign of moos to 
report. but it wa dark and he had not gone far. the _brulé_, too, wa 
bad. hi cloth and hand were smear with charcoal. simpson, watch 
him, realiz with renew vivid their position--alon togeth in 
the wilderness. 

"défago," he said presently, "these woods, you know, are a bit too big 
to feel quit at home in--to feel comfort in, I mean!... eh?" He 
mere gave express to the mood of the moment; he wa hardli prepar 
for the earnestness, the solemn even, with which the guid took him 
up. 

"you'v hit it right, simpson, boss," he replied, fix hi search 
brown eye on hi face, "and that' the truth, sure. there' no end to 
'em--no end at all." then he ad in a lower tone as if to himself, 
"there' lot found out _that_, and gone plumb to pieces!" 

but the man' graviti of manner wa not quit to the other' liking; it 
wa a littl too suggest for thi sceneri and setting; he wa sorri 
he had broach the subject. He rememb suddenli how hi uncl had 
told him that men were sometim stricken with a strang fever of the 
wilderness, when the seduct of the uninhabit wast caught them so 
fierc that they went forth, half fascinated, half deluded, to their 
death. and he had a shrewd idea that hi companion held someth in 
sympathi with that queer type. He led the convers on to other 
topics, on to hank and the doctor, for instance, and the natur rivalri 
as to who should get the first sight of moose. 

"if they went doo west," observ défago carelessly, "there' sixti 
mile between us now--with ole punk at halfway hous eatin' himself full 
to bustin' with fish and coffee." they laugh togeth over the 
picture. but the casual mention of those sixti mile again made simpson 
realiz the prodigi scale of thi land where they hunted; sixti mile 
wa a mere step; two hundr littl more than a step. stori of lost 
hunter rose persist befor hi memory. the passion and mysteri of 
homeless and wander men, seduc by the beauti of great forests, 
swept hi soul in a way too vivid to be quit pleasant. He wonder 
vagu whether it wa the mood of hi companion that invit the 
unwelcom suggest with such persistence. 

"sing us a song, défago, if you'r not too tired," he asked; "one of 
those old _voyageur_ song you sang the other night." He hand hi 
tobacco pouch to the guid and then fill hi own pipe, while the 
canadian, noth loth, sent hi light voic across the lake in one of 
those plaintive, almost melancholi chanti with which lumbermen and 
trapper lessen the burden of their labor. there wa an appeal and 
romant flavor about it, someth that recal the atmospher of the 
old pioneer day when indian and wilder were leagu together, 
battl frequent, and the old countri farther off than it is today. the 
sound travel pleasantli over the water, but the forest at their back 
seem to swallow it down with a singl gulp that permit neither echo 
nor resonance. 

It wa in the middl of the third vers that simpson notic someth 
unusual--someth that brought hi thought back with a rush from 
faraway scenes. A curiou chang had come into the man' voice. even 
befor he knew what it was, uneasi caught him, and look up 
quickly, he saw that défago, though still singing, wa peer about him 
into the bush, as though he heard or saw something. hi voic grew 
fainter--drop to a hush--then ceas altogether. the same instant, 
with a movement amazingli alert, he start to hi feet and stood 
upright--_snif the air_. like a dog scent game, he drew the air 
into hi nostril in short, sharp breaths, turn quickli as he did so 
in all directions, and final "pointing" down the lake shore, 
eastwards. It wa a perform unpleasantli suggest and at the same 
time singularli dramatic. simpson' heart flutter disagre as he 
watch it. 

"lord, man! how you made me jump!" he exclaimed, on hi feet besid him 
the same instant, and peer over hi shoulder into the sea of 
darkness. "what' up? are you frightened--?" 

even befor the question wa out of hi mouth he knew it wa foolish, 
for ani man with a pair of eye in hi head could see that the canadian 
had turn white down to hi veri gills. not even sunburn and the glare 
of the fire could hide that. 

the student felt himself trembl a little, weakish in the knees. 
"what' up?" he repeat quickly. "d'you smell moose? Or anyth queer, 
anything--wrong?" He lower hi voic instinctively. 

the forest press round them with it encircl wall; the nearer tree 
stem gleam like bronz in the firelight; beyond that--blackness, and, 
so far as he could tell, a silenc of death. just behind them a pass 
puff of wind lift a singl leaf, look at it, then laid it softli 
down again without disturb the rest of the covey. It seem as if a 
million invis caus had combin just to produc that singl 
visibl effect. _other_ life puls about them--and wa gone. 

défago turn abruptly; the livid hue of hi face had turn to a dirti 
grey. 

"I never said I heered--or smelt--nuthin'," he said slowli and 
emphatically, in an oddli alter voic that convey somehow a touch of 
defiance. "I wa only--takin' a look round--so to speak. it' alway a 
mistak to be too previou with yer questions." then he ad suddenli 
with obviou effort, in hi more natur voice, "have you got the 
matches, boss simpson?" and proceed to light the pipe he had half 
fill just befor he began to sing. 

without speak anoth word they sat down again by the fire. défago 
chang hi side so that he could face the direct the wind came 
from. for even a tenderfoot could tell that. défago chang hi posit 
in order to hear and smell--al there wa to be heard and smelt. and, 
sinc he now face the lake with hi back to the tree it wa evid 
noth in the forest that had sent so strang and sudden a warn to 
hi marvel train nerves. 

"guess now I don't feel like sing any," he explain present of hi 
own accord. "that song kinder bring back memori that' troublesom to 
me; I never oughter'v begun it. It set me on t' imagin things, 
see?" 

clearli the man wa still fight with some profoundli move emotion. 
He wish to excus himself in the eye of the other. but the 
explanation, in that it wa onli a part of the truth, wa a lie, and he 
knew perfectli well that simpson wa not deceiv by it. for noth 
could explain away the livid terror that had drop over hi face while 
he stood there snif the air. and nothing--no amount of blaze fire, 
or chat on ordinari subjects--could make that camp exactli as it had 
been before. the shadow of an unknown horror, nake if unguessed, that 
had flash for an instant in the face and gestur of the guide, had 
also commun itself, vagu and therefor more potently, to hi 
companion. the guide' visibl effort to dissembl the truth onli made 
thing worse. moreover, to add to the younger man' uneasiness, wa the 
difficulty, nay, the imposs he felt of ask questions, and also 
hi complet ignor as to the caus ...indians, wild animals, forest 
fires--al these, he knew, were wholli out of the question. hi 
imagin search vigorously, but in vain.... 

* * * * * 

yet, somehow or other, after anoth long spell of smoking, talk and 
roast themselv befor the great fire, the shadow that had so 
suddenli invad their peac camp began to shift. perhap défago' 
efforts, or the return of hi quiet and normal attitud accomplish 
this; perhap simpson himself had exagger the affair out of all 
proport to the truth; or possibl the vigor air of the wilder 
brought it own power of healing. whatev the cause, the feel of 
immedi horror seem to have pass away as mysteri as it had 
come, for noth occur to feed it. simpson began to feel that he had 
permit himself the unreason terror of a child. He put it down 
partli to a certain subconsci excit that thi wild and immens 
sceneri gener in hi blood, partli to the spell of solitude, and 
partli to overfatigue. that pallor in the guide' face was, of course, 
uncommonli hard to explain, yet it _might_ have been due in some way to 
an effect of firelight, or hi own imagin ...he gave it the benefit 
of the doubt; he wa scotch. 

when a somewhat unordinari emot ha disappeared, the mind alway 
find a dozen way of explain away it caus ...simpson lit a last 
pipe and tri to laugh to himself. On get home to scotland it would 
make quit a good story. He did not realiz that thi laughter wa a 
sign that terror still lurk in the recess of hi soul--that, in 
fact, it wa mere one of the convent sign by which a man, 
serious alarmed, tri to persuad himself that he is _not_ so. 

défago, however, heard that low laughter and look up with surpris on 
hi face. the two men stood, side by side, kick the ember about 
befor go to bed. It wa ten o'clock--a late hour for hunter to be 
still awake. 

"what' ticklin' yer?" he ask in hi ordinari tone, yet gravely. 

"i--i wa think of our littl toy wood at home, just at that 
moment," stammer simpson, come back to what realli domin hi 
mind, and startl by the question, "and compar them to--to all 
this," and he swept hi arm round to indic the bush. 

A paus follow in which neither of them said anything. 

"all the same I wouldn't laugh about it, if I wa you," défago added, 
look over simpson' shoulder into the shadows. "there' place in 
there nobodi won't never see into--nobodi know what live in there 
either." 

"too big--too far off?" the suggest in the guide' manner wa immens 
and horrible. 

défago nodded. the express on hi face wa dark. he, too, felt 
uneasy. the younger man understood that in a _hinterland_ of thi size 
there might well be depth of wood that would never in the life of the 
world be known or trodden. the thought wa not exactli the sort he 
welcomed. In a loud voice, cheerfully, he suggest that it wa time for 
bed. but the guid lingered, tinker with the fire, arrang the 
stone needlessly, do a dozen thing that did not realli need doing. 
evid there wa someth he want to say, yet found it difficult 
to "get at." 

"say, you, boss simpson," he began suddenly, as the last shower of 
spark went up into the air, "you don't--smel nothing, do you--noth 
pertickler, I mean?" the commonplac question, simpson realized, veil 
a dread seriou thought in hi mind. A shiver ran down hi back. 

"noth but burn wood," he repli firmly, kick again at the 
embers. the sound of hi own foot made him start. 

"and all the evenin' you ain't smelt--nothing?" persist the guide, 
peer at him through the gloom; "noth extrordiny, and differ to 
anyth els you ever smelt before?" 

"no, no, man; noth at all!" he repli aggressively, half angrily. 

défago' face cleared. "that' good!" he exclaim with evid relief. 
"that' good to hear." 

"have _you?_" ask simpson sharply, and the same instant regret the 
question. 

the canadian came closer in the darkness. He shook hi head. "I guess 
not," he said, though without overwhelm conviction. "it must'v been 
just that song of mine that did it. it' the song they sing in lumber 
camp and godforsaken place like that, when they'r skeer the 
wendigo' somewher around, doin' a bit of swift traveling.--" 

"and what' the wendigo, pray?" simpson ask quickly, irrit becaus 
again he could not prevent that sudden shiver of the nerves. He knew 
that he wa close upon the man' terror and the caus of it. yet a 
rush passion curios overcam hi better judgment, and hi fear. 

défago turn swiftli and look at him as though he were suddenli about 
to shriek. hi eye shone, but hi mouth wa wide open. yet all he said, 
or whisper rather, for hi voic sank veri low, was: "it' 
nuthin'--nuthin' but what those lousi feller believ when they'v bin 
hittin' the bottl too long--a sort of great anim that live up 
yonder," he jerk hi head northwards, "quick as lightn in it 
tracks, an' bigger'n anyth els in the bush, an' ain't suppos to be 
veri good to look at--that' all!" 

"A backwood superstition--" began simpson, move hastili toward the 
tent in order to shake off the hand of the guid that clutch hi arm. 
"come, come, hurri up for god' sake, and get the lantern going! it' 
time we were in bed and asleep if we'r go to be up with the sun 
tomorrow...." 

the guid wa close on hi heels. "i'm coming," he answer out of the 
darkness, "i'm coming." and after a slight delay he appear with the 
lantern and hung it from a nail in the front pole of the tent. the 
shadow of a hundr tree shift their place quickli as he did so, 
and when he stumbl over the rope, dive swiftli inside, the whole 
tent trembl as though a gust of wind struck it. 

the two men lay down, without undressing, upon their bed of soft balsam 
boughs, cunningli arranged. inside, all wa warm and cozy, but outsid 
the world of crowd tree press close about them, marshal their 
million shadows, and smother the littl tent that stood there like a 
wee white shell face the ocean of tremend forest. 

between the two lone figur within, however, there press anoth 
shadow that wa _not_ a shadow from the night. It wa the shadow cast by 
the strang fear, never wholli exorcised, that had leap suddenli upon 
défago in the middl of hi singing. and simpson, as he lay there, 
watch the dark through the open flap of the tent, readi to plung 
into the fragrant abyss of sleep, knew first that uniqu and profound 
still of a primev forest when no wind stir ... and when the night 
ha weight and substanc that enter into the soul to bind a veil about 
it.... then sleep took him.... 




iii 


thus, it seem to him, at least. yet it wa true that the lap of the 
water, just beyond the tent door, still beat time with hi lessen 
puls when he realiz that he wa lie with hi eye open and that 
anoth sound had recent introduc itself with cun soft 
between the splash and murmur of the littl waves. 

and, long befor he understood what thi sound was, it had stir in 
him the center of piti and alarm. He listen intently, though at first 
in vain, for the run blood beat all it drum too noisili in hi 
ears. did it come, he wondered, from the lake, or from the woods?... 

then, suddenly, with a rush and a flutter of the heart, he knew that it 
wa close besid him in the tent; and, when he turn over for a better 
hearing, it focus itself unmistak not two feet away. It wa a 
sound of weeping; défago upon hi bed of branch wa sob in the 
dark as though hi heart would break, the blanket evid stuf 
against hi mouth to stifl it. 

and hi first feeling, befor he could think or reflect, wa the rush of 
a poignant and search tenderness. thi intimate, human sound, heard 
amid the desol about them, woke pity. It wa so incongruous, so 
piti incongruous--and so vain! tears--in thi vast and cruel 
wilderness: of what avail? He thought of a littl child cri in 
mid-atlantic.... then, of course, with fuller realization, and the 
memori of what had gone before, came the descent of the terror upon him, 
and hi blood ran cold. 

"défago," he whisper quickly, "what' the matter?" He tri to make 
hi voic veri gentle. "are you in pain--unhappy--?" there wa no reply, 
but the sound ceas abruptly. He stretch hi hand out and touch 
him. the bodi did not stir. 

"are you awake?" for it occur to him that the man wa cri in hi 
sleep. "are you cold?" He notic that hi feet, which were uncovered, 
project beyond the mouth of the tent. He spread an extra fold of hi 
own blanket over them. the guid had slip down in hi bed, and the 
branch seem to have been drag with him. He wa afraid to pull the 
bodi back again, for fear of wake him. 

one or two tent question he ventur softly, but though he wait 
for sever minut there came no reply, nor ani sign of movement. 
present he heard hi regular and quiet breathing, and put hi hand 
again gentli on the breast, felt the steadi rise and fall beneath. 

"let me know if anything' wrong," he whispered, "or if I can do 
anything. wake me at onc if you feel--queer." 

He hardli knew what to say. He lay down again, think and wonder 
what it all meant. défago, of course, had been cri in hi sleep. some 
dream or other had afflict him. yet never in hi life would he forget 
that piti sound of sobbing, and the feel that the whole aw 
wilder of wood listened.... 

hi own mind busi itself for a long time with the recent events, of 
which _this_ took it mysteri place as one, and though hi reason 
success argu away all unwelcom suggestions, a sensat of 
uneasi remained, resist ejection, veri deep-seated--peculiar 
beyond ordinary. 




IV 


but sleep, in the long run, prove greater than all emotions. hi 
thought soon wander again; he lay there, warm as toast, exceedingli 
weary; the night sooth and comforted, blunt the edg of memori and 
alarm. half an hour later he wa oblivi of everyth in the outer 
world about him. 

yet sleep, in thi case, wa hi great enemy, conceal all approaches, 
smother the warn of hi nerves. 

as, sometimes, in a nightmar event crowd upon each other' heel with 
a convict of dreadfulest reality, yet some inconsist detail 
accus the whole display of incomplet and disguise, so the event 
that now followed, though they actual happened, persuad the mind 
somehow that the detail which could explain them had been overlook in 
the confusion, and that therefor they were but partli true, the rest 
delusion. At the back of the sleeper' mind someth remain awake, 
readi to let slip the judgment. "all thi is not _quite_ real; when you 
wake up you'll understand." 

and thus, in a way, it wa with simpson. the events, not wholli 
inexplic or incred in themselves, yet remain for the man who saw 
and heard them a sequenc of separ fact of cold horror, becaus the 
littl piec that might have made the puzzl clear lay conceal or 
overlooked. 

So far as he can recall, it wa a violent movement, run downward 
through the tent toward the door, that first woke him and made him 
awar that hi companion wa sit bolt upright besid him--quivering. 
hour must have passed, for it wa the pale gleam of the dawn that 
reveal hi outlin against the canvas. thi time the man wa not 
crying; he wa quak like a leaf; the trembl he felt plainli 
through the blanket down the entir length of hi own body. défago had 
huddl down against him for protection, shrink away from someth 
that appar conceal itself near the door flap of the littl tent. 

simpson thereupon call out in a loud voic some question or other--in 
the first bewilder of wake he doe not rememb exactli what--and 
the man made no reply. the atmospher and feel of true nightmar lay 
horribl about him, make movement and speech both difficult. At first, 
indeed, he wa not sure where he was--wheth in one of the earlier 
camps, or at home in hi bed at aberdeen. the sens of confus wa 
veri troubling. 

and next--almost simultan with hi waking, it seemed--th profound 
still of the dawn outsid wa shatter by a most uncommon sound. It 
came without warning, or audibl approach; and it wa unspeak 
dreadful. It wa a voice, simpson declares, possibl a human voice; 
hoars yet plaintive--a soft, roar voic close outsid the tent, 
overhead rather than upon the ground, of immens volume, while in some 
strang way most penetratingli and seduct sweet. It rang out, too, 
in three separ and distinct notes, or cries, that bore in some odd 
fashion a resemblance, farfetch yet recognizable, to the name of the 
guide: "_dé-fa-go!_" 

the student admit he is unabl to describ it quit intelligently, for 
it wa unlik ani sound he had ever heard in hi life, and combin a 
blend of such contrari qualities. "A sort of windy, cri voice," he 
call it, "a of someth lone and untamed, wild and of abomin 
power...." 

and, even befor it ceased, drop back into the great gulf of 
silence, the guid besid him had sprung to hi feet with an answer 
though unintellig cry. He blunder against the tent pole with 
violence, shake the whole structure, spread hi arm out 
frantic for more room, and kick hi leg impetu free of the 
cling blankets. for a second, perhap two, he stood upright by the 
door, hi outlin dark against the pallor of the dawn; then, with a 
furious, rush speed, befor hi companion could move a hand to stop 
him, he shot with a plung through the flap of canvas--and wa gone. 
and as he went--so astonishingli fast that the voic could actual be 
heard die in the distance--h call aloud in tone of anguish 
terror that at the same time held someth strang like the frenzi 
exult of delight-- 

"oh! oh! My feet of fire! My burn feet of fire! oh! oh! thi height 
and fieri speed!" 

and then the distanc quickli buri it, and the deep silenc of veri 
earli morn descend upon the forest as before. 

It had all come about with such rapid that, but for the evid of 
the empti bed besid him, simpson could almost have believ it to have 
been the memori of a nightmar carri over from sleep. He still felt 
the warm pressur of that vanish bodi against hi side; there lay the 
twist blanket in a heap; the veri tent yet trembl with the 
vehem of the impetu departure. the strang word rang in hi 
ears, as though he still heard them in the distance--wild languag of a 
suddenli stricken mind. moreover, it wa not onli the sens of sight 
and hear that report uncommon thing to hi brain, for even while 
the man cri and ran, he had becom awar that a strang perfume, faint 
yet pungent, pervad the interior of the tent. and it wa at thi 
point, it seems, brought to himself by the conscious that hi 
nostril were take thi distress odor down into hi throat, that he 
found hi courage, sprang quickli to hi feet--and went out. 

the grey light of dawn that dropped, cold and glimmering, between the 
tree reveal the scene toler well. there stood the tent behind 
him, soak with dew; the dark ash of the fire, still warm; the lake, 
white beneath a coat of mist, the island rise darkli out of it 
like object pack in wool; and patch of snow beyond among the 
clearer space of the bush--everyth cold, still, wait for the sun. 
but nowher a sign of the vanish guide--still, doubtless, fli at 
frantic speed through the frozen woods. there wa not even the sound of 
disappear footsteps, nor the echo of the die voice. He had 
gone--utterly. 

there wa nothing; noth but the sens of hi recent presence, so 
strongli left behind about the camp; _and_--thi penetrating, 
all-pervad odor. 

and even thi wa now rapidli disappear in it turn. In spite of hi 
exceed mental perturbation, simpson struggl hard to detect it 
nature, and defin it, but the ascertain of an elus scent, not 
recogn subconsci and at once, is a veri subtl oper of 
the mind. and he failed. It wa gone befor he could properli seiz or 
name it. approxim description, even, seem to have been difficult, 
for it wa unlik ani smell he knew. acrid rather, not unlik the odor 
of a lion, he thinks, yet softer and not wholli unpleasing, with 
someth almost sweet in it that remind him of the scent of decay 
garden leaves, earth, and the myriad, nameless perfum that make up the 
odor of a big forest. yet the "odor of lions" is the phrase with which 
he usual sum it all up. 

then--it wa wholli gone, and he found himself stand by the ash of 
the fire in a state of amaz and stupid terror that left him the 
helpless prey of anyth that chose to happen. had a muskrat poke it 
point muzzl over a rock, or a squirrel scuttl in that instant down 
the bark of a tree, he would most like have collaps without more ado 
and fainted. for he felt about the whole affair the touch somewher of a 
great outer horror ... and hi scatter power had not as yet had time 
to collect themselv into a definit attitud of fight self-control. 

noth did happen, however. A great kiss of wind ran softli through the 
awaken forest, and a few mapl leav here and there rustl 
tremblingli to earth. the sky seem to grow suddenli much lighter. 
simpson felt the cool air upon hi cheek and uncov head; realiz 
that he wa shiver with the cold; and, make a great effort, 
realiz next that he wa alon in the bush--_and_ that he wa call 
upon to take immedi step to find and succor hi vanish companion. 

make an effort, accordingly, he did, though an ill-calcul and futil 
one. with that wilder of tree about him, the sheet of water cut 
him off behind, and the horror of that wild cri in hi blood, he did 
what ani other inexperienc man would have done in similar 
bewilderment: he ran about, without ani sens of direction, like a 
frantic child, and call loudli without ceas the name of the guide: 

"défago! défago! défago!" he yelled, and the tree gave him back the 
name as often as he shouted, onli a littl softened--"défago! défago! 
défago!" 

He follow the trail that lay a short distanc across the patch of 
snow, and then lost it again where the tree grew too thickli for snow 
to lie. He shout till he wa hoarse, and till the sound of hi own 
voic in all that unansw and listen world began to frighten him. 
hi confus increas in direct ratio to the violenc of hi efforts. 
hi distress becam formid acute, till at length hi exert 
defeat their own object, and from sheer exhaust he head back to 
the camp again. It remain a wonder that he ever found hi way. It wa 
with great difficulty, and onli after numberless fals clues, that he at 
last saw the white tent between the trees, and so reach safety. 

exhaust then appli it own remedy, and he grew calmer. He made the 
fire and breakfasted. hot coffe and bacon put a littl sens and 
judgment into him again, and he realiz that he had been behav like 
a boy. He now made another, and more success attempt to face the 
situat collectedly, and, a natur natur plucki come to hi 
assistance, he decid that he must first make as thorough a search as 
possible, fail success in which, he must find hi way into the home 
camp as best he could and bring help. 

and thi wa what he did. take food, match and rifl with him, and a 
small axe to blaze the tree against hi return journey, he set forth. 
It wa eight o'clock when he started, the sun shine over the top of 
the tree in a sky without clouds. pin to a stake by the fire he left 
a note in case défago return while he wa away. 

thi time, accord to a care plan, he took a new direction, 
intend to make a wide sweep that must sooner or later cut into 
indic of the guide' trail; and, befor he had gone a quarter of a 
mile he came across the track of a larg anim in the snow, and besid 
it the light and smaller track of what were beyond question human 
feet--th feet of défago. the relief he at onc experienc wa natural, 
though brief; for at first sight he saw in these track a simpl 
explan of the whole matter: these big mark had sure been left by 
a bull moos that, wind against it, had blunder upon the camp, and 
utter it singular cri of warn and alarm the moment it mistak wa 
apparent. défago, in whom the hunt instinct wa develop to the 
point of uncanni perfection, had scent the brute come down the wind 
hour before. hi excit and disappear were due, of course, 
to--to his-- 

then the imposs explan at which he grasp faded, as common 
sens show him mercilessli that none of thi wa true. No guide, much 
less a guid like défago, could have act in so irrat a way, go 
off even without hi rifl ...! the whole affair demand a far more 
complic elucidation, when he rememb the detail of it all--th 
cri of terror, the amaz language, the grey face of horror when hi 
nostril first caught the new odor; that muffl sob in the 
darkness, and--for this, too, now came back to him dimly--th man' 
origin avers for thi particular bit of country.... 

besides, now that he examin them closer, these were not the track of 
a bull moos at all! hank had explain to him the outlin of a bull' 
hoofs, of a cow' or calf's, too, for that matter; he had drawn them 
clearli on a strip of birch bark. and these were wholli different. they 
were big, round, ample, and with no point outlin as of sharp hoofs. 
He wonder for a moment whether bear track were like that. there wa 
no other anim he could think of, for carib did not come so far 
south at thi season, and, even if they did, would leav hoof marks. 

they were omin signs--thes mysteri write left in the snow by 
the unknown creatur that had lure a human be away from safety--and 
when he coupl them in hi imagin with that haunt sound that 
broke the still of the dawn, a momentari dizzi shook hi mind, 
distress him again beyond belief. He felt the _threatening_ aspect of 
it all. and, stoop down to examin the mark more closely, he caught 
a faint whiff of that sweet yet pungent odor that made him instantli 
straighten up again, fight a sensat almost of nausea. 

then hi memori play him anoth evil trick. He suddenli recal 
those uncov feet project beyond the edg of the tent, and the 
body' appear of have been drag toward the opening; the man' 
shrink from someth by the door when he woke later. the detail now 
beat against hi trembl mind with concert attack. they seem to 
gather in those deep space of the silent forest about him, where the 
host of tree stood waiting, listening, watch to see what he would 
do. the wood were close round him. 

with the persist of true pluck, however, simpson went forward, 
follow the track as best he could, smother these ugli emot 
that sought to weaken hi will. He blaze innumer tree as he went, 
ever fear of be unabl to find the way back, and call aloud at 
interv of a few second the name of the guide. the dull tap of 
the axe upon the massiv trunks, and the unnatur accent of hi own 
voic becam at length sound that he even dread to make, dread to 
hear. for they drew attent without ceas to hi presenc and exact 
whereabouts, and if it were realli the case that someth wa hunt 
himself down in the same way that he wa hunt down another-- 

with a strong effort, he crush the thought out the instant it rose. 
It wa the beginning, he realized, of a bewilder utterli diabol 
in kind that would speedili destroy him. 

* * * * * 

although the snow wa not continuous, lie mere in shallow flurri 
over the more open spaces, he found no difficulti in follow the 
track for the first few miles. they went straight as a rule line 
wherev the tree permitted. the stride soon began to increas in 
length, till it final assum proport that seem absolut 
imposs for ani ordinari anim to have made. like huge fli leap 
they became. one of these he measured, and though he knew that "stretch" 
of eighteen feet must be somehow wrong, he wa at a complet loss to 
understand whi he found no sign on the snow between the extrem points. 
but what perplex him even more, make him feel hi vision had gone 
utterli awry, wa that défago' stride increas in the same manner, and 
final cover the same incred distances. It look as if the great 
beast had lift him with it and carri him across these astonish 
intervals. simpson, who wa much longer in the limb, found that he could 
not compass even half the stretch by take a run jump. 

and the sight of these huge tracks, run side by side, silent 
evid of a dread journey in which terror or mad had urg to 
imposs results, wa profoundli moving. It shock him in the secret 
depth of hi soul. It wa the most horribl thing hi eye had ever 
look upon. He began to follow them mechanically, absentmindedli 
almost, ever peer over hi shoulder to see if he, too, were be 
follow by someth with a gigant tread.... and soon it came about 
that he no longer quit realiz what it wa they signified--thes 
impress left upon the snow by someth nameless and untamed, alway 
accompani by the footmark of the littl french canadian, hi guide, 
hi comrade, the man who had share hi tent a few hour before, 
chatting, laughing, even sing by hi side.... 




V 


for a man of hi year and inexperience, onli a canni scot, perhaps, 
ground in common sens and establish in logic, could have preserv 
even that measur of balanc that thi youth somehow or other did manag 
to preserv through the whole adventure. otherwise, two thing he 
present noticed, while forg pluckili ahead, must have sent him 
headlong back to the compar safeti of hi tent, instead of onli 
make hi hand close more tightli upon the rifl stock, while hi 
heart, train for the wee kirk, sent a wordless prayer wing it way 
to heaven. both tracks, he saw, had undergon a change, and thi change, 
so far as it concern the footstep of the man, wa in some 
undecipher manner--appalling. 

It wa in the bigger track he first notic this, and for a long time 
he could not quit believ hi eyes. wa it the blown leav that 
produc odd effect of light and shade, or that the dri snow, drift 
like fine ground rice about the edges, cast shadow and high lights? 
Or wa it actual the fact that the great mark had becom faintli 
colored? for round about the deep, plung hole of the anim there 
now appear a mysterious, reddish ting that wa more like an effect of 
light than of anyth that dy the substanc of the snow itself. everi 
mark had it, and had it increasingly--thi indistinct fieri ting that 
paint a new touch of ghastli into the picture. 

but when, wholli unabl to explain or to credit it, he turn hi 
attent to the other track to discov if they, too, bore similar 
witness, he notic that these had meanwhil undergon a chang that wa 
infinit worse, and charg with far more horribl suggestion. for, in 
the last hundr yard or so, he saw that they had grown gradual into 
the semblanc of the parent tread. impercept the chang had come 
about, yet unmistakably. It wa hard to see where the chang first 
began. the result, however, wa beyond question. smaller, neater, more 
cleanli modeled, they form now an exact and care duplic of the 
larger track besid them. the feet that produc them had, therefore, 
also changed. and someth in hi mind rear up with loath and with 
terror as he saw it. 

simpson, for the first time, hesitated; then, asham of hi alarm and 
indecision, took a few hurri step ahead; the next instant stop 
dead in hi tracks. immedi in front of him all sign of the trail 
ceased; both track came to an abrupt end. On all sides, for a hundr 
yard and more, he search in vain for the least indic of their 
continuance. there was--nothing. 

the tree were veri thick just there, big tree all of them, spruce, 
cedar, hemlock; there wa no underbrush. He stood, look about him, 
all distraught; bereft of ani power of judgment. then he set to work to 
search again, and again, and yet again, but alway with the same result: 
_nothing_. the feet that print the surfac of the snow thu far had 
now, apparently, left the ground! 

and it wa in that moment of distress and confus that the whip of 
terror laid it most nice calcul lash about hi heart. It drop 
with deadli effect upon the sorest spot of all, complet unnerv 
him. He had been secretli dread all the time that it would come--and 
come it did. 

far overhead, mute by great height and distance, strang thin and 
wailing, he heard the cri voic of défago, the guide. 

the sound drop upon him out of that still, wintri sky with an effect 
of dismay and terror unsurpassed. the rifl fell to hi feet. He stood 
motionless an instant, listen as it were with hi whole body, then 
stagger back against the nearest tree for support, disorgan 
hopelessli in mind and spirit. To him, in that moment, it seem the 
most shatter and disloc experi he had ever known, so that 
hi heart empti itself of all feel whatsoev as by a sudden 
draught. 

"oh! oh! thi fieri height! oh, my feet of fire! My burn feet of 
fire ...!" ran in far, beseech accent of indescrib appeal thi 
voic of anguish down the sky. onc it called--then silenc through all 
the listen wilder of trees. 

and simpson, scarc know what he did, present found himself 
run wildli to and fro, searching, calling, trip over root and 
boulders, and fling himself in a frenzi of undirect pursuit after 
the caller. behind the screen of memori and emot with which 
experi veil events, he plunged, distract and half-deranged, 
pick up fals light like a ship at sea, terror in hi eye and 
heart and soul. for the panic of the wilder had call to him in 
that far voice--th power of untam distance--th entic of the 
desol that destroys. He knew in that moment all the pain of 
someon hopelessli and irretriev lost, suffer the lust and 
travail of a soul in the final loneliness. A vision of défago, etern 
hunted, driven and pursu across the skiey vast of those ancient 
forest fled like a flame across the dark ruin of hi thought ... 

It seem age befor he could find anyth in the chao of hi 
disorgan sensat to which he could anchor himself steadi for a 
moment, and think ... 

the cri wa not repeated; hi own hoars call brought no response; 
the inscrut forc of the wild had summon their victim beyond 
recall--and held him fast. 

* * * * * 

yet he search and called, it seems, for hour afterwards, for it wa 
late in the afternoon when at length he decid to abandon a useless 
pursuit and return to hi camp on the shore of fifti island water. even 
then he went with reluctance, that cri voic still echo in hi 
ears. with difficulti he found hi rifl and the homeward trail. the 
concentr necessari to follow the badli blaze trees, and a bite 
hunger that gnawed, help to keep hi mind steady. otherwise, he 
admits, the temporari aberr he had suffer might have been 
prolong to the point of posit disaster. gradual the ballast 
shift back again, and he regain someth that approach hi normal 
equilibrium. 

but for all that the journey through the gather dusk wa miser 
haunted. He heard innumer follow footsteps; voic that laugh 
and whispered; and saw figur crouch behind tree and boulders, 
make sign to one anoth for a concert attack the moment he had 
passed. the creep murmur of the wind made him start and listen. He 
went stealthily, tri to hide where possible, and make as littl 
sound as he could. the shadow of the woods, hitherto protect or 
cover merely, had now becom menacing, challenging; and the pageantri 
in hi frighten mind mask a host of possibl that were all the 
more omin for be obscure. the presenti of a nameless doom 
lurk ill-conc behind everi detail of what had happened. 

It wa realli admir how he emerg victor in the end; men of riper 
power and experi might have come through the ordeal with less 
success. He had himself toler well in hand, all thing considered, 
and hi plan of action prove it. sleep be absolut out of the 
question and travel an unknown trail in the dark equal 
impracticable, he sat up the whole of that night, rifl in hand, befor 
a fire he never for a singl moment allow to die down. the sever of 
the haunt vigil mark hi soul for life; but it wa success 
accomplished; and with the veri first sign of dawn he set forth upon 
the long return journey to the home camp to get help. As before, he left 
a written note to explain hi absence, and to indic where he had left 
a plenti _cache_ of food and matches--though he had no expect 
that ani human hand would find them! 

how simpson found hi way alon by the lake and forest might well make a 
stori in itself, for to hear him tell it is to _know_ the passion 
loneli of soul that a man can feel when the wilder hold him in 
the hollow of it illimit hand--and laughs. It is also to admir hi 
indomit pluck. 

He claim no skill, declar that he follow the almost invis 
trail mechanically, and without thinking. and this, doubtless, is the 
truth. He reli upon the guid of the unconsci mind, which is 
instinct. perhaps, too, some sens of orientation, known to anim and 
primit men, may have help as well, for through all that tangl 
region he succeed in reach the exact spot where défago had hidden 
the cano nearli three day befor with the remark, "strike doo west 
across the lake into the sun to find the camp." 

there wa not much sun left to guid him, but he use hi compass to the 
best of hi ability, embark in the frail craft for the last twelv 
mile of hi journey with a sensat of immens relief that the forest 
wa at last behind him. and, fortunately, the water wa calm; he took 
hi line across the center of the lake instead of coast round the 
shore for anoth twenti miles. fortunately, too, the other hunter 
were back. the light of their fire furnish a steer point without 
which he might have search all night long for the actual posit of 
the camp. 

It wa close upon midnight all the same when hi cano grate on the 
sandi cove, and hank, punk and hi uncle, disturb in their sleep by 
hi cries, ran quickli down and help a veri exhaust and broken 
specimen of scotch human over the rock toward a die fire. 




VI 


the sudden entranc of hi prosaic uncl into thi world of wizardri 
and horror that had haunt him without interrupt now for two day 
and two nights, had the immedi effect of give to the affair an 
entir new aspect. the sound of that crisp "hulloa, my boy! and what' 
up _now_?" and the grasp of that dri and vigor hand introduc 
anoth standard of judgment. A revuls of feel wash through him. 
He realiz that he had let himself "go" rather badly. He even felt 
vagu asham of himself. the nativ hard-headed of hi race 
reclaim him. 

and thi doubtless explain whi he found it so hard to tell that group 
round the fire--everything. He told enough, however, for the immedi 
decis to be arriv at that a relief parti must start at the earliest 
possibl moment, and that simpson, in order to guid it capably, must 
first have food and, abov all, sleep. dr. cathcart observ the lad' 
condit more shrewdli than hi patient knew, gave him a veri slight 
inject of morphine. for six hour he slept like the dead. 

from the descript care written out afterward by thi student of 
divinity, it appear that the account he gave to the astonish group 
omit sundri vital and import details. He declar that, with hi 
uncle' wholesome, matter-of-fact counten stare him in the face, 
he simpli had not the courag to mention them. thus, all the search 
parti gathered, it would seem, wa that défago had suffer in the night 
an acut and inexplic attack of mania, had imagin himself "called" 
by someon or something, and had plung into the bush after it without 
food or rifle, where he must die a horribl and linger death by cold 
and starvat unless he could be found and rescu in time. "in time," 
moreover, meant _at once_. 

In the cours of the follow day, however--they were off by seven, 
leav punk in charg with instruct to have food and fire alway 
ready--simpson found it possibl to tell hi uncl a good deal more of 
the story' true inwardness, without divin that it wa drawn out of 
him as a matter of fact by a veri subtl form of cross examination. By 
the time they reach the begin of the trail, where the cano wa 
laid up against the return journey, he had mention how défago spoke 
vagu of "someth he call a 'wendigo'"; how he cri in hi sleep; 
how he imagin an unusu scent about the camp; and had betray other 
symptom of mental excitement. He also admit the bewild effect 
of "that extraordinari odor" upon himself, "pungent and acrid like the 
odor of lions." and by the time they were within an easi hour of fifti 
island water he had let slip the further fact--a foolish avow of hi 
own hyster condition, as he felt afterwards--that he had heard the 
vanish guid call "for help." He omit the singular phrase used, 
for he simpli could not bring himself to repeat the preposter 
language. also, while describ how the man' footstep in the snow had 
gradual assum an exact miniatur like of the animal' plung 
tracks, he left out the fact that they measur a _wholly_ incred 
distance. It seem a question, nice balanc between individu pride 
and honesty, what he should reveal and what suppress. He mention the 
fieri ting in the snow, for instance, yet shrank from tell that bodi 
and bed had been partli drag out of the tent.... 

with the net result that dr. cathcart, adroit psychologist that he 
fanci himself to be, had assur him clearli enough exactli where hi 
mind, influenc by loneliness, bewilder and terror, had yield to 
the strain and invit delusion. while prais hi conduct, he manag 
at the same time to point out where, when, and how hi mind had gone 
astray. He made hi nephew think himself finer than he wa by judici 
praise, yet more foolish than he wa by minim the valu of the 
evidence. like mani anoth materialist, that is, he lie cleverli on 
the basi of insuffici knowledge, _because_ the knowledg suppli 
seem to hi own particular intellig inadmissible. 

"the spell of these terribl solitudes," he said, "cannot leav ani mind 
untouched, ani mind, that is, possess of the higher imagin 
qualities. It ha work upon your exactli as it work upon my own 
when I wa your age. the anim that haunt your littl camp wa 
undoubtedli a moose, for the 'belling' of a moos may have, sometimes, a 
veri peculiar qualiti of sound. the color appear of the big track 
wa obvious a defect of vision in your own eye produc by 
excitement. the size and stretch of the track we shall prove when we 
come to them. but the hallucin of an audibl voice, of course, is 
one of the commonest form of delus due to mental excitement--an 
excitement, my dear boy, perfectli excusable, and, let me add, 
wonder control by you under the circumstances. for the rest, I 
am bound to say, you have act with a splendid courage, for the terror 
of feel oneself lost in thi wilder is noth short of awful, 
and, had I been in your place, I don't for a moment believ I could have 
behav with one quarter of your wisdom and decision. the onli thing I 
find it uncommonli difficult to explain is--that--damn odor." 

"it made me feel sick, I assur you," declar hi nephew, "posit 
dizzy!" hi uncle' attitud of calm omniscience, mere becaus he knew 
more psycholog formulae, made him slightli defiant. It wa so easi 
to be wise in the explan of an experi one ha not person 
witnessed. "A kind of desol and terribl odor is the onli way I can 
describ it," he concluded, glanc at the featur of the quiet, 
unemot man besid him. 

"I can onli marvel," wa the reply, "that under the circumst it did 
not seem to you even worse." the dri words, simpson knew, hover 
between the truth, and hi uncle' interpret of "the truth." 

* * * * * 

and so at last they came to the littl camp and found the tent still 
standing, the remain of the fire, and the piec of paper pin to a 
stake besid it--untouched. the cache, poorli contriv by inexperienc 
hands, however, had been discov and opened--bi musk rats, mink and 
squirrel. the match lay scatter about the opening, but the food had 
been taken to the last crumb. 

"well, fellers, he ain't here," exclaim hank loudli after hi fashion. 
"and that' as sartain as the coal suppli down below! but whar he' got 
to by thi time is 'bout as unsartain as the trade in crown in t'other 
place." the presenc of a divin student wa no barrier to hi 
languag at such a time, though for the reader' sake it may be sever 
edited. "I propose," he added, "that we start out at onc an' hunt for'm 
like hell!" 

the gloom of défago' probabl fate oppress the whole parti with a 
sens of dread graviti the moment they saw the familiar sign of 
recent occupancy. especi the tent, with the bed of balsam branch 
still smooth and flatten by the pressur of hi body, seem to 
bring hi presenc near to them. simpson, feel vagu as if hi 
world were somehow at stake, went about explain particular in a 
hush tone. He wa much calmer now, though overweari with the strain 
of hi mani journeys. hi uncle' method of explaining--"explain 
away," rather--th detail still fresh in hi haunt memori helped, 
too, to put ice upon hi emotions. 

"and that' the direct he ran off in," he said to hi two companions, 
point in the direct where the guid had vanish that morn in 
the grey dawn. "straight down there he ran like a deer, in between the 
birch and the hemlock...." 

hank and dr. cathcart exchang glances. 

"and it wa about two mile down there, in a straight line," continu 
the other, speak with someth of the former terror in hi voice, 
"that I follow hi trail to the place where--it stopped--dead!" 

"and where you heer him callin' an' caught the stench, an' all the 
rest of the wick entertainment," cri hank, with a volubl that 
betray hi keen distress. 

"and where your excit overcam you to the point of produc 
illusions," ad dr. cathcart under hi breath, yet not so low that hi 
nephew did not hear it. 

* * * * * 

It wa earli in the afternoon, for they had travel quickly, and there 
were still a good two hour of daylight left. dr. cathcart and hank lost 
no time in begin the search, but simpson wa too exhaust to 
accompani them. they would follow the blaze mark on the trees, and 
where possible, hi footsteps. meanwhil the best thing he could do wa 
to keep a good fire going, and rest. 

but after someth like three hours' search, the dark alreadi down, 
the two men return to camp with noth to report. fresh snow had 
cover all signs, and though they had follow the blaze tree to the 
spot where simpson had turn back, they had not discov the smallest 
indic of a human being--or for that matter, of an animal. there 
were no fresh track of ani kind; the snow lay undisturbed. 

It wa difficult to know what wa best to do, though in realiti there 
wa noth more they _could_ do. they might stay and search for week 
without much chanc of success. the fresh snow destroy their onli 
hope, and they gather round the fire for supper, a gloomi and 
despond party. the facts, indeed, were sad enough, for défago had a 
wife at rat portage, and hi earn were the family' sole mean of 
support. 

now that the whole truth in all it ugli wa out, it seem useless 
to deal in further disguis or pretense. they talk openli of the fact 
and probabilities. It wa not the first time, even in the experi of 
dr. cathcart, that a man had yield to the singular seduct of the 
solitud and gone out of hi mind; défago, moreover, wa predispos to 
someth of the sort, for he alreadi had a touch of melancholia in hi 
blood, and hi fiber wa weaken by bout of drink that often last 
for week at a time. someth on thi trip--on might never know 
precis what--had suffic to push him over the line, that wa all. 
and he had gone, gone off into the great wilder of tree and lake 
to die by starvat and exhaustion. the chanc against hi find 
camp again were overwhelming; the delirium that wa upon him would also 
doubtless have increased, and it wa quit like he might do violenc 
to himself and so hasten hi cruel fate. even while they talked, indeed, 
the end had probabl come. On the suggest of hank, hi old pal, 
however, they propos to wait a littl longer and devot the whole of 
the follow day, from dawn to darkness, to the most systemat search 
they could devise. they would divid the territori between them. they 
discuss their plan in great detail. all that men could do they would 
do. and, meanwhile, they talk about the particular form in which the 
singular panic of the wilder had made it attack upon the mind of 
the unfortun guide. hank, though familiar with the legend in it 
gener outline, obvious did not welcom the turn the convers had 
taken. He contribut little, though that littl wa illuminating. for 
he admit that a stori ran over all thi section of countri to the 
effect that sever indian had "seen the wendigo" along the shore of 
fifti island water in the "fall" of last year, and that thi wa the 
true reason of défago' disinclin to hunt there. hank doubtless 
felt that he had in a sens help hi old pal to death by 
overpersuad him. "when an indian goe crazy," he explained, talk 
to himself more than to the others, it seemed, "it' alway put that 
he' 'seen the wendigo.' an' pore old défaygo wa superstiti down to 
he veri heel ...!" 

and then simpson, feel the atmospher more sympathetic, told over 
again the full stori of hi astonish tale; he left out no detail 
thi time; he mention hi own sensat and grip fears. He onli 
omit the strang languag used. 

"but défago sure had alreadi told you all these detail of the wendigo 
legend, my dear fellow," insist the doctor. "I mean, he had talk 
about it, and thu put into your mind the idea which your own 
excit afterward developed?" 

whereupon simpson again repeat the facts. défago, he declared, had 
bare mention the beast. he, simpson, knew noth of the story, and, 
so far as he remembered, had never even read about it. even the word wa 
unfamiliar. 

Of cours he wa tell the truth, and dr. cathcart wa reluctantli 
compel to admit the singular charact of the whole affair. He did 
not do thi in word so much as in manner, however. He kept hi back 
against a good, stout tree; he poke the fire into a blaze the moment it 
show sign of die down; he wa quicker than ani of them to notic 
the least sound in the night about them--a fish jump in the lake, a 
twig snap in the bush, the drop of occasion fragment of 
frozen snow from the branch overhead where the heat loosen them. hi 
voice, too, chang a littl in quality, becom a shade less 
confident, lower also in tone. fear, to put it plainly, hover close 
about that littl camp, and though all three would have been glad to 
speak of other matters, the onli thing they seem abl to discuss wa 
this--th sourc of their fear. they tri other subject in vain; there 
wa noth to say about them. hank wa the most honest of the group; he 
said next to nothing. He never once, however, turn hi back to the 
darkness. hi face wa alway to the forest, and when wood wa need he 
didn't go farther than wa necessari to get it. 




vii 


A wall of silenc wrap them in, for the snow, though not thick, wa 
suffici to deaden ani noise, and the frost held thing pretti tight 
besides. No sound but their voic and the soft roar of the flame made 
itself heard. only, from time to time, someth soft as the flutter of 
a pine moth' wing went past them through the air. No one seem 
anxiou to go to bed. the hour slip toward midnight. 

"the legend is picturesqu enough," observ the doctor after one of the 
longer pauses, speak to break it rather than becaus he had anyth 
to say, "for the wendigo is simpli the call of the wild personified, 
which some natur hear to their own destruction." 

"that' about it," hank said presently. "an' there' no misunderstandin' 
when you hear it. It call you by name right 'nough." 

anoth paus followed. then dr. cathcart came back to the forbidden 
subject with a rush that made the other jump. 

"the allegori _is_ significant," he remarked, look about him into the 
darkness, "for the voice, they say, resembl all the minor sound of 
the bush--wind, fall water, cri of the animals, and so forth. and, 
onc the victim hear _that_--he' off for good, of course! hi most 
vulner points, moreover, are said to be the feet and the eyes; the 
feet, you see, for the lust of wandering, and the eye for the lust of 
beauty. the poor beggar goe at such a dread speed that he bleed 
beneath the eyes, and hi feet burn." 

dr. cathcart, as he spoke, continu to peer uneasili into the 
surround gloom. hi voic sank to a hush tone. 

"the wendigo," he added, "i said to burn hi feet--ow to the 
friction, appar caus by it tremend velocity--til they drop 
off, and new one form exactli like it own." 

simpson listen in horrifi amazement; but it wa the pallor on hank' 
face that fascin him most. He would willingli have stop hi ear 
and close hi eyes, had he dared. 

"it don't alway keep to the ground neither," came in hank' slow, heavi 
drawl, "for it goe so high that he think the star have set him all 
a-fire. an' it'll take great thumpin' jump sometimes, an' run along the 
top of the trees, carri it partner with it, an' then droppin' him 
jest as a fish hawk'll drop a pickerel to kill it befor eatin'. an' it 
food, of all the muck in the whole bush is--moss!" and he laugh a 
short, unnatur laugh. "it' a moss-eater, is the wendigo," he added, 
look up excitedli into the face of hi companions. "moss-eater," he 
repeated, with a string of the most outlandish oath he could invent. 

but simpson now understood the true purpos of all thi talk. what 
these two men, each strong and "experienced" in hi own way, dread 
more than anyth els was--silence. they were talk against time. 
they were also talk against darkness, against the invas of panic, 
against the admiss reflect might bring that they were in an 
enemy' country--against anything, in fact, rather than allow their 
inmost thought to assum control. He himself, alreadi initi by the 
aw vigil with terror, wa beyond both of them in thi respect. He had 
reach the stage where he wa immune. but these two, the scoffing, 
analyt doctor, and the honest, dog backwoodsman, each sat 
trembl in the depth of hi being. 

thu the hour passed; and thus, with lower voic and a kind of taut 
inner resist of spirit, thi littl group of human sat in the 
jaw of the wilder and talk foolishli of the terribl and haunt 
legend. It wa an unequ contest, all thing considered, for the 
wilder had alreadi the advantag of first attack--and of a hostage. 
the fate of their comrad hung over them with a steadili increas 
weight of oppress that final becam insupportable. 

It wa hank, after a paus longer than the preced one that no one 
seem abl to break, who first let loos all thi pent-up emot in 
veri unexpect fashion, by spring suddenli to hi feet and let 
out the most ear-shatt yell imagin into the night. He could not 
contain himself ani longer, it seemed. To make it carri even beyond an 
ordinari cri he interrupt it rhythm by shake the palm of hi hand 
befor hi mouth. 

"that' for défago," he said, look down at the other two with a 
queer, defiant laugh, "for it' my belief"--th sandwich oath may be 
omitted--"that my ole partner' not far from us at thi veri minute." 

there wa a vehem and reckless about hi perform that made 
simpson, too, start to hi feet in amazement, and betray even the 
doctor into let the pipe slip from between hi lips. hank' face wa 
ghastly, but cathcart' show a sudden weakness--a loosen of all hi 
faculties, as it were. then a momentari anger blaze into hi eyes, and 
he too, though with deliber born of habitu self-control, got upon 
hi feet and face the excit guide. for thi wa unpermissible, 
foolish, dangerous, and he meant to stop it in the bud. 

what might have happen in the next minut or two one may specul 
about, yet never definit know, for in the instant of profound silenc 
that follow hank' roar voice, and as though in answer to it, 
someth went past through the dark of the sky overhead at terrif 
speed--someth of necess veri large, for it displac much air, 
while down between the tree there fell a faint and windi cri of a human 
voice, call in tone of indescrib anguish and appeal-- 

"oh, oh! thi fieri height! oh, oh! My feet of fire! My burn feet of 
fire!" 

white to the veri edg of hi shirt, hank look stupidli about him like 
a child. dr. cathcart utter some kind of unintellig cry, turn 
as he did so with an instinct movement of blind terror toward the 
protect of the tent, then halt in the act as though frozen. 
simpson, alon of the three, retain hi presenc of mind a little. hi 
own horror wa too deep to allow of ani immedi reaction. He had heard 
that cri before. 

turn to hi stricken companions, he said almost calmly-- 

"that' exactli the cri I heard--th veri word he used!" 

then, lift hi face to the sky, he cri aloud, "défago, défago! come 
down here to us! come down--!" 

and befor there wa time for anybodi to take definit action one way or 
another, there came the sound of someth drop heavili between the 
trees, strike the branch on the way down, and land with a 
dread thud upon the frozen earth below. the crash and thunder of it 
wa realli terrific. 

"that' him, s'help me the good gawd!" came from hank in a whisper 
cri half choked, hi hand go automat toward the hunt knife 
in hi belt. "and he' coming! he' coming!" he added, with an 
irrat laugh of horror, as the sound of heavi footstep crunch 
over the snow becam distinctli audible, approach through the 
black toward the circl of light. 

and while the steps, with their stumbl motion, move nearer and 
nearer upon them, the three men stood round that fire, motionless and 
dumb. dr. cathcart had the appear of a man suddenli withered; even 
hi eye did not move. hank, suffer shockingly, seem on the verg 
again of violent action; yet did nothing. he, too, wa hewn of stone. 
like stricken children they seemed. the pictur wa hideous. and, 
meanwhile, their owner still invisible, the footstep came closer, 
crunch the frozen snow. It wa endless--too prolong to be quit 
real--thi measur and pitiless approach. It wa accursed. 




viii 


then at length the darkness, have thu labori conceived, brought 
forth--a figure. It drew forward into the zone of uncertain light where 
fire and shadow mingled, not ten feet away; then halted, stare at 
them fixedly. the same instant it start forward again with the 
spasmod motion as of a thing move by wires, and come up closer to 
them, full into the glare of the fire, they perceiv then that--it wa 
a man; and appar that thi man was--défago. 

someth like a skin of horror almost percept drew down in that 
moment over everi face, and three pair of eye shone through it as 
though they saw across the frontier of normal vision into the unknown. 

défago advanced, hi tread falter and uncertain; he made hi way 
straight up to them as a group first, then turn sharpli and peer 
close into the face of simpson. the sound of a voic issu from hi 
lips-- 

"here I am, boss simpson. I heer someon call me." It wa a faint, 
dri up voice, made wheezi and breathless as by immens exertion. "i'm 
havin' a reg'lar hellfir kind of a trip, I am." and he laughed, 
thrust hi head forward into the other' face. 

but that laugh start the machineri of the group of waxwork figur 
with the wax-whit skins. hank immedi sprang forward with a stream 
of oath so farfetch that simpson did not recogn them as english at 
all, but thought he had laps into indian or some other lingo. He onli 
realiz that hank' presence, thrust thu between them, wa 
welcome--uncommonli welcome. dr. cathcart, though more calmli and 
leisurely, advanc behind him, heavili stumbling. 

simpson seem hazi as to what wa actual said and done in those next 
few seconds, for the eye of that detest and blast visag peer 
at such close quarter into hi own utterli bewild hi sens at 
first. He mere stood still. He said nothing. He had not the train 
will of the older men that forc them into action in defianc of all 
emot stress. He watch them move as behind a glass that half 
destroy their reality; it wa dreamlike; perverted. yet, through the 
torrent of hank' meaningless phrases, he rememb hear hi uncle' 
tone of authority--hard and forced--say sever thing about food and 
warmth, blankets, whiski and the rest ... and, further, that whiff of 
that penetrating, unaccustom odor, vile yet sweetli bewildering, 
assail hi nostril dure all that followed. 

It wa no less a person than himself, however--less experienc and 
adroit than the other though he was--who gave instinct utter to 
the sentenc that brought a measur of relief into the ghastli situat 
by express the doubt and thought in each one' heart. 

"it _is_--you, isn't it, défago?" he ask under hi breath, horror 
break hi speech. 

and at onc cathcart burst out with the loud answer befor the other had 
time to move hi lips. "of cours it is! Of cours it is! only--can't 
you see--he' nearli dead with exhaustion, cold and terror! isn't _that_ 
enough to chang a man beyond all recognition?" It wa said in order to 
convinc himself as much as to convinc the others. the overemphasi 
alon prove that. and continually, while he spoke and acted, he held a 
handkerchief to hi nose. that odor pervad the whole camp. 

for the "défago" who sat huddl by the big fire, wrap in blankets, 
drink hot whiski and hold food in wast hands, wa no more like 
the guid they had last seen aliv than the pictur of a man of sixti is 
like a daguerreotyp of hi earli youth in the costum of anoth 
generation. noth realli can describ that ghastli caricature, that 
parody, masquerad there in the firelight as défago. from the ruin of 
the dark and aw memori he still retains, simpson declar that the 
face wa more anim than human, the featur drawn about into wrong 
proportions, the skin loos and hanging, as though he had been subject 
to extraordinari pressur and tensions. It made him think vagu of 
those bladder face blown up by the hawker on ludgat hill, that chang 
their express as they swell, and as they collaps emit a faint and 
wail imit of a voice. both face and voic suggest some such 
abomin resemblance. but cathcart long afterwards, seek to 
describ the indescribable, assert that thu might have look a face 
and bodi that had been in air so rarifi that, the weight of atmospher 
be removed, the entir structur threaten to fli asund and 
become--_incoherent_.... 

It wa hank, though all distraught and shake with a tear volum of 
emot he could neither handl nor understand, who brought thing to a 
head without much ado. He went off to a littl distanc from the fire, 
appar so that the light should not dazzl him too much, and shade 
hi eye for a moment with both hands, shout in a loud voic that held 
anger and affect dread mingled: 

"you ain't défaygo! you ain't défaygo at all! I don't give a--damn, but 
that ain't you, my ole pal of twenti years!" He glare upon the huddl 
figur as though he would destroy him with hi eyes. "an' if it is i'll 
swab the floor of hell with a wad of cotton wool on a toothpick, s'help 
me the good gawd!" he added, with a violent fling of horror and disgust. 

It wa imposs to silenc him. He stood there shout like one 
possessed, horribl to see, horribl to hear--_becaus it wa the 
truth_. He repeat himself in fifti differ ways, each more 
outlandish than the last. the wood rang with echoes. At one time it 
look as if he meant to fling himself upon "the intruder," for hi hand 
continu jerk toward the long hunt knife in hi belt. 

but in the end he did nothing, and the whole tempest complet itself 
veri shortli with tears. hank' voic suddenli broke, he collaps on 
the ground, and cathcart somehow or other persuad him at last to go 
into the tent and lie quiet. the remaind of the affair, indeed, wa 
wit by him from behind the canvas, hi white and terrifi face 
peep through the crack of the tent door flap. 

then dr. cathcart, close follow by hi nephew who so far had kept 
hi courag better than all of them, went up with a determin air and 
stood opposit to the figur of défago huddl over the fire. He look 
him squar in the face and spoke. At first hi voic wa firm. 

"défago, tell us what' happened--just a little, so that we can know 
how best to help you?" he ask in a tone of authority, almost of 
command. and at that point, it _was_ command. At onc afterwards, 
however, it chang in quality, for the figur turn up to him a face 
so piteous, so terribl and so littl like humanity, that the doctor 
shrank back from him as from someth spiritu unclean. simpson, 
watch close behind him, say he got the impress of a mask that wa 
on the verg of drop off, and that underneath they would discov 
someth black and diabolical, reveal in utter nakedness. "out with 
it, man, out with it!" cathcart cried, terror run neck and neck with 
entreaty. "none of us can stand thi much longer ...!" It wa the cri of 
instinct over reason. 

and then "défago," smile _whitely_, answer in that thin and fade 
voic that alreadi seem pass over into a sound of quit anoth 
character-- 

"I seen that great wendigo thing," he whispered, snif the air about 
him exactli like an animal. "I been with it too--" 

whether the poor devil would have said more, or whether dr. cathcart 
would have continu the imposs cross examin cannot be known, 
for at that moment the voic of hank wa heard yell at the top of hi 
voic from behind the canva that conceal all but hi terrifi eyes. 
such a howl wa never heard. 

"hi feet! oh, gawd, hi feet! look at hi great changed--feet!" 

défago, shuffl where he sat, had move in such a way that for the 
first time hi leg were in full light and hi feet were visible. yet 
simpson had no time, himself, to see properli what hank had seen. and 
hank ha never seen fit to tell. that same instant, with a leap like 
that of a frighten tiger, cathcart wa upon him, bundl the fold of 
blanket about hi leg with such speed that the young student caught 
littl more than a pass glimps of someth dark and oddli mass 
where moccasin feet ought to have been, and saw even that but with 
uncertain vision. 

then, befor the doctor had time to do more, or simpson time to even 
think a question, much less ask it, défago wa stand upright in front 
of them, balanc with pain and difficulty, and upon hi shapeless and 
twist visag an express so dark and so malici that it was, in 
the true sense, monstrous. 

"now _you_ seen it too," he wheezed, "you seen my fiery, burn feet! 
and now--that is, unless you kin save me an' prevent--it' 'bout time 
for--" 

hi piteou and beseech voic wa interrupt by a sound that wa 
like the roar of wind come across the lake. the tree overhead shook 
their tangl branches. the blaze fire bent it flame as befor a 
blast. and someth swept with a terrific, rush nois about the 
littl camp and seem to surround it entir in a singl moment of 
time. défago shook the cling blanket from hi body, turn toward 
the wood behind, and with the same stumbl motion that had brought 
him--wa gone: gone, befor anyon could move muscl to prevent him, 
gone with an amazing, blunder swift that left no time to act. the 
dark posit swallow him; and less than a dozen second later, 
abov the roar of the sway tree and the shout of the sudden wind, 
all three men, watch and listen with stricken hearts, heard a cri 
that seem to drop down upon them from a great height of sky and 
distance-- 

"oh, oh! thi fieri height! oh, oh! My feet of fire! My burn feet of 
fire ...!" then die away, into untold space and silence. 

dr. cathcart--suddenli master of himself, and therefor of the 
others--wa just abl to seiz hank violent by the arm as he tri to 
dash headlong into the bush. 

"but I want ter know,--you!" shriek the guide. "I want ter see! that 
ain't him at all, but some--devil that' shunt into hi place ...!" 

somehow or other--h admit he never quit knew how he accomplish 
it--h manag to keep him in the tent and pacifi him. the doctor, 
apparently, had reach the stage where reaction had set in and allow 
hi own innat forc to conquer. certainli he "managed" hank admirably. 
It wa hi nephew, however, hitherto so wonder controlled, who gave 
him most caus for anxiety, for the cumul strain had now produc a 
condit of lachrymos hysteria which made it necessari to isol him 
upon a bed of bough and blanket as far remov from hank as wa 
possibl under the circumstances. 

and there he lay, as the watch of that haunt night pass over the 
lone camp, cri startl sentences, and fragment of sentences, into 
the fold of hi blanket. A quantiti of gibberish about speed and height 
and fire mingl oddli with biblic memori of the classroom. "peopl 
with broken face all on fire are come at a most awful, awful, pace 
toward the camp!" he would moan one minute; and the next would sit up 
and stare into the woods, intent listening, and whisper, "how terribl 
in the wilder are--ar the feet of them that--" until hi uncl came 
across to chang the direct of hi thought and comfort him. 

the hysteria, fortunately, prove but temporary. sleep cure him, just 
as it cure hank. 

till the first sign of daylight came, soon after five o'clock, dr. 
cathcart kept hi vigil. hi face wa the color of chalk, and there were 
strang flush beneath the eyes. An appal terror of the soul 
battl with hi will all through those silent hours. these were some of 
the outer sign ... 

At dawn he lit the fire himself, made breakfast, and woke the others, 
and by seven they were well on their way back to the home camp--thre 
perplex and afflict men, but each in hi own way have reduc hi 
inner turmoil to a condit of more or less systemat order again. 




IX 


they talk little, and then onli of the most wholesom and common 
things, for their mind were charg with pain thought that 
clamour for explanation, though no one dare refer to them. hank, 
be nearest to primit conditions, wa the first to find himself, 
for he wa also less complex. In dr. cathcart "civilization" champion 
hi forc against an attack singular enough. To thi day, perhaps, he 
is not _quite_ sure of certain things. anyhow, he took longer to "find 
himself." 

simpson, the student of divinity, it wa who arrang hi conclus 
probabl with the best, though not most scientific, appear of order. 
out there, in the heart of unreclaim wilderness, they had sure 
wit someth crude and essenti primitive. someth that 
had surviv somehow the advanc of human had emerg terrifically, 
betray a scale of life still monstrou and immature. He envisag it 
rather as a glimps into prehistor ages, when superstitions, gigant 
and uncouth, still oppress the heart of men; when the forc of natur 
were still untamed, the power that may have haunt a primev univers 
not yet withdrawn. To thi day he think of what he term year later 
in a sermon "savag and formid potenc lurk behind the soul of 
men, not evil perhap in themselves, yet instinct hostil to human 
as it exists." 

with hi uncl he never discuss the matter in detail, for the barrier 
between the two type of mind made it difficult. onli once, year later, 
someth led them to the frontier of the subject--of a singl detail of 
the subject, rather-- 

"can't you even tell me what--_they_ were like?" he asked; and the reply, 
though conceiv in wisdom, wa not encouraging, "it is far better you 
should not tri to know, or to find out." 

"well--that odour...?" persist the nephew. "what do you make of that?" 

dr. cathcart look at him and rais hi eyebrows. 

"odours," he replied, "are not so easi as sound and sight of telepath 
communication. I make as much, or as little, probably, as you do 
yourself." 

He wa not quit so glib as usual with hi explanations. that wa all. 

* * * * * 

At the fall of day, cold, exhausted, famished, the parti came to the 
end of the long portag and drag themselv into a camp that at 
first glimps seem empty. fire there wa none, and no punk came 
forward to welcom them. the emot capac of all three wa too 
over-sp to recogn either surpris or annoyance; but the cri of 
spontan affect that burst from the lip of hank, as he rush 
ahead of them toward the fire-place, came probabl as a warn that 
the end of the amaz affair wa not quit yet. and both cathcart and 
hi nephew confess afterward that when they saw him kneel down in 
hi excit and embrac someth that reclined, gentli moving, 
besid the extinguish ashes, they felt in their veri bone that thi 
"something" would prove to be défago--th true défago, returned. 

and so, indeed, it was. 

It is soon told. exhaust to the point of emaciation, the french 
canadian--what wa left of him, that is--fumbl among the ashes, tri 
to make a fire. hi bodi crouch there, the weak finger obey feebli 
the instinct habit of a lifetim with twig and matches. but there 
wa no longer ani mind to direct the simpl operation. the mind had 
fled beyond recall. and with it, too, had fled memory. not onli recent 
events, but all previou life wa a blank. 

thi time it wa the real man, though incred and horribl shrunken. 
On hi face wa no express of ani kind whatever--fear, welcome, or 
recognition. He did not seem to know who it wa that embrac him, or 
who it wa that fed, warm and spoke to him the word of comfort and 
relief. forlorn and broken beyond all reach of human aid, the littl man 
did meekli as he wa bidden. the "something" that had constitut him 
"individual" had vanish for ever. 

In some way it wa more terribl move than anyth they had yet 
seen--that idiot smile as he drew wad of coars moss from hi swollen 
cheek and told them that he wa "a damn moss-eater"; the continu 
vomit of even the simplest food; and, worst of all, the piteou 
and childish voic of complaint in which he told them that hi feet 
pain him--"burn like fire"--which wa natur enough when dr. cathcart 
examin them and found that both were dread frozen. beneath the 
eye there were faint indic of recent bleeding. 

the detail of how he surviv the prolong exposure, of where he had 
been, or of how he cover the great distanc from one camp to the 
other, includ an immens detour of the lake on foot sinc he had 
no canoe--al thi remain unknown. hi memori had vanish completely. 
and befor the end of the winter whose begin wit thi strang 
occurrence, défago, bereft of mind, memori and soul, had gone with it. 
He linger onli a few weeks. 

and what punk wa abl to contribut to the stori throw no further 
light upon it. He wa clean fish by the lake shore about five o'clock 
in the evening--an hour, that is, befor the search parti returned--when 
he saw thi shadow of the guid pick it way weakli into camp. In 
advanc of him, he declares, came the faint whiff of a certain singular 
odour. 

that same instant old punk start for home. He cover the entir 
journey of three day as onli indian blood could have cover it. the 
terror of a whole race drove him. He knew what it all meant. défago 
had "seen the wendigo." 






end of the project gutenberg ebook of the wendigo, by algernon blackwood 

*** end OF thi project gutenberg ebook the wendigo *** 

***** thi file should be name 10897-8.txt or 10897-8.zip ***** 
thi and all associ file of variou format will be found in: 
http://www.gutenberg.net/1/0/8/9/10897/ 

produc by suzann shell, beginn projects, dave morgan and the 
onlin distribut proofread team. 


updat edit will replac the previou one--th old edit 
will be renamed. 

creat the work from public domain print edit mean that no 
one own a unit state copyright in these works, so the foundat 
(and you!) can copi and distribut it in the unit state without 
permiss and without pay copyright royalties. special rules, 
set forth in the gener term of use part of thi license, appli to 
copi and distribut project gutenberg-tm electron work to 
protect the project gutenberg-tm concept and trademark. project 
gutenberg is a regist trademark, and may not be use if you 
charg for the ebooks, unless you receiv specif permission. If you 
do not charg anyth for copi of thi ebook, compli with the 
rule is veri easy. you may use thi ebook for nearli ani purpos 
such as creation of deriv works, reports, perform and 
research. they may be modifi and print and given away--y may do 
practic anyth with public domain ebooks. redistribut is 
subject to the trademark license, especi commerci 
redistribution. 



*** start: full licens *** 

the full project gutenberg licens 
pleas read thi befor you distribut OR use thi work 

To protect the project gutenberg-tm mission of promot the free 
distribut of electron works, by use or distribut thi work 
(or ani other work associ in ani way with the phrase "project 
gutenberg"), you agre to compli with all the term of the full project 
gutenberg-tm licens (avail with thi file or onlin at 
http://gutenberg.net/license). 


section 1. gener term of use and redistribut project gutenberg-tm 
electron work 

1.a. By read or use ani part of thi project gutenberg-tm 
electron work, you indic that you have read, understand, agre to 
and accept all the term of thi licens and intellectu properti 
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agre to abid by all 
the term of thi agreement, you must ceas use and return or destroy 
all copi of project gutenberg-tm electron work in your possession. 
If you paid a fee for obtain a copi of or access to a project 
gutenberg-tm electron work and you do not agre to be bound by the 
term of thi agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or 
entiti to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.e.8. 

1.b. "project gutenberg" is a regist trademark. It may onli be 
use on or associ in ani way with an electron work by peopl who 
agre to be bound by the term of thi agreement. there are a few 
thing that you can do with most project gutenberg-tm electron work 
even without compli with the full term of thi agreement. see 
paragraph 1.c below. there are a lot of thing you can do with project 
gutenberg-tm electron work if you follow the term of thi agreement 
and help preserv free futur access to project gutenberg-tm electron 
works. see paragraph 1.e below. 

1.c. the project gutenberg literari archiv foundat ("the foundation" 
or pglaf), own a compil copyright in the collect of project 
gutenberg-tm electron works. nearli all the individu work in the 
collect are in the public domain in the unit states. If an 
individu work is in the public domain in the unit state and you are 
locat in the unit states, we do not claim a right to prevent you from 
copying, distributing, performing, display or creat deriv 
work base on the work as long as all refer to project gutenberg 
are removed. Of course, we hope that you will support the project 
gutenberg-tm mission of promot free access to electron work by 
freeli share project gutenberg-tm work in complianc with the term of 
thi agreement for keep the project gutenberg-tm name associ with 
the work. you can easili compli with the term of thi agreement by 
keep thi work in the same format with it attach full project 
gutenberg-tm licens when you share it without charg with others. 

1.d. the copyright law of the place where you are locat also govern 
what you can do with thi work. copyright law in most countri are in 
a constant state of change. If you are outsid the unit states, check 
the law of your countri in addit to the term of thi agreement 
befor downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distribut or 
creat deriv work base on thi work or ani other project 
gutenberg-tm work. the foundat make no represent concern 
the copyright statu of ani work in ani countri outsid the unit 
states. 

1.e. unless you have remov all refer to project gutenberg: 

1.e.1. the follow sentence, with activ link to, or other immedi 
access to, the full project gutenberg-tm licens must appear promin 
whenev ani copi of a project gutenberg-tm work (ani work on which the 
phrase "project gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "project 
gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed, 
copi or distributed: 

thi ebook is for the use of anyon anywher at no cost and with 
almost no restrict whatsoever. you may copi it, give it away or 
re-us it under the term of the project gutenberg licens includ 
with thi ebook or onlin at www.gutenberg.net 

1.e.2. If an individu project gutenberg-tm electron work is deriv 
from the public domain (doe not contain a notic indic that it is 
post with permiss of the copyright holder), the work can be copi 
and distribut to anyon in the unit state without pay ani fee 
or charges. If you are redistribut or provid access to a work 
with the phrase "project gutenberg" associ with or appear on the 
work, you must compli either with the requir of paragraph 1.e.1 
through 1.e.7 or obtain permiss for the use of the work and the 
project gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraph 1.e.8 or 
1.e.9. 

1.e.3. If an individu project gutenberg-tm electron work is post 
with the permiss of the copyright holder, your use and distribut 
must compli with both paragraph 1.e.1 through 1.e.7 and ani addit 
term impos by the copyright holder. addit term will be link 
to the project gutenberg-tm licens for all work post with the 
permiss of the copyright holder found at the begin of thi work. 

1.e.4. Do not unlink or detach or remov the full project gutenberg-tm 
licens term from thi work, or ani file contain a part of thi 
work or ani other work associ with project gutenberg-tm. 

1.e.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribut or redistribut thi 
electron work, or ani part of thi electron work, without 
promin display the sentenc set forth in paragraph 1.e.1 with 
activ link or immedi access to the full term of the project 
gutenberg-tm license. 

1.e.6. you may convert to and distribut thi work in ani binary, 
compressed, mark up, nonproprietari or proprietari form, includ ani 
word process or hypertext form. however, if you provid access to or 
distribut copi of a project gutenberg-tm work in a format other than 
"plain vanilla ascii" or other format use in the offici version 
post on the offici project gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net), 
you must, at no addit cost, fee or expens to the user, provid a 
copy, a mean of export a copy, or a mean of obtain a copi upon 
request, of the work in it origin "plain vanilla ascii" or other 
form. ani altern format must includ the full project gutenberg-tm 
licens as specifi in paragraph 1.e.1. 

1.e.7. Do not charg a fee for access to, viewing, displaying, 
performing, copi or distribut ani project gutenberg-tm work 
unless you compli with paragraph 1.e.8 or 1.e.9. 

1.e.8. you may charg a reason fee for copi of or provid 
access to or distribut project gutenberg-tm electron work provid 
that 

- you pay a royalti fee of 20% of the gross profit you deriv from 
the use of project gutenberg-tm work calcul use the method 
you alreadi use to calcul your applic taxes. the fee is 
owe to the owner of the project gutenberg-tm trademark, but he 
ha agre to donat royalti under thi paragraph to the 
project gutenberg literari archiv foundation. royalti payment 
must be paid within 60 day follow each date on which you 
prepar (or are legal requir to prepare) your period tax 
returns. royalti payment should be clearli mark as such and 
sent to the project gutenberg literari archiv foundat at the 
address specifi in section 4, "inform about donat to 
the project gutenberg literari archiv foundation." 

- you provid a full refund of ani money paid by a user who notifi 
you in write (or by e-mail) within 30 day of receipt that s/he 
doe not agre to the term of the full project gutenberg-tm 
license. you must requir such a user to return or 
destroy all copi of the work possess in a physic medium 
and discontinu all use of and all access to other copi of 
project gutenberg-tm works. 

- you provide, in accord with paragraph 1.f.3, a full refund of ani 
money paid for a work or a replac copy, if a defect in the 
electron work is discov and report to you within 90 day 
of receipt of the work. 

- you compli with all other term of thi agreement for free 
distribut of project gutenberg-tm works. 

1.e.9. If you wish to charg a fee or distribut a project gutenberg-tm 
electron work or group of work on differ term than are set 
forth in thi agreement, you must obtain permiss in write from 
both the project gutenberg literari archiv foundat and michael 
hart, the owner of the project gutenberg-tm trademark. contact the 
foundat as set forth in section 3 below. 

1.f. 

1.f.1. project gutenberg volunt and employe expend consider 
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcrib and proofread 
public domain work in creat the project gutenberg-tm 
collection. despit these efforts, project gutenberg-tm electron 
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain 
"defects," such as, but not limit to, incomplete, inaccur or 
corrupt data, transcript errors, a copyright or other intellectu 
properti infringement, a defect or damag disk or other medium, a 
comput virus, or comput code that damag or cannot be read by 
your equipment. 

1.f.2. limit warranty, disclaim OF damag - except for the "right 
of replac or refund" describ in paragraph 1.f.3, the project 
gutenberg literari archiv foundation, the owner of the project 
gutenberg-tm trademark, and ani other parti distribut a project 
gutenberg-tm electron work under thi agreement, disclaim all 
liabil to you for damages, cost and expenses, includ legal 
fees. you agre that you have NO remedi for negligence, strict 
liability, breach OF warranti OR breach OF contract except those 
provid IN paragraph f3. you agre that the foundation, the 
trademark owner, and ani distributor under thi agreement will not BE 
liabl TO you for actual, direct, indirect, consequential, punit OR 
incident damag even IF you give notic OF the possibl OF such 
damage. 

1.f.3. limit right OF replac OR refund - If you discov a 
defect in thi electron work within 90 day of receiv it, you can 
receiv a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by send a 
written explan to the person you receiv the work from. If you 
receiv the work on a physic medium, you must return the medium with 
your written explanation. the person or entiti that provid you with 
the defect work may elect to provid a replac copi in lieu of a 
refund. If you receiv the work electronically, the person or entiti 
provid it to you may choos to give you a second opportun to 
receiv the work electron in lieu of a refund. If the second copi 
is also defective, you may demand a refund in write without further 
opportun to fix the problem. 

1.f.4. except for the limit right of replac or refund set forth 
in paragraph 1.f.3, thi work is provid to you 'as-is' with NO other 
warranti OF ani kind, express OR implied, includ but not limit TO 
warranti OF merchant OR fit for ani purpose. 

1.f.5. some state do not allow disclaim of certain impli 
warranti or the exclus or limit of certain type of damages. 
If ani disclaim or limit set forth in thi agreement violat the 
law of the state applic to thi agreement, the agreement shall be 
interpret to make the maximum disclaim or limit permit by 
the applic state law. the invalid or unenforc of ani 
provis of thi agreement shall not void the remain provisions. 

1.f.6. indemn - you agre to indemnifi and hold the foundation, the 
trademark owner, ani agent or employe of the foundation, anyon 
provid copi of project gutenberg-tm electron work in accord 
with thi agreement, and ani volunt associ with the production, 
promot and distribut of project gutenberg-tm electron works, 
harmless from all liability, cost and expenses, includ legal fees, 
that aris directli or indirectli from ani of the follow which you do 
or caus to occur: (a) distribut of thi or ani project gutenberg-tm 
work, (b) alteration, modification, or addit or delet to ani 
project gutenberg-tm work, and (c) ani defect you cause. 


section 2. inform about the mission of project gutenberg-tm 

project gutenberg-tm is synonym with the free distribut of 
electron work in format readabl by the widest varieti of comput 
includ obsolete, old, middle-ag and new computers. It exist 
becaus of the effort of hundr of volunt and donat from 
peopl in all walk of life. 

volunt and financi support to provid volunt with the 
assist they need, is critic to reach project gutenberg-tm' 
goal and ensur that the project gutenberg-tm collect will 
remain freeli avail for gener to come. In 2001, the project 
gutenberg literari archiv foundat wa creat to provid a secur 
and perman futur for project gutenberg-tm and futur generations. 
To learn more about the project gutenberg literari archiv foundat 
and how your effort and donat can help, see section 3 and 4 
and the foundat web page at http://www.pglaf.org. 


section 3. inform about the project gutenberg literari archiv 
foundat 

the project gutenberg literari archiv foundat is a non profit 
501(c)(3) educ corpor organ under the law of the 
state of mississippi and grant tax exempt statu by the intern 
revenu service. the foundation' ein or feder tax identif 
number is 64-6221541. it 501(c)(3) letter is post at 
http://pglaf.org/fundraising. contribut to the project gutenberg 
literari archiv foundat are tax deduct to the full extent 
permit by u.s. feder law and your state' laws. 

the foundation' princip offic is locat at 4557 melan dr. S. 
fairbanks, ak, 99712., but it volunt and employe are scatter 
throughout numer locations. it busi offic is locat at 
809 north 1500 west, salt lake city, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email 
business@pglaf.org. email contact link and up to date contact 
inform can be found at the foundation' web site and offici 
page at http://pglaf.org 

for addit contact information: 
dr. gregori B. newbi 
chief execut and director 
gbnewby@pglaf.org 

section 4. inform about donat to the project gutenberg 
literari archiv foundat 

project gutenberg-tm depend upon and cannot surviv without wide 
spread public support and donat to carri out it mission of 
increas the number of public domain and licens work that can be 
freeli distribut in machin readabl form access by the widest 
array of equip includ outdat equipment. mani small donat 
($1 to $5,000) are particularli import to maintain tax exempt 
statu with the irs. 

the foundat is commit to compli with the law regul 
chariti and charit donat in all 50 state of the unit 
states. complianc requir are not uniform and it take a 
consider effort, much paperwork and mani fee to meet and keep up 
with these requirements. We do not solicit donat in locat 
where we have not receiv written confirm of compliance. To 
send donat or determin the statu of complianc for ani 
particular state visit http://pglaf.org 

while we cannot and do not solicit contribut from state where we 
have not met the solicit requirements, we know of no prohibit 
against accept unsolicit donat from donor in such state who 
approach us with offer to donate. 

intern donat are grate accepted, but we cannot make 
ani statement concern tax treatment of donat receiv from 
outsid the unit states. u.s. law alon swamp our small staff. 

pleas check the project gutenberg web page for current donat 
method and addresses. donat are accept in a number of other 
way includ includ checks, onlin payment and credit card 
donations. To donate, pleas visit: http://pglaf.org/don 


section 5. gener inform about project gutenberg-tm electron 
works. 

professor michael S. hart is the origin of the project gutenberg-tm 
concept of a librari of electron work that could be freeli share 
with anyone. for thirti years, he produc and distribut project 
gutenberg-tm ebook with onli a loos network of volunt support. 

project gutenberg-tm ebook are often creat from sever print 
editions, all of which are confirm as public domain in the u.s. 
unless a copyright notic is included. thus, we do not necessarili 
keep ebook in complianc with ani particular paper edition. 

each ebook is in a subdirectori of the same number as the ebook' 
ebook number, often in sever format includ plain vanilla ascii, 
compress (zipped), html and others. 

correct edit of our ebook replac the old file and take over 
the old filenam and etext number. the replac older file is renamed. 
version base on separ sourc are treat as new ebook receiv 
new filenam and etext numbers. 

most peopl start at our web site which ha the main PG search facility: 

http://www.gutenberg.net 

thi web site includ inform about project gutenberg-tm, 
includ how to make donat to the project gutenberg literari 
archiv foundation, how to help produc our new ebooks, and how to 
subscrib to our email newslett to hear about new ebooks. 

ebook post prior to novemb 2003, with ebook number below #10000, 
are file in directori base on their releas date. If you want to 
download ani of these ebook directly, rather than use the regular 
search system you may util the follow address and just 
download by the etext year. 

http://www.gutenberg.net/etext06 

(or /etext 05, 04, 03, 02, 01, 00, 99, 
98, 97, 96, 95, 94, 93, 92, 92, 91 or 90) 

ebook post sinc novemb 2003, with etext number over #10000, are 
file in a differ way. the year of a releas date is no longer part 
of the directori path. the path is base on the etext number (which is 
ident to the filename). the path to the file is made up of singl 
digit correspond to all but the last digit in the filename. for 
exampl an ebook of filenam 10234 would be found at: 

http://www.gutenberg.net/1/0/2/3/10234 

or filenam 24689 would be found at: 
http://www.gutenberg.net/2/4/6/8/24689 

An altern method of locat ebooks: 
http://www.gutenberg.net/gutindex.al 

