the project gutenberg ebook of ghost stori of an antiquary, by M. R. jame 

thi ebook is for the use of anyon anywher at no cost and with 
almost no restrict whatsoever. you may copi it, give it away or 
re-us it under the term of the project gutenberg licens includ 
with thi ebook or onlin at www.gutenberg.net 


title: ghost stori of an antiquari 

author: M. R. jame 

post date: march 21, 2010 [ebook #8486] 
releas date: july, 2005 
first posted: juli 15, 2003 

language: english 


*** start OF thi project gutenberg ebook ghost stori OF AN antiquari *** 




produc by suzann shell, thoma berger, and the onlin 
distribut proofread team. 










M. R. jame 

ghost stori OF AN antiquari 

* * * * * 

_these stori are dedic to all those who at variou time have 
listen to them._ 

* * * * * 

content 

part 1: ghost stori OF AN antiquari 

canon alberic' scrap-book 
lost heart 
the mezzotint 
the ash-tre 
number 13 
count magnu 
'oh, whistle, and i'll come to you, My lad' 
the treasur of abbot thoma 

part 2: more ghost stori 

A school stori 
the rose garden 
the tractat middoth 
cast the rune 
the stall of barchest cathedr 
martin' close 
Mr humphrey and hi inherit 

* * * * * 

part 1: ghost stori OF AN antiquari 

* * * * * 

If anyon is curiou about my local settings, let it be record that St 
bertrand de comming and viborg are real places: that in 'oh, whistle, 
and i'll come to you' I had felixstow in mind. As for the fragment of 
ostens erudit which are scatter about my pages, hardli anyth 
in them is not pure invention; there never was, naturally, ani such book 
as that which I quot in 'the treasur of abbot thomas'. 'canon alberic' 
scrap-book' wa written in 1894 and print soon after in the _nation 
review_, 'lost hearts' appear in the _pall mall magazine_; of the next 
five stories, most of which were read to friend at christmas-tim at 
king' college, cambridge, I onli recollect that I wrote 'number 13' in 
1899, while 'the treasur of abbot thomas' wa compos in the summer of 
1904. 

M. R. jame 

* * * * * 

canon alberic' scrap-book 
prefac 
St bertrand de comming is a decay town on the spur of the pyrenees, 
not veri far from toulouse, and still nearer to bagnères-de-luchon. It 
wa the site of a bishopr until the revolution, and ha a cathedr 
which is visit by a certain number of tourists. In the spring of 1883 
an englishman arriv at thi old-world place--i can hardli dignifi it 
with the name of city, for there are not a thousand inhabitants. He wa a 
cambridg man, who had come special from toulous to see St bertrand' 
church, and had left two friends, who were less keen archaeologist than 
himself, in their hotel at toulouse, under promis to join him on the 
follow morning. half an hour at the church would satisfi _them_, and 
all three could then pursu their journey in the direct of auch. but 
our englishman had come earli on the day in question, and propos to 
himself to fill a note-book and to use sever dozen of plate in the 
process of describ and photograph everi corner of the wonder 
church that domin the littl hill of comminges. In order to carri out 
thi design satisfactorily, it wa necessari to monopol the verger of 
the church for the day. the verger or sacristan (I prefer the latter 
appellation, inaccur as it may be) wa accordingli sent for by the 
somewhat brusqu ladi who keep the inn of the chapeau rouge; and when he 
came, the englishman found him an unexpectedli interest object of 
study. It wa not in the person appear of the little, dry, wizen 
old man that the interest lay, for he wa precis like dozen of other 
church-guardian in france, but in a curiou furtiv or rather hunt and 
oppress air which he had. He wa perpetu half glanc behind him; 
the muscl of hi back and shoulder seem to be hunch in a continu 
nervou contraction, as if he were expect everi moment to find himself 
in the clutch of an enemy. the englishman hardli knew whether to put him 
down as a man haunt by a fix delusion, or as one oppress by a 
guilti conscience, or as an unbear henpeck husband. the 
probabilities, when reckon up, certainli point to the last idea; but, 
still, the impress convey wa that of a more formid persecutor 
even than a termag wife. 

however, the englishman (let us call him dennistoun) wa soon too deep in 
hi note-book and too busi with hi camera to give more than an 
occasion glanc to the sacristan. whenev he did look at him, he found 
him at no great distance, either huddl himself back against the wall 
or crouch in one of the gorgeou stalls. dennistoun becam rather 
fidgeti after a time. mingl suspicion that he wa keep the old man 
from hi _déjeuner_, that he wa regard as like to make away with St 
bertrand' ivori crozier, or with the dusti stuf crocodil that hang 
over the font, began to torment him. 

'won't you go home?' he said at last; 'i'm quit well abl to finish my 
note alone; you can lock me in if you like. I shall want at least two 
hour more here, and it must be cold for you, isn't it?' 

'good heavens!' said the littl man, whom the suggest seem to throw 
into a state of unaccount terror, 'such a thing cannot be thought of 
for a moment. leav monsieur alon in the church? no, no; two hours, 
three hours, all will be the same to me. I have breakfasted, I am not at 
all cold, with mani thank to monsieur.' 

'veri well, my littl man,' quoth dennistoun to himself: 'you have been 
warned, and you must take the consequences.' 

befor the expir of the two hours, the stalls, the enorm 
dilapid organ, the choir-screen of bishop john de mauléon, the 
remnant of glass and tapestry, and the object in the treasure-chamb 
had been well and truli examined; the sacristan still keep at 
dennistoun' heels, and everi now and then whip round as if he had 
been stung, when one or other of the strang nois that troubl a larg 
empti build fell on hi ear. curiou nois they were, sometimes. 

'once,' dennistoun said to me, 'I could have sworn I heard a thin 
metal voic laugh high up in the tower. I dart an inquir 
glanc at my sacristan. He wa white to the lips. "it is he--that is--it 
is no one; the door is locked," wa all he said, and we look at each 
other for a full minute.' 

anoth littl incid puzzl dennistoun a good deal. He wa examin 
a larg dark pictur that hang behind the altar, one of a seri 
illustr the miracl of St bertrand. the composit of the pictur 
is well-nigh indecipherable, but there is a latin legend below, which 
run thus: 

_qualit S. bertrandu liberavit hominem quem diabolu diu volebat 
strangulare_. (how St bertrand deliv a man whom the devil long 
sought to strangle.) 

dennistoun wa turn to the sacristan with a smile and a jocular remark 
of some sort on hi lips, but he wa confound to see the old man on hi 
knees, gaze at the pictur with the eye of a suppliant in agony, hi 
hand tightli clasped, and a rain of tear on hi cheeks. dennistoun 
natur pretend to have notic nothing, but the question would not 
go away from him,'whi should a daub of thi kind affect anyon so 
strongly?' He seem to himself to be get some sort of clue to the 
reason of the strang look that had been puzzl him all the day: the 
man must be a monomaniac; but what wa hi monomania? 

It wa nearli five o'clock; the short day wa draw in, and the church 
began to fill with shadows, while the curiou noises--th muffl 
footfal and distant talk voic that had been percept all 
day--seemed, no doubt becaus of the fade light and the consequ 
quicken sens of hearing, to becom more frequent and insistent. 

the sacristan began for the first time to show sign of hurri and 
impatience. He heav a sigh of relief when camera and note-book were 
final pack up and stow away, and hurriedli beckon dennistoun to 
the western door of the church, under the tower. It wa time to ring the 
angelus. A few pull at the reluct rope, and the great bell bertrande, 
high in the tower, began to speak, and swung her voic up among the pine 
and down to the valleys, loud with mountain-streams, call the dweller 
on those lone hill to rememb and repeat the salut of the angel 
to her whom he call bless among women. with that a profound quiet 
seem to fall for the first time that day upon the littl town, and 
dennistoun and the sacristan went out of the church. 

On the doorstep they fell into conversation. 

'monsieur seem to interest himself in the old choir-book in the 
sacristy.' 

'undoubtedly. I wa go to ask you if there were a librari in the 
town.' 

'no, monsieur; perhap there use to be one belong to the chapter, but 
it is now such a small place--' here came a strang paus of 
irresolution, as it seemed; then, with a sort of plunge, he went on: 'but 
if monsieur is _amateur de vieux livres_, I have at home someth that 
might interest him. It is not a hundr yards.' 

At onc all dennistoun' cherish dream of find priceless 
manuscript in untrodden corner of franc flash up, to die down again 
the next moment. It wa probabl a stupid missal of plantin' printing, 
about 1580. where wa the likelihood that a place so near toulous would 
not have been ransack long ago by collectors? however, it would be 
foolish not to go; he would reproach himself for ever after if he 
refused. So they set off. On the way the curiou irresolut and sudden 
determin of the sacristan recur to dennistoun, and he wonder in 
a shamefac way whether he wa be decoy into some purlieu to be 
made away with as a suppos rich englishman. He contrived, therefore, to 
begin talk with hi guide, and to drag in, in a rather clumsi fashion, 
the fact that he expect two friend to join him earli the next morning. 
To hi surprise, the announc seem to reliev the sacristan at onc 
of some of the anxieti that oppress him. 

'that is well,' he said quit brightly--'that is veri well. monsieur will 
travel in compani with hi friends: they will be alway near him. It is a 
good thing to travel thu in company--sometimes.' 

the last word appear to be ad as an afterthought and to bring with 
it a relaps into gloom for the poor littl man. 

they were soon at the house, which wa one rather larger than it 
neighbours, stone-built, with a shield carv over the door, the shield 
of alber de mauléon, a collater descendant, dennistoun tell me, of 
bishop john de mauléon. thi alber wa a canon of comming from 1680 
to 1701. the upper window of the mansion were board up, and the whole 
place bore, as doe the rest of comminges, the aspect of decay age. 

arriv on hi doorstep, the sacristan paus a moment. 

'perhaps,' he said, 'perhaps, after all, monsieur ha not the time?' 

'not at all--lot of time--noth to do till tomorrow. let us see what 
it is you have got.' 

the door wa open at thi point, and a face look out, a face far 
younger than the sacristan's, but bear someth of the same 
distress look: onli here it seem to be the mark, not so much of fear 
for person safeti as of acut anxieti on behalf of another. plainli the 
owner of the face wa the sacristan' daughter; and, but for the 
express I have described, she wa a handsom girl enough. she 
brighten up consider on see her father accompani by an 
able-bodi stranger. A few remark pass between father and daughter of 
which dennistoun onli caught these words, said by the sacristan: 'he wa 
laugh in the church,' word which were answer onli by a look of 
terror from the girl. 

but in anoth minut they were in the sitting-room of the house, a 
small, high chamber with a stone floor, full of move shadow cast by a 
wood-fir that flicker on a great hearth. someth of the charact of 
an oratori wa impart to it by a tall crucifix, which reach almost to 
the ceil on one side; the figur wa paint of the natur colours, 
the cross wa black. under thi stood a chest of some age and solidity, 
and when a lamp had been brought, and chair set, the sacristan went to 
thi chest, and produc therefrom, with grow excit and 
nervousness, as dennistoun thought, a larg book, wrap in a white 
cloth, on which cloth a cross wa rude embroid in red thread. even 
befor the wrap had been removed, dennistoun began to be interest 
by the size and shape of the volume. 'too larg for a missal,' he 
thought, 'and not the shape of an antiphoner; perhap it may be someth 
good, after all.' the next moment the book wa open, and dennistoun felt 
that he had at last lit upon someth better than good. befor him lay a 
larg folio, bound, perhaps, late in the seventeenth century, with the 
arm of canon alber de mauléon stamp in gold on the sides. there may 
have been a hundr and fifti leav of paper in the book, and on almost 
everi one of them wa fasten a leaf from an illumin manuscript. 
such a collect dennistoun had hardli dream of in hi wildest 
moments. here were ten leav from a copi of genesis, illustr with 
pictures, which could not be later than a.d. 700. further on wa a 
complet set of pictur from a psalter, of english execution, of the 
veri finest kind that the thirteenth centuri could produce; and, perhap 
best of all, there were twenti leav of uncial write in latin, which, 
as a few word seen here and there told him at once, must belong to some 
veri earli unknown patrist treatise. could it possibl be a fragment of 
the copi of papia 'on the word of our lord', which wa known to have 
exist as late as the twelfth centuri at nimes?[1] In ani case, hi mind 
wa made up; that book must return to cambridg with him, even if he had 
to draw the whole of hi balanc from the bank and stay at st. bertrand 
till the money came. He glanc up at the sacristan to see if hi face 
yield ani hint that the book wa for sale. the sacristan wa pale, and 
hi lip were working. 

[1] We now know that these leav did contain a consider fragment 
of that work, if not of that actual copi of it. 

'if monsieur will turn on to the end,' he said. 

So monsieur turn on, meet new treasur at everi rise of a leaf; and 
at the end of the book he came upon two sheet of paper, of much more 
recent date than anyth he had seen yet, which puzzl him 
considerably. they must be contemporary, he decided, with the 
unprincipl canon alberic, who had doubtless plunder the chapter 
librari of St bertrand to form thi priceless scrap-book. On the first of 
the paper sheet wa a plan, care drawn and instantli recogniz 
by a person who knew the ground, of the south aisl and cloister of St 
bertrand's. there were curiou sign look like planetari symbols, and 
a few hebrew word in the corners; and in the north-west angl of the 
cloister wa a cross drawn in gold paint. below the plan were some line 
of write in latin, which ran thus: 

_responsa 12(mi) dec. 1694. interrogatum est: inveniamne? responsum 
est: invenies. fiamn dives? fies. vivamn invidendus? vives. 
moriarn in lecto meo? ita._ (answer of the 12th of december, 1694. 
It wa asked: shall I find it? answer: thou shalt. shall I becom 
rich? thou wilt. shall I live an object of envy? thou wilt. shall I 
die in my bed? thou wilt.) 

'A good specimen of the treasure-hunter' record--quit remind one of Mr 
minor-canon quatremain in _old St paul's_,' wa dennistoun' comment, and 
he turn the leaf. 

what he then saw impress him, as he ha often told me, more than he 
could have conceiv ani draw or pictur capabl of impress him. 
and, though the draw he saw is no longer in existence, there is a 
photograph of it (which I possess) which fulli bear out that statement. 
the pictur in question wa a sepia draw at the end of the seventeenth 
century, representing, one would say at first sight, a biblic scene; 
for the architectur (the pictur repres an interior) and the 
figur had that semi-class flavour about them which the artist of 
two hundr year ago thought appropri to illustr of the bible. 
On the right wa a king on hi throne, the throne elev on twelv 
steps, a canopi overhead, soldier on either side--evid king 
solomon. He wa bend forward with outstretch sceptre, in attitud of 
command; hi face express horror and disgust, yet there wa in it also 
the mark of imperi command and confid power. the left half of the 
pictur wa the strangest, however. the interest plainli centr there. 

On the pavement befor the throne were group four soldiers, surround 
a crouch figur which must be describ in a moment. A fifth soldier 
lay dead on the pavement, hi neck distorted, and hi eye-bal start 
from hi head. the four surround guard were look at the king. In 
their faces, the sentiment of horror wa intensified; they seemed, in 
fact, onli restrain from flight by their implicit trust in their 
master. all thi terror wa plainli excit by the be that crouch in 
their midst. 

I entir despair of convey by ani word the impress which thi 
figur make upon anyon who look at it. I recollect onc show the 
photograph of the draw to a lectur on morphology--a person of, I wa 
go to say, abnorm sane and unimagin habit of mind. He 
absolut refus to be alon for the rest of that evening, and he told 
me afterward that for mani night he had not dare to put out hi light 
befor go to sleep. however, the main trait of the figur I can at 
least indicate. 

At first you saw onli a mass of coarse, mat black hair; present it 
wa seen that thi cover a bodi of fear thinness, almost a skeleton, 
but with the muscl stand out like wires. the hand were of a duski 
pallor, covered, like the body, with long, coars hairs, and hideous 
taloned. the eyes, touch in with a burn yellow, had intens black 
pupils, and were fix upon the throne king with a look of beast-lik 
hate. imagin one of the aw bird-catch spider of south america 
translat into human form, and endow with intellig just less than 
human, and you will have some faint concept of the terror inspir by 
the appal effigy. one remark is univers made by those to whom I 
have shown the picture: 'it wa drawn from the life.' 

As soon as the first shock of hi irresist fright had subsided, 
dennistoun stole a look at hi hosts. the sacristan' hand were press 
upon hi eyes; hi daughter, look up at the cross on the wall, wa 
tell her bead feverishly. 

At last the question wa asked: 'i thi book for sale?' 

there wa the same hesitation, the same plung of determin that he 
had notic before, and then came the welcom answer: 'if monsieur 
pleases.' 

'how much do you ask for it?' 

'I will take two hundr and fifti francs.' 

thi wa confounding. even a collector' conscienc is sometim stirred, 
and dennistoun' conscienc wa tender than a collector's. 

'mi good man!' he said again and again, 'your book is worth far more than 
two hundr and fifti francs. I assur you--far more.' 

but the answer did not vary: 'I will take two hundr and fifti 
francs--not more.' 

there wa realli no possibl of refus such a chance. the money wa 
paid, the receipt signed, a glass of wine drunk over the transaction, and 
then the sacristan seem to becom a new man. He stood upright, he 
ceas to throw those suspici glanc behind him, he actual laugh 
or tri to laugh. dennistoun rose to go. 

'I shall have the honour of accompani monsieur to hi hotel?' said the 
sacristan. 

'oh, no, thanks! it isn't a hundr yards. I know the way perfectly, and 
there is a moon.' 

the offer wa press three or four time and refus as often. 

'then, monsieur will summon me if--if he find occasion; he will keep the 
middl of the road, the side are so rough.' 

'certainly, certainly,' said dennistoun, who wa impati to examin hi 
prize by himself; and he step out into the passag with hi book under 
hi arm. 

here he wa met by the daughter; she, it appeared, wa anxiou to do a 
littl busi on her own account; perhaps, like gehazi, to 'take 
somewhat' from the foreign whom her father had spared. 

'A silver crucifix and chain for the neck; monsieur would perhap be good 
enough to accept it?' 

well, really, dennistoun hadn't much use for these things. what did 
mademoisel want for it? 

'nothing--noth in the world. monsieur is more than welcom to it.' 

the tone in which thi and much more wa said wa unmistak genuine, 
so that dennistoun wa reduc to profus thanks, and submit to have 
the chain put round hi neck. It realli seem as if he had render the 
father and daughter some servic which they hardli knew how to repay. As 
he set off with hi book they stood at the door look after him, and 
they were still look when he wave them a last good night from the 
step of the chapeau rouge. 

dinner wa over, and dennistoun wa in hi bedroom, shut up alon with 
hi acquisition. the landladi had manifest a particular interest in him 
sinc he had told her that he had paid a visit to the sacristan and 
bought an old book from him. He thought, too, that he had heard a hurri 
dialogu between her and the said sacristan in the passag outsid the 
_sall à manger_; some word to the effect that 'pierr and bertrand 
would be sleep in the house' had close the conversation. 

all thi time a grow feel of discomfort had been creep over 
him--nerv reaction, perhaps, after the delight of hi discovery. 
whatev it was, it result in a convict that there wa someon 
behind him, and that he wa far more comfort with hi back to the 
wall. all this, of course, weigh light in the balanc as against the 
obviou valu of the collect he had acquired. and now, as I said, he 
wa alon in hi bedroom, take stock of canon alberic' treasures, in 
which everi moment reveal someth more charming. 

'bless canon alberic!' said dennistoun, who had an inveter habit of 
talk to himself. 'I wonder where he is now? dear me! I wish that 
landladi would learn to laugh in a more cheer manner; it make one 
feel as if there wa someon dead in the house. half a pipe more, did you 
say? I think perhap you are right. I wonder what that crucifix is that 
the young woman insist on give me? last century, I suppose. yes, 
probably. It is rather a nuisanc of a thing to have round one' 
neck--just too heavy. most like her father ha been wear it for 
years. I think I might give it a clean up befor I put it away.' 

He had taken the crucifix off, and laid it on the table, when hi 
attent wa caught by an object lie on the red cloth just by hi left 
elbow. two or three idea of what it might be flit through hi brain 
with their own incalcul quickness. 

A penwiper? no, no such thing in the house. A rat? no, too black. A larg 
spider? I trust to good not--no. good god! a hand like the hand in 
that picture! 

In anoth infinitesim flash he had taken it in. pale, duski skin, 
cover noth but bone and tendon of appal strength; coars 
black hairs, longer than ever grew on a human hand; nail rise from the 
end of the finger and curv sharpli down and forward, grey, horny, 
and wrinkled. 

He flew out of hi chair with deadly, inconceiv terror clutch at 
hi heart. the shape, whose left hand rest on the table, wa rise to 
a stand postur behind hi seat, it right hand crook abov hi 
scalp. there wa black and tatter draperi about it; the coars hair 
cover it as in the drawing. the lower jaw wa thin--what can I call 
it?--shallow, like a beast's; teeth show behind the black lips; there 
wa no nose; the eyes, of a fieri yellow, against which the pupil show 
black and intense, and the exult hate and thirst to destroy life which 
shone there, were the most horrifi featur in the whole vision. there 
wa intellig of a kind in them--intellig beyond that of a beast, 
below that of a man. 

the feel which thi horror stir in dennistoun were the intensest 
physic fear and the most profound mental loathing. what did he do? what 
could he do? He ha never been quit certain what word he said, but he 
know that he spoke, that he grasp blindli at the silver crucifix, that 
he wa consciou of a movement toward him on the part of the demon, and 
that he scream with the voic of an anim in hideou pain. 

pierr and bertrand, the two sturdi littl serving-men, who rush in, 
saw nothing, but felt themselv thrust asid by someth that pass 
out between them, and found dennistoun in a swoon. they sat up with him 
that night, and hi two friend were at St bertrand by nine o'clock next 
morning. He himself, though still shaken and nervous, wa almost himself 
by that time, and hi stori found credenc with them, though not until 
they had seen the draw and talk with the sacristan. 

almost at dawn the littl man had come to the inn on some pretence, and 
had listen with the deepest interest to the stori retail by the 
landlady. He show no surprise. 

'it is he--it is he! I have seen him myself,' wa hi onli comment; and 
to all question but one repli wa vouchsafed: 'deux foi je l'ai vu: 
mill foi je l'ai senti.' He would tell them noth of the proven 
of the book, nor ani detail of hi experiences. 'I shall soon sleep, and 
my rest will be sweet. whi should you troubl me?' he said.[2] 

[2] He die that summer; hi daughter married, and settl at St 
papoul. she never understood the circumst of her father' 
'obsession'. 

We shall never know what he or canon alber de mauléon suffered. At the 
back of that fate draw were some line of write which may be 
suppos to throw light on the situation: 

_contradictio salomoni cum demonio nocturno. 
albericu de mauléon delineavit. 
V. deu in adiutorium. ps. qui habitat. 
sanct bertrande, demoniorum effugator, interced pro me miserrimo. 
primum uidi noct 12(mi) dec. 1694: 
uidebo mox ultimum. peccaui et passu 
sum, plura adhuc passurus. 
dec. 29, 1701_.[3] 

[3] _i.e._, the disput of solomon with a demon of the night. drawn by 
alber de mauléon. _versicle_. O lord, make hast to help me. _psalm_. 
whoso dwelleth xci. 

saint bertrand, who puttest devil to flight, pray for me most unhappy. 
I saw it first on the night of dec. 12, 1694: soon I shall see it for 
the last time. I have sin and suffered, and have more to suffer yet. 
dec. 29, 1701. 

the 'gallia christiana' give the date of the canon' death as decemb 
31, 1701, 'in bed, of a sudden seizure'. detail of thi kind are not 
common in the great work of the sammarthani. 

I have never quit understood what wa dennistoun' view of the event I 
have narrated. He quot to me onc a text from ecclesiasticus: 'some 
spirit there be that are creat for vengeance, and in their furi lay on 
sore strokes.' On anoth occas he said: 'isaiah wa a veri sensibl 
man; doesn't he say someth about night monster live in the ruin of 
babylon? these thing are rather beyond us at present.' 

anoth confid of hi impress me rather, and I sympath with it. 
We had been, last year, to comminges, to see canon alberic' tomb. It is 
a great marbl erect with an effigi of the canon in a larg wig and 
soutane, and an elabor eulog of hi learn below. I saw dennistoun 
talk for some time with the vicar of St bertrand's, and as we drove 
away he said to me: 'I hope it isn't wrong: you know I am a 
presbyterian--but i--i believ there will be "say of mass and sing 
of dirges" for alber de mauléon' rest.' then he added, with a touch of 
the northern british in hi tone, 'I had no notion they came so dear.' 

* * * * * 

the book is in the wentworth collect at cambridge. the draw wa 
photograph and then burnt by dennistoun on the day when he left 
comming on the occas of hi first visit. 




lost heart 

It was, as far as I can ascertain, in septemb of the year 1811 that a 
post-chais drew up befor the door of aswarbi hall, in the heart of 
lincolnshire. the littl boy who wa the onli passeng in the chaise, 
and who jump out as soon as it had stopped, look about him with the 
keenest curios dure the short interv that elaps between the 
ring of the bell and the open of the hall door. He saw a tall, 
square, red-brick house, built in the reign of anne; a stone-pillar 
porch had been ad in the purer classic style of 1790; the window of 
the hous were many, tall and narrow, with small pane and thick white 
woodwork. A pediment, pierc with a round window, crown the front. 
there were wing to right and left, connect by curiou glaze 
galleries, support by colonnades, with the central block. these wing 
plainli contain the stabl and offic of the house. each wa 
surmount by an ornament cupola with a gild vane. 

An even light shone on the building, make the window-pan glow like 
so mani fires. away from the hall in front stretch a flat park stud 
with oak and fring with firs, which stood out against the sky. the 
clock in the church-tower, buri in tree on the edg of the park, onli 
it golden weather-cock catch the light, wa strike six, and the 
sound came gentli beat down the wind. It wa altogeth a pleasant 
impression, though ting with the sort of melancholi appropri to an 
even in earli autumn, that wa convey to the mind of the boy who wa 
stand in the porch wait for the door to open to him. 

the post-chais had brought him from warwickshire, where, some six month 
before, he had been left an orphan. now, owe to the gener offer of 
hi elderli cousin, Mr abney, he had come to live at aswarby. the offer 
wa unexpected, becaus all who knew anyth of Mr abney look upon him 
as a somewhat auster recluse, into whose steady-go household the 
advent of a small boy would import a new and, it seemed, incongru 
element. the truth is that veri littl wa known of Mr abney' pursuit 
or temper. the professor of greek at cambridg had been heard to say that 
no one knew more of the religi belief of the later pagan than did 
the owner of aswarby. certainli hi librari contain all the then 
avail book bear on the mysteries, the orphic poems, the worship 
of mithras, and the neo-platonists. In the marble-pav hall stood a fine 
group of mithra slay a bull, which had been import from the levant 
at great expens by the owner. He had contribut a descript of it to 
the _gentleman' magazine_, and he had written a remark seri of 
articl in the _critic museum_ on the superstit of the roman of 
the lower empire. He wa look upon, in fine, as a man wrap up in hi 
books, and it wa a matter of great surpris among hi neighbour that he 
should ever have heard of hi orphan cousin, stephen elliott, much more 
that he should have volunt to make him an inmat of aswarbi hall. 

whatev may have been expect by hi neighbours, it is certain that Mr 
abney--th tall, the thin, the austere--seem inclin to give hi young 
cousin a kindli reception. the moment the front-door wa open he dart 
out of hi study, rub hi hand with delight. 

'how are you, my boy?--how are you? how old are you?' said he--'that is, 
you are not too much tired, I hope, by your journey to eat your supper?' 

'no, thank you, sir,' said master elliott; 'I am pretti well.' 

'that' a good lad,' said Mr abney. 'and how old are you, my boy?' 

It seem a littl odd that he should have ask the question twice in 
the first two minut of their acquaintance. 

'i'm twelv year old next birthday, sir,' said stephen. 

'and when is your birthday, my dear boy? eleventh of september, eh? 
that' well--that' veri well. nearli a year hence, isn't it? I like--ha, 
ha!--i like to get these thing down in my book. sure it' twelve? 
certain?' 

'yes, quit sure, sir.' 

'well, well! take him to mr bunch' room, parkes, and let him have hi 
tea--supper--whatev it is.' 

'yes, sir,' answer the staid Mr parkes; and conduct stephen to the 
lower regions. 

mr bunch wa the most comfort and human person whom stephen had as 
yet met at aswarby. she made him complet at home; they were great 
friend in a quarter of an hour: and great friend they remained. mr 
bunch had been born in the neighbourhood some fifty-f year befor the 
date of stephen' arrival, and her resid at the hall wa of twenti 
years' standing. consequently, if anyon knew the in and out of the 
hous and the district, mr bunch knew them; and she wa by no mean 
disinclin to commun her information. 

certainli there were plenti of thing about the hall and the hall garden 
which stephen, who wa of an adventur and inquir turn, wa anxiou 
to have explain to him. 'who built the templ at the end of the laurel 
walk? who wa the old man whose pictur hung on the staircase, sit at 
a table, with a skull under hi hand?' these and mani similar point were 
clear up by the resourc of mr bunch' power intellect. there were 
others, however, of which the explan furnish were less 
satisfactory. 

one novemb even stephen wa sit by the fire in the housekeeper' 
room reflect on hi surroundings. 

'i Mr abney a good man, and will he go to heaven?' he suddenli asked, 
with the peculiar confid which children possess in the abil of 
their elder to settl these questions, the decis of which is believ 
to be reserv for other tribunals. 

'good?--bless the child!' said mr bunch. 'master' as kind a soul as 
ever I see! didn't I never tell you of the littl boy as he took in out 
of the street, as you may say, thi seven year back? and the littl 
girl, two year after I first come here?' 

'no. Do tell me all about them, mr bunch--now, thi minute!' 

'well,' said mr bunch, 'the littl girl I don't seem to recollect so 
much about. I know master brought her back with him from hi walk one 
day, and give order to mr ellis, as wa housekeep then, as she should 
be took everi care with. and the pore child hadn't no one belong to 
her--sh tell me so her own self--and here she live with us a matter 
of three week it might be; and then, whether she were somethink of a 
gipsi in her blood or what not, but one morn she out of her bed afor 
ani of us had open a eye, and neither track nor yet trace of her have I 
set eye on since. master wa wonder put about, and had all the pond 
dragged; but it' my belief she wa had away by them gipsies, for there 
wa sing round the hous for as much as an hour the night she went, 
and parkes, he declar as he heard them a-cal in the wood all that 
afternoon. dear, dear! a hodd child she was, so silent in her way and 
all, but I wa wonder taken up with her, so domest she 
was--surprising.' 

'and what about the littl boy?' said stephen. 

'ah, that pore boy!' sigh mr bunch. 'he were a foreigner--jevanni he 
call hisself--and he come a-tweak hi 'urdy-gurdi round and about 
the drive one winter day, and master 'ad him in that minute, and ast all 
about where he came from, and how old he was, and how he made hi way, 
and where wa hi relatives, and all as kind as heart could wish. but it 
went the same way with him. they'r a hunruli lot, them foreign nations, 
I do suppose, and he wa off one fine morn just the same as the girl. 
whi he went and what he done wa our question for as much as a year 
after; for he never took hi 'urdy-gurdy, and there it lay on the 
shelf.' 

the remaind of the even wa spent by stephen in miscellan 
cross-examin of mr bunch and in effort to extract a tune from the 
hurdy-gurdy. 

that night he had a curiou dream. At the end of the passag at the top 
of the house, in which hi bedroom wa situated, there wa an old disus 
bathroom. It wa kept locked, but the upper half of the door wa glazed, 
and, sinc the muslin curtain which use to hang there had long been 
gone, you could look in and see the lead-lin bath affix to the wall 
on the right hand, with it head toward the window. 

On the night of which I am speaking, stephen elliott found himself, as he 
thought, look through the glaze door. the moon wa shine through 
the window, and he wa gaze at a figur which lay in the bath. 

hi descript of what he saw remind me of what I onc beheld myself in 
the famou vault of St michan' church in dublin, which possess the 
horrid properti of preserv corps from decay for centuries. A figur 
inexpress thin and pathetic, of a dusti leaden colour, envelop in a 
shroud-lik garment, the thin lip crook into a faint and dread 
smile, the hand press tightli over the region of the heart. 

As he look upon it, a distant, almost inaud moan seem to issu 
from it lips, and the arm began to stir. the terror of the sight forc 
stephen backward and he awok to the fact that he wa inde stand on 
the cold board floor of the passag in the full light of the moon. with 
a courag which I do not think can be common among boy of hi age, he 
went to the door of the bathroom to ascertain if the figur of hi dream 
were realli there. It wa not, and he went back to bed. 

mr bunch wa much impress next morn by hi story, and went so far 
as to replac the muslin curtain over the glaze door of the bathroom. Mr 
abney, moreover, to whom he confid hi experi at breakfast, wa 
greatli interest and made note of the matter in what he call 'hi 
book'. 

the spring equinox wa approaching, as Mr abney frequent remind hi 
cousin, ad that thi had been alway consid by the ancient to be 
a critic time for the young: that stephen would do well to take care of 
himself, and to shut hi bedroom window at night; and that censorinu had 
some valuabl remark on the subject. two incid that occur about 
thi time made an impress upon stephen' mind. 

the first wa after an unusu uneasi and oppress night that he had 
passed--though he could not recal ani particular dream that he had had. 

the follow even mr bunch wa occupi herself in mend hi 
nightgown. 

'graciou me, master stephen!' she broke forth rather irritably, 'how do 
you manag to tear your nightdress all to flinder thi way? look here, 
sir, what troubl you do give to poor servant that have to darn and mend 
after you!' 

there wa inde a most destruct and appar wanton seri of slit 
or score in the garment, which would undoubtedli requir a skil 
needl to make good. they were confin to the left side of the 
chest--long, parallel slit about six inch in length, some of them not 
quit pierc the textur of the linen. stephen could onli express hi 
entir ignor of their origin: he wa sure they were not there the 
night before. 

'but,' he said, 'mr bunch, they are just the same as the scratch on 
the outsid of my bedroom door: and i'm sure I never had anyth to do 
with make _them_.' 

mr bunch gaze at him open-mouthed, then snatch up a candle, depart 
hastili from the room, and wa heard make her way upstairs. In a few 
minut she came down. 

'well,' she said, 'master stephen, it' a funni thing to me how them 
mark and scratch can 'a' come there--too high up for ani cat or dog to 
'ave made 'em, much less a rat: for all the world like a chinaman' 
finger-nails, as my uncl in the tea-trad use to tell us of when we wa 
girl together. I wouldn't say noth to master, not if I wa you, 
master stephen, my dear; and just turn the key of the door when you go to 
your bed.' 

'I alway do, mr bunch, as soon as i'v said my prayers.' 

'ah, that' a good child: alway say your prayers, and then no one can't 
hurt you.' 

herewith mr bunch address herself to mend the injur nightgown, 
with interv of meditation, until bed-time. thi wa on a friday night 
in march, 1812. 

On the follow even the usual duet of stephen and mr bunch wa 
augment by the sudden arriv of Mr parkes, the butler, who as a rule 
kept himself rather _to_ himself in hi own pantry. He did not see that 
stephen wa there: he was, moreover, fluster and less slow of speech 
than wa hi wont. 

'master may get up hi own wine, if he likes, of an evening,' wa hi 
first remark. 'either I do it in the daytim or not at all, mr bunch. I 
don't know what it may be: veri like it' the rats, or the wind got into 
the cellars; but i'm not so young as I was, and I can't go through with 
it as I have done.' 

'well, Mr parkes, you know it is a surpris place for the rats, is the 
hall.' 

'i'm not deni that, mr bunch; and, to be sure, mani a time i'v heard 
the tale from the men in the shipyard about the rat that could speak. I 
never laid no confid in that before; but tonight, if i'd demean 
myself to lay my ear to the door of the further bin, I could pretti much 
have heard what they wa saying.' 

'oh, there, Mr parkes, i'v no patienc with your fancies! rat talk 
in the wine-cellar indeed!' 

'well, mr bunch, i'v no wish to argu with you: all I say is, if you 
choos to go to the far bin, and lay your ear to the door, you may prove 
my word thi minute.' 

'what nonsens you do talk, Mr parkes--not fit for children to listen to! 
why, you'll be frighten master stephen there out of hi wits.' 

'what! master stephen?' said parkes, awak to the conscious of the 
boy' presence. 'master stephen know well enough when i'm a-play a 
joke with you, mr bunch.' 

In fact, master stephen knew much too well to suppos that Mr park had 
in the first instanc intend a joke. He wa interested, not altogeth 
pleasantly, in the situation; but all hi question were unsuccess in 
induc the butler to give ani more detail account of hi experi 
in the wine-cellar. 

* * * * * 

We have now arriv at march 24, 1812. It wa a day of curiou 
experi for stephen: a windy, noisi day, which fill the hous and 
the garden with a restless impression. As stephen stood by the fenc of 
the grounds, and look out into the park, he felt as if an endless 
process of unseen peopl were sweep past him on the wind, born on 
resistlessli and aimlessly, vainli strive to stop themselves, to catch 
at someth that might arrest their flight and bring them onc again 
into contact with the live world of which they had form a part. after 
luncheon that day Mr abney said: 

'stephen, my boy, do you think you could manag to come to me tonight as 
late as eleven o'clock in my study? I shall be busi until that time, and 
I wish to show you someth connect with your futur life which it is 
most import that you should know. you are not to mention thi matter 
to mr bunch nor to anyon els in the house; and you had better go to 
your room at the usual time.' 

here wa a new excit ad to life: stephen eagerli grasp at the 
opportun of sit up till eleven o'clock. He look in at the 
librari door on hi way upstair that evening, and saw a brazier, which 
he had often notic in the corner of the room, move out befor the 
fire; an old silver-gilt cup stood on the table, fill with red wine, 
and some written sheet of paper lay near it. Mr abney wa sprinkl 
some incens on the brazier from a round silver box as stephen passed, 
but did not seem to notic hi step. 

the wind had fallen, and there wa a still night and a full moon. At 
about ten o'clock stephen wa stand at the open window of hi bedroom, 
look out over the country. still as the night was, the mysteri 
popul of the distant moon-lit wood wa not yet lull to rest. from 
time to time strang cri as of lost and despair wander sound 
from across the mere. they might be the note of owl or water-birds, yet 
they did not quit resembl either sound. were not they come nearer? 
now they sound from the nearer side of the water, and in a few moment 
they seem to be float about among the shrubberies. then they ceased; 
but just as stephen wa think of shut the window and resum hi 
read of _robinson crusoe_, he caught sight of two figur stand on 
the gravel terrac that ran along the garden side of the hall--th 
figur of a boy and girl, as it seemed; they stood side by side, look 
up at the windows. someth in the form of the girl recal 
irresist hi dream of the figur in the bath. the boy inspir him 
with more acut fear. 

whilst the girl stood still, half smiling, with her hand clasp over 
her heart, the boy, a thin shape, with black hair and rag clothing, 
rais hi arm in the air with an appear of menac and of 
unappeas hunger and longing. the moon shone upon hi almost 
transpar hands, and stephen saw that the nail were fear long and 
that the light shone through them. As he stood with hi arm thu raised, 
he disclos a terrifi spectacle. On the left side of hi chest there 
open a black and gape rent; and there fell upon stephen' brain, 
rather than upon hi ear, the impress of one of those hungri and 
desol cri that he had heard resound over the wood of aswarbi all 
that evening. In anoth moment thi dread pair had move swiftli and 
noiselessli over the dri gravel, and he saw them no more. 

inexpress frighten as he was, he determin to take hi candl and 
go down to Mr abney' study, for the hour appoint for their meet wa 
near at hand. the studi or librari open out of the front-hal on one 
side, and stephen, urg on by hi terrors, did not take long in get 
there. To effect an entranc wa not so easy. It wa not locked, he felt 
sure, for the key wa on the outsid of the door as usual. hi repeat 
knock produc no answer. Mr abney wa engaged: he wa speaking. what! 
whi did he tri to cri out? and whi wa the cri choke in hi throat? had 
he, too, seen the mysteri children? but now everyth wa quiet, and 
the door yield to stephen' terrifi and frantic pushing. 

* * * * * 

On the tabl in Mr abney' studi certain paper were found which 
explain the situat to stephen elliott when he wa of an age to 
understand them. the most import sentenc were as follows: 

'it wa a belief veri strongli and gener held by the ancients--of 
whose wisdom in these matter I have had such experi as induc me to 
place confid in their assertions--that by enact certain processes, 
which to us modern have someth of a barbar complexion, a veri 
remark enlighten of the spiritu faculti in man may be 
attained: that, for example, by absorb the person of a certain 
number of hi fellow-creatures, an individu may gain a complet 
ascend over those order of spiritu be which control the 
element forc of our universe. 

'it is record of simon magu that he wa abl to fli in the air, to 
becom invisible, or to assum ani form he pleased, by the agenc of the 
soul of a boy whom, to use the libel phrase employ by the author of 
the _clementin recognitions_, he had "murdered". I find it set down, 
moreover, with consider detail in the write of herm 
trismegistus, that similar happi result may be produc by the 
absorpt of the heart of not less than three human be below the 
age of twenty-on years. To the test of the truth of thi receipt I 
have devot the greater part of the last twenti years, select as the 
_corpora vilia_ of my experi such person as could conveni be 
remov without occas a sensibl gap in society. the first step I 
effect by the remov of one phoeb stanley, a girl of gipsi 
extraction, on march 24, 1792. the second, by the remov of a wander 
italian lad, name giovanni paoli, on the night of march 23, 1805. the 
final "victim"--to employ a word repugn in the highest degre to my 
feelings--must be my cousin, stephen elliott. hi day must be thi march 
24, 1812. 

'the best mean of effect the requir absorpt is to remov the 
heart from the _living_ subject, to reduc it to ashes, and to mingl 
them with about a pint of some red wine, prefer port. the remain of 
the first two subjects, at least, it will be well to conceal: a disus 
bathroom or wine-cellar will be found conveni for such a purpose. some 
annoy may be experienc from the psychic portion of the subjects, 
which popular languag dignifi with the name of ghosts. but the man of 
philosoph temperament--to whom alon the experi is 
appropriate--wil be littl prone to attach import to the feebl 
effort of these be to wreak their vengeanc on him. I contempl 
with the liveliest satisfact the enlarg and emancip exist 
which the experiment, if successful, will confer on me; not onli place 
me beyond the reach of human justic (so-called), but elimin to a 
great extent the prospect of death itself.' 

* * * * * 

Mr abney wa found in hi chair, hi head thrown back, hi face stamp 
with an express of rage, fright, and mortal pain. In hi left side wa 
a terribl lacer wound, expos the heart. there wa no blood on hi 
hands, and a long knife that lay on the tabl wa perfectli clean. A 
savag wild-cat might have inflict the injuries. the window of the 
studi wa open, and it wa the opinion of the coron that Mr abney had 
met hi death by the agenc of some wild creature. but stephen elliott' 
studi of the paper I have quot led him to a veri differ conclusion. 




the mezzotint 

some time ago I believ I had the pleasur of tell you the stori of an 
adventur which happen to a friend of mine by the name of dennistoun, 
dure hi pursuit of object of art for the museum at cambridge. 

He did not publish hi experi veri wide upon hi return to 
england; but they could not fail to becom known to a good mani of hi 
friends, and among other to the gentleman who at that time presid over 
an art museum at anoth university. It wa to be expect that the stori 
should make a consider impress on the mind of a man whose vocat 
lay in line similar to dennistoun's, and that he should be eager to 
catch at ani explan of the matter which tend to make it seem 
improb that he should ever be call upon to deal with so agit 
an emergency. It was, indeed, somewhat consol to him to reflect that 
he wa not expect to acquir ancient mss. for hi institution; that wa 
the busi of the shelburnian library. the author of that 
institut might, if they pleased, ransack obscur corner of the 
contin for such matters. He wa glad to be oblig at the moment to 
confin hi attent to enlarg the alreadi unsurpass collect of 
english topograph draw and engrav possess by hi museum. 
yet, as it turn out, even a depart so home and familiar as thi 
may have it dark corners, and to one of these Mr william wa 
unexpectedli introduced. 

those who have taken even the most limit interest in the acquisit of 
topograph pictur are awar that there is one london dealer whose 
aid is indispens to their researches. Mr J. W. britnel publish at 
short interv veri admir catalogu of a larg and constantli 
chang stock of engravings, plans, and old sketch of mansions, 
churches, and town in england and wales. these catalogu were, of 
course, the abc of hi subject to Mr williams: but as hi museum alreadi 
contain an enorm accumul of topograph pictures, he wa a 
regular, rather than a copious, buyer; and he rather look to Mr 
britnel to fill up gap in the rank and file of hi collect than to 
suppli him with rarities. 

now, in februari of last year there appear upon Mr williams' desk at 
the museum a catalogu from Mr britnell' emporium, and accompani it 
wa a typewritten commun from the dealer himself. thi latter ran 
as follows: 

dear sir, 

We beg to call your attent to no. 978 in our accompani 
catalogue, which we shall be glad to send on approval. 

your faithfully, 

J. W. britnell. 

To turn to no. 978 in the accompani catalogu wa with mr. william 
(a he observ to himself) the work of a moment, and in the place 
indic he found the follow entry: 

978.--_unknown._ interest mezzotint: view of a manor-house, earli 
part of the century. 15 by 10 inches; black frame. £2 2s. 

It wa not special exciting, and the price seem high. however, as Mr 
britnell, who knew hi busi and hi customer, seem to set store by 
it, Mr william wrote a postcard ask for the articl to be sent on 
approval, along with some other engrav and sketch which appear in 
the same catalogue. and so he pass without much excit of 
anticip to the ordinari labour of the day. 

A parcel of ani kind alway arriv a day later than you expect it, and 
that of Mr britnel proved, as I believ the right phrase goes, no 
except to the rule. It wa deliv at the museum by the afternoon 
post of saturday, after Mr william had left hi work, and it wa 
accordingli brought round to hi room in colleg by the attendant, in 
order that he might not have to wait over sunday befor look through 
it and return such of the content as he did not propos to keep. and 
here he found it when he came in to tea, with a friend. 

the onli item with which I am concern wa the rather large, 
black-fram mezzotint of which I have alreadi quot the short 
descript given in Mr britnell' catalogue. some more detail of it 
will have to be given, though I cannot hope to put befor you the look of 
the pictur as clearli as it is present to my own eye. veri nearli the 
exact duplic of it may be seen in a good mani old inn parlours, or in 
the passag of undisturb countri mansion at the present moment. It 
wa a rather indiffer mezzotint, and an indiffer mezzotint is, 
perhaps, the worst form of engrav known. It present a full-fac view 
of a not veri larg manor-hous of the last century, with three row of 
plain sash window with rustic masonri about them, a parapet with 
ball or vase at the angles, and a small portico in the centre. On 
either side were trees, and in front a consider expans of lawn. the 
legend _a. W. F. sculpsit_ wa engrav on the narrow margin; and there 
wa no further inscription. the whole thing gave the impress that it 
wa the work of an amateur. what in the world Mr britnel could mean by 
affix the price of £2 2s. to such an object wa more than Mr william 
could imagine. He turn it over with a good deal of contempt; upon the 
back wa a paper label, the left-hand half of which had been torn off. 
all that remain were the end of two line of writing; the first had 
the letters--_ngley hall_; the second,--_ssex_. 

It would, perhaps, be just worth while to identifi the place represented, 
which he could easili do with the help of a gazetteer, and then he would 
send it back to Mr britnell, with some remark reflect upon the 
judgement of that gentleman. 

He light the candles, for it wa now dark, made the tea, and suppli 
the friend with whom he had been play golf (for I believ the 
author of the univers I write of indulg in that pursuit by way 
of relaxation); and tea wa taken to the accompani of a discuss 
which golf person can imagin for themselves, but which the 
conscienti writer ha no right to inflict upon ani non-golf 
persons. 

the conclus arriv at wa that certain stroke might have been 
better, and that in certain emerg neither player had experienc 
that amount of luck which a human be ha a right to expect. It wa now 
that the friend--let us call him professor binks--took up the frame 
engrav and said: 

'what' thi place, williams?' 

'just what I am go to tri to find out,' said williams, go to the 
shelf for a gazetteer. 'look at the back. somethingley hall, either in 
sussex or essex. half the name' gone, you see. you don't happen to know 
it, I suppose?' 

'it' from that man britnell, I suppose, isn't it?' said binks. 'i it 
for the museum?' 

'well, I think I should buy it if the price wa five shillings,' said 
williams; 'but for some unearthli reason he want two guinea for it. I 
can't conceiv why. it' a wretch engraving, and there aren't even ani 
figur to give it life.' 

'it' not worth two guineas, I should think,' said binks; 'but I don't 
think it' so badli done. the moonlight seem rather good to me; and I 
should have thought there _were_ figures, or at least a figure, just on 
the edg in front.' 

'let' look,' said williams. 'well, it' true the light is rather 
cleverli given. where' your figure? oh, yes! just the head, in the veri 
front of the picture.' 

and inde there was--hardli more than a black blot on the extrem edg 
of the engraving--th head of a man or woman, a good deal muffl up, the 
back turn to the spectator, and look toward the house. 

william had not notic it before. 

'still,' he said, 'though it' a clever thing than I thought, I can't 
spend two guinea of museum money on a pictur of a place I don't know.' 

professor bink had hi work to do, and soon went; and veri nearli up to 
hall time william wa engag in a vain attempt to identifi the subject 
of hi picture. 'if the vowel befor the _ng_ had onli been left, it 
would have been easi enough,' he thought; 'but as it is, the name may be 
anyth from guestingley to langley, and there are mani more name 
end like thi than I thought; and thi rotten book ha no index of 
terminations.' 

hall in Mr williams' colleg wa at seven. It need not be dwelt upon; 
the less so as he met there colleagu who had been play golf dure 
the afternoon, and word with which we have no concern were freeli 
bandi across the table--mer golf words, I would hasten to 
explain. 

I suppos an hour or more to have been spent in what is call 
common-room after dinner. later in the even some few retir to 
williams' rooms, and I have littl doubt that whist wa play and 
tobacco smoked. dure a lull in these oper william pick up the 
mezzotint from the tabl without look at it, and hand it to a person 
mildli interest in art, tell him where it had come from, and the 
other particular which we alreadi know. 

the gentleman took it carelessly, look at it, then said, in a tone of 
some interest: 

'it' realli a veri good piec of work, williams; it ha quit a feel 
of the romant period. the light is admir managed, it seem to me, 
and the figure, though it' rather too grotesque, is somehow veri 
impressive.' 

'yes, isn't it?' said williams, who wa just then busi give whiski and 
soda to other of the company, and wa unabl to come across the room to 
look at the view again. 

It wa by thi time rather late in the evening, and the visitor were on 
the move. after they went william wa oblig to write a letter or two 
and clear up some odd bit of work. At last, some time past midnight, he 
wa dispos to turn in, and he put out hi lamp after light hi 
bedroom candle. the pictur lay face upward on the tabl where the last 
man who look at it had put it, and it caught hi eye as he turn the 
lamp down. what he saw made him veri nearli drop the candl on the floor, 
and he declar now if he had been left in the dark at that moment he 
would have had a fit. but, as that did not happen, he wa abl to put 
down the light on the tabl and take a good look at the picture. It wa 
indubitable--rankli impossible, no doubt, but absolut certain. In the 
middl of the lawn in front of the unknown hous there wa a figur where 
no figur had been at five o'clock that afternoon. It wa crawl on all 
four toward the house, and it wa muffl in a strang black garment 
with a white cross on the back. 

I do not know what is the ideal cours to pursu in a situat of thi 
kind, I can onli tell you what Mr william did. He took the pictur by 
one corner and carri it across the passag to a second set of room 
which he possessed. there he lock it up in a drawer, sport the door 
of both set of rooms, and retir to bed; but first he wrote out and 
sign an account of the extraordinari chang which the pictur had 
undergon sinc it had come into hi possession. 

sleep visit him rather late; but it wa consol to reflect that the 
behaviour of the pictur did not depend upon hi own unsupport 
testimony. evid the man who had look at it the night befor had 
seen someth of the same kind as he had, otherwis he might have been 
tempt to think that someth grave wrong wa happen either to hi 
eye or hi mind. thi possibl be fortun precluded, two 
matter await him on the morrow. He must take stock of the pictur veri 
carefully, and call in a wit for the purpose, and he must make a 
determin effort to ascertain what hous it wa that wa represented. He 
would therefor ask hi neighbour nisbet to breakfast with him, and he 
would subsequ spend a morn over the gazetteer. 

nisbet wa disengaged, and arriv about 9.20. hi host wa not quit 
dressed, I am sorri to say, even at thi late hour. dure breakfast 
noth wa said about the mezzotint by williams, save that he had a 
pictur on which he wish for nisbet' opinion. but those who are 
familiar with univers life can pictur for themselv the wide and 
delight rang of subject over which the convers of two fellow 
of canterburi colleg is like to extend dure a sunday morn 
breakfast. hardli a topic wa left unchallenged, from golf to 
lawn-tennis. yet I am bound to say that william wa rather distraught; 
for hi interest natur centr in that veri strang pictur which wa 
now reposing, face downwards, in the drawer in the room opposite. 

the morn pipe wa at last lighted, and the moment had arriv for 
which he looked. with veri considerable--almost tremulous--excit he 
ran across, unlock the drawer, and, extract the picture--stil face 
downwards--ran back, and put it into nisbet' hands. 

'now,' he said, 'nisbet, I want you to tell me exactli what you see in 
that picture. describ it, if you don't mind, rather minutely. i'll tell 
you whi afterwards.' 

'well,' said nisbet, 'I have here a view of a country-house--english, I 
presume--bi moonlight.' 

'moonlight? you'r sure of that?' 

'certainly. the moon appear to be on the wane, if you wish for details, 
and there are cloud in the sky.' 

'all right. Go on. i'll swear,' ad william in an aside, 'there wa no 
moon when I saw it first.' 

'well, there' not much more to be said,' nisbet continued. 'the hous 
ha one--two--thre row of windows, five in each row, except at the 
bottom, where there' a porch instead of the middl one, and--' 

'but what about figures?' said williams, with mark interest. 

'there aren't any,' said nisbet; 'but--' 

'what! No figur on the grass in front?' 

'not a thing.' 

'you'll swear to that?' 

'certainli I will. but there' just one other thing.' 

'what?' 

'why, one of the window on the ground-floor--left of the door--i open.' 

'i it realli so? My goodness! he must have got in,' said williams, with 
great excitement; and he hurri to the back of the sofa on which nisbet 
wa sitting, and, catch the pictur from him, verifi the matter for 
himself. 

It wa quit true. there wa no figure, and there wa the open window. 
williams, after a moment of speechless surprise, went to the 
writing-t and scribbl for a short time. then he brought two paper 
to nisbet, and ask him first to sign one--it wa hi own descript of 
the picture, which you have just heard--and then to read the other which 
wa williams' statement written the night before. 

'what can it all mean?' said nisbet. 

'exactly,' said williams. 'well, one thing I must do--or three things, 
now I think of it. I must find out from garwood'--thi wa hi last 
night' visitor--'what he saw, and then I must get the thing photograph 
befor it goe further, and then I must find out what the place is.' 

'I can do the photograph myself,' said nisbet, 'and I will. but, you 
know, it look veri much as if we were assist at the work out of a 
tragedi somewhere. the question is, ha it happen already, or is it 
go to come off? you must find out what the place is. yes,' he said, 
look at the pictur again, 'I expect you'r right: he ha got in. and 
if I don't mistake, there'l be the devil to pay in one of the room 
upstairs.' 

'i'll tell you what,' said williams: 'i'll take the pictur across to old 
green' (thi wa the senior fellow of the college, who had been bursar 
for mani years). 'it' quit like he'll know it. We have properti in 
essex and sussex, and he must have been over the two counti a lot in 
hi time.' 

'quit like he will,' said nisbet; 'but just let me take my photograph 
first. but look here, I rather think green isn't up today. He wasn't in 
hall last night, and I think I heard him say he wa go down for the 
sunday.' 

'that' true, too,' said williams; 'I know he' gone to brighton. well, 
if you'll photograph it now, i'll go across to garwood and get hi 
statement, and you keep an eye on it while i'm gone. i'm begin to 
think two guinea is not a veri exorbit price for it now.' 

In a short time he had returned, and brought Mr garwood with him. 
garwood' statement wa to the effect that the figure, when he had seen 
it, wa clear of the edg of the picture, but had not got far across the 
lawn. He rememb a white mark on the back of it drapery, but could 
not have been sure it wa a cross. A document to thi effect wa then 
drawn up and signed, and nisbet proceed to photograph the picture. 

'now what do you mean to do?' he said. 'are you go to sit and watch it 
all day?' 

'well, no, I think not,' said williams. 'I rather imagin we'r meant to 
see the whole thing. you see, between the time I saw it last night and 
thi morn there wa time for lot of thing to happen, but the 
creatur onli got into the house. It could easili have got through it 
busi in the time and gone to it own place again; but the fact of the 
window be open, I think, must mean that it' in there now. So I feel 
quit easi about leav it. and besides, I have a kind of idea that it 
wouldn't chang much, if at all, in the daytime. We might go out for a 
walk thi afternoon, and come in to tea, or whenev it get dark. I 
shall leav it out on the tabl here, and sport the door. My skip can get 
in, but no one else.' 

the three agre that thi would be a good plan; and, further, that if 
they spent the afternoon togeth they would be less like to talk about 
the busi to other people; for ani rumour of such a transact as wa 
go on would bring the whole of the phasmatolog societi about their 
ears. 

We may give them a respit until five o'clock. 

At or near that hour the three were enter williams' staircase. they 
were at first slightli annoy to see that the door of hi room wa 
unsported; but in a moment it wa rememb that on sunday the skip 
came for order an hour or so earlier than on weekdays. however, a 
surpris wa await them. the first thing they saw wa the pictur 
lean up against a pile of book on the table, as it had been left, and 
the next thing wa williams' skip, seat on a chair opposite, gaze at 
it with undisguis horror. how wa this? Mr filcher (the name is not my 
own invention) wa a servant of consider standing, and set the 
standard of etiquett to all hi own colleg and to sever neighbour 
ones, and noth could be more alien to hi practic than to be found 
sit on hi master' chair, or appear to take ani particular notic 
of hi master' furnitur or pictures. indeed, he seem to feel thi 
himself. He start violent when the three men were in the room, and 
got up with a mark effort. then he said: 

'I ask your pardon, sir, for take such a freedom as to set down.' 

'not at all, robert,' interpos Mr williams. 'I wa mean to ask you 
some time what you thought of that picture.' 

'well, sir, of cours I don't set up my opinion against yours, but it 
ain't the pictur I should 'ang where my littl girl could see it, sir.' 

'wouldn't you, robert? whi not?' 

'no, sir. why, the pore child, I recollect onc she see a door bible, 
with pictur not 'alf what that is, and we 'ad to set up with her three 
or four night afterwards, if you'll believ me; and if she wa to ketch 
a sight of thi skelinton here, or whatev it is, carri off the pore 
baby, she would be in a taking. you know 'ow it is with children; 'ow 
nervish they git with a littl thing and all. but what I should say, it 
don't seem a right pictur to be lay about, sir, not where anyon 
that' liabl to be startl could come on it. should you be want 
anyth thi evening, sir? thank you, sir.' 

with these word the excel man went to continu the round of hi 
masters, and you may be sure the gentlemen whom he left lost no time in 
gather round the engraving. there wa the house, as befor under the 
wane moon and the drift clouds. the window that had been open wa 
shut, and the figur wa onc more on the lawn: but not thi time 
crawl cautious on hand and knees. now it wa erect and step 
swiftly, with long strides, toward the front of the picture. the moon 
wa behind it, and the black draperi hung down over it face so that onli 
hint of that could be seen, and what wa visibl made the spectat 
profoundli thank that they could see no more than a white dome-lik 
forehead and a few straggl hairs. the head wa bent down, and the arm 
were tightli clasp over an object which could be dimli seen and 
identifi as a child, whether dead or live it wa not possibl to say. 
the leg of the appear alon could be plainli discerned, and they 
were horribl thin. 

from five to seven the three companion sat and watch the pictur by 
turns. but it never changed. they agre at last that it would be safe to 
leav it, and that they would return after hall and await further 
developments. 

when they assembl again, at the earliest possibl moment, the engrav 
wa there, but the figur wa gone, and the hous wa quiet under the 
moonbeams. there wa noth for it but to spend the even over 
gazett and guide-books. william wa the lucki one at last, and 
perhap he deserv it. At 11.30 p.m. he read from murray' _guid to 
essex_ the follow lines: 

16-1/2 miles, _anningley_. the church ha been an interest 
build of norman date, but wa extens classic in the last 
century. It contain the tomb of the famili of francis, whose 
mansion, anningley hall, a solid queen ann house, stand immedi 
beyond the churchyard in a park of about 80 acres. the famili is now 
extinct, the last heir have disappear mysteri in infanc in 
the year 1802. the father, Mr arthur francis, wa local known as a 
talent amateur engrav in mezzotint. after hi son' disappear 
he live in complet retir at the hall, and wa found dead in 
hi studio on the third anniversari of the disaster, have just 
complet an engrav of the house, impress of which are of 
consider rarity. 

thi look like business, and, indeed, Mr green on hi return at onc 
identifi the hous as anningley hall. 

'i there ani kind of explan of the figure, green?' wa the question 
which william natur asked. 

'I don't know, i'm sure, williams. what use to be said in the place when 
I first knew it, which wa befor I came up here, wa just this: old 
franci wa alway veri much down on these poach fellows, and whenev 
he got a chanc he use to get a man whom he suspect of it turn off 
the estate, and by degre he got rid of them all but one. squir could 
do a lot of thing then that they daren't think of now. well, thi man 
that wa left wa what you find pretti often in that country--th last 
remain of a veri old family. I believ they were lord of the manor at 
one time. I recollect just the same thing in my own parish.' 

'what, like the man in _tess o' the durbervilles_?' william put in. 

'yes, I dare say; it' not a book I could ever read myself. but thi 
fellow could show a row of tomb in the church there that belong to hi 
ancestors, and all that went to sour him a bit; but francis, they said, 
could never get at him--h alway kept just on the right side of the 
law--until one night the keeper found him at it in a wood right at the 
end of the estate. I could show you the place now; it march with some 
land that use to belong to an uncl of mine. and you can imagin there 
wa a row; and thi man gawdi (that wa the name, to be sure--gawdy; I 
thought I should get it--gawdy), he wa unlucki enough, poor chap! to 
shoot a keeper. well, that wa what franci wanted, and grand juries--y 
know what they would have been then--and poor gawdi wa strung up in 
double-quick time; and i'v been shown the place he wa buri in, on the 
north side of the church--you know the way in that part of the world: 
anyon that' been hang or made away with themselves, they buri them 
that side. and the idea wa that some friend of gawdy's--not a relation, 
becaus he had none, poor devil! he wa the last of hi line: kind of 
_spe ultima gentis_--must have plan to get hold of francis' boy and 
put an end to _his_ line, too. I don't know--it' rather an 
out-of-the-way thing for an essex poacher to think of--but, you know, I 
should say now it look more as if old gawdi had manag the job himself. 
booh! I hate to think of it! have some whisky, williams!' 

the fact were commun by william to dennistoun, and by him to a 
mix company, of which I wa one, and the sadducean professor of 
ophiolog another. I am sorri to say that the latter when ask what he 
thought of it, onli remarked: 'oh, those bridgeford peopl will say 
anything'--a sentiment which met with the recept it deserved. 

I have onli to add that the pictur is now in the ashleian museum; that 
it ha been treat with a view to discov whether sympathet ink 
ha been use in it, but without effect; that Mr britnel knew noth of 
it save that he wa sure it wa uncommon; and that, though care 
watched, it ha never been known to chang again. 




the ash-tre 

everyon who ha travel over eastern england know the smaller 
country-hous with which it is studded--th rather dank littl 
buildings, usual in the italian style, surround with park of some 
eighti to a hundr acres. for me they have alway had a veri strong 
attraction, with the grey pale of split oak, the nobl trees, the mere 
with their reed-beds, and the line of distant woods. then, I like the 
pillar portico--perhap stuck on to a red-brick queen ann hous which 
ha been face with stucco to bring it into line with the 'grecian' tast 
of the end of the eighteenth century; the hall inside, go up to the 
roof, which hall ought alway to be provid with a galleri and a small 
organ. I like the library, too, where you may find anyth from a 
psalter of the thirteenth centuri to a shakespear quarto. I like the 
pictures, of course; and perhap most of all I like fanci what life in 
such a hous wa when it wa first built, and in the pipe time of 
landlords' prosperity, and not least now, when, if money is not so 
plentiful, tast is more vari and life quit as interesting. I wish to 
have one of these houses, and enough money to keep it togeth and 
entertain my friend in it modestly. 

but thi is a digression. I have to tell you of a curiou seri of 
event which happen in such a hous as I have tri to describe. It is 
castringham hall in suffolk. I think a good deal ha been done to the 
build sinc the period of my story, but the essenti featur I have 
sketch are still there--italian portico, squar block of white house, 
older insid than out, park with fring of woods, and mere. the one 
featur that mark out the hous from a score of other is gone. As you 
look at it from the park, you saw on the right a great old ash-tre 
grow within half a dozen yard of the wall, and almost or quit 
touch the build with it branches. I suppos it had stood there 
ever sinc castringham ceas to be a fortifi place, and sinc the moat 
wa fill in and the elizabethan dwelling-hous built. At ani rate, it 
had well-nigh attain it full dimens in the year 1690. 

In that year the district in which the hall is situat wa the scene of 
a number of witch-trials. It will be long, I think, befor we arriv at a 
just estim of the amount of solid reason--if there wa any--which lay 
at the root of the univers fear of witch in old times. whether the 
person accus of thi offenc realli did imagin that they were 
possess of unusu power of ani kind; or whether they had the will at 
least, if not the power, of do mischief to their neighbours; or 
whether all the confessions, of which there are so many, were extort by 
the cruelti of the witch-finders--thes are question which are not, I 
fancy, yet solved. and the present narr give me pause. I cannot 
altogeth sweep it away as mere invention. the reader must judg for 
himself. 

castringham contribut a victim to the _auto-da-fé_. mr mothersol wa 
her name, and she differ from the ordinari run of villag witch onli 
in be rather better off and in a more influenti position. effort 
were made to save her by sever reput farmer of the parish. they 
did their best to testifi to her character, and show consider 
anxieti as to the verdict of the jury. 

but what seem to have been fatal to the woman wa the evid of the 
then proprietor of castringham hall--sir matthew fell. He depos to 
have watch her on three differ occas from hi window, at the 
full of the moon, gather sprig 'from the ash-tre near my house'. she 
had climb into the branches, clad onli in her shift, and wa cut 
off small twig with a peculiarli curv knife, and as she did so she 
seem to be talk to herself. On each occas sir matthew had done 
hi best to captur the woman, but she had alway taken alarm at some 
accident nois he had made, and all he could see when he got down to 
the garden wa a hare run across the path in the direct of the 
village. 

On the third night he had been at the pain to follow at hi best speed, 
and had gone straight to mr mothersole' house; but he had had to wait a 
quarter of an hour batter at her door, and then she had come out veri 
cross, and appar veri sleepy, as if just out of bed; and he had no 
good explan to offer of hi visit. 

mainli on thi evidence, though there wa much more of a less strike 
and unusu kind from other parishioners, mr mothersol wa found guilti 
and condemn to die. she wa hang a week after the trial, with five or 
six more unhappi creatures, at buri St edmunds. 

sir matthew fell, then deputy-sheriff, wa present at the execution. It 
wa a damp, drizzli march morn when the cart made it way up the rough 
grass hill outsid northgate, where the gallow stood. the other victim 
were apathet or broken down with misery; but mr mothersol was, as in 
life so in death, of a veri differ temper. her 'poyson rage', as a 
report of the time put it, 'did so work upon the bystanders--yea, even 
upon the hangman--that it wa constantli affirm of all that saw her 
that she present the live aspect of a mad divell. yet she offer'd no 
resist to the offic of the law; one she look upon those that 
laid hand upon her with so direful and venom an aspect that--a one 
of them afterward assur me--th meer thought of it prey inwardli 
upon hi mind for six month after.' 

however, all that she is report to have said were the seemingli 
meaningless words: 'there will be guest at the hall.' which she repeat 
more than onc in an undertone. 

sir matthew fell wa not unimpress by the bear of the woman. He had 
some talk upon the matter with the vicar of hi parish, with whom he 
travel home after the assiz busi wa over. hi evid at the 
trial had not been veri willingli given; he wa not special infect 
with the witch-find mania, but he declared, then and afterwards, that 
he could not give ani other account of the matter than that he had given, 
and that he could not possibl have been mistaken as to what he saw. the 
whole transact had been repugn to him, for he wa a man who like 
to be on pleasant term with those about him; but he saw a duti to be 
done in thi business, and he had done it. that seem to have been the 
gist of hi sentiments, and the vicar applaud it, as ani reason man 
must have done. 

A few week after, when the moon of may wa at the full, vicar and squir 
met again in the park, and walk to the hall together. ladi fell wa 
with her mother, who wa danger ill, and sir matthew wa alon at 
home; so the vicar, Mr crome, wa easili persuad to take a late supper 
at the hall. 

sir matthew wa not veri good compani thi evening. the talk ran chiefli 
on famili and parish matters, and, as luck would have it, sir matthew 
made a memorandum in write of certain wish or intent of hi 
regard hi estates, which afterward prove exceedingli useful. 

when Mr crome thought of start for home, about half past nine o'clock, 
sir matthew and he took a preliminari turn on the gravel walk at the 
back of the house. the onli incid that struck Mr crome wa this: they 
were in sight of the ash-tre which I describ as grow near the 
window of the building, when sir matthew stop and said: 

'what is that that run up and down the stem of the ash? It is never a 
squirrel? they will all be in their nest by now.' 

the vicar look and saw the move creature, but he could make noth 
of it colour in the moonlight. the sharp outline, however, seen for an 
instant, wa imprint on hi brain, and he could have sworn, he said, 
though it sound foolish, that, squirrel or not, it had more than four 
legs. 

still, not much wa to be made of the momentari vision, and the two men 
parted. they may have met sinc then, but it wa not for a score of 
years. 

next day sir matthew fell wa not downstair at six in the morning, as 
wa hi custom, nor at seven, nor yet at eight. hereupon the servant 
went and knock at hi chamber door. I need not prolong the descript 
of their anxiou listen and renew batter on the panels. the 
door wa open at last from the outside, and they found their master 
dead and black. So much you have guessed. that there were ani mark of 
violenc did not at the moment appear; but the window wa open. 

one of the men went to fetch the parson, and then by hi direct rode 
on to give notic to the coroner. Mr crome himself went as quick as he 
might to the hall, and wa shown to the room where the dead man lay. He 
ha left some note among hi paper which show how genuin a respect and 
sorrow wa felt for sir matthew, and there is also thi passage, which I 
transcrib for the sake of the light it throw upon the cours of events, 
and also upon the common belief of the time: 

'there wa not ani the least trace of an entranc have been forc'd to 
the chamber: but the casement stood open, as my poor friend would alway 
have it in thi season. He had hi even drink of small ale in a silver 
vessel of about a pint measure, and tonight had not drunk it out. thi 
drink wa examin by the physician from bury, a Mr hodgkins, who could 
not, however, as he afterward declar'd upon hi oath, befor the 
coroner' quest, discov that ani matter of a venom kind wa present 
in it. for, as wa natural, in the great swell and black of the 
corpse, there wa talk made among the neighbour of poyson. the bodi wa 
veri much disorder'd as it laid in the bed, be twist after so 
extream a sort as gave too probabl conjectur that my worthi friend and 
patron had expir'd in great pain and agony. and what is as yet 
unexplain'd, and to myself the argument of some horrid and artful 
design in the perpetr of thi barbar murther, wa this, that the 
women which were entrust with the laying-out of the corps and wash 
it, be both sad pearson and veri well respect in their mournful 
profession, came to me in a great pain and distress both of mind and 
body, saying, what wa inde confirm upon the first view, that they 
had no sooner touch'd the breast of the corps with their nake hand 
than they were sensibl of a more than ordinari violent smart and ach 
in their palms, which, with their whole forearms, in no long time swell'd 
so immoderately, the pain still continuing, that, as afterward proved, 
dure mani week they were forc'd to lay by the exercis of their 
calling; and yet no mark seen on the skin. 

'upon hear this, I sent for the physician, who wa still in the house, 
and we made as careful a proof as we were abl by the help of a small 
magnifi len of crystal of the condit of the skinn on thi part of 
the body: but could not detect with the instrument we had ani matter of 
import beyond a coupl of small punctur or pricks, which we then 
conclud were the spott by which the poyson might be introduced, 
rememb that ring of _pope borgia_, with other known specimen of the 
horrid art of the italian poyson of the last age. 

'so much is to be said of the symptom seen on the corpse. As to what I 
am to add, it is meerli my own experiment, and to be left to poster to 
judg whether there be anyth of valu therein. there wa on the tabl 
by the beddsid a bibl of the small size, in which my friend--punctual 
as in matter of less moment, so in thi more weighti one--us nightly, 
and upon hi first rising, to read a sett portion. and I take it 
up--not without a tear duli paid to him wich from the studi of thi 
poorer adumbr wa now pass'd to the contempl of it great 
originall--it came into my thoughts, as at such moment of helpless 
we are prone to catch at ani the least glimmer that make promis of 
light, to make trial of that old and by mani account superstiti 
practic of draw the _sortes;_ of which a principal instance, in the 
case of hi late sacr majesti the bless martyr king _charles_ and my 
lord _falkland_, wa now much talk of. I must need admit that by my 
trial not much assist wa afford me: yet, as the caus and origin 
of these dreadful event may hereaft be search'd out, I set down the 
results, in the case it may be found that they point the true quarter 
of the mischief to a quicker intellig than my own. 

'I made, then, three trials, open the book and place my finger upon 
certain words: which gave in the first these words, from luke xiii. 7, 
_cut it down_; in the second, isaiah xiii. 20, _it shall never be 
inhabited_; and upon the third experiment, job xxxix. 30, _her young one 
also suck up blood_.' 

thi is all that need be quot from Mr crome' papers. sir matthew fell 
wa duli coffin and laid into the earth, and hi funer sermon, 
preach by Mr crome on the follow sunday, ha been print under the 
titl of 'the unsearch way; or, england' danger and the malici 
deal of antichrist', it be the vicar' view, as well as that most 
commonli held in the neighbourhood, that the squir wa the victim of a 
recrudesc of the popish plot. 

hi son, sir matthew the second, succeed to the titl and estates. and 
so end the first act of the castringham tragedy. It is to be mentioned, 
though the fact is not surprising, that the new baronet did not occupi 
the room in which hi father had died. nor, indeed, wa it slept in by 
anyon but an occasion visitor dure the whole of hi occupation. He 
die in 1735, and I do not find that anyth particular mark hi 
reign, save a curious constant mortal among hi cattl and 
live-stock in general, which show a tendenc to increas slightli as 
time went on. 

those who are interest in the detail will find a statist account 
in a letter to the _gentleman' magazine_ of 1772, which draw the fact 
from the baronet' own papers. He put an end to it at last by a veri 
simpl expedient, that of shut up all hi beast in shed at night, 
and keep no sheep in hi park. for he had notic that noth wa 
ever attack that spent the night indoors. after that the disord 
confin itself to wild birds, and beast of chase. but as we have no 
good account of the symptoms, and as all-night watch wa quit 
unproduct of ani clue, I do not dwell on what the suffolk farmer 
call the 'castringham sickness'. 

the second sir matthew die in 1735, as I said, and wa duli succeed by 
hi son, sir richard. It wa in hi time that the great famili pew wa 
built out on the north side of the parish church. So larg were the 
squire' idea that sever of the grave on that unhallow side of the 
build had to be disturb to satisfi hi requirements. among them wa 
that of mr mothersole, the posit of which wa accur known, 
thank to a note on a plan of the church and yard, both made by Mr crome. 

A certain amount of interest wa excit in the villag when it wa known 
that the famou witch, who wa still rememb by a few, wa to be 
exhumed. and the feel of surprise, and inde disquiet, wa veri 
strong when it wa found that, though her coffin wa fairli sound and 
unbroken, there wa no trace whatev insid it of body, bones, or dust. 
indeed, it is a curiou phenomenon, for at the time of her buri no 
such thing were dreamt of as resurrection-men, and it is difficult to 
conceiv ani ration motiv for steal a bodi otherwis than for the 
use of the dissecting-room. 

the incid reviv for a time all the stori of witch-trial and of 
the exploit of the witches, dormant for forti years, and sir richard' 
order that the coffin should be burnt were thought by a good mani to be 
rather foolhardy, though they were duli carri out. 

sir richard wa a pestil innovator, it is certain. befor hi time the 
hall had been a fine block of the mellowest red brick; but sir richard 
had travel in itali and becom infect with the italian taste, and, 
have more money than hi predecessors, he determin to leav an 
italian palac where he had found an english house. So stucco and ashlar 
mask the brick; some indiffer roman marbl were plant about in 
the entrance-hal and gardens; a reproduct of the sibyl' templ at 
tivoli wa erect on the opposit bank of the mere; and castringham took 
on an entir new, and, I must say, a less engaging, aspect. but it wa 
much admired, and serv as a model to a good mani of the neighbour 
gentri in after-years. 

* * * * * 

one morn (it wa in 1754) sir richard woke after a night of 
discomfort. It had been windy, and hi chimney had smoke persistently, 
and yet it wa so cold that he must keep up a fire. also someth had so 
rattl about the window that no man could get a moment' peace. further, 
there wa the prospect of sever guest of posit arriv in the 
cours of the day, who would expect sport of some kind, and the inroad 
of the distemp (which continu among hi game) had been late so 
seriou that he wa afraid for hi reput as a game-preserver. but 
what realli touch him most nearli wa the other matter of hi sleepless 
night. He could certainli not sleep in that room again. 

that wa the chief subject of hi medit at breakfast, and after it 
he began a systemat examin of the room to see which would suit 
hi notion best. It wa long befor he found one. thi had a window with 
an eastern aspect and that with a northern; thi door the servant would 
be alway passing, and he did not like the bedstead in that. no, he must 
have a room with a western look-out, so that the sun could not wake him 
early, and it must be out of the way of the busi of the house. the 
housekeep wa at the end of her resources. 

'well, sir richard,' she said, 'you know that there is but the one room 
like that in the house.' 

'which may that be?' said sir richard. 

'and that is sir matthew's--th west chamber.' 

'well, put me in there, for there i'll lie tonight,' said her master. 
'which way is it? here, to be sure'; and he hurri off. 

'oh, sir richard, but no one ha slept there these forti years. the air 
ha hardli been chang sinc sir matthew die there.' 

thu she spoke, and rustl after him. 

'come, open the door, mr chiddock. i'll see the chamber, at least.' 

So it wa opened, and, indeed, the smell wa veri close and earthy. sir 
richard cross to the window, and, impatiently, as wa hi wont, threw 
the shutter back, and flung open the casement. for thi end of the hous 
wa one which the alter had bare touched, grown up as it wa with 
the great ash-tree, and be otherwis conceal from view. 

'air it, mr chiddock, all today, and move my bed-furnitur in in the 
afternoon. put the bishop of kilmor in my old room.' 

'pray, sir richard,' said a new voice, break in on thi speech, 'might 
I have the favour of a moment' interview?' 

sir richard turn round and saw a man in black in the doorway, who 
bowed. 

'I must ask your indulg for thi intrusion, sir richard. you will, 
perhaps, hardli rememb me. My name is william crome, and my grandfath 
wa vicar in your grandfather' time.' 

'well, sir,' said sir richard, 'the name of crome is alway a passport to 
castringham. I am glad to renew a friendship of two generations' 
standing. In what can I serv you? for your hour of calling--and, if I do 
not mistak you, your bearing--show you to be in some haste.' 

'that is no more than the truth, sir. I am ride from norwich to buri St 
edmund with what hast I can make, and I have call in on my way to 
leav with you some paper which we have but just come upon in look 
over what my grandfath left at hi death. It is thought you may find 
some matter of famili interest in them.' 

'you are mighti obliging, Mr crome, and, if you will be so good as to 
follow me to the parlour, and drink a glass of wine, we will take a first 
look at these same paper together. and you, mr chiddock, as I said, be 
about air thi chamber.... yes, it is here my grandfath died.... 
yes, the tree, perhaps, doe make the place a littl dampish.... no; I do 
not wish to listen to ani more. make no difficulties, I beg. you have 
your orders--go. will you follow me, sir?' 

they went to the study. the packet which young Mr crome had brought--h 
wa then just becom a fellow of clare hall in cambridge, I may say, and 
subsequ brought out a respect edit of polyaenus--contain 
among other thing the note which the old vicar had made upon the 
occas of sir matthew fell' death. and for the first time sir richard 
wa confront with the enigmat _sort biblicae_ which you have 
heard. they amus him a good deal. 

'well,' he said, 'mi grandfather' bibl gave one prudent piec of 
advice--_cut it down_. If that stand for the ash-tree, he may rest 
assur I shall not neglect it. such a nest of catarrh and agu wa 
never seen.' 

the parlour contain the famili books, which, pend the arriv of a 
collect which sir richard had made in italy, and the build of a 
proper room to receiv them, were not mani in number. 

sir richard look up from the paper to the bookcase. 

'I wonder,' say he, 'whether the old prophet is there yet? I fanci I see 
him.' 

cross the room, he took out a dumpi bible, which, sure enough, bore on 
the flyleaf the inscription: 'to matthew fell, from hi love godmother, 
ann aldous, 2 septemb 1659.' 

'it would be no bad plan to test him again, Mr crome. I will wager we get 
a coupl of name in the chronicles. h'm! what have we here? "thou shalt 
seek me in the morning, and I shall not be." well, well! your grandfath 
would have made a fine omen of that, hey? No more prophet for me! they 
are all in a tale. and now, Mr crome, I am infinit oblig to you for 
your packet. you will, I fear, be impati to get on. pray allow 
me--anoth glass.' 

So with offer of hospitality, which were genuin meant (for sir 
richard thought well of the young man' address and manner), they parted. 

In the afternoon came the guests--th bishop of kilmore, ladi mari 
hervey, sir william kentfield, etc. dinner at five, wine, cards, supper, 
and dispers to bed. 

next morn sir richard is disinclin to take hi gun with the rest. He 
talk with the bishop of kilmore. thi prelate, unlik a good mani of the 
irish bishop of hi day, had visit hi see, and, indeed, resid 
there, for some consider time. thi morning, as the two were walk 
along the terrac and talk over the alter and improv in 
the house, the bishop said, point to the window of the west room: 

'you could never get one of my irish flock to occupi that room, sir 
richard.' 

'whi is that, my lord? It is, in fact, my own.' 

'well, our irish peasantri will alway have it that it bring the worst 
of luck to sleep near an ash-tree, and you have a fine growth of ash not 
two yard from your chamber window. perhaps,' the bishop went on, with a 
smile, 'it ha given you a touch of it qualiti already, for you do not 
seem, if I may say it, so much the fresher for your night' rest as your 
friend would like to see you.' 

'that, or someth else, it is true, cost me my sleep from twelv to 
four, my lord. but the tree is to come down tomorrow, so I shall not hear 
much more from it.' 

'I applaud your determination. It can hardli be wholesom to have the air 
you breath strained, as it were, through all that leafage.' 

'your lordship is right there, I think. but I had not my window open last 
night. It wa rather the nois that went on--no doubt from the twig 
sweep the glass--that kept me open-eyed.' 

'I think that can hardli be, sir richard. here--y see it from thi 
point. none of these nearest branch even can touch your casement unless 
there were a gale, and there wa none of that last night. they miss the 
pane by a foot.' 

'no, sir, true. what, then, will it be, I wonder, that scratch and 
rustl so--ay, and cover the dust on my sill with line and marks?' 

At last they agre that the rat must have come up through the ivy. that 
wa the bishop' idea, and sir richard jump at it. 

So the day pass quietly, and night came, and the parti dispers to 
their rooms, and wish sir richard a better night. 

and now we are in hi bedroom, with the light out and the squir in bed. 
the room is over the kitchen, and the night outsid still and warm, so 
the window stand open. 

there is veri littl light about the bedstead, but there is a strang 
movement there; it seem as if sir richard were move hi head rapidli 
to and fro with onli the slightest possibl sound. and now you would 
guess, so decept is the half-darkness, that he had sever heads, 
round and brownish, which move back and forward, even as low as hi 
chest. It is a horribl illusion. Is it noth more? there! someth 
drop off the bed with a soft plump, like a kitten, and is out of the 
window in a flash; another--four--and after that there is quiet again. 

_thou shall seek me in the morning, and I shall not be._ 

As with sir matthew, so with sir richard--dead and black in hi bed! 

A pale and silent parti of guest and servant gather under the window 
when the news wa known. italian poisoners, popish emissaries, infect 
air--al these and more guess were hazarded, and the bishop of kilmor 
look at the tree, in the fork of whose lower bough a white tom-cat wa 
crouching, look down the hollow which year had gnaw in the trunk. 
It wa watch someth insid the tree with great interest. 

suddenli it got up and crane over the hole. then a bit of the edg on 
which it stood gave way, and it went slither in. everyon look up at 
the nois of the fall. 

It is known to most of us that a cat can cry; but few of us have heard, I 
hope, such a yell as came out of the trunk of the great ash. two or three 
scream there were--th wit are not sure which--and then a slight 
and muffl nois of some commot or struggl wa all that came. but 
ladi mari hervey faint outright, and the housekeep stop her ear 
and fled till she fell on the terrace. 

the bishop of kilmor and sir william kentfield stayed. yet even they 
were daunted, though it wa onli at the cri of a cat; and sir william 
swallow onc or twice befor he could say: 

'there is someth more than we know of in that tree, my lord. I am for 
an instant search.' 

and thi wa agre upon. A ladder wa brought, and one of the garden 
went up, and, look down the hollow, could detect noth but a few dim 
indic of someth moving. they got a lantern, and let it down by a 
rope. 

'we must get at the bottom of this. My life upon it, my lord, but the 
secret of these terribl death is there.' 

Up went the garden again with the lantern, and let it down the hole 
cautiously. they saw the yellow light upon hi face as he bent over, and 
saw hi face struck with an incredul terror and loath befor he 
cri out in a dread voic and fell back from the ladder--where, 
happily, he wa caught by two of the men--let the lantern fall insid 
the tree. 

He wa in a dead faint, and it wa some time befor ani word could be got 
from him. 

By then they had someth els to look at. the lantern must have broken 
at the bottom, and the light in it caught upon dri leav and rubbish 
that lay there for in a few minut a dens smoke began to come up, and 
then flame; and, to be short, the tree wa in a blaze. 

the bystand made a ring at some yards' distance, and sir william and 
the bishop sent men to get what weapon and tool they could; for, 
clearly, whatev might be use the tree as it lair would be forc out 
by the fire. 

So it was. first, at the fork, they saw a round bodi cover with 
fire--th size of a man' head--appear veri suddenly, then seem to 
collaps and fall back. this, five or six times; then a similar ball 
leapt into the air and fell on the grass, where after a moment it lay 
still. the bishop went as near as he dare to it, and saw--what but the 
remain of an enorm spider, veinou and seared! and, as the fire 
burn lower down, more terribl bodi like thi began to break out from 
the trunk, and it wa seen that these were cover with greyish hair. 

all that day the ash burned, and until it fell to piec the men stood 
about it, and from time to time kill the brute as they dart out. At 
last there wa a long interv when none appeared, and they cautious 
close in and examin the root of the tree. 

'they found,' say the bishop of kilmore, 'below it a round hollow 
place in the earth, wherein were two or three bodi of these creatur 
that had plainli been smother by the smoke; and, what is to me more 
curious, at the side of thi den, against the wall, wa crouch the 
anatomi or skeleton of a human being, with the skin dri upon the bones, 
have some remain of black hair, which wa pronounc by those that 
examin it to be undoubtedli the bodi of a woman, and clearli dead for a 
period of fifti years.' 




number 13 

among the town of jutland, viborg justli hold a high place. It is the 
seat of a bishopric; it ha a handsom but almost entir new cathedral, 
a charm garden, a lake of great beauty, and mani storks. near it is 
hald, account one of the prettiest thing in denmark; and hard by is 
finderup, where marsk stig murder king erik glip on St cecilia' 
day, in the year 1286. fifty-six blow of square-head iron mace were 
trace on erik' skull when hi tomb wa open in the seventeenth 
century. but I am not write a guide-book. 

there are good hotel in viborg--preisler' and the phoenix are all that 
can be desired. but my cousin, whose experi I have to tell you now, 
went to the golden lion the first time that he visit viborg. He ha not 
been there since, and the follow page will, perhaps, explain the 
reason of hi abstention. 

the golden lion is one of the veri few hous in the town that were not 
destroy in the great fire of 1726, which practic demolish the 
cathedral, the sognekirke, the raadhuus, and so much els that wa old 
and interesting. It is a great red-brick house--that is, the front is of 
brick, with corbi step on the gabl and a text over the door; but the 
courtyard into which the omnibu drive is of black and white wood and 
plaster. 

the sun wa declin in the heaven when my cousin walk up to the 
door, and the light smote full upon the impos façad of the house. He 
wa delight with the old-fashion aspect of the place, and promis 
himself a thoroughli satisfactori and amus stay in an inn so typic 
of old jutland. 

It wa not busi in the ordinari sens of the word that had brought Mr 
anderson to viborg. He wa engag upon some research into the church 
histori of denmark, and it had come to hi knowledg that in the 
rigsarkiv of viborg there were papers, save from the fire, relat to 
the last day of roman catholic in the country. He proposed, 
therefore, to spend a consider time--perhap as much as a fortnight 
or three weeks--in examin and copi these, and he hope that the 
golden lion would be abl to give him a room of suffici size to serv 
alik as a bedroom and a study. hi wish were explain to the 
landlord, and, after a certain amount of thought, the latter suggest 
that perhap it might be the best way for the gentleman to look at one or 
two of the larger room and pick one for himself. It seem a good idea. 

the top floor wa soon reject as entail too much get upstair 
after the day' work; the second floor contain no room of exactli the 
dimens required; but on the first floor there wa a choic of two or 
three room which would, so far as size went, suit admirably. 

the landlord wa strongli in favour of number 17, but Mr anderson point 
out that it window command onli the blank wall of the next house, and 
that it would be veri dark in the afternoon. either number 12 or number 
14 would be better, for both of them look on the street, and the bright 
even light and the pretti view would more than compens him for the 
addit amount of noise. 

eventu number 12 wa selected. like it neighbours, it had three 
windows, all on one side of the room; it wa fairli high and unusu 
long. there was, of course, no fireplace, but the stove wa handsom and 
rather old--a cast-iron erection, on the side of which wa a 
represent of abraham sacrif isaac, and the inscription, 'I bog 
mose, cap. 22,' above. noth els in the room wa remarkable; the onli 
interest pictur wa an old colour print of the town, date about 
1820. 

supper-tim wa approaching, but when anderson, refresh by the ordinari 
ablutions, descend the staircase, there were still a few minut befor 
the bell rang. He devot them to examin the list of hi 
fellow-lodgers. As is usual in denmark, their name were display on a 
larg blackboard, divid into column and lines, the number of the 
room be paint in at the begin of each line. the list wa not 
exciting. there wa an advocate, or sagförer, a german, and some bagmen 
from copenhagen. the one and onli point which suggest ani food for 
thought wa the absenc of ani number 13 from the tale of the rooms, and 
even thi wa a thing which anderson had alreadi notic half a dozen 
time in hi experi of danish hotels. He could not help wonder 
whether the object to that particular number, common as it is, wa so 
widespread and so strong as to make it difficult to let a room so 
ticketed, and he resolv to ask the landlord if he and hi colleagu in 
the profess had actual met with mani client who refus to be 
accommod in the thirteenth room. 

He had noth to tell me (I am give the stori as I heard it from him) 
about what pass at supper, and the evening, which wa spent in 
unpack and arrang hi clothes, books, and papers, wa not more 
eventful. toward eleven o'clock he resolv to go to bed, but with him, 
as with a good mani other peopl nowadays, an almost necessari 
preliminari to bed, if he meant to sleep, wa the read of a few page 
of print, and he now rememb that the particular book which he had 
been read in the train, and which alon would satisfi him at that 
present moment, wa in the pocket of hi great-coat, then hang on a 
peg outsid the dining-room. 

To run down and secur it wa the work of a moment, and, as the passag 
were by no mean dark, it wa not difficult for him to find hi way back 
to hi own door. so, at least, he thought; but when he arriv there, and 
turn the handle, the door entir refus to open, and he caught the 
sound of a hasti movement toward it from within. He had tri the wrong 
door, of course. wa hi own room to the right or to the left? He glanc 
at the number: it wa 13. hi room would be on the left; and so it was. 
and not befor he had been in bed for some minutes, had read hi wont 
three or four page of hi book, blown out hi light, and turn over to 
go to sleep, did it occur to him that, wherea on the blackboard of the 
hotel there had been no number 13, there wa undoubtedli a room number 
13 in the hotel. He felt rather sorri he had not chosen it for hi own. 
perhap he might have done the landlord a littl servic by occupi it, 
and given him the chanc of say that a well-born english gentleman had 
live in it for three week and like it veri much. but probabl it wa 
use as a servant' room or someth of the kind. after all, it wa most 
like not so larg or good a room as hi own. and he look drowsili 
about the room, which wa fairli percept in the half-light from the 
street-lamp. It wa a curiou effect, he thought. room usual look 
larger in a dim light than a full one, but thi seem to have contract 
in length and grown proportion higher. well, well! sleep wa more 
import than these vagu ruminations--and to sleep he went. 

On the day after hi arriv anderson attack the rigsarkiv of viborg. 
He was, as one might expect in denmark, kindli received, and access to 
all that he wish to see wa made as easi for him as possible. the 
document laid befor him were far more numer and interest than he 
had at all anticipated. besid offici papers, there wa a larg bundl 
of correspond relat to bishop jörgen friis, the last roman 
cathol who held the see, and in these there crop up mani amus and 
what are call 'intimate' detail of privat life and individu 
character. there wa much talk of a hous own by the bishop, but not 
inhabit by him, in the town. it tenant wa appar somewhat of a 
scandal and a stumbling-block to the reform party. He wa a disgrace, 
they wrote, to the city; he practis secret and wick arts, and had 
sold hi soul to the enemy. It wa of a piec with the gross corrupt 
and superstit of the babylonish church that such a viper and 
blood-suck _troldmand_ should be patron and harbour by the 
bishop. the bishop met these reproach boldly; he protest hi own 
abhorr of all such thing as secret arts, and requir hi 
antagonist to bring the matter befor the proper court--of course, the 
spiritu court--and sift it to the bottom. No one could be more readi 
and will than himself to condemn mag nicola francken if the evid 
show him to have been guilti of ani of the crime inform alleg 
against him. 

anderson had not time to do more than glanc at the next letter of the 
protest leader, rasmu nielsen, befor the record offic wa close 
for the day, but he gather it gener tenor, which wa to the effect 
that christian men were now no longer bound by the decis of bishop 
of rome, and that the bishop' court wa not, and could not be, a fit or 
compet tribun to judg so grave and weighti a cause. 

On leav the office, Mr anderson wa accompani by the old gentleman 
who presid over it, and, as they walked, the convers veri 
natur turn to the paper of which I have just been speaking. 

herr scavenius, the archivist of viborg, though veri well inform as to 
the gener run of the document under hi charge, wa not a specialist 
in those of the reform period. He wa much interest in what 
anderson had to tell him about them. He look forward with great 
pleasure, he said, to see the public in which Mr anderson spoke 
of embodi their contents. 'thi hous of the bishop friis,' he added, 
'it is a great puzzl to me where it can have stood. I have studi 
care the topographi of old viborg, but it is most unlucky--of the 
old terrier of the bishop' properti which wa made in 1560, and of which 
we have the greater part in the arkiv--just the piec which had the list 
of the town properti is missing. never mind. perhap I shall some day 
succeed to find him.' 

after take some exercise--i forget exactli how or where--anderson went 
back to the golden lion, hi supper, hi game of patience, and hi bed. 
On the way to hi room it occur to him that he had forgotten to talk 
to the landlord about the omiss of number 13 from the hotel board, and 
also that he might as well make sure that number 13 did actual exist 
befor he made ani refer to the matter. 

the decis wa not difficult to arriv at. there wa the door with it 
number as plain as could be, and work of some kind wa evid go on 
insid it, for as he near the door he could hear footstep and voices, 
or a voice, within. dure the few second in which he halt to make 
sure of the number, the footstep ceased, seemingli veri near the door, 
and he wa a littl startl at hear a quick hiss breath as of a 
person in strong excitement. He went on to hi own room, and again he wa 
surpris to find how much smaller it seem now than it had when he 
select it. It wa a slight disappointment, but onli slight. If he found 
it realli not larg enough, he could veri easili shift to another. In the 
meantim he want something--a far as I rememb it wa a 
pocket-handkerchief--out of hi portmanteau, which had been place by the 
porter on a veri inadequ trestl or stool against the wall at the 
farthest end of the room from hi bed. here wa a veri curiou thing: the 
portmanteau wa not to be seen. It had been move by offici servants; 
doubtless the content had been put in the wardrobe. no, none of them 
were there. thi wa vexatious. the idea of a theft he dismiss at once. 
such thing rare happen in denmark, but some piec of stupid had 
certainli been perform (which is not so uncommon), and the _stuepige_ 
must be sever spoken to. whatev it wa that he wanted, it wa not so 
necessari to hi comfort that he could not wait till the morn for it, 
and he therefor settl not to ring the bell and disturb the servants. 
He went to the window--th right-hand window it was--and look out on 
the quiet street. there wa a tall build opposite, with larg space 
of dead wall; no passers-by; a dark night; and veri littl to be seen of 
ani kind. 

the light wa behind him, and he could see hi own shadow clearli cast on 
the wall opposite. also the shadow of the beard man in number 11 on the 
left, who pass to and fro in shirtsleev onc or twice, and wa seen 
first brush hi hair, and later on in a nightgown. also the shadow of 
the occup of number 13 on the right. thi might be more interesting. 
number 13 was, like himself, lean on hi elbow on the window-sil 
look out into the street. He seem to be a tall thin man--or wa it 
by ani chanc a woman?--at least, it wa someon who cover hi or her 
head with some kind of draperi befor go to bed, and, he thought, must 
be possess of a red lamp-shade--and the lamp must be flicker veri 
much. there wa a distinct play up and down of a dull red light on the 
opposit wall. He crane out a littl to see if he could make ani more of 
the figure, but beyond a fold of some light, perhap white, materi on 
the window-sil he could see nothing. 

now came a distant step in the street, and it approach seem to recal 
number 13 to a sens of hi expos position, for veri swiftli and 
suddenli he swept asid from the window, and hi red light went out. 
anderson, who had been smoke a cigarette, laid the end of it on the 
window-sil and went to bed. 

next morn he wa woken by the _stuepige_ with hot water, etc. He 
rous himself, and after think out the correct danish words, said as 
distinctli as he could: 

'you must not move my portmanteau. where is it?' 

As is not uncommon, the maid laughed, and went away without make ani 
distinct answer. 

anderson, rather irritated, sat up in bed, intend to call her back, 
but he remain sit up, stare straight in front of him. there wa 
hi portmanteau on it trestle, exactli where he had seen the porter put 
it when he first arrived. thi wa a rude shock for a man who pride 
himself on hi accuraci of observation. how it could possibl have 
escap him the night befor he did not pretend to understand; at ani 
rate, there it wa now. 

the daylight show more than the portmanteau; it let the true 
proport of the room with it three window appear, and satisfi it 
tenant that hi choic after all had not been a bad one. when he wa 
almost dress he walk to the middl one of the three window to look 
out at the weather. anoth shock await him. strang unobserv he 
must have been last night. He could have sworn ten time over that he had 
been smoke at the right-hand window the last thing befor he went to 
bed, and here wa hi cigarette-end on the sill of the middl window. 

He start to go down to breakfast. rather late, but number 13 wa later: 
here were hi boot still outsid hi door--a gentleman' boots. So then 
number 13 wa a man, not a woman. just then he caught sight of the number 
on the door. It wa 14. He thought he must have pass number 13 without 
notic it. three stupid mistak in twelv hour were too much for a 
methodical, accurate-mind man, so he turn back to make sure. the next 
number to 14 wa number 12, hi own room. there wa no number 13 at all. 

after some minut devot to a care consider of everyth he 
had had to eat and drink dure the last twenty-four hours, anderson 
decid to give the question up. If hi eye or hi brain were give way 
he would have plenti of opportun for ascertain that fact; if not, 
then he wa evid be treat to a veri interest experience. In 
either case the develop of event would certainli be worth watching. 

dure the day he continu hi examin of the episcop 
correspond which I have alreadi summarized. To hi disappointment, it 
wa incomplete. onli one other letter could be found which refer to 
the affair of mag nicola francken. It wa from the bishop jörgen frii 
to rasmu nielsen. He said: 

'although we are not in the least degre inclin to assent to your 
judgement concern our court, and shall be prepar if need be to 
withstand you to the uttermost in that behalf, yet forasmuch as our 
trusti and well-belov mag nicola francken, against whom you have dare 
to alleg certain fals and malici charges, hath been suddenli remov 
from among us, it is appar that the question for thi time falls. but 
forasmuch as you further alleg that the apostl and evangelist St john 
in hi heavenli apocalyps describ the holi roman church under the 
guis and symbol of the scarlet woman, be it known to you,' etc. 

search as he might, anderson could find no sequel to thi letter nor ani 
clue to the caus or manner of the 'removal' of the _casu belli_. He 
could onli suppos that francken had die suddenly; and as there were 
onli two day between the date of nielsen' last letter--when francken 
wa evid still in being--and that of the bishop' letter, the death 
must have been complet unexpected. 

In the afternoon he paid a short visit to hald, and took hi tea at 
baekkelund; nor could he notice, though he wa in a somewhat nervou 
frame of mind, that there wa ani indic of such a failur of eye or 
brain as hi experi of the morn had led him to fear. 

At supper he found himself next to the landlord. 

'what,' he ask him, after some indiffer conversation, 'i the reason 
whi in most of the hotel one visit in thi countri the number thirteen 
is left out of the list of rooms? I see you have none here.' 

the landlord seem amused. 

'to think that you should have notic a thing like that! i'v thought 
about it onc or twice myself, to tell the truth. An educ man, i'v 
said, ha no busi with these superstiti notions. I wa brought up 
myself here in the high school of viborg, and our old master wa alway a 
man to set hi face against anyth of that kind. he' been dead now 
thi mani years--a fine upstand man he was, and readi with hi hand 
as well as hi head. I recollect us boys, one snowi day--' 

here he plung into reminiscence. 

'then you don't think there is ani particular object to have a 
number 13?' said anderson. 

'ah! to be sure. well, you understand, I wa brought up to the busi 
by my poor old father. He kept an hotel in aarhuu first, and then, when 
we were born, he move to viborg here, which wa hi nativ place, and 
had the phoenix here until he died. that wa in 1876. then I start 
busi in silkeborg, and onli the year befor last I move into thi 
house.' 

then follow more detail as to the state of the hous and busi when 
first taken over. 

'and when you came here, wa there a number 13?' 

'no, no. I wa go to tell you about that. you see, in a place like 
this, the commerci class--th travellers--ar what we have to provid 
for in general. and put them in number 13? why, they'd as soon sleep in 
the street, or sooner. As far as i'm concern myself, it wouldn't make a 
penni differ to me what the number of my room was, and so i'v often 
said to them; but they stick to it that it bring them bad luck. 
quantiti of stori they have among them of men that have slept in a 
number 13 and never been the same again, or lost their best customers, 
or--on thing and another,' said the landlord, after search for a more 
graphic phrase. 

'then what do you use your number 13 for?' said anderson, consciou as he 
said the word of a curiou anxieti quit disproportion to the 
import of the question. 

'mi number 13? why, don't I tell you that there isn't such a thing in the 
house? I thought you might have notic that. If there wa it would be 
next door to your own room.' 

'well, yes; onli I happen to think--that is, I fanci last night that 
I had seen a door number thirteen in that passage; and, really, I am 
almost certain I must have been right, for I saw it the night befor as 
well.' 

Of course, herr kristensen laugh thi notion to scorn, as anderson had 
expected, and emphas with much iter the fact that no number 13 
exist or had exist befor him in that hotel. 

anderson wa in some way reliev by hi certainty, but still puzzled, 
and he began to think that the best way to make sure whether he had 
inde been subject to an illus or not wa to invit the landlord to 
hi room to smoke a cigar later on in the evening. some photograph of 
english town which he had with him form a suffici good excuse. 

herr kristensen wa flatter by the invitation, and most willingli 
accept it. At about ten o'clock he wa to make hi appearance, but 
befor that anderson had some letter to write, and retir for the 
purpos of write them. He almost blush to himself at confess it, 
but he could not deni that it wa the fact that he wa becom quit 
nervou about the question of the exist of number 13; so much so that 
he approach hi room by way of number 11, in order that he might not be 
oblig to pass the door, or the place where the door ought to be. He 
look quickli and suspici about the room when he enter it, but 
there wa nothing, beyond that indefin air of be smaller than 
usual, to warrant ani misgivings. there wa no question of the presenc 
or absenc of hi portmanteau tonight. He had himself empti it of it 
content and lodg it under hi bed. with a certain effort he dismiss 
the thought of number 13 from hi mind, and sat down to hi writing. 

hi neighbour were quiet enough. occasion a door open in the 
passag and a pair of boot wa thrown out, or a bagman walk past 
hum to himself, and outside, from time to time, a cart thunder over 
the atroci cobble-stones, or a quick step hurri along the flags. 

anderson finish hi letters, order in whiski and soda, and then went 
to the window and studi the dead wall opposit and the shadow upon it. 

As far as he could remember, number 14 had been occupi by the lawyer, a 
staid man, who said littl at meals, be gener engag in studi 
a small bundl of paper besid hi plate. apparently, however, he wa in 
the habit of give vent to hi anim spirit when alone. whi els 
should he be dancing? the shadow from the next room evid show that 
he was. again and again hi thin form cross the window, hi arm waved, 
and a gaunt leg wa kick up with surpris agility. He seem to be 
barefooted, and the floor must be well laid, for no sound betray hi 
movements. sagförer herr ander jensen, danc at ten o'clock at night 
in a hotel bedroom, seem a fit subject for a histor paint in 
the grand style; and anderson' thoughts, like those of emili in the 
'mysteri of udolpho', began to 'arrang themselv in the follow 
lines': 

when I return to my hotel, 
At ten o'clock p.m., 
the waiter think I am unwell; 
I do not care for them. 
but when i'v lock my chamber door, 
and put my boot outside, 
I danc all night upon the floor. 

and even if my neighbour swore, 
i'd go on danc all the more, 
for i'm acquaint with the law, 
and in despit of all their jaw, 
their protest I deride. 

had not the landlord at thi moment knock at the door, it is probabl 
that quit a long poem might have been laid befor the reader. To judg 
from hi look of surpris when he found himself in the room, herr 
kristensen wa struck, as anderson had been, by someth unusu in it 
aspect. but he made no remark. anderson' photograph interest him 
mightily, and form the text of mani autobiograph discourses. nor is 
it quit clear how the convers could have been divert into the 
desir channel of number 13, had not the lawyer at thi moment begun to 
sing, and to sing in a manner which could leav no doubt in anyone' mind 
that he wa either exceedingli drunk or rave mad. It wa a high, thin 
voic that they heard, and it seem dry, as if from long disuse. Of 
word or tune there wa no question. It went sail up to a surpris 
height, and wa carri down with a despair moan as of a winter wind 
in a hollow chimney, or an organ whose wind fail suddenly. It wa a 
realli horribl sound, and anderson felt that if he had been alon he 
must have fled for refug and societi to some neighbour bagman' room. 

the landlord sat open-mouthed. 

'I don't understand it,' he said at last, wipe hi forehead. 'it is 
dreadful. I have heard it onc before, but I made sure it wa a cat.' 

'i he mad?' said anderson. 

'he must be; and what a sad thing! such a good customer, too, and so 
success in hi business, by what I hear, and a young famili to bring 
up.' 

just then came an impati knock at the door, and the knocker entered, 
without wait to be asked. It wa the lawyer, in _déshabille_ and veri 
rough-haired; and veri angri he looked. 

'I beg pardon, sir,' he said, 'but I should be much oblig if you would 
kindli desist--' 

here he stopped, for it wa evid that neither of the person befor 
him wa respons for the disturbance; and after a moment' lull it 
swell forth again more wildli than before. 

'but what in the name of heaven doe it mean?' broke out the lawyer. 
'where is it? who is it? Am I go out of my mind?' 

'surely, herr jensen, it come from your room next door? isn't there a 
cat or someth stuck in the chimney?' 

thi wa the best that occur to anderson to say and he realiz it 
futil as he spoke; but anyth wa better than to stand and listen to 
that horribl voice, and look at the broad, white face of the landlord, 
all perspir and quiver as he clutch the arm of hi chair. 

'impossible,' said the lawyer, 'impossible. there is no chimney. I came 
here becaus I wa convinc the nois wa go on here. It wa 
certainli in the next room to mine.' 

'wa there no door between your and mine?' said anderson eagerly. 

'no, sir,' said herr jensen, rather sharply. 'at least, not thi 
morning.' 

'ah!' said anderson. 'nor tonight?' 

'I am not sure,' said the lawyer with some hesitation. 

suddenli the cri or sing voic in the next room die away, and the 
singer wa heard seemingli to laugh to himself in a croon manner. the 
three men actual shiver at the sound. then there wa a silence. 

'come,' said the lawyer, 'what have you to say, herr kristensen? what 
doe thi mean?' 

'good heaven!' said kristensen. 'how should I tell! I know no more than 
you, gentlemen. I pray I may never hear such a nois again.' 

'so do i,' said herr jensen, and he ad someth under hi breath. 
anderson thought it sound like the last word of the psalter, '_omni 
spiritu laudet dominum_,' but he could not be sure. 

'but we must do something,' said anderson--'th three of us. shall we go 
and investig in the next room?' 

'but that is herr jensen' room,' wail the landlord. 'it is no use; he 
ha come from there himself.' 

'I am not so sure,' said jensen. 'I think thi gentleman is right: we 
must go and see.' 

the onli weapon of defenc that could be muster on the spot were a 
stick and umbrella. the expedit went out into the passage, not without 
quakings. there wa a deadli quiet outside, but a light shone from under 
the next door. anderson and jensen approach it. the latter turn the 
handle, and gave a sudden vigor push. No use. the door stood fast. 

'herr kristensen,' said jensen, 'will you go and fetch the strongest 
servant you have in the place? We must see thi through.' 

the landlord nodded, and hurri off, glad to be away from the scene of 
action. jensen and anderson remain outsid look at the door. 

'it _is_ number 13, you see,' said the latter. 

'yes; there is your door, and there is mine,' said jensen. 

'mi room ha three window in the daytime,' said anderson with 
difficulty, suppress a nervou laugh. 

'bi george, so ha mine!' said the lawyer, turn and look at 
anderson. hi back wa now to the door. In that moment the door opened, 
and an arm came out and claw at hi shoulder. It wa clad in ragged, 
yellowish linen, and the bare skin, where it could be seen, had long grey 
hair upon it. 

anderson wa just in time to pull jensen out of it reach with a cri of 
disgust and fright, when the door shut again, and a low laugh wa heard. 

jensen had seen nothing, but when anderson hurriedli told him what a risk 
he had run, he fell into a great state of agitation, and suggest that 
they should retir from the enterpris and lock themselv up in one or 
other of their rooms. 

however, while he wa develop thi plan, the landlord and two 
able-bodi men arriv on the scene, all look rather seriou and 
alarmed. jensen met them with a torrent of descript and explanation, 
which did not at all tend to encourag them for the fray. 

the men drop the crowbar they had brought, and said flatli that they 
were not go to risk their throat in that devil' den. the landlord 
wa miser nervou and undecided, consciou that if the danger were 
not face hi hotel wa ruined, and veri loth to face it himself. luckili 
anderson hit upon a way of ralli the demor force. 

'i this,' he said, 'the danish courag I have heard so much of? It isn't 
a german in there, and if it was, we are five to one.' 

the two servant and jensen were stung into action by this, and made a 
dash at the door. 

'stop!' said anderson. 'don't lose your heads. you stay out here with the 
light, landlord, and one of you two men break in the door, and don't go 
in when it give way.' 

the men nodded, and the younger step forward, rais hi crowbar, and 
dealt a tremend blow on the upper panel. the result wa not in the 
least what ani of them anticipated. there wa no crack or rend of 
wood--onli a dull sound, as if the solid wall had been struck. the man 
drop hi tool with a shout, and began rub hi elbow. hi cri drew 
their eye upon him for a moment; then anderson look at the door again. 
It wa gone; the plaster wall of the passag stare him in the face, with 
a consider gash in it where the crowbar had struck it. number 13 had 
pass out of existence. 

for a brief space they stood perfectli still, gaze at the blank wall. 
An earli cock in the yard beneath wa heard to crow; and as anderson 
glanc in the direct of the sound, he saw through the window at the 
end of the long passag that the eastern sky wa pale to the dawn. 

'perhaps,' said the landlord, with hesitation, 'you gentlemen would like 
anoth room for tonight--a double-bed one?' 

neither jensen nor anderson wa avers to the suggestion. they felt 
inclin to hunt in coupl after their late experience. It wa found 
convenient, when each of them went to hi room to collect the articl he 
want for the night, that the other should go with him and hold the 
candle. they notic that both number 12 and number 14 had _three_ 
windows. 

* * * * * 

next morn the same parti reassembl in number 12. the landlord wa 
natur anxiou to avoid engag outsid help, and yet it wa 
imper that the mysteri attach to that part of the hous should be 
clear up. accordingli the two servant had been induc to take upon 
them the function of carpenters. the furnitur wa clear away, and, at 
the cost of a good mani irretriev damag planks, that portion of the 
floor wa taken up which lay nearest to number 14. 

you will natur suppos that a skeleton--say that of mag nicola 
francken--wa discovered. that wa not so. what they did find lie 
between the beam which support the floor wa a small copper box. In 
it wa a neatly-fold vellum document, with about twenti line of 
writing. both anderson and jensen (who prove to be someth of a 
palaeographer) were much excit by thi discovery, which promis to 
afford the key to these extraordinari phenomena. 

* * * * * 

I possess a copi of an astrolog work which I have never read. It has, 
by way of frontispiece, a woodcut by han sebald beham, repres a 
number of sage seat round a table. thi detail may enabl connoisseur 
to identifi the book. I cannot myself recollect it title, and it is not 
at thi moment within reach; but the fly-leav of it are cover with 
writing, and, dure the ten year in which I have own the volume, I 
have not been abl to determin which way up thi write ought to be 
read, much less in what languag it is. not dissimilar wa the posit 
of anderson and jensen after the protract examin to which they 
submit the document in the copper box. 

after two days' contempl of it, jensen, who wa the bolder spirit of 
the two, hazard the conjectur that the languag wa either latin or 
old danish. 

anderson ventur upon no surmises, and wa veri will to surrend the 
box and the parchment to the histor societi of viborg to be place in 
their museum. 

I had the whole stori from him a few month later, as we sat in a wood 
near upsala, after a visit to the librari there, where we--or, rather, 
i--had laugh over the contract by which daniel saltheniu (in later 
life professor of hebrew at königsberg) sold himself to satan. anderson 
wa not realli amused. 

'young idiot!' he said, mean salthenius, who wa onli an undergradu 
when he commit that indiscretion, 'how did he know what compani he wa 
courting?' 

and when I suggest the usual consider he onli grunted. that same 
afternoon he told me what you have read; but he refus to draw ani 
infer from it, and to assent to ani that I drew for him. 




count magnu 

By what mean the paper out of which I have made a connect stori came 
into my hand is the last point which the reader will learn from these 
pages. but it is necessari to prefix to my extract from them a statement 
of the form in which I possess them. 

they consist, then, partli of a seri of collect for a book of 
travels, such a volum as wa a common product of the forti and 
fifties. horac marryat' _journal of a resid in jutland and the 
danish isles_ is a fair specimen of the class to which I allude. these 
book usual treat of some unknown district on the continent. they 
were illustr with woodcut or steel plates. they gave detail of 
hotel accommod and of mean of communication, such as we now expect 
to find in ani well-regul guide-book, and they dealt larg in 
report convers with intellig foreigners, raci innkeepers, and 
garrul peasants. In a word, they were chatty. 

begun with the idea of furnish materi for such a book, my paper as 
they progress assum the charact of a record of one singl person 
experience, and thi record wa continu up to the veri eve, almost, of 
it termination. 

the writer wa a Mr wraxall. for my knowledg of him I have to depend 
entir on the evid hi write afford, and from these I deduc 
that he wa a man past middl age, possess of some privat means, and 
veri much alon in the world. He had, it seems, no settl abod in 
england, but wa a denizen of hotel and boarding-houses. It is probabl 
that he entertain the idea of settl down at some futur time which 
never came; and I think it also like that the pantechnicon fire in the 
earli seventi must have destroy a great deal that would have thrown 
light on hi antecedents, for he refer onc or twice to properti of hi 
that wa wareh at that establishment. 

It is further appar that Mr wraxal had publish a book, and that it 
treat of a holiday he had onc taken in brittany. more than thi I 
cannot say about hi work, becaus a dilig search in bibliograph 
work ha convinc me that it must have appear either anonym or 
under a pseudonym. 

As to hi character, it is not difficult to form some superfici 
opinion. He must have been an intellig and cultiv man. It seem 
that he wa near be a fellow of hi colleg at oxford--brasenose, as I 
judg from the calendar. hi beset fault wa pretti clearli that of 
over-inquisitiveness, possibl a good fault in a traveller, certainli a 
fault for which thi travel paid dearli enough in the end. 

On what prove to be hi last expedition, he wa plot anoth book. 
scandinavia, a region not wide known to englishmen forti year ago, had 
struck him as an interest field. He must have alight on some old 
book of swedish histori or memoirs, and the idea had struck him that 
there wa room for a book descript of travel in sweden, interspers 
with episod from the histori of some of the great swedish families. He 
procur letter of introduction, therefore, to some person of qualiti 
in sweden, and set out thither in the earli summer of 1863. 

Of hi travel in the north there is no need to speak, nor of hi 
resid of some week in stockholm. I need onli mention that some 
_savant_ resid there put him on the track of an import collect 
of famili paper belong to the proprietor of an ancient manor-hous 
in vestergothland, and obtain for him permiss to examin them. 

the manor-house, or _herrgard_, in question is to be call råbäck 
(pronounc someth like roebeck), though that is not it name. It is 
one of the best build of it kind in all the country, and the pictur 
of it in dahlenberg' _suecia antiqua et moderna_, engrav in 1694, 
show it veri much as the tourist may see it today. It wa built soon 
after 1600, and is, roughli speaking, veri much like an english hous of 
that period in respect of material--red-brick with stone facings--and 
style. the man who built it wa a scion of the great hous of De la 
gardie, and hi descend possess it still. De la gardi is the name by 
which I will design them when mention of them becom necessary. 

they receiv Mr wraxal with great kind and courtesy, and press 
him to stay in the hous as long as hi research lasted. but, 
prefer to be independent, and mistrust hi power of convers in 
swedish, he settl himself at the villag inn, which turn out quit 
suffici comfortable, at ani rate dure the summer months. thi 
arrang would entail a short walk daili to and from the manor-hous 
of someth under a mile. the hous itself stood in a park, and wa 
protected--w should say grown up--with larg old timber. near it you 
found the wall garden, and then enter a close wood fring one of 
the small lake with which the whole countri is pitted. then came the 
wall of the demesne, and you climb a steep knoll--a knob of rock 
lightli cover with soil--and on the top of thi stood the church, 
fenc in with tall dark trees. It wa a curiou build to english 
eyes. the nave and aisl were low, and fill with pew and galleries. 
In the western galleri stood the handsom old organ, gaili painted, and 
with silver pipes. the ceil wa flat, and had been adorn by a 
seventeenth-centuri artist with a strang and hideou 'last judgement', 
full of lurid flames, fall cities, burn ships, cri souls, and 
brown and smile demons. handsom brass corona hung from the roof; the 
pulpit wa like a doll's-hous cover with littl paint wooden cherub 
and saints; a stand with three hour-glass wa hing to the preacher' 
desk. such sight as these may be seen in mani a church in sweden now, 
but what distinguish thi one wa an addit to the origin building. 
At the eastern end of the north aisl the builder of the manor-hous had 
erect a mausoleum for himself and hi family. It wa a largish 
eight-sid building, light by a seri of oval windows, and it had a 
dome roof, top by a kind of pumpkin-shap object rise into a 
spire, a form in which swedish architect greatli delighted. the roof wa 
of copper externally, and wa paint black, while the walls, in common 
with those of the church, were staringli white. To thi mausoleum there 
wa no access from the church. It had a portal and step of it own on 
the northern side. 

past the churchyard the path to the villag goes, and not more than three 
or four minut bring you to the inn door. 

On the first day of hi stay at råbäck Mr wraxal found the church door 
open, and made these note of the interior which I have epitomized. into 
the mausoleum, however, he could not make hi way. He could by look 
through the keyhol just descri that there were fine marbl effigi and 
sarcophagi of copper, and a wealth of armori ornament, which made him 
veri anxiou to spend some time in investigation. 

the paper he had come to examin at the manor-hous prove to be of just 
the kind he want for hi book. there were famili correspondence, 
journals, and account-book of the earliest owner of the estate, veri 
care kept and clearli written, full of amus and picturesqu 
detail. the first De la gardi appear in them as a strong and capabl 
man. shortli after the build of the mansion there had been a period of 
distress in the district, and the peasant had risen and attack sever 
châteaux and done some damage. the owner of råbäck took a lead part in 
supress trouble, and there wa refer to execut of ring-lead 
and sever punish inflict with no spare hand. 

the portrait of thi magnu de la gardi wa one of the best in the 
house, and Mr wraxal studi it with no littl interest after hi day' 
work. He give no detail descript of it, but I gather that the face 
impress him rather by it power than by it beauti or goodness; in 
fact, he write that count magnu wa an almost phenomen ugli man. 

On thi day Mr wraxal took hi supper with the family, and walk back 
in the late but still bright evening. 

'I must remember,' he writes, 'to ask the sexton if he can let me into 
the mausoleum at the church. He evid ha access to it himself, for I 
saw him tonight stand on the steps, and, as I thought, lock or 
unlock the door.' 

I find that earli on the follow day Mr wraxal had some convers 
with hi landlord. hi set it down at such length as he doe 
surpris me at first; but I soon realiz that the paper I wa read 
were, at least in their beginning, the materi for the book he wa 
meditating, and that it wa to have been one of those quasi-journalist 
product which admit of the introduct of an admixtur of 
convers matter. 

hi object, he says, wa to find out whether ani tradit of count 
magnu de la gardi linger on in the scene of that gentleman' 
activity, and whether the popular estim of him were favour or not. 
He found that the count wa decidedli not a favourite. If hi tenant 
came late to their work on the day which they owe to him as lord of the 
manor, they were set on the wooden horse, or flog and brand in the 
manor-hous yard. one or two case there were of men who had occupi 
land which encroach on the lord' domain, and whose hous had been 
mysteri burnt on a winter' night, with the whole famili inside. but 
what seem to dwell on the innkeeper' mind most--for he return to the 
subject more than once--wa that the count had been on the black 
pilgrimage, and had brought someth or someon back with him. 

you will natur inquire, as Mr wraxal did, what the black pilgrimag 
may have been. but your curios on the point must remain unsatisfi 
for the time being, just as hi did. the landlord wa evid unwil 
to give a full answer, or inde ani answer, on the point, and, be 
call out for a moment, trot out with obviou alacrity, onli put 
hi head in at the door a few minut afterward to say that he wa 
call away to skara, and should not be back till evening. 

So Mr wraxal had to go unsatisfi to hi day' work at the manor-house. 
the paper on which he wa just then engag soon put hi thought into 
anoth channel, for he had to occupi himself with glanc over the 
correspond between sophia albertina in stockholm and her marri 
cousin ulrica leonora at råbäck in the year 1705-10. the letter were of 
except interest from the light they threw upon the cultur of that 
period in sweden, as anyon can testifi who ha read the full edit of 
them in the public of the swedish histor manuscript 
commission. 

In the afternoon he had done with these, and after return the box in 
which they were kept to their place on the shelf, he proceeded, veri 
naturally, to take down some of the volum nearest to them, in order to 
determin which of them had best be hi princip subject of 
investig next day. the shelf he had hit upon wa occupi mostli by 
a collect of account-book in the write of the first count magnus. 
but one among them wa not an account-book, but a book of alchem and 
other tract in anoth sixteenth-centuri hand. not be veri familiar 
with alchem literature, Mr wraxal spend much space which he might 
have spare in set out the name and begin of the variou 
treatises: the book of the phoenix, book of the thirti words, book of the 
toad, book of miriam, turba philosophorum, and so forth; and then he 
announc with a good deal of circumst hi delight at finding, on a 
leaf origin left blank near the middl of the book, some write of 
count magnu himself head 'liber nigra peregrinationis'. It is true 
that onli a few line were written, but there wa quit enough to show 
that the landlord had that morn been refer to a belief at least as 
old as the time of count magnus, and probabl share by him. thi is the 
english of what wa written: 

'if ani man desir to obtain a long life, if he would obtain a faith 
messeng and see the blood of hi enemies, it is necessari that he 
should first go into the citi of chorazin, and there salut the 
prince....' here there wa an erasur of one word, not veri thoroughli 
done, so that Mr wraxal felt pretti sure that he wa right in read it 
as _aeris_ ('of the air'). but there wa no more of the text copied, onli 
a line in latin: _quaer reliqua huju materiei inter secretiora_. (see 
the rest of thi matter among the more privat things.) 

It could not be deni that thi threw a rather lurid light upon the 
tast and belief of the count; but to Mr wraxall, separ from him by 
nearli three centuries, the thought that he might have ad to hi 
gener forc alchemy, and to alchemi someth like magic, onli 
made him a more picturesqu figure, and when, after a rather prolong 
contempl of hi pictur in the hall, Mr wraxal set out on hi 
homeward way, hi mind wa full of the thought of count magnus. He had no 
eye for hi surroundings, no percept of the even scent of the 
wood or the even light on the lake; and when all of a sudden he 
pull up short, he wa astonish to find himself alreadi at the gate of 
the churchyard, and within a few minut of hi dinner. hi eye fell on 
the mausoleum. 

'ah,' he said, 'count magnus, there you are. I should dearli like to see 
you.' 

'like mani solitari men,' he writes, 'I have a habit of talk to myself 
aloud; and, unlik some of the greek and latin particles, I do not expect 
an answer. certainly, and perhap fortun in thi case, there wa 
neither voic nor ani that regarded: onli the woman who, I suppose, wa 
clean up the church, drop some metal object on the floor, whose 
clang startl me. count magnus, I think, sleep sound enough.' 

that same even the landlord of the inn, who had heard Mr wraxal say 
that he wish to see the clerk or deacon (a he would be call in 
sweden) of the parish, introduc him to that offici in the inn 
parlour. A visit to the De la gardi tomb-hous wa soon arrang for the 
next day, and a littl gener convers ensued. 

Mr wraxall, rememb that one function of scandinavian deacon is to 
teach candid for confirmation, thought he would refresh hi own 
memori on a biblic point. 

'can you tell me,' he said, 'anyth about chorazin?' 

the deacon seem startled, but readili remind him how that villag had 
onc been denounced. 

'to be sure,' said Mr wraxall; 'it is, I suppose, quit a ruin now?' 

'so I expect,' repli the deacon. 'I have heard some of our old priest 
say that antichrist is to be born there; and there are tales--' 

'ah! what tale are those?' Mr wraxal put in. 

'tales, I wa go to say, which I have forgotten,' said the deacon; and 
soon after that he said good night. 

the landlord wa now alone, and at Mr wraxall' mercy; and that inquir 
wa not inclin to spare him. 

'herr nielsen,' he said, 'I have found out someth about the black 
pilgrimage. you may as well tell me what you know. what did the count 
bring back with him?' 

swede are habitu slow, perhaps, in answering, or perhap the 
landlord wa an exception. I am not sure; but Mr wraxal note that the 
landlord spent at least one minut in look at him befor he said 
anyth at all. then he came close up to hi guest, and with a good deal 
of effort he spoke: 

'mr wraxall, I can tell you thi one littl tale, and no more--not ani 
more. you must not ask anyth when I have done. In my grandfather' 
time--that is, ninety-two year ago--ther were two men who said: "the 
count is dead; we do not care for him. We will go tonight and have a free 
hunt in hi wood"--th long wood on the hill that you have seen behind 
råbäck. well, those that heard them say this, they said: "no, do not go; 
we are sure you will meet with person walk who should not be walking. 
they should be resting, not walking." these men laughed. there were no 
forestmen to keep the wood, becaus no one wish to live there. the 
famili were not here at the house. these men could do what they wished. 

'veri well, they go to the wood that night. My grandfath wa sit 
here in thi room. It wa the summer, and a light night. with the window 
open, he could see out to the wood, and hear. 

'so he sat there, and two or three men with him, and they listened. At 
first they hear noth at all; then they hear someone--y know how far 
away it is--they hear someon scream, just as if the most insid part of 
hi soul wa twist out of him. all of them in the room caught hold of 
each other, and they sat so for three-quart of an hour. then they hear 
someon else, onli about three hundr ell off. they hear him laugh out 
loud: it wa not one of those two men that laughed, and, indeed, they 
have all of them said that it wa not ani man at all. after that they 
hear a great door shut. 

'then, when it wa just light with the sun, they all went to the priest. 
they said to him: 

'"father, put on your gown and your ruff, and come to buri these men, 
ander bjornsen and han thorbjorn." 

'you understand that they were sure these men were dead. So they went to 
the wood--mi grandfath never forgot this. He said they were all like so 
mani dead men themselves. the priest, too, he wa in a white fear. He 
said when they came to him: 

'"i heard one cri in the night, and I heard one laugh afterwards. If I 
cannot forget that, I shall not be abl to sleep again." 

'so they went to the wood, and they found these men on the edg of the 
wood. han thorbjorn wa stand with hi back against a tree, and all 
the time he wa push with hi hands--push someth away from him 
which wa not there. So he wa not dead. and they led him away, and took 
him to the hous at nykjoping, and he die befor the winter; but he went 
on push with hi hands. also ander bjornsen wa there; but he wa 
dead. and I tell you thi about ander bjornsen, that he wa onc a 
beauti man, but now hi face wa not there, becaus the flesh of it 
wa suck away off the bones. you understand that? My grandfath did 
not forget that. and they laid him on the bier which they brought, and 
they put a cloth over hi head, and the priest walk before; and they 
began to sing the psalm for the dead as well as they could. so, as they 
were sing the end of the first verse, one fell down, who wa carri 
the head of the bier, and the other look back, and they saw that the 
cloth had fallen off, and the eye of ander bjornsen were look up, 
becaus there wa noth to close over them. and thi they could not 
bear. therefor the priest laid the cloth upon him, and sent for a spade, 
and they buri him in that place.' 

the next day Mr wraxal record that the deacon call for him soon after 
hi breakfast, and took him to the church and mausoleum. He notic that 
the key of the latter wa hung on a nail just by the pulpit, and it 
occur to him that, as the church door seem to be left unlock as a 
rule, it would not be difficult for him to pay a second and more privat 
visit to the monument if there prove to be more of interest among them 
than could be digest at first. the building, when he enter it, he 
found not unimposing. the monuments, mostli larg erect of the 
seventeenth and eighteenth centuries, were dignifi if luxuriant, and 
the epitaph and heraldri were copious. the central space of the dome 
room wa occupi by three copper sarcophagi, cover with 
finely-engrav ornament. two of them had, as is commonli the case in 
denmark and sweden, a larg metal crucifix on the lid. the third, that of 
count magnus, as it appeared, had, instead of that, a full-length effigi 
engrav upon it, and round the edg were sever band of similar 
ornament repres variou scenes. one wa a battle, with cannon 
belch out smoke, and wall towns, and troop of pikemen. anoth 
show an execution. In a third, among trees, wa a man run at full 
speed, with fli hair and outstretch hands. after him follow a 
strang form; it would be hard to say whether the artist had intend it 
for a man, and wa unabl to give the requisit similitude, or whether it 
wa intent made as monstrou as it looked. In view of the skill 
with which the rest of the draw wa done, Mr wraxal felt inclin to 
adopt the latter idea. the figur wa unduli short, and wa for the most 
part muffl in a hood garment which swept the ground. the onli part of 
the form which project from that shelter wa not shape like ani hand 
or arm. Mr wraxal compar it to the tentacl of a devil-fish, and 
continues: 'on see this, I said to myself, "this, then, which is 
evid an allegor represent of some kind--a fiend pursu a 
hunt soul--may be the origin of the stori of count magnu and hi 
mysteri companion. let us see how the huntsman is pictured: doubtless 
it will be a demon blow hi horn.'" but, as it turn out, there wa 
no such sensat figure, onli the semblanc of a cloak man on a 
hillock, who stood lean on a stick, and watch the hunt with an 
interest which the engrav had tri to express in hi attitude. 

Mr wraxal note the finely-work and massiv steel padlocks--thre in 
number--which secur the sarcophagus. one of them, he saw, wa detached, 
and lay on the pavement. and then, unwil to delay the deacon longer 
or to wast hi own working-time, he made hi way onward to the 
manor-house. 

'it is curious,' he notes, 'how, on retrac a familiar path, one' 
thought engross one to the absolut exclus of surround objects. 
tonight, for the second time, I had entir fail to notic where I wa 
go (I had plan a privat visit to the tomb-hous to copi the 
epitaphs), when I suddenly, as it were, awok to consciousness, and found 
myself (a before) turn in at the churchyard gate, and, I believe, 
sing or chant some such word as, "are you awake, count magnus? are 
you asleep, count magnus?" and then someth more which I have fail to 
recollect. It seem to me that I must have been behav in thi 
nonsens way for some time.' 

He found the key of the mausoleum where he had expect to find it, and 
copi the greater part of what he wanted; in fact, he stay until the 
light began to fail him. 

'I must have been wrong,' he writes, 'in say that one of the padlock 
of my count sarcophagu wa unfastened; I see tonight that two are 
loose. I pick both up, and laid them care on the window-ledge, 
after tri unsuccess to close them. the remain one is still 
firm, and, though I take it to be a spring lock, I cannot guess how it is 
opened. had I succeed in undo it, I am almost afraid I should have 
taken the liberti of open the sarcophagus. It is strange, the interest 
I feel in the person of this, I fear, somewhat feroci and grim 
old noble.' 

the day follow was, as it turn out, the last of Mr wraxall' stay at 
råbäck. He receiv letter connect with certain invest which made 
it desir that he should return to england; hi work among the paper 
wa practic done, and travel wa slow. He decided, therefore, to 
make hi farewells, put some finish touch to hi notes, and be off. 

these finish touch and farewells, as it turn out, took more time 
than he had expected. the hospit famili insist on hi stay to 
dine with them--they dine at three--and it wa verg on half past six 
befor he wa outsid the iron gate of råbäck. He dwelt on everi step of 
hi walk by the lake, determin to satur himself, now that he trod it 
for the last time, in the sentiment of the place and hour. and when he 
reach the summit of the churchyard knoll, he linger for mani minutes, 
gaze at the limitless prospect of wood near and distant, all dark 
beneath a sky of liquid green. when at last he turn to go, the thought 
struck him that sure he must bid farewel to count magnu as well as 
the rest of the De la gardies. the church wa but twenti yard away, and 
he knew where the key of the mausoleum hung. It wa not long befor he 
wa stand over the great copper coffin, and, as usual, talk to 
himself aloud: 'you may have been a bit of a rascal in your time, 
magnus,' he wa saying, 'but for all that I should like to see you, or, 
rather--' 

'just at that instant,' he says, 'I felt a blow on my foot. hastili 
enough I drew it back, and someth fell on the pavement with a clash. 
It wa the third, the last of the three padlock which had fasten the 
sarcophagus. I stoop to pick it up, and--heaven is my wit that I am 
write onli the bare truth--befor I had rais myself there wa a sound 
of metal hing creaking, and I distinctli saw the lid shift upwards. 
I may have behav like a coward, but I could not for my life stay for 
one moment. I wa outsid that dread build in less time than I can 
write--almost as quickli as I could have said--th words; and what 
frighten me yet more, I could not turn the key in the lock. As I sit 
here in my room note these facts, I ask myself (it wa not twenti 
minut ago) whether that nois of creak metal continued, and I cannot 
tell whether it did or not. I onli know that there wa someth more 
than I have written that alarm me, but whether it wa sound or sight I 
am not abl to remember. what is thi that I have done?' 

* * * * * 

poor Mr wraxall! He set out on hi journey to england on the next day, as 
he had planned, and he reach england in safety; and yet, as I gather 
from hi chang hand and inconsequ jottings, a broken man. one of the 
sever small note-book that have come to me with hi paper gives, not 
a key to, but a kind of inkl of, hi experiences. much of hi journey 
wa made by canal-boat, and I find not less than six pain attempt to 
enumer and describ hi fellow-passengers. the entri are of thi 
kind: 

24. pastor of villag in skane. usual black coat and soft black hat. 

25. commerci travel from stockholm go to trollhättan. black 
cloak, brown hat. 

26. man in long black cloak, broad-leaf hat, veri old-fashioned. 

thi entri is line out, and a note added: 'perhap ident with no. 
13. have not yet seen hi face.' On refer to no. 13, I find that he 
is a roman priest in a cassock. 

the net result of the reckon is alway the same. twenty-eight peopl 
appear in the enumeration, one be alway a man in a long black cloak 
and broad hat, and anoth a 'short figur in dark cloak and hood'. On 
the other hand, it is alway note that onli twenty-six passeng appear 
at meals, and that the man in the cloak is perhap absent, and the short 
figur is certainli absent. 

On reach england, it appear that Mr wraxal land at harwich, and 
that he resolv at onc to put himself out of the reach of some person 
or person whom he never specifies, but whom he had evid come to 
regard as hi pursuers. accordingli he took a vehicle--it wa a close 
fly--not trust the railway and drove across countri to the villag of 
belchamp St paul. It wa about nine o'clock on a moonlight august night 
when he near the place. He wa sit forward, and look out of the 
window at the field and thickets--ther wa littl els to be 
seen--rac past him. suddenli he came to a cross-road. At the corner 
two figur were stand motionless; both were in dark cloaks; the 
taller one wore a hat, the shorter a hood. He had no time to see their 
faces, nor did they make ani motion that he could discern. yet the hors 
shi violent and broke into a gallop, and Mr wraxal sank back into 
hi seat in someth like desperation. He had seen them before. 

arriv at belchamp St paul, he wa fortun enough to find a decent 
furnish lodging, and for the next twenty-four hour he lived, 
compar speaking, in peace. hi last note were written on thi 
day. they are too disjoint and ejaculatori to be given here in full, 
but the substanc of them is clear enough. He is expect a visit from 
hi pursuers--how or when he know not--and hi constant cri is 'what ha 
he done?' and 'i there no hope?' doctors, he knows, would call him mad, 
policemen would laugh at him. the parson is away. what can he do but lock 
hi door and cri to god? 

peopl still rememb last year at belchamp St paul how a strang 
gentleman came one even in august year back; and how the next morn 
but one he wa found dead, and there wa an inquest; and the juri that 
view the bodi fainted, seven of 'em did, and none of 'em wouldn't speak 
to what they see, and the verdict wa visit of god; and how the 
peopl as kep' the 'ous move out that same week, and went away from 
that part. but they do not, I think, know that ani glimmer of light ha 
ever been thrown, or could be thrown, on the mystery. It so happen that 
last year the littl hous came into my hand as part of a legacy. It had 
stood empti sinc 1863, and there seem no prospect of let it; so I 
had it pull down, and the paper of which I have given you an abstract 
were found in a forgotten cupboard under the window in the best bedroom. 




'oh, whistle, and i'll come TO you, MY lad' 

'I suppos you will be get away pretti soon, now full term is over, 
professor,' said a person not in the stori to the professor of 
ontography, soon after they had sat down next to each other at a feast in 
the hospit hall of St james' college. 

the professor wa young, neat, and precis in speech. 

'yes,' he said; 'mi friend have been make me take up golf thi term, 
and I mean to go to the east coast--in point of fact to burnstow--(i dare 
say you know it) for a week or ten days, to improv my game. I hope to 
get off tomorrow.' 

'oh, parkins,' said hi neighbour on the other side, 'if you are go to 
burnstow, I wish you would look at the site of the templars' preceptory, 
and let me know if you think it would be ani good to have a dig there in 
the summer.' 

It was, as you might suppose, a person of antiquarian pursuit who said 
this, but, sinc he mere appear in thi prologue, there is no need to 
give hi entitlements. 

'certainly,' said parkins, the professor: 'if you will describ to me 
whereabout the site is, I will do my best to give you an idea of the lie 
of the land when I get back; or I could write to you about it, if you 
would tell me where you are like to be.' 

'don't troubl to do that, thanks. it' onli that i'm think of take 
my famili in that direct in the long, and it occur to me that, as 
veri few of the english preceptori have ever been properli planned, I 
might have an opportun of do someth use on off-days.' 

the professor rather snif at the idea that plan out a preceptori 
could be describ as useful. hi neighbour continued: 

'the site--i doubt if there is anyth show abov ground--must be 
down quit close to the beach now. the sea ha encroach tremendously, 
as you know, all along that bit of coast. I should think, from the map, 
that it must be about three-quart of a mile from the globe inn, at the 
north end of the town. where are you go to stay?' 

'well, _at_ the globe inn, as a matter of fact,' said parkins; 'I have 
engag a room there. I couldn't get in anywher else; most of the 
lodging-hous are shut up in winter, it seems; and, as it is, they tell 
me that the onli room of ani size I can have is realli a double-bed 
one, and that they haven't a corner in which to store the other bed, and 
so on. but I must have a fairli larg room, for I am take some book 
down, and mean to do a bit of work; and though I don't quit fanci have 
an empti bed--not to speak of two--in what I may call for the time be 
my study, I suppos I can manag to rough it for the short time I shall 
be there.' 

'do you call have an extra bed in your room rough it, parkins?' said 
a bluff person opposite. 'look here, I shall come down and occupi it for 
a bit; it'll be compani for you.' 

the professor quivered, but manag to laugh in a courteou manner. 

'bi all means, rogers; there' noth I should like better. but i'm 
afraid you would find it rather dull; you don't play golf, do you?' 

'no, thank heaven!' said rude Mr rogers. 

'well, you see, when i'm not write I shall most like be out on the 
links, and that, as I say, would be rather dull for you, i'm afraid.' 

'oh, I don't know! there' certain to be somebodi I know in the place; 
but, of course, if you don't want me, speak the word, parkins; I shan't 
be offended. truth, as you alway tell us, is never offensive.' 

parkin was, indeed, scrupul polit and strictli truthful. It is to 
be fear that Mr roger sometim practis upon hi knowledg of these 
characteristics. In parkins' breast there wa a conflict now raging, 
which for a moment or two did not allow him to answer. that interv 
be over, he said: 

'well, if you want the exact truth, rogers, I wa consid whether the 
room I speak of would realli be larg enough to accommod us both 
comfortably; and also whether (mind, I shouldn't have said thi if you 
hadn't press me) you would not constitut someth in the natur of a 
hindranc to my work.' 

roger laugh loudly. 

'well done, parkins!' he said. 'it' all right. I promis not to 
interrupt your work; don't you disturb yourself about that. no, I won't 
come if you don't want me; but I thought I should do so nice to keep 
the ghost off.' here he might have been seen to wink and to nudg hi 
next neighbour. parkin might also have been seen to becom pink. 'I beg 
pardon, parkins,' roger continued; 'I oughtn't to have said that. I 
forgot you didn't like leviti on these topics.' 

'well,' parkin said, 'a you have mention the matter, I freeli own 
that I do _not_ like careless talk about what you call ghosts. A man in 
my position,' he went on, rais hi voic a little, 'cannot, I find, be 
too care about appear to sanction the current belief on such 
subjects. As you know, rogers, or as you ought to know; for I think I 
have never conceal my views--' 

'no, you certainli have not, old man,' put in roger _sotto voce._ 

'--i hold that ani semblance, ani appear of concess to the view 
that such thing might exist is equival to a renunci of all that 
I hold most sacred. but i'm afraid I have not succeed in secur your 
attention.' 

'your _undivided_ attention, wa what Dr blimber actual _said_,'[4] 
roger interrupted, with everi appear of an earnest desir for 
accuracy. 'but I beg your pardon, parkins: i'm stop you.' 

[4] Mr roger wa wrong, _vide dombey and son_, chapter xii. 

'no, not at all,' said parkins. 'I don't rememb blimber; perhap he wa 
befor my time. but I needn't go on. i'm sure you know what I mean.' 

'yes, yes,' said rogers, rather hastily--'just so. we'll go into it fulli 
at burnstow, or somewhere.' 

In repeat the abov dialogu I have tri to give the impress which 
it made on me, that parkin wa someth of an old woman--rath 
henlike, perhaps, in hi littl ways; total destitute, alas! of the 
sens of humour, but at the same time dauntless and sincer in hi 
convictions, and a man deserv of the greatest respect. whether or not 
the reader ha gather so much, that wa the charact which parkin 
had. 

* * * * * 

On the follow day parkin did, as he had hoped, succeed in get 
away from hi college, and in arriv at burnstow. He wa made welcom 
at the globe inn, wa safe instal in the larg double-bed room of 
which we have heard, and wa abl befor retir to rest to arrang hi 
materi for work in apple-pi order upon a commodi tabl which 
occupi the outer end of the room, and wa surround on three side by 
window look out seaward; that is to say, the central window look 
straight out to sea, and those on the left and right command prospect 
along the shore to the north and south respectively. On the south you saw 
the villag of burnstow. On the north no hous were to be seen, but onli 
the beach and the low cliff back it. immedi in front wa a 
strip--not considerable--of rough grass, dot with old anchors, 
capstans, and so forth; then a broad path; then the beach. whatev may 
have been the origin distanc between the globe inn and the sea, not 
more than sixti yard now separ them. 

the rest of the popul of the inn was, of course, a golf one, and 
includ few element that call for a special description. the most 
conspicu figur was, perhaps, that of an _ancien militaire_, secretari 
of a london club, and possess of a voic of incred strength, and of 
view of a pronouncedli protest type. these were apt to find utter 
after hi attend upon the ministr of the vicar, an estim 
man with inclin toward a picturesqu ritual, which he gallantli 
kept down as far as he could out of defer to east anglian tradition. 

professor parkins, one of whose princip characterist wa pluck, 
spent the greater part of the day follow hi arriv at burnstow in 
what he had call improv hi game, in compani with thi colonel 
wilson: and dure the afternoon--wheth the process of improv were 
to blame or not, I am not sure--th colonel' demeanour assum a 
colour so lurid that even parkin jib at the thought of walk 
home with him from the links. He determined, after a short and furtiv 
look at that bristl moustach and those incarnadin features, that it 
would be wiser to allow the influenc of tea and tobacco to do what they 
could with the colonel befor the dinner-hour should render a meet 
inevitable. 

'I might walk home tonight along the beach,' he reflected--'yes, and take 
a look--ther will be light enough for that--at the ruin of which disney 
wa talking. I don't exactli know where they are, by the way; but I 
expect I can hardli help stumbl on them.' 

thi he accomplished, I may say, in the most liter sense, for in 
pick hi way from the link to the shingl beach hi foot caught, 
partli in a gorse-root and partli in a biggish stone, and over he went. 
when he got up and survey hi surroundings, he found himself in a patch 
of somewhat broken ground cover with small depress and mounds. 
these latter, when he came to examin them, prove to be simpli mass of 
flint embed in mortar and grown over with turf. He must, he quit 
rightli concluded, be on the site of the preceptori he had promis to 
look at. It seem not unlik to reward the spade of the explorer; 
enough of the foundat wa probabl left at no great depth to throw a 
good deal of light on the gener plan. He rememb vagu that the 
templars, to whom thi site had belonged, were in the habit of build 
round churches, and he thought a particular seri of the hump or mound 
near him did appear to be arrang in someth of a circular form. few 
peopl can resist the temptat to tri a littl amateur research in a 
depart quit outsid their own, if onli for the satisfact of 
show how success they would have been had they onli taken it up 
seriously. our professor, however, if he felt someth of thi mean 
desire, wa also truli anxiou to oblig Mr disney. So he pace with care 
the circular area he had noticed, and wrote down it rough dimens in 
hi pocket-book. then he proceed to examin an oblong emin which 
lay east of the centr of the circle, and seem to hi think like 
to be the base of a platform or altar. At one end of it, the northern, a 
patch of the turf wa gone--remov by some boy or other creatur _fera 
naturae_. It might, he thought, be as well to probe the soil here for 
evid of masonry, and he took out hi knife and began scrape away 
the earth. and now follow anoth littl discovery: a portion of soil 
fell inward as he scraped, and disclos a small cavity. He light one 
match after anoth to help him to see of what natur the hole was, but 
the wind wa too strong for them all. By tap and scratch the side 
with hi knife, however, he wa abl to make out that it must be an 
artifici hole in masonry. It wa rectangular, and the sides, top, and 
bottom, if not actual plastered, were smooth and regular. Of cours it 
wa empty. no! As he withdrew the knife he heard a metal clink, and 
when he introduc hi hand it met with a cylindr object lie on the 
floor of the hole. natur enough, he pick it up, and when he brought 
it into the light, now fast fading, he could see that it, too, wa of 
man' making--a metal tube about four inch long, and evid of some 
consider age. 

By the time parkin had made sure that there wa noth els in thi odd 
receptacle, it wa too late and too dark for him to think of undertak 
ani further search. what he had done had prove so unexpectedli 
interest that he determin to sacrific a littl more of the daylight 
on the morrow to archaeology. the object which he now had safe in hi 
pocket wa bound to be of some slight valu at least, he felt sure. 

bleak and solemn wa the view on which he took a last look befor 
start homeward. A faint yellow light in the west show the links, on 
which a few figur move toward the club-hous were still visible, the 
squat martello tower, the light of aldsey village, the pale ribbon of 
sand intersect at interv by black wooden groynings, the dim and 
murmur sea. the wind wa bitter from the north, but wa at hi back 
when he set out for the globe. He quickli rattl and clash through the 
shingl and gain the sand, upon which, but for the groyn which had 
to be got over everi few yards, the go wa both good and quiet. one 
last look behind, to measur the distanc he had made sinc leav the 
ruin templars' church, show him a prospect of compani on hi walk, in 
the shape of a rather indistinct personage, who seem to be make great 
effort to catch up with him, but made little, if any, progress. I mean 
that there wa an appear of run about hi movements, but that the 
distanc between him and parkin did not seem materi to lessen. so, 
at least, parkin thought, and decid that he almost certainli did not 
know him, and that it would be absurd to wait until he came up. for all 
that, company, he began to think, would realli be veri welcom on that 
lone shore, if onli you could choos your companion. In hi 
unenlighten day he had read of meet in such place which even now 
would hardli bear think of. He went on think of them, however, 
until he reach home, and particularli of one which catch most 
people' fanci at some time of their childhood. 'now I saw in my dream 
that christian had gone but a veri littl way when he saw a foul fiend 
come over the field to meet him.' 'what should I do now,' he thought, 
'if I look back and caught sight of a black figur sharpli defin 
against the yellow sky, and saw that it had horn and wings? I wonder 
whether I should stand or run for it. luckily, the gentleman behind is 
not of that kind, and he seem to be about as far off now as when I saw 
him first. well, at thi rate, he won't get hi dinner as soon as I 
shall; and, dear me! it' within a quarter of an hour of the time now. I 
must run!' 

parkin had, in fact, veri littl time for dressing. when he met the 
colonel at dinner, peace--or as much of her as that gentleman could 
manage--reign onc more in the militari bosom; nor wa she put to 
flight in the hour of bridg that follow dinner, for parkin wa a 
more than respect player. when, therefore, he retir toward twelv 
o'clock, he felt that he had spent hi even in quit a satisfactori 
way, and that, even for so long as a fortnight or three weeks, life at 
the globe would be support under similar conditions--'especially,' 
thought he, 'if I go on improv my game.' 

As he went along the passag he met the boot of the globe, who stop 
and said: 

'beg your pardon, sir, but as I wa abrush your coat just now there 
wa someth fell out of the pocket. I put it on your chest of drawers, 
sir, in your room, sir--a piec of a pipe or somethink of that, sir. 
thank you, sir. you'll find it on your chest of drawers, sir--yes, sir. 
good night, sir.' 

the speech serv to remind parkin of hi littl discoveri of that 
afternoon. It wa with some consider curios that he turn it over 
by the light of hi candles. It wa of bronze, he now saw, and wa shape 
veri much after the manner of the modern dog-whistle; in fact it 
was--yes, certainli it was--actu no more nor less than a whistle. He 
put it to hi lips, but it wa quit full of a fine, caked-up sand or 
earth, which would not yield to knocking, but must be loosen with a 
knife. tidi as ever in hi habits, parkin clear out the earth on to a 
piec of paper, and took the latter to the window to empti it out. the 
night wa clear and bright, as he saw when he had open the casement, 
and he stop for an instant to look at the sea and note a belat 
wander station on the shore in front of the inn. then he shut the 
window, a littl surpris at the late hour peopl kept at burnstow, and 
took hi whistl to the light again. why, sure there were mark on it, 
and not mere marks, but letters! A veri littl rub render the 
deeply-cut inscript quit legible, but the professor had to confess, 
after some earnest thought, that the mean of it wa as obscur to him 
as the write on the wall to belshazzar. there were legend both on the 
front and on the back of the whistle. the one read thus: 

fla 
fur bi 
fle 

the other: 

qui est ist qui venit 

'I ought to be abl to make it out,' he thought; 'but I suppos I am a 
littl rusti in my latin. when I come to think of it, I don't believ I 
even know the word for a whistle. the long one doe seem simpl enough. 
It ought to mean: "who is thi who is coming?" well, the best way to find 
out is evid to whistl for him.' 

He blew tent and stop suddenly, startl and yet pleas at the 
note he had elicited. It had a qualiti of infinit distanc in it, and, 
soft as it was, he somehow felt it must be audibl for mile round. It 
wa a sound, too, that seem to have the power (which mani scent 
possess) of form pictur in the brain. He saw quit clearli for a 
moment a vision of a wide, dark expans at night, with a fresh wind 
blowing, and in the midst a lone figure--how employed, he could not 
tell. perhap he would have seen more had not the pictur been broken by 
the sudden surg of a gust of wind against hi casement, so sudden that 
it made him look up, just in time to see the white glint of a seabird' 
wing somewher outsid the dark panes. 

the sound of the whistl had so fascin him that he could not help 
tri it onc more, thi time more boldly. the note wa little, if at 
all, louder than before, and repetit broke the illusion--no pictur 
followed, as he had half hope it might. "but what is this? goodness! 
what forc the wind can get up in a few minutes! what a tremend gust! 
there! I knew that window-fasten wa no use! ah! I thought so--both 
candl out. It is enough to tear the room to pieces." 

the first thing wa to get the window shut. while you might count twenti 
parkin wa struggl with the small casement, and felt almost as if he 
were push back a sturdi burglar, so strong wa the pressure. It 
slacken all at once, and the window bang to and latch itself. now 
to relight the candl and see what damage, if any, had been done. no, 
noth seem amiss; no glass even wa broken in the casement. but the 
nois had evid rous at least one member of the household: the 
colonel wa to be heard stump in hi stocking feet on the floor 
above, and growling. quickli as it had risen, the wind did not fall at 
once. On it went, moan and rush past the house, at time rise to 
a cri so desol that, as parkin disinterestedli said, it might have 
made fanci peopl feel quit uncomfortable; even the unimaginative, he 
thought after a quarter of an hour, might be happier without it. 

whether it wa the wind, or the excit of golf, or of the research 
in the preceptori that kept parkin awake, he wa not sure. awak he 
remained, in ani case, long enough to fanci (a I am afraid I often do 
myself under such conditions) that he wa the victim of all manner of 
fatal disorders: he would lie count the beat of hi heart, convinc 
that it wa go to stop work everi moment, and would entertain grave 
suspicion of hi lungs, brain, liver, etc.--suspicion which he wa sure 
would be dispel by the return of daylight, but which until then 
refus to be put aside. He found a littl vicari comfort in the idea 
that someon els wa in the same boat. A near neighbour (in the dark 
it wa not easi to tell hi direction) wa toss and rustl in hi 
bed, too. 

the next stage wa that parkin shut hi eye and determin to give 
sleep everi chance. here again over-excit assert itself in anoth 
form--that of make pictures. _experto crede_, pictur do come to the 
close eye of one tri to sleep, and are often so littl to hi tast 
that he must open hi eye and dispers them. 

parkins' experi on thi occas wa a veri distress one. He 
found that the pictur which present itself to him wa continuous. when 
he open hi eyes, of course, it went; but when he shut them onc more 
it frame itself afresh, and act itself out again, neither quicker nor 
slower than before. what he saw wa this: 

A long stretch of shore--shingl edg by sand, and intersect at short 
interv with black groyn run down to the water--a scene, in fact, 
so like that of hi afternoon' walk that, in the absenc of ani 
landmark, it could not be distinguish therefrom. the light wa obscure, 
convey an impress of gather storm, late winter evening, and 
slight cold rain. On thi bleak stage at first no actor wa visible. 
then, in the distance, a bob black object appeared; a moment more, 
and it wa a man running, jumping, clamber over the groynes, and everi 
few second look eagerli back. the nearer he came the more obviou it 
wa that he wa not onli anxious, but even terribl frightened, though 
hi face wa not to be distinguished. He was, moreover, almost at the end 
of hi strength. On he came; each success obstacl seem to caus him 
more difficulti than the last. 'will he get over thi next one?' thought 
parkins; 'it seem a littl higher than the others.' yes; half climbing, 
half throw himself, he did get over, and fell all in a heap on the 
other side (the side nearest to the spectator). there, as if realli 
unabl to get up again, he remain crouch under the groyne, look 
up in an attitud of pain anxiety. 

So far no caus whatev for the fear of the runner had been shown; but 
now there began to be seen, far up the shore, a littl flicker of 
someth light-colour move to and fro with great swift and 
irregularity. rapidli grow larger, it, too, declar itself as a 
figur in pale, flutter draperies, ill-defined. there wa someth 
about it motion which made parkin veri unwil to see it at close 
quarters. It would stop, rais arms, bow itself toward the sand, then 
run stoop across the beach to the water-edg and back again; and then, 
rise upright, onc more continu it cours forward at a speed that wa 
startl and terrifying. the moment came when the pursuer wa hover 
about from left to right onli a few yard beyond the groyn where the 
runner lay in hiding. after two or three ineffectu cast hither and 
thither it came to a stop, stood upright, with arm rais high, and then 
dart straight forward toward the groyne. 

It wa at thi point that parkin alway fail in hi resolut to keep 
hi eye shut. with mani misgiv as to incipi failur of eyesight, 
overwork brain, excess smoking, and so on, he final resign 
himself to light hi candle, get out a book, and pass the night waking, 
rather than be torment by thi persist panorama, which he saw 
clearli enough could onli be a morbid reflect of hi walk and hi 
thought on that veri day. 

the scrape of match on box and the glare of light must have startl 
some creatur of the night--rat or what not--which he heard scurri 
across the floor from the side of hi bed with much rustling. dear, dear! 
the match is out! fool that it is! but the second one burnt better, and a 
candl and book were duli procured, over which parkin pore till sleep 
of a wholesom kind came upon him, and that in no long space. for about 
the first time in hi orderli and prudent life he forgot to blow out the 
candle, and when he wa call next morn at eight there wa still a 
flicker in the socket and a sad mess of gutter greas on the top of the 
littl table. 

after breakfast he wa in hi room, put the finish touch to hi 
golf costume--fortun had again allot the colonel to him for a 
partner--when one of the maid came in. 

'oh, if you please,' she said, 'would you like ani extra blanket on your 
bed, sir?' 

'ah! thank you,' said parkins. 'yes, I think I should like one. It seem 
like to turn rather colder.' 

In a veri short time the maid wa back with the blanket. 

'which bed should I put it on, sir?' she asked. 

'what? why, that one--th one I slept in last night,' he said, point 
to it. 

'oh yes! I beg your pardon, sir, but you seem to have tri both of 
'em; leastways, we had to make 'em both up thi morning.' 

'really? how veri absurd!' said parkins. 'I certainli never touch the 
other, except to lay some thing on it. did it actual seem to have been 
slept in?' 

'oh yes, sir!' said the maid. 'why, all the thing wa crumpl and 
throw about all ways, if you'll excus me, sir--quit as if anyon 
'adn't pass but a veri poor night, sir.' 

'dear me,' said parkins. 'well, I may have disord it more than I 
thought when I unpack my things. i'm veri sorri to have given you the 
extra trouble, i'm sure. I expect a friend of mine soon, by the way--a 
gentleman from cambridge--to come and occupi it for a night or two. that 
will be all right, I suppose, won't it?' 

'oh yes, to be sure, sir. thank you, sir. it' no trouble, i'm sure,' 
said the maid, and depart to giggl with her colleagues. 

parkin set forth, with a stern determin to improv hi game. 

I am glad to be abl to report that he succeed so far in thi 
enterpris that the colonel, who had been rather repin at the prospect 
of a second day' play in hi company, becam quit chatti as the morn 
advanced; and hi voic boom out over the flats, as certain also of our 
own minor poet have said, 'like some great bourdon in a minster tower'. 

'extraordinari wind, that, we had last night,' he said. 'in my old home 
we should have said someon had been whistl for it.' 

'should you, indeed!' said perkins. 'i there a superstit of that kind 
still current in your part of the country?' 

'I don't know about superstition,' said the colonel. 'they believ in it 
all over denmark and norway, as well as on the yorkshir coast; and my 
experi is, mind you, that there' gener someth at the bottom 
of what these country-folk hold to, and have held to for generations. but 
it' your drive' (or whatev it might have been: the golf reader will 
have to imagin appropri digress at the proper intervals). 

when convers wa resumed, parkin said, with a slight hesitancy: 

'A propo of what you were say just now, colonel, I think I ought to 
tell you that my own view on such subject are veri strong. I am, in 
fact, a convinc disbeliev in what is call the "supernatural".' 

'what!' said the colonel,'do you mean to tell me you don't believ in 
second-sight, or ghosts, or anyth of that kind?' 

'in noth whatev of that kind,' return parkin firmly. 

'well,' said the colonel, 'but it appear to me at that rate, sir, that 
you must be littl better than a sadducee.' 

parkin wa on the point of answer that, in hi opinion, the sadduce 
were the most sensibl person he had ever read of in the old testament; 
but feel some doubt as to whether much mention of them wa to be found 
in that work, he prefer to laugh the accus off. 

'perhap I am,' he said; 'but--here, give me my cleek, boy!--excus me 
one moment, colonel.' A short interval. 'now, as to whistl for the 
wind, let me give you my theori about it. the law which govern wind are 
realli not at all perfectli known--to fisherfolk and such, of course, not 
known at all. A man or woman of eccentr habits, perhaps, or a stranger, 
is seen repeatedli on the beach at some unusu hour, and is heard 
whistling. soon afterward a violent wind rises; a man who could read the 
sky perfectli or who possess a baromet could have foretold that it 
would. the simpl peopl of a fishing-villag have no barometers, and 
onli a few rough rule for prophesi weather. what more natur than 
that the eccentr personag I postul should be regard as have 
rais the wind, or that he or she should clutch eagerli at the 
reput of be abl to do so? now, take last night' wind: as it 
happens, I myself wa whistling. I blew a whistl twice, and the wind 
seem to come absolut in answer to my call. If anyon had seen me--' 

the audienc had been a littl restiv under thi harangue, and parkin 
had, I fear, fallen somewhat into the tone of a lecturer; but at the last 
sentenc the colonel stopped. 

'whistling, were you?' he said. 'and what sort of whistl did you use? 
play thi stroke first.' interval. 

'about that whistl you were asking, colonel. it' rather a curiou one. 
I have it in my--no; I see i'v left it in my room. As a matter of fact, 
I found it yesterday.' 

and then parkin narrat the manner of hi discoveri of the whistle, 
upon hear which the colonel grunted, and opin that, in parkins' 
place, he should himself be care about use a thing that had belong 
to a set of papists, of whom, speak generally, it might be affirm 
that you never knew what they might not have been up to. from thi topic 
he diverg to the enorm of the vicar, who had given notic on the 
previou sunday that friday would be the feast of St thoma the apostle, 
and that there would be servic at eleven o'clock in the church. thi and 
other similar proceed constitut in the colonel' view a strong 
presumpt that the vicar wa a conceal papist, if not a jesuit; and 
parkins, who could not veri readili follow the colonel in thi region, 
did not disagre with him. In fact, they got on so well togeth in the 
morn that there wa not talk on either side of their separ after 
lunch. 

both continu to play well dure the afternoon, or at least, well 
enough to make them forget everyth els until the light began to fail 
them. not until then did parkin rememb that he had meant to do some 
more investig at the preceptory; but it wa of no great importance, 
he reflected. one day wa as good as another; he might as well go home 
with the colonel. 

As they turn the corner of the house, the colonel wa almost knock 
down by a boy who rush into him at the veri top of hi speed, and then, 
instead of run away, remain hang on to him and panting. the 
first word of the warrior were natur those of reproof and 
objurgation, but he veri quickli discern that the boy wa almost 
speechless with fright. inquiri were useless at first. when the boy got 
hi breath he began to howl, and still clung to the colonel' legs. He 
wa at last detached, but continu to howl. 

'what in the world is the matter with you? what have you been up to? what 
have you seen?' said the two men. 

'ow, I seen it wive at me out of the winder,' wail the boy, 'and I 
don't like it.' 

'what window?' said the irrit colonel. 'come pull yourself together, 
my boy.' 

'the front winder it was, at the 'otel,' said the boy. 

At thi point parkin wa in favour of send the boy home, but the 
colonel refused; he want to get to the bottom of it, he said; it wa 
most danger to give a boy such a fright as thi one had had, and if it 
turn out that peopl had been play jokes, they should suffer for it 
in some way. and by a seri of question he made out thi story: the boy 
had been play about on the grass in front of the globe with some 
others; then they had gone home to their teas, and he wa just going, 
when he happen to look up at the front winder and see it a-wiv at 
him. _it_ seem to be a figur of some sort, in white as far as he 
knew--couldn't see it face; but it wive at him, and it warn't a right 
thing--not to say not a right person. wa there a light in the room? no, 
he didn't think to look if there wa a light. which wa the window? wa 
it the top one or the second one? the seckind one it was--th big winder 
what got two littl un at the sides. 

'veri well, my boy,' said the colonel, after a few more questions. 'you 
run away home now. I expect it wa some person tri to give you a 
start. anoth time, like a brave english boy, you just throw a 
stone--well, no, not that exactly, but you go and speak to the waiter, or 
to Mr simpson, the landlord, and--yes--and say that I advis you to do 
so.' 

the boy' face express some of the doubt he felt as to the likelihood 
of Mr simpson' lend a favour ear to hi complaint, but the 
colonel did not appear to perceiv this, and went on: 

'and here' a sixpence--no, I see it' a shilling--and you be off home, 
and don't think ani more about it.' 

the youth hurri off with agit thanks, and the colonel and parkin 
went round to the front of the globe and reconnoitred. there wa onli one 
window answer to the descript they had been hearing. 

'well, that' curious,' said parkins; 'it' evid my window the lad 
wa talk about. will you come up for a moment, colonel wilson? We 
ought to be abl to see if anyon ha been take liberti in my room.' 

they were soon in the passage, and parkin made as if to open the door. 
then he stop and felt in hi pockets. 

'thi is more seriou than I thought,' wa hi next remark. 'I rememb 
now that befor I start thi morn I lock the door. It is lock 
now, and, what is more, here is the key.' and he held it up. 'now,' he 
went on, 'if the servant are in the habit of go into one' room 
dure the day when one is away, I can onli say that--well, that I don't 
approv of it at all.' consciou of a somewhat weak climax, he busi 
himself in open the door (which wa inde locked) and in light 
candles. 'no,' he said, 'noth seem disturbed.' 

'except your bed,' put in the colonel. 

'excus me, that isn't my bed,' said parkins. 'I don't use that one. but 
it doe look as if someon had been play trick with it.' 

It certainli did: the cloth were bundl up and twist togeth in a 
most tortuou confusion. parkin pondered. 

'that must be it,' he said at last. 'I disord the cloth last night 
in unpacking, and they haven't made it since. perhap they came in to 
make it, and that boy saw them through the window; and then they were 
call away and lock the door after them. yes, I think that must be 
it.' 

'well, ring and ask,' said the colonel, and thi appeal to parkin as 
practical. 

the maid appeared, and, to make a long stori short, depos that she had 
made the bed in the morn when the gentleman wa in the room, and 
hadn't been there since. no, she hadn't no other key. Mr simpson, he kep' 
the keys; he'd be abl to tell the gentleman if anyon had been up. 

thi wa a puzzle. investig show that noth of valu had been 
taken, and parkin rememb the disposit of the small object on 
tabl and so forth well enough to be pretti sure that no prank had been 
play with them. Mr and mr simpson furthermor agre that neither of 
them had given the duplic key of the room to ani person whatev 
dure the day. nor could parkins, fair-mind man as he was, detect 
anyth in the demeanour of master, mistress, or maid that indic 
guilt. He wa much more inclin to think that the boy had been impos 
on the colonel. 

the latter wa unwontedli silent and pensiv at dinner and throughout the 
evening. when he bade goodnight to parkins, he murmur in a gruff 
undertone: 

'you know where I am if you want me dure the night.' 

'why, yes, thank you, colonel wilson, I think I do; but there isn't much 
prospect of my disturb you, I hope. By the way,' he added, 'did I show 
you that old whistl I spoke of? I think not. well, here it is.' 

the colonel turn it over gingerli in the light of the candle. 

'can you make anyth of the inscription?' ask parkins, as he took it 
back. 

'no, not in thi light. what do you mean to do with it?' 

'oh, well, when I get back to cambridg I shall submit it to some of the 
archaeologist there, and see what they think of it; and veri likely, if 
they consid it worth having, I may present it to one of the museums.' 

'm!' said the colonel. 'well, you may be right. all I know is that, if it 
were mine, I should chuck it straight into the sea. it' no use talking, 
i'm well aware, but I expect that with you it' a case of live and learn. 
I hope so, i'm sure, and I wish you a good night.' 

He turn away, leav parkin in act to speak at the bottom of the 
stair, and soon each wa in hi own bedroom. 

By some unfortun accident, there were neither blind nor curtain to 
the window of the professor' room. the previou night he had thought 
littl of this, but tonight there seem everi prospect of a bright moon 
rise to shine directli on hi bed, and probabl wake him later on. when 
he notic thi he wa a good deal annoyed, but, with an ingenu which 
I can onli envy, he succeed in rig up, with the help of a 
railway-rug, some safety-pins, and a stick and umbrella, a screen which, 
if it onli held together, would complet keep the moonlight off hi 
bed. and shortli afterward he wa comfort in that bed. when he had 
read a somewhat solid work long enough to produc a decid wish to 
sleep, he cast a drowsi glanc round the room, blew out the candle, and 
fell back upon the pillow. 

He must have slept soundli for an hour or more, when a sudden clatter 
shook him up in a most unwelcom manner. In a moment he realiz what had 
happened: hi carefully-construct screen had given way, and a veri 
bright frosti moon wa shine directli on hi face. thi wa highli 
annoying. could he possibl get up and reconstruct the screen? or could 
he manag to sleep if he did not? 

for some minut he lay and ponder over all the possibilities; then he 
turn over sharply, and with hi eye open lay breathlessli listening. 
there had been a movement, he wa sure, in the empti bed on the opposit 
side of the room. tomorrow he would have it moved, for there must be rat 
or someth play about in it. It wa quiet now. no! the commot 
began again. there wa a rustl and shaking: sure more than ani rat 
could cause. 

I can figur to myself someth of the professor' bewilder and 
horror, for I have in a dream thirti year back seen the same thing 
happen; but the reader will hardly, perhaps, imagin how dread it wa 
to him to see a figur suddenli sit up in what he had known wa an empti 
bed. He wa out of hi own bed in one bound, and made a dash toward the 
window, where lay hi onli weapon, the stick with which he had prop 
hi screen. thi was, as it turn out, the worst thing he could have 
done, becaus the personag in the empti bed, with a sudden smooth 
motion, slip from the bed and took up a position, with outspread arms, 
between the two beds, and in front of the door. parkin watch it in a 
horrid perplexity. somehow, the idea of get past it and escap 
through the door wa intoler to him; he could not have borne--h 
didn't know why--to touch it; and as for it touch him, he would 
sooner dash himself through the window than have that happen. It stood 
for the moment in a band of dark shadow, and he had not seen what it 
face wa like. now it began to move, in a stoop posture, and all at 
onc the spectat realized, with some horror and some relief, that it 
must be blind, for it seem to feel about it with it muffl arm in a 
grope and random fashion. turn half away from him, it becam 
suddenli consciou of the bed he had just left, and dart toward it, 
and bent and felt over the pillow in a way which made parkin shudder as 
he had never in hi life thought it possible. In a veri few moment it 
seem to know that the bed wa empty, and then, move forward into the 
area of light and face the window, it show for the first time what 
manner of thing it was. 

parkins, who veri much dislik be question about it, did onc 
describ someth of it in my hearing, and I gather that what he 
chiefli rememb about it is a horrible, an intens horrible, face _of 
crumpl linen._ what express he read upon it he could not or would 
not tell, but that the fear of it went nigh to madden him is certain. 

but he wa not at leisur to watch it for long. with formid quick 
it move into the middl of the room, and, as it grope and waved, one 
corner of it draperi swept across parkins' face. He could not, though 
he knew how peril a sound was--h could not keep back a cri of 
disgust, and thi gave the searcher an instant clue. It leapt toward him 
upon the instant, and the next moment he wa half-way through the window 
backwards, utter cri upon cri at the utmost pitch of hi voice, and 
the linen face wa thrust close into hi own. At this, almost the last 
possibl second, deliver came, as you will have guessed: the colonel 
burst the door open, and wa just in time to see the dread group at 
the window. when he reach the figur onli one wa left. parkin sank 
forward into the room in a faint, and befor him on the floor lay a 
tumbl heap of bed-clothes. 

colonel wilson ask no questions, but busi himself in keep everyon 
els out of the room and in get parkin back to hi bed; and himself, 
wrap in a rug, occupi the other bed, for the rest of the night. 
earli on the next day roger arrived, more welcom than he would have 
been a day before, and the three of them held a veri long consult in 
the professor' room. At the end of it the colonel left the hotel door 
carri a small object between hi finger and thumb, which he cast as 
far into the sea as a veri brawni arm could send it. later on the smoke 
of a burn ascend from the back premis of the globe. 

exactli what explan wa patch up for the staff and visitor at the 
hotel I must confess I do not recollect. the professor wa somehow 
clear of the readi suspicion of delirium tremens, and the hotel of the 
reput of a troubl house. 

there is not much question as to what would have happen to parkin if 
the colonel had not interven when he did. He would either have fallen 
out of the window or els lost hi wits. but it is not so evid what 
more the creatur that came in answer to the whistl could have done than 
frighten. there seem to be absolut noth materi about it save 
the bedcloth of which it had made itself a body. the colonel, who 
rememb a not veri dissimilar occurr in india, wa of the opinion 
that if parkin had close with it it could realli have done veri little, 
and that it one power wa that of frightening. the whole thing, he said, 
serv to confirm hi opinion of the church of rome. 

there is realli noth more to tell, but, as you may imagine, the 
professor' view on certain point are less clear cut than they use to 
be. hi nerves, too, have suffered: he cannot even now see a surplic 
hang on a door quit unmoved, and the spectacl of a scarecrow in a 
field late on a winter afternoon ha cost him more than one sleepless 
night. 




the treasur OF abbot thoma 

I 

_verum usqu in praesentem diem multa garriunt inter se canonici de 
abscondito quodam istiu abbati thoma thesauro, quem saepe, 
quanquam ahduc incassum, quaesiverunt steinfeldenses. ipsum enim 
thomam adhuc florida in aetat existentem ingentem auri massam circa 
monasterium defodiss perhibent; de quo multoti interrogatu ubi 
esset, cum risu responder solitu erat: 'job, johannes, et zacharia 
vel vobi vel posteri indicabunt'; idemqu aliquando adiicer se 
inventuri minim invisurum. inter alia huiu abbati opera, hoc 
memoria praecipu dignum indico quod fenestram magnam in orientali 
part ala australi in ecclesia sua imaginibu optim in vitro 
depicti impleverit: id quod et ipsiu effigi et insignia ibidem 
posita demonstrant. domum quoqu abbatialem fere totam restauravit: 
puteo in atrio ipsiu effosso et lapidibu marmorei pulchr caelati 
exornato. decessit autem, mort aliquantulum subitanea perculsus, 
aetati suae anno lxxii(do), incarnationi vero dominica mdxxix(o)._ 

'I suppos I shall have to translat this,' said the antiquari to 
himself, as he finish copi the abov line from that rather rare and 
exceedingli diffus book, the _sertum steinfeldens norbertinum.[5]_ 
'well, it may as well be done first as last,' and accordingli the 
follow render wa veri quickli produced: 

Up to the present day there is much gossip among the canon about a 
certain hidden treasur of thi abbot thomas, for which those of 
steinfeld have often made search, though hitherto in vain. the stori 
is that thomas, while yet in the vigour of life, conceal a veri 
larg quantiti of gold somewher in the monastery. He wa often ask 
where it was, and alway answered, with a laugh: 'job, john, and 
zechariah will tell either you or your successors.' He sometim 
ad that he should feel no grudg against those who might find it. 
among other work carri out by thi abbot I may special mention 
hi fill the great window at the east end of the south aisl of 
the church with figur admir paint on glass, as hi effigi and 
arm in the window attest. He also restor almost the whole of the 
abbot' lodging, and dug a well in the court of it, which he adorn 
with beauti carv in marble. He die rather suddenli in the 
seventy-second year of hi age, a.d. 1529. 

[5] An account of the premonstratensian abbey of steinfeld, in the 
eiffel, with live of the abbots, publish at cologn in 1712 by 
christian albert erhard, a resid in the district. the epithet 
_norbertinum_ is due to the fact that St norbert wa founder of the 
premonstratensian order. 

the object which the antiquari had befor him at the moment wa that of 
trace the whereabout of the paint window of the abbey church at 
steinfeld. shortli after the revolution, a veri larg quantiti of paint 
glass made it way from the dissolv abbey of germani and belgium to 
thi country, and may now be seen adorn variou of our parish 
churches, cathedrals, and privat chapels. steinfeld abbey wa among the 
most consider of these involuntari contributor to our artist 
possess (I am quot the somewhat ponder preambl of the book 
which the antiquari wrote), and the greater part of the glass from that 
institut can be identifi without much difficulti by the help, either 
of the numer inscript in which the place is mentioned, or of the 
subject of the windows, in which sever well-defin cycl or 
narr were represented. 

the passag with which I began my stori had set the antiquari on the 
track of anoth identification. In a privat chapel--no matter where--h 
had seen three larg figures, each occupi a whole light in a window, 
and evid the work of one artist. their style made it plain that that 
artist had been a german of the sixteenth century; but hitherto the more 
exact local of them had been a puzzle. they represented--wil you be 
surpris to hear it?--job patriarcha, johann evangelista, zacharia 
propheta, and each of them held a book or scroll, inscrib with a 
sentenc from hi writings. these, as a matter of course, the antiquari 
had noted, and had been struck by the curiou way in which they differ 
from ani text of the vulgat that he had been abl to examine. thu the 
scroll in job' hand wa inscribed: _auro est locu in quo absconditur_ 
(for _conflatur_)[6]; on the book of john was: _habent in vestimenti 
sui scripturam quam nemo novit_[7] (for in _vestimento scriptum_, the 
follow word be taken from anoth verse); and zacharia had: 
_super lapidem unum septem oculi sunt_[8] (which alon of the three 
present an unalt text). 

[6] there is a place for gold where it is hidden. 

[7] they have on their raiment a write which no man knoweth. 

[8] upon one stone are seven eyes. 

A sad perplex it had been to our investig to think whi these three 
personag should have been place togeth in one window. there wa no 
bond of connexion between them, either historic, symbolic, or doctrinal, 
and he could onli suppos that they must have form part of a veri larg 
seri of prophet and apostles, which might have filled, say, all the 
clerestori window of some capaci church. but the passag from the 
_sertum_ had alter the situat by show that the name of the 
actual personag repres in the glass now in lord d----' chapel had 
been constantli on the lip of abbot thoma von eschenhausen of 
steinfeld, and that thi abbot had put up a paint window, probabl 
about the year 1520, in the south aisl of hi abbey church. It wa no 
veri wild conjectur that the three figur might have form part of 
abbot thomas' offering; it wa one which, moreover, could probabl be 
confirm or set asid by anoth care examin of the glass. and, 
as mr. somerton wa a man of leisure, he set out on pilgrimag to the 
privat chapel with veri littl delay. hi conjectur wa confirm to 
the full. not onli did the style and techniqu of the glass suit 
perfectli with the date and place required, but in anoth window of the 
chapel he found some glass, known to have been bought along with the 
figures, which contain the arm of abbot thoma von eschenhausen. 

At interv dure hi research mr. somerton had been haunt by the 
recollect of the gossip about the hidden treasure, and, as he thought 
the matter over, it becam more and more obviou to him that if the abbot 
meant anyth by the enigmat answer which he gave to hi 
questioners, he must have meant that the secret wa to be found somewher 
in the window he had place in the abbey church. It wa undeniable, 
furthermore, that the first of the curiously-select text on the 
scroll in the window might be taken to have a refer to hidden 
treasure. 

everi feature, therefore, or mark which could possibl assist in 
elucid the riddl which, he felt sure, the abbot had set to 
poster he note with scrupul care, and, return to hi berkshir 
manor-house, consum mani a pint of the midnight oil over hi trace 
and sketches. after two or three weeks, a day came when Mr somerton 
announc to hi man that he must pack hi own and hi master' thing 
for a short journey abroad, whither for the moment we will not follow 
him. 


II 

Mr gregory, the rector of parsbury, had stroll out befor breakfast, it 
be a fine autumn morning, as far as the gate of hi carriage-drive, 
with intent to meet the postman and sniff the cool air. nor wa he 
disappoint of either purpose. befor he had had time to answer more 
than ten or eleven of the miscellan question propound to him in 
the light of their heart by hi young offspring, who had accompani 
him, the postman wa seen approaching; and among the morning' budget wa 
one letter bear a foreign postmark and stamp (which becam at onc the 
object of an eager competit among the youth gregorys), and 
address in an uneducated, but plainli an english hand. 

when the rector open it, and turn to the signature, he realiz that 
it came from the confidenti valet of hi friend and squire, mr. 
somerton. thu it ran: 

honour sir, 

ha I am in a great anxieti about master I write at is wish to beg 
you sir if you could be so good as step over. master ha add a nastey 
shock and keep hi bedd. I never have known him like thi but No 
wonder and noth will serv but you sir. master say would I 
mintion the short way here is drive to cobblinc and take a trap. 
hope I have maid all plain, but am much confus in myself what 
with anxiatey and weak at night. If I might be so bold sir it 
will be a pleasur to see a honnest brish face among all these forig 
ones. 

I am sir 

your obed't serv't 

william brown. 

p.s.--the villag for town I will not turm It is name steenfeld. 

the reader must be left to pictur to himself in detail the surprise, 
confusion, and hurri of prepar into which the receipt of such a 
letter would be like to plung a quiet berkshir parsonag in the year 
of grace 1859. It is enough for me to say that a train to town wa caught 
in the cours of the day, and that Mr gregori wa abl to secur a cabin 
in the antwerp boat and a place in the coblenz train. nor wa it 
difficult to manag the transit from that centr to steinfeld. 

I labour under a grave disadvantag as narrat of thi stori in that I 
have never visit steinfeld myself, and that neither of the princip 
actor in the episod (from whom I deriv my information) wa abl to 
give me anyth but a vagu and rather dismal idea of it appearance. I 
gather that it is a small place, with a larg church despoil of it 
ancient fittings; a number of rather ruinou great buildings, mostli of 
the seventeenth century, surround thi church; for the abbey, in common 
with most of those on the continent, wa rebuilt in a luxuri fashion 
by it inhabit at that period. It ha not seem to me worth while to 
lavish money on a visit to the place, for though it is probabl far more 
attract than either Mr somerton or Mr gregori thought it, there is 
evid little, if anything, of first-rat interest to be seen--except, 
perhaps, one thing, which I should not care to see. 

the inn where the english gentleman and hi servant were lodg is, or 
was, the onli 'possible' one in the village. Mr gregori wa taken to it 
at onc by hi driver, and found Mr brown wait at the door. Mr brown, 
a model when in hi berkshir home of the impass whisker race who 
are known as confidenti valets, wa now egregi out of hi element, 
in a light tweed suit, anxious, almost irritable, and plainli anyth 
but master of the situation. hi relief at the sight of the 'honest 
british face' of hi rector wa unmeasured, but word to describ it were 
deni him. He could onli say: 

'well, I ham pleased, i'm sure, sir, to see you. and so i'm sure, sir, 
will master.' 

'how is your master, brown?' Mr gregori eagerli put in. 

'I think he' better, sir, thank you; but he' had a dread time of it. 
I 'ope he' gettin' some sleep now, but--' 

'what ha been the matter--i couldn't make out from your letter? wa it 
an accid of ani kind?' 

'well, sir, I 'ardli know whether i'd better speak about it. master wa 
veri partickl he should be the one to tell you. but there' no bone 
broke--that' one thing i'm sure we ought to be thankful--' 

'what doe the doctor say?' ask Mr gregory. 

they were by thi time outsid Mr somerton' bedroom door, and speak 
in low tones. Mr gregory, who happen to be in front, wa feel for 
the handle, and chanc to run hi finger over the panels. befor brown 
could answer, there wa a terribl cri from within the room. 

'in god' name, who is that?' were the first word they heard. 'brown, is 
it?' 

'yes, sir--me, sir, and Mr gregory,' brown hasten to answer, and there 
wa an audibl groan of relief in reply. 

they enter the room, which wa darken against the afternoon sun, and 
Mr gregori saw, with a shock of pity, how drawn, how damp with drop of 
fear, wa the usual calm face of hi friend, who, sit up in the 
curtain bed, stretch out a shake hand to welcom him. 

'better for see you, my dear gregory,' wa the repli to the rector' 
first question, and it wa palpabl true. 

after five minut of convers Mr somerton wa more hi own man, 
brown afterward reported, than he had been for days. He wa abl to eat 
a more than respect dinner, and talk confid of be fit to 
stand a journey to coblenz within twenty-four hours. 

'but there' one thing,' he said, with a return of agit which Mr 
gregori did not like to see, 'which I must beg you to do for me, my dear 
gregory. don't,' he went on, lay hi hand on gregory' to forestal 
ani interruption--'don't ask me what it is, or whi I want it done. i'm 
not up to explain it yet; it would throw me back--undo all the good 
you have done me by coming. the onli word I will say about it is that you 
run no risk whatev by do it, and that brown can and will show you 
tomorrow what it is. it' mere to put back--to keep--something--no; I 
can't speak of it yet. Do you mind call brown?' 

'well, somerton,' said Mr gregory, as he cross the room to the door. 'I 
won't ask for ani explan till you see fit to give them. and if thi 
bit of busi is as easi as you repres it to be, I will veri gladli 
undertak it for you the first thing in the morning.' 

'ah, I wa sure you would, my dear gregory; I wa certain I could reli on 
you. I shall owe you more thank than I can tell. now, here is brown. 
brown, one word with you.' 

'shall I go?' interject Mr gregory. 

'not at all. dear me, no. brown, the first thing tomorrow morning--(y 
don't mind earli hours, I know, gregory)--y must take the rector 
to--_there_, you know' (a nod from brown, who look grave and anxious), 
'and he and you will put that back. you needn't be in the least alarmed; 
it' _perfectly_ safe in the daytime. you know what I mean. It lie on 
the step, you know, where--wher we put it.' (brown swallow dryli onc 
or twice, and, fail to speak, bowed.) 'and--yes, that' all. onli thi 
one other word, my dear gregory. If you _can_ manag to keep from 
question brown about thi matter, I shall be still more bound to you. 
tomorrow evening, at latest, if all goe well, I shall be able, I 
believe, to tell you the whole stori from start to finish. and now i'll 
wish you good night. brown will be with me--h sleep here--and if I were 
you, I should lock my door. yes, be particular to do that. they--they 
like it, the peopl here, and it' better. good night, good night.' 

they part upon this, and if Mr gregori woke onc or twice in the small 
hour and fanci he heard a fumbl about the lower part of hi lock 
door, it was, perhaps, no more than what a quiet man, suddenli plung 
into a strang bed and the heart of a mystery, might reason expect. 
certainli he thought, to the end of hi days, that he had heard such a 
sound twice or three time between midnight and dawn. 

He wa up with the sun, and out in compani with brown soon after. 
perplex as wa the servic he had been ask to perform for Mr 
somerton, it wa not a difficult or an alarm one, and within half an 
hour from hi leav the inn it wa over. what it wa I shall not as yet 
divulge. 

later in the morn Mr somerton, now almost himself again, wa abl to 
make a start from steinfeld; and that same evening, whether at coblenz or 
at some intermedi stage on the journey I am not certain, he settl 
down to the promis explanation. brown wa present, but how much of the 
matter wa ever realli made plain to hi comprehens he would never 
say, and I am unabl to conjecture. 


iii 

thi wa Mr somerton' story: 

'you know roughly, both of you, that thi expedit of mine wa 
undertaken with the object of trace someth in connexion with some 
old paint glass in lord d----' privat chapel. well, the 
starting-point of the whole matter lie in thi passag from an old 
print book, to which I will ask your attention.' 

and at thi point Mr somerton went care over some ground with which 
we are alreadi familiar. 

'on my second visit to the chapel,' he went on, 'mi purpos wa to take 
everi note I could of figures, lettering, diamond-scratch on the 
glass, and even appar accident markings. the first point which I 
tackl wa that of the inscrib scrolls. I could not doubt that the 
first of these, that of job--"ther is a place for the gold where it is 
hidden"--with it intent alteration, must refer to the treasure; so 
I appli myself with some confid to the next, that of St john--"they 
have on their vestur a write which no man knoweth." the natur 
question will have occur to you: wa there an inscript on the robe 
of the figures? I could see none; each of the three had a broad black 
border to hi mantle, which made a conspicu and rather ugli featur in 
the window. I wa nonplussed, I will own, and, but for a curiou bit of 
luck, I think I should have left the search where the canon of steinfeld 
had left it befor me. but it so happen that there wa a good deal of 
dust on the surfac of the glass, and lord d----, happen to come in, 
notic my blacken hands, and kindli insist on send for a turk' 
head broom to clean down the window. there must, I suppose, have been a 
rough piec in the broom; anyhow, as it pass over the border of one of 
the mantles, I notic that it left a long scratch, and that some yellow 
stain instantli show up. I ask the man to stop hi work for a moment, 
and ran up the ladder to examin the place. the yellow stain wa there, 
sure enough, and what had come away wa a thick black pigment, which had 
evid been laid on with the brush after the glass had been burnt, and 
could therefor be easili scrape off without do ani harm. I scraped, 
accordingly, and you will hardli believe--no, I do you an injustice; you 
will have guess already--that I found under thi black pigment two or 
three clearly-form capit letter in yellow stain on a clear ground. 
Of course, I could hardli contain my delight. 

'I told lord d---- that I had detect an inscript which I thought 
might be veri interesting, and beg to be allow to uncov the whole 
of it. He made no difficulti about it whatever, told me to do exactli as 
I pleased, and then, have an engagement, wa obliged--rath to my 
relief, I must say--to leav me. I set to work at once, and found the 
task a fairli easi one. the pigment, disintegrated, of course, by time, 
came off almost at a touch, and I don't think that it took me a coupl of 
hours, all told, to clean the whole of the black border in all three 
lights. each of the figur had, as the inscript said, "a write on 
their vestur which nobodi knew". 

'thi discovery, of course, made it absolut certain to my mind that I 
wa on the right track. and, now, what wa the inscription? while I wa 
clean the glass I almost took pain not to read the lettering, save 
up the treat until I had got the whole thing clear. and when that wa 
done, my dear gregory, I assur you I could almost have cri from sheer 
disappointment. what I read wa onli the most hopeless jumbl of letter 
that wa ever shaken up in a hat. here it is: 

_job_. dreviciopedmoomsmvivlislcav 
ibasbataovt 

_st john_. rdiieamrlesipvspodseeirsetta 
aesgiavnnr 

_zechariah_. fteeailnqdpvaivmtleeattohioo 
nvmcaat.h.q.e. 

'blank as I felt and must have look for the first few minutes, my 
disappoint didn't last long. I realiz almost at onc that I wa 
deal with a cipher or cryptogram; and I reflect that it wa like 
to be of a pretti simpl kind, consid it earli date. So I copi 
the letter with the most anxiou care. anoth littl point, I may tell 
you, turn up in the process which confirm my belief in the cipher. 
after copi the letter on job' robe I count them, to make sure that 
I had them right. there were thirty-eight; and, just as I finish go 
through them, my eye fell on a scratch made with a sharp point on the 
edg of the border. It wa simpli the number xxxviii in roman numerals. 
To cut the matter short, there wa a similar note, as I may call it, in 
each of the other lights; and that made it plain to me that the 
glass-paint had had veri strict order from abbot thoma about the 
inscript and had taken pain to get it correct. 

'well, after that discoveri you may imagin how minut I went over the 
whole surfac of the glass in search of further light. Of course, I did 
not neglect the inscript on the scroll of zechariah--"upon one stone 
are seven eyes," but I veri quickli conclud that thi must refer to 
some mark on a stone which could onli be found _in situ_, where the 
treasur wa concealed. To be short, I made all possibl note and 
sketch and tracings, and then came back to parsburi to work out the 
cipher at leisure. oh, the agoni I went through! I thought myself veri 
clever at first, for I made sure that the key would be found in some of 
the old book on secret writing. the _steganographia_ of joachim 
trithemius, who wa an earlier contemporari of abbot thomas, seem 
particularli promising; so I got that and selenius' _cryptographia_ and 
bacon' _de augmenti scientiarum_ and some more. but I could hit upon 
nothing. then I tri the principl of the "most frequent letter", take 
first latin and then german as a basis. that didn't help, either; whether 
it ought to have done so, I am not clear. and then I came back to the 
window itself, and read over my notes, hope almost against hope that 
the abbot might himself have somewher suppli the key I wanted. I could 
make noth out of the colour or pattern of the robes. there were no 
landscap background with subsidiari objects; there wa noth in the 
canopies. the onli resourc possibl seem to be in the attitud of the 
figures. "job," I read: "scroll in left hand, forefing of right hand 
extend upwards. john: hold inscrib book in left hand; with right 
hand blesses, with two fingers. zechariah: scroll in left hand; right 
hand extend upwards, as job, but with three finger point up." In 
other words, I reflected, job ha one finger extended, john ha _two_, 
zechariah ha _three_. may not there be a numer key conceal in 
that? My dear gregory,' said Mr somerton, lay hi hand on hi friend' 
knee, 'that _was_ the key. I didn't get it to fit at first, but after two 
or three trial I saw what wa meant. after the first letter of the 
inscript you skip _one_ letter, after the next you skip _two_, and 
after that skip _three_. now look at the result I got. i'v underlin 
the letter which form words: 

[d]r[e]vi[c]iop[e]d[m]oo[m]smv[i]v[l]is[l]cav 
[i]b[a]sb[a]tao[v]t 
[r]di[i]eam[r]l[e]si[p]vsp[o]d[s]ee[i]rse[t]t[a] 
ae[s]gia[v]n[n]r 
f[t]eea[i]l[n]qd[p]vai[v]m[t]le[e]att[o]h[i]oo 
[n]vmc[a]a[t].h.q.e. 

'do you see it? "_decem millia auri reposita sunt in puteo in at_ ..." 
(ten thousand [pieces] of gold are laid up in a well in ...), follow by 
an incomplet word begin _at_. So far so good. I tri the same plan 
with the remain letters; but it wouldn't work, and I fanci that 
perhap the place of dot after the three last letter might indic 
some differ of procedure. then I thought to myself, "wasn't there 
some allus to a well in the account of abbot thoma in that book the 
'_sertum_'?" yes, there was; he built a _puteu in atrio_; (a well in the 
court). there, of course, wa my word _atrio_. the next step wa to copi 
out the remain letter of the inscription, omit those I had 
alreadi used. that gave what you will see on thi slip: 

rviiopdoosmvviscavbsbtaotdi 
amlsivspdeersetaegianrfeealqd 
vaimleatthoovmca.h.q.e. 

'now, I knew what the three first letter I want were--namely, 
_rio_--to complet the word _atrio_; and, as you will see, these are all 
to be found in the first five letters. I wa a littl confus at first 
by the occurr of two _i_'s, but veri soon I saw that everi altern 
letter must be taken in the remaind of the inscription. you can work it 
out for yourself; the result, continu where the first "round" left 
off, thus: 

_rio domu abbatiali de steinfeld a me, thoma, qui posui custodem 
super ea. gare à qui la touche_. 

'so the whole secret wa out: 

"ten thousand piec of gold are laid up in the well in the court of 
the abbot' hous of steinfeld by me, thomas, who have set a guardian 
over them. _gare à qui la louche_." 

'the last words, I ought to say, are a devic which abbot thoma had 
adopted. I found it with hi arm in anoth piec of glass at lord 
d----'s, and he draft it bodili into hi cipher, though it doesn't 
quit fit in point of grammar. 

'well, what would ani human be have been tempt to do, my dear 
gregory, in my place? could he have help set off, as I did, to 
steinfeld, and trace the secret liter to the fountain-head? I don't 
believ he could. anyhow, I couldn't, and, as I needn't tell you, I found 
myself at steinfeld as soon as the resourc of civil could put me 
there, and instal myself in the inn you saw. I must tell you that I 
wa not altogeth free from forebodings--on one hand of disappointment, 
on the other of danger. there wa alway the possibl that abbot 
thomas' well might have been wholli obliterated, or els that someone, 
ignor of cryptograms, and guid onli by luck, might have stumbl on 
the treasur befor me. and then'--ther wa a veri percept shake 
of the voic here--'i wa not entir easy, I need not mind confessing, 
as to the mean of the word about the guardian of the treasure. but, 
if you don't mind, i'll say no more about that until--until it becom 
necessary. 

'at the first possibl opportun brown and I began explor the place. 
I had natur repres myself as be interest in the remain of 
the abbey, and we could not avoid pay a visit to the church, impati 
as I wa to be elsewhere. still, it did interest me to see the window 
where the glass had been, and especi that at the east end of the 
south aisle. In the traceri light of that I wa startl to see some 
fragment and coats-of-arm remaining--abbot thomas' shield wa there, 
and a small figur with a scroll inscrib _oculo habent, et non 
videbunt_ (they have eyes, and shall not see), which, I take it, wa a 
hit of the abbot at hi canons. 

'but, of course, the princip object wa to find the abbot' house. 
there is no prescrib place for this, so far as I know, in the plan of a 
monastery; you can't predict of it, as you can of the chapter-house, that 
it will be on the eastern side of the cloister, or, as of the dormitory, 
that it will commun with a transept of the church. I felt that if I 
ask mani question I might awaken linger memori of the treasure, 
and I thought it best to tri first to discov it for myself. It wa not 
a veri long or difficult search. that three-sid court south-east of the 
church, with desert pile of build round it, and grass-grown 
pavement, which you saw thi morning, wa the place. and glad enough I 
wa to see that it wa put to no use, and wa neither veri far from our 
inn nor overlook by ani inhabit building; there were onli orchard 
and paddock on the slope east of the church. I can tell you that fine 
stone glow wonder in the rather wateri yellow sunset that we had 
on the tuesday afternoon. 

'next, what about the well? there wa not much doubt about that, as you 
can testify. It is realli a veri remark thing. that curb is, I think, 
of italian marble, and the carv I thought must be italian also. there 
were reliefs, you will perhap remember, of eliez and rebekah, and of 
jacob open the well for rachel, and similar subjects; but, by way of 
disarm suspicion, I suppose, the abbot had care abstain from 
ani of hi cynic and allus inscriptions. 

'I examin the whole structur with the keenest interest, of course--a 
squar well-head with an open in one side; an arch over it, with a 
wheel for the rope to pass over, evid in veri good condit still, 
for it had been use within sixti years, or perhap even later though not 
quit recently. then there wa the question of depth and access to the 
interior. I suppos the depth wa about sixti to seventi feet; and as to 
the other point, it realli seem as if the abbot had wish to lead 
searcher up to the veri door of hi treasure-house, for, as you test 
for yourself, there were big block of stone bond into the masonry, and 
lead down in a regular staircas round and round the insid of the 
well. 

'it seem almost too good to be true. I wonder if there wa a trap--if 
the stone were so contriv as to tip over when a weight wa place on 
them; but I tri a good mani with my own weight and with my stick, and 
all seemed, and actual were, perfectli firm. Of course, I resolv that 
brown and I would make an experi that veri night. 

'I wa well prepared. know the sort of place I should have to explore, 
I had brought a suffici of good rope and band of web to surround 
my body, and cross-bar to hold to, as well as lantern and candl and 
crowbars, all of which would go into a singl carpet-bag and excit no 
suspicion. I satisfi myself that my rope would be long enough, and that 
the wheel for the bucket wa in good work order, and then we went home 
to dinner. 

'I had a littl cautiou convers with the landlord, and made out 
that he would not be overmuch surpris if I went out for a stroll with 
my man about nine o'clock, to make (heaven forgiv me!) a sketch of the 
abbey by moonlight. I ask no question about the well, and am not 
like to do so now. I fanci I know as much about it as anyon in 
steinfeld: at least'--with a strong shudder--'i don't want to know ani 
more. 

'now we come to the crisis, and, though I hate to think of it, I feel 
sure, gregory, that it will be better for me in all way to recal it 
just as it happened. We started, brown and I, at about nine with our bag, 
and attract no attention; for we manag to slip out at the hinder end 
of the inn-yard into an alley which brought us quit to the edg of the 
village. In five minut we were at the well, and for some littl time we 
sat on the edg of the well-head to make sure that no one wa stir or 
spi on us. all we heard wa some hors crop grass out of sight 
farther down the eastern slope. We were perfectli unobserved, and had 
plenti of light from the gorgeou full moon to allow us to get the rope 
properli fit over the wheel. then I secur the band round my bodi 
beneath the arms. We attach the end of the rope veri secur to a ring 
in the stonework. brown took the light lantern and follow me; I had a 
crowbar. and so we began to descend cautiously, feel everi step befor 
we set foot on it, and scan the wall in search of ani mark stone. 

'half aloud I count the step as we went down, and we got as far as the 
thirty-eighth befor I note anyth at all irregular in the surfac of 
the masonry. even here there wa no mark, and I began to feel veri blank, 
and to wonder if the abbot' cryptogram could possibl be an elabor 
hoax. At the forty-ninth step the staircas ceased. It wa with a veri 
sink heart that I began retrac my steps, and when I wa back on the 
thirty-eighth--brown, with the lantern, be a step or two abov me--i 
scrutin the littl bit of irregular in the stonework with all my 
might; but there wa no vestig of a mark. 

'then it struck me that the textur of the surfac look just a littl 
smoother than the rest, or, at least, in some way different. It might 
possibl be cement and not stone. I gave it a good blow with my iron bar. 
there wa a decidedli hollow sound, though that might be the result of 
our be in a well. but there wa more. A great flake of cement drop 
on to my feet, and I saw mark on the stone underneath. I had track the 
abbot down, my dear gregory; even now I think of it with a certain pride. 
It took but a veri few more tap to clear the whole of the cement away, 
and I saw a slab of stone about two feet square, upon which wa engraven 
a cross. disappoint again, but onli for a moment. It wa you, brown, 
who reassur me by a casual remark. you said, if I rememb right: 

"'it' a funni cross: look like a lot of eyes." 

'I snatch the lantern out of your hand, and saw with inexpress 
pleasur that the cross wa compos of seven eyes, four in a vertic 
line, three horizontal. the last of the scroll in the window wa 
explain in the way I had anticipated. here wa my "stone with the seven 
eyes". So far the abbot' data had been exact, and as I thought of this, 
the anxieti about the "guardian" return upon me with increas force. 
still I wasn't go to retreat now. 

'without give myself time to think, I knock away the cement all round 
the mark stone, and then gave it a prise on the right side with my 
crowbar. It move at once, and I saw that it wa but a thin light slab, 
such as I could easili lift out myself, and that it stop the entranc 
to a cavity. I did lift it out unbroken, and set it on the step, for it 
might be veri import to us to be abl to replac it. then I wait for 
sever minut on the step just above. I don't know why, but I think to 
see if ani dread thing would rush out. noth happened. next I lit a 
candle, and veri cautious I place it insid the cavity, with some idea 
of see whether there were foul air, and of get a glimps of what 
wa inside. there _was_ some foul of air which nearli extinguish 
the flame, but in no long time it burn quit steadily. the hole went 
some littl way back, and also on the right and left of the entrance, and 
I could see some round light-colour object within which might be 
bags. there wa no use in waiting. I face the cavity, and look in. 
there wa noth immedi in the front of the hole. I put my arm in 
and felt to the right, veri gingerly.... 

'just give me a glass of cognac, brown. i'll go on in a moment, 
gregory.... 

'well, I felt to the right, and my finger touch someth curved, that 
felt--yes--mor or less like leather; dampish it was, and evid part 
of a heavy, full thing. there wa nothing, I must say, to alarm one. I 
grew bolder, and put both hand in as well as I could, I pull it to 
me, and it came. It wa heavy, but move more easili than I had expected. 
As I pull it toward the entrance, my left elbow knock over and 
extinguish the candle. I got the thing fairli in front of the mouth and 
began draw it out. just then brown gave a sharp ejacul and ran 
quickli up the step with the lantern. He will tell you whi in a moment. 
startl as I was, I look round after him, and saw him stand for a 
minut at the top and then walk away a few yards. then I heard him call 
softly, "all right, sir," and went on pull out the great bag, in 
complet darkness. It hung for an instant on the edg of the hole, then 
slip forward on to my chest, and _put it arm round my neck_. 

'mi dear gregory, I am tell you the exact truth. I believ I am now 
acquaint with the extrem of terror and repuls which a man can 
endur without lose hi mind. I can onli just manag to tell you now 
the bare outlin of the experience. I wa consciou of a most horribl 
smell of mould, and of a cold kind of face press against my own, and 
move slowli over it, and of several--i don't know how many--leg or 
arm or tentacl or someth cling to my body. I scream out, brown 
says, like a beast, and fell away backward from the step on which I 
stood, and the creatur slip downwards, I suppose, on to that same 
step. providenti the band round me held firm. brown did not lose hi 
head, and wa strong enough to pull me up to the top and get me over the 
edg quit promptly. how he manag it exactli I don't know, and I think 
he would find it hard to tell you. I believ he contriv to hide our 
implement in the desert build near by, and with veri great 
difficulti he got me back to the inn. I wa in no state to make 
explanations, and brown know no german; but next morn I told the 
peopl some tale of have had a bad fall in the abbey ruins, which I 
suppos they believed. and now, befor I go further, I should just like 
you to hear what brown' experi dure those few minut were. tell 
the rector, brown, what you told me.' 

'well, sir,' said brown, speak low and nervously, 'it wa just thi 
way. master wa busi down in front of the 'ole, and I wa 'old the 
lantern and look on, when I 'eard somethink drop in the water from the 
top, as I thought. So I look up, and I see someone' 'ead lookin' over 
at us. I s'pose I must ha' said somethink, and I 'eld the light up and 
run up the steps, and my light shone right on the face. that wa a bad 
un, sir, if ever I see one! A holdish man, and the face veri much fell 
in, and larfin', as I thought. and I got up the step as quick pretti 
nigh as i'm tellin' you, and when I wa out on the ground there warn't a 
sign of ani person. there 'adn't been the time for anyon to get away, 
let alon a hold chap, and I made sure he warn't crouch down by the 
well, nor nothink. next thing I hear master cri out somethink 'orrible, 
and hall I see wa him hang out by the rope, and, as master says, 
'owev I got him up I couldn't tell you.' 

'you hear that, gregory?' said Mr somerton. 'now, doe ani explan of 
that incid strike you?' 

'the whole thing is so ghastli and abnorm that I must own it put me 
quit off my balance; but the thought did occur to me that possibl 
the--well, the person who set the trap might have come to see the success 
of hi plan.' 

'just so, gregory, just so. I can think of noth els so--_likely_, I 
should say, if such a word had a place anywher in my story. I think it 
must have been the abbot.... well, I haven't much more to tell you. I 
spent a miser night, brown sit up with me. next day I wa no 
better; unabl to get up; no doctor to be had; and if one had been 
available, I doubt if he could have done much for me. I made brown write 
off to you, and spent a second terribl night. and, gregory, of thi I am 
sure, and I think it affect me more than the first shock, for it last 
longer: there wa someon or someth on the watch outsid my door the 
whole night. I almost fanci there were two. It wasn't onli the faint 
nois I heard from time to time all through the dark hours, but there 
wa the smell--th hideou smell of mould. everi rag I had had on me on 
that first even I had strip off and made brown take it away. I 
believ he stuf the thing into the stove in hi room; and yet the 
smell wa there, as intens as it had been in the well; and, what is 
more, it came from outsid the door. but with the first glimmer of dawn 
it fade out, and the sound ceased, too; and that convinc me that the 
thing or thing were creatur of darkness, and could not stand the 
daylight; and so I wa sure that if anyon could put back the stone, it 
or they would be powerless until someon els took it away again. I had 
to wait until you came to get that done. Of course, I couldn't send brown 
to do it by himself, and still less could I tell anyon who belong to 
the place. 

'well, there is my story; and, if you don't believ it, I can't help it. 
but I think you do.' 

'indeed,' said Mr gregory, 'I can find no alternative. I _must_ believ 
it! I saw the well and the stone myself, and had a glimpse, I thought, of 
the bag or someth els in the hole. and, to be plain with you, 
somerton, I believ my door wa watch last night, too.' 

'I dare say it was, gregory; but, thank goodness, that is over. have you, 
by the way, anyth to tell about your visit to that dread place?' 

'veri little,' wa the answer. 'brown and I manag easili enough to get 
the slab into it place, and he fix it veri firmli with the iron and 
wedg you had desir him to get, and we contriv to smear the surfac 
with mud so that it look just like the rest of the wall. one thing I did 
notic in the carv on the well-head, which I think must have escap 
you. It wa a horrid, grotesqu shape--perhap more like a toad than 
anyth else, and there wa a label by it inscrib with the two words, 
"depositum custodi".'[9] 

[9] 'keep that which is commit to thee.' 









end of project gutenberg' ghost stori of an antiquary, by M. R. jame 

*** end OF thi project gutenberg ebook ghost stori OF AN antiquari *** 

***** thi file should be name 8486-8.txt or 8486-8.zip ***** 
thi and all associ file of variou format will be found in: 
http://www.gutenberg.org/8/4/8/8486/ 

produc by suzann shell, thoma berger, and the onlin 
distribut proofread team. 


updat edit will replac the previou one--th old edit 
will be renamed. 

creat the work from public domain print edit mean that no 
one own a unit state copyright in these works, so the foundat 
(and you!) can copi and distribut it in the unit state without 
permiss and without pay copyright royalties. special rules, 
set forth in the gener term of use part of thi license, appli to 
copi and distribut project gutenberg-tm electron work to 
protect the project gutenberg-tm concept and trademark. project 
gutenberg is a regist trademark, and may not be use if you 
charg for the ebooks, unless you receiv specif permission. If you 
do not charg anyth for copi of thi ebook, compli with the 
rule is veri easy. you may use thi ebook for nearli ani purpos 
such as creation of deriv works, reports, perform and 
research. they may be modifi and print and given away--y may do 
practic anyth with public domain ebooks. redistribut is 
subject to the trademark license, especi commerci 
redistribution. 



*** start: full licens *** 

the full project gutenberg licens 
pleas read thi befor you distribut OR use thi work 

To protect the project gutenberg-tm mission of promot the free 
distribut of electron works, by use or distribut thi work 
(or ani other work associ in ani way with the phrase "project 
gutenberg"), you agre to compli with all the term of the full project 
gutenberg-tm licens (avail with thi file or onlin at 
http://gutenberg.net/license). 


section 1. gener term of use and redistribut project gutenberg-tm 
electron work 

1.a. By read or use ani part of thi project gutenberg-tm 
electron work, you indic that you have read, understand, agre to 
and accept all the term of thi licens and intellectu properti 
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agre to abid by all 
the term of thi agreement, you must ceas use and return or destroy 
all copi of project gutenberg-tm electron work in your possession. 
If you paid a fee for obtain a copi of or access to a project 
gutenberg-tm electron work and you do not agre to be bound by the 
term of thi agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or 
entiti to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.e.8. 

1.b. "project gutenberg" is a regist trademark. It may onli be 
use on or associ in ani way with an electron work by peopl who 
agre to be bound by the term of thi agreement. there are a few 
thing that you can do with most project gutenberg-tm electron work 
even without compli with the full term of thi agreement. see 
paragraph 1.c below. there are a lot of thing you can do with project 
gutenberg-tm electron work if you follow the term of thi agreement 
and help preserv free futur access to project gutenberg-tm electron 
works. see paragraph 1.e below. 

1.c. the project gutenberg literari archiv foundat ("the foundation" 
or pglaf), own a compil copyright in the collect of project 
gutenberg-tm electron works. nearli all the individu work in the 
collect are in the public domain in the unit states. If an 
individu work is in the public domain in the unit state and you are 
locat in the unit states, we do not claim a right to prevent you from 
copying, distributing, performing, display or creat deriv 
work base on the work as long as all refer to project gutenberg 
are removed. Of course, we hope that you will support the project 
gutenberg-tm mission of promot free access to electron work by 
freeli share project gutenberg-tm work in complianc with the term of 
thi agreement for keep the project gutenberg-tm name associ with 
the work. you can easili compli with the term of thi agreement by 
keep thi work in the same format with it attach full project 
gutenberg-tm licens when you share it without charg with others. 

1.d. the copyright law of the place where you are locat also govern 
what you can do with thi work. copyright law in most countri are in 
a constant state of change. If you are outsid the unit states, check 
the law of your countri in addit to the term of thi agreement 
befor downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distribut or 
creat deriv work base on thi work or ani other project 
gutenberg-tm work. the foundat make no represent concern 
the copyright statu of ani work in ani countri outsid the unit 
states. 

1.e. unless you have remov all refer to project gutenberg: 

1.e.1. the follow sentence, with activ link to, or other immedi 
access to, the full project gutenberg-tm licens must appear promin 
whenev ani copi of a project gutenberg-tm work (ani work on which the 
phrase "project gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "project 
gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed, 
copi or distributed: 

thi ebook is for the use of anyon anywher at no cost and with 
almost no restrict whatsoever. you may copi it, give it away or 
re-us it under the term of the project gutenberg licens includ 
with thi ebook or onlin at www.gutenberg.net 

1.e.2. If an individu project gutenberg-tm electron work is deriv 
from the public domain (doe not contain a notic indic that it is 
post with permiss of the copyright holder), the work can be copi 
and distribut to anyon in the unit state without pay ani fee 
or charges. If you are redistribut or provid access to a work 
with the phrase "project gutenberg" associ with or appear on the 
work, you must compli either with the requir of paragraph 1.e.1 
through 1.e.7 or obtain permiss for the use of the work and the 
project gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraph 1.e.8 or 
1.e.9. 

1.e.3. If an individu project gutenberg-tm electron work is post 
with the permiss of the copyright holder, your use and distribut 
must compli with both paragraph 1.e.1 through 1.e.7 and ani addit 
term impos by the copyright holder. addit term will be link 
to the project gutenberg-tm licens for all work post with the 
permiss of the copyright holder found at the begin of thi work. 

1.e.4. Do not unlink or detach or remov the full project gutenberg-tm 
licens term from thi work, or ani file contain a part of thi 
work or ani other work associ with project gutenberg-tm. 

1.e.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribut or redistribut thi 
electron work, or ani part of thi electron work, without 
promin display the sentenc set forth in paragraph 1.e.1 with 
activ link or immedi access to the full term of the project 
gutenberg-tm license. 

1.e.6. you may convert to and distribut thi work in ani binary, 
compressed, mark up, nonproprietari or proprietari form, includ ani 
word process or hypertext form. however, if you provid access to or 
distribut copi of a project gutenberg-tm work in a format other than 
"plain vanilla ascii" or other format use in the offici version 
post on the offici project gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net), 
you must, at no addit cost, fee or expens to the user, provid a 
copy, a mean of export a copy, or a mean of obtain a copi upon 
request, of the work in it origin "plain vanilla ascii" or other 
form. ani altern format must includ the full project gutenberg-tm 
licens as specifi in paragraph 1.e.1. 

1.e.7. Do not charg a fee for access to, viewing, displaying, 
performing, copi or distribut ani project gutenberg-tm work 
unless you compli with paragraph 1.e.8 or 1.e.9. 

1.e.8. you may charg a reason fee for copi of or provid 
access to or distribut project gutenberg-tm electron work provid 
that 

- you pay a royalti fee of 20% of the gross profit you deriv from 
the use of project gutenberg-tm work calcul use the method 
you alreadi use to calcul your applic taxes. the fee is 
owe to the owner of the project gutenberg-tm trademark, but he 
ha agre to donat royalti under thi paragraph to the 
project gutenberg literari archiv foundation. royalti payment 
must be paid within 60 day follow each date on which you 
prepar (or are legal requir to prepare) your period tax 
returns. royalti payment should be clearli mark as such and 
sent to the project gutenberg literari archiv foundat at the 
address specifi in section 4, "inform about donat to 
the project gutenberg literari archiv foundation." 

- you provid a full refund of ani money paid by a user who notifi 
you in write (or by e-mail) within 30 day of receipt that s/he 
doe not agre to the term of the full project gutenberg-tm 
license. you must requir such a user to return or 
destroy all copi of the work possess in a physic medium 
and discontinu all use of and all access to other copi of 
project gutenberg-tm works. 

- you provide, in accord with paragraph 1.f.3, a full refund of ani 
money paid for a work or a replac copy, if a defect in the 
electron work is discov and report to you within 90 day 
of receipt of the work. 

- you compli with all other term of thi agreement for free 
distribut of project gutenberg-tm works. 

1.e.9. If you wish to charg a fee or distribut a project gutenberg-tm 
electron work or group of work on differ term than are set 
forth in thi agreement, you must obtain permiss in write from 
both the project gutenberg literari archiv foundat and michael 
hart, the owner of the project gutenberg-tm trademark. contact the 
foundat as set forth in section 3 below. 

1.f. 

1.f.1. project gutenberg volunt and employe expend consider 
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcrib and proofread 
public domain work in creat the project gutenberg-tm 
collection. despit these efforts, project gutenberg-tm electron 
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain 
"defects," such as, but not limit to, incomplete, inaccur or 
corrupt data, transcript errors, a copyright or other intellectu 
properti infringement, a defect or damag disk or other medium, a 
comput virus, or comput code that damag or cannot be read by 
your equipment. 

1.f.2. limit warranty, disclaim OF damag - except for the "right 
of replac or refund" describ in paragraph 1.f.3, the project 
gutenberg literari archiv foundation, the owner of the project 
gutenberg-tm trademark, and ani other parti distribut a project 
gutenberg-tm electron work under thi agreement, disclaim all 
liabil to you for damages, cost and expenses, includ legal 
fees. you agre that you have NO remedi for negligence, strict 
liability, breach OF warranti OR breach OF contract except those 
provid IN paragraph f3. you agre that the foundation, the 
trademark owner, and ani distributor under thi agreement will not BE 
liabl TO you for actual, direct, indirect, consequential, punit OR 
incident damag even IF you give notic OF the possibl OF such 
damage. 

1.f.3. limit right OF replac OR refund - If you discov a 
defect in thi electron work within 90 day of receiv it, you can 
receiv a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by send a 
written explan to the person you receiv the work from. If you 
receiv the work on a physic medium, you must return the medium with 
your written explanation. the person or entiti that provid you with 
the defect work may elect to provid a replac copi in lieu of a 
refund. If you receiv the work electronically, the person or entiti 
provid it to you may choos to give you a second opportun to 
receiv the work electron in lieu of a refund. If the second copi 
is also defective, you may demand a refund in write without further 
opportun to fix the problem. 

1.f.4. except for the limit right of replac or refund set forth 
in paragraph 1.f.3, thi work is provid to you 'as-is' with NO other 
warranti OF ani kind, express OR implied, includ but not limit TO 
warranti OF merchant OR fit for ani purpose. 

1.f.5. some state do not allow disclaim of certain impli 
warranti or the exclus or limit of certain type of damages. 
If ani disclaim or limit set forth in thi agreement violat the 
law of the state applic to thi agreement, the agreement shall be 
interpret to make the maximum disclaim or limit permit by 
the applic state law. the invalid or unenforc of ani 
provis of thi agreement shall not void the remain provisions. 

1.f.6. indemn - you agre to indemnifi and hold the foundation, the 
trademark owner, ani agent or employe of the foundation, anyon 
provid copi of project gutenberg-tm electron work in accord 
with thi agreement, and ani volunt associ with the production, 
promot and distribut of project gutenberg-tm electron works, 
harmless from all liability, cost and expenses, includ legal fees, 
that aris directli or indirectli from ani of the follow which you do 
or caus to occur: (a) distribut of thi or ani project gutenberg-tm 
work, (b) alteration, modification, or addit or delet to ani 
project gutenberg-tm work, and (c) ani defect you cause. 


section 2. inform about the mission of project gutenberg-tm 

project gutenberg-tm is synonym with the free distribut of 
electron work in format readabl by the widest varieti of comput 
includ obsolete, old, middle-ag and new computers. It exist 
becaus of the effort of hundr of volunt and donat from 
peopl in all walk of life. 

volunt and financi support to provid volunt with the 
assist they need are critic to reach project gutenberg-tm' 
goal and ensur that the project gutenberg-tm collect will 
remain freeli avail for gener to come. In 2001, the project 
gutenberg literari archiv foundat wa creat to provid a secur 
and perman futur for project gutenberg-tm and futur generations. 
To learn more about the project gutenberg literari archiv foundat 
and how your effort and donat can help, see section 3 and 4 
and the foundat web page at http://www.pglaf.org. 


section 3. inform about the project gutenberg literari archiv 
foundat 

the project gutenberg literari archiv foundat is a non profit 
501(c)(3) educ corpor organ under the law of the 
state of mississippi and grant tax exempt statu by the intern 
revenu service. the foundation' ein or feder tax identif 
number is 64-6221541. it 501(c)(3) letter is post at 
http://pglaf.org/fundraising. contribut to the project gutenberg 
literari archiv foundat are tax deduct to the full extent 
permit by u.s. feder law and your state' laws. 

the foundation' princip offic is locat at 4557 melan dr. S. 
fairbanks, ak, 99712., but it volunt and employe are scatter 
throughout numer locations. it busi offic is locat at 
809 north 1500 west, salt lake city, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email 
business@pglaf.org. email contact link and up to date contact 
inform can be found at the foundation' web site and offici 
page at http://pglaf.org 

for addit contact information: 
dr. gregori B. newbi 
chief execut and director 
gbnewby@pglaf.org 


section 4. inform about donat to the project gutenberg 
literari archiv foundat 

project gutenberg-tm depend upon and cannot surviv without wide 
spread public support and donat to carri out it mission of 
increas the number of public domain and licens work that can be 
freeli distribut in machin readabl form access by the widest 
array of equip includ outdat equipment. mani small donat 
($1 to $5,000) are particularli import to maintain tax exempt 
statu with the irs. 

the foundat is commit to compli with the law regul 
chariti and charit donat in all 50 state of the unit 
states. complianc requir are not uniform and it take a 
consider effort, much paperwork and mani fee to meet and keep up 
with these requirements. We do not solicit donat in locat 
where we have not receiv written confirm of compliance. To 
send donat or determin the statu of complianc for ani 
particular state visit http://pglaf.org 

while we cannot and do not solicit contribut from state where we 
have not met the solicit requirements, we know of no prohibit 
against accept unsolicit donat from donor in such state who 
approach us with offer to donate. 

intern donat are grate accepted, but we cannot make 
ani statement concern tax treatment of donat receiv from 
outsid the unit states. u.s. law alon swamp our small staff. 

pleas check the project gutenberg web page for current donat 
method and addresses. donat are accept in a number of other 
way includ includ checks, onlin payment and credit card 
donations. To donate, pleas visit: http://pglaf.org/don 


section 5. gener inform about project gutenberg-tm electron 
works. 

professor michael S. hart is the origin of the project gutenberg-tm 
concept of a librari of electron work that could be freeli share 
with anyone. for thirti years, he produc and distribut project 
gutenberg-tm ebook with onli a loos network of volunt support. 


project gutenberg-tm ebook are often creat from sever print 
editions, all of which are confirm as public domain in the u.s. 
unless a copyright notic is included. thus, we do not necessarili 
keep ebook in complianc with ani particular paper edition. 


most peopl start at our web site which ha the main PG search facility: 

http://www.gutenberg.net 

thi web site includ inform about project gutenberg-tm, 
includ how to make donat to the project gutenberg literari 
archiv foundation, how to help produc our new ebooks, and how to 
subscrib to our email newslett to hear about new ebooks. 
