project gutenberg' tale of terror and mystery, by arthur conan doyl 

thi ebook is for the use of anyon anywher at no cost and with 
almost no restrict whatsoever. you may copi it, give it away or 
re-us it under the term of the project gutenberg licens includ 
with thi ebook or onlin at www.gutenberg.net 


title: tale of terror and mysteri 

author: arthur conan doyl 

post date: octob 10, 2008 [ebook #537] 
releas date: may, 1996 
[last updated: decemb 8, 2011] 

language: english 


*** start OF thi project gutenberg ebook tale OF terror and mysteri *** 




produc by charl keller. html version by Al haines. 









tale of terror and mysteri 


By 

sir arthur conan doyl 



content 

tale of terror 

the horror of the height 
the leather funnel 
the new catacomb 
the case of ladi sannox 
the terror of blue john gap 
the brazilian cat 


tale of mysteri 

the lost special 
the beetle-hunt 
the man with the watch 
the japan box 
the black doctor 
the jew' breastplat 





tale of terror 



the horror of the height 
prefac 
the idea that the extraordinari narr which ha been call the 
joyce-armstrong fragment is an elabor practic joke evolv by some 
unknown person, curs by a pervert and sinist sens of humour, ha 
now been abandon by all who have examin the matter. the most 
macabr and imagin of plotter would hesit befor link hi 
morbid fanci with the unquest and tragic fact which reinforc 
the statement. though the assert contain in it are amaz and 
even monstrous, it is none the less forc itself upon the gener 
intellig that they are true, and that we must readjust our idea to 
the new situation. thi world of our appear to be separ by a 
slight and precari margin of safeti from a most singular and 
unexpect danger. I will endeavour in thi narrative, which 
reproduc the origin document in it necessarili somewhat 
fragmentari form, to lay befor the reader the whole of the fact up to 
date, prefac my statement by say that, if there be ani who doubt 
the narr of joyce-armstrong, there can be no question at all as to 
the fact concern lieuten myrtle, R. n., and mr. hay connor, who 
undoubtedli met their end in the manner described. 

the joyce-armstrong fragment wa found in the field which is call 
lower haycock, lie one mile to the westward of the villag of 
withyham, upon the kent and sussex border. It wa on the 15th 
septemb last that an agricultur labourer, jame flynn, in the 
employ of mathew dodd, farmer, of the chauntri farm, withyham, 
perceiv a briar pipe lie near the footpath which skirt the hedg 
in lower haycock. A few pace farther on he pick up a pair of broken 
binocular glasses. finally, among some nettl in the ditch, he caught 
sight of a flat, canvas-back book, which prove to be a note-book 
with detach leaves, some of which had come loos and were 
flutter along the base of the hedge. these he collected, but some, 
includ the first, were never recovered, and leav a deplor 
hiatu in thi all-import statement. the note-book wa taken by the 
labour to hi master, who in turn show it to dr. J. H. atherton, of 
hartfield. thi gentleman at onc recogn the need for an expert 
examination, and the manuscript wa forward to the aero club in 
london, where it now lies. 

the first two page of the manuscript are missing. there is also one 
torn away at the end of the narrative, though none of these affect the 
gener coher of the story. It is conjectur that the miss 
open is concern with the record of mr. joyce-armstrong' 
qualif as an aeronaut, which can be gather from other sourc 
and are admit to be unsurpass among the air-pilot of england. 
for mani year he ha been look upon as among the most dare and the 
most intellectu of fli men, a combin which ha enabl him to 
both invent and test sever new devices, includ the common 
gyroscop attach which is known by hi name. the main bodi of the 
manuscript is written neatli in ink, but the last few line are in 
pencil and are so rag as to be hardli legible--exactly, in fact, as 
they might be expect to appear if they were scribbl off hurriedli 
from the seat of a move aeroplane. there are, it may be added, 
sever stains, both on the last page and on the outsid cover which 
have been pronounc by the home offic expert to be blood--prob 
human and certainli mammalian. the fact that someth close 
resembl the organ of malaria wa discov in thi blood, and 
that joyce-armstrong is known to have suffer from intermitt fever, 
is a remark exampl of the new weapon which modern scienc ha 
place in the hand of our detectives. 

and now a word as to the person of the author of thi epoch-mak 
statement. joyce-armstrong, accord to the few friend who realli 
knew someth of the man, wa a poet and a dreamer, as well as a 
mechan and an inventor. He wa a man of consider wealth, much of 
which he had spent in the pursuit of hi aeronaut hobby. He had 
four privat aeroplan in hi hangar near devizes, and is said to 
have made no fewer than one hundr and seventi ascent in the cours 
of last year. He wa a retir man with dark moods, in which he would 
avoid the societi of hi fellows. captain dangerfield, who knew him 
better than anyone, say that there were time when hi eccentr 
threaten to develop into someth more serious. hi habit of 
carri a shot-gun with him in hi aeroplan wa one manifest of 
it. 

anoth wa the morbid effect which the fall of lieuten myrtl had 
upon hi mind. myrtle, who wa attempt the height record, fell from 
an altitud of someth over thirti thousand feet. horribl to 
narrate, hi head wa entir obliterated, though hi bodi and limb 
preserv their configuration. At everi gather of airmen, 
joyce-armstrong, accord to dangerfield, would ask, with an enigmat 
smile: "and where, pray, is myrtle' head?" 

On anoth occas after dinner, at the mess of the fli school on 
salisburi plain, he start a debat as to what will be the most 
perman danger which airmen will have to encounter. have listen 
to success opinion as to air-pockets, faulti construction, and 
over-banking, he end by shrug hi shoulder and refus to put 
forward hi own views, though he gave the impress that they differ 
from ani advanc by hi companions. 

It is worth remark that after hi own complet disappear it wa 
found that hi privat affair were arrang with a precis which may 
show that he had a strong premonit of disaster. with these 
essenti explan I will now give the narr exactli as it 
stands, begin at page three of the blood-soak note-book: 

"nevertheless, when I dine at rheim with coselli and gustav raymond I 
found that neither of them wa awar of ani particular danger in the 
higher layer of the atmosphere. I did not actual say what wa in my 
thoughts, but I got so near to it that if they had ani correspond 
idea they could not have fail to express it. but then they are two 
empty, vainglori fellow with no thought beyond see their silli 
name in the newspaper. It is interest to note that neither of them 
had ever been much beyond the twenty-thousand-foot level. Of course, 
men have been higher than thi both in balloon and in the ascent of 
mountains. It must be well abov that point that the aeroplan enter 
the danger zone--alway presum that my premonit are correct. 

"aeroplan ha been with us now for more than twenti years, and one 
might well ask: whi should thi peril be onli reveal itself in our 
day? the answer is obvious. In the old day of weak engines, when a 
hundr horse-pow gnome or green wa consid ampl for everi need, 
the flight were veri restricted. now that three hundr horse-pow 
is the rule rather than the exception, visit to the upper layer have 
becom easier and more common. some of us can rememb how, in our 
youth, garro made a world-wid reput by attain nineteen 
thousand feet, and it wa consid a remark achiev to fli 
over the alps. our standard now ha been immeasur raised, and 
there are twenti high flight for one in former years. mani of them 
have been undertaken with impunity. the thirty-thousand-foot level ha 
been reach time after time with no discomfort beyond cold and asthma. 
what doe thi prove? A visitor might descend upon thi planet a 
thousand time and never see a tiger. yet tiger exist, and if he 
chanc to come down into a jungl he might be devoured. there are 
jungl of the upper air, and there are wors thing than tiger which 
inhabit them. I believ in time they will map these jungl accur 
out. even at the present moment I could name two of them. one of them 
lie over the pau-biarritz district of france. anoth is just over my 
head as I write here in my hous in wiltshire. I rather think there is 
a third in the homburg-wiesbaden district. 

"it wa the disappear of the airmen that first set me thinking. Of 
course, everyon said that they had fallen into the sea, but that did 
not satisfi me at all. first, there wa verrier in france; hi machin 
wa found near bayonne, but they never got hi body. there wa the 
case of baxter also, who vanished, though hi engin and some of the 
iron fix were found in a wood in leicestershire. In that case, dr. 
middleton, of amesbury, who wa watch the flight with a telescope, 
declar that just befor the cloud obscur the view he saw the 
machine, which wa at an enorm height, suddenli rise perpendicularli 
upward in a success of jerk in a manner that he would have thought 
to be impossible. that wa the last seen of baxter. there wa a 
correspond in the papers, but it never led to anything. there were 
sever other similar cases, and then there wa the death of hay 
connor. what a cackl there wa about an unsolv mysteri of the air, 
and what column in the halfpenni papers, and yet how littl wa ever 
done to get to the bottom of the business! He came down in a 
tremend vol-plan from an unknown height. He never got off hi 
machin and die in hi pilot' seat. die of what? 'heart disease,' 
said the doctors. rubbish! hay connor' heart wa as sound as mine 
is. what did venabl say? venabl wa the onli man who wa at hi 
side when he died. He said that he wa shiver and look like a man 
who had been badli scared. 'di of fright,' said venables, but could 
not imagin what he wa frighten about. onli said one word to 
venables, which sound like 'monstrous.' they could make noth of 
that at the inquest. but I could make someth of it. monsters! that 
wa the last word of poor harri hay connor. and he did die of fright, 
just as venabl thought. 

"and then there wa myrtle' head. Do you realli believe--do anybodi 
realli believe--that a man' head could be driven clean into hi bodi 
by the forc of a fall? well, perhap it may be possible, but I, for 
one, have never believ that it wa so with myrtle. and the greas 
upon hi clothes--'al slimi with grease,' said somebodi at the 
inquest. queer that nobodi got think after that! I did--but, then, 
I had been think for a good long time. i'v made three ascents--how 
dangerfield use to chaff me about my shot-gun--but i'v never been 
high enough. now, with thi new, light paul veron machin and it 
one hundr and seventy-f robur, I should easili touch the thirti 
thousand tomorrow. i'll have a shot at the record. mayb I shall have 
a shot at someth els as well. Of course, it' dangerous. If a 
fellow want to avoid danger he had best keep out of fli altogeth 
and subsid final into flannel slipper and a dressing-gown. but 
i'll visit the air-jungl tomorrow--and if there' anyth there I 
shall know it. If I return, i'll find myself a bit of a celebrity. If 
I don't thi note-book may explain what I am tri to do, and how I 
lost my life in do it. but no drivel about accid or mysteries, 
if you please. 

"I chose my paul veron monoplan for the job. there' noth like a 
monoplan when real work is to be done. beaumont found that out in veri 
earli days. for one thing it doesn't mind damp, and the weather look 
as if we should be in the cloud all the time. it' a bonni littl 
model and answer my hand like a tender-mouth horse. the engin is a 
ten-cylind rotari robur work up to one hundr and seventy-five. 
It ha all the modern improvements--enclos fuselage, high-curv 
land skids, brakes, gyroscop steadiers, and three speeds, work 
by an alter of the angl of the plane upon the venetian-blind 
principle. I took a shot-gun with me and a dozen cartridg fill 
with buck-shot. you should have seen the face of perkins, my old 
mechanic, when I direct him to put them in. I wa dress like an 
arctic explorer, with two jersey under my overalls, thick sock insid 
my pad boots, a storm-cap with flaps, and my talc goggles. It wa 
stifl outsid the hangars, but I wa go for the summit of the 
himalayas, and had to dress for the part. perkin knew there wa 
someth on and implor me to take him with me. perhap I should if 
I were use the biplane, but a monoplan is a one-man show--if you 
want to get the last foot of life out of it. Of course, I took an 
oxygen bag; the man who goe for the altitud record without one will 
either be frozen or smothered--or both. 

"I had a good look at the planes, the rudder-bar, and the elev 
lever befor I got in. everyth wa in order so far as I could see. 
then I switch on my engin and found that she wa run sweetly. 
when they let her go she rose almost at onc upon the lowest speed. I 
circl my home field onc or twice just to warm her up, and then with 
a wave to perkin and the others, I flatten out my plane and put her 
on her highest. she skim like a swallow down wind for eight or ten 
mile until I turn her nose up a littl and she began to climb in a 
great spiral for the cloud-bank abov me. it' all-import to rise 
slowli and adapt yourself to the pressur as you go. 

"it wa a close, warm day for an english september, and there wa the 
hush and heavi of impend rain. now and then there came sudden 
puff of wind from the south-west--on of them so gusti and unexpect 
that it caught me nap and turn me half-round for an instant. I 
rememb the time when gust and whirl and air-pocket use to be 
thing of danger--befor we learn to put an overmast power into 
our engines. just as I reach the cloud-banks, with the altimet 
mark three thousand, down came the rain. My word, how it poured! 
It drum upon my wing and lash against my face, blur my 
glass so that I could hardli see. I got down on to a low speed, for 
it wa pain to travel against it. As I got higher it becam hail, 
and I had to turn tail to it. one of my cylind wa out of action--a 
dirti plug, I should imagine, but still I wa rise steadili with 
plenti of power. after a bit the troubl passed, whatev it was, and 
I heard the full, deep-throat purr--th ten sing as one. that' 
where the beauti of our modern silenc come in. We can at last 
control our engin by ear. how they squeal and squeak and sob when 
they are in trouble! all those cri for help were wast in the old 
days, when everi sound wa swallow up by the monstrou racket of the 
machine. If onli the earli aviat could come back to see the beauti 
and perfect of the mechan which have been bought at the cost of 
their lives! 

"about nine-thirti I wa near the clouds. down below me, all 
blur and shadow with rain, lay the vast expans of salisburi 
plain. half a dozen fli machin were do hackwork at the 
thousand-foot level, look like littl black swallow against the 
green background. I dare say they were wonder what I wa do up 
in cloud-land. suddenli a grey curtain drew across beneath me and the 
wet fold of vapour were swirl round my face. It wa clammili cold 
and miserable. but I wa abov the hail-storm, and that wa someth 
gained. the cloud wa as dark and thick as a london fog. In my 
anxieti to get clear, I cock her nose up until the automat 
alarm-bel rang, and I actual began to slide backwards. My sop 
and drip wing had made me heavier than I thought, but present I 
wa in lighter cloud, and soon had clear the first layer. there wa 
a second--opal-colour and fleecy--at a great height abov my head, a 
white, unbroken ceil above, and a dark, unbroken floor below, with 
the monoplan labour upward upon a vast spiral between them. It is 
deadli lone in these cloud-spaces. onc a great flight of some small 
water-bird went past me, fli veri fast to the westwards. the quick 
whir of their wing and their music cri were cheeri to my ear. I 
fanci that they were teal, but I am a wretch zoologist. now that we 
human have becom bird we must realli learn to know our brethren by 
sight. 

"the wind down beneath me whirl and sway the broad cloud-plain. 
onc a great eddi form in it, a whirlpool of vapour, and through it, 
as down a funnel, I caught sight of the distant world. A larg white 
biplan wa pass at a vast depth beneath me. I fanci it wa the 
morn mail servic betwixt bristol and london. then the drift swirl 
inward again and the great solitud wa unbroken. 

"just after ten I touch the lower edg of the upper cloud-stratum. It 
consist of fine diaphan vapour drift swiftli from the 
westwards. the wind had been steadili rise all thi time and it wa 
now blow a sharp breeze--twenty-eight an hour by my gauge. alreadi 
it wa veri cold, though my altimet onli mark nine thousand. the 
engin were work beautifully, and we went drone steadili upwards. 
the cloud-bank wa thicker than I had expected, but at last it thin 
out into a golden mist befor me, and then in an instant I had shot out 
from it, and there wa an uncloud sky and a brilliant sun abov my 
head--al blue and gold above, all shine silver below, one vast, 
glimmer plain as far as my eye could reach. It wa a quarter past 
ten o'clock, and the barograph needl point to twelv thousand eight 
hundred. Up I went and up, my ear concentr upon the deep pur 
of my motor, my eye busi alway with the watch, the revolut 
indicator, the petrol lever, and the oil pump. No wonder aviat are 
said to be a fearless race. with so mani thing to think of there is 
no time to troubl about oneself. about thi time I note how 
unreli is the compass when abov a certain height from earth. At 
fifteen thousand feet mine wa point east and a point south. the 
sun and the wind gave me my true bearings. 

"I had hope to reach an etern still in these high altitudes, but 
with everi thousand feet of ascent the gale grew stronger. My machin 
groan and trembl in everi joint and rivet as she face it, and 
swept away like a sheet of paper when I bank her on the turn, 
skim down wind at a greater pace, perhaps, than ever mortal man ha 
moved. yet I had alway to turn again and tack up in the wind' eye, 
for it wa not mere a height record that I wa after. By all my 
calcul it wa abov littl wiltshir that my air-jungl lay, and 
all my labour might be lost if I struck the outer layer at some 
farther point. 

"when I reach the nineteen-thousand-foot level, which wa about 
midday, the wind wa so sever that I look with some anxieti to the 
stay of my wings, expect momentarili to see them snap or slacken. 
I even cast loos the parachut behind me, and fasten it hook into 
the ring of my leathern belt, so as to be readi for the worst. now wa 
the time when a bit of scamp work by the mechan is paid for by the 
life of the aeronaut. but she held togeth bravely. everi cord and 
strut wa hum and vibrat like so mani harp-strings, but it wa 
gloriou to see how, for all the beat and the buffeting, she wa 
still the conqueror of natur and the mistress of the sky. there is 
sure someth divin in man himself that he should rise so superior 
to the limit which creation seem to impose--rise, too, by such 
unselfish, heroic devot as thi air-conquest ha shown. talk of 
human degeneration! when ha such a stori as thi been written in the 
annal of our race? 

"these were the thought in my head as I climb that monstrous, 
inclin plane with the wind sometim beat in my face and sometim 
whistl behind my ears, while the cloud-land beneath me fell away to 
such a distanc that the fold and hummock of silver had all smooth 
out into one flat, shine plain. but suddenli I had a horribl and 
unpreced experience. I have known befor what it is to be in what 
our neighbour have call a tourbillon, but never on such a scale as 
this. that huge, sweep river of wind of which I have spoken had, as 
it appears, whirlpool within it which were as monstrou as itself. 
without a moment' warn I wa drag suddenli into the heart of 
one. I spun round for a minut or two with such veloc that I almost 
lost my senses, and then fell suddenly, left wing foremost, down the 
vacuum funnel in the centre. I drop like a stone, and lost nearli a 
thousand feet. It wa onli my belt that kept me in my seat, and the 
shock and breathless left me hang half-insens over the side 
of the fuselage. but I am alway capabl of a suprem effort--it is my 
one great merit as an aviator. I wa consciou that the descent wa 
slower. the whirlpool wa a cone rather than a funnel, and I had come 
to the apex. with a terrif wrench, throw my weight all to one 
side, I level my plane and brought her head away from the wind. In 
an instant I had shot out of the eddi and wa skim down the sky. 
then, shaken but victorious, I turn her nose up and began onc more 
my steadi grind on the upward spiral. I took a larg sweep to avoid 
the danger-spot of the whirlpool, and soon I wa safe abov it. just 
after one o'clock I wa twenty-on thousand feet abov the sea-level. 
To my great joy I had top the gale, and with everi hundr feet of 
ascent the air grew stiller. On the other hand, it wa veri cold, and 
I wa consciou of that peculiar nausea which goe with rarefact of 
the air. for the first time I unscrew the mouth of my oxygen bag and 
took an occasion whiff of the gloriou gas. I could feel it run 
like a cordial through my veins, and I wa exhilar almost to the 
point of drunkenness. I shout and sang as I soar upward into the 
cold, still outer world. 

"it is veri clear to me that the insens which came upon 
glaisher, and in a lesser degre upon coxwell, when, in 1862, they 
ascend in a balloon to the height of thirti thousand feet, wa due to 
the extrem speed with which a perpendicular ascent is made. do it 
at an easi gradient and accustom oneself to the lessen barometr 
pressur by slow degrees, there are no such dread symptoms. At the 
same great height I found that even without my oxygen inhal I could 
breath without undu distress. It wa bitterli cold, however, and my 
thermomet wa at zero, fahrenheit. At one-thirti I wa nearli seven 
mile abov the surfac of the earth, and still ascend steadily. I 
found, however, that the rarefi air wa give markedli less support 
to my planes, and that my angl of ascent had to be consider 
lower in consequence. It wa alreadi clear that even with my light 
weight and strong engine-pow there wa a point in front of me where I 
should be held. To make matter worse, one of my sparking-plug wa in 
troubl again and there wa intermitt misfir in the engine. My 
heart wa heavi with the fear of failure. 

"it wa about that time that I had a most extraordinari experience. 
someth whizz past me in a trail of smoke and explod with a loud, 
hiss sound, send forth a cloud of steam. for the instant I could 
not imagin what had happened. then I rememb that the earth is for 
ever be bombard by meteor stones, and would be hardli inhabit 
were they not in nearli everi case turn to vapour in the outer layer 
of the atmosphere. here is a new danger for the high-altitud man, for 
two other pass me when I wa near the forty-thousand-foot mark. 
I cannot doubt that at the edg of the earth' envelop the risk would 
be a veri real one. 

"mi barograph needl mark forty-on thousand three hundr when I 
becam awar that I could go no farther. physically, the strain wa 
not as yet greater than I could bear but my machin had reach it 
limit. the attenu air gave no firm support to the wings, and the 
least tilt develop into side-slip, while she seem sluggish on her 
controls. possibly, had the engin been at it best, anoth thousand 
feet might have been within our capacity, but it wa still misfiring, 
and two out of the ten cylind appear to be out of action. If I 
had not alreadi reach the zone for which I wa search then I 
should never see it upon thi journey. but wa it not possibl that I 
had attain it? soar in circl like a monstrou hawk upon the 
forty-thousand-foot level I let the monoplan guid herself, and with 
my mannheim glass I made a care observ of my surroundings. the 
heaven were perfectli clear; there wa no indic of those danger 
which I had imagined. 

"I have said that I wa soar in circles. It struck me suddenli that 
I would do well to take a wider sweep and open up a new airtract. If 
the hunter enter an earth-jungl he would drive through it if he 
wish to find hi game. My reason had led me to believ that the 
air-jungl which I had imagin lay somewher over wiltshire. thi 
should be to the south and west of me. I took my bear from the 
sun, for the compass wa hopeless and no trace of earth wa to be 
seen--noth but the distant, silver cloud-plain. however, I got my 
direct as best I might and kept her head straight to the mark. I 
reckon that my petrol suppli would not last for more than anoth 
hour or so, but I could afford to use it to the last drop, sinc a 
singl magnific vol-plan could at ani time take me to the earth. 

"suddenli I wa awar of someth new. the air in front of me had 
lost it crystal clearness. It wa full of long, rag wisp of 
someth which I can onli compar to veri fine cigarett smoke. It 
hung about in wreath and coils, turn and twist slowli in the 
sunlight. As the monoplan shot through it, I wa awar of a faint 
tast of oil upon my lips, and there wa a greasi scum upon the 
woodwork of the machine. some infinit fine organ matter appear 
to be suspend in the atmosphere. there wa no life there. It wa 
inchoat and diffuse, extend for mani squar acr and then fring 
off into the void. no, it wa not life. but might it not be the 
remain of life? abov all, might it not be the food of life, of 
monstrou life, even as the humbl greas of the ocean is the food for 
the mighti whale? the thought wa in my mind when my eye look 
upward and I saw the most wonder vision that ever man ha seen. 
can I hope to convey it to you even as I saw it myself last thursday? 

"conceiv a jelly-fish such as sail in our summer seas, bell-shap 
and of enorm size--far larger, I should judge, than the dome of st. 
paul's. It wa of a light pink colour vein with a delic green, 
but the whole huge fabric so tenuou that it wa but a fairi outlin 
against the dark blue sky. It pulsat with a delic and regular 
rhythm. from it there depend two long, drooping, green tentacles, 
which sway slowli backward and forwards. thi gorgeou vision 
pass gentli with noiseless digniti over my head, as light and fragil 
as a soap-bubble, and drift upon it state way. 

"I had half-turn my monoplane, that I might look after thi beauti 
creature, when, in a moment, I found myself amidst a perfect fleet of 
them, of all sizes, but none so larg as the first. some were quit 
small, but the major about as big as an averag balloon, and with 
much the same curvatur at the top. there wa in them a delicaci of 
textur and colour which remind me of the finest venetian glass. 
pale shade of pink and green were the prevail tints, but all had a 
love iridesc where the sun shimmer through their dainti forms. 
some hundr of them drift past me, a wonder fairi squadron of 
strang unknown argosi of the sky--creatur whose form and 
substanc were so attun to these pure height that one could not 
conceiv anyth so delic within actual sight or sound of earth. 

"but soon my attent wa drawn to a new phenomenon--th serpent of 
the outer air. these were long, thin, fantast coil of vapour-lik 
material, which turn and twist with great speed, fli round and 
round at such a pace that the eye could hardli follow them. some of 
these ghost-lik creatur were twenti or thirti feet long, but it wa 
difficult to tell their girth, for their outlin wa so hazi that it 
seem to fade away into the air around them. these air-snak were of 
a veri light grey or smoke colour, with some darker line within, which 
gave the impress of a definit organism. one of them whisk past 
my veri face, and I wa consciou of a cold, clammi contact, but their 
composit wa so unsubstanti that I could not connect them with ani 
thought of physic danger, ani more than the beauti bell-lik 
creatur which had preced them. there wa no more solid in their 
frame than in the float spume from a broken wave. 

"but a more terribl experi wa in store for me. float 
downward from a great height there came a purplish patch of vapour, 
small as I saw it first, but rapidli enlarg as it approach me, 
until it appear to be hundr of squar feet in size. though 
fashion of some transparent, jelly-lik substance, it wa none the 
less of much more definit outlin and solid consist than anyth 
which I had seen before. there were more traces, too, of a physic 
organization, especi two vast, shadowy, circular plate upon either 
side, which may have been eyes, and a perfectli solid white project 
between them which wa as curv and cruel as the beak of a vulture. 

"the whole aspect of thi monster wa formid and threatening, and 
it kept chang it colour from a veri light mauv to a dark, angri 
purpl so thick that it cast a shadow as it drift between my 
monoplan and the sun. On the upper curv of it huge bodi there were 
three great project which I can onli describ as enorm bubbles, 
and I wa convinc as I look at them that they were charg with 
some extrem light ga which serv to buoy up the misshapen and 
semi-solid mass in the rarefi air. the creatur move swiftli along, 
keep pace easili with the monoplane, and for twenti mile or more it 
form my horribl escort, hover over me like a bird of prey which 
is wait to pounce. it method of progression--don so swiftli that 
it wa not easi to follow--wa to throw out a long, glutin streamer 
in front of it, which in turn seem to draw forward the rest of the 
writh body. So elast and gelatin wa it that never for two 
success minut wa it the same shape, and yet each chang made it 
more threaten and loathsom than the last. 

"I knew that it meant mischief. everi purpl flush of it hideou bodi 
told me so. the vague, goggl eye which were turn alway upon me 
were cold and merciless in their viscid hatred. I dip the nose of 
my monoplan downward to escap it. As I did so, as quick as a flash 
there shot out a long tentacl from thi mass of float blubber, and 
it fell as light and sinuou as a whip-lash across the front of my 
machine. there wa a loud hiss as it lay for a moment across the hot 
engine, and it whisk itself into the air again, while the huge, flat 
bodi drew itself togeth as if in sudden pain. I dip to a 
vol-pique, but again a tentacl fell over the monoplan and wa shorn 
off by the propel as easili as it might have cut through a smoke 
wreath. A long, gliding, sticky, serpent-lik coil came from behind and 
caught me round the waist, drag me out of the fuselage. I tore at 
it, my finger sink into the smooth, glue-lik surface, and for an 
instant I disengag myself, but onli to be caught round the boot by 
anoth coil, which gave me a jerk that tilt me almost on to my back. 

"a I fell over I blaze off both barrel of my gun, though, indeed, it 
wa like attack an eleph with a pea-shoot to imagin that ani 
human weapon could crippl that mighti bulk. and yet I aim better 
than I knew, for, with a loud report, one of the great blister upon 
the creature' back explod with the punctur of the buck-shot. It 
wa veri clear that my conjectur wa right, and that these vast, clear 
bladder were distend with some lift gas, for in an instant the 
huge, cloud-lik bodi turn sideways, writh desper to find it 
balance, while the white beak snap and gape in horribl fury. but 
alreadi I had shot away on the steepest glide that I dare to attempt, 
my engin still full on, the fli propel and the forc of graviti 
shoot me downward like an aerolite. far behind me I saw a dull, 
purplish smudg grow swiftli smaller and merg into the blue sky 
behind it. I wa safe out of the deadli jungl of the outer air. 

"onc out of danger I throttl my engine, for noth tear a machin 
to piec quicker than run on full power from a height. It wa a 
glorious, spiral vol-plan from nearli eight mile of altitude--first, 
to the level of the silver cloud-bank, then to that of the storm-cloud 
beneath it, and finally, in beat rain, to the surfac of the earth. 
I saw the bristol channel beneath me as I broke from the clouds, but, 
have still some petrol in my tank, I got twenti mile inland befor I 
found myself strand in a field half a mile from the villag of 
ashcombe. there I got three tin of petrol from a pass motor-car, 
and at ten minut past six that even I alight gentli in my own 
home meadow at devizes, after such a journey as no mortal upon earth 
ha ever yet taken and live to tell the tale. I have seen the beauti 
and I have seen the horror of the heights--and greater beauti or 
greater horror than that is not within the ken of man. 

"and now it is my plan to go onc again befor I give my result to the 
world. My reason for thi is that I must sure have someth to show 
by way of proof befor I lay such a tale befor my fellow-men. It is 
true that other will soon follow and will confirm what I have said, 
and yet I should wish to carri convict from the first. those love 
iridesc bubbl of the air should not be hard to capture. they 
drift slowli upon their way, and the swift monoplan could intercept 
their leisur course. It is like enough that they would dissolv 
in the heavier layer of the atmosphere, and that some small heap of 
amorph jelli might be all that I should bring to earth with me. and 
yet someth there would sure be by which I could substanti my 
story. yes, I will go, even if I run a risk by do so. these purpl 
horror would not seem to be numerous. It is probabl that I shall not 
see one. If I do I shall dive at once. At the worst there is alway 
the shot-gun and my knowledg of ..." 


here a page of the manuscript is unfortun missing. On the next 
page is written, in large, straggl writing: 


"forty-thre thousand feet. I shall never see earth again. they are 
beneath me, three of them. god help me; it is a dread death to die!" 


such in it entireti is the joyce-armstrong statement. Of the man 
noth ha sinc been seen. piec of hi shatter monoplan have 
been pick up in the preserv of mr. budd-lushington upon the border 
of kent and sussex, within a few mile of the spot where the note-book 
wa discovered. If the unfortun aviator' theori is correct that 
thi air-jungle, as he call it, exist onli over the south-west of 
england, then it would seem that he had fled from it at the full speed 
of hi monoplane, but had been overtaken and devour by these horribl 
creatur at some spot in the outer atmospher abov the place where 
the grim relic were found. the pictur of that monoplan skim 
down the sky, with the nameless terror fli as swiftli beneath it 
and cut it off alway from the earth while they gradual close in 
upon their victim, is one upon which a man who valu hi saniti would 
prefer not to dwell. there are many, as I am aware, who still jeer at 
the fact which I have here set down, but even they must admit that 
joyce-armstrong ha disappeared, and I would commend to them hi own 
words: "thi note-book may explain what I am tri to do, and how I 
lost my life in do it. but no drivel about accid or mysteries, 
if you please." 



the leather funnel 

My friend, lionel dacre, live in the avenu de wagram, paris. hi 
hous wa that small one, with the iron rail and grass plot in 
front of it, on the left-hand side as you pass down from the arc de 
triomphe. I fanci that it had been there long befor the avenu wa 
constructed, for the grey tile were stain with lichens, and the 
wall were mildew and discolour with age. It look a small hous 
from the street, five window in front, if I rememb right, but it 
deepen into a singl long chamber at the back. It wa here that 
dacr had that singular librari of occult literature, and the fantast 
curios which serv as a hobbi for himself, and an amus for 
hi friends. A wealthi man of refin and eccentr tastes, he had 
spent much of hi life and fortun in gather togeth what wa said 
to be a uniqu privat collect of talmudic, cabalistic, and magic 
works, mani of them of great rariti and value. hi tast lean 
toward the marvel and the monstrous, and I have heard that hi 
experi in the direct of the unknown have pass all the bound 
of civil and of decorum. To hi english friend he never 
allud to such matters, and took the tone of the student and virtuoso; 
but a frenchman whose tast were of the same natur ha assur me 
that the worst excess of the black mass have been perpetr in that 
larg and lofti hall, which is line with the shelv of hi books, and 
the case of hi museum. 

dacre' appear wa enough to show that hi deep interest in these 
psychic matter wa intellectu rather than spiritual. there wa no 
trace of ascetic upon hi heavi face, but there wa much mental 
forc in hi huge, dome-lik skull, which curv upward from amongst 
hi thin locks, like a snowpeak abov it fring of fir trees. hi 
knowledg wa greater than hi wisdom, and hi power were far superior 
to hi character. the small bright eyes, buri deepli in hi fleshi 
face, twinkl with intellig and an unab curios of life, but 
they were the eye of a sensualist and an egotist. enough of the man, 
for he is dead now, poor devil, dead at the veri time that he had made 
sure that he had at last discov the elixir of life. It is not with 
hi complex charact that I have to deal, but with the veri strang 
and inexplic incid which had it rise in my visit to him in the 
earli spring of the year '82. 

I had known dacr in england, for my research in the assyrian room of 
the british museum had been conduct at the time when he wa 
endeavour to establish a mystic and esoter mean in the 
babylonian tablets, and thi commun of interest had brought us 
together. chanc remark had led to daili conversation, and that to 
someth verg upon friendship. I had promis him that on my next 
visit to pari I would call upon him. At the time when I wa abl to 
fulfil my compact I wa live in a cottag at fontainebleau, and as 
the even train were inconvenient, he ask me to spend the night in 
hi house. 

"I have onli that one spare couch," said he, point to a broad sofa 
in hi larg salon; "I hope that you will manag to be comfort 
there." 

It wa a singular bedroom, with it high wall of brown volumes, but 
there could be no more agreeabl furnitur to a bookworm like myself, 
and there is no scent so pleasant to my nostril as that faint, subtl 
reek which come from an ancient book. I assur him that I could 
desir no more charm chamber, and no more congeni surroundings. 

"if the fit are neither conveni nor conventional, they are at 
least costly," said he, look round at hi shelves. "I have expend 
nearli a quarter of a million of money upon these object which 
surround you. books, weapons, gems, carvings, tapestries, 
images--ther is hardli a thing here which ha not it history, and it 
is gener one worth telling." 

He wa seat as he spoke at one side of the open fire-place, and I at 
the other. hi reading-t wa on hi right, and the strong lamp 
abov it ring it with a veri vivid circl of golden light. A 
half-rol palimpsest lay in the centre, and around it were mani 
quaint articl of bric-a-brac. one of these wa a larg funnel, such 
as is use for fill wine casks. It appear to be made of black 
wood, and to be rim with discolour brass. 

"that is a curiou thing," I remarked. "what is the histori of that?" 

"ah!" said he, "it is the veri question which I have had occas to 
ask myself. I would give a good deal to know. take it in your hand 
and examin it." 

I did so, and found that what I had imagin to be wood wa in realiti 
leather, though age had dri it into an extrem hardness. It wa a 
larg funnel, and might hold a quart when full. the brass rim 
encircl the wide end, but the narrow wa also tip with metal. 

"what do you make of it?" ask dacre. 

"I should imagin that it belong to some vintner or maltster in the 
middl ages," said I. "I have seen in england leathern drink 
flagon of the seventeenth century--'black jacks' as they were 
called--which were of the same colour and hard as thi filler." 

"I dare say the date would be about the same," said dacre, "and, no 
doubt, also, it wa use for fill a vessel with liquid. If my 
suspicion are correct, however, it wa a queer vintner who use it, 
and a veri singular cask which wa filled. Do you observ noth 
strang at the spout end of the funnel." 

As I held it to the light I observ that at a spot some five inch 
abov the brass tip the narrow neck of the leather funnel wa all 
haggl and scored, as if someon had notch it round with a blunt 
knife. onli at that point wa there ani roughen of the dead black 
surface. 

"someon ha tri to cut off the neck." 

"would you call it a cut?" 

"it is torn and lacerated. It must have taken some strength to leav 
these mark on such tough material, whatev the instrument may have 
been. but what do you think of it? I can tell that you know more than 
you say." 

dacr smiled, and hi littl eye twinkl with knowledge. 

"have you includ the psycholog of dream among your learn 
studies?" he asked. 

"I did not even know that there wa such a psychology." 

"mi dear sir, that shelf abov the gem case is fill with volumes, 
from albertu magnu onward, which deal with no other subject. It is a 
scienc in itself." 

"A scienc of charlatans!" 

"the charlatan is alway the pioneer. from the astrolog came the 
astronomer, from the alchemist the chemist, from the mesmerist the 
experiment psychologist. the quack of yesterday is the professor of 
tomorrow. even such subtl and elus thing as dream will in time 
be reduc to system and order. when that time come the research of 
our friend on the bookshelf yonder will no longer be the amus of 
the mystic, but the foundat of a science." 

"suppos that is so, what ha the scienc of dream to do with a 
large, black, brass-rim funnel?" 

"I will tell you. you know that I have an agent who is alway on the 
look-out for rariti and curios for my collection. some day ago 
he heard of a dealer upon one of the quai who had acquir some old 
rubbish found in a cupboard in an ancient hous at the back of the rue 
mathurin, in the quartier latin. the dining-room of thi old hous is 
decor with a coat of arms, chevrons, and bar roug upon a field 
argent, which prove, upon inquiry, to be the shield of nichola de la 
reynie, a high offici of king loui xiv. there can be no doubt that 
the other articl in the cupboard date back to the earli day of that 
king. the infer is, therefore, that they were all the properti of 
thi nichola de la reynie, who was, as I understand, the gentleman 
special concern with the mainten and execut of the dracon 
law of that epoch." 

"what then?" 

"I would ask you now to take the funnel into your hand onc more and 
to examin the upper brass rim. can you make out ani letter upon 
it?" 

there were certainli some scratch upon it, almost obliter by 
time. the gener effect wa of sever letters, the last of which 
bore some resembl to a B. 

"you make it a b?" 

"yes, I do." 

"so do I. In fact, I have no doubt whatev that it is a b." 

"but the nobleman you mention would have had R for hi initial." 

"exactly! that' the beauti of it. He own thi curiou object, and 
yet he had someon else' initi upon it. whi did he do this?" 

"I can't imagine; can you?" 

"well, I might, perhaps, guess. Do you observ someth drawn a 
littl farther along the rim?" 

"I should say it wa a crown." 

"it is undoubtedli a crown; but if you examin it in a good light, you 
will convinc yourself that it is not an ordinari crown. It is a 
herald crown--a badg of rank, and it consist of an altern of 
four pearl and strawberri leaves, the proper badg of a marquis. We 
may infer, therefore, that the person whose initi end in B wa 
entitl to wear that coronet." 

"then thi common leather filler belong to a marquis?" 

dacr gave a peculiar smile. 

"or to some member of the famili of a marquis," said he. "so much we 
have clearli gather from thi engrav rim." 

"but what ha all thi to do with dreams?" I do not know whether it 
wa from a look upon dacre' face, or from some subtl suggest in 
hi manner, but a feel of repulsion, of unreason horror, came 
upon me as I look at the gnarl old lump of leather. 

"I have more than onc receiv import inform through my 
dreams," said my companion in the didact manner which he love to 
affect. "I make it a rule now when I am in doubt upon ani materi 
point to place the articl in question besid me as I sleep, and to 
hope for some enlightenment. the process doe not appear to me to be 
veri obscure, though it ha not yet receiv the bless of orthodox 
science. accord to my theory, ani object which ha been intim 
associ with ani suprem paroxysm of human emotion, whether it be 
joy or pain, will retain a certain atmospher or associ which it 
is capabl of commun to a sensit mind. By a sensit mind I 
do not mean an abnorm one, but such a train and educ mind as 
you or I possess." 

"you mean, for example, that if I slept besid that old sword upon the 
wall, I might dream of some bloodi incid in which that veri sword 
took part?" 

"an excel example, for, as a matter of fact, that sword wa use in 
that fashion by me, and I saw in my sleep the death of it owner, who 
perish in a brisk skirmish, which I have been unabl to identify, but 
which occur at the time of the war of the frondists. If you think 
of it, some of our popular observ show that the fact ha alreadi 
been recogn by our ancestors, although we, in our wisdom, have 
class it among superstitions." 

"for example?" 

"well, the place of the bride' cake beneath the pillow in order that 
the sleeper may have pleasant dreams. that is one of sever instanc 
which you will find set forth in a small brochur which I am myself 
write upon the subject. but to come back to the point, I slept one 
night with thi funnel besid me, and I had a dream which certainli 
throw a curiou light upon it use and origin." 

"what did you dream?" 

"I dreamed----" He paused, and an intent look of interest came over hi 
massiv face. "bi jove, that' well thought of," said he. "thi realli 
will be an exceedingli interest experiment. you are yourself a 
psychic subject--with nerv which respond readili to ani impression." 

"I have never test myself in that direction." 

"then we shall test you tonight. might I ask you as a veri great 
favour, when you occupi that couch tonight, to sleep with thi old 
funnel place by the side of your pillow?" 

the request seem to me a grotesqu one; but I have myself, in my 
complex nature, a hunger after all which is bizarr and fantastic. I 
had not the faintest belief in dacre' theory, nor ani hope for 
success in such an experiment; yet it amus me that the experi 
should be made. dacre, with great gravity, drew a small stand to the 
head of my settee, and place the funnel upon it. then, after a short 
conversation, he wish me good night and left me. 


I sat for some littl time smoke by the smoulder fire, and turn 
over in my mind the curiou incid which had occurred, and the 
strang experi which might lie befor me. sceptic as I was, there 
wa someth impress in the assur of dacre' manner, and my 
extraordinari surroundings, the huge room with the strang and often 
sinist object which were hung round it, struck solemn into my 
soul. final I undressed, and turn out the lamp, I lay down. 
after long toss I fell asleep. let me tri to describ as accur 
as I can the scene which came to me in my dreams. It stand out now in 
my memori more clearli than anyth which I have seen with my wake 
eyes. there wa a room which bore the appear of a vault. four 
spandrel from the corner ran up to join a sharp, cup-shap roof. 
the architectur wa rough, but veri strong. It wa evid part of 
a great building. 

three men in black, with curious, top-heavy, black velvet hats, sat in 
a line upon a red-carpet dais. their face were veri solemn and sad. 
On the left stood two long-gown men with port-folio in their hands, 
which seem to be stuf with papers. upon the right, look toward 
me, wa a small woman with blond hair and singular, light-blu 
eyes--th eye of a child. she wa past her first youth, but could not 
yet be call middle-aged. her figur wa inclin to stout and her 
bear wa proud and confident. her face wa pale, but serene. It 
wa a curiou face, come and yet feline, with a subtl suggest of 
cruelti about the straight, strong littl mouth and chubbi jaw. she wa 
drape in some sort of loose, white gown. besid her stood a thin, 
eager priest, who whisper in her ear, and continu rais a 
crucifix befor her eyes. she turn her head and look fixedli past 
the crucifix at the three men in black, who were, I felt, her judges. 

As I gaze the three men stood up and said something, but I could 
distinguish no words, though I wa awar that it wa the central one 
who wa speaking. they then swept out of the room, follow by the two 
men with the papers. At the same instant sever rough-look fellow 
in stout jerkin came bustl in and remov first the red carpet, and 
then the board which form the dais, so as to entir clear the 
room. when thi screen wa remov I saw some singular articl of 
furnitur behind it. one look like a bed with wooden roller at each 
end, and a winch handl to regul it length. anoth wa a wooden 
horse. there were sever other curiou objects, and a number of 
swing cord which play over pulleys. It wa not unlik a modern 
gymnasium. 

when the room had been clear there appear a new figur upon the 
scene. thi wa a tall, thin person clad in black, with a gaunt and 
auster face. the aspect of the man made me shudder. hi cloth were 
all shine with greas and mottl with stains. He bore himself with a 
slow and impress dignity, as if he took command of all thing from 
the instant of hi entrance. In spite of hi rude appear and 
sordid dress, it wa now hi business, hi room, hi to command. He 
carri a coil of light rope over hi left forearm. the ladi look 
him up and down with a search glance, but her express wa 
unchanged. It wa confident--even defiant. but it wa veri differ 
with the priest. hi face wa ghastli white, and I saw the moistur 
glisten and run on hi high, slope forehead. He threw up hi hand 
in prayer and he stoop continu to mutter frantic word in the 
lady' ear. 

the man in black now advanced, and take one of the cord from hi 
left arm, he bound the woman' hand together. she held them meekli 
toward him as he did so. then he took her arm with a rough grip and 
led her toward the wooden horse, which wa littl higher than her 
waist. On to thi she wa lift and laid, with her back upon it, and 
her face to the ceiling, while the priest, quiver with horror, had 
rush out of the room. the woman' lip were move rapidly, and 
though I could hear noth I knew that she wa praying. her feet hung 
down on either side of the horse, and I saw that the rough varlet in 
attend had fasten cord to her ankl and secur the other end 
to iron ring in the stone floor. 

My heart sank within me as I saw these omin preparations, and yet I 
wa held by the fascin of horror, and I could not take my eye 
from the strang spectacle. A man had enter the room with a bucket 
of water in either hand. anoth follow with a third bucket. they 
were laid besid the wooden horse. the second man had a wooden 
dipper--a bowl with a straight handle--in hi other hand. thi he gave 
to the man in black. At the same moment one of the varlet approach 
with a dark object in hi hand, which even in my dream fill me with a 
vagu feel of familiarity. It wa a leathern filler. with horribl 
energi he thrust it--but I could stand no more. My hair stood on end 
with horror. I writhed, I struggled, I broke through the bond of 
sleep, and I burst with a shriek into my own life, and found myself 
lie shiver with terror in the huge library, with the moonlight 
flood through the window and throw strang silver and black 
traceri upon the opposit wall. oh, what a bless relief to feel 
that I wa back in the nineteenth century--back out of that mediaev 
vault into a world where men had human heart within their bosoms. I 
sat up on my couch, trembl in everi limb, my mind divid between 
thank and horror. To think that such thing were ever 
done--that they could be done without god strike the villain dead. 
wa it all a fantasy, or did it realli stand for someth which had 
happen in the black, cruel day of the world' history? I sank my 
throb head upon my shake hands. and then, suddenly, my heart 
seem to stand still in my bosom, and I could not even scream, so 
great wa my terror. someth wa advanc toward me through the 
dark of the room. 

It is a horror come upon a horror which break a man' spirit. I 
could not reason, I could not pray; I could onli sit like a frozen 
image, and glare at the dark figur which wa come down the great 
room. and then it move out into the white lane of moonlight, and I 
breath onc more. It wa dacre, and hi face show that he wa as 
frighten as myself. 

"wa that you? for god' sake what' the matter?" he ask in a huski 
voice. 

"oh, dacre, I am glad to see you! I have been down into hell. It wa 
dreadful." 

"then it wa you who screamed?" 

"I dare say it was." 

"it rang through the house. the servant are all terrified." He struck 
a match and lit the lamp. "I think we may get the fire to burn up 
again," he added, throw some log upon the embers. "good god, my 
dear chap, how white you are! you look as if you had seen a ghost." 

"so I have--sever ghosts." 

"the leather funnel ha acted, then?" 

"I wouldn't sleep near the infern thing again for all the money you 
could offer me." 

dacr chuckled. 

"I expect that you would have a live night of it," said he. "you 
took it out of me in return, for that scream of your wasn't a veri 
pleasant sound at two in the morning. I suppos from what you say that 
you have seen the whole dread business." 

"what dread business?" 

"the tortur of the water--th 'extraordinari question,' as it wa 
call in the genial day of 'le roi soleil.' did you stand it out to 
the end?" 

"no, thank god, I awok befor it realli began." 

"ah! it is just as well for you. I held out till the third bucket. 
well, it is an old story, and they are all in their grave now, anyhow, 
so what doe it matter how they got there? I suppos that you have no 
idea what it wa that you have seen?" 

"the tortur of some criminal. she must have been a terribl 
malefactor inde if her crime are in proport to her penalty." 

"well, we have that small consolation," said dacre, wrap hi 
dressing-gown round him and crouch closer to the fire. "they were in 
proport to her penalty. that is to say, if I am correct in the 
lady' identity." 

"how could you possibl know her identity?" 

for answer dacr took down an old vellum-cov volum from the shelf. 

"just listen to this," said he; "it is in the french of the seventeenth 
century, but I will give a rough translat as I go. you will judg 
for yourself whether I have solv the riddl or not. 

"'the prison wa brought befor the grand chamber and tournel of 
parliament, sit as a court of justice, charg with the murder of 
master dreux d'aubray, her father, and of her two brothers, mm. 
d'aubray, one be civil lieutenant, and the other a counsellor of 
parliament. In person it seem hard to believ that she had realli 
done such wick deeds, for she wa of a mild appearance, and of short 
stature, with a fair skin and blue eyes. yet the court, have found 
her guilty, condemn her to the ordinari and to the extraordinari 
question in order that she might be forc to name her accomplices, 
after which she should be carri in a cart to the place de greve, 
there to have her head cut off, her bodi be afterward burn and 
her ash scatter to the winds.' 

"the date of thi entri is juli 16, 1676." 

"it is interesting," said I, "but not convincing. how do you prove the 
two women to be the same?" 

"I am come to that. the narr goe on to tell of the woman' 
behaviour when questioned. 'when the execution approach her she 
recogn him by the cord which he held in hi hands, and she at onc 
held out her own hand to him, look at him from head to foot without 
utter a word.' how' that?" 

"yes, it wa so." 

"'she gaze without winc upon the wooden hors and ring which had 
twist so mani limb and caus so mani shriek of agony. when her 
eye fell upon the three pail of water, which were all readi for her, 
she said with a smile, "all that water must have been brought here for 
the purpos of drown me, monsieur. you have no idea, I trust, of 
make a person of my small statur swallow it all."' shall I read the 
detail of the torture?" 

"no, for heaven' sake, don't." 

"here is a sentenc which must sure show you that what is here 
record is the veri scene which you have gaze upon tonight: 'the good 
abb pirot, unabl to contempl the agoni which were suffer by 
hi penitent, had hurri from the room.' doe that convinc you?" 

"it doe entirely. there can be no question that it is inde the same 
event. but who, then, is thi ladi whose appear wa so attract 
and whose end wa so horrible?" 

for answer dacr came across to me, and place the small lamp upon the 
tabl which stood by my bed. lift up the ill-omen filler, he 
turn the brass rim so that the light fell full upon it. seen in thi 
way the engrav seem clearer than on the night before. 

"we have alreadi agre that thi is the badg of a marqui or of a 
marquise," said he. "we have also settl that the last letter is b." 

"it is undoubtedli so." 

"I now suggest to you that the other letter from left to right are, M, 
M, a small d, A, a small d, and then the final b." 

"yes, I am sure that you are right. I can make out the two small d' 
quit plainly." 

"what I have read to you tonight," said dacre, "i the offici record 
of the trial of mari madelein d'aubray, marquis de brinvilliers, one 
of the most famou poison and murder of all time." 

I sat in silence, overwhelm at the extraordinari natur of the 
incident, and at the complet of the proof with which dacr had 
expos it real meaning. In a vagu way I rememb some detail of 
the woman' career, her unbridl debauchery, the cold-blood and 
protract tortur of her sick father, the murder of her brother for 
motiv of petti gain. I recollect also that the braveri of her end 
had done someth to aton for the horror of her life, and that all 
pari had sympath with her last moments, and bless her as a 
martyr within a few day of the time when they had curs her as a 
murderess. one objection, and one only, occur to my mind. 

"how came her initi and her badg of rank upon the filler? sure 
they did not carri their mediaev homag to the nobil to the point 
of decor instrument of tortur with their titles?" 

"I wa puzzl with the same point," said dacre, "but it admit of a 
simpl explanation. the case excit extraordinari interest at the 
time, and noth could be more natur than that La reynie, the head 
of the police, should retain thi filler as a grim souvenir. It wa 
not often that a marchio of franc underw the extraordinari 
question. that he should engrav her initi upon it for the 
inform of other wa sure a veri ordinari proceed upon hi 
part." 

"and this?" I asked, point to the mark upon the leathern neck. 

"she wa a cruel tigress," said dacre, as he turn away. "I think it 
is evid that like other tigress her teeth were both strong and 
sharp." 



the new catacomb 

"look here, burger," said kennedy, "I do wish that you would confid in 
me." 

the two famou student of roman remain sat togeth in kennedy' 
comfort room overlook the corso. the night wa cold, and they 
had both pull up their chair to the unsatisfactori italian stove 
which threw out a zone of stuffi rather than of warmth. outsid 
under the bright winter star lay the modern rome, the long, doubl 
chain of the electr lamps, the brilliantli light cafes, the rush 
carriages, and the dens throng upon the footpaths. but inside, in the 
sumptuou chamber of the rich young english archaeologist, there wa 
onli old rome to be seen. crack and timeworn friez hung upon the 
walls, grey old bust of senat and soldier with their fight 
head and their hard, cruel face peer out from the corners. On the 
centr table, amidst a litter of inscriptions, fragments, and 
ornaments, there stood the famou reconstruct by kennedi of the 
bath of caracalla, which excit such interest and admir when it 
wa exhibit in berlin. amphora hung from the ceiling, and a litter 
of curios strew the rich red turkey carpet. and of them all 
there wa not one which wa not of the most unimpeach authenticity, 
and of the utmost rariti and value; for kennedy, though littl more 
than thirty, had a european reput in thi particular branch of 
research, and was, moreover, provid with that long purs which either 
prove to be a fatal handicap to the student' energies, or, if hi 
mind is still true to it purpose, give him an enorm advantag in 
the race for fame. kennedi had often been seduc by whim and pleasur 
from hi studies, but hi mind wa an incis one, capabl of long and 
concentr effort which end in sharp reaction of sensuou 
languor. hi handsom face, with it high, white forehead, it 
aggress nose, and it somewhat loos and sensual mouth, wa a fair 
index of the compromis between strength and weak in hi nature. 

Of a veri differ type wa hi companion, juliu burger. He came of 
a curiou blend, a german father and an italian mother, with the robust 
qualiti of the north mingl strang with the softer grace of the 
south. blue teuton eye lighten hi sun-brown face, and abov 
them rose a square, massiv forehead, with a fring of close yellow 
curl lie round it. hi strong, firm jaw wa clean-shaven, and hi 
companion had frequent remark how much it suggest those old roman 
bust which peer out from the shadow in the corner of hi chamber. 
under it bluff german strength there lay alway a suggest of 
italian subtlety, but the smile wa so honest, and the eye so frank, 
that one understood that thi wa onli an indic of hi ancestry, 
with no actual bear upon hi character. In age and in reputation, 
he wa on the same level as hi english companion, but hi life and hi 
work had both been far more arduous. twelv year before, he had come 
as a poor student to rome, and had live ever sinc upon some small 
endow for research which had been award to him by the univers 
of bonn. painfully, slowly, and doggedly, with extraordinari tenac 
and single-mindedness, he had climb from rung to rung of the ladder 
of fame, until now he wa a member of the berlin academy, and there wa 
everi reason to believ that he would shortli be promot to the chair 
of the greatest of german universities. but the singl of purpos 
which had brought him to the same high level as the rich and brilliant 
englishman, had caus him in everyth outsid their work to stand 
infinit below him. He had never found a paus in hi studi in 
which to cultiv the social graces. It wa onli when he spoke of hi 
own subject that hi face wa fill with life and soul. At other 
time he wa silent and embarrassed, too consciou of hi own 
limit in larger subjects, and impati of that small talk which 
is the convent refug of those who have no thought to express. 

and yet for some year there had been an acquaintanceship which 
appear to be slowli ripen into a friendship between these two veri 
differ rivals. the base and origin of thi lay in the fact that in 
their own studi each wa the onli one of the younger men who had 
knowledg and enthusiasm enough to properli appreci the other. 
their common interest and pursuit had brought them together, and each 
had been attract by the other' knowledge. and then gradual 
someth had been ad to this. kennedi had been amus by the 
frank and simplic of hi rival, while burger in turn had been 
fascin by the brillianc and vivac which had made kennedi such a 
favourit in roman society. I say "had," becaus just at the moment 
the young englishman wa somewhat under a cloud. A love-affair, the 
detail of which had never quit come out, had indic a 
heartless and callous upon hi part which shock mani of hi 
friends. but in the bachelor circl of student and artist in which 
he prefer to move there is no veri rigid code of honour in such 
matters, and though a head might be shaken or a pair of shoulder 
shrug over the flight of two and the return of one, the gener 
sentiment wa probabl one of curios and perhap of envi rather than 
of reprobation. 

"look here, burger," said kennedy, look hard at the placid face of 
hi companion, "I do wish that you would confid in me." 

As he spoke he wave hi hand in the direct of a rug which lay upon 
the floor. On the rug stood a long, shallow fruit-basket of the light 
wicker-work which is use in the campagna, and thi wa heap with a 
litter of objects, inscrib tiles, broken inscriptions, crack 
mosaics, torn papyri, rusti metal ornaments, which to the uniniti 
might have seem to have come straight from a dustman' bin, but which 
a specialist would have speedili recogn as uniqu of their kind. 
the pile of odd and end in the flat wicker-work basket suppli 
exactli one of those miss link of social develop which are of 
such interest to the student. It wa the german who had brought them 
in, and the englishman' eye were hungri as he look at them. 

"I won't interfer with your treasure-trove, but I should veri much 
like to hear about it," he continued, while burger veri deliber 
lit a cigar. "it is evid a discoveri of the first importance. 
these inscript will make a sensat throughout europe." 

"for everi one here there are a million there!" said the german. 
"there are so mani that a dozen savant might spend a lifetim over 
them, and build up a reput as solid as the castl of st. angelo." 

kennedi sat think with hi fine forehead wrinkl and hi finger 
play with hi long, fair moustache. 

"you have given yourself away, burger!" said he at last. "your word 
can onli appli to one thing. you have discov a new catacomb." 

"I had no doubt that you had alreadi come to that conclus from an 
examin of these objects." 

"well, they certainli appear to indic it, but your last remark 
make it certain. there is no place except a catacomb which could 
contain so vast a store of relic as you describe." 

"quit so. there is no mysteri about that. I have discov a new 
catacomb." 

"where?" 

"ah, that is my secret, my dear kennedy. suffic it that it is so 
situat that there is not one chanc in a million of anyon els 
come upon it. it date is differ from that of ani known catacomb, 
and it ha been reserv for the burial of the highest christians, so 
that the remain and the relic are quit differ from anyth which 
ha ever been seen before. If I wa not awar of your knowledg and of 
your energy, my friend, I would not hesitate, under the pledg of 
secrecy, to tell you everyth about it. but as it is I think that I 
must certainli prepar my own report of the matter befor I expos 
myself to such formid competition." 

kennedi love hi subject with a love which wa almost a mania--a love 
which held him true to it, amidst all the distract which come to a 
wealthi and dissip young man. He had ambition, but hi ambit 
wa secondari to hi mere abstract joy and interest in everyth which 
concern the old life and histori of the city. He yearn to see thi 
new underworld which hi companion had discovered. 

"look here, burger," said he, earnestly, "I assur you that you can 
trust me most implicitli in the matter. noth would induc me to put 
pen to paper about anyth which I see until I have your express 
permission. I quit understand your feel and I think it is most 
natural, but you have realli noth whatev to fear from me. On the 
other hand, if you don't tell me I shall make a systemat search, and 
I shall most certainli discov it. In that case, of course, I should 
make what use I like of it, sinc I should be under no oblig to 
you." 

burger smile thought over hi cigar. 

"I have noticed, friend kennedy," said he, "that when I want 
inform over ani point you are not alway so readi to suppli it." 

"when did you ever ask me anyth that I did not tell you? you 
remember, for example, my give you the materi for your paper about 
the templ of the vestals." 

"ah, well, that wa not a matter of much importance. If I were to 
question you upon some intim thing would you give me an answer, I 
wonder! thi new catacomb is a veri intim thing to me, and I should 
certainli expect some sign of confid in return." 

"what you are drive at I cannot imagine," said the englishman, "but 
if you mean that you will answer my question about the catacomb if I 
answer ani question which you may put to me I can assur you that I 
will certainli do so." 

"well, then," said burger, lean luxuri back in hi settee, and 
puf a blue tree of cigar-smok into the air, "tell me all about 
your relat with miss mari saunderson." 

kennedi sprang up in hi chair and glare angrili at hi impass 
companion. 

"what the devil do you mean?" he cried. "what sort of a question is 
this? you may mean it as a joke, but you never made a wors one." 

"no, I don't mean it as a joke," said burger, simply. "I am realli 
rather interest in the detail of the matter. I don't know much 
about the world and women and social life and that sort of thing, and 
such an incid ha the fascin of the unknown for me. I know 
you, and I knew her by sight--i had even spoken to her onc or twice. 
I should veri much like to hear from your own lip exactli what it wa 
which occur between you." 

"I won't tell you a word." 

"that' all right. It wa onli my whim to see if you would give up a 
secret as easili as you expect me to give up my secret of the new 
catacomb. you wouldn't, and I didn't expect you to. but whi should you 
expect otherwis of me? there' saint john' clock strike ten. It 
is quit time that I wa go home." 

"no; wait a bit, burger," said kennedy; "thi is realli a ridicul 
capric of your to wish to know about an old love-affair which ha 
burn out month ago. you know we look upon a man who kiss and 
tell as the greatest coward and villain possible." 

"certainly," said the german, gather up hi basket of curiosities, 
"when he tell anyth about a girl which is previous unknown he 
must be so. but in thi case, as you must be aware, it wa a public 
matter which wa the common talk of rome, so that you are not realli 
do miss mari saunderson ani injuri by discuss her case with me. 
but still, I respect your scruples; and so good night!" 

"wait a bit, burger," said kennedy, lay hi hand upon the other' 
arm; "I am veri keen upon thi catacomb business, and I can't let it 
drop quit so easily. would you mind ask me someth els in 
return--someth not quit so eccentr thi time?" 

"no, no; you have refused, and there is an end of it," said burger, 
with hi basket on hi arm. "no doubt you are quit right not to 
answer, and no doubt I am quit right also--and so again, my dear 
kennedy, good night!" 

the englishman watch burger cross the room, and he had hi hand on 
the handl of the door befor hi host sprang up with the air of a man 
who is make the best of that which cannot be helped. 

"hold on, old fellow," said he; "I think you are behav in a most 
ridicul fashion; but still; if thi is your condition, I suppos 
that I must submit to it. I hate say anyth about a girl, but, as 
you say, it is all over rome, and I don't suppos I can tell you 
anyth which you do not know already. what wa it you want to 
know?" 

the german came back to the stove, and, lay down hi basket, he sank 
into hi chair onc more. 

"may I have anoth cigar?" said he. "thank you veri much! I never 
smoke when I work, but I enjoy a chat much more when I am under the 
influenc of tobacco. now, as regard thi young lady, with whom you 
had thi littl adventure. what in the world ha becom of her?" 

"she is at home with her own people." 

"oh, really--in england?" 

"yes." 

"what part of england--london?" 

"no, twickenham." 

"you must excus my curiosity, my dear kennedy, and you must put it 
down to my ignor of the world. No doubt it is quit a simpl thing 
to persuad a young ladi to go off with you for three week or so, and 
then to hand her over to her own famili at--what did you call the 
place?" 

"twickenham." 

"quit so--at twickenham. but it is someth so entir outsid my 
own experi that I cannot even imagin how you set about it. for 
example, if you had love thi girl your love could hardli disappear in 
three weeks, so I presum that you could not have love her at all. 
but if you did not love her whi should you make thi great scandal 
which ha damag you and ruin her?" 

kennedi look moodili into the red eye of the stove. 

"that' a logic way of look at it, certainly," said he. "love is a 
big word, and it repres a good mani differ shade of feeling. I 
like her, and--well, you say you'v seen her--you know how charm 
she could look. but still I am will to admit, look back, that I 
could never have realli love her." 

"then, my dear kennedy, whi did you do it?" 

"the adventur of the thing had a great deal to do with it." 

"what! you are so fond of adventures!" 

"where would the varieti of life be without them? It wa for an 
adventur that I first began to pay my attent to her. i'v chase 
a good deal of game in my time, but there' no chase like that of a 
pretti woman. there wa the piquant difficulti of it also, for, as she 
wa the companion of ladi emili rood, it wa almost imposs to see 
her alone. On the top of all the other obstacl which attract me, I 
learn from her own lip veri earli in the proceed that she wa 
engaged." 

"mein gott! To whom?" 

"she mention no names." 

"I do not think that anyon know that. So that made the adventur 
more alluring, did it?" 

"well, it did certainli give a spice to it. don't you think so?" 

"I tell you that I am veri ignor about these things." 

"mi dear fellow, you can rememb that the appl you stole from your 
neighbour' tree wa alway sweeter than that which fell from your own. 
and then I found that she care for me." 

"what--at once?" 

"oh, no, it took about three month of sap and mining. but at last 
I won her over. she understood that my judici separ from my 
wife made it imposs for me to do the right thing by her--but she 
came all the same, and we had a delight time, as long as it lasted." 

"but how about the other man?" 

kennedi shrug hi shoulders. 

"I suppos it is the surviv of the fittest," said he. "if he had 
been the better man she would not have desert him. let' drop the 
subject, for I have had enough of it!" 

"onli one other thing. how did you get rid of her in three weeks?" 

"well, we had both cool down a bit, you understand. she absolut 
refused, under ani circumstances, to come back to face the peopl she 
had known in rome. now, of course, rome is necessari to me, and I wa 
alreadi pine to be back at my work--so there wa one obviou caus of 
separation. then, again, her old father turn up at the hotel in 
london, and there wa a scene, and the whole thing becam so unpleas 
that really--though I miss her dread at first--i wa veri glad 
to slip out of it. now, I reli upon you not to repeat anyth of what 
I have said." 

"mi dear kennedy, I should not dream of repeat it. but all that you 
say interest me veri much, for it give me an insight into your way of 
look at things, which is entir differ from mine, for I have 
seen so littl of life. and now you want to know about my new 
catacomb. there' no use my tri to describ it, for you would never 
find it by that. there is onli one thing, and that is for me to take 
you there." 

"that would be splendid." 

"when would you like to come?" 

"the sooner the better. I am all impati to see it." 

"well, it is a beauti night--though a trifl cold. suppos we start 
in an hour. We must be veri care to keep the matter to ourselves. 
If anyon saw us hunt in coupl they would suspect that there wa 
someth go on." 

"we can't be too cautious," said kennedy. "i it far?" 

"some miles." 

"not too far to walk?" 

"oh, no, we could walk there easily." 

"we had better do so, then. A cabman' suspicion would be arous if 
he drop us both at some lone spot in the dead of the night." 

"quit so. I think it would be best for us to meet at the gate of the 
appian way at midnight. I must go back to my lodg for the match 
and candl and things." 

"all right, burger! I think it is veri kind of you to let me into thi 
secret, and I promis you that I will write noth about it until you 
have publish your report. good-by for the present! you will find me 
at the gate at twelve." 

the cold, clear air wa fill with the music chime from that citi 
of clock as burger, wrap in an italian overcoat, with a lantern 
hang from hi hand, walk up to the rendezvous. kennedi step out 
of the shadow to meet him. 

"you are ardent in work as well as in love!" said the german, laughing. 

"yes; I have been wait here for nearli half an hour." 

"I hope you left no clue as to where we were going." 

"not such a fool! By jove, I am chill to the bone! come on, burger, 
let us warm ourselv by a spurt of hard walking." 

their footstep sound loud and crisp upon the rough stone pave of 
the disappoint road which is all that is left of the most famou 
highway of the world. A peasant or two go home from the wine-shop, 
and a few cart of countri produc come up to rome, were the onli 
thing which they met. they swung along, with the huge tomb loom 
up through the dark upon each side of them, until they had come as 
far as the catacomb of st. calistus, and saw against a rise moon the 
great circular bastion of cecilia metella in front of them. then 
burger stop with hi hand to hi side. 

"your leg are longer than mine, and you are more accustom to 
walking," said he, laughing. "I think that the place where we turn off 
is somewher here. yes, thi is it, round the corner of the trattoria. 
now, it is a veri narrow path, so perhap I had better go in front and 
you can follow." 

He had lit hi lantern, and by it light they were enabl to follow a 
narrow and deviou track which wound across the marsh of the 
campagna. the great aqueduct of old rome lay like a monstrou 
caterpillar across the moonlit landscape, and their road led them under 
one of it huge arches, and past the circl of crumbl brick which 
mark the old arena. At last burger stop at a solitari wooden 
cow-house, and he drew a key from hi pocket. "sure your catacomb is 
not insid a house!" cri kennedy. 

"the entranc to it is. that is just the safeguard which we have 
against anyon els discov it." 

"doe the proprietor know of it?" 

"not he. He had found one or two object which made me almost certain 
that hi hous wa built on the entranc to such a place. So I rent 
it from him, and did my excav for myself. come in, and shut the 
door behind you." 

It wa a long, empti building, with the manger of the cow along one 
wall. burger put hi lantern down on the ground, and shade it light 
in all direct save one by drape hi overcoat round it. 

"it might excit remark if anyon saw a light in thi lone place," 
said he. "just help me to move thi boarding." 

the floor wa loos in the corner, and plank by plank the two 
savant rais it and lean it against the wall. below there wa a 
squar apertur and a stair of old stone step which led away down into 
the bowel of the earth. 

"be careful!" cri burger, as kennedy, in hi impatience, hurri down 
them. "it is a perfect rabbits'-warren below, and if you were onc to 
lose your way there the chanc would be a hundr to one against your 
ever come out again. wait until I bring the light." 

"how do you find your own way if it is so complicated?" 

"I had some veri narrow escap at first, but I have gradual learn 
to go about. there is a certain system to it, but it is one which a 
lost man, if he were in the dark, could not possibl find out. even 
now I alway spin out a ball of string behind me when I am go far 
into the catacomb. you can see for yourself that it is difficult, but 
everi one of these passag divid and subdivid a dozen time befor 
you go a hundr yards." 

they had descend some twenti feet from the level of the byre, and 
they were stand now in a squar chamber cut out of the soft tufa. 
the lantern cast a flicker light, bright below and dim above, over 
the crack brown walls. In everi direct were the black open of 
passag which radiat from thi common centre. 

"I want you to follow me closely, my friend," said burger. "do not 
loiter to look at anyth upon the way, for the place to which I will 
take you contain all that you can see, and more. It will save time 
for us to go there direct." 

He led the way down one of the corridors, and the englishman follow 
close at hi heels. everi now and then the passag bifurcated, but 
burger wa evid follow some secret mark of hi own, for he 
neither stop nor hesitated. everywher along the walls, pack like 
the berth upon an emigr ship, lay the christian of old rome. the 
yellow light flicker over the shrivel featur of the mummies, and 
gleam upon round skull and long, white armbon cross over 
fleshless chests. and everywher as he pass kennedi look with 
wist eye upon inscriptions, funer vessels, pictures, vestments, 
utensils, all lie as piou hand had place them so mani centuri 
ago. It wa appar to him, even in those hurried, pass glances, 
that thi wa the earliest and finest of the catacombs, contain such 
a storehous of roman remain as had never befor come at one time 
under the observ of the student. 

"what would happen if the light went out?" he asked, as they hurri 
onwards. 

"I have a spare candl and a box of match in my pocket. By the way, 
kennedy, have you ani matches?" 

"no; you had better give me some." 

"oh, that is all right. there is no chanc of our separating." 

"how far are we going? It seem to me that we have walk at least a 
quarter of a mile." 

"more than that, I think. there is realli no limit to the tombs--at 
least, I have never been abl to find any. thi is a veri difficult 
place, so I think that I will use our ball of string." 

He fasten one end of it to a project stone and he carri the coil 
in the breast of hi coat, pay it out as he advanced. kennedi saw 
that it wa no unnecessari precaution, for the passag had becom more 
complex and tortuou than ever, with a perfect network of intersect 
corridors. but these all end in one larg circular hall with a 
squar pedest of tufa top with a slab of marbl at one end of it. 

"bi jove!" cri kennedi in an ecstasy, as burger swung hi lantern 
over the marble. "it is a christian altar--prob the first one in 
existence. here is the littl consecr cross cut upon the corner 
of it. No doubt thi circular space wa use as a church." 

"precisely," said burger. "if I had more time I should like to show 
you all the bodi which are buri in these nich upon the walls, for 
they are the earli pope and bishop of the church, with their mitres, 
their croziers, and full canonicals. Go over to that one and look at 
it!" 

kennedi went across, and stare at the ghastli head which lay loos 
on the shred and moulder mitre. 

"thi is most interesting," said he, and hi voic seem to boom 
against the concav vault. "a far as my experi goes, it is 
unique. bring the lantern over, burger, for I want to see them all." 

but the german had stroll away, and wa stand in the middl of a 
yellow circl of light at the other side of the hall. 

"do you know how mani wrong turn there are between thi and the 
stairs?" he asked. "there are over two thousand. No doubt it wa one 
of the mean of protect which the christian adopted. the odd are 
two thousand to one against a man get out, even if he had a light; 
but if he were in the dark it would, of course, be far more difficult." 

"so I should think." 

"and the dark is someth dreadful. I tri it onc for an 
experiment. let us tri it again!" He stoop to the lantern, and in 
an instant it wa as if an invis hand wa squeez tightli over 
each of kennedy' eyes. never had he known what such dark was. It 
seem to press upon him and to smother him. It wa a solid obstacl 
against which the bodi shrank from advancing. He put hi hand out to 
push it back from him. 

"that will do, burger," said he, "let' have the light again." 

but hi companion began to laugh, and in that circular room the sound 
seem to come from everi side at once. 

"you seem uneasy, friend kennedy," said he. 

"go on, man, light the candle!" said kennedi impatiently. 

"it' veri strange, kennedy, but I could not in the least tell by the 
sound in which direct you stand. could you tell where I am?" 

"no; you seem to be on everi side of me." 

"if it were not for thi string which I hold in my hand I should not 
have a notion which way to go." 

"I dare say not. strike a light, man, and have an end of thi 
nonsense." 

"well, kennedy, there are two thing which I understand that you are 
veri fond of. the one is an adventure, and the other is an obstacl to 
surmount. the adventur must be the find of your way out of thi 
catacomb. the obstacl will be the dark and the two thousand wrong 
turn which make the way a littl difficult to find. but you need not 
hurry, for you have plenti of time, and when you halt for a rest now 
and then, I should like you just to think of miss mari saunderson, and 
whether you treat her quit fairly." 

"you devil, what do you mean?" roar kennedy. He wa run about in 
littl circl and clasp at the solid black with both hands. 

"good-bye," said the mock voice, and it wa alreadi at some 
distance. "I realli do not think, kennedy, even by your own show 
that you did the right thing by that girl. there wa onli one littl 
thing which you appear not to know, and I can suppli it. miss 
saunderson wa engag to a poor ungainli devil of a student, and hi 
name wa juliu burger." 

there wa a rustl somewhere, the vagu sound of a foot strike a 
stone, and then there fell silenc upon that old christian church--a 
stagnant, heavi silenc which close round kennedi and shut him in like 
water round a drown man. 


some two month afterward the follow paragraph made the round of 
the european press: 


"one of the most interest discoveri of recent year is that of the 
new catacomb in rome, which lie some distanc to the east of the 
well-known vault of st. calixtus. the find of thi import 
burial-place, which is exceed rich in most interest earli 
christian remains, is due to the energi and sagac of dr. juliu 
burger, the young german specialist, who is rapidli take the first 
place as an author upon ancient rome. although the first to publish 
hi discovery, it appear that a less fortun adventur had 
anticip dr. burger. some month ago mr. kennedy, the well-known 
english student, disappear suddenli from hi room in the corso, and 
it wa conjectur that hi associ with a recent scandal had 
driven him to leav rome. It appear now that he had in realiti fallen 
a victim to that fervid love of archaeolog which had rais him to a 
distinguish place among live scholars. hi bodi wa discov in 
the heart of the new catacomb, and it wa evid from the condit of 
hi feet and boot that he had tramp for day through the tortuou 
corridor which make these subterranean tomb so danger to 
explorers. the deceas gentleman had, with inexplic rashness, 
made hi way into thi labyrinth without, as far as can be discovered, 
take with him either candl or matches, so that hi sad fate wa the 
natur result of hi own temerity. what make the matter more pain 
is that dr. juliu burger wa an intim friend of the deceased. hi 
joy at the extraordinari find which he ha been so fortun as to make 
ha been greatli mar by the terribl fate of hi comrad and 
fellow-worker." 



the case of ladi sannox 

the relat between dougla stone and the notori ladi sannox were 
veri well known both among the fashion circl of which she wa a 
brilliant member, and the scientif bodi which number him among 
their most illustri confreres. there wa naturally, therefore, a 
veri widespread interest when it wa announc one morn that the 
ladi had absolut and for ever taken the veil, and that the world 
would see her no more. when, at the veri tail of thi rumour, there 
came the assur that the celebr oper surgeon, the man of 
steel nerves, had been found in the morn by hi valet, seat on one 
side of hi bed, smile pleasantli upon the universe, with both leg 
jam into one side of hi breech and hi great brain about as 
valuabl as a cap full of porridge, the matter wa strong enough to 
give quit a littl thrill of interest to folk who had never hope that 
their jade nerv were capabl of such a sensation. 

dougla stone in hi prime wa one of the most remark men in 
england. indeed, he could hardli be said to have ever reach hi 
prime, for he wa but nine-and-thirti at the time of thi littl 
incident. those who knew him best were awar that famou as he wa as 
a surgeon, he might have succeed with even greater rapid in ani of 
a dozen line of life. He could have cut hi way to fame as a soldier, 
struggl to it as an explorer, bulli for it in the courts, or built 
it out of stone and iron as an engineer. He wa born to be great, for 
he could plan what anoth man dare not do, and he could do what 
anoth man dare not plan. In surgeri none could follow him. hi 
nerve, hi judgement, hi intuition, were thing apart. again and 
again hi knife cut away death, but graze the veri spring of life in 
do it, until hi assist were as white as the patient. hi 
energy, hi audacity, hi full-blood self-confidence--do not the 
memori of them still linger to the south of marylebon road and the 
north of oxford street? 

hi vice were as magnific as hi virtues, and infinit more 
picturesque. larg as wa hi income, and it wa the third largest of 
all profession men in london, it wa far beneath the luxuri of hi 
living. deep in hi complex natur lay a rich vein of sensualism, at 
the sport of which he place all the prize of hi life. the eye, the 
ear, the touch, the palate, all were hi masters. the bouquet of old 
vintages, the scent of rare exotics, the curv and tint of the 
daintiest potteri of europe, it wa to these that the quick-run 
stream of gold wa transformed. and then there came hi sudden mad 
passion for ladi sannox, when a singl interview with two challeng 
glanc and a whisper word set him ablaze. she wa the loveliest 
woman in london and the onli one to him. He wa one of the handsomest 
men in london, but not the onli one to her. she had a like for new 
experiences, and wa graciou to most men who woo her. It may have 
been caus or it may have been effect that lord sannox look fifty, 
though he wa but six-and-thirty. 

He wa a quiet, silent, neutral-tint man, thi lord, with thin lip 
and heavi eyelids, much given to gardening, and full of home-lik 
habits. He had at one time been fond of acting, had even rent a 
theatr in london, and on it board had first seen miss marion dawson, 
to whom he had offer hi hand, hi title, and the third of a county. 
sinc hi marriag hi earli hobbi had becom distast to him. even 
in privat theatric it wa no longer possibl to persuad him to 
exercis the talent which he had often show that he possessed. He 
wa happier with a spud and a watering-can among hi orchid and 
chrysanthemums. 

It wa quit an interest problem whether he wa absolut devoid of 
sense, or miser want in spirit. did he know hi lady' way and 
condon them, or wa he a mere blind, dote fool? It wa a point to be 
discuss over the teacup in snug littl drawing-rooms, or with the 
aid of a cigar in the bow window of clubs. bitter and plain were the 
comment among men upon hi conduct. there wa but one who had a good 
word to say for him, and he wa the most silent member in the 
smoking-room. He had seen him break in a hors at the university, and 
it seem to have left an impress upon hi mind. 

but when dougla stone becam the favourit all doubt as to lord 
sannox' knowledg or ignor were set for ever at rest. there wa no 
subterfug about stone. In hi high-handed, impetu fashion, he set 
all caution and discret at defiance. the scandal becam notorious. 
A learn bodi intim that hi name had been struck from the list of 
it vice-presidents. two friend implor him to consid hi 
profession credit. He curs them all three, and spent forti guinea 
on a bangl to take with him to the lady. He wa at her hous everi 
evening, and she drove in hi carriag in the afternoons. there wa 
not an attempt on either side to conceal their relations; but there 
came at last a littl incid to interrupt them. 

It wa a dismal winter' night, veri cold and gusty, with the wind 
whoop in the chimney and bluster against the window-panes. A 
thin spatter of rain tinkl on the glass with each fresh sough of the 
gale, drown for the instant the dull gurgl and drip from the eaves. 
dougla stone had finish hi dinner, and sat by hi fire in the 
study, a glass of rich port upon the malachit tabl at hi elbow. As 
he rais it to hi lips, he held it up against the lamplight, and 
watch with the eye of a connoisseur the tini scale of beesw which 
float in it rich rubi depths. the fire, as it spurt up, threw 
fit light upon hi bald, clear-cut face, with it widely-open 
grey eyes, it thick and yet firm lips, and the deep, squar jaw, which 
had someth roman in it strength and it animalism. He smile from 
time to time as he nestl back in hi luxuri chair. indeed, he had 
a right to feel well pleased, for, against the advic of six 
colleagues, he had perform an oper that day of which onli two 
case were on record, and the result had been brilliant beyond all 
expectation. No other man in london would have had the dare to plan, 
or the skill to execute, such a heroic measure. 

but he had promis ladi sannox to see her that even and it wa 
alreadi half-past eight. hi hand wa outstretch to the bell to 
order the carriag when he heard the dull thud of the knocker. An 
instant later there wa the shuffl of feet in the hall, and the 
sharp close of a door. 

"A patient to see you, sir, in the consult room," said the butler. 

"about himself?" 

"no, sir; I think he want you to go out." 

"it is too late," cri dougla stone peevishly. "I won't go." 

"thi is hi card, sir." 

the butler present it upon the gold salver which had been given to 
hi master by the wife of a prime minister. 

"'hamil ali, smyrna.' hum! the fellow is a turk, I suppose." 

"yes, sir. He seem as if he came from abroad, sir. and he' in a 
terribl way." 

"tut, tut! I have an engagement. I must go somewher else. but i'll 
see him. show him in here, pim." 

A few moment later the butler swung open the door and usher in a 
small and decrepit man, who walk with a bent back and with the 
forward push of the face and blink of the eye which goe with extrem 
short sight. hi face wa swarthy, and hi hair and beard of the 
deepest black. In one hand he held a turban of white muslin stripe 
with red, in the other a small chamois-leath bag. 

"good evening," said dougla stone, when the butler had close the 
door. "you speak english, I presume?" 

"yes, sir. I am from asia minor, but I speak english when I speak 
slow." 

"you want me to go out, I understand?" 

"yes, sir. I want veri much that you should see my wife." 

"I could come in the morning, but I have an engag which prevent 
me from see your wife tonight." 

the turk' answer wa a singular one. He pull the string which 
close the mouth of the chamois-leath bag, and pour a flood of gold 
on to the table. 

"there are one hundr pound there," said he, "and I promis you that 
it will not take you an hour. I have a cab readi at the door." 

dougla stone glanc at hi watch. An hour would not make it too late 
to visit ladi sannox. He had been there later. and the fee wa an 
extraordinarili high one. He had been press by hi creditor lately, 
and he could not afford to let such a chanc pass. He would go. 

"what is the case?" he asked. 

"oh, it is so sad a one! So sad a one! you have not, perhap heard of 
the dagger of the almohades?" 

"never." 

"ah, they are eastern dagger of a great age and of a singular shape, 
with the hilt like what you call a stirrup. I am a curios dealer, 
you understand, and that is whi I have come to england from smyrna, but 
next week I go back onc more. mani thing I brought with me, and I 
have a few thing left, but among them, to my sorrow, is one of these 
daggers." 

"you will rememb that I have an appointment, sir," said the surgeon, 
with some irritation; "pray confin yourself to the necessari details." 

"you will see that it is necessary. today my wife fell down in a faint 
in the room in which I keep my wares, and she cut her lower lip upon 
thi curs dagger of almohades." 

"I see," said dougla stone, rising. "and you wish me to dress the 
wound?" 

"no, no, it is wors than that." 

"what then?" 

"these dagger are poisoned." 

"poisoned!" 

"yes, and there is no man, east or west, who can tell now what is the 
poison or what the cure. but all that is known I know, for my father 
wa in thi trade befor me, and we have had much to do with these 
poison weapons." 

"what are the symptoms?" 

"deep sleep, and death in thirti hours." 

"and you say there is no cure. whi then should you pay me thi 
consider fee?" 

"no drug can cure, but the knife may." 

"and how?" 

"the poison is slow of absorption. It remain for hour in the wound." 

"washing, then, might cleans it?" 

"no more than in a snake bite. It is too subtl and too deadly." 

"excis of the wound, then?" 

"that is it. If it be on the finger, take the finger off. So said my 
father always. but think of where thi wound is, and that it is my 
wife. It is dreadful!" 

but familiar with such grim matter may take the finer edg from a 
man' sympathy. To dougla stone thi wa alreadi an interest case, 
and he brush asid as irrelev the feebl object of the husband. 

"it appear to be that or nothing," said he brusquely. "it is better 
to lose a lip than a life." 

"ah, yes, I know that you are right. well, well, it is kismet, and it 
must be faced. I have the cab, and you will come with me and do thi 
thing." 

dougla stone took hi case of bistouri from a drawer, and place it 
with a roll of bandag and a compress of lint in hi pocket. He must 
wast no more time if he were to see ladi sannox. 

"I am ready," said he, pull on hi overcoat. "will you take a glass 
of wine befor you go out into thi cold air?" 

hi visitor shrank away, with a protest hand upraised. 

"you forget that I am a mussulman, and a true follow of the prophet," 
said he. "but tell me what is the bottl of green glass which you have 
place in your pocket?" 

"it is chloroform." 

"ah, that also is forbidden to us. It is a spirit, and we make no use 
of such things." 

"what! you would allow your wife to go through an oper without an 
anaesthetic?" 

"ah! she will feel nothing, poor soul. the deep sleep ha alreadi 
come on, which is the first work of the poison. and then I have 
given her of our smyrna opium. come, sir, for alreadi an hour ha 
passed." 

As they step out into the darkness, a sheet of rain wa driven in 
upon their faces, and the hall lamp, which dangl from the arm of a 
marbl caryatid, went out with a fluff. pim, the butler, push the 
heavi door to, strain hard with hi shoulder against the wind, while 
the two men grope their way toward the yellow glare which show 
where the cab wa waiting. An instant later they were rattl upon 
their journey. 

"i it far?" ask dougla stone. 

"oh, no. We have a veri littl quiet place off the euston road." 

the surgeon press the spring of hi repeat and listen to the 
littl ting which told him the hour. It wa a quarter past nine. He 
calcul the distances, and the short time which it would take him to 
perform so trivial an operation. He ought to reach ladi sannox by ten 
o'clock. through the fog window he saw the blur ga lamp 
danc past, with occasion the broader glare of a shop front. the 
rain wa pelt and rattl upon the leathern top of the carriage, 
and the wheel swash as they roll through puddl and mud. opposit 
to him the white headgear of hi companion gleam faintli through the 
obscurity. the surgeon felt in hi pocket and arrang hi needles, 
hi ligatur and hi safety-pins, that no time might be wast when 
they arrived. He chafe with impati and drum hi foot upon the 
floor. 

but the cab slow down at last and pull up. In an instant dougla 
stone wa out, and the smyrna merchant' toe wa at hi veri heel. 

"you can wait," said he to the driver. 

It wa a mean-look hous in a narrow and sordid street. the 
surgeon, who knew hi london well, cast a swift glanc into the 
shadows, but there wa noth distinctive--no shop, no movement, 
noth but a doubl line of dull, flat-fac houses, a doubl stretch 
of wet flagston which gleam in the lamplight, and a doubl rush of 
water in the gutter which swirl and gurgl toward the sewer 
gratings. the door which face them wa blotch and discoloured, and 
a faint light in the fan pane above, it serv to show the dust and the 
grime which cover it. abov in one of the bedroom windows, there wa 
a dull yellow glimmer. the merchant knock loudly, and, as he turn 
hi dark face toward the light, dougla stone could see that it wa 
contract with anxiety. A bolt wa drawn, and an elderli woman with a 
taper stood in the doorway, shield the thin flame with her gnarl 
hand. 

"i all well?" gasp the merchant. 

"she is as you left her, sir." 

"she ha not spoken?" 

"no, she is in a deep sleep." 

the merchant close the door, and dougla stone walk down the narrow 
passage, glanc about him in some surpris as he did so. there wa no 
oil-cloth, no mat, no hat-rack. deep grey dust and heavi festoon of 
cobweb met hi eye everywhere. follow the old woman up the 
wind stair, hi firm footfal echo harshli through the silent 
house. there wa no carpet. 

the bedroom wa on the second landing. dougla stone follow the old 
nurs into it, with the merchant at hi heels. here, at least, there 
wa furnitur and to spare. the floor wa litter and the corner 
pile with turkish cabinets, inlaid tables, coat of chain mail, 
strang pipes, and grotesqu weapons. A singl small lamp stood upon a 
bracket on the wall. dougla stone took it down, and pick hi way 
among the lumber, walk over to a couch in the corner, on which lay a 
woman dress in the turkish fashion, with yashmak and veil. the lower 
part of the face wa exposed, and the surgeon saw a jag cut which 
zigzag along the border of the under lip. 

"you will forgiv the yashmak," said the turk. "you know our view 
about women in the east." 

but the surgeon wa not think about the yashmak. thi wa no longer 
a woman to him. It wa a case. He stoop and examin the wound 
carefully. 

"there are no sign of irritation," said he. "we might delay the 
oper until local symptom develop." 

the husband wrung hi hand in uncontrol agitation. 

"oh! sir, sir," he cried. "do not trifle. you do not know. It is 
deadly. I know, and I give you my assur that an oper is 
absolut necessary. onli the knife can save her." 

"and yet I am inclin to wait," said dougla stone. 

"that is enough," the turk cried, angrily. "everi minut is of 
importance, and I cannot stand here and see my wife allow to sink. 
It onli remain for me to give you my thank for have come, and to 
call in some other surgeon befor it is too late." 

dougla stone hesitated. To refund that hundr pound wa no pleasant 
matter. but of cours if he left the case he must return the money. 
and if the turk were right and the woman died, hi posit befor a 
coron might be an embarrass one. 

"you have had person experi of thi poison?" he asked. 

"I have." 

"and you assur me that an oper is needful." 

"I swear it by all that I hold sacred." 

"the disfigur will be frightful." 

"I can understand that the mouth will not be a pretti one to kiss." 

dougla stone turn fierc upon the man. the speech wa a brutal 
one. but the turk ha hi own fashion of talk and of thought, and 
there wa no time for wrangling. dougla stone drew a bistouri from 
hi case, open it and felt the keen straight edg with hi 
forefinger. then he held the lamp closer to the bed. two dark eye 
were gaze up at him through the slit in the yashmak. they were all 
iris, and the pupil wa hardli to be seen. 

"you have given her a veri heavi dose of opium." 

"yes, she ha had a good dose." 

He glanc again at the dark eye which look straight at hi own. 
they were dull and lustreless, but, even as he gazed, a littl shift 
sparkl came into them, and the lip quivered. 

"she is not absolut unconscious," said he. 

"would it not be well to use the knife while it will be painless?" 

the same thought had cross the surgeon' mind. He grasp the 
wound lip with hi forceps, and with two swift cut he took out a 
broad v-shape piece. the woman sprang up on the couch with a dread 
gurgl scream. her cover wa torn from her face. It wa a face 
that he knew. In spite of that protrud upper lip and that slobber 
of blood, it wa a face that he knew, she kept on put her hand up 
to the gap and screaming. dougla stone sat down at the foot of the 
couch with hi knife and hi forceps. the room wa whirl round, and 
he had felt someth go like a rip seam behind hi ear. A 
bystand would have said that hi face wa the more ghastli of the 
two. As in a dream, or as if he had been look at someth at the 
play, he wa consciou that the turk' hair and beard lay upon the 
table, and that lord sannox wa lean against the wall with hi hand 
to hi side, laugh silently. the scream had die away now, and the 
dread head had drop back again upon the pillow, but dougla stone 
still sat motionless, and lord sannox still chuckl quietli to himself. 

"it wa realli veri necessari for marion, thi operation," said he, 
"not physically, but morally, you know, morally." 

dougla stone stoop for yard and began to play with the fring of 
the coverlet. hi knife tinkl down upon the ground, but he still 
held the forcep and someth more. 

"I had long intend to make a littl example," said lord sannox, 
suavely. "your note of wednesday miscarried, and I have it here in my 
pocket-book. I took some pain in carri out my idea. the wound, by 
the way, wa from noth more danger than my signet ring." 

He glanc keenli at hi silent companion, and cock the small 
revolv which he held in hi coat pocket. but dougla stone wa still 
pick at the coverlet. 

"you see you have kept your appoint after all," said lord sannox. 

and at that dougla stone began to laugh. He laugh long and loudly. 
but lord sannox did not laugh now. someth like fear sharpen and 
harden hi features. He walk from the room, and he walk on 
tiptoe. the old woman wa wait outside. 

"attend to your mistress when she awakes," said lord sannox. 

then he went down to the street. the cab wa at the door, and the 
driver rais hi hand to hi hat. 

"john," said lord sannox, "you will take the doctor home first. He will 
want lead downstairs, I think. tell hi butler that he ha been 
taken ill at a case." 

"veri good, sir." 

"then you can take ladi sannox home." 

"and how about yourself, sir?" 

"oh, my address for the next few month will be hotel di roma, venice. 
just see that the letter are sent on. and tell steven to exhibit all 
the purpl chrysanthemum next monday, and to wire me the result." 



the terror of blue john gap 

the follow narr wa found among the paper of dr. jame 
hardcastle, who die of phthisi on februari 4th, 1908, at 36, upper 
coventri flats, south kensington. those who knew him best, while 
refus to express an opinion upon thi particular statement, are 
unanim in assert that he wa a man of a sober and scientif turn 
of mind, absolut devoid of imagination, and most unlik to invent 
ani abnorm seri of events. the paper wa contain in an envelope, 
which wa docketed, "A short account of the circumst which 
occur near miss allerton' farm in north-west derbyshir in the 
spring of last year." the envelop wa sealed, and on the other side 
wa written in pencil-- 


dear seaton,-- 

"it may interest, and perhap pain you, to know that the incredul 
with which you met my stori ha prevent me from ever open my mouth 
upon the subject again. I leav thi record after my death, and 
perhap stranger may be found to have more confid in me than my 
friend." 


inquiri ha fail to elicit who thi seaton may have been. I may add 
that the visit of the deceas to allerton' farm, and the gener 
natur of the alarm there, apart from hi particular explanation, have 
been absolut established. with thi foreword I append hi account 
exactli as he left it. It is in the form of a diary, some entri in 
which have been expanded, while a few have been erased. 


april 17.--alreadi I feel the benefit of thi wonder upland air. 
the farm of the allerton lie fourteen hundr and twenti feet abov 
sea-level, so it may well be a brace climate. beyond the usual 
morn cough I have veri littl discomfort, and, what with the fresh 
milk and the home-grown mutton, I have everi chanc of put on 
weight. I think saunderson will be pleased. 

the two miss allerton are charmingli quaint and kind, two dear littl 
hard-work old maids, who are readi to lavish all the heart which 
might have gone out to husband and to children upon an invalid 
stranger. truly, the old maid is a most use person, one of the 
reserv forc of the community. they talk of the superflu woman, 
but what would the poor superflu man do without her kindli presence? 
By the way, in their simplic they veri quickli let out the reason 
whi saunderson recommend their farm. the professor rose from the 
rank himself, and I believ that in hi youth he wa not abov scare 
crow in these veri fields. 

It is a most lone spot, and the walk are picturesqu in the extreme. 
the farm consist of graze land lie at the bottom of an irregular 
valley. On each side are the fantast limeston hills, form of rock 
so soft that you can break it away with your hands. all thi countri 
is hollow. could you strike it with some gigant hammer it would boom 
like a drum, or possibl cave in altogeth and expos some huge 
subterranean sea. A great sea there must sure be, for on all side 
the stream run into the mountain itself, never to reappear. there are 
gap everywher amid the rocks, and when you pass through them you find 
yourself in great caverns, which wind down into the bowel of the 
earth. I have a small bicycl lamp, and it is a perpetu joy to me to 
carri it into these weird solitudes, and to see the wonder silver 
and black effect when I throw it light upon the stalactit which 
drape the lofti roofs. shut off the lamp, and you are in the blackest 
darkness. turn it on, and it is a scene from the arabian nights. 

but there is one of these strang open in the earth which ha a 
special interest, for it is the handiwork, not of nature, but of man. 
I had never heard of blue john when I came to these parts. It is the 
name given to a peculiar miner of a beauti purpl shade, which is 
onli found at one or two place in the world. It is so rare that an 
ordinari vase of blue john would be valu at a great price. the 
romans, with that extraordinari instinct of theirs, discov that it 
wa to be found in thi valley, and sank a horizont shaft deep into 
the mountain side. the open of their mine ha been call blue john 
gap, a clean-cut arch in the rock, the mouth all overgrown with bushes. 
It is a goodli passag which the roman miner have cut, and it 
intersect some of the great water-worn caves, so that if you enter 
blue john gap you would do well to mark your step and to have a good 
store of candles, or you may never make your way back to the daylight 
again. I have not yet gone deepli into it, but thi veri day I stood at 
the mouth of the arch tunnel, and peer down into the black 
recess beyond, I vow that when my health return I would devot 
some holiday to explor those mysteri depth and find out for 
myself how far the roman had penetr into the derbyshir hills. 

strang how superstiti these countrymen are! I should have thought 
better of young armitage, for he is a man of some educ and 
character, and a veri fine fellow for hi station in life. I wa 
stand at the blue john gap when he came across the field to me. 

"well, doctor," said he, "you'r not afraid, anyhow." 

"afraid!" I answered. "afraid of what?" 

"of it," said he, with a jerk of hi thumb toward the black vault, "of 
the terror that live in the blue john cave." 

how absurdli easi it is for a legend to aris in a lone countryside! 
I examin him as to the reason for hi weird belief. It seem that 
from time to time sheep have been miss from the fields, carri 
bodili away, accord to armitage. that they could have wander away 
of their own accord and disappear among the mountain wa an 
explan to which he would not listen. On one occas a pool of 
blood had been found, and some tuft of wool. that also, I point 
out, could be explain in a perfectli natur way. further, the 
night upon which sheep disappear were invari veri dark, cloudi 
night with no moon. thi I met with the obviou retort that those were 
the night which a commonplac sheep-steal would natur choos for 
hi work. On one occas a gap had been made in a wall, and some of 
the stone scatter for a consider distance. human agenc again, 
in my opinion. finally, armitag clinch all hi argument by tell 
me that he had actual heard the creature--indeed, that anyon could 
hear it who remain long enough at the gap. It wa a distant roar 
of an immens volume. I could not but smile at this, knowing, as I do, 
the strang reverber which come out of an underground water 
system run amid the chasm of a limeston formation. My 
incredul annoy armitag so that he turn and left me with some 
abruptness. 

and now come the queer point about the whole business. I wa still 
stand near the mouth of the cave turn over in my mind the variou 
statement of armitage, and reflect how readili they could be 
explain away, when suddenly, from the depth of the tunnel besid me, 
there issu a most extraordinari sound. how shall I describ it? 
first of all, it seem to be a great distanc away, far down in the 
bowel of the earth. secondly, in spite of thi suggest of 
distance, it wa veri loud. lastly, it wa not a boom, nor a crash, 
such as one would associ with fall water or tumbl rock, but it 
wa a high whine, tremul and vibrating, almost like the whinni of 
a horse. It wa certainli a most remark experience, and one which 
for a moment, I must admit, gave a new signific to armitage' 
words. I wait by the blue john gap for half an hour or more, but 
there wa no return of the sound, so at last I wander back to the 
farmhouse, rather mystifi by what had occurred. decidedli I shall 
explor that cavern when my strength is restored. Of course, 
armitage' explan is too absurd for discussion, and yet that sound 
wa certainli veri strange. It still ring in my ear as I write. 

april 20.--in the last three day I have made sever expedit to 
the blue john gap, and have even penetr some short distance, but my 
bicycl lantern is so small and weak that I dare not trust myself veri 
far. I shall do the thing more systematically. I have heard no sound 
at all, and could almost believ that I had been the victim of some 
hallucin suggested, perhaps, by armitage' conversation. Of 
course, the whole idea is absurd, and yet I must confess that those 
bush at the entranc of the cave do present an appear as if some 
heavi creatur had forc it way through them. I begin to be keenli 
interested. I have said noth to the miss allertons, for they are 
quit superstiti enough already, but I have bought some candles, and 
mean to investig for myself. 

I observ thi morn that among the numer tuft of sheep' wool 
which lay among the bush near the cavern there wa one which wa 
smear with blood. Of course, my reason tell me that if sheep wander 
into such rocki place they are like to injur themselves, and yet 
somehow that splash of crimson gave me a sudden shock, and for a moment 
I found myself shrink back in horror from the old roman arch. A 
fetid breath seem to ooz from the black depth into which I peered. 
could it inde be possibl that some nameless thing, some dread 
presence, wa lurk down yonder? I should have been incap of 
such feel in the day of my strength, but one grow more nervou 
and fanci when one' health is shaken. 

for the moment I weaken in my resolution, and wa readi to leav the 
secret of the old mine, if one exists, for ever unsolved. but tonight 
my interest ha return and my nerv grown more steady. tomorrow I 
trust that I shall have gone more deepli into thi matter. 

april 22.--let me tri and set down as accur as I can my 
extraordinari experi of yesterday. I start in the afternoon, and 
made my way to the blue john gap. I confess that my misgiv 
return as I gaze into it depths, and I wish that I had brought a 
companion to share my exploration. finally, with a return of 
resolution, I lit my candle, push my way through the briars, and 
descend into the rocki shaft. 

It went down at an acut angl for some fifti feet, the floor be 
cover with broken stone. thenc there extend a long, straight 
passag cut in the solid rock. I am no geologist, but the line of 
thi corridor wa certainli of some harder materi than limestone, for 
there were point where I could actual see the tool-mark which the 
old miner had left in their excavation, as fresh as if they had been 
done yesterday. down thi strange, old-world corridor I stumbled, my 
feebl flame throw a dim circl of light around me, which made the 
shadow beyond the more threaten and obscure. finally, I came to a 
spot where the roman tunnel open into a water-worn cavern--a huge 
hall, hung with long white icicl of lime deposit. from thi central 
chamber I could dimli perceiv that a number of passag worn by the 
subterranean stream wound away into the depth of the earth. I wa 
stand there wonder whether I had better return, or whether I dare 
ventur farther into thi danger labyrinth, when my eye fell upon 
someth at my feet which strongli arrest my attention. 

the greater part of the floor of the cavern wa cover with boulder 
of rock or with hard incrust of lime, but at thi particular 
point there had been a drip from the distant roof, which had left a 
patch of soft mud. In the veri centr of thi there wa a huge 
mark--an ill-defin blotch, deep, broad and irregular, as if a great 
boulder had fallen upon it. No loos stone lay near, however, nor wa 
there anyth to account for the impression. It wa far too larg to 
be caus by ani possibl animal, and besides, there wa onli the one, 
and the patch of mud wa of such a size that no reason stride could 
have cover it. As I rose from the examin of that singular mark 
and then look round into the black shadow which hem me in, I must 
confess that I felt for a moment a most unpleas sink of my heart, 
and that, do what I could, the candl trembl in my outstretch hand. 

I soon recov my nerve, however, when I reflect how absurd it wa 
to associ so huge and shapeless a mark with the track of ani known 
animal. even an eleph could not have produc it. I determined, 
therefore, that I would not be scare by vagu and senseless fear from 
carri out my exploration. befor proceeding, I took good note of a 
curiou rock format in the wall by which I could recogn the 
entranc of the roman tunnel. the precaut wa veri necessary, for 
the great cave, so far as I could see it, wa intersect by passages. 
have made sure of my position, and reassur myself by examin my 
spare candl and my matches, I advanc slowli over the rocki and 
uneven surfac of the cavern. 

and now I come to the point where I met with such sudden and desper 
disaster. A stream, some twenti feet broad, ran across my path, and I 
walk for some littl distanc along the bank to find a spot where I 
could cross dry-shod. finally, I came to a place where a singl flat 
boulder lay near the centre, which I could reach in a stride. As it 
chanced, however, the rock had been cut away and made top-heavi by the 
rush of the stream, so that it tilt over as I land on it and shot 
me into the ice-cold water. My candl went out, and I found myself 
flounder about in utter and absolut darkness. 

I stagger to my feet again, more amus than alarm by my adventure. 
the candl had fallen from my hand, and wa lost in the stream, but I 
had two other in my pocket, so that it wa of no importance. I got 
one of them ready, and drew out my box of match to light it. onli 
then did I realiz my position. the box had been soak in my fall 
into the river. It wa imposs to strike the matches. 

A cold hand seem to close round my heart as I realiz my position. 
the dark wa opaqu and horrible. It wa so utter one put one' 
hand up to one' face as if to press off someth solid. I stood 
still, and by an effort I steadi myself. I tri to reconstruct in 
my mind a map of the floor of the cavern as I had last seen it. alas! 
the bear which had impress themselv upon my mind were high on 
the wall, and not to be found by touch. still, I rememb in a 
gener way how the side were situated, and I hope that by grope my 
way along them I should at last come to the open of the roman 
tunnel. move veri slowly, and continu strike against the 
rocks, I set out on thi desper quest. 

but I veri soon realiz how imposs it was. In that black, velveti 
dark one lost all one' bear in an instant. befor I had made 
a dozen paces, I wa utterli bewild as to my whereabouts. the 
rippl of the stream, which wa the one sound audible, show me 
where it lay, but the moment that I left it bank I wa utterli lost. 
the idea of find my way back in absolut dark through that 
limeston labyrinth wa clearli an imposs one. 

I sat down upon a boulder and reflect upon my unfortun plight. I 
had not told anyon that I propos to come to the blue john mine, and 
it wa unlik that a search parti would come after me. therefor I 
must trust to my own resourc to get clear of the danger. there wa 
onli one hope, and that wa that the match might dry. when I fell 
into the river, onli half of me had got thoroughli wet. My left 
shoulder had remain abov the water. I took the box of matches, 
therefore, and put it into my left armpit. the moist air of the cavern 
might possibl be counteract by the heat of my body, but even so, I 
knew that I could not hope to get a light for mani hours. meanwhil 
there wa noth for it but to wait. 

By good luck I had slip sever biscuit into my pocket befor I 
left the farm-house. these I now devoured, and wash them down with a 
draught from that wretch stream which had been the caus of all my 
misfortunes. then I felt about for a comfort seat among the rocks, 
and, have discov a place where I could get a support for my back, 
I stretch out my leg and settl myself down to wait. I wa 
wretchedli damp and cold, but I tri to cheer myself with the 
reflect that modern scienc prescrib open window and walk in all 
weather for my disease. gradually, lull by the monoton gurgl of 
the stream, and by the absolut darkness, I sank into an uneasi slumber. 

how long thi last I cannot say. It may have been for an hour, it 
may have been for several. suddenli I sat up on my rock couch, with 
everi nerv thrill and everi sens acut on the alert. beyond all 
doubt I had heard a sound--som sound veri distinct from the gurgl 
of the waters. It had passed, but the reverber of it still 
linger in my ear. wa it a search party? they would most certainli 
have shouted, and vagu as thi sound wa which had waken me, it wa 
veri distinct from the human voice. I sat palpit and hardli 
dare to breathe. there it wa again! and again! now it had becom 
continuous. It wa a tread--yes, sure it wa the tread of some 
live creature. but what a tread it was! It gave one the impress 
of enorm weight carri upon sponge-lik feet, which gave forth a 
muffl but ear-fil sound. the dark wa as complet as ever, 
but the tread wa regular and decisive. and it wa come beyond all 
question in my direction. 

My skin grew cold, and my hair stood on end as I listen to that 
steadi and ponder footfall. there wa some creatur there, and 
sure by the speed of it advance, it wa one which could see in the 
dark. I crouch low on my rock and tri to blend myself into it. 
the step grew nearer still, then stopped, and present I wa awar of 
a loud lap and gurgling. the creatur wa drink at the stream. 
then again there wa silence, broken by a success of long sniff and 
snort of tremend volum and energy. had it caught the scent of me? 
My own nostril were fill by a low fetid odour, mephit and 
abominable. then I heard the step again. they were on my side of the 
stream now. the stone rattl within a few yard of where I lay. 
hardli dare to breathe, I crouch upon my rock. then the step drew 
away. I heard the splash as it return across the river, and the 
sound die away into the distanc in the direct from which it had 
come. 

for a long time I lay upon the rock, too much horrifi to move. I 
thought of the sound which I had heard come from the depth of the 
cave, of armitage' fears, of the strang impress in the mud, and 
now came thi final and absolut proof that there wa inde some 
inconceiv monster, someth utterli unearthli and dreadful, which 
lurk in the hollow of the mountain. Of it natur or form I could 
frame no conception, save that it wa both light-foot and gigantic. 
the combat between my reason, which told me that such thing could not 
be, and my senses, which told me that they were, rage within me as I 
lay. finally, I wa almost readi to persuad myself that thi 
experi had been part of some evil dream, and that my abnorm 
condit might have conjur up an hallucination. but there remain 
one final experi which remov the last possibl of doubt from 
my mind. 

I had taken my match from my armpit and felt them. they seem 
perfectli hard and dry. stoop down into a crevic of the rocks, I 
tri one of them. To my delight it took fire at once. I lit the 
candle, and, with a terrifi backward glanc into the obscur depth 
of the cavern, I hurri in the direct of the roman passage. As I 
did so I pass the patch of mud on which I had seen the huge imprint. 
now I stood astonish befor it, for there were three similar imprint 
upon it surface, enorm in size, irregular in outline, of a depth 
which indic the ponder weight which had left them. then a great 
terror surg over me. stoop and shade my candl with my hand, I 
ran in a frenzi of fear to the rocki archway, hasten up it, and never 
stop until, with weari feet and pant lungs, I rush up the final 
slope of stones, broke through the tangl of briars, and flung myself 
exhaust upon the soft grass under the peac light of the stars. 
It wa three in the morn when I reach the farm-house, and today I 
am all unstrung and quiver after my terrif adventure. As yet I 
have told no one. I must move warili in the matter. what would the 
poor lone women, or the uneduc yokel here think of it if I were 
to tell them my experience? let me go to someon who can understand 
and advise. 

april 25.--i wa laid up in bed for two day after my incred 
adventur in the cavern. I use the adject with a veri definit 
meaning, for I have had an experi sinc which ha shock me almost 
as much as the other. I have said that I wa look round for someon 
who could advis me. there is a dr. mark johnson who practic some 
few mile away, to whom I had a note of recommend from professor 
saunderson. To him I drove, when I wa strong enough to get about, and 
I recount to him my whole strang experience. He listen intently, 
and then care examin me, pay special attent to my reflex 
and to the pupil of my eyes. when he had finished, he refus to 
discuss my adventure, say that it wa entir beyond him, but he 
gave me the card of a mr. picton at castleton, with the advic that I 
should instantli go to him and tell him the stori exactli as I had done 
to himself. He was, accord to my adviser, the veri man who wa 
pre-emin suit to help me. I went on to the station, therefore, 
and made my way to the littl town, which is some ten mile away. mr. 
picton appear to be a man of importance, as hi brass plate wa 
display upon the door of a consider build on the outskirt of 
the town. I wa about to ring hi bell, when some misgiv came into 
my mind, and, cross to a neighbour shop, I ask the man behind 
the counter if he could tell me anyth of mr. picton. "why," said 
he, "he is the best mad doctor in derbyshire, and yonder is hi 
asylum." you can imagin that it wa not long befor I had shaken the 
dust of castleton from my feet and return to the farm, curs all 
unimagin pedant who cannot conceiv that there may be thing in 
creation which have never yet chanc to come across their mole' 
vision. after all, now that I am cooler, I can afford to admit that I 
have been no more sympathet to armitag than dr. johnson ha been to 
me. 

april 27. when I wa a student I had the reput of be a man of 
courag and enterprise. I rememb that when there wa a ghost-hunt at 
coltbridg it wa I who sat up in the haunt house. Is it advanc 
year (after all, I am onli thirty-five), or is it thi physic maladi 
which ha caus degeneration? certainli my heart quail when I think 
of that horribl cavern in the hill, and the certainti that it ha some 
monstrou occupant. what shall I do? there is not an hour in the day 
that I do not debat the question. If I say nothing, then the mysteri 
remain unsolved. If I do say anything, then I have the altern of 
mad alarm over the whole countryside, or of absolut incredul which 
may end in consign me to an asylum. On the whole, I think that my 
best cours is to wait, and to prepar for some expedit which shall 
be more deliber and better thought out than the last. As a first 
step I have been to castleton and obtain a few essentials--a larg 
acetylen lantern for one thing, and a good double-barrel sport 
rifl for another. the latter I have hired, but I have bought a dozen 
heavi game cartridges, which would bring down a rhinoceros. now I am 
readi for my troglodyt friend. give me better health and a littl 
spate of energy, and I shall tri conclus with him yet. but who and 
what is he? ah! there is the question which stand between me and my 
sleep. how mani theori do I form, onli to discard each in turn! It 
is all so utterli unthinkable. and yet the cry, the footmark, the 
tread in the cavern--no reason can get past these I think of the 
old-world legend of dragon and of other monsters. were they, 
perhaps, not such fairy-tal as we have thought? can it be that there 
is some fact which underli them, and am I, of all mortals, the one 
who is chosen to expos it? 

may 3.--for sever day I have been laid up by the vagari of an 
english spring, and dure those day there have been developments, the 
true and sinist mean of which no one can appreci save myself. 
I may say that we have had cloudi and moonless night of late, which 
accord to my inform were the season upon which sheep 
disappeared. well, sheep have disappeared. two of miss allerton's, 
one of old pearson' of the cat walk, and one of mrs. moulton's. four 
in all dure three nights. No trace is left of them at all, and the 
countrysid is buzz with rumour of gipsi and of sheep-stealers. 

but there is someth more seriou than that. young armitag ha 
disappear also. He left hi moorland cottag earli on wednesday 
night and ha never been heard of since. He wa an unattach man, so 
there is less sensat than would otherwis be the case. the popular 
explan is that he owe money, and ha found a situat in some 
other part of the country, whenc he will present write for hi 
belongings. but I have grave misgivings. Is it not much more like 
that the recent tragedi of the sheep ha caus him to take some step 
which may have end in hi own destruction? He may, for example, have 
lain in wait for the creatur and been carri off by it into the 
recess of the mountains. what an inconceiv fate for a civil 
englishman of the twentieth century! and yet I feel that it is 
possibl and even probable. but in that case, how far am I answer 
both for hi death and for ani other mishap which may occur? sure 
with the knowledg I alreadi possess it must be my duti to see that 
someth is done, or if necessari to do it myself. It must be the 
latter, for thi morn I went down to the local police-st and 
told my story. the inspector enter it all in a larg book and bow 
me out with commend gravity, but I heard a burst of laughter befor 
I had got down hi garden path. No doubt he wa recount my 
adventur to hi family. 

june 10.--i am write this, prop up in bed, six week after my last 
entri in thi journal. I have gone through a terribl shock both to 
mind and body, aris from such an experi as ha seldom befallen a 
human be before. but I have attain my end. the danger from the 
terror which dwell in the blue john gap ha pass never to return. 
thu much at least I, a broken invalid, have done for the common good. 
let me now recount what occur as clearli as I may. 

the night of friday, may 3rd, wa dark and cloudy--th veri night for 
the monster to walk. about eleven o'clock I went from the farm-hous 
with my lantern and my rifle, have first left a note upon the tabl 
of my bedroom in which I said that, if I were missing, search should be 
made for me in the direct of the gap. I made my way to the mouth of 
the roman shaft, and, have perch myself among the rock close to 
the opening, I shut off my lantern and wait patient with my load 
rifl readi to my hand. 

It wa a melancholi vigil. all down the wind valley I could see the 
scatter light of the farm-houses, and the church clock of 
chapel-le-dal toll the hour came faintli to my ears. these token 
of my fellow-men serv onli to make my own posit seem the more 
lonely, and to call for a greater effort to overcom the terror which 
tempt me continu to get back to the farm, and abandon for ever 
thi danger quest. and yet there lie deep in everi man a root 
self-respect which make it hard for him to turn back from that which 
he ha onc undertaken. thi feel of person pride wa my 
salvat now, and it wa that alon which held me fast when everi 
instinct of my natur wa drag me away. I am glad now that I had 
the strength. In spite of all that is ha cost me, my manhood is at 
least abov reproach. 

twelv o'clock struck in the distant church, then one, then two. It 
wa the darkest hour of the night. the cloud were drift low, and 
there wa not a star in the sky. An owl wa hoot somewher among 
the rocks, but no other sound, save the gentl sough of the wind, came 
to my ears. and then suddenli I heard it! from far away down the 
tunnel came those muffl steps, so soft and yet so ponderous. I heard 
also the rattl of stone as they gave way under that giant tread. 
they drew nearer. they were close upon me. I heard the crash of 
the bush round the entrance, and then dimli through the dark I 
wa consciou of the loom of some enorm shape, some monstrou 
inchoat creature, pass swiftli and veri silent out from the 
tunnel. I wa paralys with fear and amazement. long as I had 
waited, now that it had actual come I wa unprepar for the shock. 
I lay motionless and breathless, whilst the great dark mass whisk by 
me and wa swallow up in the night. 

but now I nerv myself for it return. No sound came from the 
sleep countrysid to tell of the horror which wa loose. In no way 
could I judg how far off it was, what it wa doing, or when it might 
be back. but not a second time should my nerv fail me, not a second 
time should it pass unchallenged. I swore it between my clench teeth 
as I laid my cock rifl across the rock. 

and yet it nearli happened. there wa no warn of approach now as 
the creatur pass over the grass. suddenly, like a dark, drift 
shadow, the huge bulk loom up onc more befor me, make for the 
entranc of the cave. again came that paralysi of volit which held 
my crook forefing impot upon the trigger. but with a desper 
effort I shook it off. even as the brushwood rustled, and the 
monstrou beast blend with the shadow of the gap, I fire at the 
retreat form. In the blaze of the gun I caught a glimps of a great 
shaggi mass, someth with rough and bristl hair of a wither grey 
colour, fade away to white in it lower parts, the huge bodi 
support upon short, thick, curv legs. I had just that glance, and 
then I heard the rattl of the stone as the creatur tore down into 
it burrow. In an instant, with a triumphant revuls of feeling, I 
had cast my fear to the wind, and uncov my power lantern, with 
my rifl in my hand, I sprang down from my rock and rush after the 
monster down the old roman shaft. 

My splendid lamp cast a brilliant flood of vivid light in front of me, 
veri differ from the yellow glimmer which had aid me down the same 
passag onli twelv day before. As I ran, I saw the great beast 
lurch along befor me, it huge bulk fill up the whole space from 
wall to wall. it hair look like coars fade oakum, and hung down 
in long, dens mass which sway as it moved. It wa like an 
enorm unclip sheep in it fleece, but in size it wa far larger 
than the largest elephant, and it breadth seem to be nearli as great 
as it height. It fill me with amaz now to think that I should 
have dare to follow such a horror into the bowel of the earth, but 
when one' blood is up, and when one' quarri seem to be flying, the 
old primev hunting-spirit awak and prudenc is cast to the wind. 
rifl in hand, I ran at the top of my speed upon the trail of the 
monster. 

I had seen that the creatur wa swift. now I wa to find out to my 
cost that it wa also veri cunning. I had imagin that it wa in 
panic flight, and that I had onli to pursu it. the idea that it might 
turn upon me never enter my excit brain. I have alreadi explain 
that the passag down which I wa race open into a great central 
cave. into thi I rushed, fear lest I should lose all trace of the 
beast. but he had turn upon hi own traces, and in a moment we were 
face to face. 

that picture, seen in the brilliant white light of the lantern, is 
etch for ever upon my brain. He had rear up on hi hind leg as a 
bear would do, and stood abov me, enormous, menacing--such a creatur 
as no nightmar had ever brought to my imagination. I have said that he 
rear like a bear, and there wa someth bear-like--if one could 
conceiv a bear which wa ten-fold the bulk of ani bear seen upon 
earth--in hi whole pose and attitude, in hi great crook foreleg 
with their ivory-whit claws, in hi rug skin, and in hi red, 
gape mouth, fring with monstrou fangs. onli in one point did he 
differ from the bear, or from ani other creatur which walk the earth, 
and even at that suprem moment a shudder of horror pass over me as I 
observ that the eye which glisten in the glow of my lantern were 
huge, project bulbs, white and sightless. for a moment hi great 
paw swung over my head. the next he fell forward upon me, I and my 
broken lantern crash to the earth, and I rememb no more. 


when I came to myself I wa back in the farm-hous of the allertons. 
two day had pass sinc my terribl adventur in the blue john gap. 
It seem that I had lain all night in the cave insens from 
concuss of the brain, with my left arm and two rib badli fractured. 
In the morn my note had been found, a search parti of a dozen 
farmer assembled, and I had been track down and carri back to my 
bedroom, where I had lain in high delirium ever since. there was, it 
seems, no sign of the creature, and no bloodstain which would show that 
my bullet had found him as he passed. save for my own plight and the 
mark upon the mud, there wa noth to prove that what I said wa 
true. 

six week have now elapsed, and I am abl to sit out onc more in the 
sunshine. just opposit me is the steep hillside, grey with shali 
rock, and yonder on it flank is the dark cleft which mark the open 
of the blue john gap. but it is no longer a sourc of terror. never 
again through that ill-omen tunnel shall ani strang shape flit out 
into the world of men. the educ and the scientific, the dr. 
johnson and the like, may smile at my narrative, but the poorer folk 
of the countrysid had never a doubt as to it truth. On the day after 
my recov conscious they assembl in their hundr round the 
blue john gap. As the castleton courier said: 


"it wa useless for our correspondent, or for ani of the adventur 
gentlemen who had come from matlock, buxton, and other parts, to offer 
to descend, to explor the cave to the end, and to final test the 
extraordinari narr of dr. jame hardcastle. the countri peopl had 
taken the matter into their own hands, and from an earli hour of the 
morn they had work hard in stop up the entranc of the tunnel. 
there is a sharp slope where the shaft begins, and great boulders, 
roll along by mani will hands, were thrust down it until the gap 
wa absolut sealed. So end the episod which ha caus such 
excit throughout the country. local opinion is fierc divid 
upon the subject. On the one hand are those who point to dr. 
hardcastle' impair health, and to the possibl of cerebr 
lesion of tubercular origin give rise to strang hallucinations. 
some ide fixe, accord to these gentlemen, caus the doctor to 
wander down the tunnel, and a fall among the rock wa suffici to 
account for hi injuries. On the other hand, a legend of a strang 
creatur in the gap ha exist for some month back, and the farmer 
look upon dr. hardcastle' narr and hi person injuri as a 
final corroboration. So the matter stands, and so the matter will 
continu to stand, for no definit solut seem to us to be now 
possible. It transcend human wit to give ani scientif explan 
which could cover the alleg facts." 


perhap befor the courier publish these word they would have been 
wise to send their repres to me. I have thought the matter 
out, as no one els ha occas to do, and it is possibl that I might 
have remov some of the more obviou difficulti of the narr and 
brought it one degre nearer to scientif acceptance. let me then 
write down the onli explan which seem to me to elucid what I 
know to my cost to have been a seri of facts. My theori may seem to 
be wildli improbable, but at least no one can ventur to say that it is 
impossible. 

My view is--and it wa formed, as is shown by my diary, befor my 
person adventure--that in thi part of england there is a vast 
subterranean lake or sea, which is fed by the great number of stream 
which pass down through the limestone. where there is a larg 
collect of water there must also be some evaporation, mist or rain, 
and a possibl of vegetation. thi in turn suggest that there may 
be anim life, arising, as the veget life would also do, from 
those seed and type which had been introduc at an earli period of 
the world' history, when commun with the outer air wa more 
easy. thi place had then develop a fauna and flora of it own, 
includ such monster as the one which I had seen, which may well 
have been the old cave-bear, enorm enlarg and modifi by it 
new environment. for countless aeon the intern and the extern 
creation had kept apart, grow steadili away from each other. then 
there had come some rift in the depth of the mountain which had 
enabl one creatur to wander up and, by mean of the roman tunnel, to 
reach the open air. like all subterranean life, it had lost the power 
of sight, but thi had no doubt been compens for by natur in other 
directions. certainli it had some mean of find it way about, and 
of hunt down the sheep upon the hillside. As to it choic of dark 
nights, it is part of my theori that light wa pain to those great 
white eyeballs, and that it wa onli a pitch-black world which it could 
tolerate. perhaps, indeed, it wa the glare of my lantern which save 
my life at that aw moment when we were face to face. So I read the 
riddle. I leav these fact behind me, and if you can explain them, do 
so; or if you choos to doubt them, do so. neither your belief nor 
your incredul can alter them, nor affect one whose task is nearli 
over. 


So end the strang narr of dr. jame hardcastle. 



the brazilian cat 

It is hard luck on a young fellow to have expens tastes, great 
expectations, aristocrat connections, but no actual money in hi 
pocket, and no profess by which he may earn any. the fact wa that 
my father, a good, sanguine, easy-go man, had such confid in the 
wealth and benevol of hi bachelor elder brother, lord southerton, 
that he took it for grant that I, hi onli son, would never be call 
upon to earn a live for myself. He imagin that if there were not a 
vacanc for me on the great southerton estates, at least there would be 
found some post in that diplomat servic which still remain the 
special preserv of our privileg classes. He die too earli to 
realiz how fals hi calcul had been. neither my uncl nor the 
state took the slightest notic of me, or show ani interest in my 
career. An occasion brace of pheasants, or basket of hares, wa all 
that ever reach me to remind me that I wa heir to otwel hous and 
one of the richest estat in the country. In the meantime, I found 
myself a bachelor and man about town, live in a suit of apart 
in grosvenor mansions, with no occup save that of pigeon-shoot 
and polo-play at hurlingham. month by month I realiz that it wa 
more and more difficult to get the broker to renew my bills, or to 
cash ani further post-obit upon an unentail property. ruin lay 
right across my path, and everi day I saw it clearer, nearer, and more 
absolut unavoidable. 

what made me feel my own poverti the more wa that, apart from the 
great wealth of lord southerton, all my other relat were fairli 
well-to-do. the nearest of these wa everard king, my father' nephew 
and my own first cousin, who had spent an adventur life in brazil, 
and had now return to thi countri to settl down on hi fortune. We 
never knew how he made hi money, but he appear to have plenti of it, 
for he bought the estat of greylands, near clipton-on-the-marsh, in 
suffolk. for the first year of hi resid in england he took no 
more notic of me than my miserli uncle; but at last one summer 
morning, to my veri great relief and joy, I receiv a letter ask me 
to come down that veri day and spend a short visit at greyland court. 
I wa expect a rather long visit to bankruptci court at the time, 
and thi interrupt seem almost providential. If I could onli get 
on term with thi unknown rel of mine, I might pull through yet. 
for the famili credit he could not let me go entir to the wall. I 
order my valet to pack my valise, and I set off the same even for 
clipton-on-the-marsh. 

after chang at ipswich, a littl local train deposit me at a 
small, desert station lie amidst a roll grassi country, with a 
sluggish and wind river curv in and out amidst the valleys, 
between high, silt banks, which show that we were within reach of 
the tide. No carriag wa await me (I found afterward that my 
telegram had been delayed), so I hire a dogcart at the local inn. the 
driver, an excel fellow, wa full of my relative' praises, and I 
learn from him that mr. everard king wa alreadi a name to conjur 
with in that part of the county. He had entertain the 
school-children, he had thrown hi ground open to visitors, he had 
subscrib to charities--in short, hi benevol had been so 
univers that my driver could onli account for it on the supposit 
that he had parliamentari ambitions. 

My attent wa drawn away from my driver' panegyr by the 
appear of a veri beauti bird which settl on a telegraph-post 
besid the road. At first I thought that it wa a jay, but it wa 
larger, with a brighter plumage. the driver account for it presenc 
at onc by say that it belong to the veri man whom we were about 
to visit. It seem that the acclimat of foreign creatur wa 
one of hi hobbies, and that he had brought with him from brazil a 
number of bird and beast which he wa endeavour to rear in 
england. when onc we had pass the gate of greyland park we had 
ampl evid of thi tast of his. some small spot deer, a 
curiou wild pig known, I believe, as a peccary, a gorgeous feather 
oriole, some sort of armadillo, and a singular lumber in-to beast 
like a veri fat badger, were among the creatur which I observ as we 
drove along the wind avenue. 

mr. everard king, my unknown cousin, wa stand in person upon the 
step of hi house, for he had seen us in the distance, and guess 
that it wa I. hi appear wa veri home and benevolent, short 
and stout, forty-f year old, perhaps, with a round, good-humour 
face, burn brown with the tropic sun, and shot with a thousand 
wrinkles. He wore white linen clothes, in true planter style, with a 
cigar between hi lips, and a larg panama hat upon the back of hi 
head. It wa such a figur as one associ with a verandah 
bungalow, and it look curious out of place in front of thi broad, 
stone english mansion, with it solid wing and it palladio pillar 
befor the doorway. 

"mi dear!" he cried, glanc over hi shoulder; "mi dear, here is our 
guest! welcome, welcom to greylands! I am delight to make your 
acquaintance, cousin marshall, and I take it as a great compliment that 
you should honour thi sleepi littl countri place with your presence." 

noth could be more hearti than hi manner, and he set me at my eas 
in an instant. but it need all hi cordial to aton for the 
frigid and even rude of hi wife, a tall, haggard woman, who 
came forward at hi summons. she was, I believe, of brazilian 
extraction, though she spoke excel english, and I excus her 
manner on the score of her ignor of our customs. she did not 
attempt to conceal, however, either then or afterwards, that I wa no 
veri welcom visitor at greyland court. her actual word were, as a 
rule, courteous, but she wa the possessor of a pair of particularli 
express dark eyes, and I read in them veri clearli from the first 
that she heartili wish me back in london onc more. 

however, my debt were too press and my design upon my wealthi 
rel were too vital for me to allow them to be upset by the 
ill-temp of hi wife, so I disregard her cold and reciproc 
the extrem cordial of hi welcome. No pain had been spare by him 
to make me comfortable. My room wa a charm one. He implor me to 
tell him anyth which could add to my happiness. It wa on the tip 
of my tongu to inform him that a blank chequ would materi help 
toward that end, but I felt that it might be prematur in the present 
state of our acquaintance. the dinner wa excellent, and as we sat 
togeth afterward over hi havana and coffee, which later he told me 
wa special prepar upon hi own plantation, it seem to me that 
all my driver' eulog were justified, and that I had never met a 
more large-heart and hospit man. 

but, in spite of hi cheeri good nature, he wa a man with a strong 
will and a fieri temper of hi own. Of thi I had an exampl upon the 
follow morning. the curiou avers which mrs. everard king had 
conceiv toward me wa so strong, that her manner at breakfast wa 
almost offensive. but her mean becam unmistak when her husband 
had quit the room. 

"the best train in the day is at twelve-fifteen," said she. 

"but I wa not think of go today," I answered, frankly--perhap 
even defiantly, for I wa determin not to be driven out by thi woman. 

"oh, if it rest with you--" said she, and stop with a most insol 
express in her eyes. 

"I am sure," I answered, "that mr. everard king would tell me if I were 
outstay my welcome." 

"what' this? what' this?" said a voice, and there he wa in the 
room. He had overheard my last words, and a glanc at our face had 
told him the rest. In an instant hi chubby, cheeri face set into an 
express of absolut ferocity. 

"might I troubl you to walk outside, marshall?" said he. (I may 
mention that my own name is marshal king.) 

He close the door behind me, and then, for an instant, I heard him 
talk in a low voic of concentr passion to hi wife. thi gross 
breach of hospit had evid hit upon hi tenderest point. I am 
no eavesdropper, so I walk out on to the lawn. present I heard a 
hurri step behind me, and there wa the lady, her face pale with 
excitement, and her eye red with tears. 

"mi husband ha ask me to apolog to you, mr. marshal king," said 
she, stand with downcast eye befor me. 

"pleas do not say anoth word, mrs. king." 

her dark eye suddenli blaze out at me. 

"you fool!" she hissed, with frantic vehemence, and turn on her heel 
swept back to the house. 

the insult wa so outrageous, so insufferable, that I could onli stand 
stare after her in bewilderment. I wa still there when my host 
join me. He wa hi cheery, chubbi self onc more. 

"I hope that my wife ha apolog for her foolish remarks," said he. 

"oh, yes--yes, certainly!" 

He put hi hand through my arm and walk with me up and down the lawn. 

"you must not take it seriously," said he. "it would griev me 
inexpress if you curtail your visit by one hour. the fact 
is--ther is no reason whi there should be ani conceal between 
relatives--that my poor dear wife is incred jealous. she hate 
that anyone--mal or female--should for an instant come between us. her 
ideal is a desert island and an etern tete-a-tete. that give you 
the clue to her actions, which are, I confess, upon thi particular 
point, not veri far remov from mania. tell me that you will think no 
more of it." 

"no, no; certainli not." 

"then light thi cigar and come round with me and see my littl 
menagerie." 

the whole afternoon wa occupi by thi inspection, which includ all 
the birds, beasts, and even reptil which he had imported. some were 
free, some in cages, a few actual in the house. He spoke with 
enthusiasm of hi success and hi failures, hi birth and hi 
deaths, and he would cri out in hi delight, like a schoolboy, when, as 
we walked, some gaudi bird would flutter up from the grass, or some 
curiou beast slink into the cover. final he led me down a corridor 
which extend from one wing of the house. At the end of thi there 
wa a heavi door with a slide shutter in it, and besid it there 
project from the wall an iron handl attach to a wheel and a drum. 
A line of stout bar extend across the passage. 

"I am about to show you the jewel of my collection," said he. "there is 
onli one other specimen in europe, now that the rotterdam cub is dead. 
It is a brazilian cat." 

"but how doe that differ from ani other cat?" 

"you will soon see that," said he, laughing. "will you kindli draw 
that shutter and look through?" 

I did so, and found that I wa gaze into a large, empti room, with 
stone flags, and small, bar window upon the farther wall. In the 
centr of thi room, lie in the middl of a golden patch of sunlight, 
there wa stretch a huge creature, as larg as a tiger, but as black 
and sleek as ebony. It wa simpli a veri enorm and veri well-kept 
black cat, and it cuddl up and bask in that yellow pool of light 
exactli as a cat would do. It wa so graceful, so sinewy, and so 
gentli and smoothli diabolical, that I could not take my eye from the 
opening. 

"isn't he splendid?" said my host, enthusiastically. 

"glorious! I never saw such a nobl creature." 

"some peopl call it a black puma, but realli it is not a puma at all. 
that fellow is nearli eleven feet from tail to tip. four year ago he 
wa a littl ball of black fluff, with two yellow eye stare out of 
it. He wa sold me as a new-born cub up in the wild countri at the 
head-wat of the rio negro. they spear hi mother to death after 
she had kill a dozen of them." 

"they are ferocious, then?" 

"the most absolut treacher and bloodthirsti creatur upon earth. 
you talk about a brazilian cat to an up-countri indian, and see him get 
the jumps. they prefer human to game. thi fellow ha never tast 
live blood yet, but when he doe he will be a terror. At present he 
won't stand anyon but me in hi den. even baldwin, the groom, dare 
not go near him. As to me, I am hi mother and father in one." 

As he spoke he suddenly, to my astonishment, open the door and 
slip in, close it instantli behind him. At the sound of hi voic 
the huge, lith creatur rose, yawn and rub it round, black head 
affection against hi side, while he pat and fondl it. 

"now, tommy, into your cage!" said he. 

the monstrou cat walk over to one side of the room and coil itself 
up under a grating. everard king came out, and take the iron handl 
which I have mentioned, he began to turn it. As he did so the line of 
bar in the corridor began to pass through a slot in the wall and 
close up the front of thi grating, so as to make an effect cage. 
when it wa in posit he open the door onc more and invit me 
into the room, which wa heavi with the pungent, musti smell peculiar 
to the great carnivora. 

"that' how we work it," said he. "we give him the run of the room for 
exercise, and then at night we put him in hi cage. you can let him 
out by turn the handl from the passage, or you can, as you have 
seen, coop him up in the same way. no, no, you should not do that!" 

I had put my hand between the bar to pat the glossy, heav flank. 
He pull it back, with a seriou face. 

"I assur you that he is not safe. don't imagin that becaus I can 
take liberti with him anyon els can. He is veri exclus in hi 
friends--aren't you, tommy? ah, he hear hi lunch come to him! 
don't you, boy?" 

A step sound in the stone-flag passage, and the creatur had 
sprung to hi feet, and wa pace up and down the narrow cage, hi 
yellow eye gleaming, and hi scarlet tongu rippl and quiver 
over the white line of hi jag teeth. A groom enter with a coars 
joint upon a tray, and thrust it through the bar to him. He pounc 
lightli upon it, carri it off to the corner, and there, hold it 
between hi paws, tore and wrench at it, rais hi bloodi muzzl 
everi now and then to look at us. It wa a malign and yet 
fascin sight. 

"you can't wonder that I am fond of him, can you?" said my host, as we 
left the room, "especi when you consid that I have had the 
rear of him. It wa no joke bring him over from the centr of 
south america; but here he is safe and sound--and, as I have said, far 
the most perfect specimen in europe. the peopl at the zoo are die 
to have him, but I realli can't part with him. now, I think that I have 
inflict my hobbi upon you long enough, so we cannot do better than 
follow tommy' example, and go to our lunch." 

My south american rel wa so engross by hi ground and their 
curiou occupants, that I hardli gave him credit at first for have 
ani interest outsid them. that he had some, and press ones, wa 
soon born in upon me by the number of telegram which he received. 
they arriv at all hours, and were alway open by him with the 
utmost eager and anxieti upon hi face. sometim I imagin that 
it must be the turf, and sometim the stock exchange, but certainli he 
had some veri urgent busi go forward which wa not transact 
upon the down of suffolk. dure the six day of my visit he had never 
fewer than three or four telegram a day, and sometim as mani as 
seven or eight. 

I had occupi these six day so well, that by the end of them I had 
succeed in get upon the most cordial term with my cousin. everi 
night we had sat up late in the billiard-room, he tell me the most 
extraordinari stori of hi adventur in america--stori so 
desper and reckless, that I could hardli associ them with the 
brown little, chubbi man befor me. In return, I ventur upon some of 
my own reminisc of london life, which interest him so much, that 
he vow he would come up to grosvenor mansion and stay with me. He 
wa anxiou to see the faster side of citi life, and certainly, though 
I say it, he could not have chosen a more compet guide. It wa not 
until the last day of my visit that I ventur to approach that which 
wa on my mind. I told him frankli about my pecuniari difficulti and 
my impend ruin, and I ask hi advice--though I hope for someth 
more solid. He listen attentively, puf hard at hi cigar. 

"but surely," said he, "you are the heir of our relative, lord 
southerton?" 

"I have everi reason to believ so, but he would never make me ani 
allowance." 

"no, no, I have heard of hi miserli ways. My poor marshall, your 
posit ha been a veri hard one. By the way, have you heard ani news 
of lord southerton' health lately?" 

"he ha alway been in a critic condit ever sinc my childhood." 

"exactly--a creak hinge, if ever there wa one. your inherit 
may be a long way off. dear me, how awkwardli situat you are!" 

"I had some hopes, sir, that you, know all the facts, might be 
inclin to advance----" 

"don't say anoth word, my dear boy," he cried, with the utmost 
cordiality; "we shall talk it over tonight, and I give you my word that 
whatev is in my power shall be done." 

I wa not sorri that my visit wa draw to a close, for it is 
unpleas to feel that there is one person in the hous who eagerli 
desir your departure. mrs. king' sallow face and forbid eye 
had becom more and more hate to me. she wa no longer activ 
rude--h fear of her husband prevent her--but she push her insan 
jealousi to the extent of ignor me, never address me, and in 
everi way make my stay at greyland as uncomfort as she could. 
So offens wa her manner dure that last day, that I should 
certainli have left had it not been for that interview with my host in 
the even which would, I hoped, retriev my broken fortunes. 

It wa veri late when it occurred, for my relative, who had been 
receiv even more telegram than usual dure the day, went off to 
hi studi after dinner, and onli emerg when the household had retir 
to bed. I heard him go round lock the doors, as custom wa of a 
night, and final he join me in the billiard-room. hi stout figur 
wa wrap in a dressing-gown, and he wore a pair of red turkish 
slipper without ani heels. settl down into an arm-chair, he brew 
himself a glass of grog, in which I could not help notic that the 
whiski consider predomin over the water. 

"mi word!" said he, "what a night!" 

It was, indeed. the wind wa howl and scream round the house, 
and the lattic window rattl and shook as if they were come in. 
the glow of the yellow lamp and the flavour of our cigar seem the 
brighter and more fragrant for the contrast. 

"now, my boy," said my host, "we have the hous and the night to 
ourselves. let me have an idea of how your affair stand, and I will 
see what can be done to set them in order. I wish to hear everi 
detail." 

thu encouraged, I enter into a long exposition, in which all my 
tradesmen and creditor from my landlord to my valet, figur in turn. 
I had note in my pocket-book, and I marshal my facts, and gave, I 
flatter myself, a veri businesslik statement of my own unbusinesslik 
way and lament position. I wa depressed, however, to notic that 
my companion' eye were vacant and hi attent elsewhere. when he 
did occasion throw out a remark it wa so entir perfunctori and 
pointless, that I wa sure he had not in the least follow my remarks. 
everi now and then he rous himself and put on some show of interest, 
ask me to repeat or to explain more fully, but it wa alway to sink 
onc more into the same brown study. At last he rose and threw the end 
of hi cigar into the grate. 

"i'll tell you what, my boy," said he. "I never had a head for 
figures, so you will excus me. you must jot it all down upon paper, 
and let me have a note of the amount. i'll understand it when I see it 
in black and white." 

the propos wa encouraging. I promis to do so. 

"and now it' time we were in bed. By jove, there' one o'clock 
strike in the hall." 

the tingl of the chime clock broke through the deep roar of the 
gale. the wind wa sweep past with the rush of a great river. 

"I must see my cat befor I go to bed," said my host. "A high wind 
excit him. will you come?" 

"certainly," said I. 

"then tread softli and don't speak, for everyon is asleep." 

We pass quietli down the lamp-lit persian-rug hall, and through 
the door at the farther end. all wa dark in the stone corridor, but a 
stabl lantern hung on a hook, and my host took it down and lit it. 
there wa no grate visibl in the passage, so I knew that the beast 
wa in it cage. 

"come in!" said my relative, and open the door. 

A deep growl as we enter show that the storm had realli excit 
the creature. In the flicker light of the lantern, we saw it, a 
huge black mass coil in the corner of it den and throw a squat, 
uncouth shadow upon the whitewash wall. it tail switch angrili 
among the straw. 

"poor tommi is not in the best of tempers," said everard king, hold 
up the lantern and look in at him. "what a black devil he looks, 
doesn't he? I must give him a littl supper to put him in a better 
humour. would you mind hold the lantern for a moment?" 

I took it from hi hand and he step to the door. 

"hi larder is just outsid here," said he. "you will excus me for an 
instant won't you?" He pass out, and the door shut with a sharp 
metal click behind him. 

that hard crisp sound made my heart stand still. A sudden wave of 
terror pass over me. A vagu percept of some monstrou treacheri 
turn me cold. I sprang to the door, but there wa no handl upon the 
inner side. 

"here!" I cried. "let me out!" 

"all right! don't make a row!" said my host from the passage. "you'v 
got the light all right." 

"yes, but I don't care about be lock in alon like this." 

"don't you?" I heard hi hearty, chuckl laugh. "you won't be alon 
long." 

"let me out, sir!" I repeat angrily. "I tell you I don't allow 
practic joke of thi sort." 

"practic is the word," said he, with anoth hate chuckle. and 
then suddenli I heard, amidst the roar of the storm, the creak and 
whine of the winch-handl turn and the rattl of the grate as it 
pass through the slot. great god, he wa let loos the brazilian 
cat! 

In the light of the lantern I saw the bar slide slowli befor me. 
alreadi there wa an open a foot wide at the farther end. with a 
scream I seiz the last bar with my hand and pull with the strength 
of a madman. I wa a madman with rage and horror. for a minut or 
more I held the thing motionless. I knew that he wa strain with 
all hi forc upon the handle, and that the leverag wa sure to 
overcom me. I gave inch by inch, my feet slide along the stones, 
and all the time I beg and pray thi inhuman monster to save me 
from thi horribl death. I conjur him by hi kinship. I remind 
him that I wa hi guest; I beg to know what harm I had ever done 
him. hi onli answer were the tug and jerk upon the handle, each of 
which, in spite of all my struggles, pull anoth bar through the 
opening. cling and clutching, I wa drag across the whole front 
of the cage, until at last, with ach wrist and lacer fingers, I 
gave up the hopeless struggle. the grate clang back as I releas 
it, and an instant later I heard the shuffl of the turkish slipper in 
the passage, and the slam of the distant door. then everyth wa 
silent. 

the creatur had never move dure thi time. He lay still in the 
corner, and hi tail had ceas switching. thi apparit of a man 
adher to hi bar and drag scream across him had appar 
fill him with amazement. I saw hi great eye stare steadili at 
me. I had drop the lantern when I seiz the bars, but it still 
burn upon the floor, and I made a movement to grasp it, with some 
idea that it light might protect me. but the instant I moved, the 
beast gave a deep and menac growl. I stop and stood still, 
quiver with fear in everi limb. the cat (if one may call so fear 
a creatur by so home a name) wa not more than ten feet from me. 
the eye glimmer like two disk of phosphoru in the darkness. they 
appal and yet fascin me. I could not take my own eye from 
them. natur play strang trick with us at such moment of 
intensity, and those glimmer light wax and wane with a steadi 
rise and fall. sometim they seem to be tini point of extrem 
brilliancy--littl electr spark in the black obscurity--then they 
would widen and widen until all that corner of the room wa fill with 
their shift and sinist light. and then suddenli they went out 
altogether. 

the beast had close it eyes. I do not know whether there may be ani 
truth in the old idea of the domin of the human gaze, or whether 
the huge cat wa simpli drowsy, but the fact remain that, far from 
show ani symptom of attack me, it simpli rest it sleek, black 
head upon it huge forepaw and seem to sleep. I stood, fear to 
move lest I should rous it into malign life onc more. but at 
least I wa abl to think clearli now that the bale eye were off 
me. here I wa shut up for the night with the feroci beast. My own 
instincts, to say noth of the word of the plausibl villain who 
laid thi trap for me, warn me that the anim wa as savag as it 
master. how could I stave it off until morning? the door wa 
hopeless, and so were the narrow, bar windows. there wa no shelter 
anywher in the bare, stone-flag room. To cri for assist wa 
absurd. I knew that thi den wa an outhouse, and that the corridor 
which connect it with the hous wa at least a hundr feet long. 
besides, with the gale thunder outside, my cri were not like to 
be heard. I had onli my own courag and my own wit to trust to. 

and then, with a fresh wave of horror, my eye fell upon the lantern. 
the candl had burn low, and wa alreadi begin to gutter. In ten 
minut it would be out. I had onli ten minut then in which to do 
something, for I felt that if I were onc left in the dark with that 
fear beast I should be incap of action. the veri thought of it 
paralys me. I cast my despair eye round thi chamber of death, 
and they rest upon one spot which seem to promis I will not say 
safety, but less immedi and immin danger than the open floor. 

I have said that the cage had a top as well as a front, and thi top 
wa left stand when the front wa wound through the slot in the 
wall. It consist of bar at a few inches' interval, with stout wire 
net between, and it rest upon a strong stanchion at each end. It 
stood now as a great bar canopi over the crouch figur in the 
corner. the space between thi iron shelf and the roof may have been 
from two or three feet. If I could onli get up there, squeez in 
between bar and ceiling, I should have onli one vulner side. I 
should be safe from below, from behind, and from each side. onli on 
the open face of it could I be attacked. there, it is true, I had no 
protect whatever; but at least, I should be out of the brute' path 
when he began to pace about hi den. He would have to come out of hi 
way to reach me. It wa now or never, for if onc the light were out 
it would be impossible. with a gulp in my throat I sprang up, seiz 
the iron edg of the top, and swung myself pant on to it. I writh 
in face downwards, and found myself look straight into the terribl 
eye and yawn jaw of the cat. it fetid breath came up into my 
face like the steam from some foul pot. 

It appeared, however, to be rather curiou than angry. with a sleek 
rippl of it long, black back it rose, stretch itself, and then 
rear itself on it hind legs, with one forepaw against the wall, it 
rais the other, and drew it claw across the wire mesh beneath me. 
one sharp, white hook tore through my trousers--for I may mention that 
I wa still in even dress--and dug a furrow in my knee. It wa not 
meant as an attack, but rather as an experiment, for upon my give a 
sharp cri of pain he drop down again, and spring lightli into the 
room, he began walk swiftli round it, look up everi now and again 
in my direction. for my part I shuffl backward until I lay with my 
back against the wall, screw myself into the smallest space 
possible. the farther I got the more difficult it wa for him to 
attack me. 

He seem more excit now that he had begun to move about, and he ran 
swiftli and noiselessli round and round the den, pass continu 
underneath the iron couch upon which I lay. It wa wonder to see so 
great a bulk pass like a shadow, with hardli the softest thud of 
velveti pads. the candl wa burn low--so low that I could hardli 
see the creature. and then, with a last flare and splutter it went out 
altogether. I wa alon with the cat in the dark! 

It help one to face a danger when one know that one ha done all that 
possibl can be done. there is noth for it then but to quietli 
await the result. In thi case, there wa no chanc of safeti anywher 
except the precis spot where I was. I stretch myself out, 
therefore, and lay silently, almost breathlessly, hope that the beast 
might forget my presenc if I did noth to remind him. I reckon 
that it must alreadi be two o'clock. At four it would be full dawn. I 
had not more than two hour to wait for daylight. 

outside, the storm wa still raging, and the rain lash continu 
against the littl windows. inside, the poison and fetid air wa 
overpowering. I could neither hear nor see the cat. I tri to think 
about other things--but onli one had power enough to draw my mind from 
my terribl position. that wa the contempl of my cousin' 
villainy, hi unparallel hypocrisy, hi malign hatr of me. 
beneath that cheer face there lurk the spirit of a mediaev 
assassin. and as I thought of it I saw more clearli how cunningli the 
thing had been arranged. He had appar gone to bed with the 
others. No doubt he had hi wit to prove it. then, unknown to 
them, he had slip down, had lure me into hi den and abandon me. 
hi stori would be so simple. He had left me to finish my cigar in the 
billiard-room. I had gone down on my own account to have a last look at 
the cat. I had enter the room without observ that the cage wa 
opened, and I had been caught. how could such a crime be brought home 
to him? suspicion, perhaps--but proof, never! 

how slowli those dread two hour went by! onc I heard a low, 
rasp sound, which I took to be the creatur lick it own fur. 
sever time those greenish eye gleam at me through the darkness, 
but never in a fix stare, and my hope grew stronger that my presenc 
had been forgotten or ignored. At last the least faint glimmer of 
light came through the windows--i first dimli saw them as two grey 
squar upon the black wall, then grey turn to white, and I could see 
my terribl companion onc more. and he, alas, could see me! 

It wa evid to me at onc that he wa in a much more danger and 
aggress mood than when I had seen him last. the cold of the morn 
had irrit him, and he wa hungri as well. with a continu growl he 
pace swiftli up and down the side of the room which wa farthest from 
my refuge, hi whisker bristl angrily, and hi tail switch and 
lashing. As he turn at the corner hi savag eye alway look 
upward at me with a dread menace. I knew then that he meant to 
kill me. yet I found myself even at that moment admir the sinuou 
grace of the devilish thing, it long, undulating, rippl movements, 
the gloss of it beauti flanks, the vivid, palpit scarlet of 
the glisten tongu which hung from the jet-black muzzle. and all 
the time that deep, threaten growl wa rise and rise in an 
unbroken crescendo. I knew that the crisi wa at hand. 

It wa a miser hour to meet such a death--so cold, so comfortless, 
shiver in my light dress cloth upon thi gridiron of torment upon 
which I wa stretched. I tri to brace myself to it, to rais my soul 
abov it, and at the same time, with the lucid which come to a 
perfectli desper man, I cast round for some possibl mean of 
escape. one thing wa clear to me. If that front of the cage wa onli 
back in it posit onc more, I could find a sure refug behind it. 
could I possibl pull it back? I hardli dare to move for fear of 
bring the creatur upon me. slowly, veri slowly, I put my hand 
forward until it grasp the edg of the front, the final bar which 
protrud through the wall. To my surpris it came quit easili to my 
jerk. Of cours the difficulti of draw it out aros from the fact 
that I wa cling to it. I pull again, and three inch of it came 
through. It ran appar on wheels. I pull again ... and then 
the cat sprang! 

It wa so quick, so sudden, that I never saw it happen. I simpli heard 
the savag snarl, and in an instant afterward the blaze yellow eyes, 
the flatten black head with it red tongu and flash teeth, were 
within reach of me. the impact of the creatur shook the bar upon 
which I lay, until I thought (a far as I could think of anyth at 
such a moment) that they were come down. the cat sway there for an 
instant, the head and front paw quit close to me, the hind paw 
claw to find a grip upon the edg of the grating. I heard the claw 
rasp as they clung to the wire-netting, and the breath of the beast 
made me sick. but it bound had been miscalculated. It could not 
retain it position. slowly, grin with rage, and scratch madli 
at the bars, it swung backward and drop heavili upon the floor. 
with a growl it instantli face round to me and crouch for anoth 
spring. 

I knew that the next few moment would decid my fate. the creatur 
had learn by experience. It would not miscalcul again. I must 
act promptly, fearlessly, if I were to have a chanc for life. In an 
instant I had form my plan. pull off my dress-coat, I threw it 
down over the head of the beast. At the same moment I drop over the 
edge, seiz the end of the front grating, and pull it frantic 
out of the wall. 

It came more easili than I could have expected. I rush across the 
room, bear it with me; but, as I rushed, the accid of my posit 
put me upon the outer side. had it been the other way, I might have 
come off scathless. As it was, there wa a moment' paus as I stop 
it and tri to pass in through the open which I had left. that 
moment wa enough to give time to the creatur to toss off the coat 
with which I had blind him and to spring upon me. I hurl myself 
through the gap and pull the rail to behind me, but he seiz my leg 
befor I could entir withdraw it. one stroke of that huge paw tore 
off my calf as a shave of wood curl off befor a plane. the next 
moment, bleed and fainting, I wa lie among the foul straw with a 
line of friendli bar between me and the creatur which ramp so 
frantic against them. 

too wound to move, and too faint to be consciou of fear, I could 
onli lie, more dead than alive, and watch it. It press it broad, 
black chest against the bar and angl for me with it crook paw as 
I have seen a kitten do befor a mouse-trap. It rip my clothes, 
but, stretch as it would, it could not quit reach me. I have heard of 
the curiou numb effect produc by wound from the great carnivora, 
and now I wa destin to experi it, for I had lost all sens of 
personality, and wa as interest in the cat' failur or success as 
if it were some game which I wa watching. and then gradual my mind 
drift away into strang vagu dreams, alway with that black face and 
red tongu come back into them, and so I lost myself in the nirvana 
of delirium, the bless relief of those who are too sore tried. 

trace the cours of event afterwards, I conclud that I must have 
been insens for about two hours. what rous me to conscious 
onc more wa that sharp metal click which had been the precursor of 
my terribl experience. It wa the shoot back of the spring lock. 
then, befor my sens were clear enough to entir apprehend what 
they saw, I wa awar of the round, benevol face of my cousin 
peer in through the open door. what he saw evid amaz him. 
there wa the cat crouch on the floor. I wa stretch upon my back 
in my shirt-sleev within the cage, my trouser torn to ribbon and a 
great pool of blood all round me. I can see hi amaz face now, with 
the morn sunlight upon it. He peer at me, and peer again. then 
he close the door behind him, and advanc to the cage to see if I 
were realli dead. 

I cannot undertak to say what happened. I wa not in a fit state to 
wit or to chronicl such events. I can onli say that I wa 
suddenli consciou that hi face wa away from me--that he wa look 
toward the animal. 

"good old tommy!" he cried. "good old tommy!" 

then he came near the bars, with hi back still toward me. 

"down, you stupid beast!" he roared. "down, sir! don't you know your 
master?" 

suddenli even in my bemuddl brain a remembr came of those word 
of hi when he had said that the tast of blood would turn the cat into 
a fiend. My blood had done it, but he wa to pay the price. 

"get away!" he screamed. "get away, you devil! baldwin! baldwin! oh, 
my god!" 

and then I heard him fall, and rise, and fall again, with a sound like 
the rip of sacking. hi scream grew fainter until they were lost 
in the worri snarl. and then, after I thought that he wa dead, I 
saw, as in a nightmare, a blinded, tattered, blood-soak figur 
run wildli round the room--and that wa the last glimps which I 
had of him befor I faint onc again. 


I wa mani month in my recovery--in fact, I cannot say that I have 
ever recovered, for to the end of my day I shall carri a stick as a 
sign of my night with the brazilian cat. baldwin, the groom, and the 
other servant could not tell what had occurred, when, drawn by the 
death-cri of their master, they found me behind the bars, and hi 
remains--or what they afterward discov to be hi remains--in the 
clutch of the creatur which he had reared. they stall him off with 
hot irons, and afterward shot him through the loophol of the door 
befor they could final extric me. I wa carri to my bedroom, 
and there, under the roof of my would-b murderer, I remain between 
life and death for sever weeks. they had sent for a surgeon from 
clipton and a nurs from london, and in a month I wa abl to be 
carri to the station, and so convey back onc more to grosvenor 
mansions. 

I have one remembr of that illness, which might have been part of 
the ever-chang panorama conjur up by a deliri brain were it not 
so definit fix in my memory. one night, when the nurs wa 
absent, the door of my chamber opened, and a tall woman in blackest 
mourn slip into the room. she came across to me, and as she bent 
her sallow face I saw by the faint gleam of the night-light that it wa 
the brazilian woman whom my cousin had married. she stare intent 
into my face, and her express wa more kindli than I had ever seen 
it. 

"are you conscious?" she asked. 

I feebli nodded--for I wa still veri weak. 

"well; then, I onli wish to say to you that you have yourself to 
blame. did I not do all I could for you? from the begin I tri 
to drive you from the house. By everi means, short of betray my 
husband, I tri to save you from him. I knew that he had a reason for 
bring you here. I knew that he would never let you get away again. 
No one knew him as I knew him, who had suffer from him so often. I 
did not dare to tell you all this. He would have kill me. but I did 
my best for you. As thing have turn out, you have been the best 
friend that I have ever had. you have set me free, and I fanci that 
noth but death would do that. I am sorri if you are hurt, but I 
cannot reproach myself. I told you that you were a fool--and a fool 
you have been." she crept out of the room, the bitter, singular woman, 
and I wa never destin to see her again. with what remain from her 
husband' properti she went back to her nativ land, and I have heard 
that she afterward took the veil at pernambuco. 

It wa not until I had been back in london for some time that the 
doctor pronounc me to be well enough to do business. It wa not a 
veri welcom permiss to me, for I fear that it would be the signal 
for an inrush of creditors; but it wa summers, my lawyer, who first 
took advantag of it. 

"I am veri glad to see that your lordship is so much better," said he. 
"I have been wait a long time to offer my congratulations." 

"what do you mean, summers? thi is no time for joking." 

"I mean what I say," he answered. "you have been lord southerton for 
the last six weeks, but we fear that it would retard your recoveri if 
you were to learn it." 

lord southerton! one of the richest peer in england! I could not 
believ my ears. and then suddenli I thought of the time which had 
elapsed, and how it coincid with my injuries. 

"then lord southerton must have die about the same time that I wa 
hurt?" 

"hi death occur upon that veri day." summer look hard at me as 
I spoke, and I am convinced--for he wa a veri shrewd fellow--that he 
had guess the true state of the case. He paus for a moment as if 
await a confid from me, but I could not see what wa to be 
gain by expos such a famili scandal. 

"yes, a veri curiou coincidence," he continued, with the same know 
look. "of course, you are awar that your cousin everard king wa the 
next heir to the estates. now, if it had been you instead of him who 
had been torn to piec by thi tiger, or whatev it was, then of 
cours he would have been lord southerton at the present moment." 

"no doubt," said I. 

"and he took such an interest in it," said summers. "I happen to know 
that the late lord southerton' valet wa in hi pay, and that he use 
to have telegram from him everi few hour to tell him how he wa 
get on. that would be about the time when you were down there. 
wa it not strang that he should wish to be so well informed, sinc he 
knew that he wa not the direct heir?" 

"veri strange," said I. "and now, summers, if you will bring me my 
bill and a new cheque-book, we will begin to get thing into order." 




tale of mysteri 



the lost special 

the confess of herbert de lernac, now lie under sentenc of death 
at marseilles, ha thrown a light upon one of the most inexplic 
crime of the century--an incid which is, I believe, absolut 
unpreced in the crimin annal of ani country: although there is 
a reluct to discuss the matter in offici circles, and littl 
inform ha been given to the press, there are still indic 
that the statement of thi arch-crimin is corrobor by the facts, 
and that we have at last found a solut for a most astound 
business. As the matter is eight year old, and as it import wa 
somewhat obscur by a polit crisi which wa engag the public 
attent at the time, it may be as well to state the fact as far as 
we have been abl to ascertain them. they are collat from the 
liverpool paper of that date, from the proceed at the inquest upon 
john slater, the engine-driver, and from the record of the london and 
west coast railway company, which have been courteous put at my 
disposal. briefly, they are as follows: 

On the 3rd of june, 1890, a gentleman, who gave hi name as monsieur 
loui caratal, desir an interview with mr. jame bland, the 
superintend of the london and west coast central station in 
liverpool. He wa a small man, middle-ag and dark, with a stoop 
which wa so mark that it suggest some deform of the spine. He 
wa accompani by a friend, a man of impos physique, whose 
deferenti manner and constant attent show that hi posit wa 
one of dependence. thi friend or companion, whose name did not 
transpire, wa certainli a foreigner, and probabl from hi swarthi 
complexion, either a spaniard or a south american. one peculiar wa 
observ in him. He carri in hi left hand a small black, leather 
dispatch box, and it wa notic by a sharp-ey clerk in the central 
offic that thi box wa fasten to hi wrist by a strap. No 
import wa attach to the fact at the time, but subsequ event 
endow it with some significance. monsieur carat wa shown up to mr. 
bland' office, while hi companion remain outside. 

monsieur caratal' busi wa quickli dispatched. He had arriv 
that afternoon from central america. affair of the utmost import 
demand that he should be in pari without the loss of an unnecessari 
hour. He had miss the london express. A special must be provided. 
money wa of no importance. time wa everything. If the compani would 
speed him on hi way, they might make their own terms. 

mr. bland struck the electr bell, summon mr. potter hood, the 
traffic manager, and had the matter arrang in five minutes. the train 
would start in three-quart of an hour. It would take that time to 
insur that the line should be clear. the power engin call 
rochdal (no. 247 on the company' register) wa attach to two 
carriages, with a guard' van behind. the first carriag wa sole 
for the purpos of decreas the inconveni aris from the 
oscillation. the second wa divided, as usual, into four compartments, 
a first-class, a first-class smoking, a second-class, and a 
second-class smoking. the first compartment, which wa nearest to the 
engine, wa the one allot to the travellers. the other three were 
empty. the guard of the special train wa jame mcpherson, who had 
been some year in the servic of the company. the stoker, william 
smith, wa a new hand. 

monsieur caratal, upon leav the superintendent' office, rejoin 
hi companion, and both of them manifest extrem impati to be 
off. have paid the money asked, which amount to fifti pound five 
shillings, at the usual special rate of five shill a mile, they 
demand to be shown the carriage, and at onc took their seat in it, 
although they were assur that the better part of an hour must elaps 
befor the line could be cleared. In the meantim a singular 
coincid had occur in the offic which monsieur carat had just 
quitted. 

A request for a special is not a veri uncommon circumst in a rich 
commerci centre, but that two should be requir upon the same 
afternoon wa most unusual. It so happened, however, that mr. bland 
had hardli dismiss the first travel befor a second enter with a 
similar request. thi wa a mr. horac moore, a gentlemanli man of 
militari appearance, who alleg that the sudden seriou ill of hi 
wife in london made it absolut imper that he should not lose an 
instant in start upon the journey. hi distress and anxieti were so 
evid that mr. bland did all that wa possibl to meet hi wishes. A 
second special wa out of the question, as the ordinari local servic 
wa alreadi somewhat derang by the first. there wa the alternative, 
however, that mr. moor should share the expens of monsieur caratal' 
train, and should travel in the other empti first-class compartment, if 
monsieur carat object to have him in the one which he occupied. 
It wa difficult to see ani object to such an arrangement, and yet 
monsieur caratal, upon the suggest be made to him by mr. potter 
hood, absolut refus to consid it for an instant. the train wa 
his, he said, and he would insist upon the exclus use of it. all 
argument fail to overcom hi ungraci objections, and final the 
plan had to be abandoned. mr. horac moor left the station in great 
distress, after learn that hi onli cours wa to take the ordinari 
slow train which leav liverpool at six o'clock. At four thirty-on 
exactli by the station clock the special train, contain the crippl 
monsieur carat and hi gigant companion, steam out of the 
liverpool station. the line wa at that time clear, and there should 
have been no stoppag befor manchester. 

the train of the london and west coast railway run over the line of 
anoth compani as far as thi town, which should have been reach by 
the special rather befor six o'clock. At a quarter after six 
consider surpris and some constern were caus amongst the 
offici at liverpool by the receipt of a telegram from manchest to 
say that it had not yet arrived. An inquiri direct to st. helens, 
which is a third of the way between the two cities, elicit the 
follow reply-- 


"to jame bland, superintendent, central L. & W. c., 
liverpool.--speci pass here at 4:52, well up to time.--dowster, st. 
helens." 


thi telegram wa receiv at six-forty. At six-fifti a second messag 
wa receiv from manchester-- 


"no sign of special as advis by you." 


and then ten minut later a third, more bewildering-- 


"presum some mistak as to propos run of special. local train 
from st. helen time to follow it ha just arriv and ha seen 
noth of it. kindli wire advices.--manchester." 


the matter wa assum a most amaz aspect, although in some 
respect the last telegram wa a relief to the author at 
liverpool. If an accid had occur to the special, it seem 
hardli possibl that the local train could have pass down the same 
line without observ it. and yet, what wa the alternative? where 
could the train be? had it possibl been sidetrack for some reason 
in order to allow the slower train to go past? such an explan wa 
possibl if some small repair had to be effected. A telegram wa 
dispatch to each of the station between st. helen and manchester, 
and the superintend and traffic manag wait in the utmost 
suspens at the instrument for the seri of repli which would enabl 
them to say for certain what had becom of the miss train. the 
answer came back in the order of questions, which wa the order of the 
station begin at the st. helen end-- 

"special pass here five o'clock.--collin green." 

"special pass here six past five.--earlstown." 

"special pass here 5:10.--newton." 

"special pass here 5:20.--kenyon junction." 

"no special train ha pass here.--barton moss." 

the two offici stare at each other in amazement. 

"thi is uniqu in my thirti year of experience," said mr. bland. 

"absolut unpreced and inexplicable, sir. the special ha gone 
wrong between kenyon junction and barton moss." 

"and yet there is no siding, so far as my memori serv me, between the 
two stations. the special must have run off the metals." 

"but how could the four-fifti parliamentari pass over the same line 
without observ it?" 

"there' no alternative, mr. hood. It must be so. possibl the local 
train may have observ someth which may throw some light upon the 
matter. We will wire to manchest for more information, and to kenyon 
junction with instruct that the line be examin instantli as far 
as barton moss." the answer from manchest came within a few minutes. 

"no news of miss special. driver and guard of slow train posit 
no accid between kenyon junction and barton moss. line quit clear, 
and no sign of anyth unusual.--manchester." 

"that driver and guard will have to go," said mr. bland, grimly. 
"there ha been a wreck and they have miss it. the special ha 
obvious run off the metal without disturb the line--how it could 
have done so pass my comprehension--but so it must be, and we shall 
have a wire from kenyon or barton moss present to say that they have 
found her at the bottom of an embankment." 

but mr. bland' propheci wa not destin to be fulfilled. half an hour 
passed, and then there arriv the follow messag from the 
station-mast of kenyon junction-- 


"there are no trace of the miss special. It is quit certain that 
she pass here, and that she did not arriv at barton moss. We have 
detach engin from good train, and I have myself ridden down the 
line, but all is clear, and there is no sign of ani accident." 


mr. bland tore hi hair in hi perplexity. 

"thi is rank lunacy, hood!" he cried. "doe a train vanish into thin 
air in england in broad daylight? the thing is preposterous. An 
engine, a tender, two carriages, a van, five human beings--and all lost 
on a straight line of railway! unless we get someth posit within 
the next hour i'll take inspector collins, and go down myself." 

and then at last someth posit did occur. It took the shape of 
anoth telegram from kenyon junction. 

"regret to report that the dead bodi of john slater, driver of the 
special train, ha just been found among the gors bush at a point 
two and a quarter mile from the junction. had fallen from hi engine, 
pitch down the embankment, and roll among the bushes. injuri to 
hi head, from the fall, appear to be caus of death. ground ha now 
been care examined, and there is no trace of the miss train." 

the countri was, as ha alreadi been stated, in the throe of a 
polit crisis, and the attent of the public wa further 
distract by the import and sensat develop in paris, 
where a huge scandal threaten to destroy the govern and to wreck 
the reput of mani of the lead men in france. the paper were 
full of these events, and the singular disappear of the special 
train attract less attent than would have been the case in more 
peac times. the grotesqu natur of the event help to detract 
from it importance, for the paper were disinclin to believ the 
fact as report to them. more than one of the london journal treat 
the matter as an ingeni hoax, until the coroner' inquest upon the 
unfortun driver (an inquest which elicit noth of importance) 
convinc them of the tragedi of the incident. 

mr. bland, accompani by inspector collins, the senior detect 
offic in the servic of the company, went down to kenyon junction the 
same evening, and their research last throughout the follow day, 
but wa attend with pure neg results. not onli wa no trace 
found of the miss train, but no conjectur could be put forward 
which could possibl explain the facts. At the same time, inspector 
collins' offici report (which lie befor me as I write) serv to 
show that the possibl were more numer than might have been 
expected. 

"in the stretch of railway between these two points," said he, "the 
countri is dot with ironwork and collieries. Of these, some are 
be work and some have been abandoned. there are no fewer than 
twelv which have small-gaug line which run trolly-car down to the 
main line. these can, of course, be disregarded. besid these, 
however, there are seven which have, or have had, proper line run 
down and connect with point to the main line, so as to convey their 
produc from the mouth of the mine to the great centr of 
distribution. In everi case these line are onli a few mile in 
length. out of the seven, four belong to collieri which are work 
out, or at least to shaft which are no longer used. these are the 
redgauntlet, hero, slough of despond, and heartseas mines, the latter 
have ten year ago been one of the princip mine in lancashire. 
these four side line may be elimin from our inquiry, for, to 
prevent possibl accidents, the rail nearest to the main line have 
been taken up, and there is no longer ani connection. there remain 
three other side line leading-- 

(a) To the carnstock iron works; 
(b) To the big ben colliery; 
(c) To the persever colliery. 


"of these the big ben line is not more than a quarter of a mile long, 
and end at a dead wall of coal wait remov from the mouth of the 
mine. noth had been seen or heard there of ani special. the 
carnstock iron work line wa block all day upon the 3rd of june by 
sixteen truckload of hematite. It is a singl line, and noth could 
have passed. As to the persever line, it is a larg doubl line, 
which doe a consider traffic, for the output of the mine is veri 
large. On the 3rd of june thi traffic proceed as usual; hundr of 
men includ a gang of railway platelay were work along the two 
mile and a quarter which constitut the total length of the line, and 
it is inconceiv that an unexpect train could have come down there 
without attract univers attention. It may be remark in 
conclus that thi branch line is nearer to st. helen than the point 
at which the engine-driv wa discovered, so that we have everi reason 
to believ that the train wa past that point befor misfortun 
overtook her. 

"a to john slater, there is no clue to be gather from hi appear 
or injuries. We can onli say that, so far as we can see, he met hi 
end by fall off hi engine, though whi he fell, or what becam of 
the engin after hi fall, is a question upon which I do not feel 
qualifi to offer an opinion." In conclusion, the inspector offer 
hi resign to the board, be much nettl by an accus of 
incompet in the london papers. 

A month elapsed, dure which both the polic and the compani 
prosecut their inquiri without the slightest success. A reward wa 
offer and a pardon promis in case of crime, but they were both 
unclaimed. everi day the public open their paper with the 
convict that so grotesqu a mysteri would at last be solved, but 
week after week pass by, and a solut remain as far off as ever. 
In broad daylight, upon a june afternoon in the most thickli inhabit 
portion of england, a train with it occup had disappear as 
complet as if some master of subtl chemistri had volatil it 
into gas. indeed, among the variou conjectur which were put forward 
in the public press, there were some which serious assert that 
supernatural, or, at least, preternatural, agenc had been at work, 
and that the deform monsieur carat wa probabl a person who wa 
better known under a less polit name. other fix upon hi swarthi 
companion as be the author of the mischief, but what it wa exactli 
which he had done could never be clearli formul in words. 

amongst the mani suggest put forward by variou newspap or 
privat individuals, there were one or two which were feasibl enough 
to attract the attent of the public. one which appear in the 
times, over the signatur of an amateur reason of some celebr at 
that date, attempt to deal with the matter in a critic and 
semi-scientif manner. An extract must suffice, although the curiou 
can see the whole letter in the issu of the 3rd of july. 

"it is one of the elementari principl of practic reasoning," he 
remarked, "that when the imposs ha been elimin the residuum, 
howev improbable, must contain the truth. It is certain that the 
train left kenyon junction. It is certain that it did not reach barton 
moss. It is in the highest degre unlikely, but still possible, that 
it may have taken one of the seven avail side lines. It is 
obvious imposs for a train to run where there are no rails, and, 
therefore, we may reduc our improb to the three open lines, 
name the carnstock iron works, the big ben, and the perseverance. Is 
there a secret societi of colliers, an english camorra, which is 
capabl of destroy both train and passengers? It is improbable, but 
it is not impossible. I confess that I am unabl to suggest ani other 
solution. I should certainli advis the compani to direct all their 
energi toward the observ of those three lines, and of the 
workmen at the end of them. A care supervis of the pawnbrokers' 
shop of the district might possibl bring some suggest fact to 
light." 

the suggest come from a recogn author upon such matter 
creat consider interest, and a fierc opposit from those who 
consid such a statement to be a preposter libel upon an honest 
and deserv set of men. the onli answer to thi critic wa a 
challeng to the objector to lay ani more feasibl explan befor 
the public. In repli to thi two other were forthcom (times, juli 
7th and 9th). the first suggest that the train might have run off 
the metal and be lie submerg in the lancashir and staffordshir 
canal, which run parallel to the railway for some hundr of yards. 
thi suggest wa thrown out of court by the publish depth of the 
canal, which wa entir insuffici to conceal so larg an object. 
the second correspond wrote call attent to the bag which 
appear to be the sole luggag which the travel had brought with 
them, and suggest that some novel explos of immens and 
pulver power might have been conceal in it. the obviou 
absurdity, however, of suppos that the whole train might be blown to 
dust while the metal remain uninjur reduc ani such explan 
to a farce. the investig had drift into thi hopeless posit 
when a new and most unexpect incid occurred. 

thi wa noth less than the receipt by mrs. mcpherson of a letter 
from her husband, jame mcpherson, who had been the guard on the 
miss train. the letter, which wa date juli 5th, 1890, wa post 
from new york and came to hand upon juli 14th. some doubt were 
express as to it genuin charact but mrs. mcpherson wa posit 
as to the writing, and the fact that it contain a remitt of a 
hundr dollar in five-dollar note wa enough in itself to discount 
the idea of a hoax. No address wa given in the letter, which ran in 
thi way: 


MY dear wife,-- 

"I have been think a great deal, and I find it veri hard to give you 
up. the same with lizzie. I tri to fight against it, but it will 
alway come back to me. I send you some money which will chang into 
twenti english pounds. thi should be enough to bring both lizzi and 
you across the atlantic, and you will find the hamburg boat which stop 
at southampton veri good boats, and cheaper than liverpool. If you 
could come here and stop at the johnston hous I would tri and send you 
word how to meet, but thing are veri difficult with me at present, and 
I am not veri happy, find it hard to give you both up. So no more 
at present, from your love husband, 

"jame mcpherson." 


for a time it wa confid anticip that thi letter would lead 
to the clear up of the whole matter, the more so as it wa 
ascertain that a passeng who bore a close resembl to the 
miss guard had travel from southampton under the name of summer 
in the hamburg and new york liner vistula, which start upon the 7th 
of june. mrs. mcpherson and her sister lizzi dolton went across to 
new york as direct and stay for three week at the johnston house, 
without hear anyth from the miss man. It is probabl that 
some injudici comment in the press may have warn him that the 
polic were use them as a bait. however, thi may be, it is certain 
that he neither wrote nor came, and the women were eventu compel 
to return to liverpool. 

and so the matter stood, and ha continu to stand up to the present 
year of 1898. incred as it may seem, noth ha transpir dure 
these eight year which ha shed the least light upon the extraordinari 
disappear of the special train which contain monsieur carat and 
hi companion. care inquiri into the anteced of the two 
travel have onli establish the fact that monsieur carat wa 
well known as a financi and polit agent in central america, and 
that dure hi voyag to europ he had betray extraordinari anxieti 
to reach paris. hi companion, whose name wa enter upon the 
passeng list as eduardo gomez, wa a man whose record wa a violent 
one, and whose reput wa that of a bravo and a bully. there wa 
evid to show, however, that he wa honestli devot to the 
interest of monsieur caratal, and that the latter, be a man of puni 
physique, employ the other as a guard and protector. It may be ad 
that no inform came from pari as to what the object of monsieur 
caratal' hurri journey may have been. thi compris all the fact 
of the case up to the public in the marseil paper of the 
recent confess of herbert de lernac, now under sentenc of death for 
the murder of a merchant name bonvalot. thi statement may be 
liter translat as follows: 


"it is not out of mere pride or boast that I give thi information, 
for, if that were my object, I could tell a dozen action of mine which 
are quit as splendid; but I do it in order that certain gentlemen in 
pari may understand that I, who am abl here to tell about the fate of 
monsieur caratal, can also tell in whose interest and at whose request 
the deed wa done, unless the repriev which I am await come to me 
veri quickly. take warning, messieurs, befor it is too late! you 
know herbert de lernac, and you are awar that hi deed are as readi 
as hi words. hasten then, or you are lost! 

"at present I shall mention no names--if you onli heard the names, what 
would you not think!--but I shall mere tell you how cleverli I did 
it. I wa true to my employ then, and no doubt they will be true to 
me now. I hope so, and until I am convinc that they have betray 
me, these names, which would convuls europe, shall not be divulged. 
but on that day ... well, I say no more! 

"in a word, then, there wa a famou trial in paris, in the year 1890, 
in connect with a monstrou scandal in polit and finance. how 
monstrou that scandal wa can never be known save by such confidenti 
agent as myself. the honour and career of mani of the chief men in 
franc were at stake. you have seen a group of ninepin standing, all 
so rigid, and prim, and unbending. then there come the ball from far 
away and pop, pop, pop--ther are your ninepin on the floor. well, 
imagin some of the greatest men in franc as these ninepin and then 
thi monsieur carat wa the ball which could be seen come from far 
away. If he arrived, then it wa pop, pop, pop for all of them. It 
wa determin that he should not arrive. 

"I do not accus them all of be consciou of what wa to happen. 
there were, as I have said, great financi as well as polit 
interest at stake, and a syndic wa form to manag the business. 
some subscrib to the syndic who hardli understood what were it 
objects. but other understood veri well, and they can reli upon it 
that I have not forgotten their names. they had ampl warn that 
monsieur carat wa come long befor he left south america, and they 
knew that the evid which he held would certainli mean ruin to all 
of them. the syndic had the command of an unlimit amount of 
money--absolut unlimited, you understand. they look round for an 
agent who wa capabl of wield thi gigant power. the man chosen 
must be inventive, resolute, adaptive--a man in a million. they chose 
herbert de lernac, and I admit that they were right. 

"mi duti were to choos my subordinates, to use freeli the power 
which money gives, and to make certain that monsieur carat should 
never arriv in paris. with characterist energi I set about my 
commiss within an hour of receiv my instructions, and the step 
which I took were the veri best for the purpos which could possibl be 
devised. 

"A man whom I could trust wa dispatch instantli to south america to 
travel home with monsieur caratal. had he arriv in time the ship 
would never have reach liverpool; but alas! it had alreadi start 
befor my agent could reach it. I fit out a small arm brig to 
intercept it, but again I wa unfortunate. like all great organ I 
was, however, prepar for failure, and had a seri of altern 
prepared, one or the other of which must succeed. you must not 
underr the difficulti of my undertaking, or imagin that a mere 
commonplac assassin would meet the case. We must destroy not 
onli monsieur caratal, but monsieur caratal' documents, and monsieur 
caratal' companion also, if we had reason to believ that he had 
commun hi secret to them. and you must rememb that they were 
on the alert, and keenli suspici of ani such attempt. It wa a task 
which wa in everi way worthi of me, for I am alway most master 
where anoth would be appalled. 

"I wa all readi for monsieur caratal' recept in liverpool, and I 
wa the more eager becaus I had reason to believ that he had made 
arrang by which he would have a consider guard from the 
moment that he arriv in london. anyth which wa to be done must 
be done between the moment of hi set foot upon the liverpool quay 
and that of hi arriv at the london and west coast terminu in 
london. We prepar six plans, each more elabor than the last; 
which plan would be use would depend upon hi own movements. Do what 
he would, we were readi for him. If he had stay in liverpool, we 
were ready. If he took an ordinari train, an express, or a special, 
all wa ready. everyth had been foreseen and provid for. 

"you may imagin that I could not do all thi myself. what could I 
know of the english railway lines? but money can procur will 
agent all the world over, and I soon had one of the acutest brain in 
england to assist me. I will mention no names, but it would be unjust 
to claim all the credit for myself. My english alli wa worthi of such 
an alliance. He knew the london and west coast line thoroughly, and he 
had the command of a band of worker who were trustworthi and 
intelligent. the idea wa his, and my own judgement wa onli requir 
in the details. We bought over sever officials, amongst whom the 
most import wa jame mcpherson, whom we had ascertain to be the 
guard most like to be employ upon a special train. smith, the 
stoker, wa also in our employ. john slater, the engine-driver, had 
been approached, but had been found to be obstin and dangerous, so 
we desisted. We had no certainti that monsieur carat would take a 
special, but we thought it veri probable, for it wa of the utmost 
import to him that he should reach pari without delay. It wa for 
thi contingency, therefore, that we made special 
preparations--prepar which were complet down to the last detail 
long befor hi steamer had sight the shore of england. you will be 
amus to learn that there wa one of my agent in the pilot-boat which 
brought that steamer to it moorings. 

"the moment that carat arriv in liverpool we knew that he suspect 
danger and wa on hi guard. He had brought with him as an escort a 
danger fellow, name gomez, a man who carri weapons, and wa 
prepar to use them. thi fellow carri caratal' confidenti 
paper for him, and wa readi to protect either them or hi master. 
the probabl wa that carat had taken him into hi counsel, and 
that to remov carat without remov gomez would be a mere wast of 
energy. It wa necessari that they should be involv in a common 
fate, and our plan to that end were much facilit by their request 
for a special train. On that special train you will understand that 
two out of the three servant of the compani were realli in our employ, 
at a price which would make them independ for a lifetime. I do not 
go so far as to say that the english are more honest than ani other 
nation, but I have found them more expens to buy. 

"I have alreadi spoken of my english agent--who is a man with a 
consider futur befor him, unless some complaint of the throat 
carri him off befor hi time. He had charg of all arrang at 
liverpool, whilst I wa station at the inn at kenyon, where I await 
a cipher signal to act. when the special wa arrang for, my agent 
instantli telegraph to me and warn me how soon I should have 
everyth ready. He himself under the name of horac moor appli 
immedi for a special also, in the hope that he would be sent down 
with monsieur caratal, which might under certain circumst have 
been help to us. if, for example, our great coup had failed, it 
would then have becom the duti of my agent to have shot them both and 
destroy their papers. carat wa on hi guard, however, and refus 
to admit ani other traveller. My agent then left the station, return 
by anoth entrance, enter the guard' van on the side farthest from 
the platform, and travel down with mcpherson the guard. 

"in the meantim you will be interest to know what my movement were. 
everyth had been prepar for day before, and onli the finish 
touch were needed. the side line which we had chosen had onc join 
the main line, but it had been disconnected. We had onli to replac a 
few rail to connect it onc more. these rail had been laid down as 
far as could be done without danger of attract attention, and now it 
wa mere a case of complet a junctur with the line, and arrang 
the point as they had been before. the sleeper had never been 
removed, and the rails, fish-plat and rivet were all ready, for we 
had taken them from a side on the abandon portion of the line. 
with my small but compet band of workers, we had everyth readi 
long befor the special arrived. when it did arrive, it ran off upon 
the small side line so easili that the jolt of the point appear to 
have been entir unnot by the two travellers. 

"our plan had been that smith, the stoker, should chloroform john 
slater, the driver, so that he should vanish with the others. In thi 
respect, and in thi respect only, our plan miscarried--i except the 
crimin folli of mcpherson in write home to hi wife. our stoker did 
hi busi so clumsili that slater in hi struggl fell off the 
engine, and though fortun wa with us so far that he broke hi neck in 
the fall, still he remain as a blot upon that which would otherwis 
have been one of those complet masterpiec which are onli to be 
contempl in silent admiration. the crimin expert will find in 
john slater the one flaw in all our admir combinations. A man who 
ha had as mani triumph as I can afford to be frank, and I therefor 
lay my finger upon john slater, and I proclaim him to be a flaw. 

"but now I have got our special train upon the small line two 
kilometres, or rather more than one mile, in length, which leads, or 
rather use to lead, to the abandon heartseas mine, onc one of the 
largest coal mine in england. you will ask how it is that no one saw 
the train upon thi unus line. I answer that along it entir length 
it run through a deep cutting, and that, unless someon had been on 
the edg of that cutting, he could not have seen it. there wa someon 
on the edg of that cutting. I wa there. and now I will tell you 
what I saw. 

"mi assist had remain at the point in order that he might 
superintend the switch off of the train. He had four arm men with 
him, so that if the train ran off the line--w thought it probable, 
becaus the point were veri rusty--w might still have resourc to 
fall back upon. have onc seen it safe on the side line, he hand 
over the respons to me. I wa wait at a point which 
overlook the mouth of the mine, and I wa also armed, as were my two 
companions. come what might, you see, I wa alway ready. 

"the moment that the train wa fairli on the side line, smith, the 
stoker, slowed-down the engine, and then, have turn it on to the 
fullest speed again, he and mcpherson, with my english lieutenant, 
sprang off befor it wa too late. It may be that it wa thi 
slowing-down which first attract the attent of the travellers, but 
the train wa run at full speed again befor their head appear 
at the open window. It make me smile to think how bewild they 
must have been. pictur to yourself your own feel if, on look 
out of your luxuri carriage, you suddenli perceiv that the line 
upon which you ran were rust and corroded, red and yellow with disus 
and decay! what a catch must have come in their breath as in a second 
it flash upon them that it wa not manchest but death which wa 
wait for them at the end of that sinist line. but the train wa 
run with frantic speed, roll and rock over the rotten line, 
while the wheel made a fright scream sound upon the rust 
surface. I wa close to them, and could see their faces. carat wa 
praying, I think--ther wa someth like a rosari dangl out of hi 
hand. the other roar like a bull who smell the blood of the 
slaughter-house. He saw us stand on the bank, and he beckon to us 
like a madman. then he tore at hi wrist and threw hi dispatch-box 
out of the window in our direction. Of course, hi mean wa 
obvious. here wa the evidence, and they would promis to be silent if 
their live were spared. It would have been veri agreeabl if we could 
have done so, but busi is business. besides, the train wa now as 
much beyond our control as theirs. 

"he ceas howl when the train rattl round the curv and they saw 
the black mouth of the mine yawn befor them. We had remov the 
board which had cover it, and we had clear the squar entrance. 
the rail had formerli run veri close to the shaft for the conveni 
of load the coal, and we had onli to add two or three length of 
rail in order to lead to the veri brink of the shaft. In fact, as the 
length would not quit fit, our line project about three feet over 
the edge. We saw the two head at the window: carat below, gomez 
above; but they had both been struck silent by what they saw. and yet 
they could not withdraw their heads. the sight seem to have 
paralys them. 

"I had wonder how the train run at a great speed would take the 
pit into which I had guid it, and I wa much interest in watch 
it. one of my colleagu thought that it would actual jump it, and 
inde it wa not veri far from do so. fortunately, however, it fell 
short, and the buffer of the engin struck the other lip of the shaft 
with a tremend crash. the funnel flew off into the air. the 
tender, carriages, and van were all smash up into one jumble, which, 
with the remain of the engine, choke for a minut or so the mouth of 
the pit. then someth gave way in the middle, and the whole mass of 
green iron, smoke coals, brass fittings, wheels, wood-work, and 
cushion all crumbl togeth and crash down into the mine. We 
heard the rattle, rattle, rattle, as the debri struck against the 
walls, and then, quit a long time afterwards, there came a deep roar 
as the remain of the train struck the bottom. the boiler may have 
burst, for a sharp crash came after the roar, and then a dens cloud of 
steam and smoke swirl up out of the black depths, fall in a spray 
as thick as rain all round us. then the vapour shred off into thin 
wisps, which float away in the summer sunshine, and all wa quiet 
again in the heartseas mine. 

"and now, have carri out our plan so successfully, it onli 
remain to leav no trace behind us. our littl band of worker at 
the other end had alreadi rip up the rail and disconnect the side 
line, replac everyth as it had been before. We were equal busi 
at the mine. the funnel and other fragment were thrown in, the shaft 
wa plank over as it use to be, and the line which led to it were 
torn up and taken away. then, without flurry, but without delay, we 
all made our way out of the country, most of us to paris, my english 
colleagu to manchester, and mcpherson to southampton, whenc he 
emigr to america. let the english paper of that date tell how 
throughli we had done our work, and how complet we had thrown the 
cleverest of their detect off our track. 

"you will rememb that gomez threw hi bag of paper out of the 
window, and I need not say that I secur that bag and brought them to 
my employers. It may interest my employ now, however, to learn that 
out of that bag I took one or two littl paper as a souvenir of the 
occasion. I have no wish to publish these papers; but, still, it is 
everi man for himself in thi world, and what els can I do if my 
friend will not come to my aid when I want them? messieurs, you may 
believ that herbert de lernac is quit as formid when he is 
against you as when he is with you, and that he is not a man to go to 
the guillotin until he ha seen that everi one of you is en rout for 
new caledonia. for your own sake, if not for mine, make haste, 
monsieur de ----, and gener ----, and baron ---- (you can fill up the 
blank for yourselv as you read this). I promis you that in the 
next edit there will be no blank to fill. 

"p.s.--a I look over my statement there is onli one omiss which I 
can see. It concern the unfortun man mcpherson, who wa foolish 
enough to write to hi wife and to make an appoint with her in new 
york. It can be imagin that when interest like our were at stake, 
we could not leav them to the chanc of whether a man in that class of 
life would or would not give away hi secret to a woman. have onc 
broken hi oath by write to hi wife, we could not trust him ani 
more. We took step therefor to insur that he should not see hi 
wife. I have sometim thought that it would be a kind to write to 
her and to assur her that there is no impedi to her marri 
again." 



the beetle-hunt 

A curiou experience? said the doctor. yes, my friends, I have had one 
veri curiou experience. I never expect to have another, for it is 
against all doctrin of chanc that two such event would befal ani 
one man in a singl lifetime. you may believ me or not, but the thing 
happen exactli as I tell it. 

I had just becom a medic man, but I had not start in practice, and 
I live in room in gower street. the street ha been renumb sinc 
then, but it wa in the onli hous which ha a bow-window, upon the 
left-hand side as you go down from the metropolitan station. A widow 
name murchison kept the hous at that time, and she had three medic 
student and one engin as lodgers. I occupi the top room, which 
wa the cheapest, but cheap as it wa it wa more than I could afford. 
My small resourc were dwindl away, and everi week it becam more 
necessari that I should find someth to do. yet I wa veri unwil 
to go into gener practice, for my tast were all in the direct of 
science, and especi of zoology, toward which I had alway a strong 
leaning. I had almost given the fight up and resign myself to be 
a medic drudg for life, when the turning-point of my struggl came 
in a veri extraordinari way. 

one morn I had pick up the standard and wa glanc over it 
contents. there wa a complet absenc of news, and I wa about to 
toss the paper down again, when my eye were caught by an advertis 
at the head of the person column. It wa word in thi way: 


"want for one or more day the servic of a medic man. It is 
essenti that he should be a man of strong physique, of steadi nerves, 
and of a resolut nature. must be an entomologist--coleopterist 
preferred. apply, in person, at 77b, brook street. applic must be 
made befor twelv o'clock today." 


now, I have alreadi said that I wa devot to zoology. Of all 
branch of zoology, the studi of insect wa the most attract to 
me, and of all insect beetl were the speci with which I wa most 
familiar. butterfli collector are numerous, but beetl are far more 
varied, and more access in these island than are butterflies. It 
wa thi fact which had attract my attent to them, and I had 
myself made a collect which number some hundr varieties. As to 
the other requisit of the advertisement, I knew that my nerv could 
be depend upon, and I had won the weight-throw competit at the 
inter-hospit sports. clearly, I wa the veri man for the vacancy. 
within five minut of my have read the advertis I wa in a cab 
and on my wa to brook street. 

As I drove, I kept turn the matter over in my head and tri to 
make a guess as to what sort of employ it could be which need 
such curiou qualifications. A strong physique, a resolut nature, a 
medic training, and a knowledg of beetles--what connect could 
there be between these variou requisites? and then there wa the 
dishearten fact that the situat wa not a perman one, but 
termin from day to day, accord to the term of the 
advertisement. the more I ponder over it the more unintellig did 
it become; but at the end of my medit I alway came back to the 
ground fact that, come what might, I had noth to lose, that I wa 
complet at the end of my resources, and that I wa readi for ani 
adventure, howev desperate, which would put a few honest sovereign 
into my pocket. the man fear to fail who ha to pay for hi failure, 
but there wa no penalti which fortun could exact from me. I wa like 
the gambler with empti pockets, who is still allow to tri hi luck 
with the others. 

no. 77b, brook street, wa one of those dingi and yet impos houses, 
dun-colour and flat-faced, with the intens respect and solid 
air which mark the georgian builder. As I alight from the cab, a 
young man came out of the door and walk swiftli down the street. In 
pass me, I notic that he cast an inquisit and somewhat 
malevol glanc at me, and I took the incid as a good omen, for 
hi appear wa that of a reject candidate, and if he resent my 
applic it meant that the vacanc wa not yet fill up. full of 
hope, I ascend the broad step and rap with the heavi knocker. 

A footman in powder and liveri open the door. clearli I wa in touch 
with the peopl of wealth and fashion. 


"yes, sir?" said the footman. 

"I came in answer to----" 

"quit so, sir," said the footman. "lord linchmer will see you at 
onc in the library." 

lord linchmere! I had vagu heard the name, but could not for the 
instant recal anyth about him. follow the footman, I wa shown 
into a large, book-lin room in which there wa seat behind a 
writing-desk a small man with a pleasant, clean-shaven, mobil face, 
and long hair shot with grey, brush back from hi forehead. He 
look me up and down with a veri shrewd, penetr glance, hold 
the card which the footman had given him in hi right hand. then he 
smile pleasantly, and I felt that extern at ani rate I possess 
the qualif which he desired. 

"you have come in answer to my advertisement, dr. hamilton?" he asked. 

"yes, sir." 

"do you fulfil the condit which are there laid down?" 

"I believ that I do." 

"you are a power man, or so I should judg from your appearance. 

"I think that I am fairli strong." 

"and resolute?" 

"I believ so." 

"have you ever known what it wa to be expos to immin danger?" 

"no, I don't know that I ever have." 

"but you think you would be prompt and cool at such a time?" 

"I hope so." 

"well, I believ that you would. I have the more confid in you 
becaus you do not pretend to be certain as to what you would do in a 
posit that wa new to you. My impress is that, so far as 
person qualiti go, you are the veri man of whom I am in search. 
that be settled, we may pass on to the next point." 

"which is?" 

"to talk to me about beetles." 

I look across to see if he wa joking, but, on the contrary, he wa 
lean eagerli forward across hi desk, and there wa an express of 
someth like anxieti in hi eyes. 

"I am afraid that you do not know about beetles," he cried. 

"on the contrary, sir, it is the one scientif subject about which I 
feel that I realli do know something." 

"I am overjoy to hear it. pleas talk to me about beetles." 

I talked. I do not profess to have said anyth origin upon the 
subject, but I gave a short sketch of the characterist of the 
beetle, and ran over the more common species, with some allus to 
the specimen in my own littl collect and to the articl upon 
"buri beetles" which I had contribut to the journal of 
entomolog science. 

"what! not a collector?" cri lord linchmere. "you don't mean that 
you are yourself a collector?" hi eye danc with pleasur at the 
thought. 

"you are certainli the veri man in london for my purpose. I thought 
that among five million of peopl there must be such a man, but the 
difficulti is to lay one' hand upon him. I have been extraordinarili 
fortun in find you." 

He rang a gong upon the table, and the footman entered. 

"ask ladi rossit to have the good to step thi way," said hi 
lordship, and a few moment later the ladi wa usher into the room. 
she wa a small, middle-ag woman, veri like lord linchmer in 
appearance, with the same quick, alert featur and grey-black hair. 
the express of anxiety, however, which I had observ upon hi face 
wa veri much more mark upon hers. some great grief seem to have 
cast it shadow over her features. As lord linchmer present me she 
turn her face full upon me, and I wa shock to observ a 
half-heal scar extend for two inch over her right eyebrow. It 
wa partli conceal by plaster, but none the less I could see that it 
had been a seriou wound and not long inflicted. 

"dr. hamilton is the veri man for our purpose, evelyn," said lord 
linchmere. "he is actual a collector of beetles, and he ha written 
articl upon the subject." 

"really!" said ladi rossiter. "then you must have heard of my husband. 
everyon who know anyth about beetl must have heard of sir thoma 
rossiter." 

for the first time a thin littl ray of light began to break into the 
obscur business. here, at last, wa a connect between these peopl 
and beetles. sir thoma rossiter--h wa the greatest author upon 
the subject in the world. He had made it hi lifelong study, and had 
written a most exhaust work upon it. I hasten to assur her that 
I had read and appreci it. 

"have you met my husband?" she asked. 

"no, I have not." 

"but you shall," said lord linchmere, with decision. 

the ladi wa stand besid the desk, and she put her hand upon hi 
shoulder. It wa obviou to me as I saw their face togeth that they 
were brother and sister. 

"are you realli prepar for this, charles? It is nobl of you, but 
you fill me with fears." her voic quaver with apprehension, and he 
appear to me to be equal moved, though he wa make strong effort 
to conceal hi agitation. 

"yes, yes, dear; it is all settled, it is all decided; in fact, there 
is no other possibl way, that I can see." 

"there is one obviou way." 

"no, no, evelyn, I shall never abandon you--never. It will come 
right--depend upon it; it will come right, and sure it look like the 
interfer of provid that so perfect an instrument should be put 
into our hands." 

My posit wa embarrassing, for I felt that for the instant they had 
forgotten my presence. but lord linchmer came back suddenli to me and 
to my engagement. 

"the busi for which I want you, dr. hamilton, is that you should 
put yourself absolut at my disposal. I wish you to come for a short 
journey with me, to remain alway at my side, and to promis to do 
without question whatev I may ask you, howev unreason it may 
appear to you to be." 

"that is a good deal to ask," said I. 

"unfortun I cannot put it more plainly, for I do not myself know 
what turn matter may take. you may be sure, however, that you will 
not be ask to do anyth which your conscienc doe not approve; and 
I promis you that, when all is over, you will be proud to have been 
concern in so good a work." 

"if it end happily," said the lady. 

"exactly; if it end happily," hi lordship repeated. 

"and terms?" I asked. 

"twenti pound a day." 

I wa amaz at the sum, and must have show my surpris upon my 
features. 

"it is a rare combin of qualities, as must have struck you when 
you first read the advertisement," said lord linchmere; "such vari 
gift may well command a high return, and I do not conceal from you 
that your duti might be arduou or even dangerous. besides, it is 
possibl that one or two day may bring the matter to an end." 

"pleas god!" sigh hi sister. 

"so now, dr. hamilton, may I reli upon your aid?" 

"most undoubtedly," said I. "you have onli to tell me what my duti 
are." 

"your first duti will be to return to your home. you will pack up 
whatev you may need for a short visit to the country. We start 
togeth from paddington station at 3:40 thi afternoon." 

"do we go far?" 

"a far as pangbourne. meet me at the bookstal at 3:30. I shall have 
the tickets. goodbye, dr. hamilton! and, by the way, there are two 
thing which I should be veri glad if you would bring with you, in case 
you have them. one is your case for collect beetles, and the other 
is a stick, and the thicker and heavier the better." 


you may imagin that I had plenti to think of from the time that I left 
brook street until I set out to meet lord linchmer at paddington. the 
whole fantast busi kept arrang and rearrang itself in 
kaleidoscop form insid my brain, until I had thought out a dozen 
explanations, each of them more grotesqu improb than the last. 
and yet I felt that the truth must be someth grotesqu improb 
also. At last I gave up all attempt at find a solution, and 
content myself with exactli carri out the instruct which I had 
received. with a hand valise, specimen-case, and a load cane, I wa 
wait at the paddington bookstal when lord linchmer arrived. He 
wa an even smaller man than I had thought--frail and peaky, with a 
manner which wa more nervou than it had been in the morning. He wore 
a long, thick travel ulster, and I observ that he carri a heavi 
blackthorn cudgel in hi hand. 

"I have the tickets," said he, lead the way up the platform. 

"thi is our train. I have engag a carriage, for I am particularli 
anxiou to impress one or two thing upon you while we travel down." 

and yet all that he had to impress upon me might have been said in a 
sentence, for it wa that I wa to rememb that I wa there as a 
protect to himself, and that I wa not on ani consider to leav 
him for an instant. thi he repeat again and again as our journey 
drew to a close, with an insist which show that hi nerv were 
thoroughli shaken. 

"yes," he said at last, in answer to my look rather than to my words, 
"I AM nervous, dr. hamilton. I have alway been a timid man, and my 
timid depend upon my frail physic health. but my soul is firm, 
and I can bring myself up to face a danger which a less-nerv man 
might shrink from. what I am do now is done from no compulsion, but 
entir from a sens of duty, and yet it is, beyond doubt, a desper 
risk. If thing should go wrong, I will have some claim to the titl 
of martyr." 

thi etern read of riddl wa too much for me. I felt that I 
must put a term to it. 

"I think it would veri much better, sir, if you were to trust me 
entirely," said I. "it is imposs for me to act effectively, when I 
do not know what are the object which we have in view, or even where 
we are going." 

"oh, as to where we are going, there need be no mysteri about that," 
said he; "we are go to delamer court, the resid of sir thoma 
rossiter, with whose work you are so conversant. As to the exact 
object of our visit, I do not know that at thi stage of the 
proceed anyth would be gained, dr. hamilton, by take you into 
my complet confidence. I may tell you that we are acting--i say 'we,' 
becaus my sister, ladi rossiter, take the same view as myself--with 
the one object of prevent anyth in the natur of a famili 
scandal. that be so, you can understand that I am loath to give ani 
explan which are not absolut necessary. It would be a 
differ matter, dr. hamilton, if I were ask your advice. As 
matter stand, it is onli your activ help which I need, and I will 
indic to you from time to time how you can best give it." 

there wa noth more to be said, and a poor man can put up with a 
good deal for twenti pound a day, but I felt none the less that lord 
linchmer wa act rather scurvili toward me. He wish to convert 
me into a passiv tool, like the blackthorn in hi hand. with hi 
sensit disposit I could imagine, however, that scandal would be 
abhorr to him, and I realiz that he would not take me into hi 
confid until no other cours wa open to him. I must trust to my 
own eye and ear to solv the mystery, but I had everi confid that 
I should not trust to them in vain. 

delamer court lie a good five mile from pangbourn station, and we 
drove for that distanc in an open fly. lord linchmer sat in deep 
thought dure the time, and he never open hi mouth until we were 
close to our destination. when he did speak it wa to give me a piec 
of inform which surpris me. 

"perhap you are not aware," said he, "that I am a medic man like 
yourself?" 

"no, sir, I did not know it." 

"yes, I qualifi in my younger days, when there were sever live 
between me and the peerage. I have not had occas to practise, but I 
have found it a use education, all the same. I never regret the 
year which I devot to medic study. these are the gate of 
delamer court." 

We had come to two high pillar crown with herald monster which 
flank the open of a wind avenue. over the laurel bush and 
rhododendrons, I could see a long, many-g mansion, girdl with 
ivy, and tone to the warm, cheery, mellow glow of old brick-work. My 
eye were still fix in admir upon thi delight hous when my 
companion pluck nervous at my sleeve. 

"here' sir thomas," he whispered. "pleas talk beetl all you can." 

A tall, thin figure, curious angular and bony, had emerg through a 
gap in the hedg of laurels. In hi hand he held a spud, and he wore 
gauntlet gardener' gloves. A broad-brimmed, grey hat cast hi face 
into shadow, but it struck me as exceedingli austere, with an 
ill-nourish beard and harsh, irregular features. the fli pull up 
and lord linchmer sprang out. 

"mi dear thomas, how are you?" said he, heartily. 

but the hearti wa by no mean reciprocal. the owner of the 
ground glare at me over hi brother-in-law' shoulder, and I caught 
broken scrap of sentences--"well-known wish ... hatr of 
stranger ... unjustifi intrus ... perfectli inexcusable." 
then there wa a mutter explanation, and the two of them came over 
togeth to the side of the fly. 

"let me present you to sir thoma rossiter, dr. hamilton," said lord 
linchmere. "you will find that you have a strong commun of tastes." 

I bowed. sir thoma stood veri stiffly, look at me sever from 
under the broad brim of hi hat. 

"lord linchmer tell me that you know someth about beetles," said 
he. "what do you know about beetles?" 

"I know what I have learn from your work upon the coleoptera, sir 
thomas," I answered. 

"give me the name of the better-known speci of the british 
scarabaei," said he. 

I had not expect an examination, but fortun I wa readi for one. 
My answer seem to pleas him, for hi stern featur relaxed. 

"you appear to have read my book with some profit, sir," said he. "it 
is a rare thing for me to meet anyon who take an intellig interest 
in such matters. peopl can find time for such trivial as sport 
or society, and yet the beetl are overlooked. I can assur you that 
the greater part of the idiot in thi part of the countri are unawar 
that I have ever written a book at all--i, the first man who ever 
describ the true function of the elytra. I am glad to see you, sir, 
and I have no doubt that I can show you some specimen which will 
interest you." He step into the fli and drove up with us to the 
house, expound to me as we went some recent research which he had 
made into the anatomi of the lady-bird. 

I have said that sir thoma rossit wore a larg hat drawn down over 
hi brows. As he enter the hall he uncov himself, and I wa at 
onc awar of a singular characterist which the hat had concealed. 
hi forehead, which wa natur high, and higher still on account of 
reced hair, wa in a continu state of movement. some nervou 
weak kept the muscl in a constant spasm, which sometim produc 
a mere twitch and sometim a curiou rotari movement unlik 
anyth which I had ever seen before. It wa strikingli visibl as he 
turn toward us after enter the study, and seem the more 
singular from the contrast with the hard, steady, grey eye which 
look out from underneath those palpit brows. 

"I am sorry," said he, "that ladi rossit is not here to help me to 
welcom you. By the way, charles, did evelyn say anyth about the 
date of her return?" 

"she wish to stay in town for a few more days," said lord linchmere. 
"you know how ladies' social duti accumul if they have been for 
some time in the country. My sister ha mani old friend in london at 
present." 

"well, she is her own mistress, and I should not wish to alter her 
plans, but I shall be glad when I see her again. It is veri lone 
here without her company." 

"I wa afraid that you might find it so, and that wa partli whi I ran 
down. My young friend, dr. hamilton, is so much interest in the 
subject which you have made your own, that I thought you would not mind 
hi accompani me." 

"I lead a retir life, dr. hamilton, and my avers to stranger 
grow upon me," said our host. "I have sometim thought that my 
nerv are not so good as they were. My travel in search of beetl 
in my younger day took me into mani malari and unhealthi places. 
but a brother coleopterist like yourself is alway a welcom guest, and 
I shall be delight if you will look over my collection, which I think 
that I may without exagger describ as the best in europe." 

and so no doubt it was. He had a huge, oaken cabinet arrang in 
shallow drawers, and here, neatli ticket and classified, were beetl 
from everi corner of the earth, black, brown, blue, green, and mottled. 
everi now and then as he swept hi hand over the line and line of 
impal insect he would catch up some rare specimen, and, handl it 
with as much delicaci and rever as if it were a preciou relic, he 
would hold forth upon it peculiar and the circumst under 
which it came into hi possession. It wa evid an unusu thing 
for him to meet with a sympathet listener, and he talk and talk 
until the spring even had deepen into night, and the gong 
announc that it wa time to dress for dinner. all the time lord 
linchmer said nothing, but he stood at hi brother-in-law' elbow, and 
I caught him continu shoot curiou little, question glanc 
into hi face. and hi own featur express some strong emotion, 
apprehension, sympathy, expectation: I seem to read them all. I wa 
sure that lord linchmer wa fear someth and await something, 
but what that someth might be I could not imagine. 

the even pass quietli but pleasantly, and I should have been 
entir at my eas if it had not been for that continu sens of 
tension upon the part of lord linchmere. As to our host, I found that 
he improv upon acquaintance. He spoke constantli with affect of 
hi absent wife, and also of hi littl son, who had recent been sent 
to school. the house, he said, wa not the same without them. If it 
were not for hi scientif studies, he did not know how he could get 
through the days. after dinner we smoke for some time in the 
billiard-room, and final went earli to bed. 

and then it wa that, for the first time, the suspicion that lord 
linchmer wa a lunat cross my mind. He follow me into my 
bedroom, when our host had retired. 

"doctor," said he, speak in a low, hurri voice, "you must come 
with me. you must spend the night in my bedroom." 

"what do you mean?" 

"I prefer not to explain. but thi is part of your duties. My room is 
close by, and you can return to your own befor the servant call you 
in the morning." 

"but why?" I asked. 

"becaus I am nervou of be alone," said he. "that' the reason, 
sinc you must have a reason." 

It seem rank lunacy, but the argument of those twenti pound would 
overcom mani objections. I follow him to hi room. 

"well," said I, "there' onli room for one in that bed." 

"onli one shall occupi it," said he. 

"and the other?" 

"must remain on watch." 

"why?" said I. "one would think you expect to be attacked." 

"perhap I do." 

"in that case, whi not lock your door?" 

"perhap I want to be attacked." 

It look more and more like lunacy. however, there wa noth for it 
but to submit. I shrug my shoulder and sat down in the arm-chair 
besid the empti fireplace. 

"I am to remain on watch, then?" said I, ruefully. 

"we will divid the night. If you will watch until two, I will watch 
the remainder." 

"veri good." 

"call me at two o'clock, then." 

"I will do so." 

"keep your ear open, and if you hear ani sound wake me 
instantly--instantly, you hear?" 

"you can reli upon it." I tri to look as solemn as he did. 

"and for god' sake don't go to sleep," said he, and so, take off 
onli hi coat, he threw the coverlet over him and settl down for the 
night. 

It wa a melancholi vigil, and made more so by my own sens of it 
folly. suppos that by ani chanc lord linchmer had caus to 
suspect that he wa subject to danger in the hous of sir thoma 
rossiter, whi on earth could he not lock hi door and so protect 
himself? hi own answer that he might wish to be attack wa absurd. 
whi should he possibl wish to be attacked? and who would wish to 
attack him? clearly, lord linchmer wa suffer from some singular 
delusion, and the result wa that on an imbecil pretext I wa to be 
depriv of my night' rest. still, howev absurd, I wa determin 
to carri out hi injunct to the letter as long as I wa in hi 
employment. I sat, therefore, besid the empti fireplace, and listen 
to a sonor chime clock somewher down the passag which gurgl 
and struck everi quarter of an hour. It wa an endless vigil. save for 
that singl clock, an absolut silenc reign throughout the great 
house. A small lamp stood on the tabl at my elbow, throw a circl 
of light round my chair, but leav the corner of the room drape in 
shadow. On the bed lord linchmer wa breath peacefully. I envi 
him hi quiet sleep, and again and again my own eyelid drooped, but 
everi time my sens of duti came to my help, and I sat up, rub my 
eye and pinch myself with a determin to see my irrat 
watch to an end. 

and I did so. from down the passag came the chime of two o'clock, 
and I laid my hand upon the shoulder of the sleeper. instantli he wa 
sit up, with an express of the keenest interest upon hi face. 

"you have heard something?" 

"no, sir. It is two o'clock." 

"veri good. I will watch. you can go to sleep." 

I lay down under the coverlet as he had done and wa soon unconscious. 
My last recollect wa of that circl of lamplight, and of the small, 
hunched-up figur and strained, anxiou face of lord linchmer in the 
centr of it. 

how long I slept I do not know; but I wa suddenli arous by a sharp 
tug at my sleeve. the room wa in darkness, but a hot smell of oil 
told me that the lamp had onli that instant been extinguished. 

"quick! quick!" said lord linchmere' voic in my ear. 

I sprang out of bed, he still drag at my arm. 

"over here!" he whispered, and pull me into a corner of the room. 
"hush! listen!" 

In the silenc of the night I could distinctli hear that someon wa 
come down the corridor. It wa a stealthi step, faint and 
intermittent, as of a man who paus cautious after everi stride. 
sometim for half a minut there wa no sound, and then came the 
shuffl and creak which told of a fresh advance. My companion wa 
trembl with excitement. hi hand, which still held my sleeve, 
twitch like a branch in the wind. 

"what is it?" I whispered. 

"it' he!" 

"sir thomas?" 

"yes." 

"what doe he want?" 

"hush! Do noth until I tell you." 

I wa consciou now that someon wa tri the door. there wa the 
faintest littl rattl from the handle, and then I dimli saw a thin 
slit of subdu light. there wa a lamp burn somewher far down the 
passage, and it just suffic to make the outsid visibl from the 
dark of our room. the greyish slit grew broader and broader, veri 
gradually, veri gently, and then outlin against it I saw the dark 
figur of a man. He wa squat and crouching, with the silhouett of a 
bulki and misshapen dwarf. slowli the door swung open with thi omin 
shape frame in the centr of it. and then, in an instant, the 
crouch figur shot up, there wa a tiger spring across the room and 
thud, thud, thud, came three tremend blow from some heavi object 
upon the bed. 

I wa so paralys with amaz that I stood motionless and stare 
until I wa arous by a yell for help from my companion. the open door 
shed enough light for me to see the outlin of things, and there wa 
littl lord linchmer with hi arm round the neck of hi 
brother-in-law, hold brave on to him like a game bull-terri with 
it teeth into a gaunt deerhound. the tall, boni man dash himself 
about, writh round and round to get a grip upon hi assailant; but 
the other, clutch on from behind, still kept hi hold, though hi 
shrill, frighten cri show how unequ he felt the contest to be. 
I sprang to the rescue, and the two of us manag to throw sir thoma 
to the ground, though he made hi teeth meet in my shoulder. with all 
my youth and weight and strength, it wa a desper struggl befor we 
could master hi frenzi struggles; but at last we secur hi arm 
with the waist-cord of the dressing-gown which he wa wearing. I wa 
hold hi leg while lord linchmer wa endeavour to relight the 
lamp, when there came the patter of mani feet in the passage, and 
the butler and two footmen, who had been alarm by the cries, rush 
into the room. with their aid we had no further difficulti in secur 
our prisoner, who lay foam and glare upon the ground. one glanc 
at hi face wa enough to prove that he wa a danger maniac, while 
the short, heavi hammer which lay besid the bed show how murder 
had been hi intentions. 

"do not use ani violence!" said lord linchmere, as we rais the 
struggl man to hi feet. "he will have a period of stupor after 
thi excitement. I believ that it is come on already." As he spoke 
the convuls becam less violent, and the madman' head fell forward 
upon hi breast, as if he were overcom by sleep. We led him down the 
passag and stretch him upon hi own bed, where he lay unconscious, 
breath heavily. 

"two of you will watch him," said lord linchmere. "and now, dr. 
hamilton, if you will return with me to my room, I will give you the 
explan which my horror of scandal ha perhap caus me to delay 
too long. come what may, you will never have caus to regret your 
share in thi night' work. 

"the case may be made clear in a veri few words," he continued, when we 
were alone. "mi poor brother-in-law is one of the best fellow upon 
earth, a love husband and an estim father, but he come from a 
stock which is deepli taint with insanity. He ha more than onc had 
homicid outbreaks, which are the more pain becaus hi inclin 
is alway to attack the veri person to whom he is most attached. hi 
son wa sent away to school to avoid thi danger, and then came an 
attempt upon my sister, hi wife, from which she escap with injuri 
that you may have observ when you met her in london. you understand 
that he know noth of the matter when he is in hi sound senses, and 
would ridicul the suggest that he could under ani circumst 
injur those whom he love so dearly. It is often, as you know, a 
characterist of such maladi that it is absolut imposs to 
convinc the man who suffer from them of their existence. 

"our great object was, of course, to get him under restraint befor he 
could stain hi hand with blood, but the matter wa full of 
difficulty. He is a reclus in hi habits, and would not see ani 
medic man. besides, it wa necessari for our purpos that the 
medic man should convinc himself of hi insanity; and he is sane as 
you or I, save on these veri rare occasions. but, fortunately, befor 
he ha these attack he alway show certain premonitori symptoms, 
which are providenti danger-signals, warn us to be upon our guard. 
the chief of these is that nervou contort of the forehead which you 
must have observed. thi is a phenomenon which alway appear from 
three to four day befor hi attack of frenzy. the moment it show 
itself hi wife came into town on some pretext, and took refug in my 
hous in brook street. 

"it remain for me to convinc a medic man of sir thomas' insanity, 
without which it wa imposs to put him where he could do no harm. 
the first problem wa how to get a medic man into hi house. I 
bethought me of hi interest in beetles, and hi love for anyon who 
share hi tastes. I advertised, therefore, and wa fortun enough 
to find in you the veri man I wanted. A stout companion wa necessary, 
for I knew that the lunaci could onli be prove by a murder assault, 
and I had everi reason to believ that that assault would be made upon 
myself, sinc he had the warmest regard for me in hi moment of 
sanity. I think your intellig will suppli all the rest. I did not 
know that the attack would come by night, but I thought it veri 
probable, for the crise of such case usual do occur in the earli 
hour of the morning. I am a veri nervou man myself, but I saw no 
other way in which I could remov thi terribl danger from my sister' 
life. I need not ask you whether you are will to sign the lunaci 
papers." 

"undoubtedly. but two signatur are necessary." 

"you forget that I am myself a holder of a medic degree. I have the 
paper on a side-t here, so if you will be good enough to sign them 
now, we can have the patient remov in the morning." 


So that wa my visit to sir thoma rossiter, the famou beetle-hunter, 
and that wa also my first step upon the ladder of success, for ladi 
rossit and lord linchmer have prove to be staunch friends, and they 
have never forgotten my associ with them in the time of their 
need. sir thoma is out and said to be cured, but I still think that 
if I spent anoth night at delamer court, I should be inclin to 
lock my door upon the inside. 



the man with the watch 

there are mani who will still bear in mind the singular circumst 
which, under the head of the rugbi mystery, fill mani column of 
the daili press in the spring of the year 1892. come as it did at a 
period of except dullness, it attract perhap rather more 
attent than it deserved, but it offer to the public that mixtur 
of the whimsic and the tragic which is most stimul to the 
popular imagination. interest drooped, however, when, after week of 
fruitless investigation, it wa found that no final explan of the 
fact wa forthcoming, and the tragedi seem from that time to the 
present to have final taken it place in the dark catalogu of 
inexplic and unexpi crimes. A recent commun (the 
authent of which appear to be abov question) has, however, 
thrown some new and clear light upon the matter. befor lay it 
befor the public it would be as well, perhaps, that I should refresh 
their memori as to the singular fact upon which thi commentari is 
founded. these fact were briefli as follows: 

At five o'clock on the even of the 18th of march in the year alreadi 
mention a train left euston station for manchester. It wa a rainy, 
squalli day, which grew wilder as it progressed, so it wa by no mean 
the weather in which anyon would travel who wa not driven to do so by 
necessity. the train, however, is a favourit one among manchest 
busi men who are return from town, for it doe the journey in 
four hour and twenti minutes, with onli three stoppag upon the way. 
In spite of the inclement even it was, therefore, fairli well fill 
upon the occas of which I speak. the guard of the train wa a tri 
servant of the company--a man who had work for twenty-two year 
without a blemish or complaint. hi name wa john palmer. 

the station clock wa upon the stroke of five, and the guard wa about 
to give the customari signal to the engine-driv when he observ two 
belat passeng hurri down the platform. the one wa an 
except tall man, dress in a long black overcoat with astrakhan 
collar and cuffs. I have alreadi said that the even wa an 
inclement one, and the tall travel had the high, warm collar turn 
up to protect hi throat against the bitter march wind. He appeared, 
as far as the guard could judg by so hurri an inspection, to be a 
man between fifti and sixti year of age, who had retain a good deal 
of the vigour and activ of hi youth. In one hand he carri a 
brown leather gladston bag. hi companion wa a lady, tall and erect, 
walk with a vigor step which outpac the gentleman besid her. 
she wore a long, fawn-colour dust-cloak, a black, close-fit 
toque, and a dark veil which conceal the greater part of her face. 
the two might veri well have pass as father and daughter. they 
walk swiftli down the line of carriages, glanc in at the windows, 
until the guard, john palmer, overtook them. 

"now then, sir, look sharp, the train is going," said he. 

"first-class," the man answered. 

the guard turn the handl of the nearest door. In the carriag which 
he had opened, there sat a small man with a cigar in hi mouth. hi 
appear seem to have impress itself upon the guard' memory, for 
he wa prepared, afterwards, to describ or to identifi him. He wa a 
man of thirty-four or thirty-f year of age, dress in some grey 
material, sharp-nosed, alert, with a ruddy, weather-beaten face, and a 
small, close cropped, black beard. He glanc up as the door wa 
opened. the tall man paus with hi foot upon the step. 

"thi is a smoke compartment. the ladi dislik smoke," said he, 
look round at the guard. 

"all right! here you are, sir!" said john palmer. He slam the door 
of the smoke carriage, open that of the next one, which wa empty, 
and thrust the two travel in. At the same moment he sound hi 
whistl and the wheel of the train began to move. the man with the 
cigar wa at the window of hi carriage, and said someth to the 
guard as he roll past him, but the word were lost in the bustl of 
the departure. palmer step into the guard' van, as it came up to 
him, and thought no more of the incident. 

twelv minut after it departur the train reach willesden 
junction, where it stop for a veri short interval. An examin 
of the ticket ha made it certain that no one either join or left it 
at thi time, and no passeng wa seen to alight upon the platform. 
At 5:14 the journey to manchest wa resumed, and rugbi wa reach at 
6:50, the express be five minut late. 

At rugbi the attent of the station offici wa drawn to the fact 
that the door of one of the first-class carriag wa open. An 
examin of that compartment, and of it neighbour, disclos a 
remark state of affairs. 

the smoke carriag in which the short, red-fac man with the black 
beard had been seen wa now empty. save for a half-smok cigar, there 
wa no trace whatev of it recent occupant. the door of thi 
carriag wa fastened. In the next compartment, to which attent had 
been origin drawn, there wa no sign either of the gentleman with 
the astrakhan collar or of the young ladi who accompani him. all 
three passeng had disappeared. On the other hand, there wa found 
upon the floor of thi carriage--th one in which the tall travel 
and the ladi had been--a young man fashion dress and of eleg 
appearance. He lay with hi knee drawn up, and hi head rest 
against the farther door, an elbow upon either seat. A bullet had 
penetr hi heart and hi death must have been instantaneous. No 
one had seen such a man enter the train, and no railway ticket wa 
found in hi pocket, neither were there ani mark upon hi linen, 
nor paper nor person properti which might help to identifi him. who 
he was, whenc he had come, and how he had met hi end were each as 
great a mysteri as what had occur to the three peopl who had 
start an hour and a half befor from willesden in those two 
compartments. 

I have said that there wa no person properti which might help to 
identifi him, but it is true that there wa one peculiar about thi 
unknown young man which wa much comment upon at the time. In hi 
pocket were found no fewer than six valuabl gold watches, three in 
the variou pocket of hi waist-coat, one in hi ticket-pocket, one in 
hi breast-pocket, and one small one set in a leather strap and 
fasten round hi left wrist. the obviou explan that the man 
wa a pickpocket, and that thi wa hi plunder, wa discount by the 
fact that all six were of american make and of a type which is rare in 
england. three of them bore the mark of the rochest watchmak 
company; one wa by mason, of elmira; one wa unmarked; and the small 
one, which wa highli jewel and ornamented, wa from tiffany, of new 
york. the other content of hi pocket consist of an ivori knife 
with a corkscrew by rodgers, of sheffield; a small, circular mirror, 
one inch in diameter; a readmiss slip to the lyceum theatre; a 
silver box full of vesta matches, and a brown leather cigar-cas 
contain two cheroots--also two pound fourteen shill in money. 
It wa clear, then, that whatev motiv may have led to hi death, 
robberi wa not among them. As alreadi mentioned, there were no 
mark upon the man' linen, which appear to be new, and no 
tailor' name upon hi coat. In appear he wa young, short, 
smooth-cheeked, and delic featured. one of hi front teeth wa 
conspicu stop with gold. 

On the discoveri of the tragedi an examin wa instantli made of 
the ticket of all passengers, and the number of the passeng 
themselv wa counted. It wa found that onli three ticket were 
unaccount for, correspond to the three travel who were 
missing. the express wa then allow to proceed, but a new guard wa 
sent with it, and john palmer wa detain as a wit at rugby. the 
carriag which includ the two compart in question wa uncoupl 
and side-tracked. then, on the arriv of inspector vane, of scotland 
yard, and of mr. henderson, a detect in the servic of the railway 
company, an exhaust inquiri wa made into all the circumstances. 

that crime had been commit wa certain. the bullet, which appear 
to have come from a small pistol or revolver, had been fire from some 
littl distance, as there wa no scorch of the clothes. No weapon 
wa found in the compart (which final dispos of the theori of 
suicide), nor wa there ani sign of the brown leather bag which the 
guard had seen in the hand of the tall gentleman. A lady' parasol wa 
found upon the rack, but no other trace wa to be seen of the 
travel in either of the sections. apart from the crime, the 
question of how or whi three passeng (one of them a lady) could get 
out of the train, and one other get in dure the unbroken run between 
willesden and rugby, wa one which excit the utmost curios among 
the gener public, and gave rise to much specul in the london 
press. 

john palmer, the guard wa abl at the inquest to give some evid 
which threw a littl light upon the matter. there wa a spot between 
tring and cheddington, accord to hi statement, where, on account of 
some repair to the line, the train had for a few minut slow down 
to a pace not exceed eight or ten mile an hour. At that place it 
might be possibl for a man, or even for an except activ woman, 
to have left the train without seriou injury. It wa true that a gang 
of platelay wa there, and that they had seen nothing, but it wa 
their custom to stand in the middl between the metals, and the open 
carriag door wa upon the far side, so that it wa conceiv that 
someon might have alight unseen, as the dark would by that time 
be draw in. A steep embank would instantli screen anyon who 
sprang out from the observ of the navvies. 

the guard also depos that there wa a good deal of movement upon the 
platform at willesden junction, and that though it wa certain that no 
one had either join or left the train there, it wa still quit 
possibl that some of the passeng might have chang unseen from one 
compart to another. It wa by no mean uncommon for a gentleman to 
finish hi cigar in a smoke carriag and then to chang to a clearer 
atmosphere. suppos that the man with the black beard had done so at 
willesden (and the half-smok cigar upon the floor seem to favour 
the supposition), he would natur go into the nearest section, which 
would bring him into the compani of the two other actor in thi drama. 
thu the first stage of the affair might be surmis without ani great 
breach of probability. but what the second stage had been, or how the 
final one had been arriv at, neither the guard nor the experienc 
detect offic could suggest. 

A care examin of the line between willesden and rugbi result 
in one discoveri which might or might not have a bear upon the 
tragedy. near tring, at the veri place where the train slow down, 
there wa found at the bottom of the embank a small pocket 
testament, veri shabbi and worn. It wa print by the bibl societi 
of london, and bore an inscription: "from john to alice. jan. 13th, 
1856," upon the fly-leaf. underneath wa written: "james. juli 4th, 
1859," and beneath that again: "edward. nov. 1st, 1869," all the 
entri be in the same handwriting. thi wa the onli clue, if it 
could be call a clue, which the polic obtained, and the coroner' 
verdict of "murder by a person or person unknown" wa the 
unsatisfactori end of a singular case. advertisement, rewards, and 
inquiri prove equal fruitless, and noth could be found which 
wa solid enough to form the basi for a profit investigation. 

It would be a mistake, however, to suppos that no theori were form 
to account for the facts. On the contrary, the press, both in england 
and in america, teem with suggest and suppositions, most of which 
were obvious absurd. the fact that the watch were of american 
make, and some peculiar in connect with the gold stop of 
hi front tooth, appear to indic that the deceas wa a citizen 
of the unit states, though hi linen, cloth and boot were 
undoubtedli of british manufacture. It wa surmised, by some, that he 
wa conceal under the seat, and that, be discovered, he wa for 
some reason, possibl becaus he had overheard their guilti secrets, 
put to death by hi fellow-passengers. when coupl with gener 
as to the feroc and cun of anarch and other secret 
societies, thi theori sound as plausibl as any. 

the fact that he should be without a ticket would be consist with 
the idea of concealment, and it wa well known that women play a 
promin part in the nihilist propaganda. On the other hand, it wa 
clear, from the guard' statement, that the man must have been hidden 
there befor the other arrived, and how unlik the coincid that 
conspir should stray exactli into the veri compart in which a 
spi wa alreadi concealed! besides, thi explan ignor the man in 
the smoke carriage, and gave no reason at all for hi simultan 
disappearance. the polic had littl difficulti in show that such a 
theori would not cover the facts, but they were unprepar in the 
absenc of evid to advanc ani altern explanation. 

there wa a letter in the daili gazette, over the signatur of a 
well-known crimin investigator, which gave rise to consider 
discuss at the time. He had form a hypothesi which had at least 
ingenu to recommend it, and I cannot do better than append it in hi 
own words. 

"whatev may be the truth," said he, "it must depend upon some bizarr 
and rare combin of events, so we need have no hesit in 
postul such event in our explanation. In the absenc of data we 
must abandon the analyt or scientif method of investigation, and 
must approach it in the synthet fashion. In a word, instead of take 
known event and deduc from them what ha occurred, we must build up 
a fanci explan if it will onli be consist with known events. 
We can then test thi explan by ani fresh fact which may arise. 
If they all fit into their places, the probabl is that we are upon 
the right track, and with each fresh fact thi probabl increas in 
a geometr progress until the evid becom final and 
convincing. 

"now, there is one most remark and suggest fact which ha not 
met with the attent which it deserves. there is a local train 
run through harrow and king' langley, which is time in such a way 
that the express must have overtaken it at or about the period when it 
eas down it speed to eight mile an hour on account of the repair 
of the line. the two train would at that time be travel in the 
same direct at a similar rate of speed and upon parallel lines. It 
is within everi one' experi how, under such circumstances, the 
occup of each carriag can see veri plainli the passeng in the 
other carriag opposit to him. the lamp of the express had been lit 
at willesden, so that each compart wa brightli illuminated, and 
most visibl to an observ from outside. 

"now, the sequenc of event as I reconstruct them would be after thi 
fashion. thi young man with the abnorm number of watch wa alon 
in the carriag of the slow train. hi ticket, with hi paper and 
glove and other things, was, we will suppose, on the seat besid him. 
He wa probabl an american, and also probabl a man of weak intellect. 
the excess wear of jewelleri is an earli symptom in some form of 
mania. 

"a he sat watch the carriag of the express which were (on account 
of the state of the line) go at the same pace as himself, he 
suddenli saw some peopl in it whom he knew. We will suppos for the 
sake of our theori that these peopl were a woman whom he love and a 
man whom he hated--and who in return hate him. the young man wa 
excit and impulsive. He open the door of hi carriage, step 
from the footboard of the local train to the footboard of the express, 
open the other door, and made hi way into the presenc of these two 
people. the feat (on the supposit that the train were go at the 
same pace) is by no mean so peril as it might appear. 

"have now got our young man, without hi ticket, into the carriag in 
which the elder man and the young woman are travelling, it is not 
difficult to imagin that a violent scene ensued. It is possibl that 
the pair were also americans, which is the more probabl as the man 
carri a weapon--an unusu thing in england. If our supposit of 
incipi mania is correct, the young man is like to have assault 
the other. As the upshot of the quarrel the elder man shot the 
intruder, and then made hi escap from the carriage, take the young 
ladi with him. We will suppos that all thi happen veri rapidly, 
and that the train wa still go at so slow a pace that it wa not 
difficult for them to leav it. A woman might leav a train go at 
eight mile an hour. As a matter of fact, we know that thi woman did 
do so. 

"and now we have to fit in the man in the smoke carriage. presum 
that we have, up to thi point, reconstruct the tragedi correctly, we 
shall find noth in thi other man to caus us to reconsid our 
conclusions. accord to my theory, thi man saw the young fellow 
cross from one train to the other, saw him open the door, heard the 
pistol-shot, saw the two fugit spring out on to the line, realiz 
that murder had been done, and sprang out himself in pursuit. whi he 
ha never been heard of since--wheth he met hi own death in the 
pursuit, or whether, as is more likely, he wa made to realiz that it 
wa not a case for hi interference--i a detail which we have at 
present no mean of explaining. I acknowledg that there are some 
difficulti in the way. At first sight, it might seem improb that 
at such a moment a murder would burden himself in hi flight with a 
brown leather bag. My answer is that he wa well awar that if the bag 
were found hi ident would be established. It wa absolut 
necessari for him to take it with him. My theori stand or fall upon 
one point, and I call upon the railway compani to make strict inquiri 
as to whether a ticket wa found unclaim in the local train through 
harrow and king' langley upon the 18th of march. If such a ticket 
were found my case is proved. If not, my theori may still be the 
correct one, for it is conceiv either that he travel without a 
ticket or that hi ticket wa lost." 

To thi elabor and plausibl hypothesi the answer of the polic and 
of the compani was, first, that no such ticket wa found; secondly, 
that the slow train would never run parallel to the express; and, 
thirdly, that the local train had been stationari in king' langley 
station when the express, go at fifti mile an hour, had flash 
past it. So perish the onli satisfi explanation, and five year 
have elaps without suppli a new one. now, at last, there come a 
statement which cover all the facts, and which must be regard as 
authentic. It took the shape of a letter date from new york, and 
address to the same crimin investig whose theori I have quoted. 
It is given here in extenso, with the except of the two open 
paragraphs, which are person in their nature: 

"you'll excus me if i'm not veri free with names. there' less reason 
now than there wa five year ago when mother wa still living. but 
for all that, I had rather cover up our track all I can. but I owe 
you an explanation, for if your idea of it wa wrong, it wa a mighti 
ingeni one all the same. i'll have to go back a littl so as you 
may understand all about it. 

"mi peopl came from bucks, england, and emigr to the state in the 
earli fifties. they settl in rochester, in the state of new york, 
where my father ran a larg dri good store. there were onli two sons: 
myself, james, and my brother, edward. I wa ten year older than my 
brother, and after my father die I sort of took the place of a father 
to him, as an elder brother would. He wa a bright, spirit boy, and 
just one of the most beauti creatur that ever lived. but there 
wa alway a soft spot in him, and it wa like mould in cheese, for it 
spread and spread, and noth that you could do would stop it. mother 
saw it just as clearli as I did, but she went on spoil him all the 
same, for he had such a way with him that you could refus him nothing. 
I did all I could to hold him in, and he hate me for my pains. 

"at last he fairli got hi head, and noth that we could do would 
stop him. He got off into new york, and went rapidli from bad to 
worse. At first he wa onli fast, and then he wa criminal; and then, 
at the end of a year or two, he wa one of the most notori young 
crook in the city. He had form a friendship with sparrow maccoy, 
who wa at the head of hi profess as a bunco-steerer, green 
goodsman and gener rascal. they took to card-sharping, and frequent 
some of the best hotel in new york. My brother wa an excel actor 
(he might have made an honest name for himself if he had chosen), and 
he would take the part of a young englishman of title, of a simpl lad 
from the west, or of a colleg undergraduate, whichev suit sparrow 
maccoy' purpose. and then one day he dress himself as a girl, and 
he carri it off so well, and made himself such a valuabl decoy, that 
it wa their favourit game afterwards. they had made it right with 
tammani and with the police, so it seem as if noth could ever stop 
them, for those were in the day befor the lexow commission, and if 
you onli had a pull, you could do pretti nearli everyth you wanted. 

"and noth would have stop them if they had onli stuck to card 
and new york, but they must need come up rochest way, and forg a 
name upon a cheque. It wa my brother that did it, though everyon 
knew that it wa under the influenc of sparrow maccoy. I bought up 
that cheque, and a pretti sum it cost me. then I went to my brother, 
laid it befor him on the table, and swore to him that I would 
prosecut if he did not clear out of the country. At first he simpli 
laughed. I could not prosecute, he said, without break our mother' 
heart, and he knew that I would not do that. I made him understand, 
however, that our mother' heart wa be broken in ani case, and that 
I had set firm on the point that I would rather see him in rochest 
gaol than in a new york hotel. So at last he gave in, and he made me a 
solemn promis that he would see sparrow maccoy no more, that he would 
go to europe, and that he would turn hi hand to ani honest trade that 
I help him to get. I took him down right away to an old famili 
friend, joe willson, who is an export of american watch and clocks, 
and I got him to give edward an agenc in london, with a small salari 
and a 15 per cent commiss on all business. hi manner and 
appear were so good that he won the old man over at once, and 
within a week he wa sent off to london with a case full of samples. 

"it seem to me that thi busi of the chequ had realli given my 
brother a fright, and that there wa some chanc of hi settl down 
into an honest line of life. My mother had spoken with him, and what 
she said had touch him, for she had alway been the best of mother 
to him and he had been the great sorrow of her life. but I knew that 
thi man sparrow maccoy had a great influenc over edward and my chanc 
of keep the lad straight lay in break the connect between 
them. I had a friend in the new york detect force, and through him 
I kept a watch upon maccoy. when, within a fortnight of my brother' 
sailing, I heard that maccoy had taken a berth in the etruria, I wa as 
certain as if he had told me that he wa go over to england for the 
purpos of coax edward back again into the way that he had left. 
In an instant I had resolv to go also, and to pit my influenc 
against maccoy's. I knew it wa a lose fight, but I thought, and my 
mother thought, that it wa my duty. We pass the last night togeth 
in prayer for my success, and she gave me her own testament that my 
father had given her on the day of their marriag in the old country, 
so that I might alway wear it next my heart. 

"I wa a fellow-traveller, on the steamship, with sparrow maccoy, and 
at least I had the satisfact of spoil hi littl game for the 
voyage. the veri first night I went into the smoking-room, and found 
him at the head of a card-table, with a half a dozen young fellow who 
were carri their full purs and their empti skull over to europe. 
He wa settl down for hi harvest, and a rich one it would have 
been. but I soon chang all that. 

"'gentlemen,' said I, 'are you awar whom you are play with?' 

"'what' that to you? you mind your own business!' said he, with an 
oath. 

"'who is it, anyway?' ask one of the dudes. 

"'he' sparrow maccoy, the most notori card-sharp in the states.' 

"up he jump with a bottl in hi hand, but he rememb that he wa 
under the flag of the effet old country, where law and order run, and 
tammani ha no pull. gaol and the gallow wait for violenc and 
murder, and there' no slip out by the back door on board an ocean 
liner. 

"'prove your words, you----!' said he. 

"'i will!' said I. 'if you will turn up your right shirt-sleev to the 
shoulder, I will either prove my word or I will eat them.' 

"he turn white and said not a word. you see, I knew someth of hi 
ways, and I wa awar of that part of the mechan which he and all 
such sharper use consist of an elast down the arm with a clip just 
abov the wrist. It is by mean of thi clip that they withdraw from 
their hand the card which they do not want, while they substitut 
other card from anoth hide place. I reckon on it be there, 
and it was. He curs me, slunk out of the saloon, and wa hardli seen 
again dure the voyage. for once, at ani rate, I got level with 
mister sparrow maccoy. 

"but he soon had hi reveng upon me, for when it came to influenc 
my brother he outweigh me everi time. edward had kept himself 
straight in london for the first few weeks, and had done some busi 
with hi american watches, until thi villain came across hi path onc 
more. I did my best, but the best wa littl enough. the next thing I 
heard there had been a scandal at one of the northumberland avenu 
hotels: a travel had been fleec of a larg sum by two confeder 
card-sharpers, and the matter wa in the hand of scotland yard. the 
first I learn of it wa in the even paper, and I wa at onc 
certain that my brother and maccoy were back at their old games. I 
hurri at onc to edward' lodgings. they told me that he and a tall 
gentleman (whom I recogn as maccoy) had gone off together, and that 
he had left the lodg and taken hi thing with him. the landladi 
had heard them give sever direct to the cabman, end with 
euston station, and she had accident overheard the tall gentleman 
say someth about manchester. she believ that that wa their 
destination. 

"A glanc at the time-t show me that the most like train wa at 
five, though there wa anoth at 4:35 which they might have caught. I 
had onli time to get the later one, but found no sign of them either at 
the depot or in the train. they must have gone on by the earlier one, 
so I determin to follow them to manchest and search for them in the 
hotel there. one last appeal to my brother by all that he owe to my 
mother might even now be the salvat of him. My nerv were 
overstrung, and I lit a cigar to steadi them. At that moment, just as 
the train wa move off, the door of my compart wa flung open, 
and there were maccoy and my brother on the platform. 

"they were both disguised, and with good reason, for they knew that the 
london polic were after them. maccoy had a great astrakhan collar 
drawn up, so that onli hi eye and nose were showing. My brother wa 
dress like a woman, with a black veil half down hi face, but of 
cours it did not deceiv me for an instant, nor would it have done so 
even if I had not known that he had often use such a dress before. I 
start up, and as I did so maccoy recogn me. He said something, 
the conductor slam the door, and they were shown into the next 
compartment. I tri to stop the train so as to follow them, but the 
wheel were alreadi moving, and it wa too late. 

"when we stop at willesden, I instantli chang my carriage. It 
appear that I wa not seen to do so, which is not surprising, as the 
station wa crowd with people. maccoy, of course, wa expect me, 
and he had spent the time between euston and willesden in say all he 
could to harden my brother' heart and set him against me. that is 
what I fancy, for I had never found him so imposs to soften or to 
move. I tri thi way and I tri that; I pictur hi futur in an 
english gaol; I describ the sorrow of hi mother when I came back 
with the news; I said everyth to touch hi heart, but all to no 
purpose. He sat there with a fix sneer upon hi handsom face, while 
everi now and then sparrow maccoy would throw in a taunt at me, or some 
word of encourag to hold my brother to hi resolutions. 

"'whi don't you run a sunday-school?' he would say to me, and then, in 
the same breath: 'he think you have no will of your own. He think 
you are just the babi brother and that he can lead you where he likes. 
he' onli just find out that you are a man as well as he.' 

"it wa those word of hi which set me talk bitterly. We had left 
willesden, you understand, for all thi took some time. My temper got 
the better of me, and for the first time in my life I let my brother 
see the rough side of me. perhap it would have been better had I done 
so earlier and more often. 

"'a man!' said I. 'well, i'm glad to have your friend' assur of 
it, for no one would suspect it to see you like a boarding-school 
missy. I don't suppos in all thi countri there is a more 
contemptible-look creatur than you are as you sit there with that 
dolli pinafor upon you.' He colour up at that, for he wa a vain 
man, and he winc from ridicule. 

"'it' onli a dust-cloak,' said he, and he slip it off. 'one ha to 
throw the copper off one' scent, and I had no other way to do it.' 
He took hi toqu off with the veil attached, and he put both it and 
the cloak into hi brown bag. 'anyway, I don't need to wear it until 
the conductor come round,' said he. 

"'nor then, either,' said I, and take the bag I slung it with all my 
forc out of the window. 'now,' said I, 'you'll never make a mari jane 
of yourself while I can help it. If noth but that disguis stand 
between you and a gaol, then to gaol you shall go.' 

"that wa the way to manag him. I felt my advantag at once. hi 
suppl natur wa one which yield to rough far more readili than 
to entreaty. He flush with shame, and hi eye fill with tears. 
but maccoy saw my advantag also, and wa determin that I should not 
pursu it. 

"'he' my pard, and you shall not bulli him,' he cried. 

"'he' my brother, and you shall not ruin him,' said I. 'I believ a 
spell of prison is the veri best way of keep you apart, and you 
shall have it, or it will be no fault of mine.' 

"'oh, you would squeal, would you?' he cried, and in an instant he 
whip out hi revolver. I sprang for hi hand, but saw that I wa 
too late, and jump aside. At the same instant he fired, and the 
bullet which would have struck me pass through the heart of my 
unfortun brother. 

"he drop without a groan upon the floor of the compartment, and 
maccoy and I, equal horrified, knelt at each side of him, tri to 
bring back some sign of life. maccoy still held the load revolv 
in hi hand, but hi anger against me and my resent toward him had 
both for the moment been swallow up in thi sudden tragedy. It wa 
he who first realiz the situation. the train wa for some reason 
go veri slowli at the moment, and he saw hi opportun for escape. 
In an instant he had the door open, but I wa as quick as he, and 
jump upon him the two of us fell off the footboard and roll in 
each other' arm down a steep embankment. At the bottom I struck my 
head against a stone, and I rememb noth more. when I came to 
myself I wa lie among some low bushes, not far from the railroad 
track, and somebodi wa bath my head with a wet handkerchief. It 
wa sparrow maccoy. 

"'i guess I couldn't leav you,' said he. 'I didn't want to have the 
blood of two of you on my hand in one day. you love your brother, 
i'v no doubt; but you didn't love him a cent more than I love him, 
though you'll say that I took a queer way to show it. anyhow, it seem 
a mighti empti world now that he is gone, and I don't care a 
continent whether you give me over to the hangman or not.' 

"he had turn hi ankl in the fall, and there we sat, he with hi 
useless foot, and I with my throb head, and we talk and talk 
until gradual my bitter began to soften and to turn into 
someth like sympathy. what wa the use of reveng hi death upon 
a man who wa as much stricken by that death as I was? and then, as my 
wit gradual returned, I began to realiz also that I could do 
noth against maccoy which would not recoil upon my mother and 
myself. how could we convict him without a full account of my 
brother' career be made public--th veri thing which of all other 
we wish to avoid? It wa realli as much our interest as hi to cover 
the matter up, and from be an aveng of crime I found myself 
chang to a conspir against justice. the place in which we found 
ourselv wa one of those pheasant preserv which are so common in 
the old country, and as we grope our way through it I found myself 
consult the slayer of my brother as to how far it would be possibl 
to hush it up. 

"I soon realiz from what he said that unless there were some paper 
of which we knew noth in my brother' pockets, there wa realli no 
possibl mean by which the polic could identifi him or learn how he 
had got there. hi ticket wa in maccoy' pocket, and so wa the 
ticket for some baggag which they had left at the depot. like most 
americans, he had found it cheaper and easier to buy an outfit in 
london than to bring one from new york, so that all hi linen and 
cloth were new and unmarked. the bag, contain the dust-cloak, 
which I had thrown out of the window, may have fallen among some 
brambl patch where it is still concealed, or may have been carri off 
by some tramp, or may have come into the possess of the police, who 
kept the incid to themselves. anyhow, I have seen noth about it 
in the london papers. As to the watches, they were a select from 
those which had been intrust to him for busi purposes. It may 
have been for the same busi purpos that he wa take them to 
manchester, but--well, it' too late to enter into that. 

"I don't blame the polic for be at fault. I don't see how it could 
have been otherwise. there wa just one littl clue that they might 
have follow up, but it wa a small one. I mean that small, circular 
mirror which wa found in my brother' pocket. It isn't a veri common 
thing for a young man to carri about with him, is it? but a gambler 
might have told you what such a mirror may mean to a card-sharper. If 
you sit back a littl from the table, and lay the mirror, face upwards, 
upon your lap, you can see, as you deal, everi card that you give to 
your adversary. It is not hard to say whether you see a man or rais 
him when you know hi card as well as your own. It wa as much a part 
of a sharper' outfit as the elast clip upon sparrow maccoy' arm. 
take that, in connect with the recent fraud at the hotels, the 
polic might have got hold of one end of the string. 

"I don't think there is much more for me to explain. We got to a 
villag call amersham that night in the charact of two gentlemen 
upon a walk tour, and afterward we made our way quietli to london, 
whenc maccoy went on to cairo and I return to new york. My mother 
die six month afterwards, and I am glad to say that to the day of her 
death she never knew what happened. she wa alway under the delus 
that edward wa earn an honest live in london, and I never had the 
heart to tell her the truth. He never wrote; but, then, he never did 
write at ani time, so that made no difference. hi name wa the last 
upon her lips. 

"there' just one other thing that I have to ask you, sir, and I should 
take it as a kind return for all thi explanation, if you could do it 
for me. you rememb that testament that wa pick up. I alway 
carri it in my insid pocket, and it must have come out in my fall. 
I valu it veri highly, for it wa the famili book with my birth and my 
brother' mark by my father in the begin of it. I wish you would 
appli at the proper place and have it sent to me. It can be of no 
possibl valu to anyon else. If you address it to X, bassano' 
library, broadway, new york, it is sure to come to hand." 



the japan box 

It wa a curiou thing, said the privat tutor; one of those grotesqu 
and whimsic incid which occur to one as one goe through life. I 
lost the best situat which I am ever like to have through it. but 
I am glad that I went to thorp place, for I gained--well, as I tell 
you the stori you will learn what I gained. 

I don't know whether you are familiar with that part of the midland 
which is drain by the avon. It is the most english part of england. 
shakespeare, the flower of the whole race, wa born right in the middl 
of it. It is a land of roll pastures, rise in higher fold to the 
westwards, until they swell into the malvern hills. there are no 
towns, but numer villages, each with it grey norman church. you 
have left the brick of the southern and eastern counti behind you, 
and everyth is stone--ston for the walls, and lichen slab of 
stone for the roofs. It is all grim and solid and massive, as befit 
the heart of a great nation. 

It wa in the middl of thi country, not veri far from evesham, that 
sir john bollamor live in the old ancestr home of thorp place, and 
thither it wa that I came to teach hi two littl sons. sir john wa 
a widower--hi wife had die three year before--and he had been left 
with these two lad age eight and ten, and one dear littl girl of 
seven. miss witherton, who is now my wife, wa gover to thi 
littl girl. I wa tutor to the two boys. could there be a more 
obviou prelud to an engagement? she govern me now, and I tutor two 
littl boy of our own. but, there--i have alreadi reveal what it 
wa which I gain in thorp place! 

It wa a very, veri old house, incred old--pre-norman, some of 
it--and the bollamor claim to have live in that situat sinc 
long befor the conquest. It struck a chill to my heart when first I 
came there, those enorm thick grey walls, the rude crumbl 
stones, the smell as from a sick anim which exhal from the rot 
plaster of the age building. but the modern wing wa bright and the 
garden wa well kept. No hous could be dismal which had a pretti girl 
insid it and such a show of rose in front. 

apart from a veri complet staff of servant there were onli four of us 
in the household. these were miss witherton, who wa at that time 
four-and-twenti and as pretty--well, as pretti as mrs. colmor is 
now--myself, frank colmore, age thirty, mrs. stevens, the housekeeper, 
a dry, silent woman, and mr. richards, a tall military-look man, who 
act as steward to the bollamor estates. We four alway had our 
meal together, but sir john had hi usual alon in the library. 
sometim he join us at dinner, but on the whole we were just as glad 
when he did not. 

for he wa a veri formid person. imagin a man six feet three 
inch in height, majest built, with a high-nosed, aristocrat 
face, brindl hair, shaggi eyebrows, a small, point mephistophelian 
beard, and line upon hi brow and round hi eye as deep as if they 
had been carv with a penknife. He had grey eyes, weary, 
hopeless-look eyes, proud and yet pathetic, eye which claim your 
piti and yet dare you to show it. hi back wa round with study, 
but otherwis he wa as fine a look man of hi age--five-and-fifti 
perhaps--a ani woman would wish to look upon. 

but hi presenc wa not a cheer one. He wa alway courteous, 
alway refined, but singularli silent and retiring. I have never live 
so long with ani man and known so littl of him. If he were indoor he 
spent hi time either in hi own small studi in the eastern tower, or 
in the librari in the modern wing. So regular wa hi routin that one 
could alway say at ani hour exactli where he would be. twice in the 
day he would visit hi study, onc after breakfast, and onc about ten 
at night. you might set your watch by the slam of the heavi door. for 
the rest of the day he would be in hi library--sav that for an hour 
or two in the afternoon he would take a walk or a ride, which wa 
solitari like the rest of hi existence. He love hi children, and 
wa keenli interest in the progress of their studies, but they were a 
littl awe by the silent, shaggy-brow figure, and they avoid him 
as much as they could. indeed, we all did that. 

It wa some time befor I came to know anyth about the circumst 
of sir john bollamore' life, for mrs. stevens, the housekeeper, and 
mr. richards, the land-steward, were too loyal to talk easili of their 
employer' affairs. As to the governess, she knew no more than I did, 
and our common interest wa one of the caus which drew us together. 
At last, however, an incid occur which led to a closer 
acquaint with mr. richard and a fuller knowledg of the life of 
the man whom I served. 

the immedi caus of thi wa no less than the fall of master 
percy, the youngest of my pupils, into the mill-race, with immin 
danger both to hi life and to mine, sinc I had to risk myself in 
order to save him. drip and exhausted--for I wa far more spent 
than the child--i wa make for my room when sir john, who had heard 
the hubbub, open the door of hi littl studi and ask me what wa 
the matter. I told him of the accident, but assur him that hi child 
wa in no danger, while he listen with a rugged, immobil face, which 
express in it intens eye and tighten lip all the emot which 
he tri to conceal. 

"one moment! step in here! let me have the details!" said he, turn 
back through the open door. 

and so I found myself within that littl sanctum, insid which, as I 
afterward learned, no other foot had for three year been set save 
that of the old servant who clean it out. It wa a round room, 
conform to the shape of the tower in which it wa situated, with a 
low ceiling, a singl narrow, ivy-wreath window, and the simplest of 
furniture. An old carpet, a singl chair, a deal table, and a small 
shelf of book made up the whole contents. On the tabl stood a 
full-length photograph of a woman--i took no particular notic of the 
features, but I remember, that a certain graciou gentl wa the 
prevail impression. besid it were a larg black japan box and 
one or two bundl of letter or paper fasten togeth with elast 
bands. 

our interview wa a short one, for sir john bollamor perceiv that I 
wa soaked, and that I should chang without delay. the incid led, 
however, to an instruct talk with richards, the agent, who had never 
penetr into the chamber which chanc had open to me. that veri 
afternoon he came to me, all curiosity, and walk up and down the 
garden path with me, while my two charg play tenni upon the lawn 
besid us. 

"you hardli realiz the except which ha been made in your favour," 
said he. "that room ha been kept such a mystery, and sir john' 
visit to it have been so regular and consistent, that an almost 
superstiti feel ha arisen about it in the household. I assur 
you that if I were to repeat to you the tale which are fli about, 
tale of mysteri visitor there, and of voic overheard by the 
servants, you might suspect that sir john had relaps into hi old 
ways." 

"whi do you say relapsed?" I asked. 

He look at me in surprise. 

"i it possible," said he, "that sir john bollamore' previou histori 
is unknown to you?" 

"absolutely." 

"you astound me. I thought that everi man in england knew someth of 
hi antecedents. I should not mention the matter if it were not that 
you are now one of ourselves, and that the fact might come to your 
ear in some harsher form if I were silent upon them. I alway took it 
for grant that you knew that you were in the servic of 'devil' 
bollamore." 

"but whi 'devil'?" I asked. 

"ah, you are young and the world move fast, but twenti year ago the 
name of 'devil' bollamor wa one of the best known in london. He wa 
the leader of the fastest set, bruiser, driver, gambler, drunkard--a 
surviv of the old type, and as bad as the worst of them." 

I stare at him in amazement. 

"what!" I cried, "that quiet, studious, sad-fac man?" 

"the greatest rip and debauche in england! all between ourselves, 
colmore. but you understand now what I mean when I say that a woman' 
voic in hi room might even now give rise to suspicions." 

"but what can have chang him so?" 

"littl beryl clare, when she took the risk of becom hi wife. that 
wa the turn point. He had got so far that hi own fast set had 
thrown him over. there is a world of difference, you know, between a 
man who drink and a drunkard. they all drink, but they taboo a 
drunkard. He had becom a slave to it--hopeless and helpless. then 
she step in, saw the possibl of a fine man in the wreck, took 
her chanc in marri him though she might have had the pick of a 
dozen, and, by devot her life to it, brought him back to manhood and 
decency. you have observ that no liquor is ever kept in the house. 
there never ha been ani sinc her foot cross it threshold. A drop 
of it would be like blood to a tiger even now." 

"then her influenc still hold him?" 

"that is the wonder of it. when she die three year ago, we all 
expect and fear that he would fall back into hi old ways. she 
fear it herself, and the thought gave a terror to death, for she wa 
like a guardian angel to that man, and live onli for the one purpose. 
By the way, did you see a black japan box in hi room?" 

"yes." 

"I fanci it contain her letters. If ever he ha occas to be away, 
if onli for a singl night, he invari take hi black japan box 
with him. well, well, colmore, perhap I have told you rather more 
than I should, but I shall expect you to reciproc if anyth of 
interest should come to your knowledge." 

I could see that the worthi man wa consum with curios and just a 
littl piqu that I, the newcomer, should have been the first to 
penetr into the untrodden chamber. but the fact rais me in hi 
esteem, and from that time onward I found myself upon more 
confidenti term with him. 

and now the silent and majest figur of my employ becam an object 
of greater interest to me. I began to understand that strang human 
look in hi eyes, those deep line upon hi care-worn face. He wa a 
man who wa fight a ceaseless battle, hold at arm' length, from 
morn till night, a horribl adversari who wa forev tri to 
close with him--an adversari which would destroy him bodi and soul 
could it but fix it claw onc more upon him. As I watch the grim, 
round-back figur pace the corridor or walk in the garden, thi 
immin danger seem to take bodili shape, and I could almost fanci 
that I saw thi most loathsom and danger of all the fiend 
crouch close in hi veri shadow, like a half-cow beast which 
slink besid it keeper, readi at ani unguard moment to spring at 
hi throat. and the dead woman, the woman who had spent her life in 
ward off thi danger, took shape also to my imagination, and I saw 
her as a shadowi but beauti presenc which interven for ever with 
arm uplift to screen the man whom she loved. 

In some subtl way he divin the sympathi which I had for him, and he 
show in hi own silent fashion that he appreci it. He even 
invit me onc to share hi afternoon walk, and although no word 
pass between us on thi occasion, it wa a mark of confid which 
he had never shown to anyon before. He ask me also to index hi 
librari (it wa one of the best privat librari in england), and I 
spent mani hour in the even in hi presence, if not in hi society, 
he read at hi desk and I sit in a recess by the window reduc 
to order the chao which exist among hi books. In spite of these 
close relat I wa never again ask to enter the chamber in the 
turret. 

and then came my revuls of feeling. A singl incid chang all 
my sympathi to loathing, and made me realiz that my employ still 
remain all that he had ever been, with the addit vice of 
hypocrisy. what happen wa as follows. 

one even miss witherton had gone down to broadway, the neighbour 
village, to sing at a concert for some charity, and I, accord to my 
promise, had walk over to escort her back. the drive sweep round 
under the eastern turret, and I observ as I pass that the light wa 
lit in the circular room. It wa a summer evening, and the window, 
which wa a littl higher than our heads, wa open. We were, as it 
happened, engross in our own convers at the moment and we had 
paus upon the lawn which skirt the old turret, when suddenli 
someth broke in upon our talk and turn our thought away from our 
own affairs. 

It wa a voice--th voic undoubtedli of a woman. It wa low--so low 
that it wa onli in that still night air that we could have heard it, 
but, hush as it was, there wa no mistak it feminin timbre. It 
spoke hurriedly, gaspingli for a few sentences, and then wa silent--a 
piteous, breathless, implor sort of voice. miss witherton and I 
stood for an instant stare at each other. then we walk quickli in 
the direct of the hall-door. 

"it came through the window," I said. 

"we must not play the part of eavesdroppers," she answered. "we must 
forget that we have ever heard it." 

there wa an absenc of surpris in her manner which suggest a new 
idea to me. 

"you have heard it before," I cried. 

"I could not help it. My own room is higher up on the same turret. It 
ha happen frequently." 

"who can the woman be?" 

"I have no idea. I had rather not discuss it." 

her voic wa enough to show me what she thought. but grant that 
our employ led a doubl and dubiou life, who could she be, thi 
mysteri woman who kept him compani in the old tower? I knew from my 
own inspect how bleak and bare a room it was. she certainli did not 
live there. but in that case where did she come from? It could not be 
anyon of the household. they were all under the vigil eye of mrs. 
stevens. the visitor must come from without. but how? 

and then suddenli I rememb how ancient thi build was, and how 
probabl that some mediaev passag exist in it. there is hardli an 
old castl without one. the mysteri room wa the basement of the 
turret, so that if there were anyth of the sort it would open 
through the floor. there were numer cottag in the immedi 
vicinity. the other end of the secret passag might lie among some 
tangl of brambl in the neighbour copse. I said noth to anyone, 
but I felt that the secret of my employ lay within my power. 

and the more convinc I wa of thi the more I marvel at the manner 
in which he conceal hi true nature. often as I watch hi auster 
figure, I ask myself if it were inde possibl that such a man 
should be live thi doubl life, and I tri to persuad myself that 
my suspicion might after all prove to be ill-founded. but there wa 
the femal voice, there wa the secret nightli rendezv in the 
turret-chamber--how could such fact admit of an innoc 
interpretation. I conceiv a horror of the man. I wa fill with 
loath at hi deep, consist hypocrisy. 

onli onc dure all those month did I ever see him without that sad 
but impass mask which he usual present toward hi fellow-man. 
for an instant I caught a glimps of those volcan fire which he had 
damp down so long. the occas wa an unworthi one, for the object 
of hi wrath wa none other than the age charwoman whom I have alreadi 
mention as be the one person who wa allow within hi mysteri 
chamber. I wa pass the corridor which led to the turret--for my 
own room lay in that direction--when I heard a sudden, startl scream, 
and merg in it the husky, growl note of a man who is inarticul 
with passion. It wa the snarl of a furiou wild beast. then I heard 
hi voic thrill with anger. "you would dare!" he cried. "you would 
dare to disobey my directions!" An instant later the charwoman pass 
me, fli down the passage, white-fac and tremulous, while the 
terribl voic thunder behind her. "go to mrs. steven for your 
money! never set foot in thorp place again!" consum with 
curiosity, I could not help follow the woman, and found her round 
the corner lean against the wall and palpit like a frighten 
rabbit. 

"what is the matter, mrs. brown?" I asked. 

"it' master!" she gasped. "oh, 'ow 'e frighten me! If you had seen 
'i eyes, mr. colmore, sir. I thought 'e would 'ave been the death of 
me." 

"but what had you done?" 

"done, sir! nothing. At least noth to make so much of. just laid 
my 'and on that black box of 'is--'adn't even open it, when in 'e 
came and you 'eard the way 'e went on. i'v lost my place, and glad I 
am of it, for I would never trust myself within reach of 'im again." 

So it wa the japan box which wa the caus of thi outburst--th 
box from which he would never permit himself to be separated. what wa 
the connection, or wa there ani connect between thi and the secret 
visit of the ladi whose voic I had overheard? sir john bollamore' 
wrath wa endur as well as fiery, for from that day mrs. brown, the 
charwoman, vanish from our ken, and thorp place knew her no more. 

and now I wish to tell you the singular chanc which solv all these 
strang question and put my employer' secret in my possession. the 
stori may leav you with some linger doubt as to whether my 
curios did not get the better of my honour, and whether I did not 
condescend to play the spy. If you choos to think so I cannot help 
it, but can onli assur you that, improb as it may appear, the 
matter came about exactli as I describ it. 

the first stage in thi denouement wa that the small room in the 
turret becam uninhabitable. thi occur through the fall of the 
worm-eaten oaken beam which support the ceiling. rotten with age, it 
snap in the middl one morning, and brought down a quantiti of 
plaster with it. fortun sir john wa not in the room at the time. 
hi preciou box wa rescu from amongst the debri and brought into 
the library, where, henceforward, it wa lock within hi bureau. sir 
john took no step to repair the damage, and I never had an opportun 
of search for that secret passage, the exist of which I had 
surmised. As to the lady, I had thought that thi would have brought 
her visit to an end, had I not one even heard mr. richard ask 
mrs. steven who the woman wa whom he had overheard talk to sir 
john in the library. I could not catch her reply, but I saw from her 
manner that it wa not the first time that she had had to answer or 
avoid the same question. 

"you'v heard the voice, colmore?" said the agent. 

I confess that I had. 

"and what do you think of it?" 

I shrug my shoulders, and remark that it wa no busi of mine. 

"come, come, you are just as curiou as ani of us. Is it a woman or 
not?" 

"it is certainli a woman." 

"which room did you hear it from?" 

"from the turret-room, befor the ceil fell." 

"but I heard it from the librari onli last night. I pass the door 
as I wa go to bed, and I heard someth wail and pray just 
as plainli as I hear you. It may be a woman----" 

"why, what els could it be?" 

He look at me hard. 

"there are more thing in heaven and earth," said he. "if it is a 
woman, how doe she get there?" 

"I don't know." 

"no, nor I. but if it is the other thing--but there, for a practic 
busi man at the end of the nineteenth centuri thi is rather a 
ridicul line of conversation." He turn away, but I saw that he 
felt even more than he had said. To all the old ghost stori of 
thorp place a new one wa be ad befor our veri eyes. It may by 
thi time have taken it perman place, for though an explan 
came to me, it never reach the others. 

and my explan came in thi way. I had suffer a sleepless night 
from neuralgia, and about midday I had taken a heavi dose of chlorodyn 
to allevi the pain. At that time I wa finish the index of 
sir john bollamore' library, and it wa my custom to work there from 
five till seven. On thi particular day I struggl against the doubl 
effect of my bad night and the narcotic. I have alreadi mention that 
there wa a recess in the library, and in thi it wa my habit to work. 
I settl down steadili to my task, but my weari overcam me and, 
fall back upon the settee, I drop into a heavi sleep. 

how long I slept I do not know, but it wa quit dark when I awoke. 
confus by the chlorodyn which I had taken, I lay motionless in a 
semi-consci state. the great room with it high wall cover with 
book loom darkli all round me. A dim radianc from the moonlight 
came through the farther window, and against thi lighter background I 
saw that sir john bollamor wa sit at hi studi table. hi 
well-set head and clearli cut profil were sharpli outlin against the 
glimmer squar behind him. He bent as I watch him, and I heard 
the sharp turn of a key and the rasp of metal upon metal. As if 
in a dream I wa vagu consciou that thi wa the japan box which 
stood in front of him, and that he had drawn someth out of it, 
someth squat and uncouth, which now lay befor him upon the table. 
I never realized--it never occur to my bemuddl and torpid brain 
that I wa intrud upon hi privacy, that he imagin himself to be 
alon in the room. and then, just as it rush upon my horrifi 
perceptions, and I had half risen to announc my presence, I heard a 
strange, crisp, metal clicking, and then the voice. 

yes, it wa a woman' voice; there could not be a doubt of it. but a 
voic so charg with entreati and with yearn love, that it will 
ring for ever in my ears. It came with a curiou faraway tinkle, but 
everi word wa clear, though faint--veri faint, for they were the last 
word of a die woman. 

"I am not realli gone, john," said the thin, gasp voice. "I am here 
at your veri elbow, and shall be until we meet onc more. I die happi 
to think that morn and night you will hear my voice. oh, john, be 
strong, be strong, until we meet again." 

I say that I had risen in order to announc my presence, but I could 
not do so while the voic wa sounding. I could onli remain half 
lying, half sitting, paralysed, astounded, listen to those yearn 
distant music words. and he--h wa so absorb that even if I had 
spoken he might not have heard me. but with the silenc of the voic 
came my half articul apolog and explanations. He sprang across 
the room, switch on the electr light, and in it white glare I saw 
him, hi eye gleam with anger, hi face twist with passion, as 
the hapless charwoman may have seen him week before. 

"mr. colmore!" he cried. "you here! what is the mean of this, sir?" 

with halt word I explain it all, my neuralgia, the narcotic, my 
luckless sleep and singular awakening. As he listen the glow of 
anger fade from hi face, and the sad, impass mask close onc more 
over hi features. 

"mi secret is yours, mr. colmore," said he. "I have onli myself to 
blame for relax my precautions. half confid are wors than no 
confidences, and so you may know all sinc you know so much. the stori 
may go where you will when I have pass away, but until then I reli 
upon your sens of honour that no human soul shall hear it from your 
lips. I am proud still--god help me!--or, at least, I am proud enough 
to resent that piti which thi stori would draw upon me. I have smile 
at envy, and disregard hatred, but piti is more than I can tolerate. 

"you have heard the sourc from which the voic comes--that voic which 
has, as I understand, excit so much curios in my household. I am 
awar of the rumour to which it ha given rise. these speculations, 
whether scandal or superstitious, are such as I can disregard and 
forgive. what I should never forgiv would be a disloy spi and 
eavesdrop in order to satisfi an illicit curiosity. but of that, 
mr. colmore, I acquit you. 

"when I wa a young man, sir, mani year younger than you are now, I 
wa launch upon town without a friend or adviser, and with a purs 
which brought onli too mani fals friend and fals advis to my 
side. I drank deepli of the wine of life--if there is a man live who 
ha drunk more deepli he is not a man whom I envy. My purs suffered, 
my charact suffered, my constitut suffered, stimul becam a 
necess to me, I wa a creatur from whom my memori recoils. and it 
wa at that time, the time of my blackest degradation, that god sent 
into my life the gentlest, sweetest spirit that ever descend as a 
minist angel from above. she love me, broken as I was, love me, 
and spent her life in make a man onc more of that which had degrad 
itself to the level of the beasts. 

"but a fell diseas struck her, and she wither away befor my eyes. 
In the hour of her agoni it wa never of herself, of her own suffer 
and her own death that she thought. It wa all of me. the one pang 
which her fate brought to her wa the fear that when her influenc wa 
remov I should revert to that which I had been. It wa in vain that 
I made oath to her that no drop of wine would ever cross my lips. she 
knew onli too well the hold that the devil had upon me--sh who had 
striven so to loosen it--and it haunt her night and day the thought 
that my soul might again be within hi grip. 

"it wa from some friend' gossip of the sick room that she heard of 
thi invention--thi phonograph--and with the quick insight of a love 
woman she saw how she might use it for her ends. she sent me to london 
to procur the best which money could buy. with her die breath she 
gasp into it the word which have held me straight ever since. 
lone and broken, what els have I in all the world to uphold me? but 
it is enough. pleas god, I shall face her without shame when He is 
pleas to reunit us! that is my secret, mr. colmore, and whilst I 
live I leav it in your keeping." 



the black doctor 

bishop' cross is a small villag lie ten mile in a 
south-westerli direct from liverpool. here in the earli seventi 
there settl a doctor name aloysiu lana. noth wa known local 
either of hi anteced or of the reason which had prompt him to 
come to thi lancashir hamlet. two fact onli were certain about him; 
the one that he had gain hi medic qualif with some 
distinct at glasgow; the other that he came undoubtedli of a 
tropic race, and wa so dark that he might almost have had a strain 
of the indian in hi composition. hi predomin featur were, 
however, european, and he possess a state courtesi and carriag 
which suggest a spanish extraction. A swarthi skin, raven-black 
hair, and dark, sparkl eye under a pair of heavily-tuft brow 
made a strang contrast to the flaxen or chestnut rustic of england, 
and the newcom wa soon known as "the black doctor of bishop' 
crossing." At first it wa a term of ridicul and reproach; as the 
year went on it becam a titl of honour which wa familiar to the 
whole countryside, and extend far beyond the narrow confin of the 
village. 

for the newcom prove himself to be a capabl surgeon and an 
accomplish physician. the practic of that district had been in the 
hand of edward rowe, the son of sir william rowe, the liverpool 
consultant, but he had not inherit the talent of hi father, and dr. 
lana, with hi advantag of presenc and of manner, soon beat him out 
of the field. dr. lana' social success wa as rapid as hi 
professional. A remark surgic cure in the case of the hon. jame 
lowry, the second son of lord belton, wa the mean of introduc him 
to counti society, where he becam a favourit through the charm of hi 
convers and the eleg of hi manners. An absenc of 
anteced and of rel is sometim an aid rather than an 
impedi to social advancement, and the distinguish individu 
of the handsom doctor wa it own recommendation. 

hi patient had one fault--and one fault only--to find with him. He 
appear to be a confirm bachelor. thi wa the more remark 
sinc the hous which he occupi wa a larg one, and it wa known 
that hi success in practic had enabl him to save consider sums. 
At first the local matchmak were continu coupl hi name with 
one or other of the elig ladies, but as year pass and dr. lana 
remain unmarried, it came to be gener understood that for some 
reason he must remain a bachelor. some even went so far as to assert 
that he wa alreadi married, and that it wa in order to escap the 
consequ of an earli misalli that he had buri himself at 
bishop' crossing. and, then, just as the matchmak had final given 
him up in despair, hi engag wa suddenli announc to miss 
franc morton, of leigh hall. 

miss morton wa a young ladi who wa well known upon the country-side, 
her father, jame haldan morton, have been the squir of bishop' 
crossing. both her parent were, however, dead, and she live with her 
onli brother, arthur morton, who had inherit the famili estate. In 
person miss morton wa tall and stately, and she wa famou for her 
quick, impetu natur and for her strength of character. she met dr. 
lana at a garden-party, and a friendship, which quickli ripen into 
love, sprang up between them. noth could exceed their devot to 
each other. there wa some discrep in age, he be thirty-seven, 
and she twenty-four; but, save in that one respect, there wa no 
possibl object to be found with the match. the engag wa in 
february, and it wa arrang that the marriag should take place in 
august. 

upon the 3rd of june dr. lana receiv a letter from abroad. In a small 
villag the postmast is also in a posit to be the gossip-master, 
and mr. bankley, of bishop' crossing, had mani of the secret of hi 
neighbour in hi possession. Of thi particular letter he remark 
onli that it wa in a curiou envelope, that it wa in a man' 
handwriting, that the postscript wa bueno ayres, and the stamp of the 
argentin republic. It wa the first letter which he had ever known 
dr. lana to have from abroad and thi wa the reason whi hi attent 
wa particularli call to it befor he hand it to the local postman. 
It wa deliv by the even deliveri of that date. 

next morning--that is, upon the 4th of june--dr. lana call upon miss 
morton, and a long interview followed, from which he wa observ to 
return in a state of great agitation. miss morton remain in her room 
all that day, and her maid found her sever time in tears. In the 
cours of a week it wa an open secret to the whole villag that the 
engag wa at an end, that dr. lana had behav shame to the 
young lady, and that arthur morton, her brother, wa talk of 
horse-whip him. In what particular respect the doctor had behav 
badli wa unknown--som surmis one thing and some another; but it wa 
observed, and taken as the obviou sign of a guilti conscience, that he 
would go for mile round rather than pass the window of leigh hall, 
and that he gave up attend morn servic upon sunday where he 
might have met the young lady. there wa an advertis also in the 
lancet as to the sale of a practic which mention no names, but which 
wa thought by some to refer to bishop' crossing, and to mean that dr. 
lana wa think of abandon the scene of hi success. such wa the 
posit of affair when, upon the even of monday, june 21st, there 
came a fresh develop which chang what had been a mere villag 
scandal into a tragedi which arrest the attent of the whole 
nation. some detail is necessari to caus the fact of that even to 
present their full significance. 

the sole occup of the doctor' hous were hi housekeeper, an 
elderli and most respect woman, name martha woods, and a young 
servant--mari pilling. the coachman and the surgery-boy slept out. It 
wa the custom of the doctor to sit at night in hi study, which wa 
next the surgeri in the wing of the hous which wa farthest from the 
servants' quarters. thi side of the hous had a door of it own for 
the conveni of patients, so that it wa possibl for the doctor to 
admit and receiv a visitor there without the knowledg of anyone. As 
a matter of fact, when patient came late it wa quit usual for him to 
let them in and out by the surgeri entrance, for the maid and the 
housekeep were in the habit of retir early. 

On thi particular night martha wood went into the doctor' studi at 
half-past nine, and found him write at hi desk. she bade him good 
night, sent the maid to bed, and then occupi herself until a quarter 
to eleven in household matters. It wa strike eleven upon the hall 
clock when she went to her own room. she had been there about a quarter 
of an hour or twenti minut when she heard a cri or call, which 
appear to come from within the house. she wait some time, but it 
wa not repeated. much alarmed, for the sound wa loud and urgent, she 
put on a dressing-gown, and ran at the top of her speed to the doctor' 
study. 

"who' there?" cri a voice, as she tap at the door. 

"I am here, sir--mrs. woods." 

"I beg that you will leav me in peace. Go back to your room thi 
instant!" cri the voice, which was, to the best of her belief, that 
of her master. the tone wa so harsh and so unlik her master' usual 
manner, that she wa surpris and hurt. 

"I thought I heard you calling, sir," she explained, but no answer wa 
given to her. mrs. wood look at the clock as she return to her 
room, and it wa then half-past eleven. 

At some period between eleven and twelv (she could not be posit as 
to the exact hour) a patient call upon the doctor and wa unabl to 
get ani repli from him. thi late visitor wa mrs. madding, the wife 
of the villag grocer, who wa danger ill of typhoid fever. dr. 
lana had ask her to look in the last thing and let him know how her 
husband wa progressing. she observ that the light wa burn in 
the study, but have knock sever time at the surgeri door without 
response, she conclud that the doctor had been call out, and so 
return home. 

there is a short, wind drive with a lamp at the end of it lead 
down from the hous to the road. As mrs. mad emerg from the gate 
a man wa come along the footpath. think that it might be dr. 
lana return from some profession visit, she wait for him, and 
wa surpris to see that it wa mr. arthur morton, the young squire. 
In the light of the lamp she observ that hi manner wa excited, and 
that he carri in hi hand a heavi hunting-crop. He wa turn in at 
the gate when she address him. 

"the doctor is not in, sir," said she. 

"how do you know that?" he ask harshly. 

"I have been to the surgeri door, sir." 

"I see a light," said the young squire, look up the drive. "that is 
in hi study, is it not?" 

"yes, sir; but I am sure that he is out." 

"well, he must come in again," said young morton, and pass through 
the gate while mrs. mad went upon her homeward way. 

At three o'clock that morn her husband suffer a sharp relapse, and 
she wa so alarm by hi symptom that she determin to call the 
doctor without delay. As she pass through the gate she wa surpris 
to see someon lurk among the laurel bushes. It wa certainli a man, 
and to the best of her belief mr. arthur morton. preoccupi with her 
own troubles, she gave no particular attent to the incident, but 
hurri on upon her errand. 

when she reach the hous she perceiv to her surpris that the light 
wa still burn in the study. she therefor tap at the surgeri 
door. there wa no answer. she repeat the knock sever time 
without effect. It appear to her to be unlik that the doctor 
would either go to bed or go out leav so brilliant a light behind 
him, and it struck mrs. mad that it wa possibl that he might have 
drop asleep in hi chair. she tap at the studi window, 
therefore, but without result. then, find that there wa an open 
between the curtain and the woodwork, she look through. 

the small room wa brilliantli light from a larg lamp on the central 
table, which wa litter with the doctor' book and instruments. No 
one wa visible, nor did she see anyth unusual, except that in the 
farther shadow thrown by the tabl a dingi white glove wa lie upon 
the carpet. and then suddenly, as her eye becam more accustom to 
the light, a boot emerg from the other end of the shadow, and she 
realized, with a thrill of horror, that what she had taken to be a 
glove wa the hand of a man, who wa prostrat upon the floor. 
understand that someth terribl had occurred, she rang at the 
front door, rous mrs. woods, the housekeeper, and the two women made 
their way into the study, have first dispatch the maidserv to 
the police-station. 

At the side of the table, away from the window, dr. lana wa discov 
stretch upon hi back and quit dead. It wa evid that he had 
been subject to violence, for one of hi eye wa blacken and there 
were mark of bruis about hi face and neck. A slight thicken and 
swell of hi featur appear to suggest that the caus of hi 
death had been strangulation. He wa dress in hi usual profession 
clothes, but wore cloth slippers, the sole of which were perfectli 
clean. the carpet wa mark all over, especi on the side of the 
door, with trace of dirti boots, which were presum left by the 
murderer. It wa evid that someon had enter by the surgeri door, 
had kill the doctor, and had then made hi escap unseen. that the 
assail wa a man wa certain, from the size of the footprint and 
from the natur of the injuries. but beyond that point the polic 
found it veri difficult to go. 

there were no sign of robbery, and the doctor' gold watch wa safe in 
hi pocket. He kept a heavi cash-box in the room, and thi wa 
discov to be lock but empty. mrs. wood had an impress that a 
larg sum wa usual kept there, but the doctor had paid a heavi corn 
bill in cash onli that veri day, and it wa conjectur that it wa to 
thi and not to a robber that the empti of the box wa due. one 
thing in the room wa missing--but that one thing wa suggestive. the 
portrait of miss morton, which had alway stood upon the side-table, 
had been taken from it frame, and carri off. mrs. wood had 
observ it there when she wait upon her employ that evening, and 
now it wa gone. On the other hand, there wa pick up from the floor 
a green eye-patch, which the housekeep could not rememb to have 
seen before. such a patch might, however, be in the possess of a 
doctor, and there wa noth to indic that it wa in ani way 
connect with the crime. 

suspicion could onli turn in one direction, and arthur morton, the 
young squire, wa immedi arrested. the evid against him wa 
circumstantial, but damning. He wa devot to hi sister, and it wa 
shown that sinc the ruptur between her and dr. lana he had been heard 
again and again to express himself in the most vindict term toward 
her former lover. He had, as stated, been seen somewher about eleven 
o'clock enter the doctor' drive with a hunting-crop in hi hand. 
He had then, accord to the theori of the police, broken in upon the 
doctor, whose exclam of fear or of anger had been loud enough to 
attract the attent of mrs. woods. when mrs. wood descended, dr. 
lana had made up hi mind to talk it over with hi visitor, and had, 
therefore, sent hi housekeep back to her room. thi convers 
had last a long time, had becom more and more fiery, and had end 
by a person struggle, in which the doctor lost hi life. the fact, 
reveal by a post-mortem, that hi heart wa much diseased--an ailment 
quit unsuspect dure hi life--would make it possibl that death 
might in hi case ensu from injuri which would not be fatal to a 
healthi man. arthur morton had then remov hi sister' photograph, 
and had made hi way homeward, step asid into the laurel bush to 
avoid mrs. mad at the gate. thi wa the theori of the 
prosecution, and the case which they present wa a formid one. 

On the other hand, there were some strong point for the defence. 
morton wa high-spirit and impetuous, like hi sister, but he wa 
respect and like by everyone, and hi frank and honest natur seem 
to be incap of such a crime. hi own explan wa that he wa 
anxiou to have a convers with dr. lana about some urgent famili 
matter (from first to last he refus even to mention the name of hi 
sister). He did not attempt to deni that thi convers would 
probabl have been of an unpleas nature. He had heard from a 
patient that the doctor wa out, and he therefor wait until about 
three in the morn for hi return, but as he had seen noth of him 
up to that hour, he had given it up and had return home. As to hi 
death, he knew no more about it than the constabl who arrest him. 
He had formerli been an intim friend of the deceas man; but 
circumstances, which he would prefer not to mention, had brought about 
a chang in hi sentiments. 

there were sever fact which support hi innocence. It wa certain 
that dr. lana wa aliv and in hi studi at half-past eleven o'clock. 
mrs. wood wa prepar to swear that it wa at that hour that she had 
heard hi voice. the friend of the prison contend that it wa 
probabl that at that time dr. lana wa not alone. the sound which had 
origin attract the attent of the housekeeper, and her master' 
unusu impati that she should leav him in peace, seem to point 
to that. If thi were so then it appear to be probabl that he had 
met hi end between the moment when the housekeep heard hi voic and 
the time when mrs. mad made her first call and found it imposs 
to attract hi attention. but if thi were the time of hi death, then 
it wa certain that mr. arthur morton could not be guilty, as it wa 
after thi that she had met the young squir at the gate. 

If thi hypothesi were correct, and someon wa with dr. lana befor 
mrs. mad met mr. arthur morton, then who wa thi someone, and what 
motiv had he for wish evil to the doctor? It wa univers 
admit that if the friend of the accus could throw light upon 
this, they would have gone a long way toward establish hi 
innocence. but in the meanwhil it wa open to the public to say--a 
they did say--that there wa no proof that anyon had been there at all 
except the young squire; while, on the other hand, there wa ampl 
proof that hi motiv in go were of a sinist kind. when mrs. 
mad called, the doctor might have retir to hi room, or he might, 
as she thought at the time, have gone out and return afterward to 
find mr. arthur morton wait for him. some of the support of the 
accus laid stress upon the fact that the photograph of hi sister 
frances, which had been remov from the doctor' room, had not been 
found in her brother' possession. thi argument, however, did not 
count for much, as he had ampl time befor hi arrest to burn it or to 
destroy it. As to the onli posit evid in the case--th muddi 
footmark upon the floor--they were so blur by the soft of the 
carpet that it wa imposs to make ani trustworthi deduct from 
them. the most that could be said wa that their appear wa not 
inconsist with the theori that they were made by the accused, and it 
wa further shown that hi boot were veri muddi upon that night. 
there had been a heavi shower in the afternoon, and all boot were 
probabl in the same condition. 

such is a bald statement of the singular and romant seri of event 
which centr public attent upon thi lancashir tragedy. the 
unknown origin of the doctor, hi curiou and distinguish 
personality, the posit of the man who wa accus of the murder, and 
the love affair which had preced the crime all combin to make the 
affair one of those drama which absorb the whole interest of a nation. 
throughout the three kingdom men discuss the case of the black 
doctor of bishop' crossing, and mani were the theori put forward to 
explain the facts; but it may safe be said that among them all there 
wa not one which prepar the mind of the public for the 
extraordinari sequel, which caus so much excit upon the first 
day of the trial, and came to a climax upon the second. the long file 
of the lancast weekli with their report of the case lie befor me as 
I write, but I must content myself with a synopsi of the case up to 
the point when, upon the even of the first day, the evid of miss 
franc morton threw a singular light upon the case. 

mr. porlock carr, the counsel for the prosecution, had marshal hi 
fact with hi usual skill, and as the day wore on, it becam more and 
more evid how difficult wa the task which mr. humphrey, who had 
been retain for the defence, had befor him. sever wit were 
put up to swear to the intemper express which the young squir 
had been heard to utter about the doctor, and the fieri manner in which 
he resent the alleg ill-treat of hi sister. mrs. mad 
repeat her evid as to the visit which had been paid late at night 
by the prison to the deceased, and it wa shown by anoth wit 
that the prison wa awar that the doctor wa in the habit of sit 
up alon in thi isol wing of the house, and that he had chosen 
thi veri late hour to call becaus he knew that hi victim would then 
be at hi mercy. A servant at the squire' hous wa compel to 
admit that he had heard hi master return about three that morning, 
which corrobor mrs. madding' statement that she had seen him among 
the laurel bush near the gate upon the occas of her second visit. 
the muddi boot and an alleg similar in the footprint were duli 
dwelt upon, and it wa felt when the case for the prosecut had been 
present that, howev circumstanti it might be, it wa none the 
less so complet and so convincing, that the fate of the prison wa 
sealed, unless someth quit unexpect should be disclos by the 
defence. It wa three o'clock when the prosecut closed. At 
half-past four, when the court rose, a new and unlooked-for develop 
had occurred. I extract the incident, or part of it, from the journal 
which I have alreadi mentioned, omit the preliminari observ 
of the counsel. 


consider sensat wa caus in the crowd court when the first 
wit call for the defenc prove to be miss franc morton, the 
sister of the prisoner. our reader will rememb that the young ladi 
had been engag to dr. lana, and that it wa hi anger over the sudden 
termin of thi engag which wa thought to have driven her 
brother to the perpetr of thi crime. miss morton had not, 
however, been directli implic in the case in ani way, either at the 
inquest or at the police-court proceedings, and her appear as the 
lead wit for the defenc came as a surpris upon the public. 

miss franc morton, who wa a tall and handsom brunette, gave her 
evid in a low but clear voice, though it wa evid throughout 
that she wa suffer from extrem emotion. she allud to her 
engag to the doctor, touch briefli upon it termination, which 
wa due, she said, to person matter connect with hi family, and 
surpris the court by assert that she had alway consid her 
brother' resent to be unreason and intemperate. In answer to 
a direct question from her counsel, she repli that she did not feel 
that she had ani grievanc whatev against dr. lana, and that in her 
opinion he had act in a perfectli honour manner. her brother, on 
an insuffici knowledg of the facts, had taken anoth view, and she 
wa compel to acknowledg that, in spite of her entreaties, he had 
utter threat of person violenc against the doctor, and had, upon 
the even of the tragedy, announc hi intent of "have it out 
with him." she had done her best to bring him to a more reason 
frame of mind, but he wa veri headstrong where hi emot or 
prejudic were concerned. 

Up to thi point the young lady' evid had appear to make against 
the prison rather than in hi favour. the question of her counsel, 
however, soon put a veri differ light upon the matter, and disclos 
an unexpect line of defence. 

mr. humphrey: Do you believ your brother to be guilti of thi crime? 

the judge: I cannot permit that question, mr. humphrey. We are here 
to decid upon question of fact--not of belief. 

mr. humphrey: Do you know that your brother is not guilti of the death 
of doctor lana? 

miss morton: yes. 

mr. humphrey: how do you know it? 

miss morton: becaus dr. lana is not dead. 

there follow a prolong sensat in court, which interrupt the 
examin of the witness. 

mr. humphrey: and how do you know, miss morton, that dr. lana is not 
dead? 

miss morton: becaus I have receiv a letter from him sinc the date 
of hi suppos death. 

mr. humphrey: have you thi letter? 

miss morton: yes, but I should prefer not to show it. 

mr. humphrey: have you the envelope? 

miss morton: yes, it is here. 

mr. humphrey: what is the post-mark? 

miss morton: liverpool. 

mr. humphrey: and the date? 

miss morton: june the 22nd. 

mr. humphrey: that be the day after hi alleg death. are you 
prepar to swear to thi handwriting, miss morton? 

miss morton: certainly. 

mr. humphrey: I am prepar to call six other witnesses, my lord, to 
testifi that thi letter is in the write of doctor lana. 

the judge: then you must call them tomorrow. 

mr. porlock carr (counsel for the prosecution): In the meantime, my 
lord, we claim possess of thi document, so that we may obtain 
expert evid as to how far it is an imit of the handwrit of 
the gentleman whom we still confid assert to be deceased. I need 
not point out that the theori so unexpectedli sprung upon us may prove 
to be a veri obviou devic adopt by the friend of the prison in 
order to divert thi inquiry. I would draw attent to the fact that 
the young ladi must, accord to her own account, have possess thi 
letter dure the proceed at the inquest and at the police-court. 
she desir us to believ that she permit these to proceed, although 
she held in her pocket evid which would at ani moment have brought 
them to an end. 

mr. humphrey. can you explain this, miss morton? 

miss morton: dr. lana desir hi secret to be preserved. 

mr. porlock carr: then whi have you made thi public? 

miss morton: To save my brother. 

A murmur of sympathi broke out in court, which wa instantli suppress 
by the judge. 

the judge: admit thi line of defence, it lie with you, mr. 
humphrey, to throw a light upon who thi man is whose bodi ha been 
recogn by so mani friend and patient of dr. lana as be that of 
the doctor himself. 

A juryman: ha anyon up to now express ani doubt about the matter? 

mr. porlock carr: not to my knowledge. 

mr. humphrey: We hope to make the matter clear. 

the judge: then the court adjourn until tomorrow. 


thi new develop of the case excit the utmost interest among the 
gener public. press comment wa prevent by the fact that the trial 
wa still undecided, but the question wa everywher argu as to how 
far there could be truth in miss morton' declaration, and how far it 
might be a dare ruse for the purpos of save her brother. the 
obviou dilemma in which the miss doctor stood wa that if by ani 
extraordinari chanc he wa not dead, then he must be held respons 
for the death of thi unknown man, who resembl him so exactly, and 
who wa found in hi study. thi letter which miss morton refus to 
produc wa possibl a confess of guilt, and she might find herself 
in the terribl posit of onli be abl to save her brother from 
the gallow by the sacrific of her former lover. the court next 
morn wa cram to overflowing, and a murmur of excit pass 
over it when mr. humphrey wa observ to enter in a state of emotion, 
which even hi train nerv could not conceal, and to confer with the 
oppos counsel. A few hurri words--word which left a look of 
amaz upon mr. porlock carr' face--pass between them, and then 
the counsel for the defence, address the judge, announc that, with 
the consent of the prosecution, the young ladi who had given evid 
upon the sit befor would not be recalled. 


the judge: but you appear, mr. humphrey, to have left matter in a veri 
unsatisfactori state. 

mr. humphrey: perhaps, my lord, my next wit may help to clear them 
up. 

the judge: then call your next witness. 

mr. humphrey: I call dr. aloysiu lana. 

the learn counsel ha made mani tell remark in hi day, but he 
ha certainli never produc such a sensat with so short a sentence. 
the court wa simpli stun with amaz as the veri man whose fate 
had been the subject of so much content appear bodili befor them 
in the witness-box. those among the spectat who had known him at 
bishop' cross saw him now, gaunt and thin, with deep line of care 
upon hi face. but in spite of hi melancholi bear and despond 
expression, there were few who could say that they had ever seen a man 
of more distinguish presence. bow to the judge, he ask if he 
might be allow to make a statement, and have been duli inform 
that whatev he said might be use against him, he bow onc more, 
and proceeded: 

"mi wish," said he, "i to hold noth back, but to tell with perfect 
frank all that occur upon the night of the 21st of june. had I 
known that the innoc had suffered, and that so much troubl had been 
brought upon those whom I love best in the world, I should have come 
forward long ago; but there were reason which prevent these thing 
from come to my ears. It wa my desir that an unhappi man should 
vanish from the world which had known him, but I had not foreseen that 
other would be affect by my actions. let me to the best of my 
abil repair the evil which I have done. 

"to anyon who is acquaint with the histori of the argentin republ 
the name of lana is well known. My father, who came of the best blood 
of old spain, fill all the highest offic of the state, and would 
have been presid but for hi death in the riot of san juan. A 
brilliant career might have been open to my twin brother ernest and 
myself had it not been for financi loss which made it necessari 
that we should earn our own living. I apologize, sir, if these detail 
appear to be irrelevant, but they are a necessari introduct to that 
which is to follow. 

"I had, as I have said, a twin brother name ernest, whose resembl 
to me wa so great that even when we were togeth peopl could see no 
differ between us. down to the smallest detail we were exactli the 
same. As we grew older thi like becam less mark becaus our 
express wa not the same, but with our featur in repos the point 
of differ were veri slight. 

"it doe not becom me to say too much of one who is dead, the more so 
as he is my onli brother, but I leav hi charact to those who knew 
him best. I will onli say--for I have to say it--that in my earli 
manhood I conceiv a horror of him, and that I had good reason for the 
avers which fill me. My own reput suffer from hi actions, 
for our close resembl caus me to be credit with mani of them. 
eventually, in a peculiarli disgrac business, he contriv to throw 
the whole odium upon me in such a way that I wa forc to leav the 
argentin for ever, and to seek a career in europe. the freedom from 
hi hate presenc more than compens me for the loss of my nativ 
land. I had enough money to defray my medic studi at glasgow, and 
I final settl in practic at bishop' crossing, in the firm 
convict that in that remot lancashir hamlet I should never hear of 
him again. 

"for year my hope were fulfilled, and then at last he discov me. 
some liverpool man who visit bueno ayr put him upon my track. He 
had lost all hi money, and he thought that he would come over and 
share mine. know my horror of him, he rightli thought that I would 
be will to buy him off. I receiv a letter from him say that he 
wa coming. It wa at a crisi in my own affairs, and hi arriv 
might conceiv bring trouble, and even disgrace, upon some whom I 
wa especi bound to shield from anyth of the kind. I took step 
to insur that ani evil which might come should fall on me only, and 
that"--her he turn and look at the prisoner--"wa the caus of 
conduct upon my part which ha been too harshli judged. My onli motiv 
wa to screen those who were dear to me from ani possibl connect 
with scandal or disgrace. that scandal and disgrac would come with my 
brother wa onli to say that what had been would be again. 

"mi brother arriv himself one night not veri long after my receipt of 
the letter. I wa sit in my studi after the servant had gone to 
bed, when I heard a footstep upon the gravel outside, and an instant 
later I saw hi face look in at me through the window. He wa a 
clean-shaven man like myself, and the resembl between us wa still 
so great that, for an instant, I thought it wa my own reflect in 
the glass. He had a dark patch over hi eye, but our featur were 
absolut the same. then he smile in a sardon way which had been a 
trick of hi from hi boyhood, and I knew that he wa the same brother 
who had driven me from my nativ land, and brought disgrac upon what 
had been an honour name. I went to the door and I admit him. 
that would be about ten o'clock that night. 

"when he came into the glare of the lamp, I saw at onc that he had 
fallen upon veri evil days. He had walk from liverpool, and he wa 
tire and ill. I wa quit shock by the express upon hi face. 
My medic knowledg told me that there wa some seriou intern 
malady. He had been drink also, and hi face wa bruis as the 
result of a scuffl which he had had with some sailors. It wa to 
cover hi injur eye that he wore thi patch, which he remov when he 
enter the room. He wa himself dress in a pea-jacket and flannel 
shirt, and hi feet were burst through hi boots. but hi poverti 
had onli made him more savag vindict toward me. hi hatr rose 
to the height of a mania. I had been roll in money in england, 
accord to hi account, while he had been starv in south america. 
I cannot describ to you the threat which he utter or the insult 
which he pour upon me. My impress is, that hardship and 
debaucheri had unhing hi reason. He pace about the room like a 
wild beast, demand drink, demand money, and all in the foulest 
language. I am a hot-temp man, but I thank god that I am abl to 
say that I remain master of myself, and that I never rais a hand 
against him. My cool onli irrit him the more. He raved, he 
cursed, he shook hi fist in my face, and then suddenli a horribl 
spasm pass over hi features, he clap hi hand to hi side, and 
with a loud cri he fell in a heap at my feet. I rais him up and 
stretch him upon the sofa, but no answer came to my exclamations, and 
the hand which I held in mine wa cold and clammy. hi diseas heart 
had broken down. hi own violenc had kill him. 

"for a long time I sat as if I were in some dread dream, stare at 
the bodi of my brother. I wa arous by the knock of mrs. woods, 
who had been disturb by that die cry. I sent her away to bed. 
shortli afterward a patient tap at the surgeri door, but as I took 
no notice, he or she went off again. slowli and gradual as I sat 
there a plan wa form itself in my head in the curiou automat way 
in which plan do form. when I rose from my chair my futur movement 
were final decid upon without my have been consciou of ani 
process of thought. It wa an instinct which irresist inclin me 
toward one course. 

"ever sinc that chang in my affair to which I have alluded, bishop' 
cross had becom hate to me. My plan of life had been ruined, 
and I had met with hasti judgment and unkind treatment where I had 
expect sympathy. It is true that ani danger of scandal from my 
brother had pass away with hi life; but still, I wa sore about the 
past, and felt that thing could never be as they had been. It may be 
that I wa unduli sensitive, and that I had not made suffici 
allow for others, but my feel were as I describe. ani chanc 
of get away from bishop' cross and of everyon in it would be 
most welcom to me. and here wa such a chanc as I could never have 
dare to hope for, a chanc which would enabl me to make a clean break 
with the past. 

"there wa thi dead man lie upon the sofa, so like me that save for 
some littl thick and coars of the featur there wa no 
differ at all. No one had seen him come and no one would miss him. 
We were both clean-shaven, and hi hair wa about the same length as my 
own. If I chang cloth with him, then dr. aloysiu lana would be 
found lie dead in hi study, and there would be an end of an 
unfortun fellow, and of a blight career. there wa plenti of readi 
money in the room, and thi I could carri away with me to help me to 
start onc more in some other land. In my brother' cloth I could 
walk by night unobserv as far as liverpool, and in that great seaport 
I would soon find some mean of leav the country. after my lost 
hopes, the humblest exist where I wa unknown wa far preferable, 
in my estimation, to a practice, howev successful, in bishop' 
crossing, where at ani moment I might come face to face with those whom 
I should wish, if it were possible, to forget. I determin to effect 
the change. 

"and I did so. I will not go into particulars, for the recollect is 
as pain as the experience; but in an hour my brother lay, dress 
down to the smallest detail in my clothes, while I slunk out by the 
surgeri door, and take the back path which led across some fields, I 
start off to make the best of my way to liverpool, where I arriv 
the same night. My bag of money and a certain portrait were all I 
carri out of the house, and I left behind me in my hurri the shade 
which my brother had been wear over hi eye. everyth els of hi 
I took with me. 

"I give you my word, sir, that never for one instant did the idea occur 
to me that peopl might think that I had been murdered, nor did I 
imagin that anyon might be caus seriou danger through thi 
stratagem by which I endeavour to gain a fresh start in the world. 
On the contrary, it wa the thought of reliev other from the burden 
of my presenc which wa alway uppermost in my mind. A sail vessel 
wa leav liverpool that veri day for corunna, and in thi I took my 
passage, think that the voyag would give me time to recov my 
balance, and to consid the future. but befor I left my resolut 
softened. I bethought me that there wa one person in the world to 
whom I would not caus an hour of sadness. she would mourn me in her 
heart, howev harsh and unsympathet her rel might be. she 
understood and appreci the motiv upon which I had acted, and if 
the rest of her famili condemn me, she, at least, would not forget. 
and so I sent her a note under the seal of secreci to save her from a 
baseless grief. If under the pressur of event she broke that seal, 
she ha my entir sympathi and forgiveness. 

"it wa onli last night that I return to england, and dure all thi 
time I have heard noth of the sensat which my suppos death had 
caused, nor of the accus that mr. arthur morton had been concern 
in it. It wa in a late even paper that I read an account of the 
proceed of yesterday, and I have come thi morn as fast as an 
express train could bring me to testifi to the truth." 

such wa the remark statement of dr. aloysiu lana which brought 
the trial to a sudden termination. A subsequ investig 
corrobor it to the extent of find out the vessel in which hi 
brother ernest lana had come over from south america. the ship' 
doctor wa abl to testifi that he had complain of a weak heart 
dure the voyage, and that hi symptom were consist with such a 
death as wa described. 

As to dr. aloysiu lana, he return to the villag from which he had 
made so dramat a disappearance, and a complet reconcili wa 
effect between him and the young squire, the latter have 
acknowledg that he had entir misunderstood the other' motiv in 
withdraw from hi engagement. that anoth reconcili follow 
may be judg from a notic extract from a promin column in the 
morn post: 


"A marriag wa solemn upon septemb 19th, by the rev. stephen 
johnson, at the parish church of bishop' crossing, between aloysiu 
xavier lana, son of don alfredo lana, formerli foreign minist of the 
argentin republic, and franc morton, onli daughter of the late jame 
morton, j.p., of leigh hall, bishop' crossing, lancashire." 



the jew' breastplat 

My particular friend, ward mortimer, wa one of the best men of hi day 
at everyth connect with orient archaeology. He had written 
larg upon the subject, he had live two year in a tomb at thebes, 
while he excav in the valley of the kings, and final he had 
creat a consider sensat by hi exhum of the alleg mummi 
of cleopatra in the inner room of the templ of horus, at philae. with 
such a record at the age of thirty-one, it wa felt that a consider 
career lay befor him, and no one wa surpris when he wa elect to 
the curatorship of the belmor street museum, which carri with it the 
lectureship at the orient college, and an incom which ha sunk with 
the fall in land, but which still remain at that ideal sum which is 
larg enough to encourag an investigator, but not so larg as to 
enerv him. 

there wa onli one reason which made ward mortimer' posit a littl 
difficult at the belmor street museum, and that wa the extrem 
emin of the man whom he had to succeed. professor andrea wa a 
profound scholar and a man of european reputation. hi lectur were 
frequent by student from everi part of the world, and hi admir 
manag of the collect intrust to hi care wa a commonplac in 
all learn societies. there was, therefore, consider surpris 
when, at the age of fifty-five, he suddenli resign hi posit and 
retir from those duti which had been both hi livelihood and hi 
pleasure. He and hi daughter left the comfort suit of room 
which had form hi offici resid in connect with the museum, 
and my friend, mortimer, who wa a bachelor, took up hi quarter there. 

On hear of mortimer' appoint professor andrea had written him 
a veri kindli and flatter congratulatori letter. I wa actual 
present at their first meeting, and I went with mortim round the 
museum when the professor show us the admir collect which he 
had cherish so long. the professor' beauti daughter and a young 
man, captain wilson, who was, as I understood, soon to be her husband, 
accompani us in our inspection. there were fifteen rooms, but the 
babylonian, the syrian, and the central hall, which contain the 
jewish and egyptian collection, were the finest of all. professor 
andrea wa a quiet, dry, elderli man, with a clean-shaven face and an 
impass manner, but hi dark eye sparkl and hi featur quicken 
into enthusiast life as he point out to us the rariti and the 
beauti of some of hi specimens. hi hand linger so fondli over 
them, that one could read hi pride in them and the grief in hi heart 
now that they were pass from hi care into that of another. 

He had shown us in turn hi mummies, hi papyri, hi rare scarabs, hi 
inscriptions, hi jewish relics, and hi duplic of the famou 
seven-branch candlestick of the temple, which wa brought to rome by 
titus, and which is suppos by some to be lie at thi instant in the 
bed of the tiber. then he approach a case which stood in the veri 
centr of the hall, and he look down through the glass with rever 
in hi attitud and manner. 

"thi is no novelti to an expert like yourself, mr. mortimer," said he; 
"but I daresay that your friend, mr. jackson, will be interest to see 
it." 

lean over the case I saw an object, some five inch square, which 
consist of twelv preciou stone in a framework of gold, with golden 
hook at two of the corners. the stone were all vari in sort and 
colour, but they were of the same size. their shapes, arrangement, and 
gradat of tint made me think of a box of water-colour paints. each 
stone had some hieroglyph scratch upon it surface. 

"you have heard, mr. jackson, of the urim and thummim?" 

I had heard the term, but my idea of it mean wa exceedingli vague. 

"the urim and thummim wa a name given to the jewel plate which lay 
upon the breast of the high priest of the jews. they had a veri 
special feel of rever for it--someth of the feel which an 
ancient roman might have for the sibyllin book in the capitol. there 
are, as you see, twelv magnific stones, inscrib with mystic 
characters. count from the left-hand top corner, the stone are 
carnelian, peridot, emerald, ruby, lapi lazuli, onyx, sapphire, agate, 
amethyst, topaz, beryl, and jasper." 

I wa amaz at the varieti and beauti of the stones. 

"ha the breastplat ani particular history?" I asked. 

"it is of great age and of immens value," said professor andreas. 
"without be abl to make an absolut assertion, we have mani reason 
to think that it is possibl that it may be the origin urim and 
thummim of solomon' temple. there is certainli noth so fine in ani 
collect in europe. My friend, captain wilson, here, is a practic 
author upon preciou stones, and he would tell you how pure these 
are." 

captain wilson, a man with a dark, hard, incis face, wa stand 
besid hi fiance at the other side of the case. 

"yes," said he, curtly, "I have never seen finer stones." 

"and the gold-work is also worthi of attention. the ancient excel 
in----"--h wa appar about to indic the set of the stones, 
when captain wilson interrupt him. 

"you will see a finer exampl of their gold-work in thi candlestick," 
said he, turn to anoth table, and we all join him in hi 
admir of it emboss stem and delic ornament branches. 
altogeth it wa an interest and a novel experi to have object 
of such rariti explain by so great an expert; and when, finally, 
professor andrea finish our inspect by formal hand over the 
preciou collect to the care of my friend, I could not help piti 
him and envi hi successor whose life wa to pass in so pleasant a 
duty. within a week, ward mortim wa duli instal in hi new set 
of rooms, and had becom the autocrat of the belmor street museum. 

about a fortnight afterward my friend gave a small dinner to half a 
dozen bachelor friend to celebr hi promotion. when hi guest 
were depart he pull my sleev and signal to me that he wish 
me to remain. 

"you have onli a few hundr yard to go," said he--i wa live in 
chamber in the albany. "you may as well stay and have a quiet cigar 
with me. I veri much want your advice." 

I relaps into an arm-chair and lit one of hi excel matronas. 
when he had return from see the last of hi guest out, he drew a 
letter from hi dress-jacket and sat down opposit to me. 

"thi is an anonym letter which I receiv thi morning," said he. 
"I want to read it to you and to have your advice." 

"you are veri welcom to it for what it is worth." 

"thi is how the note runs: 'sir,--i should strongli advis you to 
keep a veri care watch over the mani valuabl thing which are 
commit to your charge. I do not think that the present system of a 
singl watchman is sufficient. Be upon your guard, or an irrepar 
misfortun may occur.'" 

"i that all?" 

"yes, that is all." 

"well," said I, "it is at least obviou that it wa written by one of 
the limit number of peopl who are awar that you have onli one 
watchman at night." 

ward mortim hand me the note, with a curiou smile. "have you an 
eye for handwriting?" said he. "now, look at this!" He put anoth 
letter in front of me. "look at the c in 'congratulate' and the c in 
'committed.' look at the capit I. look at the trick of put in a 
dash instead of a stop!" 

"they are undoubtedli from the same hand--with some attempt at disguis 
in the case of thi first one." 

"the second," said ward mortimer, "i the letter of congratul 
which wa written to me by professor andrea upon my obtain my 
appointment." 

I stare at him in amazement. then I turn over the letter in my 
hand, and there, sure enough, wa "martin andreas" sign upon the 
other side. there could be no doubt, in the mind of anyon who had the 
slightest knowledg of the scienc of graphology, that the professor 
had written an anonym letter, warn hi successor against thieves. 
It wa inexplicable, but it wa certain. 

"whi should he do it?" I asked. 

"precis what I should wish to ask you. If he had ani such 
misgivings, whi could he not come and tell me direct?" 

"will you speak to him about it?" 

"there again I am in doubt. He might choos to deni that he wrote it." 

"at ani rate," said I, "thi warn is meant in a friendli spirit, and 
I should certainli act upon it. are the present precaut enough to 
insur you against robbery?" 

"I should have thought so. the public are onli admit from ten till 
five, and there is a guardian to everi two rooms. He stand at the 
door between them, and so command them both." 

"but at night?" 

"when the public are gone, we at onc put up the great iron shutters, 
which are absolut burglar-proof. the watchman is a capabl fellow. 
He sit in the lodge, but he walk round everi three hours. We keep 
one electr light burn in each room all night." 

"it is difficult to suggest anyth more--short of keep your day 
watch all night." 

"we could not afford that." 

"at least, I should commun with the police, and have a special 
constabl put on outsid in belmor street," said I. "a to the 
letter, if the writer wish to be anonymous, I think he ha a right to 
remain so. We must trust to the futur to show some reason for the 
curiou cours which he ha adopted." 

So we dismiss the subject, but all that night after my return to my 
chamber I wa puzzl my brain as to what possibl motiv professor 
andrea could have for write an anonym warn letter to hi 
successor--for that the write wa hi wa as certain to me as if I 
had seen him actual do it. He foresaw some danger to the 
collection. wa it becaus he foresaw it that he abandon hi charg 
of it? but if so, whi should he hesit to warn mortim in hi own 
name? I puzzl and puzzl until at last I fell into a troubl 
sleep, which carri me beyond my usual hour of rising. 

I wa arous in a singular and effect method, for about nine 
o'clock my friend mortim rush into my room with an express of 
constern upon hi face. He wa usual one of the most tidi men 
of my acquaintance, but now hi collar wa undon at one end, hi tie 
wa flying, and hi hat at the back of hi head. I read hi whole 
stori in hi frantic eyes. 

"the museum ha been robbed!" I cried, spring up in bed. 

"I fear so! those jewels! the jewel of the urim and thummim!" he 
gasped, for he wa out of breath with running. "i'm go on to the 
police-station. come to the museum as soon as you can, jackson! 
good-bye!" He rush distractedli out of the room, and I heard him 
clatter down the stairs. 

I wa not long in follow hi directions, but I found when I arriv 
that he had alreadi return with a polic inspector, and anoth 
elderli gentleman, who prove to be mr. purvis, one of the partner of 
morson and company, the well-known diamond merchants. As an expert in 
stone he wa alway prepar to advis the police. they were group 
round the case in which the breastplat of the jewish priest had been 
exposed. the plate had been taken out and laid upon the glass top of 
the case, and the three head were bent over it. 

"it is obviou that it ha been tamper with," said mortimer. "it 
caught my eye the moment that I pass through the room thi morning. 
I examin it yesterday evening, so that it is certain that thi ha 
happen dure the night." 

It was, as he had said, obviou that someon had been at work upon it. 
the set of the uppermost row of four stones--th carnelian, 
peridot, emerald, and ruby--wer rough and jag as if someon had 
scrape all round them. the stone were in their places, but the 
beauti gold-work which we had admir onli a few day befor had 
been veri clumsili pull about. 

"it look to me," said the polic inspector, "a if someon had been 
tri to take out the stones." 

"mi fear is," said mortimer, "that he not onli tried, but succeeded. I 
believ these four stone to be skil imit which have been put 
in the place of the originals." 

the same suspicion had evid been in the mind of the expert, for he 
had been care examin the four stone with the aid of a lens. 
He now submit them to sever tests, and final turn cheer 
to mortimer. 

"I congratul you, sir," said he, heartily. "I will pledg my 
reput that all four of these stone are genuine, and of a most 
unusu degre of purity." 

the colour began to come back to my poor friend' frighten face, and 
he drew a long breath of relief. 

"thank god!" he cried. "then what in the world did the thief want?" 

"probabl he meant to take the stones, but wa interrupted." 

"in that case one would expect him to take them out one at a time, but 
the set of each of these ha been loosened, and yet the stone are 
all here." 

"it is certainli most extraordinary," said the inspector. "I never 
rememb a case like it. let us see the watchman." 

the commissionair wa called--a soldierly, honest-fac man, who 
seem as concern as ward mortim at the incident. 

"no, sir, I never heard a sound," he answered, in repli to the 
question of the inspector. "I made my round four times, as usual, 
but I saw noth suspicious. i'v been in my posit ten years, but 
noth of the kind ha ever occur before." 

"no thief could have come through the windows?" 

"impossible, sir." 

"or pass you at the door?" 

"no, sir; I never left my post except when I walk my rounds." 

"what other open are there in the museum?" 

"there is the door into mr. ward mortimer' privat rooms." 

"that is lock at night," my friend explained, "and in order to reach 
it anyon from the street would have to open the outsid door as well." 

"your servants?" 

"their quarter are entir separate." 

"well, well," said the inspector, "thi is certainli veri obscure. 
however, there ha been no harm done, accord to mr. purvis." 

"I will swear that those stone are genuine." 

"so that the case appear to be mere one of malici damage. but 
none the less, I should be veri glad to go care round the 
premises, and to see if we can find ani trace to show us who your 
visitor may have been." 

hi investigation, which last all the morning, wa care and 
intelligent, but it led in the end to nothing. He point out to us 
that there were two possibl entranc to the museum which we had not 
considered. the one wa from the cellar by a trap-door open in the 
passage. the other through a skylight from the lumber-room, 
overlook that veri chamber to which the intrud had penetrated. As 
neither the cellar nor the lumber-room could be enter unless the 
thief wa alreadi within the lock doors, the matter wa not of ani 
practic importance, and the dust of cellar and attic assur us that 
no one had use either one or the other. finally, we end as we 
began, without the slightest clue as to how, why, or by whom the 
set of these four jewel had been tamper with. 

there remain one cours for mortim to take, and he took it. leav 
the polic to continu their fruitless researches, he ask me to 
accompani him that afternoon in a visit to professor andreas. He took 
with him the two letters, and it wa hi intent to openli tax hi 
predecessor with have written the anonym warning, and to ask him 
to explain the fact that he should have anticip so exactli that 
which had actual occurred. the professor wa live in a small villa 
in upper norwood, but we were inform by the servant that he wa away 
from home. see our disappointment, she ask us if we should like 
to see miss andreas, and show us into the modest drawing-room. 

I have mention incident that the professor' daughter wa a veri 
beauti girl. she wa a blonde, tall and graceful, with a skin of 
that delic tint which the french call "mat," the colour of old 
ivory, or of the lighter petal of the sulphur rose. I wa shocked, 
however, as she enter the room to see how much she had chang in the 
last fortnight. her young face wa haggard and her bright eye heavi 
with trouble. 

"father ha gone to scotland," she said. "he seem to be tired, and 
ha had a good deal to worri him. He onli left us yesterday." 

"you look a littl tire yourself, miss andreas," said my friend. 

"I have been so anxiou about father." 

"can you give me hi scotch address?" 

"yes, he is with hi brother, the rev. david andreas, 1, arran villas, 
ardrossan." 

ward mortim made a note of the address, and we left without say 
anyth as to the object of our visit. We found ourselv in belmor 
street in the even in exactli the same posit in which we had been 
in the morning. our onli clue wa the professor' letter, and my 
friend had made up hi mind to start for ardrossan next day, and to get 
to the bottom of the anonym letter, when a new develop came to 
alter our plans. 

veri earli on the follow morn I wa arous from my sleep by a 
tap upon my bedroom door. It wa a messeng with a note from mortimer. 

"do come round," it said; "the matter is becom more and more 
extraordinary." 

when I obey hi summon I found him pace excitedli up and down the 
central room, while the old soldier who guard the premis stood with 
militari stiff in a corner. 

"mi dear jackson," he cried, "I am so delight that you have come, for 
thi is a most inexplic business." 

"what ha happened, then?" 

He wave hi hand toward the case which contain the breastplate. 

"look at it," said he. 

I did so, and could not restrain a cri of surprise. the set of the 
middl row of preciou stone had been profan in the same manner as 
the upper ones. Of the twelv jewel eight had been now tamper with 
in thi singular fashion. the set of the lower four wa neat and 
smooth. the other jag and irregular. 

"have the stone been altered?" I asked. 

"no, I am certain that these upper four are the same which the expert 
pronounc to be genuine, for I observ yesterday that littl 
discolor on the edg of the emerald. sinc they have not 
extract the upper stones, there is no reason to think the lower have 
been transposed. you say that you heard nothing, simpson?" 

"no, sir," the commissionair answered. "but when I made my round 
after daylight I had a special look at these stones, and I saw at onc 
that someon had been meddl with them. then I call you, sir, and 
told you. I wa backward and forward all night, and I never saw a 
soul or heard a sound." 

"come up and have some breakfast with me," said mortimer, and he took 
me into hi own chambers.--"now, what DO you think of this, jackson?" 
he asked. 

"it is the most objectless, futile, idiot busi that ever I heard 
of. It can onli be the work of a monomaniac." 

"can you put forward ani theory?" 

A curiou idea came into my head. "thi object is a jewish relic of 
great antiqu and sanctity," said I. "how about the anti-semit 
movement? could one conceiv that a fanat of that way of think 
might desecrate----" 

"no, no, no!" cri mortimer. "that will never do! such a man might 
push hi lunaci to the length of destroy a jewish relic, but whi on 
earth should he nibbl round everi stone so care that he can onli 
do four stone in a night? We must have a better solut than that, 
and we must find it for ourselves, for I do not think that our 
inspector is like to help us. first of all, what do you think of 
simpson, the porter?" 

"have you ani reason to suspect him?" 

"onli that he is the one person on the premises." 

"but whi should he indulg in such wanton destruction? noth ha 
been taken away. He ha no motive." 

"mania?" 

"no, I will swear to hi sanity." 

"have you ani other theory?" 

"well, yourself, for example. you are not a somnambulist, by ani 
chance?" 

"noth of the sort, I assur you." 

"then I give it up." 

"but I don't--and I have a plan by which we will make it all clear." 

"to visit professor andreas?" 

"no, we shall find our solut nearer than scotland. I will tell you 
what we shall do. you know that skylight which overlook the central 
hall? We will leav the electr light in the hall, and we will keep 
watch in the lumber-room, you and I, and solv the mysteri for 
ourselves. If our mysteri visitor is do four stone at a time, 
he ha four still to do, and there is everi reason to think that he 
will return tonight and complet the job." 

"excellent!" I cried. 

"we will keep our own secret, and say noth either to the polic or 
to simpson. will you join me?" 

"with the utmost pleasure," said I; and so it wa agreed. 

It wa ten o'clock that night when I return to the belmor street 
museum. mortim was, as I could see, in a state of suppress nervou 
excitement, but it wa still too earli to begin our vigil, so we 
remain for an hour or so in hi chambers, discuss all the 
possibl of the singular busi which we had met to solve. At 
last the roar stream of hansom cab and the rush of hurri feet 
becam lower and more intermitt as the pleasure-seek pass on 
their way to their station or their homes. It wa nearli twelv when 
mortim led the way to the lumber-room which overlook the central 
hall of the museum. 

He had visit it dure the day, and had spread some sack so that 
we could lie at our ease, and look straight down into the museum. the 
skylight wa of unfrost glass, but wa so cover with dust that it 
would be imposs for anyon look up from below to detect that he 
wa overlooked. We clear a small piec at each corner, which gave us 
a complet view of the room beneath us. In the cold white light of the 
electr lamp everyth stood out hard and clear, and I could see the 
smallest detail of the content of the variou cases. 

such a vigil is an excel lesson, sinc one ha no choic but to 
look hard at those object which we usual pass with such half-heart 
interest. through my littl peep hole I employ the hour in studi 
everi specimen, from the huge mummy-cas which lean against the wall 
to those veri jewel which had brought us there, gleam and sparkl 
in their glass case immedi beneath us. there wa much preciou 
gold-work and mani valuabl stone scatter through the numer 
cases, but those wonder twelv which made up the urim and thummim 
glow and burn with a radianc which far eclips the others. I 
studi in turn the tomb-pictur of sicara, the friez from karnak, 
the statu of memphis, and the inscript of thebes, but my eye 
would alway come back to that wonder jewish relic, and my mind to 
the singular mysteri which surround it. I wa lost in the thought of 
it when my companion suddenli drew hi breath sharpli in, and seiz my 
arm in a convuls grip. At the same instant I saw what it wa which 
had excit him. 

I have said that against the wall--on the right-hand side of the 
doorway (the right-hand side as we look at it, but the left as one 
entered)--ther stood a larg mummy-case. To our unutter amaz 
it wa slowli opening. gradually, gradual the lid wa swing back, 
and the black slit which mark the open wa becom wider and 
wider. So gentli and care wa it done that the movement wa 
almost imperceptible. then, as we breathlessli watch it, a white 
thin hand appear at the opening, push back the paint lid, then 
anoth hand, and final a face--a face which wa familiar to us both, 
that of professor andreas. stealthili he slunk out of the mummy-case, 
like a fox steal from it burrow, hi head turn incessantli to 
left and to right, stepping, then pausing, then step again, the 
veri imag of craft and of caution. onc some sound in the street 
struck him motionless, and he stood listening, with hi ear turned, 
readi to dart back to the shelter behind him. then he crept onward 
again upon tiptoe, very, veri softli and slowly, until he had reach 
the case in the centr of the room. there he took a bunch of key from 
hi pocket, unlock the case, took out the jewish breastplate, and, 
lay it upon the glass in front of him, began to work upon it with 
some sort of small, glisten tool. He wa so directli underneath us 
that hi bent head cover hi work, but we could guess from the 
movement of hi hand that he wa engag in finish the strang 
disfigur which he had begun. 

I could realiz from the heavi breath of my companion, and the 
twitch of the hand which still clutch my wrist, the furiou 
indign which fill hi heart as he saw thi vandal in the 
quarter of all other where he could least have expect it. he, the 
veri man who a fortnight befor had rever bent over thi uniqu 
relic, and who had impress it antiqu and it sanctiti upon us, 
wa now engag in thi outrag profanation. It wa impossible, 
unthinkable--and yet there, in the white glare of the electr light 
beneath us, wa that dark figur with the bent grey head, and the 
twitch elbow. what inhuman hypocrisy, what hate depth of malic 
against hi successor must underli these sinist nocturn labours. 
It wa pain to think of and dread to watch. even I, who had none 
of the acut feel of a virtuoso, could not bear to look on and see 
thi deliber mutil of so ancient a relic. It wa a relief to 
me when my companion tug at my sleev as a signal that I wa to 
follow him as he softli crept out of the room. It wa not until we 
were within hi own quarter that he open hi lips, and then I saw by 
hi agit face how deep wa hi consternation. 

"the abomin goth!" he cried. "could you have believ it?" 

"it is amazing." 

"he is a villain or a lunatic--on or the other. We shall veri soon 
see which. come with me, jackson, and we shall get to the bottom of 
thi black business." 

A door open out of the passag which wa the privat entranc from 
hi room into the museum. thi he open softli with hi key, have 
first kick off hi shoes, an exampl which I followed. We crept 
togeth through room after room, until the larg hall lay befor us, 
with that dark figur still stoop and work at the central case. 
with an advanc as cautiou as hi own we close in upon him, but 
softli as we went we could not take him entir unawares. We were 
still a dozen yard from him when he look round with a start, and 
utter a huski cri of terror, ran frantic down the museum. 

"simpson! simpson!" roar mortimer, and far away down the vista of 
electr light door we saw the stiff figur of the old soldier 
suddenli appear. professor andrea saw him also, and stop running, 
with a gestur of despair. At the same instant we each laid a hand 
upon hi shoulder. 

"yes, yes, gentlemen," he panted, "I will come with you. To your room, 
mr. ward mortimer, if you please! I feel that I owe you an 
explanation." 

My companion' indign wa so great that I could see that he dare 
not trust himself to reply. We walk on each side of the old 
professor, the astonish commissionair bring up the rear. when we 
reach the violat case, mortim stop and examin the 
breastplate. alreadi one of the stone of the lower row had had it 
set turn back in the same manner as the others. My friend held 
it up and glanc furious at hi prisoner. 

"how could you!" he cried. "how could you!" 

"it is horrible--horrible!" said the professor. "I don't wonder at 
your feelings. take me to your room." 

"but thi shall not be left exposed!" cri mortimer. He pick the 
breastplat up and carri it tenderli in hi hand, while I walk 
besid the professor, like a policeman with a malefactor. We pass 
into mortimer' chambers, leav the amaz old soldier to understand 
matter as best he could. the professor sat down in mortimer' 
arm-chair, and turn so ghastli a colour that for the instant all our 
resent wa chang to concern. A stiff glass of brandi brought the 
life back to him onc more. 

"there, I am better now!" said he. "these last few day have been too 
much for me. I am convinc that I could not stand it ani longer. It 
is a nightmare--a horribl nightmare--that I should be arrest as a 
burglar in what ha been for so long my own museum. and yet I cannot 
blame you. you could not have done otherwise. My hope alway wa that 
I should get it all over befor I wa detected. thi would have been 
my last night' work." 

"how did you get in?" ask mortimer. 

"bi take a veri great liberti with your privat door. but the object 
justifi it. the object justifi everything. you will not be angri 
when you know everything--at least, you will not be angri with me. I 
had a key to your side door and also to the museum door. I did not 
give them up when I left. and so you see it wa not difficult for me 
to let myself into the museum. I use to come in earli befor the 
crowd had clear from the street. then I hid myself in the mummy-case, 
and took refug there whenev simpson came round. I could alway hear 
him coming. I use to leav in the same way as I came." 

"you ran a risk." 

"I had to." 

"but why? what on earth wa your object--y to do a thing like that!" 
mortim point reproach at the plate which lay befor him on the 
table. 

"I could devis no other means. I thought and thought, but there wa 
no altern except a hideou public scandal, and a privat sorrow 
which would have cloud our lives. I act for the best, incred 
as it may seem to you, and I onli ask your attent to enabl me to 
prove it." 

"I will hear what you have to say befor I take ani further steps," 
said mortimer, grimly. 

"I am determin to hold back nothing, and to take you both complet 
into my confidence. I will leav it to your own generos how far you 
will use the fact with which I suppli you." 

"we have the essenti fact already." 

"and yet you understand nothing. let me go back to what pass a few 
week ago, and I will make it all clear to you. believ me that what I 
say is the absolut and exact truth. 

"you have met the person who call himself captain wilson. I say 
'call himself' becaus I have reason now to believ that it is not hi 
correct name. It would take me too long if I were to describ all the 
mean by which he obtain an introduct to me and ingrati 
himself into my friendship and the affect of my daughter. He 
brought letter from foreign colleagu which compel me to show him 
some attention. and then, by hi own attainments, which are 
considerable, he succeed in make himself a veri welcom visitor at 
my rooms. when I learn that my daughter' affect had been gain 
by him, I may have thought it premature, but I certainli wa not 
surprised, for he had a charm of manner and of convers which would 
have made him conspicu in ani society. 

"he wa much interest in orient antiquities, and hi knowledg of 
the subject justifi hi interest. often when he spent the even 
with us he would ask permiss to go down into the museum and have an 
opportun of privat inspect the variou specimens. you can 
imagin that I, as an enthusiast, wa in sympathi with such a request, 
and that I felt no surpris at the constanc of hi visits. after hi 
actual engag to elise, there wa hardli an even which he did 
not pass with us, and an hour or two were gener devot to the 
museum. He had the free run of the place, and when I have been away 
for the even I had no object to hi do whatev he wish 
here. thi state of thing wa onli termin by the fact of my 
resign of my offici duti and my retir to norwood, where I 
hope to have the leisur to write a consider work which I had 
planned. 

"it wa immedi after this--within a week or so--that I first 
realiz the true natur and charact of the man whom I had so 
imprud introduc into my family. the discoveri came to me 
through letter from my friend abroad, which show me that hi 
introduct to me had been forgeries. aghast at the revelation, I 
ask myself what motiv thi man could origin have had in 
practis thi elabor decept upon me. I wa too poor a man for 
ani fortune-hunt to have mark me down. why, then, had he come? I 
rememb that some of the most preciou gem in europ had been under 
my charge, and I rememb also the ingeni excus by which thi 
man had made himself familiar with the case in which they were kept. 
He wa a rascal who wa plan some gigant robbery. how could I, 
without strike my own daughter, who wa infatu about him, prevent 
him from carri out ani plan which he might have formed? My devic 
wa a clumsi one, and yet I could think of noth more effective. If 
I had written a letter under my own name, you would natur have 
turn to me for detail which I did not wish to give. I resort to 
an anonym letter, beg you to be upon your guard. 

"I may tell you that my chang from belmor street to norwood had not 
affect the visit of thi man, who had, I believe, a real and 
overpow affect for my daughter. As to her, I could not have 
believ that ani woman could be so complet under the influenc of a 
man as she was. hi stronger natur seem to entir domin her. 
I had not realiz how far thi wa the case, or the extent of the 
confid which exist between them, until that veri even when hi 
true charact for the first time wa made clear to me. I had given 
order that when he call he should be shown into my studi instead of 
to the drawing-room. there I told him bluntli that I knew all about 
him, that I had taken step to defeat hi designs, and that neither I 
nor my daughter desir ever to see him again. I ad that I thank 
god that I had found him out befor he had time to harm those preciou 
object which it had been the work of my life-tim to protect. 

"he wa certainli a man of iron nerve. He took my remark without a 
sign either of surpris or of defiance, but listen grave and 
attent until I had finished. then he walk across the room 
without a word and struck the bell. 

"'ask miss andrea to be so kind as to step thi way,' said he to the 
servant. 

"mi daughter entered, and the man close the door behind her. then he 
took her hand in his. 

"'elise,' said he, 'your father ha just discov that I am a 
villain. He know now what you knew before.' 

"she stood in silence, listening. 

"'he say that we are to part for ever,' said he. 

"she did not withdraw her hand. 

"'will you be true to me, or will you remov the last good influenc 
which is ever like to come into my life?' 

"'john,' she cried, passionately. 'I will never abandon you! never, 
never, not if the whole world were against you.' 

"in vain I argu and plead with her. It wa absolut useless. 
her whole life wa bound up in thi man befor me. My daughter, 
gentlemen, is all that I have left to love, and it fill me with agoni 
when I saw how powerless I wa to save her from her ruin. My 
helpless seem to touch thi man who wa the caus of my trouble. 

"'it may not be as bad as you think, sir,' said he, in hi quiet, 
inflex way. 'I love elis with a love which is strong enough to 
rescu even one who ha such a record as I have. It wa but yesterday 
that I promis her that never again in my whole life would I do a 
thing of which she should be ashamed. I have made up my mind to it, 
and never yet did I make up my mind to a thing which I did not do.' 

"he spoke with an air which carri convict with it. As he 
conclud he put hi hand into hi pocket and he drew out a small 
cardboard box. 

"'i am about to give you a proof of my determination,' said he. 'this, 
elise, shall be the first-fruit of your redeem influenc over me. 
you are right, sir, in think that I had design upon the jewel in 
your possession. such ventur have had a charm for me, which depend 
as much upon the risk run as upon the valu of the prize. those famou 
and antiqu stone of the jewish priest were a challeng to my dare 
and my ingenuity. I determin to get them.' 

"'i guess as much.' 

"'there wa onli one thing that you did not guess.' 

"'and what is that?' 

"'that I got them. they are in thi box.' 

"he open the box, and tilt out the content upon the corner of my 
desk. My hair rose and my flesh grew cold as I looked. there were 
twelv magnific squar stone engrav with mystic characters. 
there could be no doubt that they were the jewel of the urim and 
thummim. 

"'good god!' I cried. 'how have you escap discovery?' 

"'bi the substitut of twelv others, made especi to my order, in 
which the origin are so care imit that I defi the eye to 
detect the difference.' 

"'then the present stone are false?' I cried. 

"'they have been for some weeks.' 

"we all stood in silence, my daughter white with emotion, but still 
hold thi man by the hand. 

"'you see what I am capabl of, elise,' said he. 

"'i see that you are capabl of repent and restitution,' she 
answered. 

"'yes, thank to your influence! I leav the stone in your hands, 
sir. Do what you like about it. but rememb that whatev you do 
against me, is done against the futur husband of your onli daughter. 
you will hear from me soon again, elise. It is the last time that I 
will ever caus pain to your tender heart,' and with these word he 
left both the room and the house. 

"mi posit wa a dread one. here I wa with these preciou relic 
in my possession, and how could I return them without a scandal and an 
exposure? I knew the depth of my daughter' natur too well to suppos 
that I would ever be abl to detach her from thi man now that she had 
entir given him her heart. I wa not even sure how far it wa right 
to detach her if she had such an amelior influenc over him. how 
could I expos him without injur her--and how far wa I justifi in 
expos him when he had voluntarili put himself into my power? I 
thought and thought until at last I form a resolut which may seem 
to you to be a foolish one, and yet, if I had to do it again, I believ 
it would be the best cours open to me. 

"mi idea wa to return the stone without anyon be the wiser. with 
my key I could get into the museum at ani time, and I wa confid 
that I could avoid simpson, whose hour and method were familiar to 
me. I determin to take no one into my confidence--not even my 
daughter--whom I told that I wa about to visit my brother in scotland. 
I want a free hand for a few nights, without inquiri as to my come 
and goings. To thi end I took a room in hard street that veri 
night, with an intim that I wa a pressman, and that I should keep 
veri late hours. 

"that night I made my way into the museum, and I replac four of the 
stones. It wa hard work, and took me all night. when simpson came 
round I alway heard hi footsteps, and conceal myself in the 
mummy-case. I had some knowledg of gold-work, but wa far less 
skil than the thief had been. He had replac the set so 
exactli that I defi anyon to see the difference. My work wa rude and 
clumsy. however, I hope that the plate might not be care 
examined, or the rough of the set observed, until my task wa 
done. next night I replac four more stones. and tonight I should 
have finish my task had it not been for the unfortun circumst 
which ha caus me to reveal so much which I should have wish to 
keep concealed. I appeal to you, gentlemen, to your sens of honour 
and of compassion, whether what I have told you should go ani farther 
or not. My own happiness, my daughter' future, the hope of thi 
man' regeneration, all depend upon your decision. 

"which is," said my friend, "that all is well that end well and that 
the whole matter end here and at once. tomorrow the loos set 
shall be tighten by an expert goldsmith, and so pass the greatest 
danger to which, sinc the destruct of the temple, the urim and 
thummim ha been exposed. here is my hand, professor andreas, and I 
can onli hope that under such difficult circumst I should have 
carri myself as unselfishli and as well." 

just one footnot to thi narrative. within a month elis andrea wa 
marri to a man whose name, had I the indiscret to mention it, 
would appeal to my reader as one who is now wide and deservedli 
honoured. but if the truth were known that honour is due not to him, 
but to the gentl girl who pluck him back when he had gone so far 
down that dark road along which few return. 









end of project gutenberg' tale of terror and mystery, by arthur conan doyl 

*** end OF thi project gutenberg ebook tale OF terror and mysteri *** 

***** thi file should be name 537.txt or 537.zip ***** 
thi and all associ file of variou format will be found in: 
http://www.gutenberg.org/5/3/537/ 

produc by charl keller. html version by Al haines. 

updat edit will replac the previou one--th old edit 
will be renamed. 

creat the work from public domain print edit mean that no 
one own a unit state copyright in these works, so the foundat 
(and you!) can copi and distribut it in the unit state without 
permiss and without pay copyright royalties. special rules, 
set forth in the gener term of use part of thi license, appli to 
copi and distribut project gutenberg-tm electron work to 
protect the project gutenberg-tm concept and trademark. project 
gutenberg is a regist trademark, and may not be use if you 
charg for the ebooks, unless you receiv specif permission. If you 
do not charg anyth for copi of thi ebook, compli with the 
rule is veri easy. you may use thi ebook for nearli ani purpos 
such as creation of deriv works, reports, perform and 
research. they may be modifi and print and given away--y may do 
practic anyth with public domain ebooks. redistribut is 
subject to the trademark license, especi commerci 
redistribution. 



*** start: full licens *** 

the full project gutenberg licens 
pleas read thi befor you distribut OR use thi work 

To protect the project gutenberg-tm mission of promot the free 
distribut of electron works, by use or distribut thi work 
(or ani other work associ in ani way with the phrase "project 
gutenberg"), you agre to compli with all the term of the full project 
gutenberg-tm licens (avail with thi file or onlin at 
http://gutenberg.net/license). 


section 1. gener term of use and redistribut project gutenberg-tm 
electron work 

1.a. By read or use ani part of thi project gutenberg-tm 
electron work, you indic that you have read, understand, agre to 
and accept all the term of thi licens and intellectu properti 
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agre to abid by all 
the term of thi agreement, you must ceas use and return or destroy 
all copi of project gutenberg-tm electron work in your possession. 
If you paid a fee for obtain a copi of or access to a project 
gutenberg-tm electron work and you do not agre to be bound by the 
term of thi agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or 
entiti to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.e.8. 

1.b. "project gutenberg" is a regist trademark. It may onli be 
use on or associ in ani way with an electron work by peopl who 
agre to be bound by the term of thi agreement. there are a few 
thing that you can do with most project gutenberg-tm electron work 
even without compli with the full term of thi agreement. see 
paragraph 1.c below. there are a lot of thing you can do with project 
gutenberg-tm electron work if you follow the term of thi agreement 
and help preserv free futur access to project gutenberg-tm electron 
works. see paragraph 1.e below. 

1.c. the project gutenberg literari archiv foundat ("the foundation" 
or pglaf), own a compil copyright in the collect of project 
gutenberg-tm electron works. nearli all the individu work in the 
collect are in the public domain in the unit states. If an 
individu work is in the public domain in the unit state and you are 
locat in the unit states, we do not claim a right to prevent you from 
copying, distributing, performing, display or creat deriv 
work base on the work as long as all refer to project gutenberg 
are removed. Of course, we hope that you will support the project 
gutenberg-tm mission of promot free access to electron work by 
freeli share project gutenberg-tm work in complianc with the term of 
thi agreement for keep the project gutenberg-tm name associ with 
the work. you can easili compli with the term of thi agreement by 
keep thi work in the same format with it attach full project 
gutenberg-tm licens when you share it without charg with others. 

1.d. the copyright law of the place where you are locat also govern 
what you can do with thi work. copyright law in most countri are in 
a constant state of change. If you are outsid the unit states, check 
the law of your countri in addit to the term of thi agreement 
befor downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distribut or 
creat deriv work base on thi work or ani other project 
gutenberg-tm work. the foundat make no represent concern 
the copyright statu of ani work in ani countri outsid the unit 
states. 

1.e. unless you have remov all refer to project gutenberg: 

1.e.1. the follow sentence, with activ link to, or other immedi 
access to, the full project gutenberg-tm licens must appear promin 
whenev ani copi of a project gutenberg-tm work (ani work on which the 
phrase "project gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "project 
gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed, 
copi or distributed: 

thi ebook is for the use of anyon anywher at no cost and with 
almost no restrict whatsoever. you may copi it, give it away or 
re-us it under the term of the project gutenberg licens includ 
with thi ebook or onlin at www.gutenberg.net 

1.e.2. If an individu project gutenberg-tm electron work is deriv 
from the public domain (doe not contain a notic indic that it is 
post with permiss of the copyright holder), the work can be copi 
and distribut to anyon in the unit state without pay ani fee 
or charges. If you are redistribut or provid access to a work 
with the phrase "project gutenberg" associ with or appear on the 
work, you must compli either with the requir of paragraph 1.e.1 
through 1.e.7 or obtain permiss for the use of the work and the 
project gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraph 1.e.8 or 
1.e.9. 

1.e.3. If an individu project gutenberg-tm electron work is post 
with the permiss of the copyright holder, your use and distribut 
must compli with both paragraph 1.e.1 through 1.e.7 and ani addit 
term impos by the copyright holder. addit term will be link 
to the project gutenberg-tm licens for all work post with the 
permiss of the copyright holder found at the begin of thi work. 

1.e.4. Do not unlink or detach or remov the full project gutenberg-tm 
licens term from thi work, or ani file contain a part of thi 
work or ani other work associ with project gutenberg-tm. 

1.e.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribut or redistribut thi 
electron work, or ani part of thi electron work, without 
promin display the sentenc set forth in paragraph 1.e.1 with 
activ link or immedi access to the full term of the project 
gutenberg-tm license. 

1.e.6. you may convert to and distribut thi work in ani binary, 
compressed, mark up, nonproprietari or proprietari form, includ ani 
word process or hypertext form. however, if you provid access to or 
distribut copi of a project gutenberg-tm work in a format other than 
"plain vanilla ascii" or other format use in the offici version 
post on the offici project gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net), 
you must, at no addit cost, fee or expens to the user, provid a 
copy, a mean of export a copy, or a mean of obtain a copi upon 
request, of the work in it origin "plain vanilla ascii" or other 
form. ani altern format must includ the full project gutenberg-tm 
licens as specifi in paragraph 1.e.1. 

1.e.7. Do not charg a fee for access to, viewing, displaying, 
performing, copi or distribut ani project gutenberg-tm work 
unless you compli with paragraph 1.e.8 or 1.e.9. 

1.e.8. you may charg a reason fee for copi of or provid 
access to or distribut project gutenberg-tm electron work provid 
that 

- you pay a royalti fee of 20% of the gross profit you deriv from 
the use of project gutenberg-tm work calcul use the method 
you alreadi use to calcul your applic taxes. the fee is 
owe to the owner of the project gutenberg-tm trademark, but he 
ha agre to donat royalti under thi paragraph to the 
project gutenberg literari archiv foundation. royalti payment 
must be paid within 60 day follow each date on which you 
prepar (or are legal requir to prepare) your period tax 
returns. royalti payment should be clearli mark as such and 
sent to the project gutenberg literari archiv foundat at the 
address specifi in section 4, "inform about donat to 
the project gutenberg literari archiv foundation." 

- you provid a full refund of ani money paid by a user who notifi 
you in write (or by e-mail) within 30 day of receipt that s/he 
doe not agre to the term of the full project gutenberg-tm 
license. you must requir such a user to return or 
destroy all copi of the work possess in a physic medium 
and discontinu all use of and all access to other copi of 
project gutenberg-tm works. 

- you provide, in accord with paragraph 1.f.3, a full refund of ani 
money paid for a work or a replac copy, if a defect in the 
electron work is discov and report to you within 90 day 
of receipt of the work. 

- you compli with all other term of thi agreement for free 
distribut of project gutenberg-tm works. 

1.e.9. If you wish to charg a fee or distribut a project gutenberg-tm 
electron work or group of work on differ term than are set 
forth in thi agreement, you must obtain permiss in write from 
both the project gutenberg literari archiv foundat and michael 
hart, the owner of the project gutenberg-tm trademark. contact the 
foundat as set forth in section 3 below. 

1.f. 

1.f.1. project gutenberg volunt and employe expend consider 
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcrib and proofread 
public domain work in creat the project gutenberg-tm 
collection. despit these efforts, project gutenberg-tm electron 
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain 
"defects," such as, but not limit to, incomplete, inaccur or 
corrupt data, transcript errors, a copyright or other intellectu 
properti infringement, a defect or damag disk or other medium, a 
comput virus, or comput code that damag or cannot be read by 
your equipment. 

1.f.2. limit warranty, disclaim OF damag - except for the "right 
of replac or refund" describ in paragraph 1.f.3, the project 
gutenberg literari archiv foundation, the owner of the project 
gutenberg-tm trademark, and ani other parti distribut a project 
gutenberg-tm electron work under thi agreement, disclaim all 
liabil to you for damages, cost and expenses, includ legal 
fees. you agre that you have NO remedi for negligence, strict 
liability, breach OF warranti OR breach OF contract except those 
provid IN paragraph f3. you agre that the foundation, the 
trademark owner, and ani distributor under thi agreement will not BE 
liabl TO you for actual, direct, indirect, consequential, punit OR 
incident damag even IF you give notic OF the possibl OF such 
damage. 

1.f.3. limit right OF replac OR refund - If you discov a 
defect in thi electron work within 90 day of receiv it, you can 
receiv a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by send a 
written explan to the person you receiv the work from. If you 
receiv the work on a physic medium, you must return the medium with 
your written explanation. the person or entiti that provid you with 
the defect work may elect to provid a replac copi in lieu of a 
refund. If you receiv the work electronically, the person or entiti 
provid it to you may choos to give you a second opportun to 
receiv the work electron in lieu of a refund. If the second copi 
is also defective, you may demand a refund in write without further 
opportun to fix the problem. 

1.f.4. except for the limit right of replac or refund set forth 
in paragraph 1.f.3, thi work is provid to you 'as-is' with NO other 
warranti OF ani kind, express OR implied, includ but not limit TO 
warranti OF merchant OR fit for ani purpose. 

1.f.5. some state do not allow disclaim of certain impli 
warranti or the exclus or limit of certain type of damages. 
If ani disclaim or limit set forth in thi agreement violat the 
law of the state applic to thi agreement, the agreement shall be 
interpret to make the maximum disclaim or limit permit by 
the applic state law. the invalid or unenforc of ani 
provis of thi agreement shall not void the remain provisions. 

1.f.6. indemn - you agre to indemnifi and hold the foundation, the 
trademark owner, ani agent or employe of the foundation, anyon 
provid copi of project gutenberg-tm electron work in accord 
with thi agreement, and ani volunt associ with the production, 
promot and distribut of project gutenberg-tm electron works, 
harmless from all liability, cost and expenses, includ legal fees, 
that aris directli or indirectli from ani of the follow which you do 
or caus to occur: (a) distribut of thi or ani project gutenberg-tm 
work, (b) alteration, modification, or addit or delet to ani 
project gutenberg-tm work, and (c) ani defect you cause. 


section 2. inform about the mission of project gutenberg-tm 

project gutenberg-tm is synonym with the free distribut of 
electron work in format readabl by the widest varieti of comput 
includ obsolete, old, middle-ag and new computers. It exist 
becaus of the effort of hundr of volunt and donat from 
peopl in all walk of life. 

volunt and financi support to provid volunt with the 
assist they need, is critic to reach project gutenberg-tm' 
goal and ensur that the project gutenberg-tm collect will 
remain freeli avail for gener to come. In 2001, the project 
gutenberg literari archiv foundat wa creat to provid a secur 
and perman futur for project gutenberg-tm and futur generations. 
To learn more about the project gutenberg literari archiv foundat 
and how your effort and donat can help, see section 3 and 4 
and the foundat web page at http://www.pglaf.org. 


section 3. inform about the project gutenberg literari archiv 
foundat 

the project gutenberg literari archiv foundat is a non profit 
501(c)(3) educ corpor organ under the law of the 
state of mississippi and grant tax exempt statu by the intern 
revenu service. the foundation' ein or feder tax identif 
number is 64-6221541. it 501(c)(3) letter is post at 
http://pglaf.org/fundraising. contribut to the project gutenberg 
literari archiv foundat are tax deduct to the full extent 
permit by u.s. feder law and your state' laws. 

the foundation' princip offic is locat at 4557 melan dr. S. 
fairbanks, ak, 99712., but it volunt and employe are scatter 
throughout numer locations. it busi offic is locat at 
809 north 1500 west, salt lake city, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email 
business@pglaf.org. email contact link and up to date contact 
inform can be found at the foundation' web site and offici 
page at http://pglaf.org 

for addit contact information: 
dr. gregori B. newbi 
chief execut and director 
gbnewby@pglaf.org 


section 4. inform about donat to the project gutenberg 
literari archiv foundat 

project gutenberg-tm depend upon and cannot surviv without wide 
spread public support and donat to carri out it mission of 
increas the number of public domain and licens work that can be 
freeli distribut in machin readabl form access by the widest 
array of equip includ outdat equipment. mani small donat 
($1 to $5,000) are particularli import to maintain tax exempt 
statu with the irs. 

the foundat is commit to compli with the law regul 
chariti and charit donat in all 50 state of the unit 
states. complianc requir are not uniform and it take a 
consider effort, much paperwork and mani fee to meet and keep up 
with these requirements. We do not solicit donat in locat 
where we have not receiv written confirm of compliance. To 
send donat or determin the statu of complianc for ani 
particular state visit http://pglaf.org 

while we cannot and do not solicit contribut from state where we 
have not met the solicit requirements, we know of no prohibit 
against accept unsolicit donat from donor in such state who 
approach us with offer to donate. 

intern donat are grate accepted, but we cannot make 
ani statement concern tax treatment of donat receiv from 
outsid the unit states. u.s. law alon swamp our small staff. 

pleas check the project gutenberg web page for current donat 
method and addresses. donat are accept in a number of other 
way includ includ checks, onlin payment and credit card 
donations. To donate, pleas visit: http://pglaf.org/don 


section 5. gener inform about project gutenberg-tm electron 
works. 

professor michael S. hart is the origin of the project gutenberg-tm 
concept of a librari of electron work that could be freeli share 
with anyone. for thirti years, he produc and distribut project 
gutenberg-tm ebook with onli a loos network of volunt support. 


project gutenberg-tm ebook are often creat from sever print 
editions, all of which are confirm as public domain in the u.s. 
unless a copyright notic is included. thus, we do not necessarili 
keep ebook in complianc with ani particular paper edition. 


most peopl start at our web site which ha the main PG search facility: 

http://www.gutenberg.net 

thi web site includ inform about project gutenberg-tm, 
includ how to make donat to the project gutenberg literari 
archiv foundation, how to help produc our new ebooks, and how to 
subscrib to our email newslett to hear about new ebooks. 
