the project gutenberg ebook of the monk; a romance, by M. G. lewi 

thi ebook is for the use of anyon anywher at no cost and with 
almost no restrict whatsoever. you may copi it, give it away or 
re-us it under the term of the project gutenberg licens includ 
with thi ebook or onlin at www.gutenberg.net 


title: the monk; a romanc 

author: M. G. lewi 

post date: octob 10, 2008 [ebook #601] 
releas date: july, 1996 
last updated: march 19, 2015 

language: english 


*** start OF thi project gutenberg ebook the monk; A romanc *** 




produc by charl keller. html version by Al haines. 









the monk 

A romanc 


by 

matthew lewi 




somnia, terror magicos, miracula, sagas, 
nocturno lemures, portentaque. 
horat. 

dreams, magic terrors, spell of mighti power, 
witches, and ghost who rove at midnight hour. 




prefac 

imit OF horac ep. 20.--b. 1. 

methinks, oh! vain ill-judg book, 
I see thee cast a wish look, 
where reput won and lost are 
In famou row call paternoster. 
incens to find your preciou olio 
buri in unexplor port-folio, 
you scorn the prudent lock and key, 
and pant well bound and gilt to see 
your volum in the window set 
Of stockdale, hookham, or debrett. 

Go then, and pass that danger bourn 
whenc never book can back return: 
and when you find, condemned, despised, 
neglected, blamed, and criticised, 
abus from all who read you fall, 
(if hapli you be read at all 
sore will you your folli sigh at, 
and wish for me, and home, and quiet. 

assum now a conjuror' office, I 
thu on your futur fortun prophesy:-- 
soon as your novelti is o'er, 
and you are young and new no more, 
In some dark dirti corner thrown, 
mouldi with damps, with cobweb strown, 
your leav shall be the book-worm' prey; 
Or sent to chandler-shop away, 
and doom to suffer public scandal, 
shall line the trunk, or wrap the candle! 

but should you meet with approbation, 
and some one find an inclin 
To ask, by natur transit 
respect me and my condition; 
that I am one, the enquir teach, 
nor veri poor, nor veri rich; 
Of passion strong, of hasti nature, 
Of graceless form and dwarfish stature; 
By few approved, and few approving; 
extrem in hate and in loving; 

abhor all whom I dislike, 
ador who my fanci strike; 
In form judgement never long, 
and for the most part judg wrong; 
In friendship firm, but still believ 
other are treacher and deceiving, 
and think in the present aera 
that friendship is a pure chimaera: 
more passion no creatur living, 
proud, obstinate, and unforgiving, 
but yet for those who kind show, 
readi through fire and smoke to go. 

again, should it be ask your page, 
'pray, what may be the author' age?' 
your faults, no doubt, will make it clear, 
I scarc have seen my twentieth year, 
which passed, kind reader, on my word, 
while england' throne held georg the third. 

now then your ventur cours pursue: 
go, my delight! dear book, adieu! 

hague, 
oct. 28, 1794. M. G. L. 




advertis 

the first idea of thi romanc wa suggest by the stori of the santon 
barsisa, relat in the guardian.--th bleed nun is a tradit 
still credit in mani part of germany; and I have been told that the 
ruin of the castl of lauenstein, which she is suppos to haunt, may 
yet be seen upon the border of thuringia.--th water-king, from the 
third to the twelfth stanza, is the fragment of an origin danish 
ballad--and belerma and durandart is translat from some stanza to 
be found in a collect of old spanish poetry, which contain also the 
popular song of gayfero and melesindra, mention in don quixote.--i 
have now made a full avow of all the plagiar of which I am awar 
myself; but I doubt not, mani more may be found, of which I am at 
present total unconscious. 




volum I 

chapter I 

----lord angelo is precise; 
stand at a guard with envy; scarc confess 
that hi blood flows, or that hi appetit 
Is more to bread than stone. 
measur for measure. 


scarc had the abbey bell toll for five minutes, and alreadi wa 
the church of the capuchin throng with auditors. Do not encourag 
the idea that the crowd wa assembl either from motiv of pieti or 
thirst of information. but veri few were influenc by those reasons; 
and in a citi where superstit reign with such despot sway as in 
madrid, to seek for true devot would be a fruitless attempt. the 
audienc now assembl in the capuchin church wa collect by variou 
causes, but all of them were foreign to the ostens motive. the 
women came to show themselves, the men to see the women: some were 
attract by curios to hear an orat so celebrated; some came 
becaus they had no better mean of employ their time till the play 
began; some, from be assur that it would be imposs to find 
place in the church; and one half of madrid wa brought thither by 
expect to meet the other half. the onli person truli anxiou to 
hear the preacher were a few antiqu devotees, and half a dozen 
rival orators, determin to find fault with and ridicul the 
discourse. As to the remaind of the audience, the sermon might have 
been omit altogether, certainli without their be disappointed, 
and veri probabl without their perceiv the omission. 

whatev wa the occasion, it is at least certain that the capuchin 
church had never wit a more numer assembly. everi corner wa 
filled, everi seat wa occupied. the veri statu which ornament the 
long aisl were press into the service. boy suspend themselv 
upon the wing of cherubims; st. franci and st. mark bore each a 
spectat on hi shoulders; and st. agatha found herself under the 
necess of carri double. the consequ was, that in spite of 
all their hurri and expedition, our two newcomers, on enter the 
church, look round in vain for places. 

however, the old woman continu to move forwards. In vain were 
exclam of displeasur vent against her from all sides: In vain 
wa she address with--'i assur you, segnora, there are no place 
here.'--'i beg, segnora, that you will not crowd me so 
intolerably!'--'segnora, you cannot pass thi way. bless me! how can 
peopl be so troublesome!'--th old woman wa obstinate, and on she 
went. By dint of persever and two brawni arm she made a passag 
through the crowd, and manag to bustl herself into the veri bodi of 
the church, at no great distanc from the pulpit. her companion had 
follow her with timid and in silence, profit by the exert 
of her conductress. 

'holi virgin!' exclaim the old woman in a tone of disappointment, 
while she threw a glanc of enquiri round her; 'holi virgin! what 
heat! what a crowd! I wonder what can be the mean of all this. I 
believ we must return: there is no such thing as a seat to be had, 
and nobodi seem kind enough to accommod us with theirs.' 

thi broad hint attract the notic of two cavaliers, who occupi 
stool on the right hand, and were lean their back against the 
seventh column from the pulpit. both were young, and richli habited. 
hear thi appeal to their polit pronounc in a femal voice, 
they interrupt their convers to look at the speaker. she had 
thrown up her veil in order to take a clearer look round the cathedral. 
her hair wa red, and she squinted. the cavali turn round, and 
renew their conversation. 

'bi all means,' repli the old woman' companion; 'bi all means, 
leonella, let us return home immediately; the heat is excessive, and I 
am terrifi at such a crowd.' 

these word were pronounc in a tone of unexampl sweetness. the 
cavali again broke off their discourse, but for thi time they were 
not content with look up: both start involuntarili from their 
seats, and turn themselv toward the speaker. 

the voic came from a female, the delicaci and eleg of whose figur 
inspir the youth with the most live curios to view the face to 
which it belonged. thi satisfact wa deni them. her featur 
were hidden by a thick veil; but struggl through the crowd had 
derang it suffici to discov a neck which for symmetri and 
beauti might have vie with the medicean venus. It wa of the most 
dazzl whiteness, and receiv addit charm from be shade by 
the tress of her long fair hair, which descend in ringlet to her 
waist. her figur wa rather below than abov the middl size: It wa 
light and airi as that of an hamadryad. her bosom wa care 
veiled. her dress wa white; it wa fasten by a blue sash, and just 
permit to peep out from under it a littl foot of the most delic 
proportions. A chaplet of larg grain hung upon her arm, and her face 
wa cover with a veil of thick black gauze. such wa the female, to 
whom the youngest of the cavali now offer hi seat, while the 
other thought it necessari to pay the same attent to her companion. 

the old ladi with mani express of gratitude, but without much 
difficulty, accept the offer, and seat herself: the young one 
follow her example, but made no other compliment than a simpl and 
grace reverence. don lorenzo (such wa the cavalier' name, whose 
seat she had accepted) place himself near her; but first He whisper 
a few word in hi friend' ear, who immedi took the hint, and 
endeavour to draw off the old woman' attent from her love 
charge. 

'you are doubtless late arriv at madrid,' said lorenzo to hi fair 
neighbour; 'it is imposs that such charm should have long remain 
unobserved; and had not thi been your first public appearance, the 
envi of the women and ador of the men would have render you 
alreadi suffici remarkable.' 

He paused, in expect of an answer. As hi speech did not 
absolut requir one, the ladi did not open her lips: after a few 
moment He resum hi discourse: 

'am I wrong in suppos you to be a stranger to madrid?' 

the ladi hesitated; and at last, in so low a voic as to be scarc 
intelligible, she made shift to answer,--'no, segnor.' 

'do you intend make a stay of ani length?' 

'yes, segnor.' 

'I should esteem myself fortunate, were it in my power to contribut to 
make your abod agreeable. I am well known at madrid, and my famili 
ha some interest at court. If I can be of ani service, you cannot 
honour or oblig me more than by permit me to be of use to 
you.'--'surely,' said He to himself, 'she cannot answer that by a 
monosyllable; now she must say someth to me.' 

lorenzo wa deceived, for the ladi answer onli by a bow. 

By thi time He had discov that hi neighbour wa not veri 
conversible; but whether her silenc proceed from pride, discretion, 
timidity, or idiotism, He wa still unabl to decide. 

after a paus of some minutes--'it is certainli from your be a 
stranger,' said he, 'and as yet unacquaint with our customs, that you 
continu to wear your veil. permit me to remov it.' 

At the same time He advanc hi hand toward the gauze: the ladi 
rais her to prevent him. 

'I never unveil in public, segnor.' 

'and where is the harm, I pray you?' interrupt her companion somewhat 
sharply; 'do not you see that the other ladi have all laid their 
veil aside, to do honour no doubt to the holi place in which we are? 
I have taken off mine already; and sure if I expos my featur to 
gener observation, you have no caus to put yourself in such a 
wonder alarm! bless maria! here is a fuss and a bustl about a 
chit' face! come, come, child! uncov it; I warrant you that nobodi 
will run away with it from you--' 

'dear aunt, it is not the custom in murcia.' 

'murcia, indeed! holi st. barbara, what doe that signify? you are 
alway put me in mind of that villain province. If it is the 
custom in madrid, that is all that we ought to mind, and therefor I 
desir you to take off your veil immediately. obey me thi moment 
antonia, for you know that I cannot bear contradiction--' 

her niec wa silent, but made no further opposit to don lorenzo' 
efforts, who, arm with the aunt' sanction hasten to remov the 
gauze. what a seraph' head present itself to hi admiration! yet 
it wa rather bewitch than beautiful; It wa not so love from 
regular of featur as from sweet and sensibl of 
countenance. the sever part of her face consid separately, mani 
of them were far from handsome; but when examin together, the whole 
wa adorable. her skin though fair wa not entir without freckles; 
her eye were not veri large, nor their lash particularli long. but 
then her lip were of the most rosi freshness; her fair and undul 
hair, confin by a simpl ribband, pour itself below her waist in a 
profus of ringlets; her throat wa full and beauti in the 
extreme; her hand and arm were form with the most perfect symmetry; 
her mild blue eye seem an heaven of sweetness, and the crystal in 
which they move sparkl with all the brillianc of diamonds: she 
appear to be scarc fifteen; An arch smile, play round her 
mouth, declar her to be possess of liveliness, which excess of 
timid at present represt; she look round her with a bash 
glance; and whenev her eye accident met lorenzo's, she dropt 
them hastili upon her rosary; her cheek wa immedi suffus with 
blushes, and she began to tell her beads; though her manner evid 
show that she knew not what she wa about. 

lorenzo gaze upon her with mingl surpris and admiration; but the 
aunt thought it necessari to apolog for antonia' mauvais honte. 

''ti a young creature,' said she, 'who is total ignor of the 
world. she ha been brought up in an old castl in murcia; with no 
other societi than her mother's, who, god help her! ha no more sense, 
good soul, than is necessari to carri her soup to her mouth. yet she is 
my own sister, both by father and mother.' 

'and ha so littl sense?' said don christov with feign 
astonishment; 'how veri extraordinary!' 

'veri true, segnor; Is it not strange? however, such is the fact; and 
yet onli to see the luck of some people! A young nobleman, of the veri 
first quality, took it into hi head that elvira had some pretens 
to beauty--a to pretensions, in truth, she had alway enough of them; 
but as to beauty....! If I had onli taken half the pain to set 
myself off which she did....! but thi is neither here nor there. 
As I wa saying, segnor, a young nobleman fell in love with her, and 
marri her unknown to hi father. their union remain a secret near 
three years, but at last it came to the ear of the old marquis, who, 
as you may well suppose, wa not much pleas with the intelligence. 
away He post in all hast to cordova, determin to seiz elvira, and 
send her away to some place or other, where she would never be heard of 
more. holi st. paul! how He storm on find that she had escap 
him, had join her husband, and that they had embark togeth for 
the indies. He swore at us all, as if the evil spirit had possess 
him; He threw my father into prison, as honest a painstak shoe-mak 
as ani in cordova; and when He went away, He had the cruelti to take 
from us my sister' littl boy, then scarc two year old, and whom 
in the abrupt of her flight, she had been oblig to leav behind 
her. I suppose, that the poor littl wretch met with bitter bad 
treatment from him, for in a few month after, we receiv intellig 
of hi death.' 

'why, thi wa a most terribl old fellow, segnora!' 

'oh! shocking! and a man so total devoid of taste! why, would you 
believ it, segnor? when I attempt to pacifi him, He curs me for a 
witch, and wish that to punish the count, my sister might becom as 
ugli as myself! ugli indeed! I like him for that.' 

'ridiculous', cri don christoval; 'doubtless the count would have 
thought himself fortunate, had he been permit to exchang the one 
sister for the other.' 

'oh! christ! segnor, you are realli too polite. however, I am 
heartili glad that the cond wa of a differ way of thinking. A 
mighti pretti piec of business, to be sure, elvira ha made of it! 
after broil and stew in the indi for thirteen long years, her 
husband dies, and she return to spain, without an hous to hide her 
head, or money to procur her one! thi antonia wa then but an 
infant, and her onli remain child. she found that her father-in-law 
had marri again, that he wa irreconcil to the conde, and that 
hi second wife had produc him a son, who is report to be a veri 
fine young man. the old marqui refus to see my sister or her child; 
but sent her word that on condit of never hear ani more of her, 
He would assign her a small pension, and she might live in an old 
castl which He possess in murcia; thi had been the favourit 
habit of hi eldest son; but sinc hi flight from spain, the old 
marqui could not bear the place, but let it fall to ruin and 
confusion--mi sister accept the proposal; she retir to murcia, and 
ha remain there till within the last month.' 

'and what bring her now to madrid?' enquir don lorenzo, whom 
admir of the young antonia compel to take a live interest in 
the talk old woman' narration. 

'alas! segnor, her father-in-law be late dead, the steward of hi 
murcian estat ha refus to pay her pension ani longer. 

with the design of supplic hi son to renew it, she is now come to 
madrid; but I doubt, that she might have save herself the trouble! you 
young noblemen have alway enough to do with your money, and are not 
veri often dispos to throw it away upon old women. I advis my 
sister to send antonia with her petition; but she would not hear of 
such a thing. she is so obstinate! well! she will find herself the 
wors for not follow my counsels: the girl ha a good pretti face, 
and possibl might have done much.' 

'ah! segnora,' interrupt don christoval, counterfeit a passion 
air; 'if a pretti face will do the business, whi ha not your sister 
recours to you?' 

'oh! jesus! my lord, I swear you quit overpow me with your 
gallantry! but I promis you that I am too well awar of the danger of 
such expedit to trust myself in a young nobleman' power! no, no; 
I have as yet preserv my reput without blemish or reproach, and 
I alway knew how to keep the men at a proper distance.' 

'of that, segnora, I have not the least doubt. but permit me to ask 
you; have you then ani avers to matrimony?' 

'that is an home question. I cannot but confess, that if an amiabl 
cavali wa to present himself....' 

here she intend to throw a tender and signific look upon don 
christoval; but, as she unluckili happen to squint most abominably, 
the glanc fell directli upon hi companion: lorenzo took the 
compliment to himself, and answer it by a profound bow. 

'may I enquire,' said he, 'the name of the marquis?' 

'the marqui de la cisternas.' 

'I know him intim well. He is not at present in madrid, but is 
expect here daily. He is one of the best of men; and if the love 
antonia will permit me to be her advoc with him, I doubt not my 
be abl to make a favour report of her cause.' 

antonia rais her blue eyes, and silent thank him for the offer by 
a smile of inexpress sweetness. leonella' satisfact wa much 
more loud and audible: indeed, as her niec wa gener silent in her 
company, she thought it incumb upon her to talk enough for both: 
thi she manag without difficulty, for she veri seldom found herself 
defici in words. 

'oh! segnor!' she cried; 'you will lay our whole famili under the most 
signal obligations! I accept your offer with all possibl gratitude, 
and return you a thousand thank for the generos of your proposal. 
antonia, whi do not you speak, child? while the cavali say all 
sort of civil thing to you, you sit like a statue, and never utter a 
syllabl of thanks, either bad, good, or indifferent!' 

'mi dear aunt, I am veri sensibl that....' 

'fye, niece! how often have I told you, that you never should 
interrupt a person who is speaking!? when did you ever know me do such 
a thing? are these your murcian manners? merci on me! I shall never 
be abl to make thi girl ani thing like a person of good breeding. 
but pray, segnor,' she continued, address herself to don christoval, 
'inform me, whi such a crowd is assembl today in thi cathedral?' 

'can you possibl be ignorant, that ambrosio, abbot of thi monastery, 
pronounc a sermon in thi church everi thursday? all madrid ring 
with hi praises. As yet He ha preach but thrice; but all who have 
heard him are so delight with hi eloquence, that it is as difficult 
to obtain a place at church, as at the first represent of a new 
comedy. hi fame certainli must have reach your ears--' 

'alas! segnor, till yesterday I never had the good fortun to see 
madrid; and at cordova we are so littl inform of what is pass in 
the rest of the world, that the name of ambrosio ha never been 
mention in it precincts.' 

'you will find it in everi one' mouth at madrid. He seem to have 
fascin the inhabitants; and not have attend hi sermon myself, 
I am astonish at the enthusiasm which He ha excited. the ador 
paid him both by young and old, by man and woman is unexampled. the 
grande load him with presents; their wive refus to have ani other 
confessor, and he is known through all the citi by the name of the 
"man of holiness".' 

'undoubtedly, segnor, He is of nobl origin--' 

'that point still remain undecided. the late superior of the 
capuchin found him while yet an infant at the abbey door. all 
attempt to discov who had left him there were vain, and the child 
himself could give no account of hi parents. He wa educ in the 
monastery, where He ha remain ever since. He earli show a strong 
inclin for studi and retirement, and as soon as He wa of a proper 
age, He pronounc hi vows. No one ha ever appear to claim him, or 
clear up the mysteri which conceal hi birth; and the monks, who find 
their account in the favour which is shewn to their establish from 
respect to him, have not hesit to publish that He is a present to 
them from the virgin. In truth the singular auster of hi life 
give some counten to the report. He is now thirti year old, 
everi hour of which period ha been pass in study, total seclus 
from the world, and mortif of the flesh. till these last three 
weeks, when He wa chosen superior of the societi to which He belongs, 
He had never been on the outsid of the abbey walls: even now He never 
quit them except on thursdays, when He deliv a discours in thi 
cathedr which all madrid assembl to hear. hi knowledg is said to 
be the most profound, hi eloqu the most persuasive. In the whole 
cours of hi life He ha never been known to transgress a singl rule 
of hi order; the smallest stain is not to be discov upon hi 
character; and He is report to be so strict an observ of chastity, 
that He know not in what consist the differ of man and woman. 
the common peopl therefor esteem him to be a saint.' 

'doe that make a saint?' enquir antonia; 'bless me! then am I one?' 

'holi st. barbara!' exclaim leonella; 'what a question! fye, child, 
fye! these are not fit subject for young women to handle. you should 
not seem to rememb that there is such a thing as a man in the world, 
and you ought to imagin everi bodi to be of the same sex with 
yourself. I should like to see you give peopl to understand, that you 
know that a man ha no breasts, and no hips, and no ...'. 

luckili for antonia' ignor which her aunt' lectur would soon 
have dispelled, an univers murmur through the church announc the 
preacher' arrival. donna leonella rose from her seat to take a better 
view of him, and antonia follow her example. 

He wa a man of nobl port and command presence. hi statur wa 
lofty, and hi featur uncommonli handsome. hi nose wa aquiline, 
hi eye larg black and sparkling, and hi dark brow almost join 
together. hi complexion wa of a deep but clear brown; studi and 
watch had entir depriv hi cheek of colour. tranquil 
reign upon hi smooth unwrinkl forehead; and content, express 
upon everi feature, seem to announc the man equal unacquaint 
with care and crimes. He bow himself with humil to the audience: 
still there wa a certain sever in hi look and manner that inspir 
univers awe, and few could sustain the glanc of hi eye at onc 
fieri and penetrating. such wa ambrosio, abbot of the capuchins, and 
surnamed, 'the man of holiness'. 

antonia, while she gaze upon him eagerly, felt a pleasur flutter 
in her bosom which till then had been unknown to her, and for which she 
in vain endeavour to account. she wait with impati till the 
sermon should begin; and when at length the friar spoke, the sound of 
hi voic seem to penetr into her veri soul. though no other of 
the spectat felt such violent sensat as did the young antonia, 
yet everi one listen with interest and emotion. they who were 
insens to religion' merits, were still enchant with ambrosio' 
oratory. all found their attent irresist attract while He 
spoke, and the most profound silenc reign through the crowd aisles. 

even lorenzo could not resist the charm: He forgot that antonia wa 
seat near him, and listen to the preacher with undivid attention. 

In languag nervous, clear, and simple, the monk expati on the 
beauti of religion. He explain some abstrus part of the sacr 
write in a style that carri with it univers conviction. hi 
voic at onc distinct and deep wa fraught with all the terror of the 
tempest, while He inveigh against the vice of humanity, and 
describ the punish reserv for them in a futur state. everi 
hearer look back upon hi past offences, and trembled: the thunder 
seem to roll, whose bolt wa destin to crush him, and the abyss of 
etern destruct to open befor hi feet. but when ambrosio, 
chang hi theme, spoke of the excel of an unsulli conscience, 
of the gloriou prospect which etern present to the soul untaint 
with reproach, and of the recompens which await it in the region of 
everlast glory, hi auditor felt their scatter spirit insens 
return. they threw themselv with confid upon the merci of their 
judge; they hung with delight upon the consol word of the preacher; 
and while hi full voic swell into melody, they were transport to 
those happi region which He paint to their imagin in colour 
so brilliant and glowing. 

the discours wa of consider length; yet when it concluded, the 
audienc griev that it had not last longer. though the monk had 
ceas to speak, enthusiast silenc still prevail through the 
church: At length the charm gradual dissolving, the gener 
admir wa express in audibl terms. As ambrosio descend from 
the pulpit, hi auditor crowd round him, load him with blessings, 
threw themselv at hi feet, and kiss the hem of hi garment. He 
pass on slowli with hi hand cross devoutli upon hi bosom, to the 
door open into the abbey chapel, at which hi monk wait to 
receiv him. He ascend the steps, and then turn toward hi 
followers, address to them a few word of gratitude, and exhortation. 
while He spoke, hi rosary, compos of larg grain of amber, fell 
from hi hand, and drop among the surround multitude. It wa 
seiz eagerly, and immedi divid amidst the spectators. whoever 
becam possessor of a bead, preserv it as a sacr relique; and had 
it been the chaplet of thrice-bless st. franci himself, it could not 
have been disput with greater vivacity. the abbot, smile at their 
eagerness, pronounc hi benediction, and quit the church, while 
humil dwelt upon everi feature. dwelt she also in hi heart? 

antonia' eye follow him with anxiety. As the door close after 
him, it seem to her as had she lost some one essenti to her 
happiness. A tear stole in silenc down her cheek. 

'he is separ from the world!' said she to herself; 'perhaps, I 
shall never see him more!' 

As she wipe away the tear, lorenzo observ her action. 

'are you satisfi with our orator?' said he; 'or do you think that 
madrid overr hi talents?' 

antonia' heart wa so fill with admir for the monk, that she 
eagerli seiz the opportun of speak of him: besides, as she now 
no longer consid lorenzo as an absolut stranger, she wa less 
embarrass by her excess timidity. 

'oh! He far exce all my expectations,' answer she; 'till thi 
moment I had no idea of the power of eloquence. but when He spoke, 
hi voic inspir me with such interest, such esteem, I might almost 
say such affect for him, that I am myself astonish at the 
acut of my feelings.' 

lorenzo smile at the strength of her expressions. 

'you are young and just enter into life,' said he; 'your heart, new 
to the world and full of warmth and sensibility, receiv it first 
impress with eagerness. artless yourself, you suspect not other 
of deceit; and view the world through the medium of your own truth 
and innocence, you fanci all who surround you to deserv your 
confid and esteem. what pity, that these gay vision must soon be 
dissipated! what pity, that you must soon discov the base of 
mankind, and guard against your fellow-creatur as against your foes!' 

'alas! segnor,' repli antonia; 'the misfortun of my parent have 
alreadi place befor me but too mani sad exampl of the perfidi of 
the world! yet sure in the present instanc the warmth of sympathi 
cannot have deceiv me.' 

'in the present instance, I allow that it ha not. ambrosio' 
charact is perfectli without reproach; and a man who ha pass the 
whole of hi life within the wall of a convent cannot have found the 
opportun to be guilty, even were He possess of the inclination. 
but now, when, oblig by the duti of hi situation, He must enter 
occasion into the world, and be thrown into the way of temptation, 
it is now that it behov him to show the brillianc of hi virtue. 
the trial is dangerous; He is just at that period of life when the 
passion are most vigorous, unbridled, and despotic; hi establish 
reput will mark him out to seduct as an illustri victim; 
novelti will give addit charm to the allur of pleasure; and 
even the talent with which natur ha endow him will contribut to 
hi ruin, by facilit the mean of obtain hi object. veri few 
would return victori from a contest so severe.' 

'ah! sure ambrosio will be one of those few.' 

'of that I have myself no doubt: By all account He is an except to 
mankind in general, and envi would seek in vain for a blot upon hi 
character.' 

'segnor, you delight me by thi assurance! It encourag me to indulg 
my prepossess in hi favour; and you know not with what pain I 
should have repress the sentiment! ah! dearest aunt, entreat my 
mother to choos him for our confessor.' 

'I entreat her?' repli leonella; 'I promis you that I shall do no 
such thing. I do not like thi same ambrosio in the least; He ha a 
look of sever about him that made me trembl from head to foot: 
were He my confessor, I should never have the courag to avow one half 
of my peccadilloes, and then I should be in a rare condition! I never 
saw such a stern-look mortal, and hope that I never shall see such 
another. hi descript of the devil, god bless us! almost terrifi 
me out of my wits, and when He spoke about sinner He seem as if He 
wa readi to eat them.' 

'you are right, segnora,' answer don christoval; 'too great sever 
is said to be ambrosio' onli fault. exempt himself from human 
failings, He is not suffici indulg to those of others; and 
though strictli just and disinterest in hi decisions, hi govern 
of the monk ha alreadi shown some proof of hi inflexibility. but 
the crowd is nearli dissipated: will you permit us to attend you home?' 

'oh! christ! segnor,' exclaim leonella affect to blush; 'I would 
not suffer such a thing for the universe! If I came home attend by 
so gallant a cavalier, My sister is so scrupul that she would read 
me an hour' lecture, and I should never hear the last of it. besides, 
I rather wish you not to make your propos just at present.' 

'mi proposals? I assur you, segnora....' 

'oh! segnor, I believ that your assur of impati are all veri 
true; but realli I must desir a littl respite. It would not be quit 
so delic in me to accept your hand at first sight.' 

'accept my hand? As I hope to live and breathe....' 

'oh! dear segnor, press me no further, if you love me! I shall consid 
your obedi as a proof of your affection; you shall hear from me 
tomorrow, and so farewell. but pray, cavaliers, may I not enquir your 
names?' 

'mi friend's,' repli lorenzo, 'i the cond d'ossorio, and mine 
lorenzo de medina.' 

''ti sufficient. well, don lorenzo, I shall acquaint my sister with 
your oblig offer, and let you know the result with all expedition. 
where may I send to you?' 

'I am alway to be found at the medina palace.' 

'you may depend upon hear from me. farewell, cavaliers. segnor 
conde, let me entreat you to moder the excess ardour of your 
passion: however, to prove to you that I am not displeas with you, 
and prevent your abandon yourself to despair, receiv thi mark of 
my affection, and sometim bestow a thought upon the absent leonella.' 

As she said this, she extend a lean and wrinkl hand; which her 
suppos admir kiss with such sorri grace and constraint so 
evident, that lorenzo with difficulti repress hi inclin to 
laugh. leonella then hasten to quit the church; the love antonia 
follow her in silence; but when she reach the porch, she turn 
involuntarily, and cast back her eye toward lorenzo. He bow to 
her, as bid her farewell; she return the compliment, and hastili 
withdrew. 

'so, lorenzo!' said don christov as soon as they were alone, 'you 
have procur me an agreeabl intrigue! To favour your design upon 
antonia, I obligingli make a few civil speech which mean noth to 
the aunt, and at the end of an hour I find myself upon the brink of 
matrimony! how will you reward me for have suffer so grievous 
for your sake? what can repay me for have kiss the leathern paw of 
that confound old witch? diavolo! she ha left such a scent upon my 
lip that I shall smell of garlick for thi month to come! As I pass 
along the prado, I shall be taken for a walk omelet, or some larg 
onion run to seed!' 

'I confess, my poor count,' repli lorenzo, 'that your servic ha 
been attend with danger; yet am I so far from suppos it be past 
all endur that I shall probabl solicit you to carri on your amour 
still further.' 

'from that petit I conclud that the littl antonia ha made some 
impress upon you.' 

'I cannot express to you how much I am charm with her. sinc my 
father' death, My uncl the duke de medina, ha signifi to me hi 
wish to see me married; I have till now elud hi hints, and refus 
to understand them; but what I have seen thi evening....' 

'well? what have you seen thi evening? whi surely, don lorenzo, you 
cannot be mad enough to think of make a wife out of thi 
grand-daught of "a honest a painstak shoe-mak as ani in 
cordova"?' 

'you forget, that she is also the grand-daught of the late marqui de 
la cisternas; but without disput about birth and titles, I must 
assur you, that I never beheld a woman so interest as antonia.' 

'veri possibly; but you cannot mean to marri her?' 

'whi not, my dear conde? I shall have wealth enough for both of us, 
and you know that my uncl think liber upon the subject. 

from what I have seen of raymond de la cisternas, I am certain that he 
will readili acknowledg antonia for hi niece. her birth therefor 
will be no object to my offer her my hand. I should be a villain 
could I think of her on ani other term than marriage; and in truth she 
seem possess of everi qualiti requisit to make me happi in a wife. 
young, lovely, gentle, sensible....' 

'sensible? why, she said noth but "yes," and "no".' 

'she did not say much more, I must confess--but then she alway said 
"yes," or "no," in the right place.' 

'did she so? oh! your most obedient! that is use a right lover' 
argument, and I dare disput no longer with so profound a casuist. 
suppos we adjourn to the comedy?' 

'it is out of my power. I onli arriv last night at madrid, and have 
not yet had an opportun of see my sister; you know that her 
convent is in thi street, and I wa go thither when the crowd which 
I saw throng into thi church excit my curios to know what wa 
the matter. I shall now pursu my first intention, and probabl pass 
the even with my sister at the parlour grate.' 

'your sister in a convent, say you? oh! veri true, I had forgotten. 
and how doe donna agnes? I am amazed, don lorenzo, how you could 
possibl think of immur so charm a girl within the wall of a 
cloister!' 

'I think of it, don christoval? how can you suspect me of such 
barbarity? you are consciou that she took the veil by her own desire, 
and that particular circumst made her wish for a seclus from 
the world. I use everi mean in my power to induc her to chang her 
resolution; the endeavour wa fruitless, and I lost a sister!' 

'the luckier fellow you; I think, lorenzo, you were a consider 
gainer by that loss: If I rememb right, donna agn had a portion of 
ten thousand pistoles, half of which revert to your lordship. By st. 
jago! I wish that I had fifti sister in the same predicament. I should 
consent to lose them everi soul without much heart-burning--' 

'how, conde?' said lorenzo in an angri voice; 'do you suppos me base 
enough to have influenc my sister' retirement? Do you suppos that 
the despic wish to make myself master of her fortun could....' 

'admirable! courage, don lorenzo! now the man is all in a blaze. god 
grant that antonia may soften that fieri temper, or we shall certainli 
cut each other' throat befor the month is over! however, to prevent 
such a tragic catastroph for the present, I shall make a retreat, 
and leav you master of the field. farewell, my knight of mount aetna! 
moder that inflamm disposition, and rememb that whenev it is 
necessari to make love to yonder harridan, you may reckon upon my 
services.' 

He said, and dart out of the cathedral. 

'how wild-brained!' said lorenzo; 'with so excel an heart, what 
piti that He possess so littl solid of judgment!' 

the night wa now fast advancing. the lamp were not yet lighted. the 
faint beam of the rise moon scarc could pierc through the gothic 
obscur of the church. lorenzo found himself unabl to quit the 
spot. the void left in hi bosom by antonia' absence, and hi 
sister' sacrific which don christov had just recal to hi 
imagination, creat that melancholi of mind which accord but too 
well with the religi gloom surround him. He wa still lean 
against the seventh column from the pulpit. A soft and cool air 
breath along the solitari aisles: the moonbeam dart into the 
church through paint window ting the fret roof and massi 
pillar with a thousand variou tint of light and colours: 

univers silenc prevail around, onli interrupt by the occasion 
close of door in the adjoin abbey. 

the calm of the hour and solitud of the place contribut to nourish 
lorenzo' disposit to melancholy. He threw himself upon a seat which 
stood near him, and abandon himself to the delus of hi fancy. 
He thought of hi union with antonia; He thought of the obstacl which 
might oppos hi wishes; and a thousand chang vision float befor 
hi fancy, sad 'ti true, but not unpleasing. sleep insens stole 
over him, and the tranquil solemn of hi mind when awak for a while 
continu to influenc hi slumbers. 

He still fanci himself to be in the church of the capuchins; but it 
wa no longer dark and solitary. multitud of silver lamp shed 
splendour from the vault roof; accompani by the captiv chaunt 
of distant choristers, the organ' melodi swell through the church; 
the altar seem decor as for some distinguish feast; It wa 
surround by a brilliant company; and near it stood antonia array in 
bridal white, and blush with all the charm of virgin modesty. 

half hoping, half fearing, lorenzo gaze upon the scene befor him. 
sudden the door lead to the abbey unclosed, and He saw, attend by 
a long train of monks, the preacher advanc to whom He had just 
listen with so much admiration. He drew near antonia. 

'and where is the bridegroom?' said the imaginari friar. 

antonia seem to look round the church with anxiety. involuntarili the 
youth advanc a few step from hi concealment. she saw him; the 
blush of pleasur glow upon her cheek; with a grace motion of her 
hand she beckon to him to advance. He disobey not the command; He 
flew toward her, and threw himself at her feet. 

she retreat for a moment; then gaze upon him with unutter 
delight;--'yes!' she exclaimed, 'mi bridegroom! My destin 
bridegroom!' she said, and hasten to throw herself into hi arms; but 
befor He had time to receiv her, an unknown rush between them. hi 
form wa gigantic; hi complexion wa swarthy, hi eye fierc and 
terrible; hi mouth breath out volum of fire; and on hi forehead 
wa written in legibl characters--'pride! lust! inhumanity!' 

antonia shrieked. the monster clasp her in hi arms, and spring 
with her upon the altar, tortur her with hi odiou caresses. she 
endeavour in vain to escap from hi embrace. lorenzo flew to her 
succour, but ere He had time to reach her, a loud burst of thunder wa 
heard. instantli the cathedr seem crumbl into pieces; the monk 
betook themselv to flight, shriek fearfully; the lamp were 
extinguished, the altar sank down, and in it place appear an abyss 
vomit forth cloud of flame. utter a loud and terribl cri the 
monster plung into the gulph, and in hi fall attempt to drag 
antonia with him. He strove in vain. anim by supernatur power 
she disengag herself from hi embrace; but her white robe wa left in 
hi possession. instantli a wing of brilliant splendour spread itself 
from either of antonia' arms. she dart upwards, and while ascend 
cri to lorenzo, 

'friend! we shall meet above!' 

At the same moment the roof of the cathedr opened; harmoni voic 
peal along the vaults; and the glori into which antonia wa receiv 
wa compos of ray of such dazzl brightness, that lorenzo wa 
unabl to sustain the gaze. hi sight failed, and He sank upon the 
ground. 

when He woke, He found himself extend upon the pavement of the 
church: It wa illuminated, and the chaunt of hymn sound from a 
distance. for a while lorenzo could not persuad himself that what He 
had just wit had been a dream, so strong an impress had it 
made upon hi fancy. A littl recollect convinc him of it 
fallacy: the lamp had been light dure hi sleep, and the music 
which he heard wa occas by the monks, who were celebr their 
vesper in the abbey chapel. 

lorenzo rose, and prepar to bend hi step toward hi sister' 
convent. hi mind fulli occupi by the singular of hi dream, He 
alreadi drew near the porch, when hi attent wa attract by 
perceiv a shadow move upon the opposit wall. He look curious 
round, and soon descri a man wrap up in hi cloak, who seem 
care examin whether hi action were observed. veri few peopl 
are exempt from the influenc of curiosity. the unknown seem anxiou 
to conceal hi busi in the cathedral, and it wa thi veri 
circumstance, which made lorenzo wish to discov what He wa about. 

our hero wa consciou that He had no right to pri into the secret of 
thi unknown cavalier. 

'I will go,' said lorenzo. and lorenzo stayed, where He was. 

the shadow thrown by the column, effectu conceal him from the 
stranger, who continu to advanc with caution. At length He drew a 
letter from beneath hi cloak, and hastili place it beneath a coloss 
statu of st. francis. then retir with precipitation, He conceal 
himself in a part of the church at a consider distanc from that in 
which the imag stood. 

'so!' said lorenzo to himself; 'thi is onli some foolish love affair. 
I believe, I may as well be gone, for I can do no good in it.' 

In truth till that moment it never came into hi head that He could do 
ani good in it; but He thought it necessari to make some littl excus 
to himself for have indulg hi curiosity. He now made a second 
attempt to retir from the church: for thi time He gain the porch 
without meet with ani impediment; but it wa destin that He should 
pay it anoth visit that night. As He descend the step lead into 
the street, a cavali rush against him with such violence, that both 
were nearli overturn by the concussion. lorenzo put hi hand to hi 
sword. 

'how now, segnor?' said he; 'what mean you by thi rudeness?' 

'ha! Is it you, medina?' repli the newcomer, whom lorenzo by hi 
voic now recogn for don christoval; 'you are the luckiest fellow 
in the universe, not to have left the church befor my return. in, in! 
my dear lad! they will be here immediately!' 

'who will be here?' 

'the old hen and all her pretti littl chickens! in, I say, and then 
you shall know the whole history.' 

lorenzo follow him into the cathedral, and they conceal themselv 
behind the statu of st. francis. 

'and now,' said our hero, 'may I take the liberti of asking, what is 
the mean of all thi hast and rapture?' 

'oh! lorenzo, we shall see such a gloriou sight! the prioress of st. 
clare and her whole train of nun are come hither. you are to know, 
that the piou father ambrosio (the lord reward him for it!) will upon 
no account move out of hi own precincts: It be absolut 
necessari for everi fashion convent to have him for it confessor, 
the nun are in consequ oblig to visit him at the abbey; sinc 
when the mountain will not come to mahomet, mahomet must need go to 
the mountain. now the prioress of st. clare, the better to escap the 
gaze of such impur eye as belong to yourself and your humbl servant, 
think proper to bring her holi flock to confess in the dusk: she is 
to be admit into the abbey chapel by yon privat door. the 
porteress of st. clare, who is a worthi old soul and a particular 
friend of mine, ha just assur me of their be here in a few 
moments. there is news for you, you rogue! We shall see some of the 
prettiest face in madrid!' 

'in truth, christoval, we shall do no such thing. the nun are alway 
veiled.' 

'no! no! I know better. On enter a place of worship, they ever 
take off their veil from respect to the saint to whom 'ti dedicated. 
but hark! they are coming! silence, silence! observe, and be 
convinced.' 

'good!' said lorenzo to himself; 'I may possibl discov to whom the 
vow are address of thi mysteri stranger.' 

scarc had don christov ceas to speak, when the domina of st. 
clare appeared, follow by a long process of nuns. each upon 
enter the church took off her veil. the prioress cross her hand 
upon her bosom, and made a profound rever as she pass the statu 
of st. francis, the patron of thi cathedral. the nun follow her 
example, and sever move onward without have satisfi lorenzo' 
curiosity. He almost began to despair of see the mysteri clear 
up, when in pay her respect to st. francis, one of the nun 
happen to drop her rosary. As she stoop to pick it up, the light 
flash full upon her face. At the same moment she dexter remov 
the letter from beneath the image, place it in her bosom, and hasten 
to resum her rank in the procession. 

'ha!' said christov in a low voice; 'here we have some littl 
intrigue, no doubt.' 

'agnes, by heaven!' cri lorenzo. 

'what, your sister? diavolo! then somebody, I suppose, will have to 
pay for our peeping.' 

'and shall pay for it without delay,' repli the incens brother. 

the piou process had now enter the abbey; the door wa alreadi 
close upon it. the unknown immedi quit hi conceal and 
hasten to leav the church: ere He could effect hi intention, He 
descri medina station in hi passage. the stranger hastili 
retreated, and drew hi hat over hi eyes. 

'attempt not to fli me!' exclaim lorenzo; 'I will know who you are, 
and what were the content of that letter.' 

'of that letter?' repeat the unknown. 'and by what titl do you ask 
the question?' 

'bi a titl of which I am now ashamed; but it becom not you to 
question me. either repli circumstanti to my demands, or answer me 
with your sword.' 

'the latter method will be the shortest,' rejoin the other, draw 
hi rapier; 'come on, segnor bravo! I am ready!' 

burn with rage, lorenzo hasten to the attack: the antagonist had 
alreadi exchang sever pass befor christoval, who at that moment 
had more sens than either of them, could throw himself between their 
weapons. 

'hold! hold! medina!' He exclaimed; 'rememb the consequ of 
shed blood on consecr ground!' 

the stranger immedi drop hi sword. 

'medina?' He cried; 'great god, is it possible! lorenzo, have you quit 
forgotten raymond de la cisternas?' 

lorenzo' astonish increas with everi succeed moment. raymond 
advanc toward him, but with a look of suspicion He drew back hi 
hand, which the other wa prepar to take. 

'you here, marquis? what is the mean of all this? you engag in a 
clandestin correspond with my sister, whose affections....' 

'have ever been, and still are mine. but thi is no fit place for an 
explanation. accompani me to my hotel, and you shall know everi thing. 
who is that with you?' 

'one whom I believ you to have seen before,' repli don christoval, 
'though probabl not at church.' 

'the cond d'ossorio?' 

'exactli so, marquis.' 

'I have no object to entrust you with my secret, for I am sure 
that I may depend upon your silence.' 

'then your opinion of me is better than my own, and therefor I must 
beg leav to declin your confidence. Do you go your own way, and I 
shall go mine. marquis, where are you to be found?' 

'a usual, at the hotel de la cisternas; but remember, that I am 
incognito, and that if you wish to see me, you must ask for alphonso 
d'alvarada.' 

'good! good! farewell, cavaliers!' said don christoval, and instantli 
departed. 

'you, marquis,' said lorenzo in the accent of surprise; 'you, alphonso 
d'alvarada?' 

'even so, lorenzo: but unless you have alreadi heard my stori from 
your sister, I have much to relat that will astonish you. follow me, 
therefore, to my hotel without delay.' 

At thi moment the porter of the capuchin enter the cathedr to 
lock up the door for the night. the two noblemen instantli withdrew, 
and hasten with all speed to the palac de la cisternas. 

'well, antonia!' said the aunt, as soon as she had quit the church; 
'what think you of our gallants? don lorenzo realli seem a veri 
oblig good sort of young man: He paid you some attention, and 
nobodi know what may come of it. but as to don christoval, I protest 
to you, He is the veri phoenix of politeness. So gallant! so 
well-bred! So sensible, and so pathetic! well! If ever man can 
prevail upon me to break my vow never to marry, it will be that don 
christoval. you see, niece, that everi thing turn out exactli as I 
told you: the veri moment that I produc myself in madrid, I knew 
that I should be surround by admirers. when I took off my veil, did 
you see, antonia, what an effect the action had upon the conde? and 
when I present him my hand, did you observ the air of passion with 
which He kiss it? If ever I wit real love, I then saw it 
impress upon don christoval' countenance!' 

now antonia had observ the air, with which don christov had kiss 
thi same hand; but as she drew conclus from it somewhat differ 
from her aunt's, she wa wise enough to hold her tongue. As thi is 
the onli instanc known of a woman' ever have done so, it wa judg 
worthi to be record here. 

the old ladi continu her discours to antonia in the same strain, 
till they gain the street in which wa their lodging. here a crowd 
collect befor their door permit them not to approach it; and 
place themselv on the opposit side of the street, they endeavour 
to make out what had drawn all these peopl together. after some 
minut the crowd form itself into a circle; and now antonia 
perceiv in the midst of it a woman of extraordinari height, who 
whirl herself repeatedli round and round, use all sort of 
extravag gestures. her dress wa compos of shred of 
various-colour silk and linen fantast arranged, yet not 
entir without taste. her head wa cover with a kind of turban, 
ornament with vine leav and wild flowers. she seem much 
sun-burnt, and her complexion wa of a deep olive: her eye look 
fieri and strange; and in her hand she bore a long black rod, with 
which she at interv trace a varieti of singular figur upon the 
ground, round about which she danc in all the eccentr attitud of 
folli and delirium. suddenli she broke off her dance, whirl herself 
round thrice with rapidity, and after a moment' paus she sang the 
follow ballad. 

the gypsy' song 

come, cross my hand! My art surpass 
all that did ever mortal know; 
come, maidens, come! My magic glass 
your futur husband' form can show: 

for 'ti to me the power is given 
unclos the book of fate to see; 
To read the fix resolv of heaven, 
and dive into futurity. 

I guid the pale moon' silver waggon; 
the wind in magic bond I hold; 
I charm to sleep the crimson dragon, 
who love to watch o'er buri gold: 

fenc round with spells, unhurt I ventur 
their sabbath strang where witch keep; 
fearless the sorcerer' circl enter, 
and woundless tread on snake asleep. 

lo! here are charm of mighti power! 
thi make secur an husband' truth 
and thi compos at midnight hour 
will forc to love the coldest youth: 

If ani maid too much ha granted, 
her loss thi philtr will repair; 
thi bloom a cheek where red is wanted, 
and thi will make a brown girl fair! 

then silent hear, while I discov 
what I in fortune' mirror view; 
and each, when mani a year is over, 
shall own the gypsy' say true. 


'dear aunt!' said antonia when the stranger had finished, 'i she not 
mad?' 

'mad? not she, child; she is onli wicked. she is a gypsy, a sort of 
vagabond, whose sole occup is to run about the countri tell 
lyes, and pilfer from those who come by their money honestly. out 
upon such vermin! If I were king of spain, everi one of them should be 
burnt aliv who wa found in my dominion after the next three weeks.' 

these word were pronounc so audibl that they reach the gypsy' 
ears. she immedi pierc through the crowd and made toward the 
ladies. she salut them thrice in the eastern fashion, and then 
address herself to antonia. 

the gypsi 

'lady! gentl lady! know, 
I your futur fate can show; 
give your hand, and do not fear; 
lady! gentl lady! hear!' 

'dearest aunt!' said antonia, 'indulg me thi once! let me have my 
fortun told me!' 

'nonsense, child! she will tell you noth but falsehoods.' 

'no matter; let me at least hear what she ha to say. do, my dear aunt! 
oblig me, I beseech you!' 

'well, well! antonia, sinc you are so bent upon the thing, ... here, 
good woman, you shall see the hand of both of us. there is money for 
you, and now let me hear my fortune.' 

As she said this, she drew off her glove, and present her hand; the 
gypsi look at it for a moment, and then made thi reply. 


the gypsi 

'your fortune? you are now so old, 
good dame, that 'ti alreadi told: 
yet for your money, in a trice 
I will repay you in advice. 
astonish at your childish vanity, 
your friend all tax you with insanity, 
and griev to see you use your art 
To catch some youth lover' heart. 
believ me, dame, when all is done, 
your age will still be fifti one; 
and men will rare take an hint 
Of love, from two grey eye that squint. 
take then my counsels; lay asid 
your paint and patches, lust and pride, 
and on the poor those sum bestow, 
which now are spent on useless show. 
think on your maker, not a suitor; 
think on your past faults, not on future; 
and think time' scyth will quickli mow 
the few red hairs, which deck your brow. 

the audienc rang with laughter dure the gypsy' address; and--'fifti 
one,'--'squint eyes,' 'red hair,'--'paint and patches,' &c. were 
bandi from mouth to mouth. leonella wa almost choak with passion, 
and load her malici advis with the bitterest reproaches. the 
swarthi prophetess for some time listen to her with a contemptu 
smile: at length she made her a short answer, and then turn to 
antonia. 

the gypsi 

'peace, lady! what I said wa true; 
and now, my love maid, to you; 
give me your hand, and let me see 
your futur doom, and heaven' decree.' 

In imit of leonella, antonia drew off her glove, and present her 
white hand to the gypsy, who have gaze upon it for some time with a 
mingl express of piti and astonishment, pronounc her oracl in 
the follow words. 

the gypsi 

'jesus! what a palm is there! 
chaste, and gentle, young and fair, 
perfect mind and form possessing, 
you would be some good man' blessing: 
but alas! thi line discovers, 
that destruct o'er you hovers; 
lust man and crafti devil 
will combin to work your evil; 
and from earth by sorrow driven, 
soon your soul must speed to heaven. 
yet your suffer to delay, 
well rememb what I say. 
when you one more virtuou see 
than belong to man to be, 
one, whose self no crime assailing, 
piti not hi neighbour' failing, 
call the gypsy' word to mind: 
though He seem so good and kind, 
fair exterior oft will hide 
hearts, that swell with lust and pride! 
love maid, with tear I leav you! 
let not my predict griev you; 
rather with submiss bend 
calmli wait distress impending, 
and expect etern bliss 
In a better world than this. 

have said this, the gypsi again whirl herself round thrice, and 
then hasten out of the street with frantic gesture. the crowd 
follow her; and elvira' door be now unembarrass leonella 
enter the hous out of honour with the gypsy, with her niece, and 
with the people; In short with everi body, but herself and her charm 
cavalier. the gypsy' predict had also consider affect 
antonia; but the impress soon wore off, and in a few hour she had 
forgotten the adventur as total as had it never taken place. 



chapter II 

fors se tu gustassi una sol volta 
La millesima part dell gioje, 
che gusta un cor amato riamando, 
diresti ripentita sospirando, 
perduto e tutto il tempo 
che in amar non si sponde. 
tasso. 

hadst thou but tast onc the thousandth part 
Of joys, which bless the love and love heart, 
your word repent and your sigh would prove, 
lost is the time which is not past in love. 

the monk have attend their abbot to the door of hi cell, He 
dismiss them with an air of consciou superior in which humility' 
semblanc combat with the realiti of pride. 

He wa no sooner alone, than He gave free loos to the indulg of 
hi vanity. when He rememb the enthusiasm which hi discours had 
excited, hi heart swell with rapture, and hi imagin present 
him with splendid vision of aggrandizement. He look round him with 
exultation, and pride told him loudli that He wa superior to the rest 
of hi fellow-creatures. 

'who,' thought he; 'who but myself ha pass the ordeal of youth, yet 
see no singl stain upon hi conscience? who els ha subdu the 
violenc of strong passion and an impetu temperament, and submit 
even from the dawn of life to voluntari retirement? I seek for such a 
man in vain. I see no one but myself possess of such resolution. 
religion cannot boast ambrosio' equal! how power an effect did my 
discours produc upon it auditors! how they crowd round me! how 
they load me with benedictions, and pronounc me the sole 
uncorrupt pillar of the church! what then now is left for me to do? 
nothing, but to watch as care over the conduct of my brother as I 
have hitherto watch over my own. yet hold! may I not be tempt 
from those path which till now I have pursu without one moment' 
wandering? Am I not a man, whose natur is frail, and prone to error? 
I must now abandon the solitud of my retreat; the fairest and noblest 
dame of madrid continu present themselv at the abbey, and will 
use no other confessor. 

I must accustom my eye to object of temptation, and expos myself to 
the seduct of luxuri and desire. should I meet in that world which 
I am constrain to enter some love female, love ... as you, 
madona....!' 

As He said this, He fix hi eye upon a pictur of the virgin, which 
wa suspend opposit to him: thi for two year had been the object 
of hi increas wonder and adoration. He paused, and gaze upon it 
with delight. 

'what beauti in that countenance!' He continu after a silenc of 
some minutes; 'how grace is the turn of that head! what sweetness, 
yet what majesti in her divin eyes! how softli her cheek reclin 
upon her hand! can the rose vie with the blush of that cheek? can the 
lili rival the white of that hand? oh! if such a creatur existed, 
and exist but for me! were I permit to twine round my finger 
those golden ringlets, and press with my lip the treasur of that 
snowi bosom! graciou god, should I then resist the temptation? 
should I not barter for a singl embrac the reward of my suffer 
for thirti years? should I not abandon.... fool that I am! 
whither do I suffer my admir of thi pictur to hurri me? away, 
impur ideas! let me rememb that woman is for ever lost to me. never 
wa mortal form so perfect as thi picture. but even did such exist, 
the trial might be too mighti for a common virtue, but ambrosio' is 
proof against temptation. temptation, did I say? To me it would be 
none. what charm me, when ideal and consid as a superior being, 
would disgust me, becom woman and taint with all the fail of 
mortality. It is not the woman' beauti that fill me with such 
enthusiasm; It is the painter' skill that I admire, it is the divin 
that I adore! are not the passion dead in my bosom? have I not freed 
myself from the frailti of mankind? fear not, ambrosio! take 
confid in the strength of your virtue. enter boldli into a world 
to whose fail you are superior; reflect that you are now exempt 
from humanity' defects, and defi all the art of the spirit of 
darkness. they shall know you for what you are!' 

here hi reveri wa interrupt by three soft knock at the door of 
hi cell. with difficulti did the abbot awak from hi delirium. the 
knock wa repeated. 

'who is there?' said ambrosio at length. 

'it is onli rosario,' repli a gentl voice. 

'enter! enter, my son!' 

the door wa immedi opened, and rosario appear with a small 
basket in hi hand. 

rosario wa a young novic belong to the monastery, who in three 
month intend to make hi profession. A sort of mysteri envelop 
thi youth which render him at onc an object of interest and 
curiosity. hi hatr of society, hi profound melancholy, hi rigid 
observ of the duti of hi order, and hi voluntari seclus 
from the world at hi age so unusual, attract the notic of the whole 
fraternity. He seem fear of be recognised, and no one had ever 
seen hi face. hi head wa continu muffl up in hi cowl; yet 
such of hi featur as accid discovered, appear the most 
beauti and noble. rosario wa the onli name by which He wa known in 
the monastery. 

No one knew from whenc He came, and when question in the subject He 
preserv a profound silence. A stranger, whose rich habit and 
magnific equipag declar him to be of distinguish rank, had 
engag the monk to receiv a novice, and had deposit the necessari 
sums. the next day He return with rosario, and from that time no 
more had been heard of him. 

the youth had care avoid the compani of the monks: He answer 
their civil with sweetness, but reserve, and evid show that 
hi inclin led him to solitude. To thi gener rule the superior 
wa the onli exception. To him He look up with a respect approach 
idolatry: He sought hi compani with the most attent assiduity, and 
eagerli seiz everi mean to ingrati himself in hi favour. In the 
abbot' societi hi heart seem to be at ease, and an air of gaieti 
pervad hi whole manner and discourse. ambrosio on hi side did not 
feel less attract toward the youth; with him alon did He lay asid 
hi habitu severity. when He spoke to him, He insens assum a 
tone milder than wa usual to him; and no voic sound so sweet to him 
as did rosario's. He repay the youth' attent by instruct him 
in variou sciences; the novic receiv hi lesson with docility; 
ambrosio wa everi day more charm with the vivac of hi genius, 
the simplic of hi manners, and the rectitud of hi heart: In 
short He love him with all the affect of a father. He could not 
help sometim indulg a desir secretli to see the face of hi 
pupil; but hi rule of self-deni extend even to curiosity, and 
prevent him from commun hi wish to the youth. 

'pardon my intrusion, father,' said rosario, while He place hi basket 
upon the table; 'I come to you a suppliant. hear that a dear friend 
is danger ill, I entreat your prayer for hi recovery. If 
supplic can prevail upon heaven to spare him, sure your must 
be efficacious.' 

'whatev depend upon me, my son, you know that you may command. 

what is your friend' name?' 

'vincentio della ronda.' 

''ti sufficient. I will not forget him in my prayers, and may our 
thrice-bless st. franci deign to listen to my intercession!--what 
have you in your basket, rosario?' 

'A few of those flowers, reverend father, which I have observ to be 
most accept to you. will you permit my arrang them in your 
chamber?' 

'your attent charm me, my son.' 

while rosario dispers the content of hi basket in small vase 
place for that purpos in variou part of the room, the abbot thu 
continu the conversation. 

'I saw you not in the church thi evening, rosario.' 

'yet I wa present, father. I am too grate for your protect to 
lose an opportun of wit your triumph.' 

'alas! rosario, I have but littl caus to triumph: the saint spoke by 
my mouth; To him belong all the merit. It seem then you were 
content with my discourse?' 

'contented, say you? oh! you surpass yourself! never did I hear 
such eloqu ... save once!' 

here the novic heav an involuntari sigh. 

'when wa that once?' demand the abbot. 

'when you preach upon the sudden indisposit of our late superior.' 

'I rememb it: that is more than two year ago. and were you 
present? I knew you not at that time, rosario.' 

''ti true, father; and would to god! I had expired, ere I beheld that 
day! what sufferings, what sorrow should I have escaped!' 

'suffer at your age, rosario?' 

'aye, father; sufferings, which if known to you, would equal rais 
your anger and compassion! sufferings, which form at onc the torment 
and pleasur of my existence! yet in thi retreat my bosom would feel 
tranquil, were it not for the tortur of apprehension. Oh god! Oh 
god! how cruel is a life of fear!--father! I have given up all; I have 
abandon the world and it delight for ever: noth now remains, 
noth now ha charm for me, but your friendship, but your affection. 
If I lose that, father! oh! if I lose that, trembl at the effect of 
my despair!' 

'you apprehend the loss of my friendship? how ha my conduct justifi 
thi fear? know me better, rosario, and think me worthi of your 
confidence. what are your sufferings? reveal them to me, and believ 
that if 'ti in my power to reliev them....' 

'ah! 'ti in no one' power but yours. yet I must not let you know 
them. you would hate me for my avowal! you would drive me from your 
presenc with scorn and ignominy!' 

'mi son, I conjur you! I entreat you!' 

'for pity' sake, enquir no further! I must not ... I dare not... 
hark! the bell ring for vespers! father, your benediction, and I 
leav you!' 

As He said this, He threw himself upon hi knee and receiv the 
bless which He demanded. then press the abbot' hand to hi 
lips, He start from the ground and hastili quit the apartment. 
soon after ambrosio descend to vesper (which were celebr in a 
small chapel belong to the abbey), fill with surpris at the 
singular of the youth' behaviour. 

vesper be over, the monk retir to their respect cells. the 
abbot alon remain in the chapel to receiv the nun of st. clare. 
He had not been long seat in the confession chair befor the 
prioress made her appearance. each of the nun wa heard in her turn, 
while the other wait with the domina in the adjoin vestry. 
ambrosio listen to the confess with attention, made mani 
exhortations, enjoin penanc proport to each offence, and for 
some time everi thing went on as usual: till at last one of the nuns, 
conspicu from the nobl of her air and eleg of her figure, 
carelessli permit a letter to fall from her bosom. she wa 
retiring, unconsci of her loss. ambrosio suppos it to have been 
written by some one of her relations, and pick it up intend to 
restor it to her. 

'stay, daughter,' said he; 'you have let fall....' 

At thi moment, the paper be alreadi open, hi eye involuntarili 
read the first words. He start back with surprise! the nun had 
turn round on hear hi voice: she perceiv her letter in hi 
hand, and utter a shriek of terror, flew hastili to regain it. 

'hold!' said the friar in a tone of severity; 'daughter, I must read 
thi letter.' 

'then I am lost!' she exclaim clasp her hand togeth wildly. 

all colour instantli fade from her face; she trembl with agitation, 
and wa oblig to fold her arm round a pillar of the chapel to save 
herself from sink upon the floor. In the meanwhil the abbot read 
the follow lines. 

'all is readi for your escape, my dearest agnes. At twelv tomorrow 
night I shall expect to find you at the garden door: I have obtain 
the key, and a few hour will suffic to place you in a secur asylum. 
let no mistaken scrupl induc you to reject the certain mean of 
preserv yourself and the innoc creatur whom you nourish in your 
bosom. rememb that you had promis to be mine, long ere you engag 
yourself to the church; that your situat will soon be evid to the 
pri eye of your companions; and that flight is the onli mean of 
avoid the effect of their malevol resentment. farewell, my 
agnes! my dear and destin wife! fail not to be at the garden door at 
twelve!' 

As soon as He had finished, ambrosio bent an eye stern and angri upon 
the imprud nun. 

'thi letter must to the prioress!' said he, and pass her. 

hi word sound like thunder to her ears: she awok from her 
torpid onli to be sensibl of the danger of her situation. she 
follow him hastily, and detain him by hi garment. 

'stay! oh! stay!' she cri in the accent of despair, while she threw 
herself at the friar' feet, and bath them with her tears. 'father, 
compassion my youth! look with indulg on a woman' weakness, 
and deign to conceal my frailty! the remaind of my life shall be 
employ in expiat thi singl fault, and your leniti will bring 
back a soul to heaven!' 

'amaz confidence! what! shall st. clare' convent becom the 
retreat of prostitutes? shall I suffer the church of christ to cherish 
in it bosom debaucheri and shame? unworthi wretch! such leniti would 
make me your accomplice. merci would here be criminal. you have 
abandon yourself to a seducer' lust; you have defil the sacr 
habit by your impurity; and still dare you think yourself deserv my 
compassion? hence, nor detain me longer! where is the ladi prioress?' 
He added, rais hi voice. 

'hold! father, hold! hear me but for one moment! tax me not with 
impurity, nor think that I have er from the warmth of temperament. 
long befor I took the veil, raymond wa master of my heart: He 
inspir me with the purest, the most irreproach passion, and wa 
on the point of becom my law husband. An horribl adventure, and 
the treacheri of a relation, separ us from each other: I believ 
him for ever lost to me, and threw myself into a convent from motiv 
of despair. accid again unit us; I could not refus myself the 
melancholi pleasur of mingl my tear with his: We met nightli in 
the garden of st. clare, and in an unguard moment I violat my vow 
of chastity. I shall soon becom a mother: reverend ambrosio, take 
compass on me; take compass on the innoc be whose exist 
is attach to mine. If you discov my imprud to the domina, both 
of us are lost: the punish which the law of st. clare assign to 
unfortun like myself is most sever and cruel. worthy, worthi 
father! let not your own untaint conscienc render you unfeel 
toward those less abl to withstand temptation! let not merci be the 
onli virtu of which your heart is unsusceptible! piti me, most 
reverend! restor my letter, nor doom me to inevit destruction!' 

'your bold confound me! shall I conceal your crime, I whom you 
have deceiv by your feign confession? no, daughter, no! I will 
render you a more essenti service. I will rescu you from perdit 
in spite of yourself; penanc and mortif shall expiat your 
offence, and sever forc you back to the path of holiness. what; 
ho! mother st. agatha!' 

'father! By all that is sacred, by all that is most dear to you, I 
supplicate, I entreat....' 

'releas me! I will not hear you. where is the domina? mother st. 
agatha, where are you?' 

the door of the vestri opened, and the prioress enter the chapel, 
follow by her nuns. 

'cruel! cruel!' exclaim agnes, relinquish her hold. 

wild and desperate, she threw herself upon the ground, beat her 
bosom and rend her veil in all the delirium of despair. the nun 
gaze with astonish upon the scene befor them. the friar now 
present the fatal paper to the prioress, inform her of the manner 
in which he had found it, and added, that it wa her busi to 
decide, what penanc the delinqu merited. 

while she perus the letter, the domina' counten grew inflam 
with passion. what! such a crime commit in her convent, and made 
known to ambrosio, to the idol of madrid, to the man whom she wa most 
anxiou to impress with the opinion of the strict and regular of 
her house! word were inadequ to express her fury. she wa silent, 
and dart upon the prostrat nun look of menac and malignity. 

'away with her to the convent!' said she at length to some of her 
attendants. 

two of the oldest nun now approach agnes, rais her forcibl from 
the ground, and prepar to conduct her from the chapel. 

'what!' she exclaim suddenli shake off their hold with distract 
gestures; 'i all hope then lost? alreadi do you drag me to 
punishment? where are you, raymond? oh! save me! save me!' 

then cast upon the abbot a frantic look, 'hear me!' she continued; 
'man of an hard heart! hear me, proud, stern, and cruel! you could 
have save me; you could have restor me to happi and virtue, but 
would not! you are the destroy of my soul; you are my murderer, and 
on you fall the curs of my death and my unborn infant's! insol in 
your yet-unshaken virtue, you disdain the prayer of a penitent; but 
god will show mercy, though you show none. and where is the merit of 
your boast virtue? what temptat have you vanquished? coward! 
you have fled from it, not oppos seduction. but the day of trial 
will arrive! oh! then when you yield to impetu passions! when you 
feel that man is weak, and born to err; when shudder you look back 
upon your crimes, and solicit with terror the merci of your god, oh! in 
that fear moment think upon me! think upon your cruelty! think 
upon agnes, and despair of pardon!' 

As she utter these last words, her strength wa exhausted, and she 
sank inanim upon the bosom of a nun who stood near her. she wa 
immedi convey from the chapel, and her companion follow her. 

ambrosio had not listen to her reproach without emotion. A secret 
pang at hi heart made him feel, that He had treat thi unfortun 
with too great severity. He therefor detain the prioress and 
ventur to pronounc some word in favour of the delinquent. 

'the violenc of her despair,' said he, 'proves, that at least vice is 
not becom familiar to her. perhap by treat her with somewhat less 
rigour than is gener practised, and mitig in some degre the 
accustom penance....' 

'mitig it, father?' interrupt the ladi prioress; 'not I, believ 
me. the law of our order are strict and severe; they have fallen into 
disus of late, but the crime of agn show me the necess of their 
revival. I go to signifi my intent to the convent, and agn shall 
be the first to feel the rigour of those laws, which shall be obey to 
the veri letter. father, farewell.' 

thu saying, she hasten out of the chapel. 

'I have done my duty,' said ambrosio to himself. 

still did He not feel perfectli satisfi by thi reflection. To 
dissip the unpleas idea which thi scene had excit in him, 
upon quit the chapel He descend into the abbey garden. 

In all madrid there wa no spot more beauti or better regulated. It 
wa laid out with the most exquisit taste. the choicest flower 
adorn it in the height of luxuriance, and though art arranged, 
seem onli plant by the hand of nature: fountains, spring from 
bason of white marble, cool the air with perpetu showers; and the 
wall were entir cover by jessamine, vines, and honeysuckles. the 
hour now ad to the beauti of the scene. the full moon, rang 
through a blue and cloudless sky, shed upon the tree a trembl 
lustre, and the water of the fountain sparkl in the silver beam: A 
gentl breez breath the fragranc of orange-blossom along the 
alleys; and the nightingal pour forth her melodi murmur from the 
shelter of an artifici wilderness. thither the abbot bent hi steps. 

In the bosom of thi littl grove stood a rustic grotto, form in 
imit of an hermitage. the wall were construct of root of 
trees, and the interstic fill up with moss and ivy. seat of turf 
were place on either side, and a natur cascad fell from the rock 
above. buri in himself the monk approach the spot. the univers 
calm had commun itself to hi bosom, and a voluptu 
tranquil spread languor through hi soul. 

He reach the hermitage, and wa enter to repos himself, when He 
stop on perceiv it to be alreadi occupied. extend upon one of 
the bank lay a man in a melancholi posture. 

hi head wa support upon hi arm, and He seem lost in mediation. 
the monk drew nearer, and recognis rosario: He watch him in 
silence, and enter not the hermitage. after some minut the youth 
rais hi eyes, and fix them mourn upon the opposit wall. 

'yes!' said He with a deep and plaintiv sigh; 'I feel all the 
happi of thi situation, all the miseri of my own! happi were I, 
could I think like thee! could I look like thee with disgust upon 
mankind, could buri myself for ever in some impenetr solitude, and 
forget that the world hold be deserv to be loved! Oh god! 
what a bless would misanthropi be to me!' 

'that is a singular thought, rosario,' said the abbot, enter the 
grotto. 

'you here, reverend father?' cri the novice. 

At the same time start from hi place in confusion, He drew hi cowl 
hastili over hi face. ambrosio seat himself upon the bank, and 
oblig the youth to place himself by him. 

'you must not indulg thi disposit to melancholy,' said he; 'what 
can possibl have made you view in so desir a light, misanthropy, 
of all sentiment the most hateful?' 

'the perus of these verses, father, which till now had escap my 
observation. the bright of the moonbeam permit my read 
them; and oh! how I envi the feel of the writer!' 

As He said this, He point to a marbl tablet fix against the 
opposit wall: On it were engrav the follow lines. 

inscript IN AN hermitag 

who-e' thou art these line now reading, 
think not, though from the world reced 
I joy my lone day to lead in 
thi desart drear, 
that with remors a conscienc bleed 
hath led me here. 

No thought of guilt my bosom sowrs: 
free-wil I fled from courtli bowers; 
for well I saw in hall and tower 
that lust and pride, 
the arch-fiend' dearest darkest powers, 
In state preside. 

I saw mankind with vice incrusted; 
I saw that honour' sword wa rusted; 
that few for aught but folli lusted; 
that He wa still deceiv'd, who trust 
In love or friend; 
and hither came with men disgust 
My life to end. 

In thi lone cave, in garment lowly, 
alik a foe to noisi folly, 
and brow-bent gloomi melancholi 
I wear away 
My life, and in my offic holi 
consum the day. 

content and comfort bless me more in 
thi grot, than e'er I felt befor in 
A palace, and with thought still soar 
To god on high, 
each night and morn with voic implor 
thi wish I sigh. 

'let me, oh! lord! from life retire, 
unknown each guilti worldli fire, 
remors throb, or loos desire; 
and when I die, 
let me in thi belief expire, 
"to god I fly"!' 

stranger, if full of youth and riot 
As yet no grief ha mar thi quiet, 
thou hapli throw'st a scorn eye at 
the hermit' prayer: 
but if thou hast a caus to sigh at 
thi fault, or care; 

If thou hast known fals love' vexation, 
Or hast been exil'd from thi nation, 
Or guilt affright thi contemplation, 
and make thee pine, 
oh! how must thou lament thi station, 
and envi mine! 

'were it possible' said the friar, 'for man to be so total wrap up 
in himself as to live in absolut seclus from human nature, and 
could yet feel the content tranquil which these line express, I 
allow that the situat would be more desirable, than to live in a 
world so pregnant with everi vice and everi folly. but thi never can 
be the case. thi inscript wa mere place here for the ornament 
of the grotto, and the sentiment and the hermit are equal imaginary. 
man wa born for society. howev littl He may be attach to the 
world, He never can wholli forget it, or bear to be wholli forgotten by 
it. disgust at the guilt or absurd of mankind, the misanthrop 
fli from it: He resolv to becom an hermit, and buri himself in 
the cavern of some gloomi rock. while hate inflam hi bosom, 
possibl He may feel content with hi situation: but when hi 
passion begin to cool; when time ha mellow hi sorrows, and heal 
those wound which He bore with him to hi solitude, think you that 
content becom hi companion? ah! no, rosario. No longer sustain 
by the violenc of hi passions, He feel all the monotoni of hi way 
of living, and hi heart becom the prey of ennui and weariness. He 
look round, and find himself alon in the universe: the love of 
societi reviv in hi bosom, and He pant to return to that world 
which He ha abandoned. natur lose all her charm in hi eyes: No 
one is near him to point out her beauties, or share in hi admir 
of her excel and variety. prop upon the fragment of some rock, 
He gaze upon the tumbl waterfal with a vacant eye, He view 
without emot the glori of the set sun. slowli He return to hi 
cell at evening, for no one there is anxiou for hi arrival; He ha no 
comfort in hi solitari unsavouri meal: He throw himself upon hi 
couch of moss despond and dissatisfied, and wake onli to pass a day 
as joyless, as monoton as the former.' 

'you amaz me, father! suppos that circumst condemn you to 
solitude; would not the duti of religion and the conscious of a 
life well spent commun to your heart that calm which....' 

'I should deceiv myself, did I fanci that they could. I am convinc 
of the contrary, and that all my fortitud would not prevent me from 
yield to melancholi and disgust. after consum the day in study, 
if you knew my pleasur at meet my brethren in the evening! after 
pass mani a long hour in solitude, if I could express to you the joy 
which I feel at onc more behold a fellow-creature! 'ti in thi 
particular that I place the princip merit of a monast institution. 
It seclud man from the temptat of vice; It procur that leisur 
necessari for the proper servic of the supreme; It spare him the 
mortif of wit the crime of the worldly, and yet permit 
him to enjoy the bless of society. and do you, rosario, do you 
envi an hermit' life? can you be thu blind to the happi of your 
situation? reflect upon it for a moment. thi abbey is becom your 
asylum: your regularity, your gentleness, your talent have render 
you the object of univers esteem: you are seclud from the world 
which you profess to hate; yet you remain in possess of the benefit 
of society, and that a societi compos of the most estim of 
mankind.' 

'father! father! 'ti that which caus my torment! happi had it been 
for me, had my life been pass among the viciou and abandoned! had I 
never heard pronounc the name of virtue! 'ti my unbound ador 
of religion; 'ti my soul' exquisit sensibl of the beauti of fair 
and good, that load me with shame! that hurri me to perdition! oh! 
that I had never seen these abbey walls!' 

'how, rosario? when we last conversed, you spoke in a differ tone. 
Is my friendship then becom of such littl consequence? had you never 
seen these abbey walls, you never had seen me: can that realli be your 
wish?' 

'had never seen you?' repeat the novice, start from the bank, and 
grasp the friar' hand with a frantic air; 'you? you? would to god, 
that lightn had blast them, befor you ever met my eyes! would to 
god! that I were never to see you more, and could forget that I had 
ever seen you!' 

with these word He flew hastili from the grotto. ambrosio remain in 
hi former attitude, reflect on the youth' unaccount behaviour. 
He wa inclin to suspect the derang of hi senses: yet the 
gener tenor of hi conduct, the connexion of hi ideas, and calm 
of hi demeanour till the moment of hi quit the grotto, seem to 
discounten thi conjecture. after a few minut rosario returned. 
He again seat himself upon the bank: He reclin hi cheek upon one 
hand, and with the other wipe away the tear which trickl from hi 
eye at intervals. 

the monk look upon him with compassion, and forbor to interrupt hi 
meditations. both observ for some time a profound silence. the 
nightingal had now taken her station upon an orang tree front the 
hermitage, and pour forth a strain the most melancholi and melodious. 
rosario rais hi head, and listen to her with attention. 

'it wa thus,' said he, with a deep-drawn sigh; 'it wa thus, that 
dure the last month of her unhappi life, my sister use to sit 
listen to the nightingale. poor matilda! she sleep in the grave, 
and her broken heart throb no more with passion.' 

'you had a sister?' 

'you say right, that I had; alas! I have one no longer. she sunk 
beneath the weight of her sorrow in the veri spring of life.' 

'what were those sorrows?' 

'they will not excit your pity: you know not the power of those 
irresistible, those fatal sentiments, to which her heart wa a prey. 
father, she love unfortunately. A passion for one endow with everi 
virtue, for a man, oh! rather let me say, for a divinity, prove the 
bane of her existence. hi nobl form, hi spotless character, hi 
variou talents, hi wisdom solid, wonderful, and glorious, might have 
warm the bosom of the most insensible. My sister saw him, and dare 
to love though she never dare to hope.' 

'if her love wa so well bestowed, what forbad her to hope the 
obtain of it object?' 

'father, befor He knew her, julian had alreadi plight hi vow to a 
bride most fair, most heavenly! yet still my sister loved, and for the 
husband' sake she dote upon the wife. one morn she found mean to 
escap from our father' house: array in humbl weed she offer 
herself as a domest to the consort of her beloved, and wa accepted. 
she wa now continu in hi presence: she strove to ingrati 
herself into hi favour: she succeeded. her attent attract 
julian' notice; the virtuou are ever grateful, and He distinguish 
matilda abov the rest of her companions.' 

'and did not your parent seek for her? did they submit tame to 
their loss, nor attempt to recov their wander daughter?' 

'ere they could find her, she discov herself. her love grew too 
violent for concealment; yet she wish not for julian' person, she 
ambit but a share of hi heart. In an unguard moment she 
confess her affection. what wa the return? doat upon hi wife, 
and believ that a look of piti bestow upon anoth wa a theft 
from what He owe to her, He drove matilda from hi presence. He 
forbad her ever again appear befor him. hi sever broke her 
heart: she return to her father's, and in a few month after wa 
carri to her grave.' 

'unhappi girl! sure her fate wa too severe, and julian wa too 
cruel.' 

'do you think so, father?' cri the novic with vivacity; 'do you 
think that He wa cruel?' 

'doubtless I do, and piti her most sincerely.' 

'you piti her? you piti her? oh! father! father! then piti me!' 

the friar started; when after a moment' paus rosario ad with a 
falter voice,--'for my suffer are still greater. My sister had 
a friend, a real friend, who piti the acut of her feelings, nor 
reproach her with her inabl to repress them. I ...! I have no 
friend! the whole wide world cannot furnish an heart that is will 
to particip in the sorrow of mine!' 

As He utter these words, He sob audibly. the friar wa affected. 
He took rosario' hand, and press it with tenderness. 

'you have no friend, say you? what then am I? whi will you not 
confid in me, and what can you fear? My severity? have I ever use 
it with you? the digniti of my habit? rosario, I lay asid the monk, 
and bid you consid me as no other than your friend, your father. 
well may I assum that title, for never did parent watch over a child 
more fondli than I have watch over you. from the moment in which I 
first beheld you, I perceiv sensat in my bosom till then unknown 
to me; I found a delight in your societi which no one' els could 
afford; and when I wit the extent of your geniu and information, 
I rejoic as doe a father in the perfect of hi son. then lay 
asid your fears; speak to me with openness: speak to me, rosario, and 
say that you will confid in me. If my aid or my piti can allevi 
your distress....' 

'your can! your onli can! ah! father, how willingli would I unveil 
to you my heart! how willingli would I declar the secret which bow 
me down with it weight! but oh! I fear! I fear!' 

'what, my son?' 

'that you should abhor me for my weakness; that the reward of my 
confid should be the loss of your esteem.' 

'how shall I reassur you? reflect upon the whole of my past conduct, 
upon the patern tender which I have ever shown you. abhor you, 
rosario? It is no longer in my power. To give up your societi would 
be to depriv myself of the greatest pleasur of my life. then reveal 
to me what afflict you, and believ me while I solemnli swear....' 

'hold!' interrupt the novice; 'swear, that whatev be my secret, you 
will not oblig me to quit the monasteri till my novici shall 
expire.' 

'I promis it faithfully, and as I keep my vow to you, may christ keep 
hi to mankind. now then explain thi mystery, and reli upon my 
indulgence.' 

'I obey you. know then.... oh! how I trembl to name the word! 
listen to me with pity, rever ambrosio! call up everi latent spark 
of human weak that may teach you compass for mine! father!' 
continu He throw himself at the friar' feet, and press hi 
hand to hi lip with eagerness, while agit for a moment choak 
hi voice; 'father!' continu He in falter accents, 'I am a woman!' 

the abbot start at thi unexpect avowal. prostrat on the ground 
lay the feign rosario, as if wait in silenc the decis of hi 
judge. astonish on the one part, apprehens on the other, for 
some minut chain them in the same attitudes, as had they been 
touch by the rod of some magician. At length recov from hi 
confusion, the monk quit the grotto, and sped with precipit 
toward the abbey. hi action did not escap the suppliant. she 
sprang from the ground; she hasten to follow him, overtook him, threw 
herself in hi passage, and embrac hi knees. ambrosio strove in 
vain to disengag himself from her grasp. 

'do not fli me!' she cried; 'leav me not abandon to the impuls of 
despair! listen, while I excus my imprudence; while I acknowledg my 
sister' stori to be my own! I am matilda; you are her beloved.' 

If ambrosio' surpris wa great at her first avowal, upon hear her 
second it exceed all bounds. amazed, embarrassed, and irresolut He 
found himself incap of pronounc a syllable, and remain in 
silenc gaze upon matilda: thi gave her opportun to continu her 
explan as follows. 

'think not, ambrosio, that I come to rob your bride of your affections. 
no, believ me: religion alon deserv you; and far is it from 
matilda' wish to draw you from the path of virtue. what I feel for 
you is love, not licentiousness; I sigh to be possessor of your heart, 
not lust for the enjoy of your person. deign to listen to my 
vindication: A few moment will convinc you that thi holi retreat is 
not pollut by my presence, and that you may grant me your compass 
without trespass against your vows.'--sh seat herself: ambrosio, 
scarc consciou of what He did, follow her example, and she 
proceed in her discourse. 

'I spring from a distinguish family: My father wa chief of the 
nobl hous of villanegas. He die while I wa still an infant, and 
left me sole heiress of hi immens possessions. young and wealthy, I 
wa sought in marriag by the noblest youth of madrid; but no one 
succeed in gain my affections. I had been brought up under the 
care of an uncl possess of the most solid judgment and extens 
erudition. He took pleasur in commun to me some portion of hi 
knowledge. under hi instruct my understand acquir more 
strength and just than gener fall to the lot of my sex: the 
abil of my preceptor be aid by natur curiosity, I not onli 
made a consider progress in scienc univers studied, but in 
others, reveal but to few, and lie under censur from the blind 
of superstition. but while my guardian labour to enlarg the sphere 
of my knowledge, He care inculc everi moral precept: He 
reliev me from the shackl of vulgar prejudice; He point out the 
beauti of religion; He taught me to look with ador upon the pure 
and virtuous, and, woe is me! I have obey him but too well! 

'with such dispositions, judg whether I could observ with ani other 
sentiment than disgust the vice, dissipation, and ignorance, which 
disgrac our spanish youth. I reject everi offer with disdain. My 
heart remain without a master till chanc conduct me to the 
cathedr of the capuchins. oh! sure on that day my guardian angel 
slumber neglect of hi charge! then wa it that I first beheld 
you: you suppli the superior' place, absent from illness. you 
cannot but rememb the live enthusiasm which your discours created. 
oh! how I drank your words! how your eloqu seem to steal me from 
myself! I scarc dare to breathe, fear to lose a syllable; and 
while you spoke, methought a radiant glori beam round your head, and 
your counten shone with the majesti of a god. I retir from the 
church, glow with admiration. from that moment you becam the idol 
of my heart, the never-chang object of my meditations. I enquir 
respect you. the report which were made me of your mode of life, 
of your knowledge, piety, and self-deni rivet the chain impos on 
me by your eloquence. I wa consciou that there wa no longer a void 
in my heart; that I had found the man whom I had sought till then in 
vain. In expect of hear you again, everi day I visit your 
cathedral: you remain seclud within the abbey walls, and I alway 
withdrew, wretch and disappointed. the night wa more propiti to 
me, for then you stood befor me in my dreams; you vow to me etern 
friendship; you led me through the path of virtue, and assist me to 
support the vexat of life. the morn dispel these pleas 
visions; I woke, and found myself separ from you by barrier which 
appear insurmountable. time seem onli to increas the strength of 
my passion: I grew melancholi and despondent; I fled from society, and 
my health declin daily. At length no longer abl to exist in thi 
state of torture, I resolv to assum the disguis in which you see 
me. My artific wa fortunate: I wa receiv into the monastery, and 
succeed in gain your esteem. 

'now then I should have felt compleatli happy, had not my quiet been 
disturb by the fear of detection. the pleasur which I receiv from 
your society, wa embitt by the idea that perhap I should soon be 
depriv of it: and my heart throb so raptur at obtain the 
mark of your friendship, as to convinc me that I never should surviv 
it loss. I resolved, therefore, not to leav the discoveri of my sex 
to chance, to confess the whole to you, and throw myself entir on 
your merci and indulgence. ah! ambrosio, can I have been deceived? 
can you be less gener than I thought you? I will not suspect it. 
you will not drive a wretch to despair; I shall still be permit to 
see you, to convers with you, to ador you! your virtu shall be my 
exampl through life; and when we expire, our bodi shall rest in the 
same grave.' 

she ceased. while she spoke, a thousand oppos sentiment combat 
in ambrosio' bosom. surpris at the singular of thi adventure, 
confus at her abrupt declaration, resent at her bold in 
enter the monastery, and conscious of the auster with which 
it behov him to reply, such were the sentiment of which He wa 
aware; but there were other also which did not obtain hi notice. He 
perceiv not, that hi vaniti wa flatter by the prais bestow 
upon hi eloqu and virtue; that He felt a secret pleasur in 
reflect that a young and seemingli love woman had for hi sake 
abandon the world, and sacrif everi other passion to that which 
He had inspired: still less did He perceiv that hi heart throb 
with desire, while hi hand wa press gentli by matilda' ivori 
fingers. 

By degre He recov from hi confusion. hi idea becam less 
bewildered: He wa immedi sensibl of the extrem impropriety, 
should matilda be permit to remain in the abbey after thi avow of 
her sex. He assum an air of severity, and drew away hi hand. 

'how, lady!' said he; 'can you realli hope for my permiss to remain 
amongst us? even were I to grant your request, what good could you 
deriv from it? think you that I ever can repli to an affection, 
which...' 

'no, father, no! I expect not to inspir you with a love like mine. I 
onli wish for the liberti to be near you, to pass some hour of the day 
in your society; to obtain your compassion, your friendship and esteem. 
sure my request is not unreasonable.' 

'but reflect, lady! reflect onli for a moment on the improprieti of my 
harbour a woman in the abbey; and that too a woman, who confess 
that she love me. It must not be. the risqu of your be 
discov is too great, and I will not expos myself to so danger a 
temptation.' 

'temptation, say you? forget that I am a woman, and it no longer 
exists: consid me onli as a friend, as an unfortunate, whose 
happiness, whose life depend upon your protection. fear not lest I 
should ever call to your remembr that love the most impetuous, the 
most unbounded, ha induc me to disguis my sex; or that instig 
by desires, offens to your vow and my own honour, I should 
endeavour to seduc you from the path of rectitude. no, ambrosio, 
learn to know me better. I love you for your virtues: lose them, and 
with them you lose my affections. I look upon you as a saint; prove to 
me that you are no more than man, and I quit you with disgust. Is it 
then from me that you fear temptation? from me, in whom the world' 
dazzl pleasur creat no other sentiment than contempt? from me, 
whose attach is ground on your exempt from human frailty? oh! 
dismiss such injuri apprehensions! think nobler of me, think nobler 
of yourself. I am incap of seduc you to error; and sure your 
virtu is establish on a basi too firm to be shaken by unwarr 
desires. ambrosio, dearest ambrosio! drive me not from your presence; 
rememb your promise, and author my stay!' 

'impossible, matilda; your interest command me to refus your prayer, 
sinc I trembl for you, not for myself. after vanquish the 
impetu ebullit of youth; after pass thirti year in 
mortif and penance, I might safe permit your stay, nor fear 
your inspir me with warmer sentiment than pity. but to yourself, 
remain in the abbey can produc none but fatal consequences. you 
will misconstru my everi word and action; you will seiz everi 
circumst with avidity, which encourag you to hope the return of 
your affection; insens your passion will gain a superior over 
your reason; and far from these be repress by my presence, everi 
moment which we pass together, will onli serv to irrit and excit 
them. believ me, unhappi woman! you possess my sincer compassion. I 
am convinc that you have hitherto act upon the purest motives; but 
though you are blind to the imprud of your conduct, in me it would 
be culpabl not to open your eyes. I feel that duti oblig my 
treat you with harshness: I must reject your prayer, and remov 
everi shadow of hope which may aid to nourish sentiment so pernici 
to your repose. matilda, you must from henc tomorrow.' 

'tomorrow, ambrosio? tomorrow? oh! sure you cannot mean it! 

you cannot resolv on drive me to despair! you cannot have the 
cruelty....' 

'you have heard my decision, and it must be obeyed. the law of our 
order forbid your stay: It would be perjuri to conceal that a woman is 
within these walls, and my vow will oblig me to declar your stori to 
the community. you must from hence!--i piti you, but can do no more!' 

He pronounc these word in a faint and trembl voice: then rise 
from hi seat, He would have hasten toward the monastery. utter 
a loud shriek, matilda followed, and detain him. 

'stay yet one moment, ambrosio! hear me yet speak one word!' 

'I dare not listen! releas me! you know my resolution!' 

'but one word! but one last word, and I have done!' 

'leav me! your entreati are in vain! you must from henc tomorrow!' 

'go then, barbarian! but thi resourc is still left me.' 

As she said this, she suddenli drew a poignard: she rent open her 
garment, and place the weapon' point against her bosom. 

'father, I will never quit these wall alive!' 

'hold! hold, matilda! what would you do?' 

'you are determined, so am I: the moment that you leav me, I plung 
thi steel in my heart.' 

'holi st. francis! matilda, have you your senses? Do you know the 
consequ of your action? that suicid is the greatest of crimes? 
that you destroy your soul? that you lose your claim to salvation? 
that you prepar for yourself everlast torments?' 

'I care not! I care not!' she repli passionately; 'either your hand 
guid me to paradise, or my own doom me to perdition! speak to me, 
ambrosio! tell me that you will conceal my story, that I shall remain 
your friend and your companion, or thi poignard drink my blood!' 

As she utter these last words, she lift her arm, and made a motion 
as if to stab herself. the friar' eye follow with dread the cours 
of the dagger. she had torn open her habit, and her bosom wa half 
exposed. the weapon' point rest upon her left breast: and oh! that 
wa such a breast! the moonbeam dart full upon it enabl the monk 
to observ it dazzl whiteness. hi eye dwelt with insati 
avid upon the beauteou orb. A sensat till then unknown fill 
hi heart with a mixtur of anxieti and delight: A rage fire shot 
through everi limb; the blood boil in hi veins, and a thousand wild 
wish bewild hi imagination. 

'hold!' He cri in an hurri faulter voice; 'I can resist no 
longer! stay, then, enchantress; stay for my destruction!' 

He said, and rush from the place, hasten toward the monastery: 
He regain hi cell and threw himself upon hi couch, distract 
irresolut and confused. 

He found it imposs for some time to arrang hi ideas. the scene 
in which He had been engag had excit such a varieti of sentiment 
in hi bosom, that He wa incap of decid which wa predominant. 
He wa irresolut what conduct He ought to hold with the disturb of 
hi repose. He wa consciou that prudence, religion, and proprieti 
necessit hi oblig her to quit the abbey: but on the other hand 
such power reason author her stay that He wa but too much 
inclin to consent to her remaining. He could not avoid be 
flatter by matilda' declaration, and at reflect that He had 
unconsci vanquish an heart which had resist the attack of 
spain' noblest cavaliers: the manner in which He had gain her 
affect wa also the most satisfactori to hi vanity: He rememb 
the mani happi hour which He had pass in rosario' society, and 
dread that void in hi heart which part with him would occasion. 
besid all this, He considered, that as matilda wa wealthy, her 
favour might be of essenti benefit to the abbey. 

'and what do I risque,' said He to himself, 'bi author her stay? 
may I not safe credit her assertions? will it not be easi for me to 
forget her sex, and still consid her as my friend and my disciple? 
sure her love is as pure as she describes. had it been the offspr 
of mere licentiousness, would she so long have conceal it in her own 
bosom? would she not have employ some mean to procur it 
gratification? she ha done quit the contrary: she strove to keep me 
in ignor of her sex; and noth but the fear of detection, and my 
instances, would have compel her to reveal the secret. she ha 
observ the duti of religion not less strictli than myself. she ha 
made no attempt to rouz my slumber passions, nor ha she ever 
convers with me till thi night on the subject of love. had she been 
desir to gain my affections, not my esteem, she would not have 
conceal from me her charm so carefully: At thi veri moment I have 
never seen her face: yet certainli that face must be lovely, and her 
person beautiful, to judg by her ... by what I have seen.' 

As thi last idea pass through hi imagination, a blush spread itself 
over hi cheek. alarm at the sentiment which He wa indulging, He 
betook himself to prayer; He start from hi couch, knelt befor the 
beauti madona, and entreat her assist in stifl such 
culpabl emotions. He then return to hi bed, and resign himself 
to slumber. 

He awoke, heat and unrefreshed. dure hi sleep hi inflam 
imagin had present him with none but the most voluptu 
objects. matilda stood befor him in hi dreams, and hi eye again 
dwelt upon her nake breast. she repeat her protest of etern 
love, threw her arm round hi neck, and load him with kisses: He 
return them; He clasp her passion to hi bosom, and ... the 
vision wa dissolved. sometim hi dream present the imag of hi 
favourit madona, and He fanci that He wa kneel befor her: As 
He offer up hi vow to her, the eye of the figur seem to beam on 
him with inexpress sweetness. He press hi lip to hers, and 
found them warm: the anim form start from the canvas, embrac 
him affectionately, and hi sens were unabl to support delight so 
exquisite. such were the scenes, on which hi thought were employ 
while sleeping: hi unsatisfi desir place befor him the most 
lust and provok images, and he riot in joy till then unknown 
to him. 

He start from hi couch, fill with confus at the remembr of 
hi dreams. scarc wa He less ashamed, when He reflect on hi 
reason of the former night which induc him to author matilda' 
stay. the cloud wa now dissip which had obscur hi judgment: He 
shudder when He beheld hi argument blazon in their proper 
colours, and found that He had been a slave to flattery, to avarice, 
and self-love. If in one hour' convers matilda had produc a 
chang so remark in hi sentiments, what had He not to dread from 
her remain in the abbey? becom sensibl of hi danger, awaken 
from hi dream of confidence, He resolv to insist on her depart 
without delay. He began to feel that He wa not proof against 
temptation; and that howev matilda might restrain herself within the 
bound of modesty, He wa unabl to contend with those passions, from 
which He fals thought himself exempted. 

'agnes! agnes!' He exclaimed, while reflect on hi embarrassments, 
'I alreadi feel thi curse!' 

He quit hi cell, determin upon dismiss the feign rosario. 
He appear at matins; but hi thought were absent, and He paid them 
but littl attention. hi heart and brain were both of them fill 
with worldli objects, and He pray without devotion. the servic over, 
He descend into the garden. He bent hi step toward the same spot 
where, on the preced night, He had made thi embarrass discovery. 
He doubt not but that matilda would seek him there: He wa not 
deceived. she soon enter the hermitage, and approach the monk with 
a timid air. after a few minut dure which both were silent, she 
appear as if on the point of speaking; but the abbot, who dure thi 
time had been summon up all hi resolution, hastili interrupt her. 
though still unconsci how extens wa it influence, He dread 
the melodi seduct of her voice. 

'seat yourself by my side, matilda,' said he, assum a look of 
firmness, though care avoid the least mixtur of severity; 
'listen to me patiently, and believe, that in what I shall say, I am 
not more influenc by my own interest than by yours: believe, that I 
feel for you the warmest friendship, the truest compassion, and that 
you cannot feel more griev than I do, when I declar to you that we 
must never meet again.' 

'ambrosio!' she cried, in a voic at onc express of surpris and 
sorrow. 

'be calm, my friend! My rosario! still let me call you by that name 
so dear to me! our separ is unavoidable; I blush to own, how 
sensibl it affect me.-- but yet it must be so. I feel myself 
incap of treat you with indifference, and that veri convict 
oblig me to insist upon your departure. matilda, you must stay here 
no longer.' 

'oh! where shall I now seek for probity? disgust with a perfidi 
world, in what happi region doe truth conceal herself? father, I 
hope that she resid here; I thought that your bosom had been her 
favourit shrine. and you too prove false? Oh god! and you too can 
betray me?' 

'matilda!' 

'yes, father, yes! 'ti with justic that I reproach you. oh! where 
are your promises? My novici is not expired, and yet will you 
compel me to quit the monastery? can you have the heart to drive me 
from you? and have I not receiv your solemn oath to the contrary?' 

'I will not compel you to quit the monastery: you have receiv my 
solemn oath to the contrary. but yet when I throw myself upon your 
generosity, when I declar to you the embarrass in which your 
presenc involv me, will you not releas me from that oath? reflect 
upon the danger of a discovery, upon the opprobrium in which such an 
event would plung me: reflect that my honour and reput are at 
stake, and that my peac of mind depend on your compliance. As yet my 
heart is free; I shall separ from you with regret, but not with 
despair. stay here, and a few week will sacrific my happi on the 
altar of your charms. you are but too interesting, too amiable! I 
should love you, I should doat on you! My bosom would becom the prey 
of desir which honour and my profess forbid me to gratify. If I 
resist them, the impetuos of my wish unsatisfi would drive me 
to madness: If I yield to the temptation, I should sacrific to one 
moment of guilti pleasur my reput in thi world, my salvat in 
the next. To you then I fli for defenc against myself. preserv me 
from lose the reward of thirti year of sufferings! preserv me from 
becom the victim of remorse! your heart ha alreadi felt the 
anguish of hopeless love; oh! then if you realli valu me, spare mine 
that anguish! give me back my promise; fli from these walls. go, and 
you bear with you my warmest prayer for your happiness, my friendship, 
my esteem and admiration: stay, and you becom to me the sourc of 
danger, of sufferings, of despair! answer me, matilda; what is your 
resolve?'--sh wa silent--'wil you not speak, matilda? will you not 
name your choice?' 

'cruel! cruel!' she exclaimed, wring her hand in agony; 'you know 
too well that you offer me no choice! you know too well that I can have 
no will but yours!' 

'I wa not then deceived! matilda' generos equal my expectations.' 

'yes; I will prove the truth of my affect by submit to a decre 
which cut me to the veri heart. take back your promise. I will quit 
the monasteri thi veri day. I have a relation, abbess of a covent in 
estramadura: To her will I bend my steps, and shut myself from the 
world for ever. yet tell me, father, shall I bear your good wish 
with me to my solitude? will you sometim abstract your attent 
from heavenli object to bestow a thought upon me?' 

'ah! matilda, I fear that I shall think on you but too often for my 
repose!' 

'then I have noth more to wish for, save that we may meet in heaven. 
farewell, my friend! my ambrosio!-- and yet methinks, I would fain bear 
with me some token of your regard!' 

'what shall I give you?' 

'something.--ani thing.--on of those flower will be sufficient.' 
(here she point to a bush of roses, plant at the door of the 
grotto.) 'I will hide it in my bosom, and when I am dead, the nun 
shall find it wither upon my heart.' 

the friar wa unabl to reply: with slow steps, and a soul heavi with 
affliction, He quit the hermitage. He approach the bush, and 
stoop to pluck one of the roses. suddenli He utter a pierc cry, 
start back hastily, and let the flower, which He alreadi held, fall 
from hi hand. matilda heard the shriek, and flew anxious toward 
him. 

'what is the matter?' she cried; 'answer me, for god' sake! what ha 
happened?' 

'I have receiv my death!' He repli in a faint voice; 'conceal 
among the rose ... A serpent....' 

here the pain of hi wound becam so exquisite, that natur wa unabl 
to bear it: hi sens abandon him, and He sank inanim into 
matilda' arms. 

her distress wa beyond the power of description. she rent her hair, 
beat her bosom, and not dare to quit ambrosio, endeavour by loud 
cri to summon the monk to her assistance. she at length succeeded. 
alarm by her shrieks, sever of the brother hasten to the spot, 
and the superior wa convey back to the abbey. He wa immedi 
put to bed, and the monk who offici as surgeon to the fratern 
prepar to examin the wound. By thi time ambrosio' hand had 
swell to an extraordinari size; the remedi which had been 
administ to him, 'ti true, restor him to life, but not to hi 
senses; He rave in all the horror of delirium, foam at the mouth, 
and four of the strongest monk were scarc abl to hold him in hi 
bed. 

father pablos, such wa the surgeon' name, hasten to examin the 
wound hand. the monk surround the bed, anxious wait for the 
decision: among these the feign rosario appear not the most 
insens to the friar' calamity. He gaze upon the suffer with 
inexpress anguish; and the groan which everi moment escap from 
hi bosom suffici betray the violenc of hi affliction. 

father pablo probe the wound. As He drew out hi lancet, it point 
wa ting with a greenish hue. He shook hi head mournfully, and 
quit the bedside. 

''ti as I feared!' said he; 'there is no hope.' 

'no hope?' exclaim the monk with one voice; 'say you, no hope?' 

'from the sudden effects, I suspect that the abbot wa stung by a 
cientipedoro: the venom which you see upon my lancet confirm my idea: 
He cannot live three days.' 

'and can no possibl remedi be found?' enquir rosario. 

'without extract the poison, He cannot recover; and how to extract 
it is to me still a secret. all that I can do is to appli such herb 
to the wound as will reliev the anguish: the patient will be restor 
to hi senses; but the venom will corrupt the whole mass of hi blood, 
and in three day He will exist no longer.' 

excess wa the univers grief at hear thi decision. pablos, as 
He had promised, dress the wound, and then retired, follow by hi 
companions: rosario alon remain in the cell, the abbot at hi 
urgent entreati have been commit to hi care. ambrosio' strength 
worn out by the violenc of hi exertions, He had by thi time fallen 
into a profound sleep. So total wa He overcom by weariness, that 
He scarc gave ani sign of life; He wa still in thi situation, 
when the monk return to enquir whether ani chang had taken place. 
pablo loosen the bandag which conceal the wound, more from a 
principl of curios than from indulg the hope of discov ani 
favour symptoms. what wa hi astonish at finding, that the 
inflamm had total subsided! He probe the hand; hi lancet came 
out pure and unsullied; No trace of the venom were perceptible; and 
had not the orific still been visible, pablo might have doubt that 
there had ever been a wound. 

He commun thi intellig to hi brethren; their delight wa 
onli equal by their surprize. from the latter sentiment, however, 
they were soon releas by explain the circumst accord to 
their own ideas: they were perfectli convinc that their superior wa 
a saint, and thought, that noth could be more natur than for st. 
franci to have oper a miracl in hi favour. thi opinion wa 
adopt unanimously: they declar it so loudly, and vociferated,--'a 
miracle! a miracle!'--with such fervour, that they soon interrupt 
ambrosio' slumbers. 

the monk immedi crowd round hi bed, and express their 
satisfact at hi wonder recovery. He wa perfectli in hi 
senses, and free from everi complaint except feel weak and languid. 
pablo gave him a strengthen medicine, and advis hi keep hi 
bed for the two succeed days: He then retired, have desir hi 
patient not to exhaust himself by conversation, but rather to endeavour 
at take some repose. the other monk follow hi example, and the 
abbot and rosario were left without observers. 

for some minut ambrosio regard hi attend with a look of mingl 
pleasur and apprehension. she wa seat upon the side of the bed, 
her head bend down, and as usual envelop in the cowl of her habit. 

'and you are still here, matilda?' said the friar at length. 'are you 
not satisfi with have so nearli effect my destruction, that 
noth but a miracl could have save me from the grave? ah! sure 
heaven sent that serpent to punish....' 

matilda interrupt him by put her hand befor hi lip with an air 
of gaiety. 

'hush! father, hush! you must not talk!' 

'he who impos that order, knew not how interest are the subject 
on which I wish to speak.' 

'but I know it, and yet issu the same posit command. I am 
appoint your nurse, and you must not disobey my orders.' 

'you are in spirits, matilda!' 

'well may I be so: I have just receiv a pleasur unexampl through 
my whole life.' 

'what wa that pleasure?' 

'what I must conceal from all, but most from you.' 

'but most from me? nay then, I entreat you, matilda....' 

'hush, father! hush! you must not talk. but as you do not seem 
inclin to sleep, shall I endeavour to amus you with my harp?' 

'how? I knew not that you understood music.' 

'oh! I am a sorri performer! yet as silenc is prescrib you for 
eight and forti hours, I may possibl entertain you, when weari of 
your own reflections. I go to fetch my harp.' 

she soon return with it. 

'now, father; what shall I sing? will you hear the ballad which treat 
of the gallant durandarte, who die in the famou battl of 
roncevalles?' 

'what you please, matilda.' 

'oh! call me not matilda! call me rosario, call me your friend! those 
are the names, which I love to hear from your lips. now listen!' 

she then tune her harp, and afterward prelud for some moment with 
such exquisit tast as to prove her a perfect mistress of the 
instrument. the air which she play wa soft and plaintive: 

ambrosio, while He listened, felt hi uneasi subside, and a 
pleas melancholi spread itself into hi bosom. suddenli matilda 
chang the strain: with an hand bold and rapid she struck a few loud 
martial chords, and then chaunt the follow ballad to an air at 
onc simpl and melodious. 

durandart and belerma 

sad and fear is the stori 
Of the ronceval fight; 
On those fatal plain of glori 
perish mani a gallant knight. 

there fell durandarte; never 
vers a nobler chieftain named: 
he, befor hi lip for ever 
close in silenc thu exclaimed. 

'oh! belerma! oh! my dear-one! 
for my pain and pleasur born! 
seven long year I serv thee, fair-one, 
seven long year my fee wa scorn: 

'and when now thi heart repli 
To my wishes, burn like mine, 
cruel fate my bliss deni 
bid me everi hope resign. 

'ah! though young I fall, believ me, 
death would never claim a sigh; 
'ti to lose thee, 'ti to leav thee, 
make me think it hard to die! 

'oh! my cousin montesinos, 
By that friendship firm and dear 
which from youth ha live between us, 
now my last petit hear! 

'when my soul these limb forsak 
eager seek a purer air, 
from my breast the cold heart taking, 
give it to belerma' care. 

say, I of my land possessor 
name her with my die breath: 
say, my lip I op'd to bless her, 
ere they close for aye in death: 

'twice a week too how sincer 
I ador her, cousin, say; 
twice a week for one who dearli 
love her, cousin, bid her pray. 

'montesinos, now the hour 
mark by fate is near at hand: 
lo! my arm ha lost it power! 
lo! I drop my trusti brand! 

'eyes, which forth beheld me going, 
homeward ne'er shall see me hie! 
cousin, stop those tear o'er-flowing, 
let me on thi bosom die! 

'thi kind hand my eyelid closing, 
yet one favour I implore: 
pray thou for my soul' reposing, 
when my heart shall throb no more; 

'so shall jesus, still attend 
graciou to a christian' vow, 
pleas accept my ghost ascending, 
and a seat in heaven allow.' 

thu spoke gallant durandarte; 
soon hi brave heart broke in twain. 
greatli joy the moorish party, 
that the gallant knight wa slain. 

bitter weep montesino 
took from him hi helm and glaive; 
bitter weep montesino 
dug hi gallant cousin' grave. 

To perform hi promis made, He 
cut the heart from out the breast, 
that belerma, wretch lady! 
might receiv the last bequest. 

sad wa montesinos' heart, He 
felt distress hi bosom rend. 
'oh! my cousin durandarte, 
woe is me to view thi end! 

'sweet in manners, fair in favour, 
mild in temper, fierc in fight, 
warrior, nobler, gentler, braver, 
never shall behold the light! 

'cousin, lo! my tear bedew thee! 
how shall I thi loss survive! 
durandarte, He who slew thee, 
wherefor left He me alive!' 


while she sung, ambrosio listen with delight: never had He heard a 
voic more harmonious; and He wonder how such heavenli sound could 
be produc by ani but angels. but though He indulg the sens of 
hearing, a singl look convinc him that He must not trust to that of 
sight. the songstress sat at a littl distanc from hi bed. the 
attitud in which she bent over her harp, wa easi and graceful: her 
cowl had fallen backward than usual: two coral lip were visible, 
ripe, fresh, and melting, and a chin in whose dimpl seem to lurk a 
thousand cupids. her habit' long sleev would have swept along the 
chord of the instrument: To prevent thi inconveni she had drawn 
it abov her elbow, and by thi mean an arm wa discov form in 
the most perfect symmetry, the delicaci of whose skin might have 
contend with snow in whiteness. ambrosio dare to look on her but 
once: that glanc suffic to convinc him, how danger wa the 
presenc of thi seduc object. He close hi eyes, but strove in 
vain to banish her from hi thoughts. there she still move befor him, 
adorn with all those charm which hi heat imagin could 
supply: everi beauti which He had seen, appear embellished, and 
those still conceal fanci repres to him in glow colours. 
still, however, hi vow and the necess of keep to them were 
present to hi memory. He struggl with desire, and shudder when He 
beheld how deep wa the precipic befor him. 

matilda ceas to sing. dread the influenc of her charms, ambrosio 
remain with hi eye closed, and offer up hi prayer to st. 
franci to assist him in thi danger trial! matilda believ that He 
wa sleeping. she rose from her seat, approach the bed softly, and 
for some minut gaze upon him attentively. 

'he sleeps!' said she at length in a low voice, but whose accent the 
abbot distinguish perfectly; 'now then I may gaze upon him without 
offence! I may mix my breath with his; I may doat upon hi features, 
and He cannot suspect me of impur and deceit!--h fear my seduc 
him to the violat of hi vows! oh! the unjust! were it my wish to 
excit desire, should I conceal my featur from him so carefully? 
those features, of which I daili hear him....' 

she stopped, and wa lost in her reflections. 

'it wa but yesterday!' she continued; 'but a few short hour have 
past, sinc I wa dear to him! He esteem me, and my heart wa 
satisfied! now!... oh! now how cruelli is my situat changed! He 
look on me with suspicion! He bid me leav him, leav him for ever! 
oh! you, my saint! my idol! you, hold the next place to god in my 
breast! yet two days, and my heart will be unveil to you.--could you 
know my feelings, when I beheld your agony! could you know, how much 
your suffer have endear you to me! but the time will come, when 
you will be convinc that my passion is pure and disinterested. then 
you will piti me, and feel the whole weight of these sorrows!' 

As she said this, her voic wa choak by weeping. while she bent over 
ambrosio, a tear fell upon hi cheek. 

'ah! I have disturb him!' cri matilda, and retreat hastily. 

her alarm wa ungrounded. none sleep so profoundly, as those who are 
determin not to wake. the friar wa in thi predicament: He still 
seem buri in a repose, which everi succeed minut render him 
less capabl of enjoying. the burn tear had commun it warmth 
to hi heart. 

'what affection! what purity!' said He internally; 'ah! sinc my 
bosom is thu sensibl of pity, what would it be if agit by love?' 

matilda again quit her seat, and retir to some distanc from the 
bed. ambrosio ventur to open hi eyes, and to cast them upon her 
fearfully. her face wa turn from him. she rest her head in a 
melancholi postur upon her harp, and gaze on the pictur which hung 
opposit to the bed. 

'happy, happi image!' thu did she address the beauti madona; ''ti 
to you that He offer hi prayers! 'ti on you that He gaze with 
admiration! I thought you would have lighten my sorrows; you have 
onli serv to increas their weight: you have made me feel that had I 
known him ere hi vow were pronounced, ambrosio and happi might 
have been mine. with what pleasur He view thi picture! with what 
fervour He address hi prayer to the insens image! ah! may not 
hi sentiment be inspir by some kind and secret genius, friend to my 
affection? may it not be man' natur instinct which inform him... 
Be silent, idl hopes! let me not encourag an idea which take from 
the brillianc of ambrosio' virtue. 'ti religion, not beauti which 
attract hi admiration; 'ti not to the woman, but the divin that 
He kneels. would He but address to me the least tender express 
which He pour forth to thi madona! would He but say that were He not 
alreadi affianc to the church, He would not have despis matilda! 
oh! let me nourish that fond idea! perhap He may yet acknowledg 
that He feel for me more than pity, and that affect like mine might 
well have deserv a return; perhaps, He may own thu much when I lye 
on my deathbed! He then need not fear to infring hi vows, and the 
confess of hi regard will soften the pang of dying. would I were 
sure of this! oh! how earnestli should I sigh for the moment of 
dissolution!' 

Of thi discours the abbot lost not a syllable; and the tone in which 
she pronounc these last word pierc to hi heart. involuntarili He 
rais himself from hi pillow. 

'matilda!' He said in a troubl voice; 'oh! my matilda!' 

she start at the sound, and turn toward him hastily. the 
sudden of her movement made her cowl fall back from her head; her 
featur becam visibl to the monk' enquir eye. what wa hi 
amaz at behold the exact resembl of hi admir madona? 
the same exquisit proport of features, the same profus of golden 
hair, the same rosi lips, heavenli eyes, and majesti of counten 
adorn matilda! utter an exclam of surprize, ambrosio sank 
back upon hi pillow, and doubt whether the object befor him wa 
mortal or divine. 

matilda seem penetr with confusion. she remain motionless in 
her place, and support herself upon her instrument. her eye were 
bent upon the earth, and her fair cheek overspread with blushes. On 
recov herself, her first action wa to conceal her features. she 
then in an unsteadi and troubl voic ventur to address these word 
to the friar. 

'accid ha made you master of a secret, which I never would have 
reveal but on the bed of death. yes, ambrosio; In matilda de 
villanega you see the origin of your belov madona. soon after I 
conceiv my unfortun passion, I form the project of convey to 
you my picture: crowd of admir had persuad me that I possess 
some beauty, and I wa anxiou to know what effect it would produc 
upon you. I caus my portrait to be drawn by martin galuppi, a 
celebr venetian at that time resid in madrid. the resembl 
wa striking: I sent it to the capuchin abbey as if for sale, and the 
jew from whom you bought it wa one of my emissaries. you purchas 
it. judg of my rapture, when inform that you had gaze upon it with 
delight, or rather with adoration; that you had suspend it in your 
cell, and that you address your supplic to no other saint. 
will thi discoveri make me still more regard as an object of 
suspicion? rather should it convinc you how pure is my affection, and 
engag you to suffer me in your societi and esteem. I heard you daili 
extol the prais of my portrait: I wa an eyewit of the 
transports, which it beauti excit in you: yet I forbor to use 
against your virtu those arms, with which yourself had furnish me. 
I conceal those featur from your sight, which you love 
unconsciously. I strove not to excit desir by display my charms, 
or to make myself mistress of your heart through the medium of your 
senses. To attract your notic by studious attend to religi 
duties, to endear myself to you by convinc you that my mind wa 
virtuou and my attach sincere, such wa my onli aim. I succeeded; 
I becam your companion and your friend. I conceal my sex from your 
knowledge; and had you not press me to reveal my secret, had I not 
been torment by the fear of a discovery, never had you known me for 
ani other than rosario. and still are you resolv to drive me from 
you? the few hour of life which yet remain for me, may I not pass 
them in your presence? oh! speak, ambrosio, and tell me that I may 
stay!' 

thi speech gave the abbot an opportun of recollect himself. He 
wa consciou that in the present disposit of hi mind, avoid her 
societi wa hi onli refug from the power of thi enchant woman. 

'you declar ha so much astonish me,' said he, 'that I am at 
present incap of answer you. Do not insist upon a reply, 
matilda; leav me to myself; I have need to be alone.' 

'I obey you--but befor I go, promis not to insist upon my quit 
the abbey immediately.' 

'matilda, reflect upon your situation; reflect upon the consequ of 
your stay. our separ is indispensable, and we must part.' 

'but not to-day, father! oh! in piti not today!' 

'you press me too hard, but I cannot resist that tone of supplication. 
sinc you insist upon it, I yield to your prayer: I consent to your 
remain here a suffici time to prepar in some measur the 
brethren for your departure. stay yet two days; but on the third,' ... 
(he sigh involuntarily)--'remember, that on the third we must part 
for ever!' 

she caught hi hand eagerly, and press it to her lips. 

'on the third?' she exclaim with an air of wild solemnity; 'you are 
right, father! you are right! On the third we must part for ever!' 

there wa a dread express in her eye as she utter these words, 
which penetr the friar' soul with horror: again she kiss hi 
hand, and then fled with rapid from the chamber. 

anxiou to authoris the presenc of hi danger guest, yet consciou 
that her stay wa infring the law of hi order, ambrosio' bosom 
becam the theatr of a thousand contend passions. At length hi 
attach to the feign rosario, aid by the natur warmth of hi 
temperament, seem like to obtain the victory: the success wa 
assured, when that presumpt which form the groundwork of hi 
charact came to matilda' assistance. the monk reflect that to 
vanquish temptat wa an infinit greater merit than to avoid it: 
He thought that He ought rather to rejoic in the opportun given him 
of prove the firm of hi virtue. st. anthoni had withstood all 
seduct to lust; then whi should not he? besides, st. anthoni wa 
tempt by the devil, who put everi art into practic to excit hi 
passions: whereas, ambrosio' danger proceed from a mere mortal 
woman, fear and modest, whose apprehens of hi yield were not 
less violent than hi own. 

'yes,' said he; 'the unfortun shall stay; I have noth to fear 
from her presence. even should my own prove too weak to resist the 
temptation, I am secur from danger by the innoc of matilda.' 

ambrosio wa yet to learn, that to an heart unacquaint with her, vice 
is ever most danger when lurk behind the mask of virtue. 

He found himself so perfectli recovered, that when father pablo 
visit him again at night, He entreat permiss to quit hi chamber 
on the day following. hi request wa granted. matilda appear no 
more that evening, except in compani with the monk when they came in a 
bodi to enquir after the abbot' health. she seem fear of 
convers with him in private, and stay but a few minut in hi 
room. the friar slept well; but the dream of the former night were 
repeated, and hi sensat of voluptu were yet more keen and 
exquisite. the same lust-excit vision float befor hi eyes: 
matilda, in all the pomp of beauty, warm, tender, and luxurious, 
clasp him to her bosom, and lavish upon him the most ardent 
caresses. He return them as eagerly, and alreadi wa on the point of 
satisfi hi desires, when the faithless form disappeared, and left 
him to all the horror of shame and disappointment. 

the morn dawned. fatigued, harassed, and exhaust by hi provok 
dreams, He wa not dispos to quit hi bed. He excus himself from 
appear at matins: It wa the first morn in hi life that He had 
ever miss them. He rose late. dure the whole of the day He had no 
opportun of speak to matilda without witnesses. hi cell wa 
throng by the monks, anxiou to express their concern at hi illness; 
and He wa still occupi in receiv their compliment on hi 
recovery, when the bell summon them to the refectory. 

after dinner the monk separated, and dispers themselv in variou 
part of the garden, where the shade of tree or retir of some 
grotto present the most agreeabl mean of enjoy the siesta. the 
abbot bent hi step toward the hermitage: A glanc of hi eye 
invit matilda to accompani him. 

she obeyed, and follow him thither in silence. they enter the 
grotto, and seat themselves. both seem unwil to begin the 
conversation, and to labour under the influenc of mutual 
embarrassment. At length the abbot spoke: He convers onli on 
indiffer topics, and matilda answer him in the same tone. she 
seem anxiou to make him forget that the person who sat by him wa 
ani other than rosario. neither of them dared, or inde wish to 
make an allusion, to the subject which wa most at the heart of both. 

matilda' effort to appear gay were evid forced: her spirit were 
oppress by the weight of anxiety, and when she spoke her voic wa 
low and feeble. she seem desir of finish a convers which 
embarrass her; and complain that she wa unwell, she request 
ambrosio' permiss to return to the abbey. He accompani her to 
the door of her cell; and when arriv there, He stop her to declar 
hi consent to her continu the partner of hi solitud so long as 
should be agreeabl to herself. 

she discov no mark of pleasur at receiv thi intelligence, 
though on the preced day she had been so anxiou to obtain the 
permission. 

'alas! father,' she said, wave her head mournfully; 'your kind 
come too late! My doom is fixed. We must separ for ever. yet 
believe, that I am grate for your generosity, for your compass of 
an unfortun who is but too littl deserv of it!' 

she put her handkerchief to her eyes. her cowl wa onli half drawn 
over her face. ambrosio observ that she wa pale, and her eye sunk 
and heavy. 

'good god!' He cried; 'you are veri ill, matilda! I shall send father 
pablo to you instantly.' 

'no; Do not. I am ill, 'ti true; but He cannot cure my malady. 
farewell, father! rememb me in your prayer tomorrow, while I shall 
rememb you in heaven!' 

she enter her cell, and close the door. 

the abbot dispatch to her the physician without lose a moment, and 
wait hi report impatiently. but father pablo soon returned, and 
declar that hi errand had been fruitless. rosario refus to admit 
him, and had posit reject hi offer of assistance. the 
uneasi which thi account gave ambrosio wa not trifling: yet He 
determin that matilda should have her own way for that night: but 
that if her situat did not mend by the morning, he would insist upon 
her take the advic of father pablos. 

He did not find himself inclin to sleep. He open hi casement, and 
gaze upon the moonbeam as they play upon the small stream whose 
water bath the wall of the monastery. the cool of the night 
breez and tranquil of the hour inspir the friar' mind with 
sadness. He thought upon matilda' beauti and affection; upon the 
pleasur which He might have share with her, had He not been 
restrain by monast fetters. He reflected, that unsustain by hope 
her love for him could not long exist; that doubtless she would succeed 
in extinguish her passion, and seek for happi in the arm of one 
more fortunate. He shudder at the void which her absenc would leav 
in hi bosom. He look with disgust on the monotoni of a convent, and 
breath a sigh toward that world from which He wa for ever 
separated. such were the reflect which a loud knock at hi door 
interrupted. the bell of the church had alreadi struck two. the abbot 
hasten to enquir the caus of thi disturbance. He open the door 
of hi cell, and a lay-broth entered, whose look declar hi hurri 
and confusion. 

'hasten, reverend father!' said he; 'hasten to the young rosario. 

He earnestli request to see you; He lie at the point of death.' 

'graciou god! where is father pablos? whi is He not with him? oh! I 
fear! I fear!' 

'father pablo ha seen him, but hi art can do nothing. He say that 
He suspect the youth to be poisoned.' 

'poisoned? oh! the unfortunate! It is then as I suspected! but let 
me not lose a moment; perhap it may yet be time to save her!' 

He said, and flew toward the cell of the novice. sever monk were 
alreadi in the chamber. father pablo wa one of them, and held a 
medicin in hi hand which He wa endeavour to persuad rosario to 
swallow. the other were employ in admir the patient' divin 
countenance, which they now saw for the first time. she look 
loveli than ever. she wa no longer pale or languid; A bright glow 
had spread itself over her cheeks; her eye sparkl with a seren 
delight, and her counten wa express of confid and 
resignation. 

'oh! torment me no more!' wa she say to pablos, when the terrifi 
abbot rush hastili into the cell; 'mi diseas is far beyond the reach 
of your skill, and I wish not to be cure of it'--then perceiv 
ambrosio,-- 'ah! 'ti he!' she cried; 'I see him onc again, befor we 
part for ever! leav me, my brethren; much have I to tell thi holi 
man in private.' 

the monk retir immediately, and matilda and the abbot remain 
together. 

'what have you done, imprud woman!' exclaim the latter, as soon as 
they were left alone; 'tell me; are my suspicion just? Am I inde to 
lose you? ha your own hand been the instrument of your destruction?' 

she smiled, and grasp hi hand. 

'in what have I been imprudent, father? I have sacrif a pebble, 
and save a diamond: My death preserv a life valuabl to the world, 
and more dear to me than my own. yes, father; I am poisoned; but know 
that the poison onc circul in your veins.' 

'matilda!' 

'what I tell you I resolv never to discov to you but on the bed of 
death: that moment is now arrived. you cannot have forgotten the day 
already, when your life wa endang by the bite of a cientipedoro. 
the physician gave you over, declar himself ignor how to extract 
the venom: I knew but of one means, and hesit not a moment to 
employ it. I wa left alon with you: you slept; I loosen the 
bandag from your hand; I kiss the wound, and drew out the poison 
with my lips. the effect ha been more sudden than I expected. I feel 
death at my heart; yet an hour, and I shall be in a better world.' 

'almighti god!' exclaim the abbot, and sank almost lifeless upon the 
bed. 

after a few minut He again rais himself up suddenly, and gaze upon 
matilda with all the wild of despair. 

'and you have sacrif yourself for me! you die, and die to preserv 
ambrosio! and is there inde no remedy, matilda? and is there inde 
no hope? speak to me, oh! speak to me! tell me, that you have still 
the mean of life!' 

'be comforted, my onli friend! yes, I have still the mean of life in 
my power: but 'ti a mean which I dare not employ. It is dangerous! 
It is dreadful! life would be purchas at too dear a rate, ... 
unless it were permit me to live for you.' 

'then live for me, matilda, for me and gratitude!'-- (he caught her 
hand, and press it raptur to hi lips.)--'rememb our late 
conversations; I now consent to everi thing: rememb in what live 
colour you describ the union of souls; Be it our to realiz those 
ideas. let us forget the distinct of sex, despis the world' 
prejudices, and onli consid each other as brother and friend. live 
then, matilda! oh! live for me!' 

'ambrosio, it must not be. when I thought thus, I deceiv both you 
and myself. either I must die at present, or expir by the linger 
torment of unsatisfi desire. oh! sinc we last convers together, 
a dread veil ha been rent from befor my eyes. I love you no 
longer with the devot which is paid to a saint: I prize you no more 
for the virtu of your soul; I lust for the enjoy of your person. 
the woman reign in my bosom, and I am becom a prey to the wildest of 
passions. away with friendship! 'ti a cold unfeel word. My bosom 
burn with love, with unutter love, and love must be it return. 
trembl then, ambrosio, trembl to succeed in your prayers. If I live, 
your truth, your reputation, your reward of a life past in sufferings, 
all that you valu is irretriev lost. I shall no longer be abl to 
combat my passions, shall seiz everi opportun to excit your 
desires, and labour to effect your dishonour and my own. no, no, 
ambrosio; I must not live! I am convinc with everi moment, that I 
have but one alternative; I feel with everi heart-throb, that I must 
enjoy you, or die.' 

'amazement!--matilda! can it be you who speak to me?' 

He made a movement as if to quit hi seat. she utter a loud shriek, 
and rais herself half out of the bed, threw her arm round the friar 
to detain him. 

'oh! do not leav me! listen to my error with compassion! In a few 
hour I shall be no more; yet a little, and I am free from thi 
disgrac passion.' 

'wretch woman, what can I say to you! I cannot ... I must not ... 
but live, matilda! oh! live!' 

'you do not reflect on what you ask. what? live to plung myself in 
infamy? To becom the agent of hell? To work the destruct both of 
you and of myself? feel thi heart, father!' 

she took hi hand: confused, embarrassed, and fascinated, He withdrew 
it not, and felt her heart throb under it. 

'feel thi heart, father! It is yet the seat of honour, truth, and 
chastity: If it beat tomorrow, it must fall a prey to the blackest 
crimes. oh! let me then die today! let me die, while I yet deserv 
the tear of the virtuous! thu will expire!'--(sh reclin her head 
upon hi shoulder; her golden hair pour itself over hi chest.)-- 
'fold in your arms, I shall sink to sleep; your hand shall close my 
eye for ever, and your lip receiv my die breath. and will you not 
sometim think of me? will you not sometim shed a tear upon my 
tomb? oh! yes! yes! yes! that kiss is my assurance!' 

the hour wa night. all wa silenc around. the faint beam of a 
solitari lamp dart upon matilda' figure, and shed through the 
chamber a dim mysteri light. No pri eye, or curiou ear wa near 
the lovers: noth wa heard but matilda' melodi accents. 
ambrosio wa in the full vigour of manhood. He saw befor him a young 
and beauti woman, the preserv of hi life, the ador of hi 
person, and whom affect for him had reduc to the brink of the 
grave. He sat upon her bed; hi hand rest upon her bosom; her head 
reclin voluptu upon hi breast. who then can wonder, if He 
yield to the temptation? drunk with desire, He press hi lip to 
those which sought them: hi kiss vie with matilda' in warmth and 
passion. He clasp her raptur in hi arms; He forgot hi vows, 
hi sanctity, and hi fame: He rememb noth but the pleasur and 
opportunity. 

'ambrosio! oh! my ambrosio!' sigh matilda. 

'thine, ever thine!' murmur the friar, and sank upon her bosom. 



chapter iii 

----these are the villain 
whom all the travel do fear so much. 
--------some of them are gentlemen 
such as the furi of ungovern youth 
thrust from the compani of aw men. 
two gentlemen of verona. 

the marqui and lorenzo proceed to the hotel in silence. the former 
employ himself in call everi circumst to hi mind, which 
relat might give lorenzo' the most favour idea of hi connexion 
with agnes. the latter, justli alarm for the honour of hi family, 
felt embarrass by the presenc of the marquis: the adventur which He 
had just wit forbad hi treat him as a friend; and antonia' 
interest be entrust to hi mediation, He saw the impolici of 
treat him as a foe. He conclud from these reflections, that 
profound silenc would be the wisest plan, and wait with impati 
for don raymond' explanation. 

they arriv at the hotel de la cisternas. the marqui immedi 
conduct him to hi apartment, and began to express hi satisfact 
at find him at madrid. lorenzo interrupt him. 

'excus me, my lord,' said He with a distant air, 'if I repli somewhat 
coldli to your express of regard. A sister' honour is involv in 
thi affair: till that is established, and the purport of your 
correspond with agn clear up, I cannot consid you as my 
friend. I am anxiou to hear the mean of your conduct, and hope 
that you will not delay the promis explanation.' 

'first give me your word, that you will listen with patienc and 
indulgence.' 

'I love my sister too well to judg her harshly; and till thi moment I 
possess no friend so dear to me as yourself. I will also confess, 
that your have it in your power to oblig me in a busi which I 
have much at heart, make me veri anxiou to find you still deserv 
my esteem.' 

'lorenzo, you transport me! No greater pleasur can be given me, than 
an opportun of serv the brother of agnes.' 

'convinc me that I can accept your favour without dishonour, and 
there is no man in the world to whom I am more will to be obliged.' 

'probably, you have alreadi heard your sister mention the name of 
alphonso d'alvarada?' 

'never. though I feel for agn an affect truli fraternal, 
circumst have prevent us from be much together. while yet a 
child she wa consign to the care of her aunt, who had marri a 
german nobleman. At hi castl she remain till two year since, when 
she return to spain, determin upon seclud herself from the 
world.' 

'good god! lorenzo, you knew of her intention, and yet strove not to 
make her chang it?' 

'marquis, you wrong me. the intelligence, which I receiv at naples, 
shock me extremely, and I hasten my return to madrid for the 
express purpos of prevent the sacrifice. the moment that I 
arrived, I flew to the convent of st. clare, in which agn had chosen 
to perform her noviciate. I request to see my sister. conceiv my 
surpris when she sent me a refusal; she declar positively, that 
apprehend my influenc over her mind, she would not trust herself in 
my societi till the day befor that on which she wa to receiv the 
veil. I supplic the nuns; I insist upon see agnes, and 
hesit not to avow my suspicion that her be kept from me wa 
against her own inclinations. To free herself from the imput of 
violence, the prioress brought me a few line written in my sister' 
well-known hand, repeat the messag alreadi delivered. all futur 
attempt to obtain a moment' convers with her were as fruitless 
as the first. she wa inflexible, and I wa not permit to see her 
till the day preced that on which she enter the cloister never to 
quit it more. thi interview took place in the presenc of our 
princip relations. It wa for the first time sinc her childhood 
that I saw her, and the scene wa most affecting. she threw herself 
upon my bosom, kiss me, and wept bitterly. By everi possibl 
argument, by tears, by prayers, by kneeling, I strove to make her 
abandon her intention. I repres to her all the hardship of a 
religi life; I paint to her imagin all the pleasur which 
she wa go to quit, and besought her to disclos to me, what 
occas her disgust to the world. At thi last question she turn 
pale, and her tear flow yet faster. she entreat me not to press 
her on that subject; that it suffic me to know that her resolut 
wa taken, and that a convent wa the onli place where she could now 
hope for tranquillity. she persev in her design, and made her 
profession. I visit her frequent at the grate, and everi moment 
that I pass with her, made me feel more afflict at her loss. I 
wa shortli after oblig to quit madrid; I return but yesterday 
evening, and sinc then have not had time to call at st. clare' 
convent.' 

'then till I mention it, you never heard the name of alphonso 
d'alvarada?' 

'pardon me: my aunt wrote me word that an adventur so call had 
found mean to get introduc into the castl of lindenberg; that He 
had insinu himself into my sister' good graces, and that she had 
even consent to elop with him. however, befor the plan could be 
executed, the cavali discov that the estat which He believ 
agn to possess in hispaniola, in realiti belong to me. thi 
intellig made him chang hi intention; He disappear on the day 
that the elop wa to have taken place, and agnes, in despair at 
hi perfidi and meanness, had resolv upon seclus in a convent. 
she added, that as thi adventur had given himself out to be a friend 
of mine, she wish to know whether I had ani knowledg of him. I 
repli in the negative. I had then veri littl idea, that alphonso 
d'alvarada and the marqui de la cisterna were one and the same 
person: the descript given me of the first by no mean talli with 
what I knew of the latter.' 

'in thi I easili recogn donna rodolpha' perfidi character. 
everi word of thi account is stamp with mark of her malice, of her 
falsehood, of her talent for misrepres those whom she wish to 
injure. forgiv me, medina, for speak so freeli of your relation. 
the mischief which she ha done me authoris my resentment, and when 
you have heard my story, you will be convinc that my express have 
not been too severe.' 

He then began hi narr in the follow manner. 

histori OF don raymond, marqui DE la cisterna 

long experience, my dear lorenzo, ha convinc me how gener is your 
nature: I wait not for your declar of ignor respect your 
sister' adventur to suppos that they had been purpos conceal 
from you. had they reach your knowledge, from what misfortun 
should both agn and myself have escaped! fate had ordain it 
otherwise! you were on your travel when I first becam acquaint 
with your sister; and as our enemi took care to conceal from her your 
direction, it wa imposs for her to implor by letter your 
protect and advice. 

On leav salamanca, at which univers as I have sinc heard, you 
remain a year after I quit it, I immedi set out upon my 
travels. My father suppli me liber with money; but He insist 
upon my conceal my rank, and present myself as no more than a 
privat gentleman. thi command wa issu by the counsel of hi 
friend, the duke of villa hermosa, a nobleman for whose abil and 
knowledg of the world I have ever entertain the most profound 
veneration. 

'believ me,' said he, 'mi dear raymond, you will hereaft feel the 
benefit of thi temporari degradation. 'ti true, that as the cond 
de la cisterna you would have been receiv with open arms; and your 
youth vaniti might have felt gratifi by the attent shower 
upon you from all sides. At present, much will depend upon yourself: 
you have excel recommendations, but it must be your own busi to 
make them of use to you. you must lay yourself out to please; you must 
labour to gain the approb of those, to whom you are presented: 
they who would have court the friendship of the cond de la 
cisterna will have no interest in find out the merits, or bear 
patient with the faults, of alphonso d'alvarada. consequently, when 
you find yourself realli liked, you may safe ascrib it to your good 
qualities, not your rank, and the distinct shown you will be 
infinit more flattering. besides, your exalt birth would not 
permit your mix with the lower class of society, which will now be 
in your power, and from which, in my opinion, you will deriv 
consider benefit. Do not confin yourself to the illustri of 
those countri through which you pass. examin the manner and 
custom of the multitude: enter into the cottages; and by observ how 
the vassal of foreign are treated, learn to diminish the burthen 
and augment the comfort of your own. accord to my ideas, of those 
advantag which a youth destin to the possess of power and wealth 
may reap from travel, He should not consid as the least essential, 
the opportun of mix with the class below him, and becom an 
eyewit of the suffer of the people.' 

forgiv me, lorenzo, if I seem tediou in my narration. the close 
connexion which now exist between us, make me anxiou that you should 
know everi particular respect me; and in my fear of omit the 
least circumst which may induc you to think favour of your 
sister and myself, I may possibl relat mani which you may think 
uninteresting. 

I follow the duke' advice; I wa soon convinc of it wisdom. 

I quit spain, call myself by the assum titl of don alphonso 
d'alvarada, and attend by a singl domest of approv fidelity. 
pari wa my first station. for some time I wa enchant with it, as 
inde must be everi man who is young, rich, and fond of pleasure. yet 
among all it gaieties, I felt that someth wa want to my heart. 
I grew sick of dissipation: I discovered, that the peopl among whom I 
lived, and whose exterior wa so polish and seducing, were at bottom 
frivolous, unfeel and insincere. I turn from the inhabit of 
pari with disgust, and quit that theatr of luxuri without heav 
one sigh of regret. 

I now bent my cours toward germany, intend to visit most of the 
princip courts: prior to thi expedition, I meant to make some 
littl stay at strasbourg. On quit my chais at lunevil to take 
some refreshment, I observ a splendid equipage, attend by four 
domest in rich liveries, wait at the door of the silver lion. 
soon after as I look out of the window, I saw a ladi of nobl 
presence, follow by two femal attendants, step into the carriage, 
which drove off immediately. 

I enquir of the host, who the ladi was, that had just departed. 

'A german baroness, monsieur, of great rank and fortune. she ha been 
upon a visit to the duchess of longueville, as her servant inform 
me; she is go to strasbourg, where she will find her husband, and 
then both return to their castl in germany.' 

I resum my journey, intend to reach strasbourg that night. My 
hopes, howev were frustrat by the break down of my chaise. the 
accid happen in the middl of a thick forest, and I wa not a 
littl embarrass as to the mean of proceeding. 

It wa the depth of winter: the night wa alreadi close round us; 
and strasbourg, which wa the nearest town, wa still distant from us 
sever leagues. It seem to me that my onli altern to pass 
the night in the forest, wa to take my servant' hors and ride on to 
strasbourg, an undertak at that season veri far from agreeable. 
however, see no other resource, I wa oblig to make up my mind to 
it. accordingli I commun my design to the postillion, tell 
him that I would send peopl to assist him as soon as I reach 
strasbourg. I had not much confid in hi honesty; but stephano 
be well-armed, and the driver to all appear consider 
advanc in years, I believ I ran no danger of lose my baggage. 

luckily, as I then thought, an opportun present itself of pass 
the night more agreeabl than I expected. On mention my design of 
proceed by myself to strasbourg, the postillion shook hi head in 
disapprobation. 

'it is a long way,' said he; 'you will find it a difficult matter to 
arriv there without a guide. besides, monsieur seem unaccustom to 
the season' severity, and 'ti possibl that unabl to sustain the 
excess cold....' 

'what use is there to present me with all these objections?' said I, 
impati interrupt him; 'I have no other resource: I run still 
greater risqu of perish with cold by pass the night in the 
forest.' 

'pass the night in the forest?' He replied; 'oh! by st. denis! We 
are not in quit so bad a plight as that come to yet. If I am not 
mistaken, we are scarc five minut walk from the cottag of my old 
friend, baptiste. He is a wood-cutter, and a veri honest fellow. I 
doubt not but He will shelter you for the night with pleasure. In the 
meantim I can take the saddle-horse, ride to strasbourg, and be back 
with proper peopl to mend your carriag by break of day.' 

'and in the name of god,' said I, 'how could you leav me so long in 
suspense? whi did you not tell me of thi cottag sooner? what 
excess stupidity!' 

'I thought that perhap monsieur would not deign to accept....' 

'absurd! come, come! say no more, but conduct us without delay to the 
wood-man' cottage.' 

He obeyed, and we move onwards: the hors contriv with some 
difficulti to drag the shatter vehicl after us. My servant wa 
becom almost speechless, and I began to feel the effect of the cold 
myself, befor we reach the wished-for cottage. It wa a small but 
neat building: As we drew near it, I rejoic at observ through the 
window the blaze of a comfort fire. our conductor knock at the 
door: It wa some time befor ani one answered; the peopl within 
seem in doubt whether we should be admitted. 

'come! come, friend baptiste!' cri the driver with impatience; 'what 
are you about? are you asleep? Or will you refus a night' lodg 
to a gentleman, whose chais ha just broken down in the forest?' 

'ah! is it you, honest claude?' repli a man' voic from within; 
'wait a moment, and the door shall be opened.' 

soon after the bolt were drawn back. the door wa unclosed, and a man 
present himself to us with a lamp in hi hand. He gave the guid an 
hearti reception, and then address himself to me. 

'walk in, monsieur; walk in, and welcome! excus me for not admit 
you at first: but there are so mani rogu about thi place, that 
save your presence, I suspect you to be one.' 

thu saying, He usher me into the room, where I had observ the 
fire: I wa immedi place in an easi chair, which stood close to 
the hearth. A female, whom I suppos to be the wife of my host, rose 
from her seat upon my entrance, and receiv me with a slight and 
distant reverence. she made no answer to my compliment, but 
immedi re-seat herself, continu the work on which she had 
been employed. her husband' manner were as friendli as her were 
harsh and repulsive. 

'I wish, I could lodg you more conveniently, monsieur,' said he; 'but 
we cannot boast of much spare room in thi hovel. however, a chamber 
for yourself, and anoth for your servant, I think, we can make shift 
to supply. you must content yourself with sorri fare; but to what we 
have, believ me, you are heartili welcome.' ----then turn to hi 
wife--'why, how you sit there, marguerite, with as much tranquil as 
if you had noth better to do! stir about, dame! stir about! get 
some supper; look out some sheets; here, here; throw some log upon the 
fire, for the gentleman seem perish with cold.' 

the wife threw her work hastili upon the table, and proceed to 
execut hi command with everi mark of unwillingness. her counten 
had displeas me on the first moment of my examin it. yet upon the 
whole her featur were handsom unquestionably; but her skin wa 
sallow, and her person thin and meagre; A lour gloom over-spread her 
countenance; and it bore such visibl mark of rancour and ill-will, as 
could not escap be notic by the most inattent observer. her 
everi look and action express discont and impatience, and the 
answer which she gave baptiste, when He reproach her good-humouredli 
for her dissatisfi air, were tart, short, and cutting. In tine, I 
conceiv at first sight equal disgust for her, and prepossess in 
favour of her husband, whose appear wa calcul to inspir 
esteem and confidence. hi counten wa open, sincere, and 
friendly; hi manner had all the peasant' honesti unaccompani by 
hi rudeness; hi cheek were broad, full, and ruddy; and in the 
solid of hi person He seem to offer an ampl apolog for the 
lean of hi wife's. from the wrinkl on hi brow I judg him to 
be turn of sixty; but He bore hi year well, and seem still hearti 
and strong: the wife could not be more than thirty, but in spirit and 
vivac she wa infinit older than the husband. 

however, in spite of her unwillingness, marguerit began to prepar the 
supper, while the wood-man convers gaili on differ subjects. the 
postillion, who had been furnish with a bottl of spirits, wa now 
readi to set out for strasbourg, and enquired, whether I had ani 
further commands. 

'for strasbourg?' interrupt baptiste; 'you are not go thither 
tonight?' 

'I beg your pardon: If I do not fetch workmen to mend the chaise, how 
is monsieur to proceed tomorrow?' 

'that is true, as you say; I had forgotten the chaise. well, but 
claude; you may at least eat your supper here? that can make you lose 
veri littl time, and monsieur look too kind-heart to send you out 
with an empti stomach on such a bitter cold night as thi is.' 

To thi I readili assented, tell the postillion that my reach 
strasbourg the next day an hour or two later would be perfectli 
immaterial. He thank me, and then leav the cottag with stephano, 
put up hi hors in the wood-man' stable. baptist follow them to 
the door, and look out with anxiety. 

''ti a sharp bite wind!' said he; 'I wonder, what detain my boy so 
long! monsieur, I shall show you two of the finest lads, that ever 
stept in shoe of leather. the eldest is three and twenty, the second a 
year younger: their equal for sense, courage, and activity, are not 
to be found within fifti mile of strasbourg. would they were back 
again! I begin to feel uneasi about them.' 

marguerit wa at thi time employ in lay the cloth. 

'and are you equal anxiou for the return of your sons?' said I to 
her. 

'not i!' she repli peevishly; 'they are no children of mine.' 

'come! come, marguerite!' said the husband; 'do not be out of humour 
with the gentleman for ask a simpl question. had you not look so 
cross, He would never have thought you old enough to have a son of 
three and twenty: but you see how mani year ill-temp add to 
you!--excus my wife' rudeness, monsieur. A littl thing put her 
out, and she is somewhat displeas at your not think her to be 
under thirty. that is the truth, is it not, marguerite? you know, 
monsieur, that age is alway a ticklish subject with a woman. come! 
come! marguerite, clear up a little. If you have not son as old, you 
will some twenti year hence, and I hope, that we shall live to see 
them just such lad as jacqu and robert.' 

marguerit clasp her hand togeth passionately. 

'god forbid!' said she; 'god forbid! If I thought it, I would strangl 
them with my own hands!' 

she quit the room hastily, and went up stairs. 

I could not help express to the wood-man how much I piti him for 
be chain for life to a partner of such ill-humour. 

'ah! lord! monsieur, everi one ha hi share of grievances, and 
marguerit ha fallen to mine. besides, after all she is onli cross, 
and not malicious. the worst is, that her affect for two children 
by a former husband make her play the step-moth with my two sons. 
she cannot bear the sight of them, and by her good-wil they would 
never set a foot within my door. but on thi point I alway stand 
firm, and never will consent to abandon the poor lad to the world' 
mercy, as she ha often solicit me to do. In everi thing els I let 
her have her own way; and truli she manag a famili rarely, that I 
must say for her.' 

We were convers in thi manner, when our discours wa interrupt 
by a loud halloo, which rang through the forest. 

'mi sons, I hope!' exclaim the wood-man, and ran to open the door. 

the halloo wa repeated: We now distinguish the trampl of horses, 
and soon after a carriage, attend by sever cavali stop at the 
cottag door. one of the horsemen enquir how far they were still 
from strasbourg. As He address himself to me, I answer in the 
number of mile which claud had told me; upon which a volley of curs 
wa vent against the driver for have lost their way. the person 
in the coach were now inform of the distanc of strasbourg, and also 
that the hors were so fatigu as to be incap of proceed 
further. A lady, who appear to be the principal, express much 
chagrin at thi intelligence; but as there wa no remedy, one of the 
attend ask the wood-man, whether He could furnish them with 
lodg for the night. 

He seem much embarrassed, and repli in the negative; ad that a 
spanish gentleman and hi servant were alreadi in possess of the 
onli spare apart in hi house. On hear this, the gallantri of 
my nation would not permit me to retain those accommodations, of which 
a femal wa in want. I instantli signifi to the wood-man, that I 
transfer my right to the lady; He made some objections; but I 
overrul them, and hasten to the carriage, open the door, and 
assist the ladi to descend. I immedi recogn her for the 
same person whom I had seen at the inn at luneville. I took an 
opportun of ask one of her attendants, what wa her name? 

'the baro lindenberg,' wa the answer. 

I could not but remark how differ a recept our host had given 
these newcom and myself. hi reluct to admit them wa visibl 
express on hi countenance, and He prevail on himself with 
difficulti to tell the ladi that she wa welcome. I conduct her into 
the house, and place her in the armed-chair, which I had just quitted. 
she thank me veri graciously; and made a thousand apolog for 
put me to an inconvenience. suddenli the wood-man' counten 
clear up. 

'at last I have arrang it!' said he, interrupt her excuses; 'I can 
lodg you and your suite, madam, and you will not be under the 
necess of make thi gentleman suffer for hi politeness. 

We have two spare chambers, one for the lady, the other, monsieur, for 
you: My wife shall give up her to the two waiting-women; As for the 
men-servants, they must content themselv with pass the night in a 
larg barn, which stand at a few yard distanc from the house. there 
they shall have a blaze fire, and as good a supper as we can make 
shift to give them.' 

after sever express of gratitud on the lady' part, and 
opposit on mine to marguerite' give up her bed, thi arrang 
wa agre to. As the room wa small, the baro immedi 
dismiss her male domestics: baptist wa on the point of conduct 
them to the barn which He had mention when two young men appear at 
the door of the cottage. 

'hell and furies!' exclaim the first start back; 'robert, the 
hous is fill with strangers!' 

'ha! there are my sons!' cri our host. 'why, jacques! robert! 
whither are you running, boys? there is room enough still for you.' 

upon thi assur the youth returned. the father present them to 
the baro and myself: after which He withdrew with our domestics, 
while at the request of the two waiting-women, marguerit conduct 
them to the room design for their mistress. 

the two new-com were tall, stout, well-mad young men, 
hard-featured, and veri much sun-burnt. they paid their compliment to 
us in few words, and acknowledg claude, who now enter the room, as 
an old acquaintance. they then threw asid their cloak in which they 
were wrap up, took off a leathern belt to which a larg cutlass wa 
suspended, and each draw a brace of pistol from hi girdl laid 
them upon a shelf. 

'you travel well-armed,' said I. 

'true, monsieur;' repli robert. 'we left strasbourg late thi 
evening, and 'ti necessari to take precaut at pass through thi 
forest after dark. It doe not bear a good repute, I promis you.' 

'how?' said the baroness; 'are there robber hereabout?' 

'so it is said, madame; for my own part, I have travel through the 
wood at all hours, and never met with one of them.' 

here marguerit returned. her stepson drew her to the other end of 
the room, and whisper her for some minutes. By the look which they 
cast toward us at intervals, I conjectur them to be enquir our 
busi in the cottage. 

In the meanwhil the baro express her apprehensions, that her 
husband would be suffer much anxieti upon her account. she had 
intend to send on one of her servant to inform the baron of her 
delay; but the account which the young men gave of the forest render 
thi plan impracticable. claud reliev her from her embarrassment. 
He inform her that He wa under the necess of reach strasbourg 
that night, and that would she trust him with a letter, she might 
depend upon it be safe delivered. 

'and how come it,' said I, 'that you are under no apprehens of 
meet these robbers?' 

'alas! monsieur, a poor man with a larg famili must not lose certain 
profit becaus 'ti attend with a littl danger, and perhap my lord 
the baron may give me a trifl for my pains. besides, I have noth to 
lose except my life, and that will not be worth the robber taking.' 

I thought hi argument bad, and advis hi wait till the morning; 
but as the baro did not second me, I wa oblig to give up the 
point. the baro lindenberg, as I found afterwards, had long been 
accustom to sacrific the interest of other to her own, and her 
wish to send claud to strasbourg blind her to the danger of the 
undertaking. accordingly, it wa resolv that He should set out 
without delay. the baro wrote her letter to her husband, and I 
sent a few line to my banker, appris him that I should not be at 
strasbourg till the next day. claud took our letters, and left the 
cottage. 

the ladi declar herself much fatigu by her journey: besid have 
come from some distance, the driver had contriv to lose their way in 
the forest. she now address herself to marguerite, desir to be 
shown to her chamber, and permit to take half an hour' repose. one 
of the waiting-women wa immedi summoned; she appear with a 
light, and the baro follow her up stairs. the cloth wa 
spread in the chamber where I was, and marguerit soon gave me to 
understand that I wa in her way. her hint were too broad to be 
easili mistaken; I therefor desir one of the young men to conduct me 
to the chamber where I wa to sleep, and where I could remain till 
supper wa ready. 

'which chamber is it, mother?' said robert. 

'the one with green hangings,' she replied; 'I have just been at the 
troubl of get it ready, and have put fresh sheet upon the bed; If 
the gentleman choos to lollop and loung upon it, He may make it 
again himself for me.' 

'you are out of humour, mother, but that is no novelty. have the 
good to follow me, monsieur.' 

He open the door, and advanc toward a narrow staircase. 

'you have got no light!' said marguerite; 'i it your own neck or the 
gentleman' that you have a mind to break?' 

she cross by me, and put a candl into robert' hand, have receiv 
which, He began to ascend the staircase. jacqu wa employ in 
lay the cloth, and hi back wa turn toward me. 

marguerit seiz the moment, when we were unobserved. she caught my 
hand, and press it strongly. 

'look at the sheets!' said she as she pass me, and immedi 
resum her former occupation. 

startl by the abrupt of her action, I remain as if petrified. 
robert' voice, desir me to follow him, recal me to myself. I 
ascend the staircase. My conductor usher me into a chamber, where 
an excel wood-fir wa blaze upon the hearth. He place the 
light upon the table, enquir whether I had ani further commands, and 
on my repli in the negative, He left me to myself. you may be 
certain that the moment when I found myself alon wa that on which I 
compli with marguerite' injunction. I took the candle, hastili 
approach the bed, and turn down the coverture. what wa my 
astonishment, my horror, at find the sheet crimson with blood! 

At that moment a thousand confus idea pass befor my imagination. 
the robber who infest the wood, marguerite' exclam respect 
her children, the arm and appear of the two young men, and the 
variou anecdot which I had heard related, respect the secret 
correspond which frequent exist between banditti and 
postillions, all these circumst flash upon my mind, and inspir 
me with doubt and apprehension. I rumin on the most probabl mean 
of ascertain the truth of my conjectures. suddenli I wa awar of 
someon below pace hastili backward and forwards. everi thing now 
appear to me an object of suspicion. with precaut I drew near the 
window, which, as the room had been long shut up, wa left open in 
spite of the cold. I ventur to look out. the beam of the moon 
permit me to distinguish a man, whom I had no difficulti to 
recogn for my host. I watch hi movements. 

He walk swiftly, then stopped, and seem to listen: He stamp upon 
the ground, and beat hi stomach with hi arm as if to guard himself 
from the inclem of the season. At the least noise, if a voic wa 
heard in the lower part of the house, if a bat flit past him, or the 
wind rattl amidst the leafless boughs, He started, and look round 
with anxiety. 

'plagu take him!' said He at length with impatience; 'what can He be 
about!' 

He spoke in a low voice; but as He wa just below my window, I had no 
difficulti to distinguish hi words. 

I now heard the step of one approaching. baptist went toward the 
sound; He join a man, whom hi low statur and the horn suspend 
from hi neck, declar to be no other than my faith claude, whom I 
had suppos to be alreadi on hi way to strasbourg. expect their 
discours to throw some light upon my situation, I hasten to put 
myself in a condit to hear it with safety. for thi purpos I 
extinguish the candle, which stood upon a tabl near the bed: the 
flame of the fire wa not strong enough to betray me, and I immedi 
resum my place at the window. 

the object of my curios had station themselv directli under it. 
I suppos that dure my momentari absenc the wood-man had been 
blame claud for tardiness, sinc when I return to the window, the 
latter wa endeavour to excus hi fault. 

'however,' ad he, 'mi dilig at present shall make up for my past 
delay.' 

'on that condition,' answer baptiste, 'I shall readili forgiv you. 
but in truth as you share equal with us in our prizes, your own 
interest will make you use all possibl diligence. 'twould be a shame 
to let such a nobl booti escap us! you say, that thi spaniard is 
rich?' 

'hi servant boast at the inn, that the effect in hi chais were 
worth abov two thousand pistoles.' 

oh! how I curs stephano' imprud vanity! 

'and I have been told,' continu the postillion, 'that thi baro 
carri about her a casket of jewel of immens value.' 

'may be so, but I had rather she had stay away. the spaniard wa a 
secur prey. the boy and myself could easili have master him and 
hi servant, and then the two thousand pistol would have been share 
between us four. now we must let in the band for a share, and perhap 
the whole covey may escap us. should our friend have betaken 
themselv to their differ post befor you reach the cavern, all 
will be lost. the lady' attend are too numer for us to 
overpow them: unless our associ arriv in time, we must need 
let these travel set out tomorrow without damag or hurt.' 

''ti plaguy unlucki that my comrad who drove the coach should be 
those unacquaint with our confederacy! but never fear, friend 
baptiste. An hour will bring me to the cavern; It is now but ten 
o'clock, and by twelv you may expect the arriv of the band. By the 
bye, take care of your wife: you know how strong is her repugn to 
our mode of life, and she may find mean to give inform to the 
lady' servant of our design.' 

'oh! I am secur of her silence; she is too much afraid of me, and fond 
of her children, to dare to betray my secret. besides, jacqu and 
robert keep a strict eye over her, and she is not permit to set a 
foot out of the cottage. the servant are safe lodg in the barn; I 
shall endeavour to keep all quiet till the arriv of our friends. 
were I assur of your find them, the stranger should be dispatch 
thi instant; but as it is possibl for you to miss the banditti, I am 
fear of be summon to produc them by their domest in the 
morning.' 

'and suppos either of the travel should discov your design?' 

'then we must poignard those in our power, and take our chanc about 
master the rest. however, to avoid run such a risque, hasten to 
the cavern: the banditti never leav it befor eleven, and if you use 
diligence, you may reach it in time to stop them.' 

'tell robert that I have taken hi horse: My own ha broken hi 
bridle, and escap into the wood. what is the watch-word?' 

'the reward of courage.' 

''ti sufficient. I hasten to the cavern.' 

'and I to rejoin my guests, lest my absenc should creat suspicion. 
farewell, and be diligent.' 

these worthi associ now separated: the one bent hi cours toward 
the stable, while the other return to the house. 

you may judge, what must have been my feel dure thi 
conversation, of which I lost not a singl syllable. I dare not trust 
myself to my reflections, nor did ani mean present itself to escap 
the danger which threaten me. resistance, I knew to be vain; I wa 
unarmed, and a singl man against three: however, I resolv at least 
to sell my life as dearli as I could. dread lest baptist should 
perceiv my absence, and suspect me to have overheard the messag with 
which claud wa dispatched, I hastili relight my candl and quit 
the chamber. On descending, I found the tabl spread for six persons. 
the baro sat by the fireside: marguerit wa employ in dress a 
sallad, and her step-son were whisper togeth at the further end 
of the room. baptist have the round of the garden to make, ere He 
could reach the cottag door, wa not yet arrived. I seat myself 
quietli opposit to the baroness. 

A glanc upon marguerit told her that her hint had not been thrown 
away upon me. how differ did she now appear to me! what befor 
seem gloom and sullenness, I now found to be disgust at her 
associates, and compass for my danger. I look up to her as to my 
onli resource; yet know her to be watch by her husband with a 
suspici eye, I could place but littl relianc on the exert of 
her good-will. 

In spite of all my endeavour to conceal it, my agit wa but too 
visibl express upon my countenance. I wa pale, and both my word 
and action were disord and embarrassed. the young men observ 
this, and enquir the cause. I attribut it to excess of fatigue, 
and the violent effect produc on me by the sever of the season. 
whether they believ me or not, I will not pretend to say: they at 
least ceas to embarrass me with their questions. I strove to divert 
my attent from the peril which surround me, by convers on 
differ subject with the baroness. I talk of germany, declar 
my intent of visit it immediately: god knows, that I littl 
thought at that moment of ever see it! she repli to me with great 
eas and politeness, profess that the pleasur of make my 
acquaint ampli compens for the delay in her journey, and gave 
me a press invit to make some stay at the castl of lindenberg. 
As she spoke thus, the youth exchang a malici smile, which 
declar that she would be fortun if she ever reach that castl 
herself. thi action did not escap me; but I conceal the emot 
which it excit in my breast. I continu to convers with the lady; 
but my discours wa so frequent incoherent, that as she ha sinc 
inform me, she began to doubt whether I wa in my right senses. the 
fact was, that while my convers turn upon one subject, my 
thought were entir occupi by another. I medit upon the mean 
of quit the cottage, find my way to the barn, and give the 
domest inform of our host' designs. I wa soon convinced, how 
impractic wa the attempt. jacqu and robert watch my everi 
movement with an attent eye, and I wa oblig to abandon the idea. 
all my hope now rest upon claude' not find the banditti: In 
that case, accord to what I had overheard, we should be permit to 
depart unhurt. 

I shudder involuntarili as baptist enter the room. He made mani 
apolog for hi long absence, but 'he had been detain by affair 
imposs to be delayed.' He then entreat permiss for hi famili 
to sup at the same tabl with us, without which, respect would not 
author hi take such a liberty. oh! how in my heart I curs the 
hypocrite! how I loath hi presence, who wa on the point of 
depriv me of an existence, at that time infinit dear! I had 
everi reason to be satisfi with life; I had youth, wealth, rank, and 
education; and the fairest prospect present themselv befor me. I 
saw those prospect on the point of close in the most horribl 
manner: yet wa I oblig to dissimulate, and to receiv with a 
semblanc of gratitud the fals civil of him who held the dagger 
to my bosom. 

the permiss which our host demanded, wa easili obtained. We seat 
ourselv at the table. the baro and myself occupi one side: 
the son were opposit to us with their back to the door. baptist 
took hi seat by the baro at the upper end, and the place next to 
him wa left for hi wife. she soon enter the room, and place 
befor us a plain but comfort peasant' repast. our host thought 
it necessari to apolog for the poor of the supper: 'he had not 
been appriz of our coming; He could onli offer us such fare as had 
been intend for hi own family:' 

'but,' ad he, 'should ani accid detain my nobl guest longer 
than they at present intend, I hope to give them a better treatment.' 

the villain! I well knew the accid to which He alluded; I shudder 
at the treatment which He taught us to expect! 

My companion in danger seem entir to have got rid of her chagrin 
at be delayed. she laughed, and convers with the famili with 
infinit gaiety. I strove but in vain to follow her example. My 
spirit were evid forced, and the constraint which I put upon 
myself escap not baptiste' observation. 

'come, come, monsieur, cheer up!' said he; 'you seem not quit 
recov from your fatigue. To rais your spirits, what say you to a 
glass of excel old wine which wa left me by my father? god rest 
hi soul, He is in a better world! I seldom produc thi wine; but as 
I am not honour with such guest everi day, thi is an occas which 
deserv a bottle.' 

He then gave hi wife a key, and instruct her where to find the wine 
of which He spoke. she seem by no mean pleas with the commission; 
she took the key with an embarrass air, and hesit to quit the 
table. 

'did you hear me?' said baptist in an angri tone. 

marguerit dart upon him a look of mingl anger and fear, and left 
the chamber. hi eye follow her suspiciously, till she had close 
the door. 

she soon return with a bottl seal with yellow wax. she place it 
upon the table, and gave the key back to her husband. I suspect that 
thi liquor wa not present to us without design, and I watch 
marguerite' movement with inquietude. she wa employ in rins 
some small horn goblets. As she place them befor baptiste, she saw 
that my eye wa fix upon her; and at the moment when she thought 
herself unobserv by the banditti, she motion to me with her head 
not to tast the liquor, she then resum her place. 

In the mean while our host had drawn the cork, and fill two of the 
goblets, offer them to the ladi and myself. she at first made some 
objections, but the instanc of baptist were so urgent, that she wa 
oblig to comply. fear to excit suspicion, I hesit not to 
take the goblet present to me. By it smell and colour I guess it 
to be champagne; but some grain of powder float upon the top 
convinc me that it wa not unadulterated. however, I dare not to 
express my repugn to drink it; I lift it to my lips, and 
seem to be swallow it: suddenli start from my chair, I made 
the best of my way toward a vase of water at some distance, in which 
marguerit had been rins the goblets. I pretend to spit out the 
wine with disgust, and took an opportun unperceiv of empti the 
liquor into the vase. 

the banditti seem alarm at my action. jacqu half rose from hi 
chair, put hi hand into hi bosom, and I discov the haft of a 
dagger. I return to my seat with tranquillity, and affect not to 
have observ their confusion. 

'you have not suit my taste, honest friend,' said I, address 
myself to baptiste. 'I never can drink champagn without it produc 
a violent illness. I swallow a few mouth ere I wa awar of it 
quality, and fear that I shall suffer for my imprudence.' 

baptist and jacqu exchang look of distrust. 

'perhaps,' said robert, 'the smell may be disagre to you.' 

He quit hi chair, and remov the goblet. I observed, that He 
examined, whether it wa nearli empty. 

'he must have drank sufficient,' said He to hi brother in a low voice, 
while He reseat himself. 

marguerit look apprehensive, that I had tast the liquor: A glanc 
from my eye reassur her. 

I wait with anxieti for the effect which the beverag would produc 
upon the lady. I doubt not but the grain which I had observ were 
poisonous, and lament that it had been imposs for me to warn her 
of the danger. but a few minut had elaps befor I perceiv her 
eye grow heavy; her head sank upon her shoulder, and she fell into a 
deep sleep. I affect not to attend to thi circumstance, and 
continu my convers with baptiste, with all the outward gaieti in 
my power to assume. but He no longer answer me without constraint. 
He eye me with distrust and astonishment, and I saw that the banditti 
were frequent whisper among themselves. My situat becam everi 
moment more painful; I sustain the charact of confid with a 
wors grace than ever. equal afraid of the arriv of their 
accomplic and of their suspect my knowledg of their designs, I 
knew not how to dissip the distrust which the banditti evid 
entertain for me. In thi new dilemma the friendli marguerit again 
assist me. she pass behind the chair of her stepsons, stop for 
a moment opposit to me, close her eyes, and reclin her head upon 
her shoulder. thi hint immedi dispel my incertitude. It told 
me, that I ought to imit the baroness, and pretend that the liquor 
had taken it full effect upon me. I did so, and in a few minut 
seem perfectli overcom with slumber. 

'so!' cri baptiste, as I fell back in my chair; 'at last He sleeps! 
I began to think that He had scent our design, and that we should 
have been forc to dispatch him at all events.' 

'and whi not dispatch him at all events?' enquir the feroci 
jacques. 'whi leav him the possibl of betray our secret? 
marguerite, give me one of my pistols: A singl touch of the trigger 
will finish him at once.' 

'and supposing,' rejoin the father, 'suppos that our friend 
should not arriv tonight, a pretti figur we should make when the 
servant enquir for him in the morning! no, no, jacques; We must wait 
for our associates. If they join us, we are strong enough to dispatch 
the domest as well as their masters, and the booti is our own; If 
claud doe not find the troop, we must take patience, and suffer the 
prey to slip through our fingers. ah! boys, boys, had you arriv but 
five minut sooner, the spaniard would have been done for, and two 
thousand pistol our own. but you are alway out of the way when you 
are most wanted. 

you are the most unlucki rogues!' 

'well, well, father!' answer jacques; 'had you been of my mind, all 
would have been over by thi time. you, robert, claude, and myself, whi 
the stranger were but doubl the number, and I warrant you we might 
have master them. however, claud is gone; 'ti too late to think of 
it now. We must wait patient for the arriv of the gang; and if the 
travel escap us tonight, we must take care to waylay them 
tomorrow.' 

'true! true!' said baptiste; 'marguerite, have you given the 
sleeping-draught to the waiting-women?' 

she repli in the affirmative. 

'all then is safe. come, come, boys; whatev fall out, we have no 
reason to complain of thi adventure. We run no danger, may gain much, 
and can lose nothing.' 

At thi moment I heard a trampl of horses. oh! how dread wa the 
sound to my ears. A cold sweat flow down my forehead, and I felt all 
the terror of impend death. I wa by no mean reassur by hear 
the compassion marguerit exclaim in the accent of despair, 

'almighti god! they are lost!' 

luckili the wood-man and hi son were too much occupi by the arriv 
of their associ to attend to me, or the violenc of my agit 
would have convinc them that my sleep wa feigned. 

'open! open!' exclaim sever voic on the outsid of the cottage. 

'yes! yes!' cri baptist joyfully; 'they are our friend sure 
enough! now then our booti is certain. away! lads, away! lead them 
to the barn; you know what is to be done there.' 

robert hasten to open the door of the cottage. 

'but first,' said jacques, take up hi arms; 'first let me dispatch 
these sleepers.' 

'no, no, no!' repli hi father; 'go you to the barn, where your 
presenc is wanted. leav me to take care of these and the women 
above.' 

jacqu obeyed, and follow hi brother. they seem to convers with 
the new-com for a few minutes: after which I heard the robber 
dismount, and as I conjectured, bend their cours toward the barn. 

'so! that is wise done!' mutter baptiste; 'they have quit their 
horses, that they may fall upon the stranger by surprise. good! good! 
and now to business.' 

I heard him approach a small cupboard which wa fix up in a distant 
part of the room, and unlock it. At thi moment I felt myself shaken 
gently. 

'now! now!' whisper marguerite. 

I open my eyes. baptist stood with hi back toward me. No one 
els wa in the room save marguerit and the sleep lady. the villain 
had taken a dagger from the cupboard and seem examin whether it 
wa suffici sharp. I had neglect to furnish myself with arms; 
but I perceiv thi to be my onli chanc of escaping, and resolv not 
to lose the opportunity. I sprang from my seat, dart suddenli upon 
baptiste, and clasp my hand round hi throat, press it so 
forcibl as to prevent hi utter a singl cry. you may rememb 
that I wa remark at salamanca for the power of my arm: It now 
render me an essenti service. surprised, terrified, and 
breathless, the villain wa by no mean an equal antagonist. I threw 
him upon the ground; I grasp him still tighter; and while I fix him 
without motion upon the floor, marguerite, wrest the dagger from hi 
hand, plung it repeatedli in hi heart till He expired. 

No sooner wa thi horribl but necessari act perpetr than 
marguerit call on me to follow her. 

'flight is our onli refuge!' said she; 'quick! quick! away!' 

I hesit not to obey her: but unwil to leav the baro a 
victim to the vengeanc of the robbers, I rais her in my arm still 
sleeping, and hasten after marguerite. the hors of the banditti 
were fasten near the door: My conductress sprang upon one of them. 
I follow her example, place the baro befor me, and spur on 
my horse. our onli hope wa to reach strasbourg, which wa much nearer 
than the perfidi claud had assur me. marguerit wa well 
acquaint with the road, and gallop on befor me. We were oblig 
to pass by the barn, where the robber were slaughter our domestics. 
the door wa open: We distinguish the shriek of the die and 
imprec of the murderers! what I felt at that moment languag is 
unabl to describe! 

jacqu heard the trampl of our hors as we rush by the barn. He 
flew to the door with a burn torch in hi hand, and easili 
recognis the fugitives. 

'betrayed! betrayed!' He shout to hi companions. 

instantli they left their bloodi work, and hasten to regain their 
horses. We heard no more. I buri my spur in the side of my 
courser, and marguerit goad on her with the poignard, which had 
alreadi render us such good service. We flew like lightning, and 
gain the open plains. alreadi wa strasbourg' steepl in sight, 
when we heard the robber pursu us. marguerit look back, and 
distinguish our follow descend a small hill at no great 
distance. It wa in vain that we urg on our horses; the nois 
approach nearer with everi moment. 

'we are lost!' she exclaimed; 'the villain gain upon us!' 

'on! on!' repli I; 'I hear the trampl of hors come from the 
town.' 

We redoubl our exertions, and were soon awar of a numer band of 
cavaliers, who came toward us at full speed. they were on the point 
of pass us. 

'stay! stay!' shriek marguerite; 'save us! for god' sake, save us!' 

the foremost, who seem to act as guide, immedi rein in hi 
steed. 

''ti she! 'ti she!' exclaim he, spring upon the ground; 'stop, 
my lord, stop! they are safe! 'ti my mother!' 

At the same moment marguerit threw herself from her horse, clasp him 
in her arms, and cover him with kisses. the other cavali stop 
at the exclamation. 

'the baro lindenberg?' cri anoth of the stranger eagerly; 
'where is she? Is she not with you?' 

He stop on behold her lie senseless in my arms. hastili He 
caught her from me. the profound sleep in which she wa plung made 
him at first trembl for her life; but the beat of her heart soon 
reassur him. 

'god be thanked!' said he; 'she ha escap unhurt.' 

I interrupt hi joy by point out the brigands, who continu to 
approach. No sooner had I mention them than the greatest part of the 
company, which appear to be chiefli compos of soldiers, hasten 
forward to meet them. the villain stay not to receiv their attack: 
perceiv their danger they turn the head of their horses, and fled 
into the wood, whither they were follow by our preservers. In the 
mean while the stranger, whom I guess to be the baron lindenberg, 
after thank me for my care of hi lady, propos our return with 
all speed to the town. the baroness, on whom the effect of the opiat 
had not ceas to operate, wa place befor him; marguerit and her 
son remount their horses; the baron' domest followed, and we soon 
arriv at the inn, where He had taken hi apartments. 

thi wa at the austrian eagle, where my banker, whom befor my 
quit pari I had appris of my intent to visit strasbourg, had 
prepar lodg for me. I rejoic at thi circumstance. It gave me 
an opportun of cultiv the baron' acquaintance, which I foresaw 
would be of use to me in germany. immedi upon our arriv the 
ladi wa convey to bed; A physician wa sent for, who prescrib a 
medicin like to counteract the effect of the sleepi potion, and 
after it had been pour down her throat, she wa commit to the care 
of the hostess. the baron then address himself to me, and entreat 
me to recount the particular of thi adventure. I compli with hi 
request instantaneously; for in pain respect stephano' fate, whom I 
had been compel to abandon to the cruelti of the banditti, I found 
it imposs for me to repose, till I had some news of him. I 
receiv but too soon the intelligence, that my trusti servant had 
perished. the soldier who had pursu the brigand return while I 
wa employ in relat my adventur to the baron. By their account I 
found that the robber had been overtaken: guilt and true courag are 
incompatible; they had thrown themselv at the feet of their pursuers, 
had surrend themselv without strike a blow, had discov 
their secret retreat, made known their signal by which the rest of the 
gang might be seized, and in short had betray ever mark of cowardic 
and baseness. By thi mean the whole of the band, consist of near 
sixti persons, had been made prisoners, bound, and conduct to 
strasbourg. some of the soldier hasten to the cottage, one of the 
banditti serv them as guide. their first visit wa to the fatal 
barn, where they were fortun enough to find two of the baron' 
servant still alive, though desper wounded. the rest had expir 
beneath the sword of the robbers, and of these my unhappi stephano wa 
one. 

alarm at our escape, the robber in their hast to overtak us, had 
neglect to visit the cottage. In consequence, the soldier found the 
two waiting-women unhurt, and buri in the same death-lik slumber 
which had overpow their mistress. there wa nobodi els found in 
the cottage, except a child not abov four year old, which the 
soldier brought away with them. We were busi ourselv with 
conjectur respect the birth of thi littl unfortunate, when 
marguerit rush into the room with the babi in her arms. she fell at 
the feet of the offic who wa make us thi report, and bless him 
a thousand time for the preserv of her child. 

when the first burst of matern tender wa over, I besought her to 
declare, by what mean she had been unit to a man whose principl 
seem so total discord with her own. she bent her eye 
downwards, and wipe a few tear from her cheek. 

'gentlemen,' said she after a silenc of some minutes, 'I would request 
a favour of you: you have a right to know on whom you confer an 
obligation. I will not therefor stifl a confess which cover me 
with shame; but permit me to compris it in as few word as possible. 

'I wa born in strasbourg of respect parents; their name I must at 
present conceal: My father still lives, and deserv not to be 
involv in my infamy; If you grant my request, you shall be inform 
of my famili name. A villain made himself master of my affections, and 
to follow him I quit my father' house. yet though my passion 
overpow my virtue, I sank not into that degeneraci of vice, but too 
commonli the lot of women who make the first fals step. I love my 
seducer; dearli love him! I wa true to hi bed; thi baby, and the 
youth who warn you, my lord baron, of your lady' danger, are the 
pledg of our affection. even at thi moment I lament hi loss, 
though 'ti to him that I owe all the miseri of my existence. 

'he wa of nobl birth, but He had squander away hi patern 
inheritance. hi relat consid him as a disgrac to their name, 
and utterli discard him. hi excess drew upon him the indign 
of the police. He wa oblig to fli from strasbourg, and saw no other 
resourc from beggari than an union with the banditti who infest the 
neighbour forest, and whose troop wa chiefli compos of young men 
of famili in the same predica with himself. I wa determin not 
to forsak him. I follow him to the cavern of the brigands, and 
share with him the miseri insepar from a life of pillage. but 
though I wa awar that our exist wa support by plunder, I knew 
not all the horribl circumst attach to my lover' profession. 
these He conceal from me with the utmost care; He wa consciou that 
my sentiment were not suffici deprav to look without horror 
upon assassination: He supposed, and with justice, that I should fli 
with detest from the embrac of a murderer. eight year of 
possess had not abat hi love for me; and He cautious remov 
from my knowledg everi circumstance, which might lead me to suspect 
the crime in which He but too often participated. He succeed 
perfectly: It wa not till after my seducer' death, that I discov 
hi hand to have been stain with the blood of innocence. 

'one fatal night He wa brought back to the cavern cover with wounds: 
He receiv them in attack an english traveller, whom hi companion 
immedi sacrif to their resentment. He had onli time to 
entreat my pardon for all the sorrow which He had caus me: He 
press my hand to hi lips, and expired. My grief wa inexpressible. 
As soon as it violenc abated, I resolv to return to strasbourg, to 
throw myself with my two children at my father' feet, and implor hi 
forgiveness, though I littl hope to obtain it. what wa my 
constern when inform that no one entrust with the secret of 
their retreat wa ever permit to quit the troop of the banditti; 
that I must give up all hope of ever rejoin society, and consent 
instantli to accept one of their band for my husband! My prayer 
and remonstr were vain. they cast lot to decid to whose 
possess I should fall; I becam the properti of the infam 
baptiste. A robber, who had onc been a monk, pronounc over us a 
burlesqu rather than a religi ceremony: I and my children were 
deliv into the hand of my new husband, and He convey us 
immedi to hi home. 

'he assur me that He had long entertain for me the most ardent 
regard; but that friendship for my deceas lover had oblig him to 
stifl hi desires. He endeavour to reconcil me to my fate, and for 
some time treat me with respect and gentleness: At length find 
that my avers rather increas than diminished, He obtain those 
favour by violence, which I persist to refus him. No resourc 
remain for me but to bear my sorrow with patience; I wa consciou 
that I deserv them but too well. flight wa forbidden: My children 
were in the power of baptiste, and He had sworn that if I attempt to 
escape, their live should pay for it. I had had too mani 
opportun of wit the barbar of hi natur to doubt hi 
fulfil hi oath to the veri letter. sad experi had convinc 
me of the horror of my situation: My first lover had care 
conceal them from me; baptist rather rejoic in open my eye to 
the cruelti of hi profession, and strove to familiaris me with 
blood and slaughter. 

'mi natur wa licenti and warm, but not cruel: My conduct had been 
imprudent, but my heart wa not unprincipled. judg then what I must 
have felt at be a continu wit of crime the most horribl and 
revolting! judg how I must have griev at be unit to a man who 
receiv the unsuspect guest with an air of open and 
hospitality, at the veri moment that He medit hi destruction. 
chagrin and discont prey upon my constitution: the few charm 
bestow on me by natur wither away, and the deject of my 
counten denot the suffer of my heart. I wa tempt a 
thousand time to put an end to my existence; but the remembr of my 
children held my hand. I trembl to leav my dear boy in my tyrant' 
power, and trembl yet more for their virtu than their lives. the 
second wa still too young to benefit by my instructions; but in the 
heart of my eldest I labour unceasingli to plant those principles, 
which might enabl him to avoid the crime of hi parents. He listen 
to me with docility, or rather with eagerness. even at hi earli age, 
He show that He wa not calcul for the societi of villains; and 
the onli comfort which I enjoy among my sorrows, wa to wit the 
dawn virtu of my theodore. 

'such wa my situation, when the perfidi of don alphonso' postillion 
conduct him to the cottage. hi youth, air, and manner interest 
me most forcibl in hi behalf. the absenc of my husband' son gave 
me an opportun which I had long wish to find, and I resolv to 
risqu everi thing to preserv the stranger. the vigil of baptist 
prevent me from warn don alphonso of hi danger: I knew that my 
betray the secret would be immedi punish with death; and 
howev embitt wa my life by calamities, I want courag to 
sacrific it for the sake of preserv that of anoth person. My onli 
hope rest upon procur succour from strasbourg: At thi I resolv 
to try; and should an opportun offer of warn don alphonso of hi 
danger unobserved, I wa determin to seiz it with avidity. By 
baptiste' order I went upstair to make the stranger' bed: I spread 
upon it sheet in which a travel had been murder but a few night 
before, and which still were stain with blood. I hope that these 
mark would not escap the vigil of our guest, and that He would 
collect from them the design of my perfidi husband. neither wa 
thi the onli step which I took to preserv the stranger. theodor wa 
confin to hi bed by illness. I stole into hi room unobserv by my 
tyrant, commun to him my project, and He enter into it with 
eagerness. He rose in spite of hi malady, and dress himself with 
all speed. I fasten one of the sheet round hi arms, and lower 
him from the window. He flew to the stable, took claude' horse, and 
hasten to strasbourg. had He been accost by the banditti, He wa 
to have declar himself sent upon a messag by baptiste, but 
fortun He reach the town without meet ani obstacle. 
immedi upon hi arriv at strasbourg, He entreat assist 
from the magistrature: hi stori pass from mouth to mouth, and at 
length came to the knowledg of my lord the baron. anxiou for the 
safeti of hi lady, whom He knew would be upon the road that evening, 
it struck him that she might have fallen into the power of the robbers. 
He accompani theodor who guid the soldier toward the cottage, 
and arriv just in time to save us from fall onc more into the 
hand of our enemies.' 

here I interrupt marguerit to enquir whi the sleepi potion had been 
present to me. she said that baptist suppos me to have arm about 
me, and wish to incapacit me from make resistance: It wa a 
precaut which He alway took, sinc as the travel had no hope 
of escaping, despair would have incit them to sell their live dearly. 

the baron then desir marguerit to inform him, what were her present 
plans. I join him in declar my readi to show my gratitud to 
her for the preserv of my life. 

'disgust with a world,' she replied, 'in which I have met with 
noth but misfortunes, my onli wish is to retir into a convent. but 
first I must provid for my children. I find that my mother is no 
more, probabl driven to an untim grave by my desertion! My father 
is still living; He is not an hard man; perhaps, gentlemen, in spite of 
my ingratitud and imprudence, your intercess may induc him to 
forgiv me, and to take charg of hi unfortun grand-sons. If you 
obtain thi boon for me, you will repay my servic a thousand-fold!' 

both the baron and myself assur marguerite, that we would spare no 
pain to obtain her pardon: and that even should her father be 
inflexible, she need be under no apprehens respect the fate of 
her children. I engag myself to provid for theodore, and the baron 
promis to take the youngest under hi protection. 

the grate mother thank us with tear for what she call 
generosity, but which in fact wa no more than a proper sens of our 
oblig to her. she then left the room to put her littl boy to 
bed, whom fatigu and sleep had compleatli overpowered. 

the baroness, on recov and be inform from what danger I had 
rescu her, set no bound to the express of her gratitude. she 
wa join so warmli by her husband in press me to accompani them to 
their castl in bavaria, that I found it imposs to resist their 
entreaties. dure a week which we pass at strasbourg, the interest 
of marguerit were not forgotten: In our applic to her father we 
succeed as ampli as we could wish. the good old man had lost hi 
wife: He had no children but thi unfortun daughter, of whom He had 
receiv no news for almost fourteen years. He wa surround by 
distant relations, who wait with impati for hi deceas in order 
to get possess of hi money. when therefor marguerit appear 
again so unexpectedly, He consid her as a gift from heaven: He 
receiv her and her children with open arms, and insist upon their 
establish themselv in hi hous without delay. the disappoint 
cousin were oblig to give place. the old man would not hear of hi 
daughter' retir into a convent: He said that she wa too necessari 
to hi happiness, and she wa easili persuad to relinquish her 
design. but no persuas could induc theodor to give up the plan 
which I had at first mark out for him. He had attach himself to me 
most sincer dure my stay at strasbourg; and when I wa on the 
point of leav it, He besought me with tear to take him into my 
service: He set forth all hi littl talent in the most favour 
colours, and tri to convinc me that I should find him of infinit 
use to me upon the road. I wa unwil to charg myself with a lad 
but scarc turn of thirteen, whom I knew could onli be a burthen to 
me: however, I could not resist the entreati of thi affection 
youth, who in fact possess a thousand estim qualities. with some 
difficulti He persuad hi relat to let him follow me, and that 
permiss onc obtained, He wa dub with the titl of my page. 
have pass a week at strasbourg, theodor and myself set out for 
bavaria in compani with the baron and hi lady. these latter as well 
as myself had forc marguerit to accept sever present of value, 
both for herself, and her youngest son: On leav her, I promis hi 
mother faith that I would restor theodor to her within the year. 

I have relat thi adventur at length, lorenzo, that you might 
understand the mean by which 'the adventurer, alphonso d'alvarada got 
introduc into the castl of lindenberg.' judg from thi specimen 
how much faith should be given to your aunt' assertions! 



volum II 



chapter I 

avaunt! and quit my sight! let the earth hide thee! 
thi bone are marrowless, thi blood is cold! 
thou hast no specul in those eye 
which thou dost glare with! hence, horribl shadow! 
unreal mockeri hence! 
macbeth. 

continu of the histori of don raymond. 

My journey wa uncommonli agreeable: I found the baron a man of some 
sense, but littl knowledg of the world. He had past a great part of 
hi life without stir beyond the precinct of hi own domains, and 
consequ hi manner were far from be the most polished: but He 
wa hearty, good-humoured, and friendly. hi attent to me wa all 
that I could wish, and I had everi reason to be satisfi with hi 
behaviour. hi rule passion wa hunting, which He had brought himself 
to consid as a seriou occupation; and when talk over some 
remark chace, He treat the subject with as much graviti as it had 
been a battl on which the fate of two kingdom wa depending. I 
happen to be a toler sportsman: soon after my arriv at 
lindenberg I gave some proof of my dexterity. the baron immedi 
mark me down for a man of genius, and vow to me an etern 
friendship. 

that friendship wa becom to me by no mean indifferent. At the 
castl of lindenberg I beheld for the first time your sister, the 
love agnes. for me whose heart wa unoccupied, and who griev at 
the void, to see her and to love her were the same. I found in agn 
all that wa requisit to secur my affection. she wa then scarc 
sixteen; her person light and eleg wa alreadi formed; she possess 
sever talent in perfection, particularli those of music and drawing: 
her charact wa gay, open, and good-humoured; and the grace 
simplic of her dress and manner form an advantag contrast to 
the art and studi coquetri of the parisian dames, whom I had just 
quitted. from the moment that I beheld her, I felt the most live 
interest in her fate. I made mani enquiri respect her of the 
baroness. 

'she is my niece,' repli that lady; 'you are still ignorant, don 
alphonso, that I am your countrywoman. I am sister to the duke of 
medina celi: agn is the daughter of my second brother, don gaston: 
she ha been destin to the convent from her cradle, and will soon 
make her profess at madrid.' 

(here lorenzo interrupt the marqui by an exclam of surprise. 

'intend for the convent from her cradle?' said he; 'bi heaven, thi 
is the first word that I ever heard of such a design!' 

'I believ it, my dear lorenzo,' answer don raymond; 'but you must 
listen to me with patience. you will not be less surprised, when I 
relat some particular of your famili still unknown to you, and which 
I have learnt from the mouth of agn herself.' 

He then resum hi narr as follows.) 

you cannot but be awar that your parent were unfortun slave to 
the grossest superstition: when thi foibl wa call into play, 
their everi other sentiment, their everi other passion yield to it 
irresist strength. while she wa big with agnes, your mother wa 
seiz by a danger illness, and given over by her physicians. In 
thi situation, donna inesilla vowed, that if she recov from her 
malady, the child then live in her bosom if a girl should be 
dedic to st. clare, if a boy to st. benedict. her prayer were 
heard; she got rid of her complaint; agn enter the world alive, and 
wa immedi destin to the servic of st. clare. 

don gaston readili chime in with hi lady' wishes: but know the 
sentiment of the duke, hi brother, respect a monast life, it wa 
determin that your sister' destin should be care conceal 
from him. the better to guard the secret, it wa resolv that agn 
should accompani her aunt, donna rodolpha into germany, whither that 
ladi wa on the point of follow her new-marri husband, baron 
lindenberg. On her arriv at that estate, the young agn wa put 
into a convent, situat but a few mile from the castle. the nun to 
whom her educ wa confid perform their charg with exactitude: 
they made her a perfect mistress of mani talents, and strove to infus 
into her mind a tast for the retir and tranquil pleasur of a 
convent. but a secret instinct made the young reclus sensibl that 
she wa not born for solitude: In all the freedom of youth and gaiety, 
she scrupl not to treat as ridicul mani ceremoni which the nun 
regard with awe; and she wa never more happi than when her live 
imagin inspir her with some scheme to plagu the stiff ladi 
abbess, or the ugli ill-temp old porteress. she look with 
disgust upon the prospect befor her: howev no altern wa 
offer to her, and she submit to the decre of her parents, though 
not without secret repining. 

that repugn she had not art enough to conceal long: don gaston wa 
inform of it. alarmed, lorenzo, lest your affect for her should 
oppos itself to hi projects, and lest you should posit object to 
your sister' misery, He resolv to keep the whole affair from your 
knowledg as well as the duke's, till the sacrific should be 
consummated. the season of her take the veil wa fix for the time 
when you should be upon your travels: In the meanwhil no hint wa 
drop of donna inesilla' fatal vow. your sister wa never permit 
to know your direction. all your letter were read befor she receiv 
them, and those part effaced, which were like to nourish her 
inclin for the world: her answer were dictat either by her 
aunt, or by dame cunegonda, her governess. these particular I learnt 
partli from agnes, partli from the baro herself. 

I immedi determin upon rescu thi love girl from a fate so 
contrari to her inclinations, and ill-suit to her merit. I 
endeavour to ingrati myself into her favour: I boast of my 
friendship and intimaci with you. she listen to me with avidity; she 
seem to devour my word while I spoke in your praise, and her eye 
thank me for my affect to her brother. My constant and unremit 
attent at length gain me her heart, and with difficulti I oblig 
her to confess that she love me. when however, I propos her 
quit the castl of lindenberg, she reject the idea in posit 
terms. 

'be generous, alphonso,' she said; 'you possess my heart, but use not 
the gift ignobly. employ not your ascend over me in persuad me 
to take a step, at which I should hereaft have to blush. I am young 
and deserted: My brother, my onli friend, is separ from me, and my 
other relat act with me as my enemies. take piti on my unprotect 
situation. instead of seduc me to an action which would cover me 
with shame, strive rather to gain the affect of those who govern 
me. the baron esteem you. My aunt, to other ever harsh proud and 
contemptuous, rememb that you rescu her from the hand of 
murderers, and wear with you alon the appear of kind and 
benignity. tri then your influenc over my guardians. If they consent 
to our union my hand is yours: from your account of my brother, I 
cannot doubt your obtain hi approbation: and when they find the 
imposs of execut their design, I trust that my parent will 
excus my disobedience, and expiat by some other sacrific my mother' 
fatal vow.' 

from the first moment that I beheld agnes, I had endeavour to 
concili the favour of her relations. authoris by the confess 
of her regard, I redoubl my exertions. My princip batteri wa 
direct against the baroness; It wa easi to discov that her word 
wa law in the castle: her husband paid her the most absolut 
submission, and consid her as a superior being. she wa about 
forty: In her youth she had been a beauty; but her charm had been 
upon that larg scale which can but ill sustain the shock of years: 
howev she still possess some remain of them. her understand 
wa strong and excel when not obscur by prejudice, which 
unluckili wa but seldom the case. her passion were violent: she 
spare no pain to gratifi them, and pursu with unremit vengeanc 
those who oppos themselv to her wishes. the warmest of friends, 
the most inveter of enemies, such wa the baro lindenberg. 

I labour incessantli to pleas her: unluckili I succeed but too 
well. she seem gratifi by my attention, and treat me with a 
distinct accord by her to no one else. one of my daili 
occup wa read to her for sever hours: those hour I should 
much rather have past with agnes; but as I wa consciou that 
complais for her aunt would advanc our union, I submit with a 
good grace to the penanc impos upon me. donna rodolpha' librari 
wa princip compos of old spanish romances: these were her 
favourit studies, and onc a day one of these unmerci volum wa 
put regularli into my hands. I read the wearisom adventur of 
'perceforest,' 'tirant the white,' 'palmerin of england,' and 'the 
knight of the sun,' till the book wa on the point of fall from my 
hand through ennui. however, the increas pleasur which the 
baro seem to take in my society, encourag me to persevere; and 
latterli she show for me a partial so marked, that agn advis 
me to seiz the first opportun of declar our mutual passion to 
her aunt. 

one evening, I wa alon with donna rodolpha in her own apartment. As 
our read gener treat of love, agn wa never permit to 
assist at them. I wa just congratul myself on have finish 
'the love of tristan and the queen iseult----' 

'ah! the unfortunates!' cri the baroness; 'how say you, segnor? Do 
you think it possibl for man to feel an attach so disinterest 
and sincere?' 

'I cannot doubt it,' repli I; 'mi own heart furnish me with the 
certainty. ah! donna rodolpha, might I but hope for your approb 
of my love! might I but confess the name of my mistress without 
incur your resentment!' 

she interrupt me. 

'suppose, I were to spare you that confession? suppos I were to 
acknowledg that the object of your desir is not unknown to me? 
suppos I were to say that she return your affection, and lament not 
less sincer than yourself the unhappi vow which separ her from 
you?' 

'ah! donna rodolpha!' I exclaimed, throw myself upon my knee befor 
her, and press her hand to my lips, 'you have discov my secret! 
what is your decision? must I despair, or may I reckon upon your 
favour?' 

she withdrew not the hand which I held; but she turn from me, and 
cover her face with the other. 

'how can I refus it you?' she replied; 'ah! don alphonso, I have long 
perceiv to whom your attent were directed, but till now I 
perceiv not the impress which they made upon my heart. 

At length I can no longer hide my weak either from myself or from 
you. I yield to the violenc of my passion, and own that I ador you! 
for three long month I stifl my desires; but grown stronger by 
resistance, I submit to their impetuosity. pride, fear, and honour, 
respect for myself, and my engag to the baron, all are 
vanquished. I sacrific them to my love for you, and it still seem to 
me that I pay too mean a price for your possession.' 

she paus for an answer.--judge, my lorenzo, what must have been my 
confus at thi discovery. I at onc saw all the magnitud of thi 
obstacle, which I had rais myself to my happiness. the baro had 
place those attent to her own account, which I had mere paid her 
for the sake of agnes: and the strength of her expressions, the look 
which accompani them, and my knowledg of her reveng disposit 
made me trembl for myself and my beloved. I wa silent for some 
minutes. I knew not how to repli to her declaration: I could onli 
resolv to clear up the mistak without delay, and for the present to 
conceal from her knowledg the name of my mistress. No sooner had she 
avow her passion than the transport which befor were evid in my 
featur gave place to constern and constraint. I drop her 
hand, and rose from my knees. the chang in my counten did not 
escap her observation. 

'what mean thi silence?' said she in a trembl voice; 'where is 
that joy which you led me to expect?' 

'forgiv me, segnora,' I answered, 'if what necess forc from me 
should seem harsh and ungrateful: To encourag you in an error, which, 
howev it may flatter myself, must prove to you the sourc of 
disappointment, would make me appear crimin in everi eye. honour 
oblig me to inform you that you have mistaken for the solicitud of 
love what wa onli the attent of friendship. the latter sentiment 
is that which I wish to excit in your bosom: To entertain a warmer, 
respect for you forbid me, and gratitud for the baron' gener 
treatment. perhap these reason would not be suffici to shield me 
from your attractions, were it not that my affect are alreadi 
bestow upon another. you have charms, segnora, which might captiv 
the most insensible; No heart unoccupi could resist them. happi is 
it for me that mine is no longer in my possession; or I should have to 
reproach myself for ever with have violat the law of hospitality. 
recollect yourself, nobl lady; recollect what is owe by you to 
honour, by me to the baron, and replac by esteem and friendship those 
sentiment which I never can return.' 

the baro turn pale at thi unexpect and posit declaration: 
she doubt whether she slept or woke. At length recov from her 
surprise, constern gave place to rage, and the blood rush back 
into her cheek with violence. 

'villain!' she cried; 'monster of deceit! thu is the avow of my 
love received? Is it thu that.... but no, no! It cannot, it 
shall not be! alphonso, behold me at your feet! Be wit of my 
despair! look with piti on a woman who love you with sincer 
affection! she who possess your heart, how ha she merit such a 
treasure? what sacrific ha she made to you? 

what rais her abov rodolpha?' 

I endeavour to lift her from her knees. 

'for god' sake, segnora, restrain these transports: they disgrac 
yourself and me. your exclam may be heard, and your secret 
divulg to your attendants. I see that my presenc onli irrit 
you: permit me to retire.' 

I prepar to quit the apartment: the baro caught me suddenli by 
the arm. 

'and who is thi happi rival?' said she in a menac tone; 'I will 
know her name, and when I know it.... ! she is someon in my power; 
you entreat my favour, my protection! let me but find her, let me 
but know who dare to rob me of your heart, and she shall suffer everi 
torment which jealousi and disappoint can inflict! who is she? 
answer me thi moment. hope not to conceal her from my vengeance! 
spi shall be set over you; everi step, everi look shall be watched; 
your eye will discov my rival; I shall know her, and when she is 
found, tremble, alphonso for her and for yourself!' 

As she utter these last word her furi mount to such a pitch as to 
stop her power of respiration. she panted, groaned, and at length 
faint away. As she wa fall I caught her in my arms, and place 
her upon a sopha. then hasten to the door, I summon her women to 
her assistance; I commit her to their care, and seiz the 
opportun of escaping. 

agit and confus beyond express I bent my step toward the 
garden. the benign with which the baro had listen to me at 
first rais my hope to the highest pitch: I imagin her to have 
perceiv my attach for her niece, and to approv of it. extrem 
wa my disappoint at understand the true purport of her 
discourse. I knew not what cours to take: the superstit of the 
parent of agnes, aid by her aunt' unfortun passion, seem to 
oppos such obstacl to our union as were almost insurmountable. 

As I past by a low parlour, whose window look into the garden, 
through the door which stood half open I observ agn seat at a 
table. she wa occupi in drawing, and sever unfinish sketch 
were scatter round her. I entered, still undetermin whether I 
should acquaint her with the declar of the baroness. 

'oh! is it onli you?' said she, rais her head; 'you are no stranger, 
and I shall continu my occup without ceremony. take a chair, and 
seat yourself by me.' 

I obeyed, and place myself near the table. unconsci what I wa 
doing, and total occupi by the scene which had just passed, I took 
up some of the drawings, and cast my eye over them. one of the 
subject struck me from it singularity. It repres the great hall 
of the castl of lindenberg. A door conduct to a narrow staircas 
stood half open. In the foreground appear a group of figures, 
place in the most grotesqu attitudes; terror wa express upon everi 
countenance. 

here wa one upon hi knee with hi eye cast up to heaven, and 
pray most devoutly; there anoth wa creep away upon all fours. 
some hid their face in their cloak or the lap of their companions; 
some had conceal themselv beneath a table, on which the remnant of 
a feast were visible; while other with gape mouth and eye 
wide-stretch point to a figure, suppos to have creat thi 
disturbance. It repres a femal of more than human stature, 
cloth in the habit of some religi order. her face wa veiled; On 
her arm hung a chaplet of beads; her dress wa in sever place 
stain with the blood which trickl from a wound upon her bosom. In 
one hand she held a lamp, in the other a larg knife, and she seem 
advanc toward the iron gate of the hall. 

'what doe thi mean, agnes?' said I; 'i thi some invent of your 
own?' 

she cast her eye upon the drawing. 

'oh! no,' she replied; ''ti the invent of much wiser head than 
mine. but can you possibl have live at lindenberg for three whole 
month without hear of the bleed nun?' 

'you are the first, who ever mention the name to me. pray, who may 
the ladi be?' 

'that is more than I can pretend to tell you. all my knowledg of her 
histori come from an old tradit in thi family, which ha been 
hand down from father to son, and is firmli credit throughout the 
baron' domains. nay, the baron believ it himself; and as for my 
aunt who ha a natur turn for the marvellous, she would sooner doubt 
the verac of the bible, than of the bleed nun. shall I tell you 
thi history?' 

I answer that she would oblig me much by relat it: she resum 
her drawing, and then proceed as follow in a tone of burlesqu 
gravity. 

'it is surpris that in all the chronicl of past times, thi 
remark personag is never onc mentioned. fain would I recount to 
you her life; but unluckili till after her death she wa never known to 
have existed. then first did she think it necessari to make some nois 
in the world, and with that intent she made bold to seiz upon the 
castl of lindenberg. have a good taste, she took up her abod in the 
best room of the house: and onc establish there, she began to amus 
herself by knock about the tabl and chair in the middl of the 
night. perhap she wa a bad sleeper, but thi I have never been abl 
to ascertain. accord to the tradition, thi entertain commenc 
about a centuri ago. It wa accompani with shrieking, howling, 
groaning, swearing, and mani other agreeabl nois of the same kind. 
but though one particular room wa more especi honour with her 
visits, she did not entir confin herself to it. she occasion 
ventur into the old galleries, pace up and down the spaciou halls, 
or sometim stop at the door of the chambers, she wept and wail 
there to the univers terror of the inhabitants. In these nocturn 
excurs she wa seen by differ people, who all describ her 
appear as you behold it here, trace by the hand of her unworthi 
historian.' 

the singular of thi account insens engag my attention. 

'did she never speak to those who met her?' said I. 

'not she. the specimen indeed, which she gave nightli of her talent 
for conversation, were by no mean inviting. sometim the castl rung 
with oath and execrations: A moment after she repeat her 
paternoster: now she howl out the most horribl blasphemies, and then 
chaunt De profundis, as orderli as if still in the choir. In short 
she seem a mighti caprici being: but whether she pray or 
cursed, whether she wa impiou or devout, she alway contriv to 
terrifi her auditor out of their senses. the castl becam scarc 
habitable; and it lord wa so frighten by these midnight revels, 
that one fine morn He wa found dead in hi bed. thi success 
seem to pleas the nun mightily, for now she made more nois than 
ever. but the next baron prove too cun for her. He made hi 
appear with a celebr exorcis in hi hand, who fear not to 
shut himself up for a night in the haunt chamber. there it seem 
that He had an hard battl with the ghost, befor she would promis to 
be quiet. she wa obstinate, but He wa more so, and at length she 
consent to let the inhabit of the castl take a good night' 
rest. for some time after no news wa heard of her. but at the end of 
five year the exorcis died, and then the nun ventur to peep abroad 
again. however, she wa now grown much more tractabl and 
well-behaved. she walk about in silence, and never made her 
appear abov onc in five years. thi custom, if you will believ 
the baron, she still continues. He is fulli persuaded, that on the 
fifth of may of everi fifth year, as soon as the clock strike one, the 
door of the haunt chamber opens. (observe, that thi room ha been 
shut up for near a century.) then out walk the ghostli nun with her 
lamp and dagger: she descend the staircas of the eastern tower; and 
cross the great hall! On that night the porter alway leav the 
gate of the castl open, out of respect to the apparition: not that 
thi is thought by ani mean necessary, sinc she could easili whip 
through the keyhol if she chose it; but mere out of politeness, and 
to prevent her from make her exit in a way so derogatori to the 
digniti of her ghost-ship.' 

'and whither doe she go on quit the castle?' 

'to heaven, I hope; but if she does, the place certainli is not to her 
taste, for she alway return after an hour' absence. the ladi then 
retir to her chamber, and is quiet for anoth five years.' 

'and you believ this, agnes?' 

'how can you ask such a question? no, no, alphonso! I have too much 
reason to lament superstition' influenc to be it victim myself. 
howev I must not avow my incredul to the baroness: she entertain 
not a doubt of the truth of thi history. As to dame cunegonda, my 
governess, she protest that fifteen year ago she saw the spectr with 
her own eyes. she relat to me one even how she and sever other 
domest had been terrifi while at supper by the appear of the 
bleed nun, as the ghost is call in the castle: 'ti from her 
account that I drew thi sketch, and you may be certain that cunegonda 
wa not omitted. there she is! I shall never forget what a passion 
she wa in, and how ugli she look while she scold me for have 
made her pictur so like herself!' 

here she point to a burlesqu figur of an old woman in an attitud 
of terror. 

In spite of the melancholi which oppress me, I could not help smile 
at the play imagin of agnes: she had perfectli preserv dame 
cunegonda' resemblance, but had so much exagger everi fault, and 
render everi featur so irresist laughable, that I could easili 
conceiv the duenna' anger. 

'the figur is admirable, my dear agnes! I knew not that you possess 
such talent for the ridiculous.' 

'stay a moment,' she replied; 'I will show you a figur still more 
ridicul than dame cunegonda's. If it pleas you, you may dispos 
of it as seem best to yourself.' 

she rose, and went to a cabinet at some littl distance. unlock a 
drawer, she took out a small case, which she opened, and present to 
me. 

'do you know the resemblance?' said she smiling. 

It wa her own. 

transport at the gift, I press the portrait to my lip with 
passion: I threw myself at her feet, and declar my gratitud in the 
warmest and most affection terms. she listen to me with 
complaisance, and assur me that she share my sentiments: when 
suddenli she utter a loud shriek, disengag the hand which I held, 
and flew from the room by a door which open to the garden. amaz at 
thi abrupt departure, I rose hastili from my knees. I beheld with 
confus the baro stand near me glow with jealousy, and 
almost choak with rage. On recov from her swoon, she had 
tortur her imagin to discov her conceal rival. No one 
appear to deserv her suspicion more than agnes. she immedi 
hasten to find her niece, tax her with encourag my addresses, and 
assur herself whether her conjectur were well-grounded. 
unfortun she had alreadi seen enough to need no other 
confirmation. she arriv at the door of the room at the precis 
moment, when agn gave me her portrait. she heard me profess an 
everlast attach to her rival, and saw me kneel at her feet. 
she advanc to separ us; We were too much occupi by each other to 
perceiv her approach, and were not awar of it, till agn beheld her 
stand by my side. 

rage on the part of donna rodolpha, embarrass on mine, for some 
time kept us both silent. the ladi recov herself first. 

'mi suspicion then were just,' said she; 'the coquetri of my niec ha 
triumphed, and 'ti to her that I am sacrificed. In one respect 
howev I am fortunate: I shall not be the onli one who lament a 
disappoint passion. you too shall know, what it is to love without 
hope! I daili expect order for restor agn to her parents. 
immedi upon her arriv in spain, she will take the veil, and 
place an insuper barrier to your union. you may spare your 
supplications.' she continued, perceiv me on the point of speaking; 
'mi resolut is fix and immoveable. your mistress shall remain a 
close prison in her chamber till she exchang thi castl for the 
cloister. solitud will perhap recal her to a sens of her duty: but 
to prevent your oppos that wish event, I must inform you, don 
alphonso, that your presenc here is no longer agreeabl either to the 
baron or myself. It wa not to talk nonsens to my niec that your 
relat sent you to germany: your busi wa to travel, and I 
should be sorri to imped ani longer so excel a design. farewell, 
segnor; remember, that tomorrow morn we meet for the last time.' 

have said this, she dart upon me a look of pride, contempt, and 
malice, and quit the apartment. I also retir to mine, and 
consum the night in plan the mean of rescu agn from the 
power of her tyrann aunt. 

after the posit declar of it mistress, it wa imposs for 
me to make a longer stay at the castl of lindenberg. accordingli I the 
next day announc my immedi departure. the baron declar that it 
gave him sincer pain; and He express himself in my favour so warmly, 
that I endeavour to win him over to my interest. scarc had I 
mention the name of agn when He stop me short, and said, that it 
wa total out of hi power to interfer in the business. I saw that 
it wa in vain to argue; the baro govern her husband with 
despot sway, and I easili perceiv that she had prejud him 
against the match. agn did not appear: I entreat permiss to 
take leav of her, but my prayer wa rejected. I wa oblig to depart 
without see her. 

At quit him the baron shook my hand affectionately, and assur me 
that as soon as hi niec wa gone, I might consid hi hous as my 
own. 

'farewell, don alphonso!' said the baroness, and stretch out her hand 
to me. 

I took it, and offer to carri it to my lips. she prevent me. 

her husband wa at the other end of the room, and out of hearing. 

'take care of yourself,' she continued; 'mi love is becom hatred, and 
my wound pride shall not be unatoned. Go where you will, my 
vengeanc shall follow you!' 

she accompani these word with a look suffici to make me tremble. 
I answer not, but hasten to quit the castle. 

As my chais drove out of the court, I look up to the window of your 
sister' chamber. nobodi wa to be seen there: I threw myself back 
despond in my carriage. I wa attend by no other servant than a 
frenchman whom I had hire at strasbourg in stephano' room, and my 
littl page whom I befor mention to you. the fidelity, 
intelligence, and good temper of theodor had alreadi made him dear to 
me; but He now prepar to lay an oblig on me, which made me look 
upon him as a guardian genius. scarc had we proceed half a mile 
from the castle, when He rode up to the chaise-door. 

'take courage, segnor!' said He in spanish, which He had alreadi learnt 
to speak with fluenci and correctness. 'while you were with the baron, 
I watch the moment when dame cunegonda wa below stairs, and mount 
into the chamber over that of donna agnes. I sang as loud as I could a 
littl german air well-known to her, hope that she would recollect my 
voice. I wa not disappointed, for I soon heard her window open. I 
hasten to let down a string with which I had provid myself: upon 
hear the casement close again, I drew up the string, and fasten 
to it I found thi scrap of paper.' 

He then present me with a small note address to me. I open it 
with impatience: It contain the follow word written in pencil: 

conceal yourself for the next fortnight in some neighbour village. 
My aunt will believ you to have quit lindenberg, and I shall be 
restor to liberty. I will be in the west pavilion at twelv on the 
night of the thirtieth. fail not to be there, and we shall have an 
opportun of concert our futur plans. adieu. 
agnes. 

At perus these line my transport exceed all bounds; neither did 
I set ani to the express of gratitud which I heap upon theodore. 
In fact hi address and attent merit my warmest praise. you will 
readili believ that I had not entrust him with my passion for agnes; 
but the arch youth had too much discern not to discov my secret, 
and too much discret not to conceal hi knowledg of it. He 
observ in silenc what wa go on, nor strove to make himself an 
agent in the busi till my interest requir hi interference. I 
equal admir hi judgment, hi penetration, hi address, and hi 
fidelity. thi wa not the first occas in which I had found him of 
infinit use, and I wa everi day more convinc of hi quick and 
capacity. dure my short stay at strasbourg, He had appli himself 
dilig to learn the rudiment of spanish: He continu to studi 
it, and with so much success that He spoke it with the same facil as 
hi nativ language. He past the greatest part of hi time in reading; 
He had acquir much inform for hi age; and unit the advantag 
of a live counten and prepossess figur to an excel 
understand and the veri best of hearts. He is now fifteen; He is 
still in my service, and when you see him, I am sure that He will 
pleas you. but excus thi digression: I return to the subject which 
I quitted. 

I obey the instruct of agnes. I proceed to munich. there I 
left my chais under the care of lucas, my french servant, and then 
return on horseback to a small villag about four mile distant from 
the castl of lindenberg. upon arriv there a stori wa relat to 
the host at whose inn I descended, which prevent hi wonder at my 
make so long a stay in hi house. the old man fortun wa 
credul and incurious: He believ all I said, and sought to know no 
more than what I thought proper to tell him. nobodi wa with me but 
theodore; both were disguised, and as we kept ourselv close, we were 
not suspect to be other than what we seemed. In thi manner the 
fortnight pass away. dure that time I had the pleas convict 
that agn wa onc more at liberty. she past through the villag with 
dame cunegonda: she seem in health and spirits, and talk to her 
companion without ani appear of constraint. 

'who are those ladies?' said I to my host, as the carriag past. 

'baron lindenberg' niec with her governess,' He replied; 'she goe 
regularli everi friday to the convent of st. catharine, in which she 
wa brought up, and which is situat about a mile from hence.' 

you may be certain that I wait with impati for the ensu 
friday. I again beheld my love mistress. she cast her eye upon me, 
as she pass the inn-door. A blush which overspread her cheek told me 
that in spite of my disguis I had been recognised. I bow 
profoundly. she return the compliment by a slight inclin of the 
head as if made to one inferior, and look anoth way till the 
carriag wa out of sight. 

the long-expected, long-wish for night arrived. It wa calm, and the 
moon wa at the full. As soon as the clock struck eleven I hasten to 
my appointment, determin not to be too late. theodor had provid a 
ladder; I ascend the garden wall without difficulty; the page 
follow me, and drew the ladder after us. I post myself in the west 
pavilion, and wait impati for the approach of agnes. everi 
breez that whispered, everi leaf that fell, I believ to be her 
footstep, and hasten to meet her. thu wa I oblig to pass a full 
hour, everi minut of which appear to me an age. the castl bell at 
length toll twelve, and scarc could I believ the night to be no 
further advanced. anoth quarter of an hour elapsed, and I heard the 
light foot of my mistress approach the pavilion with precaution. I 
flew to receiv her, and conduct her to a seat. I threw myself at 
her feet, and wa express my joy at see her, when she thu 
interrupt me. 

'we have no time to lose, alphonso: the moment are precious, for 
though no more a prisoner, cunegonda watch my everi step. An express 
is arriv from my father; I must depart immedi for madrid, and 
'ti with difficulti that I have obtain a week' delay. the 
superstit of my parents, support by the represent of my 
cruel aunt, leav me no hope of soften them to compassion. In thi 
dilemma I have resolv to commit myself to your honour: god grant 
that you may never give me caus to repent my resolution! flight is my 
onli resourc from the horror of a convent, and my imprud must be 
excus by the urgenc of the danger. now listen to the plan by which 
I hope to effect my escape. 

'we are now at the thirtieth of april. On the fifth day from thi the 
visionari nun is expect to appear. In my last visit to the convent I 
provid myself with a dress proper for the character: A friend, whom 
I have left there and to whom I made no scrupl to confid my secret, 
readili consent to suppli me with a religi habit. provid a 
carriage, and be with it at a littl distanc from the great gate of 
the castle. As soon as the clock strike 'one,' I shall quit my 
chamber, drest in the same apparel as the ghost is suppos to wear. 
whoever meet me will be too much terrifi to oppos my escape. I 
shall easili reach the door, and throw myself under your protection. 
thu far success is certain: but oh! alphonso, should you deceiv me! 
should you despis my imprud and reward it with ingratitude, the 
world will not hold a be more wretch than myself! I feel all the 
danger to which I shall be exposed. I feel that I am give you a 
right to treat me with levity: but I reli upon your love, upon your 
honour! the step which I am on the point of taking, will incens my 
relat against me: should you desert me, should you betray the 
trust repos in you, I shall have no friend to punish your insult, or 
support my cause. On yourself alon rest all my hope, and if your own 
heart doe not plead in my behalf, I am undon for ever!' 

the tone in which she pronounc these word wa so touching, that in 
spite of my joy at receiv her promis to follow me, I could not help 
be affected. I also repin in secret at not have taken the 
precaut to provid a carriag at the village, in which case I might 
have carri off agn that veri night. such an attempt wa now 
impracticable: neither carriag or hors were to be procur nearer 
than munich, which wa distant from lindenberg two good day journey. 
I wa therefor oblig to chime in with her plan, which in truth 
seem well arranged: her disguis would secur her from be stop 
in quit the castle, and would enabl her to step into the carriag 
at the veri gate without difficulti or lose time. 

agn reclin her head mourn upon my shoulder, and by the light 
of the moon I saw tear flow down her cheek. I strove to dissip 
her melancholy, and encourag her to look forward to the prospect of 
happiness. I protest in the most solemn term that her virtu and 
innoc would be safe in my keeping, and that till the church had 
made her my law wife, her honour should be held by me as sacr as a 
sister's. I told her that my first care should be to find you out, 
lorenzo, and reconcil you to our union; and I wa continu to speak 
in the same strain, when a nois without alarm me. suddenli the door 
of the pavilion wa thrown open, and cunegonda stood befor us. she 
had heard agn steal out of her chamber, follow her into the garden, 
and perceiv her enter the pavilion. favour by the tree which 
shade it, and unperceiv by theodor who wait at a littl distance, 
she had approach in silence, and overheard our whole conversation. 

'admirable!' cri cunegonda in a voic shrill with passion, while 
agn utter a loud shriek; 'bi st. barbara, young lady, you have an 
excel invention! you must person the bleed nun, truly? what 
impiety! what incredulity! marry, I have a good mind to let you 
pursu your plan: when the real ghost met you, I warrant, you would be 
in a pretti condition! don alphonso, you ought to be asham of 
yourself for seduc a young ignor creatur to leav her famili and 
friends: however, for thi time at least I shall mar your wick 
designs. the nobl ladi shall be inform of the whole affair, and 
agn must defer play the spectr till a better opportunity. 
farewell, segnor-- donna agnes, let me have the honour of conduct 
your ghost-ship back to your apartment.' 

she approach the sopha on which her trembl pupil wa seated, took 
her by the hand, and prepar to lead her from the pavilion. 

I detain her, and strove by entreaties, soothing, promises, and 
flatteri to win her to my party: but find all that I could say of 
no avail, I abandon the vain attempt. 

'your obstinaci must be it own punishment,' said I; 'but one resourc 
remain to save agn and myself, and I shall not hesit to employ 
it.' 

terrifi at thi menace, she again endeavour to quit the pavilion; 
but I seiz her by the wrist, and detain her forcibly. At the same 
moment theodore, who had follow her into the room, close the door, 
and prevent her escape. I took the veil of agnes: I threw it round 
the duenna' head, who utter such pierc shriek that in spite of 
our distanc from the castle, I dread their be heard. At length I 
succeed in gag her so compleatli that she could not produc a 
singl sound. theodor and myself with some difficulti next contriv 
to bind her hand and feet with our handkerchiefs; and I advis agn 
to regain her chamber with all diligence. I promis that no harm 
should happen to cunegonda, bad her rememb that on the fifth of may I 
should be in wait at the great gate of the castle, and took of her 
an affection farewell. trembl and uneasi she had scarc power 
enough to signifi her consent to my plans, and fled back to her 
apart in disord and confusion. 

In the meanwhil theodor assist me in carri off my antiqu 
prize. she wa hoist over the wall, place befor me upon my hors 
like a portmanteau, and I gallop away with her from the castl of 
lindenberg. the unlucki duenna never had made a more disagre 
journey in her life: she wa jolt and shaken till she wa becom 
littl more than an anim mummy; not to mention her fright when we 
wade through a small river through which it wa necessari to pass in 
order to regain the village. befor we reach the inn, I had alreadi 
determin how to dispos of the troublesom cunegonda. We enter the 
street in which the inn stood, and while the page knocked, I wait at 
a littl distance. the landlord open the door with a lamp in hi 
hand. 

'give me the light!' said theodore; 'mi master is coming.' 

He snatch the lamp hastily, and purpos let it fall upon the 
ground: the landlord return to the kitchen to re-light the lamp, 
leav the door open. I profit by the obscurity, sprang from my 
hors with cunegonda in my arms, dart up stairs, reach my chamber 
unperceived, and unlock the door of a spaciou closet, stow her 
within it, and then turn the key. the landlord and theodor soon 
after appear with lights: the former express himself a littl 
surpris at my return so late, but ask no impertin questions. 
He soon quit the room, and left me to exult in the success of my 
undertaking. 

I immedi paid a visit to my prisoner. I strove to persuad her 
submit with patienc to her temporari confinement. My attempt wa 
unsuccessful. unabl to speak or move, she express her furi by her 
looks, and except at meal I never dare to unbind her, or releas her 
from the gag. At such time I stood over her with a drawn sword, and 
protested, that if she utter a singl cry, I would plung it in her 
bosom. As soon as she had done eating, the gag wa replaced. I wa 
consciou that thi proceed wa cruel, and could onli be justifi 
by the urgenc of circumstances: As to theodore, He had no scrupl 
upon the subject. cunegonda' captiv entertain him beyond 
measure. dure hi abod in the castle, a continu warfar had been 
carri on between him and the duenna; and now that He found hi enemi 
so absolut in hi power, He triumph without mercy. He seem to 
think of noth but how to find out new mean of plagu her: 
sometim He affect to piti her misfortune, then laugh at, abused, 
and mimick her; He play her a thousand tricks, each more provok 
than the other, and amus himself by tell her that her elop 
must have occas much surpris at the baron's. thi wa in fact 
the case. No one except agn could imagin what wa becom of dame 
cunegonda: everi hole and corner wa search for her; the pond were 
dragged, and the wood underw a thorough examination. still no dame 
cunegonda made her appearance. agn kept the secret, and I kept the 
duenna: the baroness, therefore, remain in total ignor 
respect the old woman' fate, but suspect her to have perish by 
suicide. thu past away five days, dure which I had prepar everi 
thing necessari for my enterprise. On quit agnes, I had made it my 
first busi to dispatch a peasant with a letter to luca at munich, 
order him to take care that a coach and four should arriv about ten 
o'clock on the fifth of may at the villag of rosenwald. He obey my 
instruct punctually: the equipag arriv at the time appointed. 
As the period of her lady' elop drew nearer, cunegonda' rage 
increased. I verili believ that spight and passion would have kill 
her, had I not luckili discov her prepossess in favour of cherri 
brandy. with thi favourit liquor she wa plenti supplied, and 
theodor alway remain to guard her, the gag wa occasion 
removed. the liquor seem to have a wonder effect in soften the 
acrimoni of her nature; and her confin not admit of ani other 
amusement, she got drunk regularli onc a day just by way of pass 
the time. 

the fifth of may arrived, a period by me never to be forgotten! befor 
the clock struck twelve, I betook myself to the scene of action. 
theodor follow me on horseback. I conceal the carriag in a 
spaciou cavern of the hill, on whose brow the castl wa situated: 
thi cavern wa of consider depth, and among the peasant wa known 
by the name of lindenberg hole. the night wa calm and beautiful: the 
moonbeam fell upon the antient tower of the castle, and shed upon 
their summit a silver light. all wa still around me: noth wa to 
be heard except the night breez sigh among the leaves, the distant 
bark of villag dogs, or the owl who had establish herself in a 
nook of the desert eastern turret. I heard her melancholi shriek, 
and look upwards. she sat upon the ride of a window, which I 
recogn to be that of the haunt room. thi brought to my 
remembr the stori of the bleed nun, and I sigh while I 
reflect on the influenc of superstit and weak of human 
reason. suddenli I heard a faint choru steal upon the silenc of the 
night. 

'what can occas that noise, theodore?' 

'A stranger of distinction,' repli he, 'pass through the villag 
today in hi way to the castle: He is report to be the father of 
donna agnes. doubtless, the baron ha given an entertain to 
celebr hi arrival.' 

the castl bell announc the hour of midnight: thi wa the usual 
signal for the famili to retir to bed. soon after I perceiv light 
in the castl move backward and forward in differ directions. I 
conjectur the compani to be separating. I could hear the heavi door 
grate as they open with difficulty, and as they close again the 
rotten casement rattl in their frames. the chamber of agn wa on 
the other side of the castle. I trembl lest she should have fail 
in obtain the key of the haunt room: through thi it wa 
necessari for her to pass in order to reach the narrow staircas by 
which the ghost wa suppos to descend into the great hall. agit 
by thi apprehension, I kept my eye constantli fix upon the window, 
where I hope to perceiv the friendli glare of a lamp born by agnes. 
I now heard the massi gate unbarred. By the candl in hi hand I 
distinguish old conrad, the porter. He set the portal door wide 
open, and retired. the light in the castl gradual disappeared, and 
at length the whole build wa wrapt in darkness. 

while I sat upon a broken ridg of the hill, the still of the scene 
inspir me with melancholi idea not altogeth unpleasing. the 
castl which stood full in my sight, form an object equal aw and 
picturesque. it ponder wall ting by the moon with solemn 
brightness, it old and partly-ruin tower lift themselv into 
the cloud and seem to frown on the plain around them, it lofti 
battlement oergrown with ivy, and fold gate expand in honour of 
the visionari inhabitant, made me sensibl of a sad and reverenti 
horror. yet did not these sensat occupi me so fully, as to prevent 
me from wit with impati the slow progress of time. I 
approach the castle, and ventur to walk round it. A few ray of 
light still glimmer in the chamber of agnes. I observ them with 
joy. I wa still gaze upon them, when I perceiv a figur draw near 
the window, and the curtain wa care close to conceal the lamp 
which burn there. convinc by thi observ that agn had not 
abandon our plan, I return with a light heart to my former station. 

the half-hour struck! the three-quart struck! My bosom beat high 
with hope and expectation. At length the wished-for sound wa heard. 
the bell toll 'one,' and the mansion echo with the nois loud and 
solemn. I look up to the casement of the haunt chamber. scarc 
had five minut elapsed, when the expect light appeared. I wa now 
close to the tower. the window wa not so far from the ground but that 
I fanci I perceiv a femal figur with a lamp in her hand move 
slowli along the apartment. the light soon fade away, and all wa 
again dark and gloomy. 

occasion gleam of bright dart from the staircas window as 
the love ghost past by them. I trace the light through the hall: 
It reach the portal, and at length I beheld agn pass through the 
fold gates. she wa habit exactli as she had describ the 
spectre. A chaplet of bead hung upon her arm; her head wa envelop 
in a long white veil; her nun' dress wa stain with blood, and she 
had taken care to provid herself with a lamp and dagger. she advanc 
toward the spot where I stood. I flew to meet her, and clasp her in 
my arms. 

'agnes!' said I while I press her to my bosom, 
agnes! agnes! thou art mine! 
agnes! agnes! I am thine! 
In my vein while blood shall roll, 
thou art mine! 
I am thine! 
thine my body! thine my soul! 

terrifi and breathless she wa unabl to speak: she dropt her lamp 
and dagger, and sank upon my bosom in silence. I rais her in my 
arms, and convey her to the carriage. theodor remain behind in 
order to releas dame cunegonda. I also charg him with a letter to 
the baro explain the whole affair, and entreat her good 
offic in reconcil don gaston to my union with hi daughter. I 
discov to her my real name: I prove to her that my birth and 
expect justifi my pretend to her niece, and assur her, 
though it wa out of my power to return her love, that I would strive 
unceasingli to obtain her esteem and friendship. 

I step into the carriage, where agn wa alreadi seated. theodor 
close the door, and the postillion drove away. At first I wa 
delight with the rapid of our progress; but as soon as we were in 
no danger of pursuit, I call to the drivers, and bad them moder 
their pace. they strove in vain to obey me. the hors refus to 
answer the rein, and continu to rush on with astonish swiftness. 
the postillion redoubl their effort to stop them, but by kick 
and plung the beast soon releas themselv from thi restraint. 
utter a loud shriek, the driver were hurl upon the ground. 
immedi thick cloud obscur the sky: the wind howl around us, 
the lightn flashed, and the thunder roar tremendously. never did 
I behold so fright a tempest! terrifi by the jar of contend 
elements, the hors seem everi moment to increas their speed. 
noth could interrupt their career; they drag the carriag through 
hedg and ditches, dash down the most danger precipices, and 
seem to vye in swift with the rapid of the winds. 

all thi while my companion lay motionless in my arms. truli alarm 
by the magnitud of the danger, I wa in vain attempt to recal her 
to her senses; when a loud crash announced, that a stop wa put to our 
progress in the most disagre manner. the carriag wa shatter to 
pieces. In fall I struck my templ against a flint. the pain of 
the wound, the violenc of the shock, and apprehens for the safeti 
of agn combin to overpow me so compleatly, that my sens forsook 
me, and I lay without anim on the ground. 

I probabl remain for some time in thi situation, sinc when I 
open my eyes, it wa broad daylight. sever peasant were stand 
round me, and seem disput whether my recoveri wa possible. I 
spoke german toler well. As soon as I could utter an articul 
sound, I enquir after agnes. what wa my surpris and distress, when 
assur by the peasants, that nobodi had been seen answer the 
descript which I gave of her! they told me that in go to their 
daili labour they had been alarm by observ the fragment of my 
carriage, and by hear the groan of an horse, the onli one of the 
four which remain alive: the other three lay dead by my side. nobodi 
wa near me when they came up, and much time had been lost, befor they 
succeed in recov me. uneasi beyond express respect the 
fate of my companion, I besought the peasant to dispers themselv in 
search of her: I describ her dress, and promis immens reward to 
whoever brought me ani intelligence. As for myself, it wa imposs 
for me to join in the pursuit: I had broken two of my rib in the fall: 
My arm be disloc hung useless by my side; and my left leg wa 
shatter so terribly, that I never expect to recov it use. 

the peasant compli with my request: all left me except four, who 
made a litter of bough and prepar to convey me to the neighbour 
town. I enquir it name. It prove to be ratisbon, and I could 
scarc persuad myself that I had travel to such a distanc in a 
singl night. I told the countrymen that at one o'clock that morn I 
had past through the villag of rosenwald. they shook their head 
wistfully, and made sign to each other that I must certainli be 
delirious. I wa convey to a decent inn and immedi put to bed. 
A physician wa sent for, who set my arm with success. He then 
examin my other hurts, and told me that I need be under no 
apprehens of the consequ of ani of them; but order me to keep 
myself quiet, and be prepar for a tediou and pain cure. I 
answer him that if He hope to keep me quiet, He must first endeavour 
to procur me some news of a ladi who had quit rosenwald in my 
compani the night before, and had been with me at the moment when the 
coach broke down. He smiled, and onli repli by advis me to make 
myself easy, for that all proper care should be taken of me. As He 
quit me, the hostess met him at the door of the room. 

'the gentleman is not quit in hi right senses;' I heard him say to 
her in a low voice; ''ti the natur consequ of hi fall, but that 
will soon be over.' 

one after anoth the peasant return to the inn, and inform me 
that no trace had been discov of my unfortun mistress. 

uneasi now becam despair. I entreat them to renew their search 
in the most urgent terms, doubl the promis which I had alreadi 
made them. My wild and frantic manner confirm the bye-stand in 
the idea of my be delirious. No sign of the ladi have appeared, 
they believ her to be a creatur fabric by my over-h brain, 
and paid no attent to my entreaties. however, the hostess assur 
me that a fresh enquiri should be made, but I found afterward that her 
promis wa onli given to quiet me. No further step were taken in the 
business. 

though my baggag wa left at munich under the care of my french 
servant, have prepar myself for a long journey, my purs wa ampli 
furnished: besid my equipag prove me to be of distinction, and in 
consequ all possibl attent wa paid me at the inn. the day 
pass away: still no news arriv of agnes. the anxieti of fear now 
gave place to despondency. I ceas to rave about her and wa plung 
in the depth of melancholi reflections. perceiv me to be silent and 
tranquil, my attend believ my delirium to have abated, and that 
my maladi had taken a favour turn. accord to the physician' 
order I swallow a compos medicine; and as soon as the night shut 
in, my attend withdrew and left me to repose. 

that repos I woo in vain. the agit of my bosom chase away 
sleep. restless in my mind, in spite of the fatigu of my body, I 
continu to toss about from side to side, till the clock in a 
neighbour steepl struck 'one.' As I listen to the mourn 
hollow sound, and heard it die away in the wind, I felt a sudden 
chill spread itself over my body. I shudder without know 
wherefore; cold dew pour down my forehead, and my hair stood 
bristl with alarm. suddenli I heard slow and heavi step ascend 
the staircase. By an involuntari movement I start up in my bed, and 
drew back the curtain. A singl rush-light which glimmer upon the 
hearth shed a faint gleam through the apartment, which wa hung with 
tapestry. the door wa thrown open with violence. A figur entered, 
and drew near my bed with solemn measur steps. with trembl 
apprehens I examin thi midnight visitor. god almighty! It wa 
the bleed nun! It wa my lost companion! her face wa still 
veiled, but she no longer held her lamp and dagger. she lift up her 
veil slowly. what a sight present itself to my startl eyes! I 
beheld befor me an anim corse. her counten wa long and 
haggard; her cheek and lip were bloodless; the pale of death wa 
spread over her features, and her eyebal fix stedfastli upon me 
were lustreless and hollow. 

I gaze upon the spectr with horror too great to be described. My 
blood wa frozen in my veins. I would have call for aid, but the 
sound expir ere it could pass my lips. My nerv were bound up in 
impotence, and I remain in the same attitud inanim as a statue. 

the visionari nun look upon me for some minut in silence: there wa 
someth petrifi in her regard. At length in a low sepulchr voic 
she pronounc the follow words. 

"raymond! raymond! thou art mine! 
raymond! raymond! I am thine! 
In thi vein while blood shall roll, 
I am thine! 
thou art mine! 
mine thi body! mine thi soul!----" 

breathless with fear, I listen while she repeat my own expressions. 
the apparit seat herself opposit to me at the foot of the bed, 
and wa silent. her eye were fix earnestli upon mine: they seem 
endow with the properti of the rattlesnake's, for I strove in vain to 
look off her. My eye were fascinated, and I had not the power of 
withdraw them from the spectre's. 

In thi attitud she remain for a whole long hour without speak or 
moving; nor wa I abl to do either. At length the clock struck two. 
the apparit rose from her seat, and approach the side of the bed. 
she grasp with her ici finger my hand which hung lifeless upon the 
coverture, and press her cold lip to mine, again repeated, 

"raymond! raymond! thou art mine! 
raymond! raymond! 
I am thine! &c.----" 

she then drop my hand, quit the chamber with slow steps, and the 
door close after her. till that moment the faculti of my bodi had 
been all suspended; those of my mind had alon been waking. the charm 
now ceas to operate: the blood which had been frozen in my vein 
rush back to my heart with violence: I utter a deep groan, and sank 
lifeless upon my pillow. 

the adjoin room wa onli separ from mine by a thin partition: 
It wa occupi by the host and hi wife: the former wa rouz by my 
groan, and immedi hasten to my chamber: the hostess soon 
follow him. with some difficulti they succeed in restor me to 
my senses, and immedi sent for the physician, who arriv in all 
diligence. He declar my fever to be veri much increased, and that if 
I continu to suffer such violent agitation, He would not take upon 
him to ensur my life. some medicin which He gave me in some degre 
tranquil my spirits. I fell into a sort of slumber toward 
daybreak; but fear dream prevent me from deriv ani benefit 
from my repose. agn and the bleed nun present themselv by 
turn to my fancy, and combin to harass and torment me. I awok 
fatigu and unrefreshed. My fever seem rather augment than 
diminished; the agit of my mind imped my fractur bone from 
knitting: I had frequent faint fits, and dure the whole day the 
physician judg it expedi not to quit me for two hour together. 

the singular of my adventur made me determin to conceal it from 
everi one, sinc I could not expect that a circumst so strang 
should gain credit. I wa veri uneasi about agnes. I knew not what 
she would think at not find me at the rendezvous, and dread her 
entertain suspicion of my fidelity. however, I depend upon 
theodore' discretion, and trust that my letter to the baro would 
convinc her of the rectitud of my intentions. these consider 
somewhat lighten my inquietud upon her account: but the impress 
left upon my mind by my nocturn visitor grew stronger with everi 
succeed moment. the night drew near; I dread it arrival. yet I 
strove to persuad myself that the ghost would appear no more, and at 
all event I desir that a servant might sit up in my chamber. 

the fatigu of my bodi from not have slept on the former night, 
co-oper with the strong opiat administ to me in profusion, 
at length procur me that repos of which I wa so much in need. I 
sank into a profound and tranquil slumber, and had alreadi slept for 
some hours, when the neighbour clock rouz me by strike 'one'. 
it sound brought with it to my memori all the horror of the night 
before. the same cold shiver seiz me. I start up in my bed, 
and perceiv the servant fast asleep in an armed-chair near me. I 
call him by hi name: He made no answer. I shook him forcibl by 
the arm, and strove in vain to wake him. He wa perfectli insens 
to my efforts. I now heard the heavi step ascend the staircase; 
the door wa thrown open, and again the bleed nun stood befor me. 
onc more my limb were chain in second infancy. onc more I heard 
those fatal word repeated, 

"raymond! raymond! thou art mine! 
raymond! raymond! I am thine! &c.----" 

the scene which had shock me so sensibl on the former night, wa 
again presented. the spectr again press her lip to mine, again 
touch me with her rot fingers, and as on her first appearance, 
quit the chamber as soon as the clock told 'two.' 

even night wa thi repeated. far from grow accustom to the 
ghost, everi succeed visit inspir me with greater horror. her idea 
pursu me continually, and I becam the prey of habitu melancholy. 
the constant agit of my mind natur retard the 
re-establish of my health. sever month elaps befor I wa 
abl to quit my bed; and when at length I wa move to a sopha, I wa 
so faint, spiritless, and emaciated, that I could not cross the room 
without assistance. the look of my attend suffici denot 
the littl hope, which they entertain of my recovery. the profound 
sadness, which oppress me without remiss made the physician 
consid me to be an hypochondriac. the caus of my distress I 
care conceal in my own bosom, for I knew that no one could give 
me relief: the ghost wa not even visibl to ani eye but mine. I had 
frequent caus attend to sit up in my room: but the moment that 
the clock struck 'one,' irresist slumber seiz them, nor left them 
till the departur of the ghost. 

you may be surpriz that dure thi time I made no enquiri after 
your sister. theodore, who with difficulti had discov my abode, 
had quiet my apprehens for her safety: At the same time He 
convinc me that all attempt to releas her from captiv must be 
fruitless till I should be in a condit to return to spain. the 
particular of her adventur which I shall now relat to you, were 
partli commun to me by theodore, and partli by agn herself. 

On the fatal night when her elop wa to have taken place, accid 
had not permit her to quit her chamber at the appoint time. At 
length she ventur into the haunt room, descend the staircas 
lead into the hall, found the gate open as she expected, and left 
the castl unobserved. what wa her surpriz at not find me readi 
to receiv her! she examin the cavern, rang through everi alley of 
the neighbour wood, and pass two full hour in thi fruitless 
enquiry. she could discov no trace either of me or of the carriage. 
alarm and disappointed, her onli resourc wa to return to the castl 
befor the baro miss her: but here she found herself in a fresh 
embarrassment. the bell had alreadi toll 'two:' the ghostli hour wa 
past, and the care porter had lock the fold gates. after much 
irresolut she ventur to knock softly. luckili for her, conrad wa 
still awake: He heard the nois and rose, murmur at be call up 
a second time. No sooner had He open one of the doors, and beheld 
the suppos apparit wait there for admittance, than He utter a 
loud cry, and sank upon hi knees. agn profit by hi terror. she 
glide by him, flew to her own apartment, and have thrown off her 
spectre' trappings, retir to bed endeavour in vain to account for 
my disappearing. 

In the mean while theodor have seen my carriag drive off with the 
fals agnes, return joy to the village. the next morn He 
releas cunegonda from her confinement, and accompani her to the 
castle. there He found the baron, hi lady, and don gaston, disput 
togeth upon the porter' relation. all of them agre in believ 
the exist of spectres: but the latter contended, that for a ghost 
to knock for admitt wa a proceed till then unwitnessed, and 
total incompat with the immateri natur of a spirit. they were 
still discuss thi subject when the page appear with cunegonda and 
clear up the mystery. On hear hi deposition, it wa agre 
unanim that the agn whom theodor had seen step into my carriag 
must have been the bleed nun, and that the ghost who had terrifi 
conrad wa no other than don gaston' daughter. 

the first surpriz which thi discoveri occas be over, the 
baro resolv to make it of use in persuad her niec to take the 
veil. fear lest so advantag an establish for hi daughter 
should induc don gaston to renounc hi resolution, she suppress my 
letter, and continu to repres me as a needi unknown adventurer. A 
childish vaniti had led me to conceal my real name even from my 
mistress; I wish to be love for myself, not for be the son and 
heir of the marqui de la cisternas. the consequ wa that my rank 
wa known to no one in the castl except the baroness, and she took 
good care to confin the knowledg to her own breast. don gaston 
have approv hi sister' design, agn wa summon to appear 
befor them. she wa tax with have medit an elopement, oblig 
to make a full confession, and wa amaz at the gentl with which 
it wa received: but what wa her affliction, when inform that the 
failur of her project must be attribut to me! cunegonda, tutor by 
the baroness, told her that when I releas her, I had desir her to 
inform her ladi that our connexion wa at an end, that the whole affair 
wa occas by a fals report, and that it by no mean suit my 
circumst to marri a woman without fortun or expectations. 

To thi account my sudden disappear gave but too great an air of 
probability. theodore, who could have contradict the story, by donna 
rodolpha' order wa kept out of her sight: what prove a still 
greater confirm of my be an impostor, wa the arriv of a 
letter from yourself declar that you had no sort of acquaint 
with alphonso d'alvarada. these seem proof of my perfidy, aid by 
the art insinu of her aunt, by cunegonda' flattery, and her 
father' threat and anger, entir conquer your sister' repugn 
to a convent. incens at my behaviour, and disgust with the world in 
general, she consent to receiv the veil. she past anoth month at 
the castl of lindenberg, dure which my non-appear confirm her 
in her resolution, and then accompani don gaston into spain. 
theodor wa now set at liberty. He hasten to munich, where I had 
promis to let him hear from me; but find from luca that I had 
never arriv there, He pursu hi search with indefatig 
perseverance, and at length succeed in rejoin me at ratisbon. 

So much wa I altered, that scarc could He recollect my features: 
the distress visibl upon hi suffici testifi how live wa the 
interest which He felt for me. the societi of thi amiabl boy, whom I 
had alway consid rather as a companion than a servant, wa now my 
onli comfort. hi convers wa gay yet sensible, and hi 
observ shrewd and entertaining: He had pick up much more 
knowledg than is usual at hi age: but what render him most 
agreeabl to me, wa hi have a delight voice, and some skill in 
music. He had also acquir some tast in poetry, and even ventur 
sometim to write vers himself. He occasion compos littl 
ballad in spanish, hi composit were but indifferent, I must 
confess; yet they were pleas to me from their novelty, and hear 
him sing them to hi guitar wa the onli amusement, which I wa capabl 
of receiving. theodor perceiv well enough that someth prey 
upon my mind; but as I conceal the caus of my grief even from him, 
respect would not permit him to pri into my secrets. 

one even I wa lie upon my sopha, plung in reflect veri far 
from agreeable: theodor amus himself by observ from the window a 
battl between two postillions, who were quarrel in the inn-yard. 

'ha! ha!' cri He suddenly; 'yonder is the great mogul.' 

'who?' said I. 

'onli a man who made me a strang speech at munich.' 

'what wa the purport of it?' 

'now you put me in mind of it, segnor, it wa a kind of messag to you; 
but truli it wa not worth delivering. I believ the fellow to be mad, 
for my part. when I came to munich in search of you, I found him 
live at 'the king of the romans,' and the host gave me an odd account 
of him. By hi accent He is suppos to be a foreigner, but of what 
countri nobodi can tell. He seem to have no acquaint in the 
town, spoke veri seldom, and never wa seen to smile. He had neither 
servant or baggage; but hi purs seem well-furnished, and He did 
much good in the town. some suppos him to be an arabian astrologer, 
other to be a travel mountebank, and mani declar that He wa 
doctor faustus, whom the devil had sent back to germany. the landlord, 
howev told me, that He had the best reason to believ him to be the 
great mogul incognito.' 

'but the strang speech, theodore.' 

'true, I had almost forgotten the speech: inde for that matter, it 
would not have been a great loss if I had forgotten it altogether. you 
are to know, segnor, that while I wa enquir about you of the 
landlord, thi stranger pass by. He stopped, and look at me 
earnestly. 'youth!' said He in a solemn voice, 'he whom you seek, ha 
found that which He would fain lose. My hand alon can dri up the 
blood: bid your master wish for me when the clock strikes, 'one.' 

'how?' cri I, start from my sopha. (the word which theodor had 
repeated, seem to impli the stranger' knowledg of my secret) 'fli 
to him, my boy! entreat him to grant me one moment' conversation!' 

theodor wa surpris at the vivac of my manner: however, He ask 
no questions, but hasten to obey me. I wait hi return 
impatiently. but a short space of time had elaps when He again 
appear and usher the expect guest into my chamber. He wa a man 
of majest presence: hi counten wa strongli marked, and hi 
eye were large, black, and sparkling: yet there wa a someth in 
hi look which, the moment that I saw him, inspir me with a secret 
awe, not to say horror. He wa drest plainly, hi hair wa unpowdered, 
and a band of black velvet which encircl hi forehead spread over hi 
featur an addit gloom. hi counten wore the mark of 
profound melancholy; hi step wa slow, and hi manner grave, stately, 
and solemn. 

He salut me with politeness; and have repli to the usual 
compliment of introduction, He motion to theodor to quit the 
chamber. the page instantli withdrew. 

'I know your business,' said he, without give me time to speak. 

'I have the power of releas you from your nightli visitor; but thi 
cannot be done befor sunday. On the hour when the sabbath morn 
breaks, spirit of dark have least influenc over mortals. after 
saturday the nun shall visit you no more.' 

'may I not enquire,' said I, 'bi what mean you are in possess of a 
secret which I have care conceal from the knowledg of everyone?' 

'how can I be ignor of your distress, when their caus at thi 
moment stand besid you?' 

I started. the stranger continued. 

'though to you onli visibl for one hour in the twenty-four, neither 
day or night doe she ever quit you; nor will she ever quit you till 
you have grant her request.' 

'and what is that request?' 

'that she must herself explain: It lie not in my knowledge. wait with 
patienc for the night of saturday: all shall be then clear up.' 

I dare not press him further. He soon after chang the convers 
and talk of variou matters. He name peopl who had ceas to exist 
for mani centuries, and yet with whom He appear to have been 
person acquainted. I could not mention a countri howev distant 
which He had not visited, nor could I suffici admir the extent 
and varieti of hi information. I remark to him that have 
travelled, seen, and known so much, must have given him infinit 
pleasure. He shook hi head mournfully. 

'no one,' He replied, 'i adequ to comprehend the miseri of my 
lot! fate oblig me to be constantli in movement: I am not permit 
to pass more than a fortnight in the same place. I have no friend in 
the world, and from the restless of my destini I never can acquir 
one. fain would I lay down my miser life, for I envi those who 
enjoy the quiet of the grave: but death elud me, and fli from my 
embrace. In vain do I throw myself in the way of danger. I plung 
into the ocean; the wave throw me back with abhorr upon the shore: 
I rush into fire; the flame recoil at my approach: I oppos myself to 
the furi of banditti; their sword becom blunted, and break against my 
breast: the hungri tiger shudder at my approach, and the allig 
fli from a monster more horribl than itself. god ha set hi seal 
upon me, and all hi creatur respect thi fatal mark!' 

He put hi hand to the velvet, which wa bound round hi forehead. 
there wa in hi eye an express of fury, despair, and malevolence, 
that struck horror to my veri soul. An involuntari convuls made me 
shudder. the stranger perceiv it. 

'such is the curs impos on me,' he continued: 'I am doom to 
inspir all who look on me with terror and detestation. you alreadi 
feel the influenc of the charm, and with everi succeed moment will 
feel it more. I will not add to your suffer by my presence. 
farewel till saturday. As soon as the clock strike twelve, expect me 
at your chamber door.' 

have said thi He departed, leav me in astonish at the 
mysteri turn of hi manner and conversation. 

hi assur that I should soon be reliev from the apparition' 
visit produc a good effect upon my constitution. theodore, whom I 
rather treat as an adopt child than a domestic, wa surpriz at 
hi return to observ the amend in my looks. He congratul me 
on thi symptom of return health, and declar himself delight at 
my have receiv so much benefit from my confer with the great 
mogul. upon enquiri I found that the stranger had alreadi past eight 
day in ratisbon: accord to hi own account, therefore, He wa onli 
to remain there six day longer. saturday wa still at the distanc of 
three. oh! with what impati did I expect it arrival! In the 
interim, the bleed nun continu her nocturn visits; but hope 
soon to be releas from them altogether, the effect which they 
produc on me becam less violent than before. 

the wished-for night arrived. To avoid creat suspicion I retir to 
bed at my usual hour: but as soon as my attend had left me, I 
dress myself again, and prepar for the stranger' reception. He 
enter my room upon the turn of midnight. A small chest wa in hi 
hand, which He place near the stove. He salut me without speaking; 
I return the compliment, observ an equal silence. He then open 
hi chest. the first thing which He produc wa a small wooden 
crucifix: He sank upon hi knees, gaze upon it mournfully, and cast 
hi eye toward heaven. He seem to be pray devoutly. At length 
He bow hi head respectfully, kiss the crucifix thrice, and quit 
hi kneel posture. He next drew from the chest a cover goblet: 
with the liquor which it contained, and which appear to be blood, He 
sprinkl the floor, and then dip in it one end of the crucifix, He 
describ a circl in the middl of the room. round about thi He 
place variou reliques, sculls, thigh-bon &c; I observed, that He 
dispos them all in the form of crosses. lastli He took out a larg 
bible, and beckon me to follow him into the circle. I obeyed. 

'be cautiou not to utter a syllable!' whisper the stranger; 'step 
not out of the circle, and as you love yourself, dare not to look upon 
my face!' 

hold the crucifix in one hand, the bibl in the other, He seem to 
read with profound attention. the clock struck 'one'! As usual I heard 
the spectre' step upon the staircase: but I wa not seiz with the 
accustom shivering. I wait her approach with confidence. she 
enter the room, drew near the circle, and stopped. the stranger 
mutter some words, to me unintelligible. then rais hi head from 
the book, and extend the crucifix toward the ghost, He pronounc 
in a voic distinct and solemn, 

'beatrice! beatrice! beatrice!' 

'what wouldst thou?' repli the apparit in a hollow falter tone. 

'what disturb thi sleep? whi dost thou afflict and tortur thi 
youth? how can rest be restor to thi unquiet spirit?' 

'I dare not tell!--i must not tell!--fain would I repos in my grave, 
but stern command forc me to prolong my punishment!' 

'knowest thou thi blood? knowest thou in whose vein it flowed? 

beatrice! beatrice! In hi name I charg thee to answer me!' 

'I dare not disobey my taskers.' 

'darest thou disobey me?' 

He spoke in a command tone, and drew the sabl band from hi 
forehead. In spite of hi injunct to the contrary, curios would 
not suffer me to keep my eye off hi face: I rais them, and beheld 
a burn cross impress upon hi brow. for the horror with which thi 
object inspir me I cannot account, but I never felt it equal! My 
sens left me for some moments; A mysteri dread overcam my 
courage, and had not the exorcis caught my hand, I should have fallen 
out of the circle. 

when I recov myself, I perceiv that the burn cross had 
produc an effect no less violent upon the spectre. her counten 
express reverence, and horror, and her visionari limb were shaken by 
fear. 

'yes!' she said at length; 'I trembl at that mark!--respect it!--i 
obey you! know then, that my bone lie still unburied: they rot in the 
obscur of lindenberg hole. none but thi youth ha the right of 
consign them to the grave. hi own lip have made over to me hi 
bodi and hi soul: never will I give back hi promise, never shall He 
know a night devoid of terror, unless He engag to collect my 
moulder bones, and deposit them in the famili vault of hi 
andalusian castle. then let thirti mass be said for the repos of my 
spirit, and I troubl thi world no more. now let me depart! those 
flame are scorching!' 

He let the hand drop slowli which held the crucifix, and which till 
then He had point toward her. the apparit bow her head, and 
her form melt into air. the exorcis led me out of the circle. He 
replac the bibl &c. in the chest, and then address himself to me, 
who stood near him speechless from astonishment. 

'don raymond, you have heard the condit on which repos is promis 
you. Be it your busi to fulfil them to the letter. for me noth 
more remain than to clear up the dark still spread over the 
spectre' history, and inform you that when living, beatric bore the 
name of la cisternas. she wa the great aunt of your grandfather: In 
qualiti of your relation, her ash demand respect from you, though the 
enorm of her crime must excit your abhorrence. the natur of 
those crime no one is more capabl of explain to you than myself: 
I wa person acquaint with the holi man who proscrib her 
nocturn riot in the castl of lindenberg, and I hold thi narr 
from hi own lips. 

'beatric de la cisterna took the veil at an earli age, not by her 
own choice, but at the express command of her parents. she wa then 
too young to regret the pleasur of which her profess depriv her: 
but no sooner did her warm and voluptu charact begin to be 
develop than she abandon herself freeli to the impuls of her 
passions, and seiz the first opportun to procur their 
gratification. thi opportun wa at length presented, after mani 
obstacl which onli ad new forc to her desires. she contriv to 
elop from the convent, and fled to germani with the baron lindenberg. 
she live at hi castl sever month as hi avow concubine: all 
bavaria wa scandal by her impud and abandon conduct. her 
feast vie in luxuri with cleopatra's, and lindenberg becam the 
theatr of the most unbridl debauchery. not satisfi with 
display the incontin of a prostitute, she profess herself an 
atheist: she took everi opportun to scoff at her monast vows, 
and load with ridicul the most sacr ceremoni of religion. 

'possess of a charact so depraved, she did not long confin her 
affect to one object. soon after her arriv at the castle, the 
baron' younger brother attract her notic by hi strong-mark 
features, gigant stature, and herculean limbs. she wa not of an 
humour to keep her inclin long unknown; but she found in otto von 
lindenberg her equal in depravity. He return her passion just 
suffici to increas it; and when He had work it up to the 
desir pitch, He fix the price of hi love at hi brother' murder. 
the wretch consent to thi horribl agreement. A night wa pitch 
upon for perpetr the deed. otto, who resid on a small estat a 
few mile distant from the castle, promis that at one in the morn 
He would be wait for her at lindenberg hole; that He would bring 
with him a parti of chosen friends, by whose aid He doubt not be 
abl to make himself master of the castle; and that hi next step 
should be the unit her hand to his. It wa thi last promise, which 
overrul everi scrupl of beatrice, sinc in spite of hi affect 
for her, the baron had declar posit that He never would make her 
hi wife. 

'the fatal night arrived. the baron slept in the arm of hi 
perfidi mistress, when the castle-bel struck 'one.' immedi 
beatric drew a dagger from underneath the pillow, and plung it in 
her paramour' heart. the baron utter a singl dread groan, and 
expired. the murderess quit her bed hastily, took a lamp in one 
hand, in the other the bloodi dagger, and bent her cours toward the 
cavern. the porter dare not to refus open the gate to one more 
dread in the castl than it master. beatric reach lindenberg 
hole unopposed, where accord to promis she found otto wait for 
her. He receiv and listen to her narr with transport: but ere 
she had time to ask whi He came unaccompanied, He convinc her that He 
wish for no wit to their interview. anxiou to conceal hi 
share in the murder, and to free himself from a woman, whose violent 
and atroci charact made him trembl with reason for hi own 
safety, He had resolv on the destruct of hi wretch agent. 
rush upon her suddenly, He wrest the dagger from her hand: He 
plung it still reek with hi brother' blood in her bosom, and put 
an end to her exist by repeat blows. 

'otto now succeed to the baroni of lindenberg. the murder wa 
attribut sole to the fugit nun, and no one suspect him to have 
persuad her to the action. but though hi crime wa unpunish by 
man, god' justic permit him not to enjoy in peac hi 
blood-stain honours. her bone lie still unburi in the cave, the 
restless soul of beatric continu to inhabit the castle. drest in 
her religi habit in memori of her vow broken to heaven, furnish 
with the dagger which had drank the blood of her paramour, and hold 
the lamp which had guid her fli steps, everi night did she stand 
befor the bed of otto. the most dread confus reign through the 
castle; the vault chamber resound with shriek and groans; and the 
spectre, as she rang along the antiqu galleries, utter an 
incoher mixtur of prayer and blasphemies. otto wa unabl to 
withstand the shock which He felt at thi fear vision: it horror 
increas with everi succeed appearance: hi alarm at length becam 
so insupport that hi heart burst, and one morn He wa found in 
hi bed total depriv of warmth and animation. hi death did not 
put an end to the nocturn riots. the bone of beatric continu to 
lie unburied, and her ghost continu to haunt the castle. 

'the domain of lindenberg now fell to a distant relation. but 
terrifi by the account given him of the bleed nun (so wa the 
spectr call by the multitude), the new baron call to hi 
assist a celebr exorciser. thi holi man succeed in oblig 
her to temporari repose; but though she discov to him her history, 
He wa not permit to reveal it to others, or caus her skeleton to 
be remov to hallow ground. that offic wa reserv for you, and 
till your coming, her ghost wa doom to wander about the castl and 
lament the crime which she had there committed. however, the exorcis 
oblig her to silenc dure hi lifetime. So long as He existed, the 
haunt chamber wa shut up, and the spectr wa invisible. At hi 
death which happen in five year after, she again appeared, but onli 
onc on everi fifth year, on the same day and at the same hour when she 
plung her knife in the heart of her sleep lover: she then visit 
the cavern which held her moulder skeleton, return to the castl 
as soon as the clock struck 'two,' and wa seen no more till the next 
five year had elapsed. 

'she wa doom to suffer dure the space of a century. that period 
is past. noth now remain but to consign to the grave the ash of 
beatrice. I have been the mean of releas you from your visionari 
tormentor; and amidst all the sorrow which oppress me, to think that I 
have been of use to you, is some consolation. youth, farewell! may 
the ghost of your relat enjoy that rest in the tomb, which the 
almighty' vengeanc ha deni to me for ever!' 

here the stranger prepar to quit the apartment. 

'stay yet one moment!' said I; 'you have satisfi my curios with 
regard to the spectre, but you leav me in prey to yet greater 
respect yourself. deign to inform me, to whom I am under such real 
obligations. you mention circumst long past, and person long 
dead: you were person acquaint with the exorciser, who by your 
own account ha been deceas near a century. how am I to account for 
this? what mean that burn cross upon your forehead, and whi did 
the sight of it strike such horror to my soul?' 

On these point He for some time refus to satisfi me. At length 
overcom by my entreaties, He consent to clear up the whole, on 
condit that I would defer hi explan till the next day. with 
thi request I wa oblig to comply, and He left me. In the morn 
my first care wa to enquir after the mysteri stranger. conceiv 
my disappoint when inform that He had alreadi quit ratisbon. 
I dispatch messeng in pursuit of him but in vain. No trace of 
the fugit were discovered. sinc that moment I never have heard ani 
more of him, and 'ti most probabl that I never shall.' 

(lorenzo here interrupt hi friend' narrative. 

'how?' said he; 'you have never discov who He was, or even form a 
guess?' 

'pardon me,' repli the marquis; 'when I relat thi adventur to my 
uncle, the cardinal-duke, He told me that He had no doubt of thi 
singular man' be the celebr charact known univers by the 
name of 'the wander jew.' hi not be permit to pass more than 
fourteen day on the same spot, the burn cross impress upon hi 
forehead, the effect which it produc upon the beholders, and mani 
other circumst give thi supposit the colour of truth. the 
cardin is fulli persuad of it; and for my own part I am inclin to 
adopt the onli solut which offer itself to thi riddle. I return 
to the narr from which I have digressed.') 

from thi period I recov my health so rapidli as to astonish my 
physicians. the bleed nun appear no more, and I wa soon abl to 
set out for lindenberg. the baron receiv me with open arms. I 
confid to him the sequel of my adventure; and He wa not a littl 
pleas to find that hi mansion would be no longer troubl with the 
phantom' quiennial visits. I wa sorri to perceiv that absenc had 
not weaken donna rodolpha' imprud passion. In a privat 
convers which I had with her dure my short stay at the castle, 
she renew her attempt to persuad me to return her affection. 
regard her as the primari caus of all my sufferings, I entertain 
for her no other sentiment than disgust. the skeleton of beatric wa 
found in the place which she had mentioned. thi be all that I 
sought at lindenberg, I hasten to quit the baron' domains, equal 
anxiou to perform the obsequi of the murder nun, and escap the 
importun of a woman whom I detested. I departed, follow by donna 
rodolpha' menac that my contempt should not be long unpunished. 

I now bent my cours toward spain with all diligence. luca with my 
baggag had join me dure my abod at lindenberg. I arriv in my 
nativ countri without ani accident, and immedi proceed to my 
father' castl in andalusia. the remain of beatric were deposit 
in the famili vault, all due ceremoni performed, and the number of 
mass said which she had required. noth now hinder me from 
employ all my endeavour to discov the retreat of agnes. the 
baro had assur me that her niec had alreadi taken the veil: 
thi intellig I suspect to have been forg by jealousy, and 
hope to find my mistress still at liberti to accept my hand. I 
enquir after her family; I found that befor her daughter could reach 
madrid, donna inesilla wa no more: you, my dear lorenzo, were said to 
be abroad, but where I could not discover: your father wa in a 
distant provinc on a visit to the duke de medina, and as to agnes, no 
one could or would inform me what wa becom of her. theodore, 
accord to promise, had return to strasbourg, where He found hi 
grandfath dead, and marguerit in possess of hi fortune. all her 
persuas to remain with her were fruitless: He quit her a second 
time, and follow me to madrid. He exert himself to the utmost in 
forward my search: but our unit endeavour were unattend by 
success. the retreat which conceal agn remain an impenetr 
mystery, and I began to abandon all hope of recov her. 

about eight month ago I wa return to my hotel in a melancholi 
humour, have past the even at the play-house. the night wa dark, 
and I wa unaccompanied. plung in reflect which were far from 
be agreeable, I perceiv not that three men had follow me from 
the theatre; till, on turn into an unfrequ street, they all 
attack me at the same time with the utmost fury. I sprang back a few 
paces, drew my sword, and threw my cloak over my left arm. the 
obscur of the night wa in my favour. for the most part the blow 
of the assassins, be aim at random, fail to touch me. I at 
length wa fortun enough to lay one of my adversari at my feet; 
but befor thi I had alreadi receiv so mani wounds, and wa so 
warmli pressed, that my destruct would have been inevitable, had not 
the clash of sword call a cavali to my assistance. He ran 
toward me with hi sword drawn: sever domest follow him with 
torches. hi arriv made the combat equal: yet would not the bravo 
abandon their design till the servant were on the point of join us. 
they then fled away, and we lost them in the obscurity. 

the stranger now address himself to me with politeness, and enquir 
whether I wa wounded. faint with the loss of blood, I could scarc 
thank him for hi season aid, and entreat him to let some of hi 
servant convey me to the hotel de la cisternas. I no sooner 
mention the name than He profest himself an acquaint of my 
father's, and declar that He would not permit my be transport to 
such a distanc befor my wound had been examined. He ad that hi 
hous wa hard by, and beg me to accompani him thither. hi manner 
wa so earnest, that I could not reject hi offer, and lean upon hi 
arm, a few minut brought me to the porch of a magnific hotel. 

On enter the house, an old grey-head domest came to welcom my 
conductor: He enquir when the duke, hi master, meant to quit the 
country, and wa answer that He would remain there yet some months. 
My deliver then desir the famili surgeon to be summon without 
delay. hi order were obeyed. I wa seat upon a sopha in a nobl 
apartment; and my wound be examined, they were declar to be veri 
slight. the surgeon, however, advis me not to expos myself to the 
night air; and the stranger press me so earnestli to take a bed in 
hi house, that I consent to remain where I wa for the present. 

be now left alon with my deliverer, I took the opportun of 
thank him in more express terms, than I had done hitherto: but He 
beg me to be silent upon the subject. 

'I esteem myself happy,' said he, 'in have had it in my power to 
render you thi littl service; and I shall think myself etern 
oblig to my daughter for detain me so late at the convent of st. 
clare. the high esteem in which I have ever held the marqui de la 
cisternas, though accid ha not permit our be so intim as I 
could wish, make me rejoic in the opportun of make hi son' 
acquaintance. I am certain that my brother in whose hous you now are, 
will lament hi not be at madrid to receiv you himself: but in the 
duke' absenc I am master of the family, and may assur you in hi 
name, that everi thing in the hotel de medina is perfectli at your 
disposal.' 

conceiv my surprize, lorenzo, at discov in the person of my 
preserv don gaston de medina: It wa onli to be equal by my 
secret satisfact at the assur that agn inhabit the convent 
of st. clare. thi latter sensat wa not a littl weakened, when in 
answer to my seemingli indiffer question He told me that hi 
daughter had realli taken the veil. I suffer not my grief at thi 
circumst to take root in my mind: I flatter myself with the idea 
that my uncle' credit at the court of rome would remov thi obstacle, 
and that without difficulti I should obtain for my mistress a 
dispens from her vows. buoy up with thi hope I calm the 
uneasi of my bosom; and I redoubl my endeavour to appear 
grate for the attent and pleas with the societi of don gaston. 

A domest now enter the room, and inform me that the bravo whom I 
had wound discov some sign of life. I desir that He might be 
carri to my father' hotel, and that as soon as He recov hi 
voice, I would examin him respect hi reason for attempt my 
life. I wa answer that He wa alreadi abl to speak, though with 
difficulty: don gaston' curios made him press me to interrog 
the assassin in hi presence, but thi curios I wa by no mean 
inclin to gratify. one reason was, that doubt from whenc the 
blow came, I wa unwil to place befor don gaston' eye the guilt 
of a sister: anoth was, that I fear to be recogn for alphonso 
d'alvarada, and precaut taken in consequ to keep me from the 
sight of agnes. To avow my passion for hi daughter, and endeavour to 
make him enter into my schemes, what I knew of don gaston' charact 
convinc me would be an imprud step: and consid it to be 
essenti that He should know me for no other than the cond de la 
cisternas, I wa determin not to let him hear the bravo' confession. 
I insinu to him, that as I suspect a ladi to be concern in the 
business, whose name might accident escap from the assassin, it 
wa necessari for me to examin the man in private. don gaston' 
delicaci would not permit hi urg the point ani longer, and in 
consequ the bravo wa convey to my hotel. 

the next morn I took leav of my host, who wa to return to the duke 
on the same day. My wound had been so trifl that, except be 
oblig to wear my arm in a sling for a short time, I felt no 
inconveni from the night' adventure. the surgeon who examin the 
bravo' wound declar it to be mortal: He had just time to confess 
that He had been instig to murder me by the reveng donna 
rodolpha, and expir in a few minut after. 

all my thought were now bent upon get to the speech of my love 
nun. theodor set himself to work, and for thi time with better 
success. He attack the garden of st. clare so forcibl with bribe 
and promis that the old man wa entir gain over to my interests; 
and it wa settl that I should be introduc into the convent in the 
charact of hi assistant. the plan wa put into execut without 
delay. disguis in a common habit, and a black patch cover one of 
my eyes, I wa present to the ladi prioress, who condescend to 
approv of the gardener' choice. I immedi enter upon my 
employment. botani have been a favourit studi with me, I wa by no 
mean at a loss in my new station. for some day I continu to work 
in the convent garden without meet the object of my disguise: On the 
fourth morn I wa more successful. I heard the voic of agnes, and 
wa speed toward the sound, when the sight of the domina stop 
me. I drew back with caution, and conceal myself behind a thick 
clump of trees. 

the prioress advanc and seat herself with agn on a bench at no 
great distance. I heard her in an angri tone blame her companion' 
continu melancholy: she told her that to weep the loss of ani lover 
in her situat wa a crime; but that to weep the loss of a faithless 
one wa folli and absurd in the extreme. agn repli in so low a 
voic that I could not distinguish her words, but I perceiv that she 
use term of gentl and submission. the convers wa 
interrupt by the arriv of a young pension who inform the domina 
that she wa wait for in the parlour. the old ladi rose, kiss the 
cheek of agnes, and retired. the newcom remained. agn spoke much 
to her in prais of somebodi whom I could not make out, but her auditor 
seem highli delighted, and interest by the conversation. the nun 
show her sever letters; the other perus them with evid 
pleasure, obtain permiss to copi them, and withdrew for that 
purpos to my great satisfaction. 

No sooner wa she out of sight, than I quit my concealment. fear 
to alarm my love mistress, I drew near her gently, intend to 
discov myself by degrees. but who for a moment can deceiv the eye 
of love? she rais her head at my approach, and recognis me in 
spite of my disguis at a singl glance. she rose hastili from her 
seat with an exclam of surprize, and attempt to retire; but I 
follow her, detain her, and entreat to be heard. persuad of my 
falsehood she refus to listen to me, and order me posit to 
quit the garden. It wa now my turn to refuse. I protest that 
howev danger might be the consequences, I would not leav her till 
she had heard my justification. I assur her that she had been 
deceiv by the artific of her relations; that I could convinc her 
beyond the power of doubt that my passion had been pure and 
disinterested; and I ask her what should induc me to seek her in the 
convent, were I influenc by the selfish motiv which my enemi had 
ascrib to me. 

My prayers, my arguments, and vow not to quit her, till she had 
promis to listen to me, unit to her fear lest the nun should see 
me with her, to her natur curiosity, and to the affect which she 
still felt for me in spite of my suppos desertion, at length 
prevailed. she told me that to grant my request at that moment wa 
impossible; but she engag to be in the same spot at eleven that 
night, and to convers with me for the last time. have obtain thi 
promis I releas her hand, and she fled back with rapid toward 
the convent. 

I commun my success to my ally, the old gardener: He point out 
an hide place where I might shelter myself till night without fear of 
a discovery. thither I betook myself at the hour when I ought to have 
retir with my suppos master, and wait impati for the 
appoint time. the chill of the night wa in my favour, sinc it 
kept the other nun confin to their cells. agn alon wa 
insens of the inclem of the air, and befor eleven join me at 
the spot which had wit our former interview. secur from 
interruption, I relat to her the true caus of my disappear on the 
fatal fifth of may. she wa evid much affect by my narrative: 
when it wa concluded, she confess the injustic of her suspicions, 
and blame herself for have taken the veil through despair at my 
ingratitude. 

'but now it is too late to repine!' she added; 'the die is thrown: I 
have pronounc my vows, and dedic myself to the servic of heaven. 
I am sensible, how ill I am calcul for a convent. My disgust at a 
monast life increas daily: ennui and discont are my constant 
companions; and I will not conceal from you that the passion which I 
formerli felt for one so near be my husband is not yet extinguish 
in my bosom. but we must part! insuper barrier divid us from 
each other, and on thi side the grave we must never meet again!' 

I now exert myself to prove that our union wa not so imposs as 
she seem to think it. I vaunt to her the cardinal-duk of lerma' 
influenc at the court of rome: I assur her that I should easili 
obtain a dispens from her vows; and I doubt not but don gaston 
would coincid with my views, when inform of my real name and long 
attachment. agn repli that sinc I encourag such an hope, I 
could know but littl of her father. liber and kind in everi other 
respect, superstit form the onli stain upon hi character. upon 
thi head He wa inflexible; He sacrif hi dearest interest to hi 
scruples, and would consid it an insult to suppos him capabl of 
authoris hi daughter to break her vow to heaven. 

'but suppose,' said I interrupt her; 'suppos that He should 
disapprov of our union; let him remain ignor of my proceedings, 
till I have rescu you from the prison in which you are now confined. 
onc my wife, you are free from hi authority: I need from him no 
pecuniari assistance; and when He see hi resent to be unavailing, 
He will doubtless restor you to hi favour. but let the worst happen; 
should don gaston be irreconcileable, my relat will vie with each 
other in make you forget hi loss: and you will find in my father a 
substitut for the parent of whom I shall depriv you.' 

'don raymond,' repli agn in a firm and resolut voice, 'I love my 
father: He ha treat me harshli in thi one instance; but I have 
receiv from him in everi other so mani proof of love that hi 
affect is becom necessari to my existence. were I to quit the 
convent, He never would forgiv me; nor can I think that on hi 
deathb He would leav me hi curse, without shudder at the veri 
idea. besides, I am consciou myself, that my vow are binding: 
wil did I contract my engag with heaven; I cannot break it 
without a crime. then banish from your mind the idea of our be ever 
united. I am devot to religion; and howev I may griev at our 
separation, I would oppos obstacl myself, to what I feel would 
render me guilty.' 

I strove to overrul these ill-ground scruples: We were still 
disput upon the subject, when the convent bell summon the nun to 
matins. agn wa oblig to attend them; but she left me not till I 
had compel her to promis that on the follow night she would be 
at the same place at the same hour. these meet continu for 
sever week uninterrupted; and 'ti now, lorenzo, that I must implor 
your indulgence. reflect upon our situation, our youth, our long 
attachment: weigh all the circumst which attend our 
assignations, and you will confess the temptat to have been 
irresistible; you will even pardon me when I acknowledge, that in an 
unguard moment, the honour of agn wa sacrif to my passion.' 

(lorenzo' eye sparkl with fury: A deep crimson spread itself over 
hi face. He start from hi seat, and attempt to draw hi sword. 
the marqui wa awar of hi movement, and caught hi hand: He press 
it affectionately. 

'mi friend! My brother! hear me to the conclusion! till then restrain 
your passion, and be at least convinced, that if what I have relat is 
criminal, the blame must fall upon me, and not upon your sister.' 

lorenzo suffer himself to be prevail upon by don raymond' 
entreaties. He resum hi place, and listen to the rest of the 
narr with a gloomi and impati countenance. the marqui thu 
continued.) 

'scarc wa the first burst of passion past when agnes, recov 
herself, start from my arm with horror. she call me infam 
seducer, load me with the bitterest reproaches, and beat her bosom in 
all the wild of delirium. asham of my imprudence, I with 
difficulti found word to excus myself. I endeavour to consol her; 
I threw myself at her feet, and entreat her forgiveness. she forc 
her hand from me, which I had taken, and would have prest to my lips. 

'touch me not!' she cri with a violenc which terrifi me; 'monster 
of perfidi and ingratitude, how have I been deceiv in you! I look 
upon you as my friend, my protector: I trust myself in your hand 
with confidence, and reli upon your honour, thought that mine ran no 
risque. and 'ti by you, whom I adored, that I am cover with infamy! 
'ti by you that I have been seduc into break my vow to god, that 
I am reduc to a level with the basest of my sex! shame upon you, 
villain, you shall never see me more!' 

she start from the bank on which she wa seated. I endeavour to 
detain her; but she disengag herself from me with violence, and took 
refug in the convent. 

I retired, fill with confus and inquietude. the next morn I 
fail not as usual to appear in the garden; but agn wa no where to 
be seen. At night I wait for her at the place where we gener 
met; I found no better success. sever day and night pass away in 
the same manner. At length I saw my offend mistress cross the walk 
on whose border I wa working: she wa accompani by the same young 
pensioner, on whose arm she seem from weak oblig to support 
herself. she look upon me for a moment, but instantli turn her 
head away. I wait her return; but she pass on to the convent 
without pay ani attent to me, or the penit look with which I 
implor her forgiveness. 

As soon as the nun were retired, the old garden join me with a 
sorrow air. 

'segnor,' said he, 'it griev me to say, that I can be no longer of 
use to you. the ladi whom you use to meet ha just assur me that if 
I admit you again into the garden, she would discov the whole 
busi to the ladi prioress. she bade me tell you also, that your 
presenc wa an insult, and that if you still possess the least respect 
for her, you will never attempt to see her more. excus me then for 
inform you that I can favour your disguis no longer. should the 
prioress be acquaint with my conduct, she might not be content with 
dismiss me her service: out of reveng she might accus me of 
have profan the convent, and caus me to be thrown into the prison 
of the inquisition.' 

fruitless were my attempt to conquer hi resolution. He deni me all 
futur entranc into the garden, and agn persev in neither 
let me see or hear from her. In about a fortnight after, a violent 
ill which had seiz my father oblig me to set out for andalusia. 
I hasten thither, and as I imagined, found the marqui at the point 
of death. though on it first appear hi complaint wa declar 
mortal, He linger out sever months; dure which my attend upon 
him dure hi malady, and the occup of settl hi affair after 
hi decease, permit not my quit andalusia. within these four 
day I return to madrid, and on arriv at my hotel, I there found 
thi letter wait for me. 

(here the marqui unlock the drawer of a cabinet: He took out a 
fold paper, which He present to hi auditor. lorenzo open it, 
and recognis hi sister' hand. the content were as follows. 

into what an abyss of miseri have you plung me! raymond, you forc 
me to becom as crimin as yourself. I had resolv never to see you 
more; if possible, to forget you; If not, onli to rememb you with 
hate. A be for whom I alreadi feel a mother' tenderness, solicit 
me to pardon my seducer, and appli to hi love for the mean of 
preservation. raymond, your child live in my bosom. I trembl at the 
vengeanc of the prioress; I trembl much for myself, yet more for the 
innoc creatur whose exist depend upon mine. both of us are 
lost, should my situat be discovered. advis me then what step to 
take, but seek not to see me. the gardener, who undertak to deliv 
this, is dismissed, and we have noth to hope from that quarter: the 
man engag in hi place is of incorrupt fidelity. the best mean 
of convey to me your answer, is by conceal it under the great 
statu of st. francis, which stand in the capuchin cathedral. thither 
I go everi thursday to confession, and shall easili have an opportun 
of secur your letter. I hear that you are now absent from madrid; 
need I entreat you to write the veri moment of your return? I will not 
think it. ah! raymond! mine is a cruel situation! deceiv by my 
nearest relations, compel to embrac a profess the duti of 
which I am ill-calcul to perform, consciou of the sanctiti of 
those duties, and seduc into violat them by one whom I least 
suspect of perfidy, I am now oblig by circumst to chuse 
between death and perjury. woman' timidity, and matern affection, 
permit me not to balanc in the choice. I feel all the guilt into 
which I plung myself, when I yield to the plan which you befor 
propos to me. My poor father' death which ha taken place sinc we 
met, ha remov one obstacle. He sleep in hi grave, and I no longer 
dread hi anger. but from the anger of god, oh! raymond! who shall 
shield me? who can protect me against my conscience, against myself? 
I dare not dwell upon these thoughts; they will drive me mad. I have 
taken my resolution: procur a dispens from my vows; I am readi 
to fli with you. write to me, my husband! tell me, that absenc ha 
not abat your love, tell me that you will rescu from death your 
unborn child, and it unhappi mother. I live in all the agoni of 
terror: everi eye which is fix upon me seem to read my secret and 
my shame. and you are the caus of those agonies! oh! when my heart 
first love you, how littl did it suspect you of make it feel such 
pangs! 

agnes. 

have perus the letter, lorenzo restor it in silence. the marqui 
replac it in the cabinet, and then proceeded.) 

'excess wa my joy at read thi intellig so 
earnestly-desired, so littl expected. My plan wa soon arranged. 
when don gaston discov to me hi daughter' retreat, I entertain 
no doubt of her readi to quit the convent: I had, therefore, 
entrust the cardinal-duk of lerma with the whole affair, who 
immedi busi himself in obtain the necessari bull. 
fortun I had afterward neglect to stop hi proceedings. not 
long sinc I receiv a letter from him, state that He expect daili 
to receiv the order from the court of rome. upon thi I would 
willingli have relyed: but the cardin wrote me word, that I must 
find some mean of convey agn out of the convent, unknown to the 
prioress. He doubt not but thi latter would be much incens by 
lose a person of such high rank from her society, and consid the 
renunci of agn as an insult to her house. He repres her as 
a woman of a violent and reveng character, capabl of proceed to 
the greatest extremities. It wa therefor to be feared, lest by 
confin agn in the convent she should frustrat my hopes, and 
render the pope' mandat unavailing. influenc by thi 
consideration, I resolv to carri off my mistress, and conceal her 
till the arriv of the expect bull in the cardinal-duke' estate. 
He approv of my design, and profest himself readi to give a shelter 
to the fugitive. I next caus the new garden of st. clare to be 
seiz privately, and confin in my hotel. By thi mean I becam 
master of the key to the garden door, and I had now noth more to do 
than prepar agn for the elopement. thi wa done by the letter, 
which you saw me deliv thi evening. I told her in it, that I should 
be readi to receiv her at twelv tomorrow night, that I had secur 
the key of the garden, and that she might depend upon a speedi release. 

you have now, lorenzo, heard the whole of my long narrative. I have 
noth to say in my excuse, save that my intent toward your 
sister have been ever the most honourable: that it ha alway been, 
and still is my design to make her my wife: and that I trust, when you 
consid these circumstances, our youth, and our attachment, you will 
not onli forgiv our momentari laps from virtue, but will aid me in 
repair my fault to agnes, and secur a law titl to her person 
and her heart. 



chapter II 

O you! whom vanity' light bark convey 
On fame' mad voyag by the wind of praise, 
with what a shift gale your cours you ply, 
for ever sunk too low, or born too high! 
who pant for glori find but short repose, 
A breath reviv him, and a breath o'er-throws. 
pope. 

here the marqui conclud hi adventures. lorenzo, befor He could 
determin on hi reply, past some moment in reflection. At length He 
broke silence. 

'raymond,' said He take hi hand, 'strict honour would oblig me to 
wash off in your blood the stain thrown upon my family; but the 
circumst of your case forbid me to consid you as an enemy. the 
temptat wa too great to be resisted. 'ti the superstit of my 
relat which ha occas these misfortunes, and they are more the 
offend than yourself and agnes. what ha past between you cannot be 
recalled, but may yet be repair by unit you to my sister. you 
have ever been, you still continu to be, my dearest and inde my onli 
friend. I feel for agn the truest affection, and there is no one on 
whom I would bestow her more willingli than on yourself. pursu then 
your design. I will accompani you tomorrow night, and conduct her 
myself to the hous of the cardinal. My presenc will be a sanction 
for her conduct, and prevent her incur blame by her flight from the 
convent.' 

the marqui thank him in term by no mean defici in gratitude. 
lorenzo then inform him that He had noth more to apprehend from 
donna rodolpha' enmity. five month had alreadi elaps since, in an 
excess of passion, she broke a blood-vessel and expir in the cours 
of a few hours. He then proceed to mention the interest of antonia. 
the marqui wa much surpriz at hear of thi new relation: hi 
father had carri hi hatr of elvira to the grave, and had never 
given the least hint that He knew what wa becom of hi eldest son' 
widow. don raymond assur hi friend that He wa not mistaken in 
suppos him readi to acknowledg hi sister-in-law and her amiabl 
daughter. the prepar for the elop would not permit hi 
visit them the next day; but in the meanwhil He desir lorenzo to 
assur them of hi friendship, and to suppli elvira upon hi account 
with ani sum which she might want. thi the youth promis to do, as 
soon as her abod should be known to him: He then took leav of hi 
futur brother, and return to the palac de medina. 

the day wa alreadi on the point of break when the marqui retir 
to hi chamber. consciou that hi narr would take up some hours, 
and wish to secur himself from interrupt on return to the 
hotel, He order hi attend not to sit up for him. consequently, 
He wa somewhat surpris on enter hi antiroom, to find theodor 
establish there. the page sat near a tabl with a pen in hi hand, 
and wa so total occupi by hi employ that He perceiv not hi 
lord' approach. the marqui stop to observ him. theodor wrote a 
few lines, then paused, and scratch out a part of the writing: then 
wrote again, smiled, and seem highli pleas with what He had been 
about. At last He threw down hi pen, sprang from hi chair, and 
clap hi hand togeth joyfully. 

'there it is!' cri He aloud: 'now they are charming!' 

hi transport were interrupt by a laugh from the marquis, who 
suspect the natur of hi employment. 

'what is so charming, theodore?' 

the youth started, and look round. He blushed, ran to the table, 
seiz the paper on which He had been writing, and conceal it in 
confusion. 

'oh! my lord, I knew not that you were so near me. can I be of use to 
you? luca is alreadi gone to bed.' 

'I shall follow hi exampl when I have given my opinion of your 
verses.' 

'mi verses, my lord?' 

'nay, I am sure that you have been write some, for noth els could 
have kept you awak till thi time of the morning. where are they, 
theodore? I shall like to see your composition.' 

theodore' cheek glow with still deeper crimson: He long to show 
hi poetry, but first chose to be press for it. 

'indeed, my lord, they are not worthi your attention.' 

'not these verses, which you just now declar to be so charming? 

come, come, let me see whether our opinion are the same. I promis 
that you shall find in me an indulg critic.' 

the boy produc hi paper with seem reluctance; but the 
satisfact which sparkl in hi dark express eye betray the 
vaniti of hi littl bosom. the marqui smile while He observ the 
emot of an heart as yet but littl skill in veil it 
sentiments. He seat himself upon a sopha: theodore, while hope and 
fear contend on hi anxiou countenance, wait with inquietud for 
hi master' decision, while the marqui read the follow lines. 

love and age 

the night wa dark; the wind blew cold; 
anacreon, grown moros and old, 
sat by hi fire, and fed the chear flame: 
sudden the cottage-door expands, 
and lo! befor him cupid stands, 
cast round a friendli glance, and greet him by hi name. 

'what is it thou?' the startl sire 
In sullen tone exclaimed, while ire 
with crimson flush hi pale and wrinkl cheek: 
'wouldst thou again with amor rage 
inflam my bosom? steel by age, 
vain boy, to pierc my breast thine arrow are too weak. 

'what seek you in thi desart drear? 
No smile or sport inhabit here; 
ne'er did these valli wit dallianc sweet: 
etern winter bind the plains; 
age in my hous despot reigns, 
My garden boast no flower, my bosom boast no heat. 

'begone, and seek the bloom bower, 
where some ripe virgin court thi power, 
Or bid provok dream flit round her bed; 
On damon' amor breast repose; 
wanton--on chloe' lip of rose, 
Or make her blush cheek a pillow for thi head. 

'be such thi haunts; these region cold 
avoid! nor think grown wise and old 
thi hoari head again thi yoke shall bear: 
rememb that my fairest year 
By thee were mark with sigh and tears, 
I think thi friendship false, and shun the guil snare. 

'I have not yet forgot the pain 
I felt, while bound in julia' chains; 
the ardent flame with which my bosom burned; 
the night I pass depriv of rest; 
the jealou pang which rack my breast; 
My disappoint hopes, and passion unreturned. 

'then fly, and curs mine eye no more! 
fli from my peac cottage-door! 
No day, no hour, no moment shalt thou stay. 
I know thi falsehood, scorn thi arts, 
distrust thi smiles, and fear thi darts; 
traitor, begone, and seek some other to betray!' 

'doe age, old man, your wit confound?' 
repli the offend god, and frowned; 
(hi frown wa sweet as is the virgin' smile!) 
'do you to Me these word address? 
To me, who do not love you less, 
though you my friendship scorn, and pleasur past revile! 

'if one proud fair you chanc to find, 
An hundr other nymph were kind, 
whose smile might well for julia' frown atone: 
but such is man! hi partial hand 
unnumb favour write on sand, 
but stamp one littl fault on solid last stone. 

'ingrate! who led thee to the wave, 
At noon where lesbia love to lave? 
who name the bower alon where daphn lay? 
and who, when caelia shriek for aid, 
bad you with kiss hush the maid? 
what other was't than love, oh! fals anacreon, say! 

'then you could call me--"gentl boy! 
"mi onli bliss! my sourc of joy!"-- 
then you could prize me dearer than your soul! 
could kiss, and danc me on your knees; 
and swear, not wine itself would please, 
had not the lip of love first touch the flow bowl! 

'must those sweet day return no more? 
must I for aye your loss deplore, 
banish your heart, and from your favour driven? 
ah! no; My fear that smile denies; 
that heav breast, those sparkl eye 
declar me ever dear and all my fault forgiven. 

'again beloved, esteemed, carest, 
cupid shall in thine arm be prest, 
sport on thi knees, or on thi bosom sleep: 
My torch thine age-struck heart shall warm; 
My hand pale winter' rage disarm, 
and youth and spring shall here onc more their revel keep.'-- 

A feather now of golden hue 
He smile from hi pinion drew; 
thi to the poet' hand the boy commits; 
and straight befor anacreon' eye 
the fairest dream of fanci rise, 
and round hi favour head wild inspir flits. 

hi bosom glow with amor fire 
eager He grasp the magic lyre; 
swift o'er the tune chord hi finger move: 
the feather pluck from cupid' wing 
sweep the too-long-neglect string, 
while soft anacreon sing the power and prais of love. 

soon as that name wa heard, the wood 
shook off their snows; the melt flood 
broke their cold chains, and winter fled away. 
onc more the earth wa deckt with flowers; 
mild zephyr breath through bloom bowers; 
high tower the gloriou sun, and pour the blaze of day. 

attract by the harmoni sound, 
sylvan and faun the cot surround, 
and curiou crowd the minstrel to behold: 
the wood-nymph hast the spell to prove; 
eager they run; they list, they love, 
and while they hear the strain, forget the man is old. 

cupid, to noth constant long, 
perch on the harp attend the song, 
Or stifl with a kiss the dulcet notes: 
now on the poet' breast reposes, 
now twine hi hoari lock with roses, 
Or born on wing of gold in wanton circl floats. 

then thu anacreon--'i no more 
At other shrine my vow will pour, 
sinc cupid deign my number to inspire: 
from phoebu or the blue-ey maid 
now shall my vers request no aid, 
for love alon shall be the patron of my lyre. 

'in lofti strain, of earlier days, 
I spread the king' or hero' praise, 
and struck the martial chord with epic fire: 
but farewell, hero! farewell, king! 
your deed my lip no more shall sing, 
for love alon shall be the subject of my lyre. 


the marqui return the paper with a smile of encouragement. 

'your littl poem pleas me much,' said he; 'however, you must not 
count my opinion for anything. I am no judg of verses, and for my own 
part, never compos more than six line in my life: those six produc 
so unlucki an effect that I am fulli resolv never to compos another. 
but I wander from my subject. I wa go to say that you cannot 
employ your time wors than in make verses. An author, whether good 
or bad, or between both, is an anim whom everybodi is privileg to 
attack; for though all are not abl to write books, all conceiv 
themselv abl to judg them. A bad composit carri with it it 
own punishment, contempt and ridicule. A good one excit envy, and 
entail upon it author a thousand mortifications. He find himself 
assail by partial and ill-humour criticism: one man find fault 
with the plan, anoth with the style, a third with the precept, which 
it strive to inculcate; and they who cannot succeed in find fault 
with the book, employ themselv in stigmat it author. they 
malici rake out from obscur everi littl circumst which may 
throw ridicul upon hi privat charact or conduct, and aim at 
wound the man, sinc they cannot hurt the writer. In short, to 
enter the list of literatur is wil to expos yourself to the 
arrow of neglect, ridicule, envy, and disappointment. whether you 
write well or ill, be assur that you will not escap from blame; 
inde thi circumst contain a young author' chief consolation: 
He rememb that lope de vega and calderona had unjust and enviou 
critics, and He modestli conceiv himself to be exactli in their 
predicament. but I am consciou that all these sage observ are 
thrown away upon you. authorship is a mania to conquer which no 
reason are suffici strong; and you might as easili persuad me 
not to love, as I persuad you not to write. however, if you cannot 
help be occasion seiz with a poetic paroxysm, take at least 
the precaut of commun your vers to none but those whose 
partial for you secur their approbation.' 

'then, my lord, you do not think these line tolerable?' said theodor 
with an humbl and deject air. 

'you mistak my meaning. As I said before, they have pleas me much; 
but my regard for you make me partial, and other might judg them 
less favourably. I must still remark that even my prejudic in your 
favour doe not blind me so much as to prevent my observ sever 
faults. for instance, you make a terribl confus of metaphors; you 
are too apt to make the strength of your line consist more in the 
word than sense; some of the vers onli seem introduc in order to 
rhyme with others; and most of the best idea are borrow from other 
poets, though possibl you are unconsci of the theft yourself. 
these fault may occasion be excus in a work of length; but a 
short poem must be correct and perfect.' 

'all thi is true, segnor; but you should consid that I onli write 
for pleasure.' 

'your defect are the less excusable. their incorrect may be 
forgiven in those who work for money, who are oblig to compleat a 
given task in a given time, and are paid accord to the bulk, not 
valu of their productions. but in those whom no necess forc to 
turn author, who mere write for fame, and have full leisur to polish 
their compositions, fault are impardonable, and merit the sharpest 
arrow of criticism.' 

the marqui rose from the sopha; the page look discourag and 
melancholy, and thi did not escap hi master' observation. 

'however' ad He smiling, 'I think that these line do you no 
discredit. your versif is toler easy, and your ear seem to 
be just. the perus of your littl poem upon the whole gave me much 
pleasure; and if it is not ask too great a favour, I shall be highli 
oblig to you for a copy.' 

the youth' counten immedi clear up. He perceiv not the 
smile, half approving, half ironical, which accompani the request, 
and He promis the copi with great readiness. the marqui withdrew to 
hi chamber, much amus by the instantan effect produc upon 
theodore' vaniti by the conclus of hi criticism. He threw himself 
upon hi couch; sleep soon stole over him, and hi dream present him 
with the most flatter pictur of happi with agnes. 

On reach the hotel de medina, lorenzo' first care wa to enquir 
for letters. He found sever wait for him; but that which He 
sought wa not amongst them. leonella had found it imposs to write 
that evening. however, her impati to secur don christoval' 
heart, on which she flatter herself with have made no slight 
impression, permit her not to pass anoth day without inform him 
where she wa to be found. On her return from the capuchin church, she 
had relat to her sister with exult how attent an handsom 
cavali had been to her; as also how hi companion had undertaken to 
plead antonia' caus with the marqui de la cisternas. elvira 
receiv thi intellig with sensat veri differ from those 
with which it wa communicated. she blame her sister' imprud in 
confid her histori to an absolut stranger, and express her fear 
lest thi inconsider step should prejudic the marqui against her. 
the greatest of her apprehens she conceal in her own breast. she 
had observ with inquietud that at the mention of lorenzo, a deep 
blush spread itself over her daughter' cheek. the timid antonia dare 
not to pronounc hi name: without know wherefore, she felt 
embarrass when He wa made the subject of discourse, and endeavour 
to chang the convers to ambrosio. elvira perceiv the emot 
of thi young bosom: In consequence, she insist upon leonella' 
break her promis to the cavaliers. A sigh, which on hear thi 
order escap from antonia, confirm the wari mother in her resolution. 

through thi resolut leonella wa determin to break: she 
conceiv it to be inspir by envy, and that her sister dread her 
be elev abov her. without impart her design to anyone, she 
took an opportun of dispatch the follow note to lorenzo; It 
wa deliv to him as soon as He woke. 

'doubtless, segnor don lorenzo, you have frequent accus me of 
ingratitud and forgetfulness: but on the word of a virgin, it wa out 
of my power to perform my promis yesterday. I know not in what word 
to inform you how strang a recept my sister gave your kind wish to 
visit her. she is an odd woman, with mani good point about her; but 
her jealousi of me frequent make her conceiv notion quit 
unaccountable. On hear that your friend had paid some littl 
attent to me, she immedi took the alarm: she blame my 
conduct, and ha absolut forbidden me to let you know our abode. My 
strong sens of gratitud for your kind offer of service, and ... 
shall I confess it? my desir to behold onc more the too amiabl don 
christoval, will not permit my obey her injunctions. I have 
therefor stolen a moment to inform you, that we lodg in the strada di 
san iago, four door from the palac d'albornos, and nearli opposit to 
the barber' miguel coello. enquir for donna elvira dalfa, sinc in 
complianc with her father-in-law' order, my sister continu to be 
call by her maiden name. At eight thi even you will be sure of 
find us: but let not a word drop which may rais a suspicion of my 
have written thi letter. should you see the cond d'ossorio, tell 
him ... I blush while I declar it ... 

tell him that hi presenc will be but too accept to the 
sympathet leonella. 

the latter sentenc were written in red ink, to express the blush of 
her cheek, while she commit an outrag upon her virgin modesty. 

lorenzo had no sooner perus thi note than He set out in search of 
don christoval. not be abl to find him in the cours of the day, 
He proceed to donna elvira' alone, to leonella' infinit 
disappointment. the domest by whom He sent up hi name, have 
alreadi declar hi ladi to be at home, she had no excus for refus 
hi visit: yet she consent to receiv it with much reluctance. that 
reluct wa increas by the chang which hi approach produc in 
antonia' countenance; nor wa it by ani mean abat when the youth 
himself appeared. the symmetri of hi person, anim of hi 
features, and natur eleg of hi manner and address, convinc 
elvira that such a guest must be danger for her daughter. she 
resolv to treat him with distant politeness, to declin hi servic 
with gratitud for the tender of them, and to make him feel, without 
offence, that hi futur visit would be far from acceptable. 

On hi entranc He found elvira, who wa indisposed, reclin upon a 
sopha: antonia sat by her embroideri frame, and leonella, in a 
pastor dress, held 'montemayor' diana.' In spite of her be the 
mother of antonia, lorenzo could not help expect to find in elvira 
leonella' true sister, and the daughter of 'a honest a painstak 
shoe-maker, as ani in cordova.' A singl glanc wa suffici to 
undec him. He beheld a woman whose features, though impair by 
time and sorrow, still bore the mark of distinguish beauty: A 
seriou digniti reign upon her countenance, but wa temper by a 
grace and sweet which render her truli enchanting. lorenzo 
fanci that she must have resembl her daughter in her youth, and 
readili excus the imprud of the late cond de la cisternas. she 
desir him to be seated, and immedi resum her place upon the 
sopha. 

antonia receiv him with a simpl reverence, and continu her work: 
her cheek were suffus with crimson, and she strove to conceal her 
emot by lean over her embroideri frame. her aunt also chose to 
play off her air of modesty; she affect to blush and tremble, and 
wait with her eye cast down to receive, as she expected, the 
compliment of don christoval. find after some time that no sign of 
hi approach wa given, she ventur to look round the room, and 
perceiv with vexat that medina wa unaccompanied. impati 
would not permit her wait for an explanation: interrupt lorenzo, 
who wa deliv raymond' message, she desir to know what wa 
becom of hi friend. 

he, who thought it necessari to maintain himself in her good graces, 
strove to consol her under her disappoint by commit a littl 
violenc upon truth. 

'ah! segnora,' He repli in a melancholi voic 'how griev will He be 
at lose thi opportun of pay you hi respects! A relation' 
ill ha oblig him to quit madrid in haste: but on hi return, He 
will doubtless seiz the first moment with transport to throw himself 
at your feet!' 

As He said this, hi eye met those of elvira: she punish hi 
falsehood suffici by dart at him a look express of 
displeasur and reproach. neither did the deceit answer hi intention. 
vex and disappoint leonella rose from her seat, and retir in 
dudgeon to her own apartment. 

lorenzo hasten to repair the fault, which had injur him in elvira' 
opinion. He relat hi convers with the marqui respect her: 
He assur her that raymond wa prepar to acknowledg her for hi 
brother' widow; and that till it wa in hi power to pay hi 
compliment to her in person, lorenzo wa commiss to suppli hi 
place. thi intellig reliev elvira from an heavi weight of 
uneasiness: she had now found a protector for the fatherless antonia, 
for whose futur fortun she had suffer the greatest apprehensions. 
she wa not spare of her thank to him who had interf so 
gener in her behalf; but still she gave him no invit to 
repeat hi visit. 

however, when upon rise to depart He request permiss to enquir 
after her health occasionally, the polit earnest of hi manner, 
gratitud for hi services, and respect for hi friend the marquis, 
would not admit of a refusal. she consent reluctantli to receiv 
him: He promis not to abus her goodness, and quit the house. 

antonia wa now left alon with her mother: A temporari silenc 
ensued. both wish to speak upon the same subject, but neither knew 
how to introduc it. the one felt a bash which seal up her 
lips, and for which she could not account: the other fear to find 
her apprehens true, or to inspir her daughter with notion to 
which she might be still a stranger. At length elvira began the 
conversation. 

'that is a charm young man, antonia; I am much pleas with him. 
wa He long near you yesterday in the cathedral?' 

'he quit me not for a moment while I staid in the church: He gave 
me hi seat, and wa veri oblig and attentive.' 

'indeed? whi then have you never mention hi name to me? your aunt 
lanch out in prais of hi friend, and you vaunt ambrosio' 
eloquence: but neither said a word of don lorenzo' person and 
accomplishments. had not leonella spoken of hi readi to undertak 
our cause, I should not have known him to be in existence.' 

she paused. antonia coloured, but wa silent. 

'perhap you judg him less favour than I do. In my opinion hi 
figur is pleasing, hi convers sensible, and manner engaging. 
still He may have struck you differently: you may think him 
disagreeable, and ...'. 

'disagreeable? oh! dear mother, how should I possibl think him so? I 
should be veri ungrat were I not sensibl of hi kind 
yesterday, and veri blind if hi merit had escap me. hi figur is 
so graceful, so noble! hi manner so gentle, yet so manly! I never 
yet saw so mani accomplish unit in one person, and I doubt 
whether madrid can produc hi equal.' 

'whi then were you so silent in prais of thi phoenix of madrid? 

whi wa it conceal from me that hi societi had afford you 
pleasure?' 

'in truth, I know not: you ask me a question which I cannot resolv 
myself. I wa on the point of mention him a thousand times: hi 
name wa constantli upon my lips, but when I would have pronounc it, 
I want courag to execut my design. however, if I did not speak of 
him, it wa not that I thought of him the less.' 

'that I believe; but shall I tell you whi you want courage? It wa 
because, accustom to confid to me your most secret thoughts, you 
knew not how to conceal, yet fear to acknowledge, that your heart 
nourish a sentiment which you were consciou I should disapprove. 
come hither to me, my child.' 

antonia quit her embroideri frame, threw herself upon her knee by 
the sopha, and hid her face in her mother' lap. 

'fear not, my sweet girl! consid me equal as your friend and 
parent, and apprehend no reproof from me. I have read the emot of 
your bosom; you are yet ill-skil in conceal them, and they could 
not escap my attent eye. thi lorenzo is danger to your repose; 
He ha alreadi made an impress upon your heart. 'ti true that I 
perceiv easili that your affect is returned; but what can be the 
consequ of thi attachment? you are poor and friendless, my 
antonia; lorenzo is the heir of the duke of medina celi. even should 
himself mean honourably, hi uncl never will consent to your union; 
nor without that uncle' consent, will I. By sad experi I know 
what sorrow she must endure, who marri into a famili unwil to 
receiv her. then struggl with your affection: whatev pain it may 
cost you, strive to conquer it. your heart is tender and susceptible: 
It ha alreadi receiv a strong impression; but when onc convinc 
that you should not encourag such sentiments, I trust, that you have 
suffici fortitud to drive them from your bosom.' 

antonia kiss her hand, and promis implicit obedience. elvira then 
continued. 

'to prevent your passion from grow stronger, it will be need to 
prohibit lorenzo' visits. the servic which He ha render me 
permit not my forbid them positively; but unless I judg too 
favour of hi character, He will discontinu them without take 
offence, if I confess to him my reasons, and throw myself entir on 
hi generosity. the next time that I see him, I will honestli avow to 
him the embarrass which hi presenc occasions. how say you, my 
child? Is not thi measur necessary?' 

antonia subscrib to everi thing without hesitation, though not 
without regret. her mother kiss her affectionately, and retir to 
bed. antonia follow her example, and vow so frequent never more 
to think of lorenzo, that till sleep close her eye she thought of 
noth else. 

while thi wa pass at elvira's, lorenzo hasten to rejoin the 
marquis. everi thing wa readi for the second elop of agnes; and 
at twelv the two friend with a coach and four were at the garden wall 
of the convent. don raymond drew out hi key, and unlock the door. 
they entered, and wait for some time in expect of be join 
by agnes. At length the marqui grew impatient: begin to fear 
that hi second attempt would succeed no better than the first, He 
propos to reconnoitr the convent. the friend advanc toward it. 
everi thing wa still and dark. the prioress wa anxiou to keep the 
stori a secret, fear lest the crime of one of it member should 
bring disgrac upon the whole community, or that the interposit of 
power relat should depriv her vengeanc of it intend victim. 
she took care therefor to give the lover of agn no caus to suppos 
that hi design wa discovered, and hi mistress on the point of 
suffer the punish of her fault. the same reason made her reject 
the idea of arrest the unknown seduc in the garden; such a 
proceed would have creat much disturbance, and the disgrac of her 
convent would have been nois about madrid. she content herself 
with confin agn closely; As to the lover, she left him at liberti 
to pursu hi designs. what she had expect wa the result. the 
marqui and lorenzo wait in vain till the break of day: they then 
retir without noise, alarm at the failur of their plan, and 
ignor of the caus of it ill-success. 

the next morn lorenzo went to the convent, and request to see hi 
sister. the prioress appear at the grate with a melancholi 
countenance: she inform him that for sever day agn had appear 
much agitated; that she had been prest by the nun in vain to reveal 
the cause, and appli to their tender for advic and consolation; 
that she had obstin persist in conceal the caus of her 
distress; but that on thursday even it had produc so violent an 
effect upon her constitution, that she had fallen ill, and wa actual 
confin to her bed. lorenzo did not credit a syllabl of thi 
account: He insist upon see hi sister; If she wa unabl to come 
to the grate, He desir to be admit to her cell. the prioress 
cross herself! she wa shock at the veri idea of a man' profan 
eye pervad the interior of her holi mansion, and profess herself 
astonish that lorenzo could think of such a thing. she told him that 
hi request could not be granted; but that if He return the next day, 
she hope that her belov daughter would then be suffici 
recov to join him at the parlour grate. 

with thi answer lorenzo wa oblig to retire, unsatisfi and 
trembl for hi sister' safety. 

He return the next morn at an earli hour. 'agn wa worse; the 
physician had pronounc her to be in immin danger; she wa order 
to remain quiet, and it wa utterli imposs for her to receiv her 
brother' visit.' lorenzo storm at thi answer, but there wa no 
resource. He raved, He entreated, He threatened: No mean were left 
untri to obtain a sight of agnes. hi endeavour were as fruitless 
as those of the day before, and He return in despair to the marquis. 
On hi side, the latter had spare no pain to discov what had 
occas hi plot to fail: don christoval, to whom the affair wa 
now entrusted, endeavour to worm out the secret from the old 
porteress of st. clare, with whom He had form an acquaintance; but 
she wa too much upon her guard, and He gain from her no 
intelligence. the marqui wa almost distracted, and lorenzo felt 
scarc less inquietude. both were convinc that the purpos 
elop must have been discovered: they doubt not but the maladi 
of agn wa a pretence, but they knew not by what mean to rescu her 
from the hand of the prioress. 

regularli everi day did lorenzo visit the convent: As regularli wa He 
inform that hi sister rather grew wors than better. certain that 
her indisposit wa feigned, these account did not alarm him: but 
hi ignor of her fate, and of the motiv which induc the 
prioress to keep her from him, excit the most seriou uneasiness. He 
wa still uncertain what step He ought to take, when the marqui 
receiv a letter from the cardinal-duk of lerma. It inclos the 
pope' expect bull, order that agn should be releas from her 
vows, and restor to her relations. thi essenti paper decid at 
onc the proceed of her friends: they resolv that lorenzo should 
carri it to the domina without delay, and demand that hi sister should 
be instantli given up to him. against thi mandat ill could not 
be pleaded: It gave her brother the power of remov her instantli to 
the palac de medina, and He determin to use that power on the 
follow day. 

hi mind reliev from inquietud respect hi sister, and hi 
spirit rais by the hope of soon restor her to freedom, He now had 
time to give a few moment to love and to antonia. At the same hour as 
on hi former visit He repair to donna elvira's: she had given 
order for hi admission. As soon as He wa announced, her daughter 
retir with leonella, and when He enter the chamber, He found the 
ladi of the hous alone. she receiv him with less distanc than 
before, and desir him to place himself near her upon the sopha. she 
then without lose time open her business, as had been agre 
between herself and antonia. 

'you must not think me ungrateful, don lorenzo, or forget how 
essenti are the servic which you have render me with the marquis. 
I feel the weight of my obligations; noth under the sun should 
induc my take the step to which I am now compel but the interest 
of my child, of my belov antonia. My health is declining; god onli 
know how soon I may be summon befor hi throne. My daughter will 
be left without parents, and should she lose the protect of the 
cisterna family, without friends. 

she is young and artless, uninstruct in the world' perfidy, and with 
charm suffici to render her an object of seduction. judg then, how 
I must trembl at the prospect befor her! judg how anxiou I must be 
to keep her from their societi who may excit the yet dormant passion 
of her bosom. you are amiable, don lorenzo: antonia ha a 
susceptible, a love heart, and is grate for the favour confer 
upon us by your interfer with the marquis. your presenc make me 
tremble: I fear lest it should inspir her with sentiment which may 
embitt the remaind of her life, or encourag her to cherish hope 
in her situat unjustifi and futile. pardon me when I avow my 
terrors, and let my frank plead in my excuse. I cannot forbid you 
my house, for gratitud restrain me; I can onli throw myself upon your 
generosity, and entreat you to spare the feel of an anxious, of a 
dote mother. believ me when I assur you that I lament the 
necess of reject your acquaintance; but there is no remedy, and 
antonia' interest oblig me to beg you to forbear your visits. By 
compli with my request, you will increas the esteem which I alreadi 
feel for you, and of which everyth convinc me that you are truli 
deserving.' 

'your frank charm me,' repli lorenzo; 'you shall find that in 
your favour opinion of me you were not deceived. yet I hope that 
the reasons, now in my power to allege, will persuad you to withdraw a 
request which I cannot obey without infinit reluctance. I love your 
daughter, love her most sincerely: I wish for no greater happi 
than to inspir her with the same sentiments, and receiv her hand at 
the altar as her husband. 'ti true, I am not rich myself; My father' 
death ha left me but littl in my own possession; but my expect 
justifi my pretend to the cond de la cisternas' daughter.' 

He wa proceeding, but elvira interrupt him. 

'ah! don lorenzo, you forget in that pompou titl the mean of my 
origin. you forget that I have now past fourteen year in spain, 
disavow by my husband' family, and exist upon a stipend bare 
suffici for the support and educ of my daughter. nay, I have 
even been neglect by most of my own relations, who out of envi affect 
to doubt the realiti of my marriage. My allow be discontinu 
at my father-in-law' death, I wa reduc to the veri brink of want. 
In thi situat I wa found by my sister, who amongst all her foibl 
possess a warm, generous, and affection heart. she aid me with 
the littl fortun which my father left her, persuad me to visit 
madrid, and ha support my child and myself sinc our quit 
murcia. then consid not antonia as descend from the cond de la 
cisternas: consid her as a poor and unprotect orphan, as the 
grand-child of the tradesman torribio dalfa, as the needi pension of 
that tradesman' daughter. reflect upon the differ between such a 
situation, and that of the nephew and heir of the potent duke of 
medina. I believ your intent to be honourable; but as there are 
no hope that your uncl will approv of the union, I forese that the 
consequ of your attach must be fatal to my child' repose.' 

'pardon me, segnora; you are misinform if you suppos the duke of 
medina to resembl the gener of men. hi sentiment are liber 
and disinterested: He love me well; and I have no reason to dread hi 
forbid the marriag when He perceiv that my happi depend 
upon antonia. but suppos him to refus hi sanction, what have I 
still to fear? My parent are no more; My littl fortun is in my own 
possession: It will be suffici to support antonia, and I shall 
exchang for her hand medina' dukedom without one sigh of regret.' 

'you are young and eager; It is natur for you to entertain such 
ideas. but experi ha taught me to my cost that curs accompani 
an unequ alliance. I marri the cond de la cisterna in 
opposit to the will of hi relations; mani an heart-pang ha 
punish me for the imprud step. whereev we bent our course, a 
father' execr pursu gonzalvo. poverti overtook us, and no 
friend wa near to reliev our wants. still our mutual affect 
existed, but alas! not without interruption. 

accustom to wealth and ease, ill could my husband support the 
transit to distress and indigence. He look back with repin to 
the comfort which He onc enjoyed. He regret the situat which 
for my sake He had quitted; and in moment when despair possess hi 
mind, ha reproach me with have made him the companion of want and 
wretchedness! He ha call me hi bane! the sourc of hi sorrows, 
the caus of hi destruction! Ah god! He littl knew how much keener 
were my own heart' reproaches! He wa ignor that I suffer 
trebly, for myself, for my children, and for him! 'ti true that hi 
anger seldom last long: hi sincer affect for me soon reviv in 
hi heart; and then hi repent for the tear which He had made me 
shed tortur me even more than hi reproaches. He would throw himself 
on the ground, implor my forgiv in the most frantic terms, and 
load himself with curs for be the murder of my repose. taught 
by experi that an union contract against the inclin of 
famili on either side must be unfortunate, I will save my daughter 
from those miseri which I have suffered. without your uncle' 
consent, while I live, she never shall be yours. undoubtedli He will 
disapprov of the union; hi power is immense, and antonia shall not be 
expos to hi anger and persecution.' 

'hi persecution? how easili may that be avoided! let the worst 
happen, it is but quit spain. My wealth may easili be realised; 
the indian island will offer us a secur retreat; I have an estate, 
though not of value, in hispaniola: thither will we fly, and I shall 
consid it to be my nativ country, if it give me antonia' 
undisturb possession.' 

'ah! youth, thi is a fond romant vision. gonzalvo thought the same. 
He fanci that He could leav spain without regret; but the moment of 
part undeceiv him. you know not yet what it is to quit your 
nativ land; to quit it, never to behold it more! 

you know not, what it is to exchang the scene where you have pass 
your infancy, for unknown realm and barbar climates! To be 
forgotten, utterli etern forgotten, by the companion of your 
youth! To see your dearest friends, the fondest object of your 
affection, perish with diseas incident to indian atmospheres, 
and find yourself unabl to procur for them necessari assistance! I 
have felt all this! My husband and two sweet babe found their grave 
in cuba: noth would have save my young antonia but my sudden 
return to spain. ah! don lorenzo, could you conceiv what I suffer 
dure my absence! could you know how sore I regret all that I 
left behind, and how dear to me wa the veri name of spain! I envi 
the wind which blew toward it: and when the spanish sailor chaunt 
some well-known air as He past my window, tear fill my eye while I 
thought upon my nativ land. gonzalvo too ... My husband ...'. 

elvira paused. her voic faltered, and she conceal her face with her 
handkerchief. after a short silenc she rose from the sopha, and 
proceeded. 

'excus my quit you for a few moments: the remembr of what I 
have suffer ha much agit me, and I need to be alone. till I 
return perus these lines. after my husband' death I found them among 
hi papers; had I known sooner that He entertain such sentiments, 
grief would have kill me. He wrote these vers on hi voyag to 
cuba, when hi mind wa cloud by sorrow, and He forgot that He had a 
wife and children. 

what we are losing, ever seem to us the most precious: gonzalvo wa 
quit spain for ever, and therefor wa spain dearer to hi eye 
than all els which the world contained. read them, don lorenzo; they 
will give you some idea of the feel of a banish man!' 

elvira put a paper into lorenzo' hand, and retir from the chamber. 
the youth examin the contents, and found them to be as follows. 

the exil 

farewell, oh! nativ spain! farewel for ever! 
these banish eye shall view thi coast no more; 
A mourn presag tell my heart, that never 
gonzalvo' step again shall press thi shore. 

hush are the winds; while soft the vessel sail 
with gentl motion plow the unruffl main, 
I feel my bosom' boast courag failing, 
and curs the wave which bear me far from spain. 

I see it yet! beneath yon blue clear heaven 
still do the spires, so well beloved, appear; 
from yonder craggi point the gale of even 
still waft my nativ accent to mine ear: 

prop on some moss-crown rock, and gaili singing, 
there in the sun hi net the fisher dries; 
oft have I heard the plaintiv ballad, bring 
scene of past joy befor my sorrow eyes. 

ah! happi swain! He wait the accustom hour, 
when twilight-gloom obscur the close sky; 
then gladli seek hi love patern bower, 
and share the feast hi nativ field supply: 

friendship and love, hi cottag guests, receiv him 
with honest welcom and with smile sincere; 
No threaten woe of present joy bereav him, 
No sigh hi bosom owns, hi cheek no tear. 

ah! happi swain! such bliss to me denying, 
fortun thi lot with envi bid me view; 
me, who from home and spain an exil flying, 
bid all I value, all I love, adieu. 

No more mine ear shall list the well-known ditti 
sung by some mountain-girl, who tend her goats, 
some village-swain implor amor pity, 
Or shepherd chaunt wild hi rustic notes: 

No more my arm a parent' fond embraces, 
No more my heart domest calm, must know; 
far from these joys, with sigh which memori traces, 
To sultri skies, and distant clime I go. 

where indian sun engend new diseases, 
where snake and tiger breed, I bend my way 
To brave the feverish thirst no art appeases, 
the yellow plague, and mad blaze of day: 

but not to feel slow pang consum my liver, 
To die by piece-m in the bloom of age, 
My boil blood drank by insati fever, 
and brain deliri with the day-star' rage, 

can make me know such grief, as thu to sever 
with mani a bitter sigh, dear land, from thee; 
To feel thi heart must doat on thee for ever, 
and feel, that all thi joy are torn from me! 

Ah me! how oft will fancy' spell in slumber 
recal my nativ countri to my mind! 
how oft regret will bid me sadli number 
each lost delight and dear friend left behind! 

wild murcia' vales, and love romant bowers, 
the river on whose bank a child I played, 
My castle' antient halls, it frown towers, 
each much-regret wood, and well-known glade, 

dream of the land where all my wish centre, 
thi scenes, which I am doom no more to know, 
full oft shall memori trace, my soul' tormentor, 
and turn each pleasur past to present woe. 

but lo! the sun beneath the wave retires; 
night speed apac her empir to restore: 
cloud from my sight obscur the village-spires, 
now seen but faintly, and now seen no more. 

oh! breath not, winds! still be the water' motion! 
sleep, sleep, my bark, in silenc on the main! 
So when to-morrow' light shall gild the ocean, 
onc more mine eye shall see the coast of spain. 

vain is the wish! My last petit scorning, 
fresh blow the gale, and high the billow swell: 
far shall we be befor the break of morning; 
oh! then for ever, nativ spain, farewell! 


lorenzo had scarc time to read these lines, when elvira return to 
him: the give a free cours to her tear had reliev her, and her 
spirit had regain their usual composure. 

'I have noth more to say, my lord,' said she; 'you have heard my 
apprehensions, and my reason for beg you not to repeat your 
visits. I have thrown myself in full confid upon your honour: I 
am certain that you will not prove my opinion of you to have been too 
favourable.' 

'but one question more, segnora, and I leav you. should the duke of 
medina approv my love, would my address be unaccept to yourself 
and the fair antonia?' 

'I will be open with you, don lorenzo: there be littl probabl 
of such an union take place, I fear that it is desir but too 
ardent by my daughter. you have made an impress upon her young 
heart, which give me the most seriou alarm: To prevent that 
impress from grow stronger, I am oblig to declin your 
acquaintance. for me, you may be sure that I should rejoic at 
establish my child so advantageously. consciou that my 
constitution, impair by grief and illness, forbid me to expect a 
long continu in thi world, I trembl at the thought of leav her 
under the protect of a perfect stranger. the marqui de la 
cisterna is total unknown to me: 

He will marry; hi ladi may look upon antonia with an eye of 
displeasure, and depriv her of her onli friend. should the duke, your 
uncle, give hi consent, you need not doubt obtain mine, and my 
daughter's: but without his, hope not for ours. At all events, what 
ever step you may take, what ever may be the duke' decision, till you 
know it let me beg your forbear to strengthen by your presenc 
antonia' prepossession. If the sanction of your relat authoris 
your address her as your wife, my door fli open to you: If that 
sanction is refused, be satisfi to possess my esteem and gratitude, 
but remember, that we must meet no more.' 

lorenzo promis reluctantli to conform to thi decree: but He ad 
that He hope soon to obtain that consent which would give him a claim 
to the renew of their acquaintance. He then explain to her whi the 
marqui had not call in person, and made no scrupl of confid to 
her hi sister' history. He conclud by say that He hope to set 
agn at liberti the next day; and that as soon as don raymond' fear 
were quiet upon thi subject, He would lose no time in assur donna 
elvira of hi friendship and protection. 

the ladi shook her head. 

'I trembl for your sister,' said she; 'I have heard mani trait of the 
domina of st. clare' character, from a friend who wa educ in the 
same convent with her. she report her to be haughty, inflexible, 
superstitious, and revengeful. I have sinc heard that she is 
infatu with the idea of render her convent the most regular in 
madrid, and never forgav those whose imprud threw upon it the 
slightest stain. though natur violent and severe, when her 
interest requir it, she well know how to assum an appear of 
benignity. she leav no mean untri to persuad young women of rank 
to becom member of her community: she is implac when onc 
incensed, and ha too much intrepid to shrink at take the most 
rigor measur for punish the offender. doubtless, she will 
consid your sister' quit the convent as a disgrac thrown upon 
it: she will use everi artific to avoid obey the mandat of hi 
holiness, and I shudder to think that donna agn is in the hand of 
thi danger woman.' 

lorenzo now rose to take leave. elvira gave him her hand at parting, 
which He kiss respectfully; and tell her that He soon hope for 
the permiss to salut that of antonia, He return to hi hotel. 
the ladi wa perfectli satisfi with the convers which had past 
between them. she look forward with satisfact to the prospect of 
hi becom her son-in-law; but prudenc bad her conceal from her 
daughter' knowledg the flatter hope which herself now ventur to 
entertain. 

scarc wa it day, and alreadi lorenzo wa at the convent of st. 
clare, furnish with the necessari mandate. the nun were at matins. 
He wait impati for the conclus of the service, and at length 
the prioress appear at the parlour grate. agn wa demanded. the 
old ladi replied, with a melancholi air, that the dear child' 
situat grew hourli more dangerous; that the physician despair of 
her life; but that they had declar the onli chanc for her recoveri 
to consist in keep her quiet, and not to permit those to approach 
her whose presenc wa like to agit her. not a word of all thi 
wa believ by lorenzo, ani more than He credit the express of 
grief and affect for agnes, with which thi account wa interlarded. 
To end the business, He put the pope' bull into the hand of the 
domina, and insist that, ill or in health, hi sister should be 
deliv to him without delay. 

the prioress receiv the paper with an air of humility: but no sooner 
had her eye glanc over the contents, than her resent baffl all 
the effort of hypocrisy. A deep crimson spread itself over her face, 
and she dart upon lorenzo look of rage and menace. 

'thi order is positive,' said she in a voic of anger, which she in 
vain strove to disguise; 'willingli would I obey it; but unfortun 
it is out of my power.' 

lorenzo interrupt her by an exclam of surprize. 

'I repeat it, segnor; to obey thi order is total out of my power. 
from tender to a brother' feelings, I would have commun the 
sad event to you by degrees, and have prepar you to hear it with 
fortitude. My measur are broken through: thi order command me to 
deliv up to you the sister agn without delay; I am therefor 
oblig to inform you without circumlocution, that on friday last, she 
expired.' 

lorenzo start back with horror, and turn pale. A moment' 
recollect convinc him that thi assert must be false, and it 
restor him to himself. 

'you deceiv me!' said He passionately; 'but five minut past sinc 
you assur me that though ill she wa still alive. produc her thi 
instant! see her I must and will, and everi attempt to keep her from 
me will be unavailing.' 

'you forget yourself, segnor; you owe respect to my age as well as my 
profession. your sister is no more. If I at first conceal her 
death, it wa from dread lest an event so unexpect should produc 
on you too violent an effect. In truth, I am but ill repaid for my 
attention. and what interest, I pray you, should I have in detain 
her? To know her wish of quit our societi is a suffici reason 
for me to wish her absence, and think her a disgrac to the sisterhood 
of st. clare: but she ha forfeit my affect in a manner yet more 
culpable. her crime were great, and when you know the caus of her 
death, you will doubtless rejoice, don lorenzo, that such a wretch is 
no longer in existence. she wa taken ill on thursday last on 
return from confess in the capuchin chapel. her maladi seem 
attend with strang circumstances; but she persist in conceal 
it cause: thank to the virgin, we were too ignor to suspect it! 
judg then what must have been our consternation, our horror, when she 
wa deliv the next day of a stillborn child, whom she immedi 
follow to the grave. how, segnor? Is it possibl that your 
counten express no surprize, no indignation? Is it possibl that 
your sister' infami wa known to you, and that still she possess 
your affection? In that case, you have no need of my compassion. I 
can say noth more, except repeat my inabl of obey the order 
of hi holiness. agn is no more, and to convinc you that what I say 
is true, I swear by our bless saviour, that three day have past 
sinc she wa buried.' 

here she kiss a small crucifix which hung at her girdle. she then 
rose from her chair, and quit the parlour. As she withdrew, she 
cast upon lorenzo a scorn smile. 

'farewell, segnor,' said she; 'I know no remedi for thi accident: I 
fear that even a second bull from the pope will not procur your 
sister' resurrection.' 

lorenzo also retired, penetr with affliction: but don raymond' at 
the news of thi event amount to madness. He would not be convinc 
that agn wa realli dead, and continu to insist that the wall of 
st. clare still confin her. No argument could make him abandon hi 
hope of regain her: everi day some fresh scheme wa invent for 
procur intellig of her, and all of them were attend with the 
same success. 

On hi part, medina gave up the idea of ever see hi sister more: 
yet He believ that she had been taken off by unfair means. under 
thi persuasion, He encourag don raymond' researches, determined, 
should He discov the least warrant for hi suspicions, to take a 
sever vengeanc upon the unfeel prioress. the loss of hi sister 
affect him sincerely; nor wa it the least caus of hi distress that 
proprieti oblig him for some time to defer mention antonia to the 
duke. In the meanwhil hi emissari constantli surround elvira' 
door. He had intellig of all the movement of hi mistress: As she 
never fail everi thursday to attend the sermon in the capuchin 
cathedral, He wa secur of see her onc a week, though in 
complianc with hi promise, He care shun her observation. 
thu two long month pass away. still no inform wa procur of 
agnes: all but the marqui credit her death; and now lorenzo 
determin to disclos hi sentiment to hi uncle. He had alreadi 
dropt some hint of hi intent to marry; they had been as favour 
receiv as He could expect, and He harbour no doubt of the success 
of hi application. 



chapter iii 

while in each other' arm entranc they lay, 
they bless the night, and curst the come day. 
lee. 

the burst of transport wa past: ambrosio' lust wa satisfied; 
pleasur fled, and shame usurp her seat in hi bosom. confus and 
terrifi at hi weakness, He drew himself from matilda' arms. hi 
perjuri present itself befor him: He reflect on the scene which 
had just been acted, and trembl at the consequ of a discovery. 
He look forward with horror; hi heart wa despondent, and becam the 
abod of satieti and disgust. He avoid the eye of hi partner in 
frailty; A melancholi silenc prevailed, dure which both seem 
busi with disagre reflections. 

matilda wa the first to break it. she took hi hand gently, and 
press it to her burn lips. 

'ambrosio!' she murmur in a soft and trembl voice. 

the abbot start at the sound. He turn hi eye upon matilda's: 
they were fill with tears; her cheek were cover with blushes, and 
her supplic look seem to solicit hi compassion. 

'danger woman!' said he; 'into what an abyss of miseri have you 
plung me! should your sex be discovered, my honour, nay my life, 
must pay for the pleasur of a few moments. fool that I was, to trust 
myself to your seductions! what can now be done? how can my offenc be 
expiated? what aton can purchas the pardon of my crime? 
wretch matilda, you have destroy my quiet for ever!' 

'to me these reproaches, ambrosio? To me, who have sacrif for you 
the world' pleasures, the luxuri of wealth, the delicaci of sex, my 
friends, my fortune, and my fame? what have you lost, which I 
preserved? have _i_ not share in your guilt? have you not share in 
MY pleasure? guilt, did I say? In what consist ours, unless in the 
opinion of an ill-judg world? let that world be ignor of them, 
and our joy becom divin and blameless! unnatur were your vow of 
celibacy; man wa not creat for such a state; and were love a crime, 
god never would have made it so sweet, so irresistible! then banish 
those cloud from your brow, my ambrosio! indulg in those pleasur 
freely, without which life is a worthless gift: ceas to reproach me 
with have taught you what is bliss, and feel equal transport with 
the woman who ador you!' 

As she spoke, her eye were fill with a delici languor. her bosom 
panted: she twine her arm voluptu round him, drew him toward 
her, and glew her lip to his. ambrosio again rage with desire: 
the die wa thrown: hi vow were alreadi broken; He had alreadi 
commit the crime, and whi should He refrain from enjoy it 
reward? He clasp her to hi breast with redoubl ardour. No longer 
repress by the sens of shame, He gave a loos to hi intemper 
appetites. while the fair wanton put everi invent of lust in 
practice, everi refin in the art of pleasur which might heighten 
the bliss of her possession, and render her lover' transport still 
more exquisite, ambrosio riot in delight till then unknown to him: 
swift fled the night, and the morn blush to behold him still 
clasp in the embrac of matilda. 

intox with pleasure, the monk rose from the syren' luxuri 
couch. He no longer reflect with shame upon hi incontinence, or 
dread the vengeanc of offend heaven. hi onli fear wa lest death 
should rob him of enjoyments, for which hi long fast had onli given a 
keener edg to hi appetite. matilda wa still under the influenc of 
poison, and the voluptu monk trembl less for hi preserver' life 
than hi concubine's. depriv of her, He would not easili find 
anoth mistress with whom He could indulg hi passion so fully, and 
so safely. He therefor press her with earnest to use the mean 
of preserv which she had declar to be in her possession. 

'yes!' repli matilda; 'sinc you have made me feel that life is 
valuable, I will rescu mine at ani rate. No danger shall appal me: 
I will look upon the consequ of my action boldly, nor shudder at 
the horror which they present. I will think my sacrific scarc 
worthi to purchas your possession, and rememb that a moment past in 
your arm in thi world o'er-pay an age of punish in the next. 
but befor I take thi step, ambrosio, give me your solemn oath never 
to enquir by what mean I shall preserv myself.' 

He did so in a manner the most binding. 

'I thank you, my beloved. thi precaut is necessary, for though you 
know it not, you are under the command of vulgar prejudices: the 
busi on which I must be employ thi night, might startl you from 
it singularity, and lower me in your opinion. tell me; are you 
possess of the key of the low door on the western side of the garden?' 

'the door which open into the burying-ground common to us and the 
sisterhood of st. clare? I have not the key, but can easili procur 
it.' 

'you have onli thi to do. admit me into the burying-ground at 
midnight; watch while I descend into the vault of st. clare, lest some 
pri eye should observ my actions; leav me there alon for an hour, 
and that life is safe which I dedic to your pleasures. To prevent 
creat suspicion, do not visit me dure the day. rememb the key, 
and that I expect you befor twelve. hark! I hear step approaching! 
leav me; I will pretend to sleep.' 

the friar obeyed, and left the cell. As He open the door, father 
pablo made hi appearance. 

'I come,' said the latter, 'to enquir after the health of my young 
patient.' 

'hush!' repli ambrosio, lay hi finger upon hi lip; 'speak 
softly; I am just come from him. He ha fallen into a profound 
slumber, which doubtless will be of servic to him. Do not disturb him 
at present, for He wish to repose.' 

father pablo obeyed, and hear the bell ring, accompani the abbot 
to matins. ambrosio felt embarrass as He enter the chapel. guilt 
wa new to him, and He fanci that everi eye could read the 
transact of the night upon hi countenance. He strove to pray; hi 
bosom no longer glow with devotion; hi thought insens wander 
to matilda' secret charms. but what He want in puriti of heart, He 
suppli by exterior sanctity. the better to cloak hi transgression, 
He redoubl hi pretens to the semblanc of virtue, and never 
appear more devot to heaven as sinc He had broken through hi 
engagements. thu did He unconsci add hypocrisi to perjuri and 
incontinence; He had fallen into the latter error from yield to 
seduct almost irresistible; but he wa now guilti of a voluntari 
fault by endeavour to conceal those into which anoth had betray 
him. 

the matin concluded, ambrosio retir to hi cell. the pleasur 
which He had just tast for the first time were still impress upon 
hi mind. hi brain wa bewildered, and present a confus chao of 
remorse, voluptuousness, inquietude, and fear. He look back with 
regret to that peac of soul, that secur of virtue, which till then 
had been hi portion. He had indulg in excess whose veri idea but 
four and twenti hour befor He had recoil at with horror. He 
shudder at reflect that a trifl indiscret on hi part, or on 
matilda's, would overturn that fabric of reput which it had cost 
him thirti year to erect, and render him the abhorr of that peopl 
of whom He wa then the idol. conscienc paint to him in glare 
colour hi perjuri and weakness; apprehens magnifi to him the 
horror of punishment, and He alreadi fanci himself in the prison of 
the inquisition. To these torment idea succeed matilda' beauty, 
and those delici lesson which, onc learnt, can never be forgotten. 
A singl glanc thrown upon these reconcil him with himself. He 
consid the pleasur of the former night to have been purchas at 
an easi price by the sacrific of innoc and honour. their veri 
remembr fill hi soul with ecstacy; He curs hi foolish vanity, 
which had induc him to wast in obscur the bloom of life, ignor 
of the bless of love and woman. He determin at all event to 
continu hi commerc with matilda, and call everi argument to hi 
aid which might confirm hi resolution. He ask himself, provid hi 
irregular wa unknown, in what would hi fault consist, and what 
consequ He had to apprehend? By adher strictli to everi rule 
of hi order save chastity, He doubt not to retain the esteem of men, 
and even the protect of heaven. He trust easili to be forgiven so 
slight and natur a deviat from hi vows: but He forgot that 
have pronounc those vows, incontinence, in laymen the most venial 
of errors, becam in hi person the most heinou of crimes. 

onc decid upon hi futur conduct, hi mind becam more easy. He 
threw himself upon hi bed, and strove by sleep to recruit hi 
strength exhaust by hi nocturn excesses. He awok refreshed, and 
eager for a repetit of hi pleasures. obedi to matilda' order, 
He visit not her cell dure the day. father pablo mention in the 
refectori that rosario had at length been prevail upon to follow hi 
prescription; but that the medicin had not produc the slightest 
effect, and that He believ no mortal skill could rescu him from the 
grave. with thi opinion the abbot agreed, and affect to lament the 
untim fate of a youth, whose talent had appear so promising. 

the night arrived. ambrosio had taken care to procur from the porter 
the key of the low door open into the cemetery. furnish with this, 
when all wa silent in the monastery, He quit hi cell, and hasten 
to matilda's. she had left her bed, and wa drest befor hi arrival. 

'I have been expect you with impatience,' said she; 'mi life depend 
upon these moments. have you the key?' 

'I have.' 

'away then to the garden. We have no time to lose. follow me!' 

she took a small cover basket from the table. bear thi in one 
hand, and the lamp, which wa flame upon the hearth, in the other, 
she hasten from the cell. ambrosio follow her. both maintain a 
profound silence. she move on with quick but cautiou steps, pass 
through the cloisters, and reach the western side of the garden. her 
eye flash with a fire and wild which impress the monk at onc 
with awe and horror. A determin desper courag reign upon her 
brow. she gave the lamp to ambrosio; then take from him the key, she 
unlock the low door, and enter the cemetery. It wa a vast and 
spaciou squar plant with yew trees: half of it belong to the 
abbey; the other half wa the properti of the sisterhood of st. clare, 
and wa protect by a roof of stone. the divis wa mark by an 
iron railing, the wicket of which wa gener left unlocked. 

thither matilda bent her course. she open the wicket and sought for 
the door lead to the subterran vaults, where repos the 
moulder bodi of the votari of st. clare. the night wa 
perfectli dark; neither moon or star were visible. luckili there wa 
not a breath of wind, and the friar bore hi lamp in full security: By 
the assist of it beams, the door of the sepulchr wa soon 
discovered. It wa sunk within the hollow of a wall, and almost 
conceal by thick festoon of ivi hang over it. three step of 
rough-hewn stone conduct to it, and matilda wa on the point of 
descend them when she suddenli start back. 

'there are peopl in the vaults!' she whisper to the monk; 'conceal 
yourself till they are past. 

she took refug behind a lofti and magnific tomb, erect in honour 
of the convent' foundress. ambrosio follow her example, care 
hide hi lamp lest it beam should betray them. but a few moment 
had elaps when the door wa push open lead to the subterran 
caverns. ray of light proceed up the staircase: they enabl the 
conceal spectat to observ two femal drest in religi habits, 
who seem engag in earnest conversation. the abbot had no 
difficulti to recogn the prioress of st. clare in the first, and one 
of the elder nun in her companion. 

'everi thing is prepared,' said the prioress; 'her fate shall be 
decid tomorrow. all her tear and sigh will be unavailing. no! In 
five and twenti year that I have been superior of thi convent, never 
did I wit a transact more infamous!' 

'you must expect much opposit to your will;' the other repli in a 
milder voice; 'agn ha mani friend in the convent, and in particular 
the mother st. ursula will espous her caus most warmly. In truth, 
she merit to have friends; and I wish I could prevail upon you to 
consid her youth, and her peculiar situation. she seem sensibl of 
her fault; the excess of her grief prove her penitence, and I am 
convinc that her tear flow more from contrit than fear of 
punishment. reverend mother, would you be persuad to mitig the 
sever of your sentence, would you but deign to overlook thi first 
transgression, I offer myself as the pledg of her futur conduct.' 

'overlook it, say you? mother camilla, you amaz me! what? after 
disgrac me in the presenc of madrid' idol, of the veri man on whom 
I most wish to impress an idea of the strict of my discipline? 
how despic must I have appear to the reverend abbot! no, mother, 
no! I never can forgiv the insult. I cannot better convinc ambrosio 
that I abhor such crimes, than by punish that of agn with all the 
rigour of which our sever law admit. ceas then your supplications; 
they will all be unavailing. My resolut is taken: tomorrow agn 
shall be made a terribl exampl of my justic and resentment.' 

the mother camilla seem not to give up the point, but by thi time 
the nun were out of hearing. the prioress unlock the door which 
commun with st. clare' chapel, and have enter with her 
companion, close it again after them. 

matilda now asked, who wa thi agn with whom the prioress wa thu 
incensed, and what connexion she could have with ambrosio. He relat 
her adventure; and He added, that sinc that time hi idea have 
undergon a thorough revolution, He now felt much compass for the 
unfortun nun. 

'I design,' said he, 'to request an audienc of the domina tomorrow, 
and use everi mean of obtain a mitig of her sentence.' 

'bewar of what you do!' interrupt matilda; 'your sudden chang of 
sentiment may natur creat surprize, and may give birth to 
suspicion which it is most our interest to avoid. rather, redoubl 
your outward austerity, and thunder out menac against the error of 
others, the better to conceal your own. abandon the nun to her fate. 
your interf might be dangerous, and her imprud merit to be 
punished: she is unworthi to enjoy love' pleasures, who ha not wit 
enough to conceal them. but in discuss thi trifl subject I 
wast moment which are precious. the night fli apace, and much must 
be done befor morning. the nun are retired; all is safe. give me 
the lamp, ambrosio. I must descend alon into these caverns: wait 
here, and if ani one approaches, warn me by your voice; but as you 
valu your existence, presum not to follow me. your life would fall a 
victim to your imprud curiosity.' 

thu say she advanc toward the sepulchre, still hold her lamp 
in one hand, and her littl basket in the other. she touch the door: 
It turn slowli upon it grate hinges, and a narrow wind 
staircas of black marbl present itself to her eyes. she descend 
it. ambrosio remain above, watch the faint beam of the lamp as 
they still proceed up the stairs. they disappeared, and He found 
himself in total darkness. 

left to himself He could not reflect without surpriz on the sudden 
chang in matilda' charact and sentiments. but a few day had past 
sinc she appear the mildest and softest of her sex, devot to hi 
will, and look up to him as to a superior being. now she assum a 
sort of courag and manli in her manner and discours but 
ill-calcul to pleas him. she spoke no longer to insinuate, but 
command: He found himself unabl to cope with her in argument, and wa 
unwillingli oblig to confess the superior of her judgment. everi 
moment convinc him of the astonish power of her mind: but what 
she gain in the opinion of the man, she lost with interest in the 
affect of the lover. He regret rosario, the fond, the gentle, 
and submissive: He griev that matilda prefer the virtu of hi 
sex to those of her own; and when He thought of her express 
respect the devot nun, He could not help blame them as cruel and 
unfeminine. piti is a sentiment so natural, so appropri to the 
femal character, that it is scarc a merit for a woman to possess 
it, but to be without it is a grievou crime. ambrosio could not 
easili forgiv hi mistress for be defici in thi amiabl 
quality. however, though he blame her insensibility, He felt the 
truth of her observations; and though He piti sincer the 
unfortun agnes, He resolv to drop the idea of interpos in her 
behalf. 

near an hour had elapsed, sinc matilda descend into the caverns; 
still she return not. ambrosio' curios wa excited. He drew 
near the staircase. He listened. all wa silent, except that at 
interv He caught the sound of matilda' voice, as it wound along the 
subterran passages, and wa re-echo by the sepulchre' vault 
roofs. she wa at too great a distanc for him to distinguish her 
words, and ere they reach him they were deaden into a low murmur. 
He long to penetr into thi mystery. He resolv to disobey her 
injunct and follow her into the cavern. He advanc to the 
staircase; He had alreadi descend some step when hi courag fail 
him. He rememb matilda' menac if He infring her orders, and 
hi bosom wa fill with a secret unaccount awe. He return up 
the stairs, resum hi former station, and wait impati for the 
conclus of thi adventure. 

suddenli He wa sensibl of a violent shock: An earthquak rock the 
ground. the column which support the roof under which He stood were 
so strongli shaken, that everi moment menac him with it fall, and at 
the same moment He heard a loud and tremend burst of thunder. It 
ceased, and hi eye be fix upon the staircase, He saw a bright 
column of light flash along the cavern beneath. It wa seen but for 
an instant. No sooner did it disappear, than all wa onc more quiet 
and obscure. profound dark again surround him, and the silenc 
of night wa onli broken by the whir bat, as she flit slowli by 
him. 

with everi instant ambrosio' amaz increased. anoth hour 
elapsed, after which the same light again appear and wa lost again 
as suddenly. It wa accompani by a strain of sweet but solemn music, 
which as it stole through the vault below, inspir the monk with 
mingl delight and terror. It had not long been hushed, when He heard 
matilda' step upon the staircase. she ascend from the cavern; the 
most live joy anim her beauti features. 

'did you see ani thing?' she asked. 

'twice I saw a column of light flash up the staircase.' 

'noth else?' 

'nothing.' 

'the morn is on the point of breaking. let us retir to the abbey, 
lest daylight should betray us.' 

with a light step she hasten from the burying-ground. she regain 
her cell, and the curiou abbot still accompani her. she close the 
door, and disembarrass herself of her lamp and basket. 

'I have succeeded!' she cried, throw herself upon hi bosom: 
'succeed beyond my fondest hopes! I shall live, ambrosio, shall live 
for you! the step which I shudder at take prove to me a sourc of 
joy inexpressible! oh! that I dare commun those joy to you! 
oh! that I were permit to share with you my power, and rais you as 
high abov the level of your sex, as one bold deed ha exalt me abov 
mine!' 

'and what prevent you, matilda?' interrupt the friar; 'whi is your 
busi in the cavern made a secret? Do you think me undeserv of 
your confidence? matilda, I must doubt the truth of your affection, 
while you have joy in which I am forbidden to share.' 

'you reproach me with injustice. I griev sincer that I am oblig 
to conceal from you my happiness. but I am not to blame: the fault 
lie not in me, but in yourself, my ambrosio! you are still too much 
the monk. your mind is enslav by the prejudic of education; and 
superstit might make you shudder at the idea of that which 
experi ha taught me to prize and value. At present you are unfit 
to be trust with a secret of such importance: but the strength of 
your judgment; and the curios which I rejoic to see sparkl in 
your eyes, make me hope that you will one day deserv my confidence. 
till that period arrives, restrain your impatience. rememb that you 
have given me your solemn oath never to enquir into thi night' 
adventures. I insist upon your keep thi oath: for though' she 
ad smiling, while she seal hi lip with a wanton kiss; 'though I 
forgiv your break your vow to heaven, I expect you to keep your 
vow to me.' 

the friar return the embrac which had set hi blood on fire. the 
luxuri and unbound excess of the former night were renewed, and 
they separ not till the bell rang for matins. 

the same pleasur were frequent repeated. the monk rejoic in the 
feign rosario' unexpect recovery, and none of them suspect hi 
real sex. the abbot possess hi mistress in tranquillity, and 
perceiv hi frailti unsuspected, abandon himself to hi passion 
in full security. shame and remors no longer torment him. frequent 
repetit made him familiar with sin, and hi bosom becam proof 
against the sting of conscience. In these sentiment He wa 
encourag by matilda; but she soon wa awar that she had satiat her 
lover by the unbound freedom of her caresses. her charm becom 
accustom to him, they ceas to excit the same desir which at 
first they had inspired. the delirium of passion be past, He had 
leisur to observ everi trifl defect: where none were to be found, 
satieti made him fanci them. the monk wa glut with the full of 
pleasure: A week had scarc elaps befor He wa weari of hi 
paramour: hi warm constitut still made him seek in her arm the 
gratif of hi lust: but when the moment of passion wa over, He 
quit her with disgust, and hi humour, natur inconstant, made 
him sigh impati for variety. 

possession, which cloy man, onli increas the affect of woman. 
matilda with everi succeed day grew more attach to the friar. 
sinc He had obtain her favours, He wa becom dearer to her than 
ever, and she felt grate to him for the pleasur in which they had 
equal been sharers. unfortun as her passion grew ardent, 
ambrosio' grew cold; the veri mark of her fond excit hi 
disgust, and it excess serv to extinguish the flame which alreadi 
burn but feebli in hi bosom. matilda could not but remark that her 
societi seem to him daili less agreeable: He wa inattent while 
she spoke: her music talents, which she possess in perfection, had 
lost the power of amus him; Or if He deign to prais them, hi 
compliment were evid forc and cold. He no longer gaze upon 
her with affection, or applaud her sentiment with a lover' 
partiality. thi matilda well perceived, and redoubl her effort to 
reviv those sentiment which He onc had felt. she could not but fail, 
sinc He consid as importun the pain which she took to pleas 
him, and wa disgust by the veri mean which she use to recal the 
wanderer. still, however, their illicit commerc continued: but it 
wa clear that He wa led to her arms, not by love, but the crave of 
brutal appetite. hi constitut made a woman necessari to him, and 
matilda wa the onli one with whom He could indulg hi passion 
safely: In spite of her beauty, He gaze upon everi other femal with 
more desire; but fear that hi hypocrisi should be made public, He 
confin hi inclin to hi own breast. 

It wa by no mean hi natur to be timid: but hi educ had 
impress hi mind with fear so strongly, that apprehens wa now 
becom part of hi character. had hi youth been pass in the world, 
He would have shown himself possess of mani brilliant and manli 
qualities. He wa natur enterprizing, firm, and fearless: He had 
a warrior' heart, and He might have shone with splendour at the head 
of an army. there wa no want of generos in hi nature: the 
wretch never fail to find in him a compassion auditor: hi 
abil were quick and shining, and hi judgment, vast, solid, and 
decisive. with such qualif He would have been an ornament to 
hi country: that He possess them, He had given proof in hi 
earliest infancy, and hi parent had beheld hi dawn virtu with 
the fondest delight and admiration. unfortunately, while yet a child 
He wa depriv of those parents. He fell into the power of a relat 
whose onli wish about him wa never to hear of him more; for that 
purpos He gave him in charg to hi friend, the former superior of the 
capuchins. the abbot, a veri monk, use all hi endeavour to persuad 
the boy that happi exist not without the wall of a convent. He 
succeed fully. To deserv admitt into the order of st. franci 
wa ambrosio' highest ambition. hi instructor care repress 
those virtu whose grandeur and disinterested were ill-suit to 
the cloister. instead of univers benevolence, He adopt a selfish 
partial for hi own particular establishment: He wa taught to 
consid compass for the error of other as a crime of the blackest 
dye: the nobl frank of hi temper wa exchang for servil 
humility; and in order to break hi natur spirit, the monk terrifi 
hi young mind by place befor him all the horror with which 
superstit could furnish them: they paint to him the torment of 
the damn in colour the most dark, terrible, and fantastic, and 
threaten him at the slightest fault with etern perdition. No 
wonder that hi imagin constantli dwell upon these fear 
object should have render hi charact timid and apprehensive. add 
to this, that hi long absenc from the great world, and total 
unacquaint with the common danger of life, made him form of them 
an idea far more dismal than the reality. while the monk were busi 
in root out hi virtu and narrow hi sentiments, they allow 
everi vice which had fallen to hi share to arriv at full perfection. 
He wa suffer to be proud, vain, ambitious, and disdainful: He wa 
jealou of hi equals, and despis all merit but hi own: He wa 
implac when offended, and cruel in hi revenge. still in spite of 
the pain taken to pervert them, hi natur good qualiti would 
occasion break through the gloom cast over them so carefully: 

At such time the contest for superior between hi real and acquir 
charact wa strike and unaccount to those unacquaint with hi 
origin disposition. He pronounc the most sever sentenc upon 
offenders, which, the moment after, compass induc him to mitigate: 
He undertook the most dare enterprizes, which the fear of their 
consequ soon oblig him to abandon: hi inborn geniu dart a 
brilliant light upon subject the most obscure; and almost 
instantan hi superstit replung them in dark more 
profound than that from which they had just been rescued. hi brother 
monks, regard him as a superior being, remark not thi 
contradict in their idol' conduct. they were persuad that what 
He did must be right, and suppos him to have good reason for 
chang hi resolutions. the fact was, that the differ sentiment 
with which educ and natur had inspir him were combat in hi 
bosom: It remain for hi passions, which as yet no opportun had 
call into play, to decid the victory. unfortun hi passion 
were the veri worst judges, to whom He could possibl have applied. 
hi monast seclus had till now been in hi favour, sinc it gave 
him no room for discov hi bad qualities. the superior of hi 
talent rais him too far abov hi companion to permit hi be 
jealou of them: hi exemplari piety, persuas eloquence, and 
pleas manner had secur him univers esteem, and consequ He 
had no injuri to revenge: hi ambit wa justifi by hi 
acknowledg merit, and hi pride consid as no more than proper 
confidence. He never saw, much less convers with, the other sex: He 
wa ignor of the pleasur in woman' power to bestow, and if He 
read in the cours of hi studi 

'that men were fond, He smiled, and wonder how!' 

for a time, spare diet, frequent watching, and sever penanc cool 
and represt the natur warmth of hi constitution: but no sooner did 
opportun present itself, no sooner did He catch a glimps of joy to 
which He wa still a stranger, than religion' barrier were too feebl 
to resist the overwhelm torrent of hi desires. all impedi 
yield befor the forc of hi temperament, warm, sanguine, and 
voluptu in the excess. 

As yet hi other passion lay dormant; but they onli need to be onc 
awakened, to display themselv with violenc as great and irresistible. 

He continu to be the admir of madrid. the enthusiasm creat by 
hi eloqu seem rather to increas than diminish. 

everi thursday, which wa the onli day when He appear in public, the 
capuchin cathedr wa crowd with auditors, and hi discours wa 
alway receiv with the same approbation. He wa name confessor to 
all the chief famili in madrid; and no one wa count fashion 
who wa injoin penanc by ani other than ambrosio. In hi resolut 
of never stir out of hi convent, He still persisted. thi 
circumst creat a still greater opinion of hi sanctiti and 
self-denial. abov all, the women sang forth hi prais loudly, less 
influenc by devot than by hi nobl countenance, majest air, and 
well-turned, grace figure. the abbey door wa throng with 
carriag from morn to night; and the noblest and fairest dame of 
madrid confess to the abbot their secret peccadilloes. 

the eye of the luxuri friar devour their charms: had hi 
penit consult those interpreters, He would have need no other 
mean of express hi desires. for hi misfortune, they were so 
strongli persuad of hi continence, that the possibl of hi 
harbour indec thought never onc enter their imaginations. 
the climate' heat, 'ti well known, oper with no small influenc 
upon the constitut of the spanish ladies: but the most abandon 
would have thought it an easier task to inspir with passion the marbl 
statu of st. franci than the cold and rigid heart of the immacul 
ambrosio. 

On hi part, the friar wa littl acquaint with the deprav of the 
world; He suspect not that but few of hi penit would have 
reject hi addresses. yet had He been better instruct on thi 
head, the danger attend such an attempt would have seal up hi 
lip in silence. He knew that it would be difficult for a woman to 
keep a secret so strang and so import as hi frailty; and He even 
trembl lest matilda should betray him. anxiou to preserv a 
reput which wa infinit dear to him, He saw all the risqu of 
commit it to the power of some vain giddi female; and as the 
beauti of madrid affect onli hi sens without touch hi heart, 
He forgot them as soon as they were out of hi sight. the danger of 
discovery, the fear of be repulsed, the loss of reputation, all 
these consider counsel him to stifl hi desires: and though 
He now felt for it the most perfect indifference, He wa necessit 
to confin himself to matilda' person. 

one morning, the confluenc of penit wa greater than usual. He wa 
detain in the confession chair till a late hour. At length the 
crowd wa dispatched, and He prepar to quit the chapel, when two 
femal enter and drew near him with humility. they threw up their 
veils, and the youngest entreat him to listen to her for a few 
moments. the melodi of her voice, of that voic to which no man ever 
listen without interest, immedi caught ambrosio' attention. He 
stopped. the petition seem bow down with affliction: her cheek 
were pale, her eye dim with tears, and her hair fell in disord 
over her face and bosom. still her counten wa so sweet, so 
innocent, so heavenly, as might have charm an heart less susceptible, 
than that which pant in the abbot' breast. with more than usual 
soft of manner He desir her to proceed, and heard her speak as 
follow with an emot which increas everi moment. 

'reverend father, you see an unfortunate, threaten with the loss of 
her dearest, of almost her onli friend! My mother, my excel mother 
lie upon the bed of sickness. A sudden and dread maladi seiz her 
last night; and so rapid ha been it progress, that the physician 
despair of her life. human aid fail me; noth remain for me but to 
implor the merci of heaven. father, all madrid ring with the report 
of your pieti and virtue. deign to rememb my mother in your prayers: 
perhap they may prevail on the almighti to spare her; and should that 
be the case, I engag myself everi thursday in the next three month to 
illumin the shrine of st. franci in hi honour.' 

'so!' thought the monk; 'here we have a second vincentio della ronda. 
rosario' adventur began thus,' and He wish secretli that thi might 
have the same conclusion. 

He acced to the request. the petition return him thank with 
everi mark of gratitude, and then continued. 

'I have yet anoth favour to ask. We are stranger in madrid; My 
mother need a confessor, and know not to whom she should apply. We 
understand that you never quit the abbey, and alas! my poor mother is 
unabl to come hither! If you would have the goodness, reverend 
father, to name a proper person, whose wise and piou consol may 
soften the agoni of my parent' deathbed, you will confer an 
everlast favour upon heart not ungrateful.' 

with thi petit also the monk complied. indeed, what petit would 
He have refused, if urg in such enchant accents? the suppliant 
wa so interesting! her voic wa so sweet, so harmonious! her veri 
tear becam her, and her afflict seem to add new lustr to her 
charms. He promis to send to her a confessor that same evening, and 
beg her to leav her address. the companion present him with a 
card on which it wa written, and then withdrew with the fair 
petitioner, who pronounc befor her departur a thousand benedict 
on the abbot' goodness. hi eye follow her out of the chapel. It 
wa not till she wa out of sight that He examin the card, on which 
He read the follow words. 

'donna elvira dalfa, strada di san iago, four door from the palac 
d'albornos.' 

the suppliant wa no other than antonia, and leonella wa her 
companion. the latter had not consent without difficulti to 
accompani her niec to the abbey: ambrosio had inspir her with such 
awe that she trembl at the veri sight of him. her fear had 
conquer even her natur loquacity, and while in hi presenc she 
utter not a singl syllable. 

the monk retir to hi cell, whither He wa pursu by antonia' 
image. He felt a thousand new emot spring in hi bosom, and He 
trembl to examin into the caus which gave them birth. they were 
total differ from those inspir by matilda, when she first 
declar her sex and her affection. He felt not the provoc of 
lust; No voluptu desir riot in hi bosom; nor did a burn 
imagin pictur to him the charm which modesti had veil from hi 
eyes. On the contrary, what He now felt wa a mingl sentiment of 
tenderness, admiration, and respect. A soft and delici melancholi 
infus itself into hi soul, and He would not have exchang it for 
the most live transport of joy. societi now disgust him: He 
delight in solitude, which permit hi indulg the vision of 
fancy: hi thought were all gentle, sad, and soothing, and the whole 
wide world present him with no other object than antonia. 

'happi man!' He exclaim in hi romant enthusiasm; 'happi man, who 
is destin to possess the heart of that love girl! what delicaci in 
her features! what eleg in her form! how enchant wa the timid 
innoc of her eyes, and how differ from the wanton expression, 
the wild luxuri fire which sparkl in matilda's! oh! sweeter must 
one kiss be snatch from the rosi lip of the first, than all the full 
and lust favour bestow so freeli by the second. matilda glut me 
with enjoy even to loathing, forc me to her arms, ape the 
harlot, and glori in her prostitution. disgusting! did she know the 
inexpress charm of modesty, how irresist it enthral the heart 
of man, how firmli it chain him to the throne of beauty, she never 
would have thrown it off. what would be too dear a price for thi 
love girl' affections? what would I refus to sacrifice, could I be 
releas from my vows, and permit to declar my love in the sight of 
earth and heaven? while I strove to inspir her with tenderness, with 
friendship and esteem, how tranquil and undisturb would the hour 
roll away! graciou god! To see her blue downcast eye beam upon mine 
with timid fondness! To sit for days, for year listen to that 
gentl voice! To acquir the right of oblig her, and hear the 
artless express of her gratitude! To watch the emot of her 
spotless heart! To encourag each dawn virtue! To share in her joy 
when happy, to kiss away her tear when distrest, and to see her fli to 
my arm for comfort and support! yes; If there is perfect bliss on 
earth, 'ti hi lot alone, who becom that angel' husband.' 

while hi fanci coin these ideas, He pace hi cell with a disord 
air. hi eye were fix upon vacancy: hi head reclin upon hi 
shoulder; A tear roll down hi cheek, while He reflect that the 
vision of happi for him could never be realized. 

'she is lost to me!' He continued; 'bi marriag she cannot be mine: 
and to seduc such innocence, to use the confid repos in me to 
work her ruin.... oh! it would be a crime, blacker than yet the 
world ever witnessed! fear not, love girl! your virtu run no 
risqu from me. not for indi would I make that gentl bosom know the 
tortur of remorse.' 

again He pace hi chamber hastily. then stopping, hi eye fell upon 
the pictur of hi once-admir madona. He tore it with indign 
from the wall: He threw it on the ground, and spurn it from him with 
hi foot. 

'the prostitute!' 

unfortun matilda! her paramour forgot that for hi sake alon she 
had forfeit her claim to virtue; and hi onli reason for despis 
her wa that she had love him much too well. 

He threw himself into a chair which stood near the table. He saw the 
card with elvira' address. He took it up, and it brought to hi 
recollect hi promis respect a confessor. He pass a few 
minut in doubt: but antonia' empir over him wa alreadi too much 
decid to permit hi make a long resist to the idea which struck 
him. He resolv to be the confessor himself. He could leav the 
abbey unobserv without difficulty: By wrap up hi head in hi 
cowl He hope to pass through the street without be recognised: By 
take these precautions, and by recommend secreci to elvira' 
family, He doubt not to keep madrid in ignor that He had broken 
hi vow never to see the outsid of the abbey walls. matilda wa the 
onli person whose vigil He dreaded: but by inform her at the 
refectori that dure the whole of that day, busi would confin him 
to hi cell, He thought himself secur from her wake jealousy. 
accordingly, at the hour when the spaniard are gener take their 
siesta, He ventur to quit the abbey by a privat door, the key of 
which wa in hi possession. the cowl of hi habit wa thrown over hi 
face: from the heat of the weather the street were almost total 
deserted: the monk met with few people, found the strada di san iago, 
and arriv without accid at donna elvira' door. He rang, wa 
admitted, and immedi usher into an upper apartment. 

It wa here that He ran the greatest risqu of a discovery. had 
leonella been at home, she would have recogn him directly: her 
commun disposit would never have permit her to rest till 
all madrid wa inform that ambrosio had ventur out of the abbey, 
and visit her sister. fortun here stood the monk' friend. On 
leonella' return home, she found a letter instruct her that a 
cousin wa just dead, who had left what littl He possess between 
herself and elvira. To secur thi bequest she wa oblig to set out 
for cordova without lose a moment. amidst all her foibl her heart 
wa truli warm and affectionate, and she wa unwil to quit her 
sister in so danger a state. but elvira insist upon her take 
the journey, consciou that in her daughter' forlorn situat no 
increas of fortune, howev trifling, ought to be neglected. 
accordingly, leonella left madrid, sincer griev at her sister' 
illness, and give some few sigh to the memori of the amiabl but 
inconst don christoval. she wa fulli persuad that at first she 
had made a terribl breach in hi heart: but hear noth more of 
him, she suppos that He had quit the pursuit, disgust by the 
low of her origin, and know upon other term than marriag He 
had noth to hope from such a dragon of virtu as she profess 
herself; Or else, that be natur caprici and changeable, the 
remembr of her charm had been effac from the conde' heart by 
those of some newer beauty. whatev wa the caus of her lose him, 
she lament it sorely. she strove in vain, as she assur everi bodi 
who wa kind enough to listen to her, to tear hi imag from her too 
suscept heart. she affect the air of a lovesick virgin, and 
carri them all to the most ridicul excess. she heav lament 
sighs, walk with her arm folded, utter long soliloquies, and her 
discours gener turn upon some forsaken maid who expir of a 
broken heart! her fieri lock were alway ornament with a garland of 
willow; everi even she wa seen stray upon the bank of a rivulet 
by moonlight; and she declar herself a violent admir of murmur 
stream and nightingales; 

'of lone haunts, and twilight groves, 
'place which pale passion loves!' 

such wa the state of leonella' mind, when oblig to quit madrid. 
elvira wa out of patienc at all these follies, and endeavour at 
persuad her to act like a reason woman. her advic wa thrown 
away: leonella assur her at part that noth could make her 
forget the perfidi don christoval. In thi point she wa 
fortun mistaken. An honest youth of cordova, journeyman to an 
apothecary, found that her fortun would be suffici to set him up in 
a genteel shop of hi own: In consequ of thi reflect He avow 
himself her admirer. leonella wa not inflexible. the ardour of hi 
sigh melt her heart, and she soon consent to make him the happiest 
of mankind. she wrote to inform her sister of her marriage; but, for 
reason which will be explain hereafter, elvira never answer her 
letter. 

ambrosio wa conduct into the antichamb to that where elvira wa 
reposing. the femal domest who had admit him left him alon 
while she announc hi arriv to her mistress. antonia, who had been 
by her mother' bedside, immedi came to him. 

'pardon me, father,' said she, advanc toward him; when recogn 
hi features, she stop suddenly, and utter a cri of joy. 'i it 
possible!' she continued; 

'do not my eye deceiv me? ha the worthi ambrosio broken through hi 
resolution, that He may soften the agoni of the best of women? what 
pleasur will thi visit give my mother! let me not delay for a moment 
the comfort which your pieti and wisdom will afford her.' 

thu saying, she open the chamber door, present to her mother her 
distinguish visitor, and have place an armed-chair by the side of 
the bed, withdrew into anoth department. 

elvira wa highli gratifi by thi visit: her expect had been 
rais high by gener report, but she found them far exceeded. 
ambrosio, endow by natur with power of pleasing, exert them to 
the utmost while convers with antonia' mother. with persuas 
eloqu He calm everi fear, and dissip everi scruple: He bad 
her reflect on the infinit merci of her judge, despoil death of hi 
dart and terrors, and taught her to view without shrink the abyss 
of eternity, on whose brink she then stood. elvira wa absorb in 
attent and delight: while she listen to hi exhortations, 
confid and comfort stole insens into her mind. she unbosom 
to him without hesit her care and apprehensions. the latter 
respect a futur life He had alreadi quieted: and He now remov 
the former, which she felt for the concern of this. she trembl for 
antonia. she had none to whose care she could recommend her, save to 
the marqui de la cisterna and her sister leonella. the protect 
of the one wa veri uncertain; and as to the other, though fond of her 
niece, leonella wa so thoughtless and vain as to make her an improp 
person to have the sole direct of a girl so young and ignor of 
the world. the friar no sooner learnt the caus of her alarm than He 
beg her to make herself easi upon that head. He doubt not be 
abl to secur for antonia a safe refug in the hous of one of hi 
penitents, the marchio of villa-franca: thi wa a ladi of 
acknowledg virtue, remark for strict principl and extens 
charity. should accid depriv her of thi resource, He engag to 
procur antonia a recept in some respect convent: that is to 
say, in qualiti of boarder; for elvira had declar herself no friend 
to a monast life, and the monk wa either candid or complais 
enough to allow that her disapprob wa not unfounded. 

these proof of the interest which He felt for her complet won 
elvira' heart. In thank him she exhaust everi express which 
gratitud could furnish, and protest that now she should resign 
herself with tranquil to the grave. ambrosio rose to take leave: 
He promis to return the next day at the same hour, but request that 
hi visit might be kept secret. 

'I am unwilling' said he, 'that my break through a rule impos by 
necess should be gener known. had I not resolv never to quit 
my convent, except upon circumst as urgent as that which ha 
conduct me to your door, I should be frequent summon upon 
insignific occasions: that time would be engross by the curious, 
the unoccupied, and the fanciful, which I now pass at the bedsid of 
the sick, in comfort the expir penitent, and clear the passag 
to etern from thorns.' 

elvira commend equal hi prudenc and compassion, promis to 
conceal care the honour of hi visits. the monk then gave her hi 
benediction, and retir from the chamber. 

In the antiroom He found antonia: He could not refus himself the 
pleasur of pass a few moment in her society. He bad her take 
comfort, for that her mother seem compos and tranquil, and He hope 
that she might yet do well. He enquir who attend her, and engag 
to send the physician of hi convent to see her, one of the most 
skil in madrid. He then launch out in elvira' commendation, 
prais her puriti and fortitud of mind, and declar that she had 
inspir him with the highest esteem and reverence. antonia' innoc 
heart swell with gratitude: joy danc in her eyes, where a tear 
still sparkled. the hope which He gave her of her mother' recovery, 
the live interest which He seem to feel for her, and the flatter 
way in which she wa mention by him, ad to the report of hi 
judgment and virtue, and to the impress made upon her by hi 
eloquence, confirm the favour opinion with which hi first 
appear had inspir antonia. she repli with diffidence, but 
without restraint: she fear not to relat to him all her littl 
sorrows, all her littl fear and anxieties; and she thank him for 
hi good with all the genuin warmth which favour kindl in a 
young and innoc heart. such alon know how to estim benefit at 
their full value. they who are consciou of mankind' perfidi and 
selfishness, ever receiv an oblig with apprehens and distrust: 
they suspect that some secret motiv must lurk behind it: they express 
their thank with restraint and caution, and fear to prais a kind 
action to it full extent, awar that some futur day a return may be 
required. not so antonia; she thought the world wa compos onli of 
those who resembl her, and that vice existed, wa to her still a 
secret. the monk had been of servic to her; He said that He wish 
her well; she wa grate for hi kindness, and thought that no term 
were strong enough to be the vehicl of her thanks. with what delight 
did ambrosio listen to the declar of her artless gratitude! the 
natur grace of her manners, the unequal sweet of her voice, 
her modest vivacity, her unstudi elegance, her express 
countenance, and intellig eye unit to inspir him with pleasur 
and admiration, while the solid and correct of her remark 
receiv addit beauti from the unaffect simplic of the 
languag in which they were conveyed. 

ambrosio wa at length oblig to tear himself from thi convers 
which possess for him but too mani charms. He repeat to antonia 
hi wish that hi visit should not be made known, which desir she 
promis to observe. He then quit the house, while hi enchantress 
hasten to her mother, ignor of the mischief which her beauti had 
caused. she wa eager to know elvira' opinion of the man whom she had 
prais in such enthusiast terms, and wa delight to find it 
equal favourable, if not even more so, than her own. 

'even befor He spoke,' said elvira, 'I wa prejud in hi favour: 
the fervour of hi exhortations, digniti of hi manner, and close 
of hi reasoning, were veri far from induc me to alter my opinion. 
hi fine and full-ton voic struck me particularly; but surely, 
antonia, I have heard it before. It seem perfectli familiar to my 
ear. either I must have known the abbot in former times, or hi voic 
bear a wonder resembl to that of some other, to whom I have 
often listened. 

there were certain tone which touch my veri heart, and made me feel 
sensat so singular, that I strive in vain to account for them.' 

'mi dearest mother, it produc the same effect upon me: yet certainli 
neither of us ever heard hi voic till we came to madrid. I suspect 
that what we attribut to hi voice, realli proce from hi pleasant 
manners, which forbid our consid him as a stranger. I know not 
why, but I feel more at my eas while convers with him than I 
usual do with peopl who are unknown to me. I fear not to repeat 
to him all my childish thoughts; and somehow I felt confid that He 
would hear my folli with indulgence. oh! I wa not deceiv in him! 
He listen to me with such an air of kind and attention! He 
answer me with such gentleness, such condescension! He did not call 
me an infant, and treat me with contempt, as our cross old confessor at 
the castl use to do. I verili believ that if I had live in murcia 
a thousand years, I never should have like that fat old father 
dominic!' 

'I confess that father domin had not the most pleas manner in the 
world; but He wa honest, friendly, and well-meaning.' 

'ah! my dear mother, those qualiti are so common!' 

'god grant, my child, that experi may not teach you to think them 
rare and precious: I have found them but too much so! but tell me, 
antonia; whi is it imposs for me to have seen the abbot before?' 

'becaus sinc the moment when He enter the abbey, He ha never been 
on the outsid of it walls. He told me just now, that from hi 
ignor of the streets, He had some difficulti to find the strada di 
san iago, though so near the abbey.' 

'all thi is possible, and still I may have seen him befor He enter 
the abbey: In order to come out, it wa rather necessari that He 
should first go in.' 

'holi virgin! As you say, that is veri true.--oh! but might He not 
have been born in the abbey?' 

elvira smiled. 

'why, not veri easily.' 

'stay, stay! now I recollect how it was. He wa put into the abbey 
quit a child; the common peopl say that He fell from heaven, and wa 
sent as a present to the capuchin by the virgin.' 

'that wa veri kind of her. and so He fell from heaven, antonia? 

He must have had a terribl tumble.' 

'mani do not credit this, and I fancy, my dear mother, that I must 
number you among the unbelievers. indeed, as our landladi told my 
aunt, the gener idea is that hi parents, be poor and unabl to 
maintain him, left him just born at the abbey door. the late superior 
from pure chariti had him educ in the convent, and He prove to be 
a model of virtue, and piety, and learning, and I know not what els 
besides: In consequence, He wa first receiv as a brother of the 
order, and not long ago wa chosen abbot. however, whether thi 
account or the other is the true one, at least all agre that when the 
monk took him under their care, He could not speak: therefore, you 
could not have heard hi voic befor He enter the monastery, becaus 
at that time He had no voic at all.' 

'upon my word, antonia, you argu veri closely! your conclus are 
infallible! I did not suspect you of be so abl a logician.' 

'ah! you are mock me! but so much the better. It delight me to see 
you in spirits: besid you seem tranquil and easy, and I hope that 
you will have no more convulsions. oh! I wa sure the abbot' visit 
would do you good!' 

'it ha inde done me good, my child. He ha quiet my mind upon 
some point which agit me, and I alreadi feel the effect of hi 
attention. My eye grow heavy, and I think I can sleep a little. draw 
the curtains, my antonia: but if I should not wake befor midnight, do 
not sit up with me, I charg you.' 

antonia promis to obey her, and have receiv her bless drew the 
curtain of the bed. she then seat herself in silenc at her 
embroideri frame, and beguil the hour with build castl in the 
air. her spirit were enliven by the evid chang for the better 
in elvira, and her fanci present her with vision bright and 
pleasing. In these dream ambrosio made no despic figure. she 
thought of him with joy and gratitude; but for everi idea which fell to 
the friar' share, at least two were unconsci bestow upon 
lorenzo. thu pass the time, till the bell in the neighbour 
steepl of the capuchin cathedr announc the hour of midnight: 
antonia rememb her mother' injunctions, and obey them, though 
with reluctance. she undrew the curtain with caution. elvira wa 
enjoy a profound and quiet slumber; her cheek glow with health' 
return colours: A smile declar that her dream were pleasant, and 
as antonia bent over her, she fanci that she heard her name 
pronounced. she kiss her mother' forehead softly, and retir to 
her chamber. there she knelt befor a statu of st. rosolia, her 
patroness; she recommend herself to the protect of heaven, and as 
had been her custom from infancy, conclud her devot by chaunt 
the follow stanzas. 

midnight hymn 

now all is hushed; the solemn chime 
No longer swell the nightli gale: 
thi aw presence, hour sublime, 
with spotless heart onc more I hail. 

'ti now the moment still and dread, 
when sorcer use their bale power; 
when grave give up their buri dead 
To profit by the sanction hour: 

from guilt and guilti thought secure, 
To duti and devot true, 
with bosom light and conscienc pure, 
repose, thi gentl aid I woo. 

good angels, take my thanks, that still 
the snare of vice I view with scorn; 
thanks, that to-night as free from ill 
I sleep, as when I woke at morn. 

yet may not my unconsci breast 
harbour some guilt to me unknown? 
some wish impure, which unreprest 
you blush to see, and I to own? 

If such there be, in gentl dream 
instruct my feet to shun the snare; 
bid truth upon my error beam, 
and deign to make me still your care. 

chase from my peac bed away 
the witch spell, a foe to rest, 
the nightli goblin, wanton fay, 
the ghost in pain, and fiend unblest: 

let not the tempter in mine ear 
pour lesson of unhallow joy; 
let not the night-mare, wander near 
My couch, the calm of sleep destroy; 

let not some horrid dream affright 
with strang fantast form mine eyes; 
but rather bid some vision bright 
display the bliss of yonder skies. 

show me the crystal dome of heaven, 
the world of light where angel lie; 
shew me the lot to mortal given, 
who guiltless live, who guiltless die. 

then show me how a seat to gain 
amidst those bliss realm of 
air; teach me to shun each guilti stain, 
and guid me to the good and fair. 

So everi morn and night, my voic 
To heaven the grate strain shall raise; 
In you as guardian power rejoice, 
good angels, and exalt your praise: 

So will I strive with zealou fire 
each vice to shun, each fault correct; 
will love the lesson you inspire, 
and prize the virtu you protect. 

then when at length by high command 
My bodi seek the grave' repose, 
when death draw nigh with friendli hand 
My fail pilgrim eye to close; 

pleas that my soul ha 'scape the wreck, 
sighless will I my life resign, 
and yield to god my spirit back, 
As pure as when it first wa mine. 


have finish her usual devotions, antonia retir to bed. sleep soon 
stole over her senses; and for sever hour she enjoy that calm 
repos which innoc alon can know, and for which mani a monarch 
with pleasur would exchang hi crown. 



chapter IV 

----ah! how dark 
these long-extend realm and rueful wastes; 
where nought but silenc reigns, and night, dark night, 
dark as wa chao ere the infant sun 
wa roll together, or had tri it beam 
athwart the gloom profound! 
the sickli taper 
By glimmer through thi low-brow misti vaults, 
fur round with mouldi damps, and ropi slime, 
let fall a supernumerari horror, 
and onli serv to make 
thi night more irksome! 
blair. 

return undiscov to the abbey, ambrosio' mind wa fill with the 
most pleas images. He wa wil blind to the danger of expos 
himself to antonia' charms: He onli rememb the pleasur which her 
societi had afford him, and rejoic in the prospect of that pleasur 
be repeated. He fail not to profit by elvira' indisposit to 
obtain a sight of her daughter everi day. At first He bound hi 
wish to inspir antonia with friendship: but no sooner wa He 
convinc that she felt that sentiment in it fullest extent, than hi 
aim becam more decided, and hi attent assum a warmer colour. 
the innoc familiar with which she treat him, encourag hi 
desires: grown use to her modesty, it no longer command the same 
respect and awe: He still admir it, but it onli made him more 
anxiou to depriv her of that qualiti which form her princip 
charm. warmth of passion, and natur penetration, of which latter 
unfortun both for himself and antonia He possess an ampl share, 
suppli a knowledg of the art of seduction. He easili distinguish 
the emot which were favour to hi designs, and seiz everi 
mean with avid of infus corrupt into antonia' bosom. thi 
He found no easi matter. extrem simplic prevent her from 
perceiv the aim to which the monk' insinu tended; but the 
excel moral which she owe to elvira' care, the solid and 
correct of her understanding, and a strong sens of what wa right 
implant in her heart by nature, made her feel that hi precept must 
be faulty. By a few simpl word she frequent overthrew the whole 
bulk of hi sophist arguments, and made him consciou how weak they 
were when oppos to virtu and truth. On such occas He took refug 
in hi eloquence; He overpow her with a torrent of philosoph 
paradoxes, to which, not understand them, it wa imposs for her 
to reply; and thu though He did not convinc her that hi reason 
wa just, He at least prevent her from discov it to be false. 
He perceiv that her respect for hi judgment augment daily, and 
doubt not with time to bring her to the point desired. 

He wa not unconsci that hi attempt were highli criminal: He saw 
clearli the base of seduc the innoc girl: but hi passion 
wa too violent to permit hi abandon hi design. He resolv to 
pursu it, let the consequ be what they might. He depend upon 
find antonia in some unguard moment; and see no other man 
admit into her society, nor hear ani mention either by her or 
by elvira, He imagin that her young heart wa still unoccupied. while 
He wait for the opportun of satisfi hi unwarrant lust, 
everi day increas hi cold for matilda. not a littl wa thi 
occas by the conscious of hi fault to her. To hide them 
from her He wa not suffici master of himself: yet He dread 
lest, in a transport of jealou rage, she should betray the secret on 
which hi charact and even hi life depended. matilda could not but 
remark hi indifference: He wa consciou that she remark it, and 
fear her reproaches, shun her studiously. yet when He could not 
avoid her, her mild might have convinc him that He had noth to 
dread from her resentment. she had resum the charact of the gentl 
interest rosario: she tax him not with ingratitude; but her eye 
fill with involuntari tears, and the soft melancholi of her 
counten and voic utter complaint far more touch than word 
could have conveyed. ambrosio wa not unmov by her sorrow; but 
unabl to remov it cause, He forbor to show that it affect him. 
As her conduct convinc him that He need not fear her vengeance, He 
continu to neglect her, and avoid her compani with care. matilda 
saw that she in vain attempt to regain hi affections: yet she 
stifl the impuls of resentment, and continu to treat her 
inconst lover with her former fond and attention. 

By degre elvira' constitut recov itself. she wa no longer 
troubl with convulsions, and antonia ceas to trembl for her 
mother. ambrosio beheld thi reestablish with displeasure. He saw 
that elvira' knowledg of the world would not be the dupe of hi 
sanctifi demeanour, and that she would easili perceiv hi view upon 
her daughter. He resolv therefore, befor she quit her chamber, 
to tri the extent of hi influenc over the innoc antonia. 

one evening, when He had found elvira almost perfectli restor to 
health, He quit her earlier than wa hi usual custom. not find 
antonia in the antichamber, He ventur to follow her to her own. It 
wa onli separ from her mother' by a closet, in which flora, the 
waiting-woman, gener slept. antonia sat upon a sopha with her back 
toward the door, and read attentively. she heard not hi approach, 
till He had seat himself by her. she started, and welcom him with 
a look of pleasure: then rising, she would have conduct him to the 
sitting-room; but ambrosio take her hand, oblig her by gentl 
violenc to resum her place. she compli without difficulty: she 
knew not that there wa more improprieti in convers with him in one 
room than another. she thought herself equal secur of hi 
principl and her own, and have replac herself upon the sopha, she 
began to prattl to him with her usual eas and vivacity. 

He examin the book which she had been reading, and had now place 
upon the table. It wa the bible. 

'how!' said the friar to himself; 'antonia read the bible, and is 
still so ignorant?' 

but, upon a further inspection, He found that elvira had made exactli 
the same remark. that prudent mother, while she admir the beauti 
of the sacr writings, wa convinc that, unrestricted, no read 
more improp could be permit a young woman. mani of the narr 
can onli tend to excit idea the worst calcul for a femal breast: 
everi thing is call plainli and roundli by it name; and the annal 
of a brothel would scarc furnish a greater choic of indec 
expressions. yet thi is the book which young women are recommend to 
study; which is put into the hand of children, abl to comprehend 
littl more than those passag of which they had better remain 
ignorant; and which but too frequent inculc the first rudiment 
of vice, and give the first alarm to the still sleep passions. Of 
thi wa elvira so fulli convinced, that she would have prefer 
put into her daughter' hand 'amadi de gaul,' or 'the valiant 
champion, tirant the white;' and would sooner have authoris her 
studi the lewd exploit of 'don galaor,' or the lascivi joke of 
the 'damsel plazer di mi vida.' she had in consequ made two 
resolut respect the bible. the first wa that antonia should 
not read it till she wa of an age to feel it beauties, and profit by 
it morality: the second, that it should be copi out with her own 
hand, and all improp passag either alter or omitted. she had 
adher to thi determination, and such wa the bibl which antonia wa 
reading: It had been late deliv to her, and she perus it with 
an avidity, with a delight that wa inexpressible. ambrosio perceiv 
hi mistake, and replac the book upon the table. 

antonia spoke of her mother' health with all the enthusiast joy of a 
youth heart. 

'I admir your filial affection,' said the abbot; 'it prove the 
excel and sensibl of your character; It promis a treasur to 
him whom heaven ha destin to possess your affections. the breast, 
so capabl of fond for a parent, what will it feel for a lover? 
nay, perhaps, what feel it for one even now? tell me, my love 
daughter; have you known what it is to love? answer me with sincerity: 
forget my habit, and consid me onli as a friend.' 

'what it is to love?' said she, repeat hi question; 'oh! yes, 
undoubtedly; I have love many, mani people.' 

'that is not what I mean. the love of which I speak can be felt onli 
for one. have you never seen the man whom you wish to be your 
husband?' 

'oh! no, indeed!' 

thi wa an untruth, but she wa unconsci of it falsehood: she knew 
not the natur of her sentiment for lorenzo; and never have seen him 
sinc hi first visit to elvira, with everi day hi imag grew less 
feebli impress upon her bosom. besides, she thought of an husband 
with all a virgin' terror, and negativ the friar' demand without a 
moment' hesitation. 

'and do you not long to see that man, antonia? Do you feel no void in 
your heart which you fain would have fill up? Do you heav no sigh 
for the absenc of some one dear to you, but who that some one is, you 
know not? perceiv you not that what formerli could please, ha charm 
for you no longer? that a thousand new wishes, new ideas, new 
sensations, have sprang in your bosom, onli to be felt, never to be 
described? Or while you fill everi other heart with passion, is it 
possibl that your own remain insens and cold? It cannot be! 
that melt eye, that blush cheek, that enchant voluptu 
melancholi which at time overspread your features, all these mark 
bely your words. you love, antonia, and in vain would hide it from 
me.' 

'father, you amaz me! what is thi love of which you speak? I 
neither know it nature, nor if I felt it, whi I should conceal the 
sentiment.' 

'have you seen no man, antonia, whom though never seen before, you 
seem long to have sought? whose form, though a stranger's, wa 
familiar to your eyes? the sound of whose voic sooth you, pleas 
you, penetr to your veri soul? In whose presenc you rejoiced, for 
whose absenc you lamented? with whom your heart seem to expand, and 
in whose bosom with confid unbound you repos the care of your 
own? have you not felt all this, antonia?' 

'certainli I have: the first time that I saw you, I felt it.' 

ambrosio started. scarc dare He credit hi hearing. 

'me, antonia?' He cried, hi eye sparkl with delight and 
impatience, while He seiz her hand, and press it raptur to hi 
lips. 'me, antonia? you felt these sentiment for me?' 

'even with more strength than you have described. the veri moment that 
I beheld you, I felt so pleased, so interested! I wait so eagerli to 
catch the sound of your voice, and when I heard it, it seem so sweet! 
It spoke to me a languag till then so unknown! methought, it told me 
a thousand thing which I wish to hear! It seem as if I had long 
known you; as if I had a right to your friendship, your advice, and 
your protection. 

I wept when you departed, and long for the time which should restor 
you to my sight.' 

'antonia! my charm antonia!' exclaim the monk, and caught her to 
hi bosom; 'can I believ my senses? repeat it to me, my sweet girl! 
tell me again that you love me, that you love me truli and tenderly!' 

'indeed, I do: let my mother be excepted, and the world hold no one 
more dear to me!' 

At thi frank avow ambrosio no longer possess himself; wild with 
desire, He clasp the blush trembler in hi arms. He fasten hi 
lip greedili upon hers, suck in her pure delici breath, violat 
with hi bold hand the treasur of her bosom, and wound around him her 
soft and yield limbs. startled, alarmed, and confus at hi action, 
surpriz at first depriv her of the power of resistance. At length 
recov herself, she strove to escap from hi embrace. 

'father! .... ambrosio!' she cried; 'releas me, for god' sake!' 

but the licenti monk heed not her prayers: He persist in hi 
design, and proceed to take still greater liberties. antonia prayed, 
wept, and struggled: terrifi to the extreme, though at what she knew 
not, she exert all her strength to repuls the friar, and wa on the 
point of shriek for assist when the chamber door wa suddenli 
thrown open. ambrosio had just suffici presenc of mind to be 
sensibl of hi danger. reluctantli He quit hi prey, and start 
hastili from the couch. antonia utter an exclam of joy, flew 
toward the door, and found herself clasp in the arm of her mother. 

alarm at some of the abbot' speeches, which antonia had innoc 
repeated, elvira resolv to ascertain the truth of her suspicions. 
she had known enough of mankind not to be impos upon by the monk' 
reput virtue. she reflect on sever circumstances, which though 
trifling, on be put togeth seem to author her fears. hi 
frequent visits, which as far as she could see, were confin to her 
family; hi evid emotion, whenev she spoke of antonia; hi be 
in the full prime and heat of manhood; and abov all, hi pernici 
philosophi commun to her by antonia, and which accord but ill 
with hi convers in her presence, all these circumst inspir 
her with doubt respect the puriti of ambrosio' friendship. In 
consequence, she resolved, when He should next be alon with antonia, 
to endeavour at surpriz him. her plan had succeeded. 'ti true, 
that when she enter the room, He had alreadi abandon hi prey; but 
the disord of her daughter' dress, and the shame and confus 
stamp upon the friar' countenance, suffic to prove that her 
suspicion were but too well-founded. however, she wa too prudent to 
make those suspicion known. she judg that to unmask the impost 
would be no easi matter, the public be so much prejud in hi 
favour: and have but few friends, she thought it danger to make 
herself so power an enemy. she affect therefor not to remark hi 
agitation, seat herself tranquilli upon the sopha, assign some 
trifl reason for have quit her room unexpectedly, and convers 
on variou subject with seem confid and ease. 

reassur by her behaviour, the monk began to recov himself. He 
strove to answer elvira without appear embarrassed: but He wa 
still too great a novic in dissimulation, and He felt that He must 
look confus and awkward. He soon broke off the conversation, and 
rose to depart. what wa hi vexation, when on take leave, elvira 
told him in polit terms, that be now perfectli reestablished, she 
thought it an injustic to depriv other of hi company, who might be 
more in need of it! she assur him of her etern gratitude, for the 
benefit which dure her ill she had deriv from hi societi and 
exhortations: and she lament that her domest affairs, as well as 
the multitud of busi which hi situat must of necess impos 
upon him, would in futur depriv her of the pleasur of hi visits. 
though deliv in the mildest languag thi hint wa too plain to be 
mistaken. still, He wa prepar to put in a remonstr when an 
express look from elvira stop him short. He dare not press her 
to receiv him, for her manner convinc him that He wa discovered: 
He submit without reply, took an hasti leave, and retir to the 
abbey, hi heart fill with rage and shame, with bitter and 
disappointment. 

antonia' mind felt reliev by hi departure; yet she could not help 
lament that she wa never to see him more. elvira also felt a 
secret sorrow; she had receiv too much pleasur from think him her 
friend, not to regret the necess of chang her opinion: but her 
mind wa too much accustom to the fallaci of worldli friendship to 
permit her present disappoint to weigh upon it long. she now 
endeavour to make her daughter awar of the risqu which she had ran: 
but she wa oblig to treat the subject with caution, lest in remov 
the bandag of ignorance, the veil of innoc should be rent away. 
she therefor content herself with warn antonia to be upon her 
guard, and order her, should the abbot persist in hi visits, never 
to receiv them but in company. with thi injunct antonia promis 
to comply. 

ambrosio hasten to hi cell. He close the door after him, and threw 
himself upon the bed in despair. the impuls of desire, the sting of 
disappointment, the shame of detection, and the fear of be publicli 
unmasked, render hi bosom a scene of the most horribl confusion. 
He knew not what cours to pursue. debar the presenc of antonia, 
He had no hope of satisfi that passion which wa now becom a part 
of hi existence. He reflect that hi secret wa in a woman' power: 
He trembl with apprehens when He beheld the precipic befor him, 
and with rage, when He thought that had it not been for elvira, He 
should now have possess the object of hi desires. with the direct 
imprec He vow vengeanc against her; He swore that, cost what 
it would, He still would possess antonia. start from the bed, He 
pace the chamber with disord steps, howl with impot fury, 
dash himself violent against the walls, and indulg all the 
transport of rage and madness. 

He wa still under the influenc of thi storm of passion when He 
heard a gentl knock at the door of hi cell. consciou that hi voic 
must have been heard, He dare not refus admitt to the importuner: 
He strove to compos himself, and to hide hi agitation. have in 
some degre succeeded, He drew back the bolt: the door opened, and 
matilda appeared. 

At thi precis moment there wa no one with whose presenc He could 
better have dispensed. He had not suffici command over himself to 
conceal hi vexation. He start back, and frowned. 

'I am busy,' said He in a stern and hasti tone; 'leav me!' 

matilda heed him not: she again fasten the door, and then advanc 
toward him with an air gentl and supplicating. 

'forgiv me, ambrosio,' said she; 'for your own sake I must not obey 
you. fear no complaint from me; I come not to reproach you with your 
ingratitude. I pardon you from my heart, and sinc your love can no 
longer be mine, I request the next best gift, your confid and 
friendship. We cannot forc our inclinations; the littl beauti which 
you onc saw in me ha perish with it novelty, and if it can no 
longer excit desire, mine is the fault, not yours. but whi persist in 
shun me? whi such anxieti to fli my presence? you have sorrows, 
but will not permit me to share them; you have disappointments, but 
will not accept my comfort; you have wishes, but forbid my aid your 
pursuits. 'ti of thi which I complain, not of your indiffer to 
my person. I have given up the claim of the mistress, but noth 
shall prevail on me to give up those of the friend.' 

her mild had an instantan effect upon ambrosio' feelings. 

'gener matilda!' He replied, take her hand, 'how far do you rise 
superior to the foibl of your sex! yes, I accept your offer. I have 
need of an adviser, and a confident: In you I find everi need 
qualiti united. but to aid my pursuit .... ah! matilda, it lie 
not in your power!' 

'it lie in no one' power but mine. ambrosio, your secret is none to 
me; your everi step, your everi action ha been observ by my 
attent eye. you love.' 

'matilda!' 

'whi conceal it from me? fear not the littl jealousi which taint the 
gener of women: My soul disdain so despic a passion. you 
love, ambrosio; antonia dalfa is the object of your flame. I know 
everi circumst respect your passion: everi convers ha 
been repeat to me. I have been inform of your attempt to enjoy 
antonia' person, your disappointment, and dismiss from elvira' 
house. you now despair of possess your mistress; but I come to 
reviv your hopes, and point out the road to success.' 

'to success? oh! impossible!' 

'to them who dare noth is impossible. reli upon me, and you may yet 
be happy. the time is come, ambrosio, when regard for your comfort and 
tranquil compel me to reveal a part of my history, with which you 
are still unacquainted. listen, and do not interrupt me: should my 
confess disgust you, rememb that in make it my sole aim is to 
satisfi your wishes, and restor that peac to your heart which at 
present ha abandon it. I formerli mention that my guardian wa a 
man of uncommon knowledge: He took pain to instil that knowledg into 
my infant mind. among the variou scienc which curios had induc 
him to explore, He neglect not that which by most is esteem 
impious, and by mani chimerical. I speak of those art which relat to 
the world of spirits. hi deep research into caus and effects, hi 
unweari applic to the studi of natur philosophy, hi profound 
and unlimit knowledg of the properti and virtu of everi gem 
which enrich the deep, of everi herb which the earth produces, at 
length procur him the distinct which He had sought so long, so 
earnestly. hi curios wa fulli slaked, hi ambit ampli 
gratified. He gave law to the elements; He could revers the order of 
nature; hi eye read the mandat of futurity, and the infern spirit 
were submiss to hi commands. whi shrink you from me? I understand 
that enquir look. your suspicion are right, though your terror 
are unfounded. My guardian conceal not from me hi most preciou 
acquisition. yet had I never seen you, I should never have exert my 
power. like you I shudder at the thought of magic: like you I had 
form a terribl idea of the consequ of rais a daemon. To 
preserv that life which your love had taught me to prize, I had 
recours to mean which I trembl at employing. you rememb that 
night which I past in st. clare' sepulchre? then wa it that, 
surround by moulder bodies, I dare to perform those mystic rite 
which summon to my aid a fallen angel. judg what must have been my 
joy at discov that my terror were imaginary: I saw the daemon 
obedi to my orders, I saw him trembl at my frown, and found that, 
instead of sell my soul to a master, my courag had purchas for 
myself a slave.' 

'rash matilda! what have you done? you have doom yourself to 
endless perdition; you have barter for momentari power etern 
happiness! If on witchcraft depend the fruition of my desires, I 
renounc your aid most absolutely. the consequ are too horrible: 
I doat upon antonia, but am not so blind by lust as to sacrific for 
her enjoy my exist both in thi world and the next.' 

'ridicul prejudices! oh! blush, ambrosio, blush at be subject 
to their dominion. where is the risqu of accept my offers? what 
should induc my persuad you to thi step, except the wish of 
restor you to happi and quiet. If there is danger, it must fall 
upon me: It is I who invok the ministri of the spirits; mine 
therefor will be the crime, and your the profit. but danger there is 
none: the enemi of mankind is my slave, not my sovereign. Is there no 
differ between give and receiv laws, between serv and 
commanding? awak from your idl dreams, ambrosio! throw from you 
these terror so ill-suit to a soul like yours; leav them for common 
men, and dare to be happy! accompani me thi night to st. clare' 
sepulchre, wit my incantations, and antonia is your own.' 

'to obtain her by such mean I neither can, or will. ceas then to 
persuad me, for I dare not employ hell' agency. 

'you dare not? how have you deceiv me! that mind which I esteem 
so great and valiant, prove to be feeble, puerile, and grovelling, a 
slave to vulgar errors, and weaker than a woman's.' 

'what? though consciou of the danger, wil shall I expos myself 
to the seducer' arts? shall I renounc for ever my titl to 
salvation? shall my eye seek a sight which I know will blast them? 
no, no, matilda; I will not alli myself with god' enemy.' 

'are you then god' friend at present? have you not broken your 
engag with him, renounc hi service, and abandon yourself to 
the impuls of your passions? are you not plan the destruct of 
innocence, the ruin of a creatur whom He form in the mould of 
angels? If not of daemons, whose aid would you invok to forward thi 
laudabl design? will the seraphim protect it, conduct antonia to 
your arms, and sanction with their ministri your illicit pleasures? 
absurd! but I am not deceived, ambrosio! It is not virtu which make 
you reject my offer: you would accept it, but you dare not. 'ti not 
the crime which hold your hand, but the punishment; 'ti not respect 
for god which restrain you, but the terror of hi vengeance! fain 
would you offend him in secret, but you trembl to profess yourself hi 
foe. now shame on the coward soul, which want the courag either to 
be a firm friend or open enemy!' 

'to look upon guilt with horror, matilda, is in itself a merit: In thi 
respect I glori to confess myself a coward. though my passion have 
made me deviat from her laws, I still feel in my heart an innat love 
of virtue. but it ill becom you to tax me with my perjury: you, who 
first seduc me to violat my vows; you, who first rouz my sleep 
vices, made me feel the weight of religion' chains, and bad me be 
convinc that guilt had pleasures. yet though my principl have 
yield to the forc of temperament, I still have suffici grace to 
shudder at sorcery, and avoid a crime so monstrous, so unpardonable!' 

'unpardonable, say you? where then is your constant boast of the 
almighty' infinit mercy? ha He of late set bound to it? receiv 
He no longer a sinner with joy? you injur him, ambrosio; you will 
alway have time to repent, and He have good to forgive. afford 
him a gloriou opportun to exert that goodness: the greater your 
crime, the greater hi merit in pardoning. away then with these 
childish scruples: Be persuad to your good, and follow me to the 
sepulchre.' 

'oh! cease, matilda! that scof tone, that bold and impiou 
language, is horribl in everi mouth, but most so in a woman's. let us 
drop a convers which excit no other sentiment than horror and 
disgust. I will not follow you to the sepulchre, or accept the 
servic of your infern agents. antonia shall be mine, but mine by 
human means.' 

'then your she will never be! you are banish her presence; her 
mother ha open her eye to your designs, and she is now upon her 
guard against them. nay more, she love another. A youth of 
distinguish merit possess her heart, and unless you interfere, a 
few day will make her hi bride. thi intellig wa brought me by 
my invis servants, to whom I had recours on first perceiv your 
indifference. they watch your everi action, relat to me all that 
past at elvira's, and inspir me with the idea of favour your 
designs. their report have been my onli comfort. though you shun 
my presence, all your proceed were known to me: nay, I wa 
constantli with you in some degree, thank to thi preciou gift!' 

with these word she drew from beneath her habit a mirror of polish 
steel, the border of which were mark with variou strang and 
unknown characters. 

'amidst all my sorrows, amidst all my regret for your coldness, I wa 
sustain from despair by the virtu of thi talisman. On pronounc 
certain words, the person appear in it on whom the observer' thought 
are bent: thu though _i_ wa exil from your sight, you, ambrosio, 
were ever present to mine.' 

the friar' curios wa excit strongly. 

'what you relat is incredible! matilda, are you not amus yourself 
with my credulity?' 

'be your own eye the judge.' 

she put the mirror into hi hand. curios induc him to take it, 
and love, to wish that antonia might appear. matilda pronounc the 
magic words. immediately, a thick smoke rose from the charact 
trace upon the borders, and spread itself over the surface. It 
dispers again gradually; A confus mixtur of colour and imag 
present themselv to the friar' eyes, which at length arrang 
themselv in their proper places, He beheld in miniatur antonia' 
love form. 

the scene wa a small closet belong to her apartment. she wa 
undress to bath herself. the long tress of her hair were alreadi 
bound up. the amor monk had full opportun to observ the 
voluptu contour and admir symmetri of her person. she threw 
off her last garment, and advanc to the bath prepar for her, she 
put her foot into the water. It struck cold, and she drew it back 
again. though unconsci of be observed, an inbr sens of 
modesti induc her to veil her charms; and she stood hesit upon 
the brink, in the attitud of the venu de medicis. At thi moment a 
tame linnet flew toward her, nestl it head between her breasts, and 
nibbl them in wanton play. the smile antonia strove in vain to 
shake off the bird, and at length rais her hand to drive it from it 
delight harbour. ambrosio could bear no more: hi desir were 
work up to phrenzy. 

'I yield!' He cried, dash the mirror upon the ground: 'matilda, I 
follow you! Do with me what you will!' 

she wait not to hear hi consent repeated. It wa alreadi midnight. 
she flew to her cell, and soon return with her littl basket and the 
key of the cemetery, which had remain in her possess sinc her 
first visit to the vaults. she gave the monk no time for reflection. 

'come!' she said, and took hi hand; 'follow me, and wit the 
effect of your resolve!' 

thi said, she drew him hastili along. they pass into the 
burying-ground unobserved, open the door of the sepulchre, and found 
themselv at the head of the subterran staircase. As yet the 
beam of the full moon had guid their steps, but that resourc now 
fail them. matilda had neglect to provid herself with a lamp. 
still hold ambrosio' hand she descend the marbl steps; but the 
profound obscur with which they were overspread oblig them to walk 
slow and cautiously. 

'you tremble!' said matilda to her companion; 'fear not; the destin 
spot is near.' 

they reach the foot of the staircase, and continu to proceed, 
feel their way along the walls. On turn a corner suddenly, they 
descri faint gleam of light which seem burn at a distance. 
thither they bent their steps: the ray proceed from a small 
sepulchr lamp which flame unceasingli befor the statu of st. 
clare. It ting with dim and cheerless beam the massi column which 
support the roof, but wa too feebl to dissip the thick gloom in 
which the vault abov were buried. 

matilda took the lamp. 

'wait for me!' said she to the friar; 'in a few moment I am here 
again.' 

with these word she hasten into one of the passag which branch 
in variou direct from thi spot, and form a sort of labyrinth. 
ambrosio wa now left alone: dark the most profound surround him, 
and encourag the doubt which began to reviv in hi bosom. He had 
been hurri away by the delirium of the moment: the shame of 
betray hi terrors, while in matilda' presence, had induc him to 
repress them; but now that he wa abandon to himself, they resum 
their former ascendancy. He trembl at the scene which He wa soon to 
witness. He knew not how far the delus of magic might oper upon 
hi mind, and possibl might forc him to some deed whose commiss 
would make the breach between himself and heaven irreparable. In thi 
fear dilemma, He would have implor god' assistance, but wa 
consciou that He had forfeit all claim to such protection. gladli 
would He have return to the abbey; but as He had past through 
innumer cavern and wind passages, the attempt of regain the 
stair wa hopeless. hi fate wa determined: No possibl of 
escap present itself: He therefor combat hi apprehensions, and 
call everi argument to hi succour, which might enabl him to support 
the tri scene with fortitude. He reflect that antonia would be the 
reward of hi daring: He inflam hi imagin by enumer her 
charms. He persuad himself that (a matilda had observed), He alway 
should have time suffici for repentance, and that as He employ her 
assistance, not that of the daemons, the crime of sorceri could not be 
laid to hi charge. He had read much respect witchcraft: He 
understood that unless a formal act wa sign renounc hi claim to 
salvation, satan would have no power over him. He wa fulli determin 
not to execut ani such act, whatev threat might be used, or 
advantag held out to him. 

such were hi medit while wait for matilda. they were 
interrupt by a low murmur which seem at no great distanc from him. 
He wa startled. He listened. some minut past in silence, after 
which the murmur wa repeated. It appear to be the groan of one 
in pain. In ani other situation, thi circumst would onli have 
excit hi attent and curiosity: 

In the present, hi predomin sensat wa that of terror. hi 
imagin total engross by the idea of sorceri and spirits, He 
fanci that some unquiet ghost wa wander near him; or els that 
matilda had fallen a victim to her presumption, and wa perish under 
the cruel fang of the daemons. the nois seem not to approach, but 
continu to be heard at intervals. sometim it becam more audible, 
doubtless as the suffer of the person who utter the groan becam 
more acut and insupportable. ambrosio now and then thought that He 
could distinguish accents; and onc in particular He wa almost 
convinc that He heard a faint voic exclaim, 

'god! oh! god! No hope! No succour!' 

yet deeper groan follow these words. they die away gradually, and 
univers silenc again prevailed. 

'what can thi mean?' thought the bewild monk. 

At that moment an idea which flash into hi mind, almost petrifi 
him with horror. He started, and shudder at himself. 

'should it be possible!' He groan involuntarily; 'should it but be 
possible, oh! what a monster am i!' 

He wish to resolv hi doubts, and to repair hi fault, if it were 
not too late already: but these gener and compassion sentiment 
were soon put to flight by the return of matilda. He forgot the 
groan sufferer, and rememb noth but the danger and 
embarrass of hi own situation. the light of the return lamp 
gild the walls, and in a few moment after matilda stood besid him. 
she had quit her religi habit: she wa now cloath in a long 
sabl robe, on which wa trace in gold embroideri a varieti of unknown 
characters: It wa fasten by a girdl of preciou stones, in which 
wa fix a poignard. her neck and arm were uncovered. In her hand 
she bore a golden wand. her hair wa loos and flow wildli upon her 
shoulders; her eye sparkl with terrif expression; and her whole 
demeanour wa calcul to inspir the behold with awe and 
admiration. 

'follow me!' she said to the monk in a low and solemn voice; 'all is 
ready!' 

hi limb trembled, while He obey her. she led him through variou 
narrow passages; and on everi side as they past along, the beam of the 
lamp display none but the most revolt objects; skulls, bones, 
graves, and imag whose eye seem to glare on them with horror and 
surprize. At length they reach a spaciou cavern, whose lofti roof 
the eye sought in vain to discover. A profound obscur hover 
through the void. damp vapour struck cold to the friar' heart; and 
He listen sadli to the blast while it howl along the lone vaults. 
here matilda stopped. she turn to ambrosio. hi cheek and lip 
were pale with apprehension. By a glanc of mingl scorn and anger 
she reprov hi pusillanimity, but she spoke not. she place the lamp 
upon the ground, near the basket. she motion that ambrosio should be 
silent, and began the mysteri rites. she drew a circl round him, 
anoth round herself, and then take a small phial from the basket, 
pour a few drop upon the ground befor her. she bent over the 
place, mutter some indistinct sentences, and immedi a pale 
sulphur flame aros from the ground. It increas by degrees, and 
at length spread it wave over the whole surface, the circl alon 
except in which stood matilda and the monk. It then ascend the 
huge column of unhewn stone, glide along the roof, and form the 
cavern into an immens chamber total cover with blue trembl 
fire. It emit no heat: On the contrary, the extrem chill of 
the place seem to augment with everi moment. matilda continu her 
incantations: At interv she took variou articl from the basket, 
the natur and name of most of which were unknown to the friar: but 
among the few which He distinguished, He particularli observ three 
human fingers, and an agnu dei which she broke in pieces. she threw 
them all into the flame which burn befor her, and they were 
instantli consumed. 

the monk beheld her with anxiou curiosity. suddenli she utter a 
loud and pierc shriek. she appear to be seiz with an access of 
delirium; she tore her hair, beat her bosom, use the most frantic 
gestures, and draw the poignard from her girdl plung it into her 
left arm. the blood gush out plentifully, and as she stood on the 
brink of the circle, she took care that it should fall on the outside. 
the flame retir from the spot on which the blood wa pouring. A 
volum of dark cloud rose slowli from the ensanguin earth, and 
ascend gradually, till it reach the vault of the cavern. At the 
same time a clap of thunder wa heard: the echo peal fear along 
the subterran passages, and the ground shook beneath the feet of 
the enchantress. 

It wa now that ambrosio repent of hi rashness. the solemn 
singular of the charm had prepar him for someth strang and 
horrible. He wait with fear for the spirit' appearance, whose 
come wa announc by thunder and earthquakes. He look wildli 
round him, expect that some dread apparit would meet hi eyes, 
the sight of which would drive him mad. A cold shiver seiz hi 
body, and He sank upon one knee, unabl to support himself. 

'he comes!' exclaim matilda in a joy accent. 

ambrosio started, and expect the daemon with terror. what wa hi 
surprize, when the thunder ceas to roll, a full strain of melodi 
music sound in the air. At the same time the cloud dispersed, and He 
beheld a figur more beauti than fancy' pencil ever drew. It wa a 
youth seemingli scarc eighteen, the perfect of whose form and face 
wa unrivalled. He wa perfectli naked: A bright star sparkl upon 
hi forehead; two crimson wing extend themselv from hi shoulders; 
and hi silken lock were confin by a band of many-colour fires, 
which play round hi head, form themselv into a varieti of 
figures, and shone with a brillianc far surpass that of preciou 
stones. circlet of diamond were fasten round hi arm and ankles, 
and in hi right hand He bore a silver branch, imit myrtle. hi 
form shone with dazzl glory: He wa surround by cloud of 
rose-colour light, and at the moment that He appeared, a refresh 
air breath perfum through the cavern. enchant at a vision so 
contrari to hi expectations, ambrosio gaze upon the spirit with 
delight and wonder: yet howev beauti the figure, He could not but 
remark a wild in the daemon' eyes, and a mysteri melancholi 
impress upon hi features, betray the fallen angel, and inspir 
the spectat with secret awe. 

the music ceased. matilda address herself to the spirit: she spoke 
in a languag unintellig to the monk, and wa answer in the same. 
she seem to insist upon someth which the daemon wa unwil to 
grant. He frequent dart upon ambrosio angri glances, and at such 
time the friar' heart sank within him. matilda appear to grow 
incensed. she spoke in a loud and command tone, and her gestur 
declar that she wa threaten him with her vengeance. her menac 
had the desir effect: the spirit sank upon hi knee, and with a 
submiss air present to her the branch of myrtle. No sooner had 
she receiv it, than the music wa again heard; A thick cloud spread 
itself over the apparition; the blue flame disappeared, and total 
obscur reign through the cave. the abbot move not from hi 
place: hi faculti were all bound up in pleasure, anxiety, and 
surprize. At length the dark dispersing, He perceiv matilda 
stand near him in her religi habit, with the myrtl in her hand. 
No trace of the incantation, and the vault were onli illumin by 
the faint ray of the sepulchr lamp. 

'I have succeeded,' said matilda, 'though with more difficulti than I 
expected. lucifer, whom I summon to my assistance, wa at first 
unwil to obey my commands: To enforc hi complianc I wa 
constrain to have recours to my strongest charms. they have 
produc the desir effect, but I have engag never more to invok 
hi agenc in your favour. bewar then, how you employ an opportun 
which never will return. My magic art will now be of no use to you: 
In futur you can onli hope for supernatur aid by invok the 
daemon yourself, and accept the condit of their service. thi 
you will never do: you want strength of mind to forc them to 
obedience, and unless you pay their establish price, they will not be 
your voluntari servants. In thi one instanc they consent to obey 
you: I offer you the mean of enjoy your mistress, and be care 
not to lose the opportunity. receiv thi constel myrtle: while 
you bear thi in your hand, everi door will fli open to you. It will 
procur you access tomorrow night to antonia' chamber: then breath 
upon it thrice, pronounc her name, and place it upon her pillow. A 
death-lik slumber will immedi seiz upon her, and depriv her of 
the power of resist your attempts. sleep will hold her till break 
of morning. In thi state you may satisfi your desir without danger 
of be discovered; sinc when daylight shall dispel the effect of 
the enchantment, antonia will perceiv her dishonour, but be ignor 
of the ravisher. Be happi then, my ambrosio, and let thi servic 
convinc you that my friendship is disinterest and pure. the night 
must be near expiring: let us return to the abbey, lest our absenc 
should creat surprize.' 

the abbot receiv the talisman with silent gratitude. hi idea were 
too much bewild by the adventur of the night to permit hi 
express hi thank audibly, or inde as yet to feel the whole valu 
of her present. matilda took up her lamp and basket, and guid her 
companion from the mysteri cavern. she restor the lamp to it 
former place, and continu her rout in darkness, till she reach the 
foot of the staircase. the first beam of the rise sun dart down 
it facilit the ascent. matilda and the abbot hasten out of the 
sepulchre, close the door after them, and soon regain the abbey' 
western cloister. No one met them, and they retir unobserv to 
their respect cells. 

the confus of ambrosio' mind now began to appease. He rejoic in 
the fortun issu of hi adventure, and reflect upon the virtu 
of the myrtle, look upon antonia as alreadi in hi power. 
imagin retrac to him those secret charm betray to him by the 
enchant mirror, and He wait with impati for the approach of 
midnight. 




volum iii 



chapter I 

the cricket sing, and man' o'er-labour sens 
repair itself by rest: our tarquin thu 
did softli press the rushes, ere He waken 
the chastiti He wounded--cytherea, 
how brave thou becom'st thi bed! fresh lily! 
and whiter than the sheets! 
cymbeline. 

all the research of the marqui de la cisterna prove vain: agn 
wa lost to him for ever. despair produc so violent an effect upon 
hi constitution, that the consequ wa a long and sever illness. 
thi prevent him from visit elvira as He had intended; and she 
be ignor of the caus of hi neglect, it gave her no trifl 
uneasiness. hi sister' death had prevent lorenzo from 
commun to hi uncl hi design respect antonia: the 
injunct of her mother forbad hi present himself to her without 
the duke' consent; and as she heard no more of him or hi proposals, 
elvira conjectur that He had either met with a better match, or had 
been command to give up all thought of her daughter. everi day made 
her more uneasi respect antonia' fate: while she retain the 
abbot' protection, she bore with fortitud the disappoint of her 
hope with regard to lorenzo and the marquis. that resourc now fail 
her. she wa convinc that ambrosio had medit her daughter' 
ruin: and when she reflect that her death would leav antonia 
friendless and unprotect in a world so base, so perfidi and 
depraved, her heart swell with the bitter of apprehension. At 
such time she would sit for hour gaze upon the love girl; and 
seem to listen to her innoc prattle, while in realiti her 
thought dwelt upon the sorrow into which a moment would suffic to 
plung her. then she would clasp her in her arm suddenly, lean her 
head upon her daughter' bosom, and bedew it with her tears. 

An event wa in prepar which, had she known it, would have 
reliev her from her inquietude. lorenzo now wait onli for a 
favour opportun to inform the duke of hi intend marriage: 
however, a circumst which occur at thi period, oblig him to 
delay hi explan for a few day longer. 

don raymond' maladi seem to gain ground. lorenzo wa constantli at 
hi bedside, and treat him with a tender truli fraternal. both 
the caus and effect of the disord were highli afflict to the 
brother of agnes: yet theodore' grief wa scarc less sincere. that 
amiabl boy quit not hi master for a moment, and put everi mean in 
practic to consol and allevi hi sufferings. the marqui had 
conceiv so root an affect for hi deceas mistress, that it wa 
evid to all that He never could surviv her loss: noth could 
have prevent him from sink under hi grief but the persuas of 
her be still alive, and in need of hi assistance. though convinc 
of it falsehood, hi attend encourag him in a belief which 
form hi onli comfort. He wa assur daili that fresh perquisit 
were make respect the fate of agnes: stori were invent 
recount the variou attempt made to get admitt into the 
convent; and circumst were relat which, though they did not 
promis her absolut recovery, at least were suffici to keep hi 
hope alive. the marqui constantli fell into the most terribl excess 
of passion when inform of the failur of these suppos attempts. 
still He would not credit that the succeed one would have the same 
fate, but flatter himself that the next would prove more fortunate. 

theodor wa the onli one who exert himself to realiz hi master' 
chimoeras. He wa etern busi in plan scheme for enter 
the convent, or at least of obtain from the nun some intellig 
of agnes. To execut these scheme wa the onli induc which could 
prevail on him to quit don raymond. He becam a veri proteus, chang 
hi shape everi day; but all hi metamorphos were to veri littl 
purpose: He regularli return to the palac de la cisterna without 
ani intellig to confirm hi master' hopes. one day He took it 
into hi head to disguis himself as a beggar. He put a patch over hi 
left eye, took hi guitar in hand, and post himself at the gate of 
the convent. 

'if agn is realli confin in the convent,' thought he, 'and hear my 
voice, she will recollect it, and possibl may find mean to let me 
know that she is here.' 

with thi idea He mingl with a crowd of beggar who assembl daili 
at the gate of st. clare to receiv soup, which the nun were 
accustom to distribut at twelv o'clock. all were provid with 
jug or bowl to carri it away; but as theodor had no utensil of thi 
kind, He beg leav to eat hi portion at the convent door. thi wa 
grant without difficulty: hi sweet voice, and in spite of hi 
patch eye, hi engag countenance, won the heart of the good old 
porteress, who, aid by a lay-sister, wa busi in serv to each 
hi mess. theodor wa bad to stay till the other should depart, and 
promis that hi request should then be granted. the youth desir no 
better, sinc it wa not to eat soup that He present himself at the 
convent. He thank the porteress for her permission, retir from the 
door, and seat himself upon a larg stone, amus himself in tune 
hi guitar while the beggar were served. 

As soon as the crowd wa gone, theodor wa beckon to the gate, and 
desir to come in. He obey with infinit readiness, but affect 
great respect at pass the hallow threshold, and to be much daunt 
by the presenc of the reverend ladies. hi feign timid flatter 
the vaniti of the nuns, who endeavour to reassur him. the porteress 
took him into her awn littl parlour: In the meanwhile, the lay-sist 
went to the kitchen, and soon return with a doubl portion of soup, 
of better qualiti than what wa given to the beggars. hi hostess 
ad some fruit and confect from her own privat store, and both 
encourag the youth to dine heartily. To all these attent He 
repli with much seem gratitude, and abund of bless upon 
hi benefactresses. while He ate, the nun admir the delicaci of hi 
features, the beauti of hi hair, and the sweet and grace which 
accompani all hi actions. they lament to each other in whispers, 
that so charm a youth should be expos to the seduct of the 
world, and agreed, that He would be a worthi pillar of the cathol 
church. they conclud their confer by resolv that heaven would 
be render a real servic if they entreat the prioress to interced 
with ambrosio for the beggar' admiss into the order of capuchins. 

thi be determined, the porteress, who wa a person of great 
influenc in the convent, post away in all hast to the domina' 
cell. here she made so flame a narr of theodore' merit that 
the old ladi grew curiou to see him. accordingly, the porteress wa 
commiss to convey him to the parlour grate. In the interim, the 
suppos beggar wa sift the lay-sist with respect to the fate of 
agnes: her evid onli corrobor the domina' assertions. she 
said that agn had been taken ill on return from confession, had 
never quit her bed from that moment, and that she had herself been 
present at the funeral. she even attest have seen her dead body, 
and assist with her own hand in adjust it upon the bier. thi 
account discourag theodore: yet as He had push the adventur so 
far, He resolv to wit it conclusion. 

the porteress now returned, and order him to follow her. He obeyed, 
and wa conduct into the parlour, where the ladi prioress wa alreadi 
post at the grate. the nun surround her, who all flock with 
eager to a scene which promis some diversion. theodor salut 
them with profound respect, and hi presenc had the power to smooth 
for a moment even the stern brow of the superior. she ask sever 
question respect hi parents, hi religion, and what had reduc 
him to a state of beggary. To these demand hi answer were perfectli 
satisfactori and perfectli false. He wa then ask hi opinion of a 
monast life: He repli in term of high estim and respect for 
it. upon this, the prioress told him that hi obtain an entranc 
into a religi order wa not impossible; that her recommend 
would not permit hi poverti to be an obstacle, and that if she found 
him deserv it, He might depend in futur upon her protection. 
theodor assur her that to merit her favour would be hi highest 
ambition; and have order him to return next day, when she would 
talk with him further, the domina quit the parlour. 

the nuns, whom respect for the superior had till then kept silent, now 
crowd all togeth to the grate, and assail the youth with a 
multitud of questions. He had alreadi examin each with attention: 
alas! agn wa not amongst them. the nun heap question upon 
question so thickli that it wa scarc possibl for him to reply. 
one ask where He wa born, sinc hi accent declar him to be a 
foreigner: anoth want to know, whi He wore a patch upon hi left 
eye: sister helena enquir whether He had not a sister like him, 
becaus she should like such a companion; and sister rachael wa fulli 
persuad that the brother would be the pleasant companion of the 
two. theodor amus himself with retail to the credul nun for 
truth all the strang stori which hi imagin could invent. He 
relat to them hi suppos adventures, and penetr everi auditor 
with astonishment, while He talk of giants, savages, ship-wrecks, and 
island inhabit 

'bi anthropophagi, and men whose head 
Do grow beneath their shoulders,' 

with mani other circumst to the full as remarkable. He said, that 
He wa born in terra incognita, wa educ at an hottentot 
university, and had past two year among the american of silesia. 

'for what regard the loss of my eye' said he, 'it wa a just 
punish upon me for disrespect to the virgin, when I made my second 
pilgrimag to loretto. I stood near the altar in the miracul 
chapel: the monk were proceed to array the statu in her best 
apparel. the pilgrim were order to close their eye dure thi 
ceremony: but though by natur extrem religious, curios wa too 
powerful. At the moment ..... I shall penetr you with horror, 
reverend ladies, when I reveal my crime! .... At the moment that 
the monk were chang her shift, I ventur to open my left eye, and 
gave a littl peep toward the statue. that look wa my last! the 
glori which surround the virgin wa too great to be supported. I 
hastili shut my sacrilegi eye, and never have been abl to unclos 
it since!' 

At the relat of thi miracl the nun all cross themselves, and 
promis to interced with the bless virgin for the recoveri of hi 
sight. they express their wonder at the extent of hi travels, and 
at the strang adventur which He had met with at so earli an age. 
they now remark hi guitar, and enquir whether he wa an adept in 
music. He repli with modesti that it wa not for him to decid upon 
hi talents, but request permiss to appeal to them as judges. 
thi wa grant without difficulty. 

'but at least,' said the old porteress, 'take care not to sing ani 
thing profane.' 

'you may depend upon my discretion,' repli theodore: 'you shall hear 
how danger it is for young women to abandon themselv to their 
passions, illustr by the adventur of a damsel who fell suddenli in 
love with an unknown knight.' 

'but is the adventur true?' enquir the porteress. 

'everi word of it. It happen in denmark, and the heroin wa thought 
so beauti that she wa known by no other name but that of "the 
love maid".' 

'in denmark, say you?' mumbl an old nun; 'are not the peopl all 
black in denmark?' 

'bi no means, reverend lady; they are of a delic pea-green with 
flame-colour hair and whiskers.' 

'mother of god! pea-green?' exclaim sister helena; 'oh! 'ti 
impossible!' 

'impossible?' said the porteress with a look of contempt and 
exultation: 'not at all: when I wa a young woman, I rememb see 
sever of them myself.' 

theodor now put hi instrument in proper order. He had read the stori 
of a king of england whose prison wa discov by a minstrel; and He 
hope that the same scheme would enabl him to discov agnes, should 
she be in the convent. He chose a ballad which she had taught him 
herself in the castl of lindenberg: she might possibl catch the 
sound, and He hope to hear her repli to some of the stanzas. hi 
guitar wa now in tune, and He prepar to strike it. 

'but befor I begin,' said He 'it is necessari to inform you, ladies, 
that thi same denmark is terribl infest by sorcerers, witches, and 
evil spirits. everi element possess it appropri daemons. the 
wood are haunt by a malign power, call "the erl- or 
oak-king:" He it is who blight the trees, spoil the harvest, and 
command the imp and goblins: He appear in the form of an old man of 
majest figure, with a golden crown and long white beard: hi 
princip amus is to entic young children from their parents, and 
as soon as He get them into hi cave, He tear them into a thousand 
pieces--th river are govern by anoth fiend, call "the 
water-king:" hi provinc is to agit the deep, occas 
ship-wrecks, and drag the drown sailor beneath the waves: He wear 
the appear of a warrior, and employ himself in lure young 
virgin into hi snare: what He doe with them, when He catch them 
in the water, reverend ladies, I leav for you to imagine--"th 
fire-king" seem to be a man all form of flames: He rais the 
meteor and wander light which beguil travel into pond and 
marshes, and He direct the lightn where it may do most 
mischief--th last of these elementari daemon is call "the 
cloud-king;" hi figur is that of a beauti youth, and He is 
distinguish by two larg sabl wings: though hi outsid is so 
enchanting, He is not a bit better dispos than the others: He is 
continu employ in rais storms, tear up forest by the 
roots, and blow castl and convent about the ear of their 
inhabitants. the first ha a daughter, who is queen of the elv and 
fairies; the second ha a mother, who is a power enchantress: 
neither of these ladi are worth more than the gentlemen: I do not 
rememb to have heard ani famili assign to the two other daemons, 
but at present I have no busi with ani of them except the fiend of 
the waters. He is the hero of my ballad; but I thought it necessari 
befor I began, to give you some account of hi proceedings--' 

theodor then play a short symphony; after which, stretch hi 
voic to it utmost extent to facilit it reach the ear of agnes, 
He sang the follow stanzas. 

the water-k 

A danish ballad 

with gentl murmur flow the tide, 
while by the fragrant floweri side 
the love maid with carol gay 
To mary' church pursu her way. 

the water-fiend' malign eye 
along the bank beheld her hie; 
straight to hi mother-witch He sped, 
and thu in suppliant accent said: 

'oh! mother! mother! now advise, 
how I may yonder maid surprize: 
oh! mother! mother! now explain, 
how I may yonder maid obtain.' 

the witch she gave him armour white; 
she form him like a gallant knight; 
Of water clear next made her hand 
A steed, whose hous were of sand. 

the water-k then swift He went; 
To mary' church hi step He bent: 
He bound hi courser to the door, 
and pace the church-yard three time four. 

hi courser to the door bound he, 
and pace the church-yard four time three: 
then hasten up the aisle, where all 
the peopl flocked, both great and small. 

the priest said, as the knight drew near, 
'and wherefor come the white chief here?' 
the love maid she smile aside; 
'oh! would I were the white chief' bride!' 

He stept o'er bench one and two; 
'oh! love maid, I die for you!' 
He stept o'er bench two and three; 
'oh! love maiden, go with me!' 

then sweet she smiled, the love maid, 
and while she gave her hand, she said, 
'betid me joy, betid me woe, 
o'er hill, o'er dale, with thee I go.' 

the priest their hand togeth joins: 
they dance, while clear the moon-beam shines; 
and littl think the maiden bright, 
her partner is the water-spright. 

oh! had some spirit deign to sing, 
'your partner is the water-king!' 
the maid had fear and hate confest, 
and curs the hand which then she prest. 

but noth give caus to think, 
how near she stray to danger' brink, 
still on she went, and hand in hand 
the lover reach the yellow sand. 

'ascend thi steed with me, my dear; 
We need must cross the streamlet here; 
ride boldli in; It is not deep; 
the wind are hushed, the billow sleep.' 

thu spoke the water-king. the maid 
her traitor-bride-groom' wish obeyed: 
and soon she saw the courser lave 
delight in hi parent wave. 

'stop! stop! my love! the water blue 
e'en now my shrink foot bedew!' 
'oh! lay asid your fears, sweet heart! 
We now have reach the deepest part.' 

'stop! stop! my love! for now I see 
the water rise abov my knee.' 
'oh! lay asid your fears, sweet heart! 
We now have reach the deepest part.' 

'stop! stop! for god' sake, stop! for oh! 
the water o'er my bosom flow!'-- 
scarc wa the word pronounced, when knight 
and courser vanish from her sight. 

she shrieks, but shriek in vain; for high 
the wild wind rise dull the cry; 
the fiend exults; the billow dash, 
and o'er their hapless victim wash. 

three time while struggl with the stream, 
the love maid wa heard to scream; 
but when the tempest' rage wa o'er, 
the love maid wa seen no more. 

warn by thi tale, ye damsel fair, 
To whom you give your love beware! 
believ not everi handsom knight, 
and danc not with the water-spright! 


the youth ceas to sing. the nun were delight with the sweet 
of hi voic and masterli manner of touch the instrument: but 
howev accept thi applaus would have been at ani other time, at 
present it wa insipid to theodore. hi artific had not succeeded. He 
paus in vain between the stanzas: No voic repli to his, and He 
abandon the hope of equal blondel. 

the convent bell now warn the nun that it wa time to assembl in 
the refectory. they were oblig to quit the grate; they thank the 
youth for the entertain which hi music had afford them, and 
charg him to return the next day. thi He promised: the nuns, to 
give him the greater inclin to keep hi word, told him that He 
might alway depend upon the convent for hi meals, and each of them 
made him some littl present. one gave him a box of sweetmeats; 
another, an agnu dei; some brought reliqu of saints, waxen images, 
and consecr crosses; and other present him with piec of those 
work in which the religi excel, such as embroidery, artifici 
flowers, lace, and needlework. all these He wa advis to sell, in 
order to put himself into better case; and He wa assur that it would 
be easi to dispos of them, sinc the spaniard hold the perform 
of the nun in high estimation. have receiv these gift with 
seem respect and gratitude, He remark that, have no basket, He 
knew not how to convey them away. sever of the nun were hasten 
in search of one, when they were stop by the return of an elderli 
woman, whom theodor had not till then observed: her mild countenance, 
and respect air prejud him immedi in her favour. 

'hah!' said the porteress; 'here come the mother st. ursula with a 
basket.' 

the nun approach the grate, and present the basket to theodore: It 
wa of willow, line with blue satin, and upon the four side were 
paint scene from the legend of st. genevieve. 

'here is my gift,' said she, as she gave it into hi hand; 'good youth, 
despis it not; though it valu seem insignificant, it ha mani 
hidden virtues.' 

she accompani these word with an express look. It wa not lost 
upon theodore; In receiv the present, He drew as near the grate as 
possible. 

'agnes!' she whisper in a voic scarc intelligible. theodore, 
however, caught the sound: He conclud that some mysteri wa 
conceal in the basket, and hi heart beat with impati and joy. 
At thi moment the domina returned. her air wa gloomi and frowning, 
and she look if possibl more stern than ever. 

'mother st. ursula, I would speak with you in private.' 

the nun chang colour, and wa evid disconcerted. 

'with me?' she repli in a falter voice. 

the domina motion that she must follow her, and retired. the mother 
st. ursula obey her; soon after, the refectori bell ring a second 
time, the nun quit the grate, and theodor wa left at liberti to 
carri off hi prize. delight that at length He had obtain some 
intellig for the marquis, He flew rather than ran, till He reach 
the hotel de la cisternas. In a few minut He stood by hi master' 
bed with the basket in hi hand. lorenzo wa in the chamber, 
endeavour to reconcil hi friend to a misfortun which He felt 
himself but too severely. theodor relat hi adventure, and the hope 
which had been creat by the mother st. ursula' gift. the marqui 
start from hi pillow: that fire which sinc the death of agn had 
been extinguished, now reviv in hi bosom, and hi eye sparkl with 
the eager of expectation. the emot which lorenzo' counten 
betrayed, were scarc weaker, and He wait with inexpress 
impati for the solut of thi mystery. raymond caught the basket 
from the hand of hi page: He empti the content upon the bed, and 
examin them with minut attention. He hope that a letter would be 
found at the bottom; noth of the kind appeared. the search wa 
resumed, and still with no better success. At length don raymond 
observ that one corner of the blue satin line wa unripped; He tore 
it open hastily, and drew forth a small scrap of paper neither fold 
or sealed. It wa address to the marqui de la cisternas, and the 
content were as follows. 

have recognis your page, I ventur to send these few lines. procur 
an order from the cardinal-duk for seiz my person, and that of the 
domina; but let it not be execut till friday at midnight. It is the 
festiv of st. clare: there will be a process of nun by 
torch-light, and I shall be among them. bewar not to let your 
intent be known: should a syllabl be dropt to excit the domina' 
suspicions, you will never hear of me more. Be cautious, if you prize 
the memori of agnes, and wish to punish her assassins. I have that to 
tell, will freez your blood with horror. st. ursula. 

No sooner had the marqui read the note than He fell back upon hi 
pillow depriv of sens or motion. the hope fail him which till now 
had support hi existence; and these line convinc him but too 
posit that agn wa inde no more. lorenzo felt thi 
circumst less forcibly, sinc it had alway been hi idea that hi 
sister had perish by unfair means. when He found by the mother st. 
ursula' letter how true were hi suspicions, the confirm excit 
no other sentiment in hi bosom than a wish to punish the murder as 
they deserved. It wa no easi task to recal the marqui to himself. 
As soon as He recov hi speech, He broke out into execr 
against the assassin of hi beloved, and vow to take upon them a 
signal vengeance. He continu to rave and torment himself with 
impot passion till hi constitution, enfeebl by grief and illness, 
could support itself no longer, and He relaps into insensibility. 
hi melancholi situat sincer affect lorenzo, who would 
willingli have remain in the apart of hi friend; but other care 
now demand hi presence. It wa necessari to procur the order for 
seiz the prioress of st. clare. for thi purpose, have commit 
raymond to the care of the best physician in madrid, He quit the 
hotel de la cisternas, and bent hi cours toward the palac of the 
cardinal-duke. 

hi disappoint wa excessive, when He found that affair of state 
had oblig the cardin to set out for a distant province. 

It want but five to friday: yet by travel day and night, He 
hope to return in time for the pilgrimag of st. clare. In thi He 
succeeded. He found the cardinal-duke; and repres to him the 
suppos culpabl of the prioress, as also the violent effect which 
it had produc upon don raymond. He could have use no argument so 
forcibl as thi last. Of all hi nephews, the marqui wa the onli 
one to whom the cardinal-duk wa sincer attached: He perfectli 
doat upon him, and the prioress could have commit no greater crime 
in hi eye than to have endang the life of the marquis. 
consequently, He grant the order of arrest without difficulty: He 
also gave lorenzo a letter to a princip offic of the inquisition, 
desir him to see hi mandat executed. furnish with these papers, 
medina hasten back to madrid, which He reach on the friday a few 
hour befor dark. He found the marqui somewhat easier, but so weak 
and exhaust that without great exert He could neither speak or 
more. have past an hour by hi bedside, lorenzo left him to 
commun hi design to hi uncle, as also to give don ramirez de 
mello the cardinal' letter. the first wa petrifi with horror when 
He learnt the fate of hi unhappi niece: He encourag lorenzo to 
punish her assassins, and engag to accompani him at night to st. 
clare' convent. don ramirez promis hi firmest support, and 
select a band of trusti archer to prevent opposit on the part of 
the populace. 

but while lorenzo wa anxiou to unmask one religi hypocrite, He wa 
unconsci of the sorrow prepar for him by another. aid by 
matilda' infern agents, ambrosio had resolv upon the innoc 
antonia' ruin. the moment destin to be so fatal to her arrived. 
she had taken leav of her mother for the night. 

As she kiss her, she felt an unusu despond infus itself into 
her bosom. she left her, and return to her instantly, threw herself 
into her matern arms, and bath her cheek with tears: she felt 
uneasi at quit her, and a secret presenti assur her that 
never must they meet again. elvira observed, and tri to laugh her 
out of thi childish prejudice: she chid her mildli for encourag 
such unground sadness, and warn her how danger it wa to 
encourag such ideas. 

To all her remonstr she receiv no other answer than, 

'mother! dear mother! oh! would to god, it were morning!' 

elvira, whose inquietud respect her daughter wa a great obstacl 
to her perfect reestablishment, wa still labour under the effect 
of her late sever illness. she wa thi even more than usual 
indisposed, and retir to bed befor her accustom hour. antonia 
withdrew from her mother' chamber with regret, and till the door 
closed, kept her eye fix upon her with melancholi expression. she 
retir to her own apartment; her heart wa fill with bitterness: It 
seem to her that all her prospect were blasted, and the world 
contain noth for which it wa worth existing. she sank into a 
chair, reclin her head upon her arm, and gaze upon the floor with a 
vacant stare, while the most gloomi imag float befor her fancy. 
she wa still in thi state of insens when she wa disturb by 
hear a strain of soft music breath beneath her window. she rose, 
drew near the casement, and open it to hear it more distinctly. 
have thrown her veil over her face, she ventur to look out. By the 
light of the moon she perceiv sever men below with guitar and 
lute in their hands; and at a littl distanc from them stood anoth 
wrap in hi cloak, whose statur and appear bore a strong 
resembl to lorenzo's. she wa not deceiv in thi conjecture. It 
wa inde lorenzo himself, who bound by hi word not to present 
himself to antonia without hi uncle' consent, endeavour by 
occasion serenades, to convinc hi mistress that hi attach 
still existed. hi stratagem had not the desir effect. antonia wa 
far from suppos that thi nightli music wa intend as a compliment 
to her: she wa too modest to think herself worthi such attentions; and 
conclud them to be address to some neighbour lady, she griev 
to find that they were offer by lorenzo. 

the air which wa played, wa plaintiv and melodious. It accord with 
the state of antonia' mind, and she listen with pleasure. after a 
symphoni of some length, it wa succeed by the sound of voices, and 
antonia distinguish the follow words. 

serenad 

choru 

oh! breath in gentl strain, my lyre! 
'ti here that beauti love to rest: 
describ the pang of fond desire, 
which rend a faith lover' breast. 

song 

In everi heart to find a slave, 
In everi soul to fix hi reign, 
In bond to lead the wise and brave, 
and make the captiv kiss hi chain, 
such is the power of love, and oh! 
I griev so well love' power to know. 

In sigh to pass the live-long day, 
To tast a short and broken sleep, 
for one dear object far away, 
all other scorned, to watch and weep, 
such are the pain of love, and oh! 
I griev so well love' pain to know! 

To read consent in virgin eyes, 
To press the lip ne'er prest till then 
To hear the sigh of transport rise, 
and kiss, and kiss, and kiss again, 
such are thi pleasures, love, but oh! 
when shall my heart thi pleasur know? 

choru 

now hush, my lyre! My voic be still! 
sleep, gentl maid! may fond desir 
with amor thought thi vision fill, 
though still my voice, and hush my lyre. 


the music ceased: the perform dispersed, and silenc prevail 
through the street. antonia quit the window with regret: she as 
usual recommend herself to the protect of st. rosolia, said her 
accustom prayers, and retir to bed. sleep wa not long absent, and 
hi presenc reliev her from her terror and inquietude. 

It wa almost two o'clock befor the lust monk ventur to bend hi 
step toward antonia' dwelling. It ha been alreadi mention that 
the abbey wa at no great distanc from the strada di san iago. He 
reach the hous unobserved. here He stopped, and hesit for a 
moment. He reflect on the enorm of the crime, the consequ of 
a discovery, and the probability, after what had passed, of elvira' 
suspect him to be her daughter' ravisher: On the other hand it wa 
suggest that she could do no more than suspect; that no proof of hi 
guilt could be produced; that it would seem imposs for the rape to 
have been commit without antonia' know when, where, or by whom; 
and finally, He believ that hi fame wa too firmli establish to be 
shaken by the unsupport accus of two unknown women. thi 
latter argument wa perfectli false: He knew not how uncertain is the 
air of popular applause, and that a moment suffic to make him today 
the detest of the world, who yesterday wa it idol. the result 
of the monk' deliber wa that He should proceed in hi 
enterprize. He ascend the step lead to the house. No sooner did 
He touch the door with the silver myrtle, than it flew open, and 
present him with a free passage. He entered, and the door close 
after him of it own accord. 

guid by the moonbeams, He proceed up the staircas with slow and 
cautiou steps. He look round him everi moment with apprehens and 
anxiety. He saw a spi in everi shadow, and heard a voic in everi 
murmur of the night breeze. conscious of the guilti busi on 
which He wa employ appal hi heart, and render it more timid 
than a woman's. yet still He proceeded. He reach the door of 
antonia' chamber. He stopped, and listened. all wa hush within. 
the total silenc persuad him that hi intend victim wa retir to 
rest, and He ventur to lift up the latch. the door wa fastened, and 
resist hi efforts: but no sooner wa it touch by the talisman, 
than the bolt flew back. the ravish stept on, and found himself in 
the chamber, where slept the innoc girl, unconsci how danger a 
visitor wa draw near her couch. the door close after him, and the 
bolt shot again into it fastening. 

ambrosio advanc with precaution. He took care that not a board 
should creak under hi foot, and held in hi breath as He approach 
the bed. hi first attent wa to perform the magic ceremony, as 
matilda had charg him: He breath thrice upon the silver myrtle, 
pronounc over it antonia' name, and laid it upon her pillow. the 
effect which it had alreadi produc permit not hi doubt it 
success in prolong the slumber of hi devot mistress. No sooner 
wa the enchant perform than He consid her to be absolut 
in hi power, and hi eye flame with lust and impatience. He now 
ventur to cast a glanc upon the sleep beauty. A singl lamp, 
burn befor the statu of st. rosolia, shed a faint light through 
the room, and permit him to examin all the charm of the love 
object befor him. the heat of the weather had oblig her to throw 
off part of the bed-cloathes: those which still cover her, 
ambrosio' insol hand hasten to remove. she lay with her cheek 
reclin upon one ivori arm; the other rest on the side of the bed 
with grace indolence. A few tress of her hair had escap from 
beneath the muslin which confin the rest, and fell carelessli over 
her bosom, as it heav with slow and regular suspiration. the warm 
air had spread her cheek with higher colour than usual. A smile 
inexpress sweet play round her ripe and coral lips, from which 
everi now and then escap a gentl sigh or an half-pronounc 
sentence. An air of enchant innoc and candour pervad her 
whole form; and there wa a sort of modesti in her veri naked which 
ad fresh sting to the desir of the lust monk. 

He remain for some moment devour those charm with hi eye which 
soon were to be subject to hi ill-regul passions. her mouth 
half-open seem to solicit a kiss: He bent over her; he join hi 
lip to hers, and drew in the fragranc of her breath with rapture. 
thi momentari pleasur increas hi long for still greater. hi 
desir were rais to that frantic height by which brute are 
agitated. He resolv not to delay for one instant longer the 
accomplish of hi wishes, and hastili proceed to tear off those 
garment which imped the gratif of hi lust. 

'graciou god!' exclaim a voic behind him; 'am I not deceived? 

Is not thi an illusion?' 

terror, confusion, and disappoint accompani these words, as they 
struck ambrosio' hearing. He started, and turn toward it. elvira 
stood at the door of the chamber, and regard the monk with look of 
surpriz and detestation. 

A fright dream had repres to her antonia on the verg of a 
precipice. she saw her trembl on the brink: everi moment seem to 
threaten her fall, and she heard her exclaim with shrieks, 'save me, 
mother! save me!--yet a moment, and it will be too late!' elvira woke 
in terror. the vision had made too strong an impress upon her mind, 
to permit her rest till assur of her daughter' safety. she 
hastili start from her bed, threw on a loos night-gown, and pass 
through the closet in which slept the waiting-woman, she reach 
antonia' chamber just in time to rescu her from the grasp of the 
ravisher. 

hi shame and her amaz seem to have petrifi into statu both 
elvira and the monk: they remain gaze upon each other in silence. 
the ladi wa the first to recov herself. 

'it is no dream!' she cried; 'it is realli ambrosio, who stand befor 
me! It is the man whom madrid esteem a saint, that I find at thi 
late hour near the couch of my unhappi child! monster of hypocrisy! I 
alreadi suspect your designs, but forbor your accus in piti to 
human frailty. silenc would now be criminal: the whole citi shall be 
inform of your incontinence. I will unmask you, villain, and 
convinc the church what a viper she cherish in her bosom.' 

pale and confus the baffl culprit stood trembl befor her. 

He would fain have extenu hi offence, but could find no apolog 
for hi conduct: He could produc noth but broken sentences, and 
excus which contradict each other. elvira wa too justli incens 
to grant the pardon which He requested. she protest that she would 
rais the neighbourhood, and make him an exampl to all futur 
hypocrites. then hasten to the bed, she call to antonia to wake; 
and find that her voic had no effect, she took her arm, and rais 
her forcibl from the pillow. the charm oper too powerfully. 
antonia remain insensible, and on be releas by her mother, sank 
back upon the pillow. 

'thi slumber cannot be natural!' cri the amaz elvira, whose 
indign increas with everi moment. 'some mysteri is conceal in 
it; but tremble, hypocrite; all your villaini shall soon be unravelled! 
help! help!' she exclaim aloud; 'within there! flora! flora!' 

'hear me for one moment, lady!' cri the monk, restor to himself by 
the urgenc of the danger; 'bi all that is sacr and holy, I swear 
that your daughter' honour is still unviolated. forgiv my 
transgression! spare me the shame of a discovery, and permit me to 
regain the abbey undisturbed. grant me thi request in mercy! I 
promis not onli that antonia shall be secur from me in future, but 
that the rest of my life shall prove .....' 

elvira interrupt him abruptly. 

'antonia secur from you? _i_ will secur her! you shall betray no 
longer the confid of parents! your iniqu shall be unveil to 
the public eye: all madrid shall shudder at your perfidy, your 
hypocrisi and incontinence. what ho! there! flora! flora, I say!' 

while she spoke thus, the remembr of agn struck upon hi mind. 
thu had she su to him for mercy, and thu had He refus her prayer! 
It wa now hi turn to suffer, and He could not but acknowledg that 
hi punish wa just. In the meanwhil elvira continu to call 
flora to her assistance; but her voic wa so choak with passion that 
the servant, who wa buri in profound slumber, wa insens to all 
her cries: elvira dare not go toward the closet in which flora slept, 
lest the monk should take that opportun to escape. such inde wa 
hi intention: He trust that could He reach the abbey unobserv by 
ani other than elvira, her singl testimoni would not suffic to ruin a 
reput so well establish as hi wa in madrid. with thi idea He 
gather up such garment as He had alreadi thrown off, and hasten 
toward the door. elvira wa awar of hi design; she follow him, 
and ere He could draw back the bolt, seiz him by the arm, and 
detain him. 

'attempt not to fly!' said she; 'you quit not thi room without 
wit of your guilt.' 

ambrosio struggl in vain to disengag himself. elvira quit not 
her hold, but redoubl her cri for succour. the friar' danger grew 
more urgent. He expect everi moment to hear peopl assembl at her 
voice; and work up to mad by the approach of ruin, He adopt a 
resolut equal desper and savage. turn round suddenly, with 
one hand He grasp elvira' throat so as to prevent her continu her 
clamour, and with the other, dash her violent upon the ground, He 
drag her toward the bed. confus by thi unexpect attack, she 
scarc had power to strive at forc herself from hi grasp: while 
the monk, snatch the pillow from beneath her daughter' head, 
cover with it elvira' face, and press hi knee upon her stomach 
with all hi strength, endeavour to put an end to her existence. He 
succeed but too well. her natur strength increas by the excess 
of anguish, long did the suffer struggl to disengag herself, but in 
vain. the monk continu to kneel upon her breast, wit without 
merci the convuls trembl of her limb beneath him, and sustain 
with inhuman firm the spectacl of her agonies, when soul and bodi 
were on the point of separating. those agoni at length were over. 
she ceas to struggl for life. the monk took off the pillow, and 
gaze upon her. her face wa cover with a fright blackness: 

her limb move no more; the blood wa chill in her veins; her heart 
had forgotten to beat, and her hand were stiff and frozen. 

ambrosio beheld befor him that onc nobl and majest form, now 
becom a corse, cold, senseless and disgusting. 

thi horribl act wa no sooner perpetrated, than the friar beheld the 
enorm of hi crime. A cold dew flow over hi limbs; hi eye 
closed; He stagger to a chair, and sank into it almost as lifeless as 
the unfortun who lay extend at hi feet. from thi state He wa 
rouz by the necess of flight, and the danger of be found in 
antonia' apartment. He had no desir to profit by the execut of 
hi crime. antonia now appear to him an object of disgust. A deadli 
cold had usurp the place of that warmth which glow in hi bosom: 
No idea offer themselv to hi mind but those of death and guilt, 
of present shame and futur punishment. agit by remors and fear 
He prepar for flight: yet hi terror did not so compleatli master 
hi recollection, as to prevent hi take the precaut necessari 
for hi safety. He replac the pillow upon the bed, gather up hi 
garments, and with the fatal talisman in hi hand, bent hi unsteadi 
step toward the door. bewild by fear, He fanci that hi flight 
wa oppos by legion of phantoms; whereev He turned, the disfigur 
cors seem to lie in hi passage, and it wa long befor He succeed 
in reach the door. the enchant myrtl produc it former effect. 
the door opened, and He hasten down the staircase. He enter the 
abbey unobserved, and have shut himself into hi cell, He abandon 
hi soul to the tortur of unavail remorse, and terror of 
impend detection. 



chapter II 

tell us, ye dead, will none of you in piti 
To those you left behind disclos the secret? 
O! that some courteou ghost would blab it out, 
what 'ti you are, and we must shortli be. 
i'v heard that soul depart have sometim 
fore-warn men of their deaths: 
'twa kindli done 
To knock, and give the alarum. 
blair. 


ambrosio shudder at himself, when He reflect on hi rapid advanc 
in iniquity. the enorm crime which He had just commit fill him 
with real horror. the murder elvira wa continu befor hi eyes, 
and hi guilt wa alreadi punish by the agoni of hi conscience. 
time, however, consider weaken these impressions: one day pass 
away, anoth follow it, and still not the least suspicion wa thrown 
upon him. impun reconcil him to hi guilt: He began to resum 
hi spirits; and as hi fear of detect die away, He paid less 
attent to the reproach of remorse. matilda exert herself to 
quiet hi alarms. At the first intellig of elvira' death, she 
seem greatli affected, and join the monk in deplor the unhappi 
catastroph of hi adventure: but when she found hi agit to be 
somewhat calmed, and himself better dispos to listen to her 
arguments, she proceed to mention hi offenc in milder terms, and 
convinc him that He wa not so highli culpabl as He appear to 
consid himself. she repres that He had onli avail himself of 
the right which natur allow to everi one, those of 
self-preservation: that either elvira or himself must have perished, 
and that her inflex and resolut to ruin him had deservedli 
mark her out for the victim. she next stated, that as He had befor 
render himself suspect to elvira, it wa a fortun event for him 
that her lip were close by death; sinc without thi last adventure, 
her suspicion if made public might have produc veri disagre 
consequences. He had therefor freed himself from an enemy, to whom 
the error of hi conduct were suffici known to make her 
dangerous, and who wa the greatest obstacl to hi design upon 
antonia. those design she encourag him not to abandon. she assur 
him that, no longer protect by her mother' watch eye, the 
daughter would fall an easi conquest; and by prais and enumer 
antonia' charms, she strove to rekindl the desir of the monk. In 
thi endeavour she succeed but too well. 

As if the crime into which hi passion had seduc him had onli 
increas it violence, He long more eagerli than ever to enjoy 
antonia. the same success in conceal hi present guilt, He trust 
would attend hi future. He wa deaf to the murmur of conscience, and 
resolv to satisfi hi desir at ani price. He wait onli for an 
opportun of repeat hi former enterprize; but to procur that 
opportun by the same mean wa now impracticable. In the first 
transport of despair He had dash the enchant myrtl into a 
thousand pieces: matilda told him plainli that He must expect no 
further assist from the infern power unless He wa will to 
subscrib to their establish conditions. thi ambrosio wa 
determin not to do: He persuad himself that howev great might be 
hi iniquity, so long as he preserv hi claim to salvation, He need 
not despair of pardon. He therefor resolut refus to enter into 
ani bond or compact with the fiends; and matilda find him obstin 
upon thi point, forbor to press him further. she exert her 
invent to discov some mean of put antonia into the abbot' 
power: nor wa it long befor that mean present itself. 

while her ruin wa thu meditating, the unhappi girl herself suffer 
sever from the loss of her mother. everi morn on waking, it wa 
her first care to hasten to elvira' chamber. On that which follow 
ambrosio' fatal visit, she woke later than wa her usual custom: Of 
thi she wa convinc by the abbey chimes. she start from her bed, 
threw on a few loos garment hastily, and wa speed to enquir how 
her mother had pass the night, when her foot struck against someth 
which lay in her passage. she look down. what wa her horror at 
recogn elvira' livid corse! she utter a loud shriek, and threw 
herself upon the floor. she clasp the inanim form to her bosom, 
felt that it wa dead-cold, and with a movement of disgust, of which 
she wa not the mistress, let it fall again from her arms. the cri had 
alarm flora, who hasten to her assistance. the sight which she 
beheld penetr her with horror; but her alarm wa more audibl than 
antonia's. she made the hous ring with her lamentations, while her 
mistress, almost suffoc with grief, could onli mark her distress by 
sob and groans. flora' shriek soon reach the ear of the hostess, 
whose terror and surpriz were excess on learn the caus of thi 
disturbance. A physician wa immedi sent for: but on the first 
moment of behold the corse, He declar that elvira' recoveri wa 
beyond the power of art. He proceed therefor to give hi assist 
to antonia, who by thi time wa truli in need of it. she wa convey 
to bed, while the landladi busi herself in give order for elvira' 
burial. dame jacintha wa a plain good kind of woman, charitable, 
generous, and devout: but her intellect were weak, and she wa a 
miser slave to fear and superstition. she shudder at the idea of 
pass the night in the same hous with a dead body: she wa persuad 
that elvira' ghost would appear to her, and no less certain that such 
a visit would kill her with fright. from thi persuasion, she resolv 
to pass the night at a neighbour's, and insist that the funer 
should take place the next day. st. clare' cemeteri be the nearest, 
it wa determin that elvira should be buri there. dame jacintha 
engag to defray everi expenc attend the burial. she knew not in 
what circumst antonia wa left, but from the spare manner in 
which the famili had lived, she conclud them to be indifferent. 

consequently, she entertain veri littl hope of ever be 
recompensed; but thi consider prevent her not from take care 
that the inter wa perform with decency, and from show the 
unfortun antonia all possibl respect. 

nobodi die of mere grief; Of thi antonia wa an instance. aid by 
her youth and healthi constitution, she shook off the maladi which her 
mother' death had occasioned; but it wa not so easi to remov the 
diseas of her mind. her eye were constantli fill with tears: everi 
trifl affect her, and she evid nourish in her bosom a 
profound and root melancholy. the slightest mention of elvira, the 
most trivial circumst recal that belov parent to her memory, 
wa suffici to throw her into seriou agitation. how much would her 
grief have been increased, had she known the agoni which termin 
her mother' existence! but of thi no one entertain the least 
suspicion. elvira wa subject to strong convulsions: It wa suppos 
that, awar of their approach, she had drag herself to her 
daughter' chamber in hope of assistance; that a sudden access of her 
fit had seiz her, too violent to be resist by her alreadi 
enfeebl state of health; and that she had expir ere she had time to 
reach the medicin which gener reliev her, and which stood upon a 
shelf in antonia' room. thi idea wa firmli credit by the few 
people, who interest themselv about elvira: her death wa esteem 
a natur event, and soon forgotten by all save by her, who had but too 
much reason to deplor her loss. 

In truth antonia' situat wa suffici embarrass and 
unpleasant. she wa alon in the midst of a dissip and expens 
city; she wa ill provid with money, and wors with friends. her 
aunt leonella wa still at cordova, and she knew not her direction. Of 
the marqui de la cisterna she heard no news: As to lorenzo, she had 
long given up the idea of possess ani interest in hi bosom. she 
knew not to whom she could address herself in her present dilemma. she 
wish to consult ambrosio; but she rememb her mother' injunct 
to shun him as much as possible, and the last convers which elvira 
had held with her upon the subject had given her suffici light 
respect hi design to put her upon her guard against him in future. 
still all her mother' warn could not make her chang her good 
opinion of the friar. she continu to feel that hi friendship and 
societi were requisit to her happiness: she look upon hi fail 
with a partial eye, and could not persuad herself that He realli had 
intend her ruin. however, elvira had posit command her to 
drop hi acquaintance, and she had too much respect for her order to 
disobey them. 

At length she resolv to address herself for advic and protect to 
the marqui de la cisternas, as be her nearest relation. she wrote 
to him, briefli state her desol situation; she besought him to 
compassion hi brother' child, to continu to her elvira' pension, 
and to authoris her retir to hi old castl in murcia, which till 
now had been her retreat. have seal her letter, she gave it to the 
trusti flora, who immedi set out to execut her commission. but 
antonia wa born under an unlucki star. had she made her applic 
to the marqui but one day sooner, receiv as hi niec and place at 
the head of hi family, she would have escap all the misfortun with 
which she wa now threatened. raymond had alway intend to execut 
thi plan: but first, hi hope of make the propos to elvira 
through the lip of agnes, and afterwards, hi disappoint at lose 
hi intend bride, as well as the sever ill which for some time 
had confin him to hi bed, made him defer from day to day the give 
an asylum in hi hous to hi brother' widow. He had commiss 
lorenzo to suppli her liber with money: but elvira, unwil to 
receiv oblig from that nobleman, had assur him that she need 
no immedi pecuniari assistance. consequently, the marqui did not 
imagin that a trifl delay on hi part could creat ani 
embarrassment; and the distress and agit of hi mind might well 
excus hi negligence. 

had He been inform that elvira' death had left her daughter 
friendless and unprotected, He would doubtless have taken such 
measures, as would have ensur her from everi danger: but antonia wa 
not destin to be so fortunate. the day on which she sent her letter 
to the palac de la cisterna wa that follow lorenzo' departur 
from madrid. the marqui wa in the first paroxysm of despair at the 
convict that agn wa inde no more: He wa delirious, and hi 
life be in danger, no one wa suffer to approach him. flora wa 
inform that He wa incap of attend to letters, and that 
probabl a few hour would decid hi fate. with thi unsatisfactori 
answer she wa oblig to return to her mistress, who now found herself 
plung into greater difficulti than ever. 

flora and dame jacintha exert themselv to consol her. the latter 
beg her to make herself easy, for that as long as she chose to stay 
with her, she would treat her like her own child. antonia, find that 
the good woman had taken a real affect for her, wa somewhat 
comfort by think that she had at least one friend in the world. A 
letter wa now brought to her, direct to elvira. she recogn 
leonella' writing, and open it with joy, found a detail account 
of her aunt' adventur at cordova. she inform her sister that she 
had recov her legacy, had lost her heart, and had receiv in 
exchang that of the most amiabl of apothecaries, past, present, and 
to come. she ad that she should be at madrid on the tuesday night, 
and meant to have the pleasur of present her caro sposo in form. 
though her nuptial were far from pleas antonia, leonella' speedi 
return gave her niec much delight. she rejoic in think that she 
should onc more be under a relation' care. she could not but judg 
it to be highli improper, for a young woman to be live among absolut 
strangers, with no one to regul her conduct, or protect her from the 
insult to which, in her defenceless situation, she wa exposed. she 
therefor look forward with impati to the tuesday night. 

It arrived. antonia listen anxious to the carriages, as they 
roll along the street. none of them stopped, and it grew late 
without leonella' appearing. still, antonia resolv to sit up till 
her aunt' arrival, and in spite of all her remonstrances, dame 
jacintha and flora insist upon do the same. the hour pass on 
slow and tediously. lorenzo' departur from madrid had put a stop to 
the nightli serenades: she hope in vain to hear the usual sound of 
guitar beneath her window. she took up her own, and struck a few 
chords: but music that even had lost it charm for her, and she 
soon replac the instrument in it case. she seat herself at her 
embroideri frame, but noth went right: the silk were missing, the 
thread snap everi moment, and the needl were so expert at fall 
that they seem to be animated. At length a flake of wax fell from 
the taper which stood near her upon a favourit wreath of violets: thi 
compleatli discompos her; she threw down her needle, and quit the 
frame. It wa decre that for that night noth should have the 
power of amus her. she wa the prey of ennui, and employ herself 
in make fruitless wish for the arriv of her aunt. 

As she walk with a listless air up and down the chamber, the door 
caught her eye conduct to that which had been her mother's. she 
rememb that elvira' littl librari wa arrang there, and thought 
that she might possibl find in it some book to amus her till leonella 
should arrive. accordingli she took her taper from the table, pass 
through the littl closet, and enter the adjoin apartment. As she 
look around her, the sight of thi room brought to her recollect a 
thousand pain ideas. It wa the first time of her enter it sinc 
her mother' death. the total silenc prevail through the chamber, 
the bed despoil of it furniture, the cheerless hearth where stood an 
extinguish lamp, and a few die plant in the window which, sinc 
elvira' loss, had been neglected, inspir antonia with a melancholi 
awe. the gloom of night gave strength to thi sensation. she place 
her light upon the table, and sank into a larg chair, in which she had 
seen her mother seat a thousand and a thousand times. she wa never 
to see her seat there again! tear unbidden stream down her cheek, 
and she abandon herself to the sad which grew deeper with everi 
moment. 

asham of her weakness, she at length rose from her seat: she 
proceed to seek for what had brought her to thi melancholi scene. 
the small collect of book wa arrang upon sever shelv in 
order. antonia examin them without find ani thing like to 
interest her, till she put her hand upon a volum of old spanish 
ballads. she read a few stanza of one of them: they excit her 
curiosity. she took down the book, and seat herself to perus it 
with more ease. she trim the taper, which now drew toward it end, 
and then read the follow ballad. 

alonzo the brave, and fair imogin 

A warrior so bold, and a virgin so bright 
conversed, as they sat on the green: 
they gaze on each other with tender delight; 
alonzo the brave wa the name of the knight, 
the maid' wa the fair imogine. 

'and oh!' said the youth, 'sinc to-morrow I go 
To fight in a far distant land, 
your tear for my absenc soon leav to flow, 
some other will court you, and you will bestow 
On a wealthier suitor your hand.' 

'oh! hush these suspicions,' fair imogin said, 
'offens to love and to me! 
for if ye be living, or if ye be dead, 
I swear by the virgin, that none in your stead 
shall husband of imogin be. 

'if e'er I by lust or by wealth led asid 
forget my alonzo the brave, 
god grant, that to punish my falsehood and pride 
your ghost at the marriag may sit by my side, 
may tax me with perjury, claim me as bride, 
and bear me away to the grave!' 

To palestin hasten the hero so bold; 
hi love, she lament him sore: 
but scarc had a twelve-month elapsed, when behold, 
A baron all cover with jewel and gold 
arriv at fair imogine' door. 

hi treasure, hi presents, hi spaciou domain 
soon made her untru to her vows: 
He dazzl her eyes; He bewild her brain; 
He caught her affect so light and so vain, 
and carri her home as hi spouse. 

and now had the marriag been blest by the priest; 
the revelri now wa begun: 
the tables, they groan with the weight of the feast; 
nor yet had the laughter and merriment ceased, 
when the bell of the castl told,--'one!' 

then first with amaz fair imogin found 
that a stranger wa place by her side: hi air wa terrific; 
He utter no sound; He spoke not, He move not, 
He look not around, 
but earnestli gaze on the bride. 

hi vizor wa closed, and gigant hi height; 
hi armour wa sabl to view: 
all pleasur and laughter were hush at hi sight; 
the dog as they eye him drew back in affright, 
the light in the chamber burn blue! 

hi presenc all bosom appear to dismay; 
the guest sat in silenc and fear. 
At length spoke the bride, while she trembled; 
'I pray, sir knight, that your helmet asid you would lay, 
and deign to partak of our chear.' 

the ladi is silent: the stranger complies. 
hi vizor lie slowli unclosed: 
oh! god! what a sight met fair imogine' eyes! 
what word can express her dismay and surprize, 
when a skeleton' head wa exposed. 

all present then utter a terrifi shout; 
all turn with disgust from the scene. 
the worms, they crept in, and the worms, they crept out, 
and sport hi eye and hi templ about, 
while the spectr address imogine. 

'behold me, thou fals one! behold me!' He cried; 
'rememb alonzo the brave! 
god grants, that to punish thi falsehood and pride 
My ghost at thi marriag should sit by thi side, 
should tax thee with perjury, claim thee as bride 
and bear thee away to the grave!' 

thu saying, hi arm round the ladi He wound, 
while loudli she shriek in dismay; 
then sank with hi prey through the wide-yawn ground: 
nor ever again wa fair imogin found, 
Or the spectr who bore her away. 

not long live the baron; and none sinc that time 
To inhabit the castl presume: 
for chronicl tell, that by order sublim 
there imogin suffer the pain of her crime, 
and mourn her deplor doom. 

At midnight four time in each year doe her spright 
when mortal in slumber are bound, 
array in her bridal apparel of white, 
appear in the hall with the skeleton-knight, 
and shriek, as He whirl her around. 

while they drink out of skull newli torn from the grave, 
danc round them the spectr are seen: 
their liquor is blood, and thi horribl stave 
they howl.--'to the health of alonzo the brave, 
and hi consort, the fals imogine!' 


the perus of thi stori wa ill-calcul to dispel antonia' 
melancholy. she had natur a strong inclin to the marvellous; 
and her nurse, who believ firmli in apparitions, had relat to her 
when an infant so mani horribl adventur of thi kind, that all 
elvira' attempt had fail to erad their impress from her 
daughter' mind. antonia still nourish a superstiti prejudic in 
her bosom: she wa often suscept of terror which, when she 
discov their natur and insignific cause, made her blush at her 
own weakness. with such a turn of mind, the adventur which she had 
just been read suffic to give her apprehens the alarm. the 
hour and the scene combin to author them. It wa the dead of 
night: she wa alone, and in the chamber onc occupi by her deceas 
mother. the weather wa comfortless and stormy: the wind howl 
around the house, the door rattl in their frames, and the heavi rain 
patter against the windows. No other sound wa heard. the taper, 
now burnt down to the socket, sometim flare upward shot a gleam of 
light through the room, then sink again seem upon the point of 
expiring. antonia' heart throb with agitation: her eye wander 
fear over the object around her, as the trembl flame 
illumin them at intervals. she attempt to rise from her seat; 
but her limb trembl so violent that she wa unabl to proceed. 
she then call flora, who wa in a room at no great distance: but 
agit choak her voice, and her cri die away in hollow murmurs. 

she pass some minut in thi situation, after which her terror 
began to diminish. she strove to recov herself, and acquir strength 
enough to quit the room: suddenli she fancied, that she heard a low 
sigh drawn near her. thi idea brought back her former weakness. she 
had alreadi rais herself from her seat, and wa on the point of 
take the lamp from the table. the imaginari nois stop her: she 
drew back her hand, and support herself upon the back of a chair. 
she listen anxiously, but noth more wa heard. 

'graciou god!' she said to herself; 'what could be that sound? wa I 
deceived, or did I realli hear it?' 

her reflect were interrupt by a nois at the door scarc 
audible: It seem as if somebodi wa whispering. antonia' alarm 
increased: yet the bolt she knew to be fastened, and thi idea in some 
degre reassur her. present the latch wa lift up softly, and 
the door move with caution backward and forwards. excess of terror 
now suppli antonia with that strength, of which she had till then 
been deprived. she start from her place and made toward the closet 
door, whenc she might soon have reach the chamber where she expect 
to find flora and dame jacintha. scarc had she reach the middl 
of the room when the latch wa lift up a second time. An involuntari 
movement oblig her to turn her head. slowli and gradual the door 
turn upon it hinges, and stand upon the threshold she beheld a 
tall thin figure, wrap in a white shroud which cover it from head 
to foot. 

thi vision arrest her feet: she remain as if petrifi in the 
middl of the apartment. the stranger with measur and solemn step 
drew near the table. the die taper dart a blue and melancholi 
flame as the figur advanc toward it. over the tabl wa fix a 
small clock; the hand of it wa upon the stroke of three. the figur 
stop opposit to the clock: It rais it right arm, and point to 
the hour, at the same time look earnestli upon antonia, who wait 
for the conclus of thi scene, motionless and silent. 

the figur remain in thi postur for some moments. the clock struck. 
when the sound had ceased, the stranger advanc yet a few step nearer 
antonia. 

'yet three days,' said a voic faint, hollow, and sepulchral; 'yet 
three days, and we meet again!' 

antonia shudder at the words. 

'we meet again?' she pronounc at length with difficulty: 'where shall 
we meet? whom shall I meet?' 

the figur point to the ground with one hand, and with the other 
rais the linen which cover it face. 

'almighti god! My mother!' 

antonia shrieked, and fell lifeless upon the floor. 

dame jacintha who wa at work in a neighbour chamber, wa alarm by 
the cry: flora wa just gone down stair to fetch fresh oil for the 
lamp, by which they had been sitting. jacintha therefor hasten 
alon to antonia' assistance, and great wa her amaz to find her 
extend upon the floor. she rais her in her arms, convey her to 
her apartment, and place her upon the bed still senseless. she then 
proceed to bath her temples, chafe her hands, and use all possibl 
mean of bring her to herself. with some difficulti she succeeded. 
antonia open her eyes, and look round her wildly. 

'where is she?' she cri in a trembl voice; 'i she gone? Am I 
safe? speak to me! comfort me! oh! speak to me for god' sake!' 

'safe from whom, my child?' repli the astonish jacintha; 'what 
alarm you? Of whom are you afraid?' 

'in three days! she told me that we should meet in three days! I heard 
her say it! I saw her, jacintha, I saw her but thi moment!' 

she threw herself upon jacintha' bosom. 

'you saw her? saw whom?' 

'mi mother' ghost!' 

'christ jesus!' cri jacintha, and start from the bed, let fall 
antonia upon the pillow, and fled in constern out of the room. 

As she hasten down stairs, she met flora ascend them. 

'go to your mistress, flora,' said she; 'here are rare doings! oh! I am 
the most unfortun woman alive! My hous is fill with ghost and 
dead bodies, and the lord know what besides; yet I am sure, nobodi 
like such compani less than I do. but go your way to donna antonia, 
flora, and let me go mine.' 

thu saying, she continu her cours to the street door, which she 
opened, and without allow herself time to throw on her veil, she 
made the best of her way to the capuchin abbey. In the meanwhile, 
flora hasten to her lady' chamber, equal surpriz and alarm at 
jacintha' consternation. she found antonia lie upon the bed 
insensible. she use the same mean for her recoveri that jacintha had 
alreadi employed; but find that her mistress onli recov from one 
fit to fall into another, she sent in all hast for a physician. while 
expect hi arrival, she undrest antonia, and convey her to bed. 

heedless of the storm, terrifi almost out of her senses, jacintha ran 
through the streets, and stop not till she reach the gate of the 
abbey. she rang loudli at the bell, and as soon as the porter 
appeared, she desir permiss to speak to the superior. ambrosio 
wa then confer with matilda upon the mean of procur access to 
antonia. the caus of elvira' death remain unknown, He wa 
convinc that crime were not so swiftli follow by punishment, as 
hi instructor the monk had taught him, and as till then He had 
himself believed. thi persuas made him resolv upon antonia' 
ruin, for the enjoy of whose person danger and difficulti onli 
seem to have increas hi passion. the monk had alreadi made one 
attempt to gain admiss to her presence; but flora had refus him in 
such a manner as to convinc him that all futur endeavour must be 
vain. elvira had confid her suspicion to that trusti servant: she 
had desir her never to leav ambrosio alon with her daughter, and if 
possibl to prevent their meet altogether. flora promis to obey 
her, and had execut her order to the veri letter. ambrosio' visit 
had been reject that morning, though antonia wa ignor of it. He 
saw that to obtain a sight of hi mistress by open mean wa out of the 
question; and both himself and matilda had consum the night, in 
endeavour to invent some plan, whose event might be more successful. 
such wa their employment, when a lay-broth enter the abbot' cell, 
and inform him that a woman call herself jacintha zuniga request 
audienc for a few minutes. 

ambrosio wa by no mean dispos to grant the petit of hi visitor. 
He refus it positively, and bad the lay-broth tell the stranger to 
return the next day. matilda interrupt him. 

'see thi woman,' said she in a low voice; 'I have my reasons.' 

the abbot obey her, and signifi that He would go to the parlour 
immediately. with thi answer the lay-broth withdrew. As soon as 
they were alon ambrosio enquir whi matilda wish him to see thi 
jacintha. 

'she is antonia' hostess,' repli matilda; 'she may possibl be of 
use to you: but let us examin her, and learn what bring her hither.' 

they proceed togeth to the parlour, where jacintha wa alreadi 
wait for the abbot. she had conceiv a great opinion of hi pieti 
and virtue; and suppos him to have much influenc over the devil, 
thought that it must be an easi matter for him to lay elvira' ghost in 
the red sea. fill with thi persuas she had hasten to the 
abbey. As soon as she saw the monk enter the parlour, she drop upon 
her knees, and began her stori as follows. 

'oh! reverend father! such an accident! such an adventure! I know 
not what cours to take, and unless you can help me, I shall certainli 
go distracted. well, to be sure, never wa woman so unfortunate, as 
myself! all in my power to keep clear of such abomin have I done, 
and yet that all is too little. what signifi my tell my bead 
four time a day, and observ everi fast prescrib by the calendar? 
what signifi my have made three pilgrimag to st. jame of 
compostella, and purchas as mani pardon from the pope as would buy 
off cain' punishment? noth prosper with me! all goe wrong, and 
god onli knows, whether ani thing will ever go right again! whi now, 
be your holi the judge. My lodger die in convulsions; out of pure 
kind I buri her at my own expence; (not that she is ani relat of 
mine, or that I shall be benefit a singl pistol by her death: I 
got noth by it, and therefor you know, reverend father, that her 
live or die wa just the same to me. but that is noth to the 
purpose; To return to what I wa saying,) I took care of her funeral, 
had everi thing perform decent and properly, and put myself to 
expenc enough, god knows! and how do you think the ladi repay me for 
my kindness? whi truli by refus to sleep quietli in her comfort 
deal coffin, as a peaceabl well-dispos spirit ought to do, and 
come to plagu me, who never wish to set eye on her again. 
forsooth, it well becom her to go racket about my hous at 
midnight, pop into her daughter' room through the keyhole, and 
frighten the poor child out of her wits! though she be a ghost, she 
might be more civil than to bolt into a person' house, who like her 
compani so little. but as for me, reverend father, the plain state of 
the case is this: If she walk into my house, I must walk out of it, 
for I cannot abid such visitors, not I! thu you see, your sanctity, 
that without your assist I am ruin and undon for ever. I shall 
be oblig to quit my house; nobodi will take it, when 'ti known that 
she haunt it, and then I shall find myself in a fine situation! 
miser woman that I am! what shall I do! what will becom of me!' 

here she wept bitterly, wrung her hands, and beg to know the abbot' 
opinion of her case. 

'in truth, good woman,' repli he, 'it will be difficult for me to 
reliev you without know what is the matter with you. you have 
forgotten to tell me what ha happened, and what it is you want.' 

'let me die' cri jacintha, 'but your sanctiti is in the right! thi 
then is the fact state briefly. A lodger of mine is late dead, a 
veri good sort of woman that I must need say for her as far as my 
knowledg of her went, though that wa not a great way: 

she kept me too much at a distance; for inde she wa given to be upon 
the high ropes, and whenev I ventur to speak to her, she had a look 
with her which alway made me feel a littl queerish, god forgiv me 
for say so. however, though she wa more state than needful, and 
affect to look down upon me (though if I am well informed, I come of 
as good parent as she could do for her ears, for her father wa a 
shoe-mak at cordova, and mine wa an hatter at madrid, aye, and a 
veri credit hatter too, let me tell you,) yet for all her pride, 
she wa a quiet well-behav body, and I never wish to have a better 
lodger. thi make me wonder the more at her not sleep quietli in 
her grave: but there is no trust to peopl in thi world! for my 
part, I never saw her do amiss, except on the friday befor her death. 
To be sure, I wa then much scandal by see her eat the wing of a 
chicken! "how, madona flora!" quoth I; (flora, may it pleas your 
reverence, is the name of the wait maid)--"how, madona flora!" 
quoth I; "doe your mistress eat flesh upon fridays? well! well! 
see the event, and then rememb that dame jacintha warn you of it!" 
these were my veri words, but alas! I might as well have held my 
tongue! nobodi mind me; and flora, who is somewhat pert and 
snappish, (more is the pity, say I) told me that there wa no more harm 
in eat a chicken than the egg from which it came. nay, she even 
declar that if her ladi ad a slice of bacon, she would not be an 
inch nearer damnation, god protect us! A poor ignor sin soul! I 
protest to your holiness, I trembl to hear her utter such 
blasphemies, and expect everi moment to see the ground open and 
swallow her up, chicken and all! for you must know, worship father, 
that while she talk thus, she held the plate in her hand, on which 
lay the ident roast fowl. and a fine bird it was, that I must say 
for it! done to a turn, for I superintend the cook of it myself: 
It wa a littl gallician of my own raising, may it pleas your 
holiness, and the flesh wa as white as an egg-shell, as inde donna 
elvira told me herself. "dame jacintha," said she, veri 
good-humouredly, though to say the truth, she wa alway veri polit to 
me .....' 

here ambrosio' patienc fail him. eager to know jacintha' busi 
in which antonia seem to be concerned, He wa almost distract while 
listen to the rambl of thi prose old woman. He interrupt 
her, and protest that if she did not immedi tell her stori and 
have done with it, He should quit the parlour, and leav her to get out 
of her difficulti by herself. thi threat had the desir effect. 
jacintha relat her busi in as few word as she could manage; but 
her account wa still so prolix that ambrosio had need of hi patienc 
to bear him to the conclusion. 

'and so, your reverence,' said she, after relat elvira' death and 
burial, with all their circumstances; 'and so, your reverence, upon 
hear the shriek, I put away my work, and away post I to donna 
antonia' chamber. find nobodi there, I past on to the next; but I 
must own, I wa a littl timor at go in, for thi wa the veri 
room where donna elvira use to sleep. however, in I went, and sure 
enough, there lay the young ladi at full length upon the floor, as cold 
as a stone, and as white as a sheet. I wa surpriz at this, as your 
holi may well suppose; but Oh me! how I shook when I saw a great 
tall figur at my elbow whose head touch the ceiling! the face wa 
donna elvira's, I must confess; but out of it mouth came cloud of 
fire, it arm were load with heavi chain which it rattl 
piteously, and everi hair on it head wa a serpent as big as my arm! 
At thi I wa frighten enough, and began to say my ave-maria: but 
the ghost interrupt me utter three loud groans, and roar out in 
a terribl voice, "oh! that chicken' wing! My poor soul suffer for 
it!" As soon as she had said this, the ground opened, the spectr 
sank down, I heard a clap of thunder, and the room wa fill with a 
smell of brimstone. when I recov from my fright, and had brought 
donna antonia to herself, who told me that she had cri out upon 
see her mother' ghost, (and well might she cry, poor soul! had I 
been in her place, I should have cri ten time louder) it directli 
came into my head, that if ani one had power to quiet thi spectre, it 
must be your reverence. So hither I came in all diligence, to beg that 
you will sprinkl my hous with holi water, and lay the apparit in 
the red sea.' 

ambrosio stare at thi strang story, which He could not credit. 

'did donna antonia also see the ghost?' said he. 

'a plain as I see you, reverend father!' 

ambrosio paus for a moment. here wa an opportun offer him of 
gain access to antonia, but He hesit to employ it. the 
reput which He enjoy in madrid wa still dear to him; and sinc 
He had lost the realiti of virtue, it appear as if it semblanc wa 
becom more valuable. He wa consciou that publicli to break through 
the rule never to quit the abbey precincts, would derog much from 
hi suppos austerity. In visit elvira, He had alway taken care to 
keep hi featur conceal from the domestics. except by the lady, 
her daughter, and the faith flora, He wa known in the famili by no 
other name than that of father jerome. should He compli with 
jacintha' request, and accompani her to her house, He knew that the 
violat of hi rule could not be kept a secret. however, hi 
eager to see antonia obtain the victory: He even hoped, that the 
singular of thi adventur would justifi him in the eye of madrid: 
but whatev might be the consequences, He resolv to profit by the 
opportun which chanc had present to him. An express look from 
matilda confirm him in thi resolution. 

'good woman,' said He to jacintha, 'what you tell me is so 
extraordinari that I can scarc credit your assertions. however, I 
will compli with your request. tomorrow after matin you may expect me 
at your house: I will then examin into what I can do for you, and if 
it is in my power, will free you from thi unwelcom visitor. now then 
go home, and peac be with you!' 

'home?' exclaim jacintha; 'I go home? not I by my troth! except 
under your protection, I set no foot of mine within the threshold. god 
help me, the ghost may meet me upon the stairs, and whisk me away with 
her to the devil! oh! that I had accept young melchior basco' 
offer! then I should have had somebodi to protect me; but now I am a 
lone woman, and meet with noth but cross and misfortunes! thank 
heaven, it is not yet too late to repent! there is simon gonzalez will 
have me ani day of the week, and if I live till daybreak, I will marri 
him out of hand: An husband I will have, that is determined, for now 
thi ghost is onc in my house, I shall be frighten out of my wit to 
sleep alone. but for god' sake, reverend father, come with me now. I 
shall have no rest till the hous is purified, or the poor young ladi 
either. the dear girl! she is in a piteou taking: I left her in 
strong convulsions, and I doubt, she will not easili recov her 
fright.' 

the friar started, and interrupt her hastily. 

'in convulsions, say you? antonia in convulsions? lead on, good 
woman! I follow you thi moment!' 

jacintha insist upon hi stop to furnish himself with the vessel 
of holi water: with thi request He complied. think herself safe 
under hi protect should a legion of ghost attack her, the old 
woman return the monk a profus of thanks, and they depart 
togeth for the strada di san iago. 

So strong an impress had the spectr made upon antonia, that for the 
first two or three hour the physician declar her life to be in 
danger. the fit at length becom less frequent induc him to alter 
hi opinion. He said that to keep her quiet wa all that wa 
necessary; and He order a medicin to be prepar which would 
tranquil her nerves, and procur her that repos which at present 
she much wanted. the sight of ambrosio, who now appear with jacintha 
at her bedside, contribut essenti to compos her ruffl spirits. 
elvira had not suffici explain herself upon the natur of hi 
designs, to make a girl so ignor of the world as her daughter awar 
how danger wa hi acquaintance. At thi moment, when penetr 
with horror at the scene which had just past, and dread to 
contempl the ghost' prediction, her mind had need of all the 
succour of friendship and religion, antonia regard the abbot with an 
eye doubli partial. that strong prepossess in hi favour still 
exist which she had felt for him at first sight: she fancied, yet 
knew not wherefore, that hi presenc wa a safeguard to her from everi 
danger, insult, or misfortune. 

she thank him grate for hi visit, and relat to him the 
adventure, which had alarm her so seriously. 

the abbot strove to reassur her, and convinc her that the whole had 
been a decept of her overh fancy. the solitud in which she 
had pass the evening, the gloom of night, the book which she had been 
reading, and the room in which she sat, were all calcul to place 
befor her such a vision. He treat the idea of ghost with ridicule, 
and produc strong argument to prove the fallaci of such a system. 
hi convers tranquil and comfort her, but did not convinc 
her. she could not believ that the spectr had been a mere creatur 
of her imagination; everi circumst wa impress upon her mind too 
forcibly, to permit her flatter herself with such an idea. she 
persist in assert that she had realli seen her mother' ghost, had 
heard the period of her dissolut announc and declar that she 
never should quit her bed alive. ambrosio advis her against 
encourag these sentiments, and then quit her chamber, have 
promis to repeat hi visit on the morrow. antonia receiv thi 
assur with everi mark of joy: but the monk easili perceiv that 
He wa not equal accept to her attendant. flora obey elvira' 
injunct with the most scrupul observance. she examin everi 
circumst with an anxiou eye like in the least to prejudic her 
young mistress, to whom she had been attach for mani years. she wa 
a nativ of cuba, had follow elvira to spain, and love the young 
antonia with a mother' affection. flora quit not the room for a 
moment while the abbot remain there: she watch hi everi word, hi 
everi look, hi everi action. He saw that her suspici eye wa 
alway fix upon him, and consciou that hi design would not bear 
inspect so minute, He felt frequent confus and disconcerted. He 
wa awar that she doubt the puriti of hi intentions; that she would 
never leav him alon with antonia, and hi mistress defend by the 
presenc of thi vigil observer, He despair of find the mean 
to gratifi hi passion. 

As He quit the house, jacintha met him, and beg that some mass 
might be sung for the repos of elvira' soul, which she doubt not 
wa suffer in purgatory. He promis not to forget her request; but 
He perfectli gain the old woman' heart by engag to watch dure 
the whole of the approach night in the haunt chamber. jacintha 
could find no term suffici strong to express her gratitude, and 
the monk depart load with her benedictions. 

It wa broad day when He return to the abbey. hi first care wa to 
commun what had past to hi confident. He felt too sincer a 
passion for antonia to have heard unmov the predict of her speedi 
death, and He shudder at the idea of lose an object so dear to him. 
upon thi head matilda reassur him. she confirm the argument 
which himself had alreadi used: she declar antonia to have been 
deceiv by the wander of her brain, by the spleen which opprest her 
at the moment, and by the natur turn of her mind to superstition, and 
the marvellous. As to jacintha' account, the absurd refut 
itself; the abbot hesit not to believ that she had fabric the 
whole story, either confus by terror, or hope to make him compli 
more readili with her request. have overrul the monk' 
apprehensions, matilda continu thus. 

'the predict and the ghost are equal false; but it must be your 
care, ambrosio, to verifi the first. antonia within three day must 
inde be dead to the world; but she must live for you. 

her present illness, and thi fanci which she ha taken into her head, 
will colour a plan which I have long meditated, but which wa 
impractic without your procur access to antonia. she shall be 
yours, not for a singl night, but for ever. all the vigil of her 
duenna shall not avail her: you shall riot unrestrain in the charm 
of your mistress. thi veri day must the scheme be put in execution, 
for you have no time to lose. the nephew of the duke of medina celi 
prepar to demand antonia for hi bride: In a few day she will be 
remov to the palac of her relation, the marqui de la cisternas, 
and there she will be secur from your attempts. thu dure your 
absenc have I been inform by my spies, who are ever employ in 
bring me intellig for your service. now then listen to me. 
there is a juic extract from certain herbs, known but to few, which 
bring on the person who drink it the exact imag of death. let thi 
be administ to antonia: you may easili find mean to pour a few 
drop into her medicine. the effect will be throw her into strong 
convuls for an hour: after which her blood will gradual ceas to 
flow, and heart to beat; A mortal pale will spread itself over her 
features, and she will appear a cors to everi eye. she ha no friend 
about her: you may charg yourself unsuspect with the 
superintend of her funeral, and caus her to be buri in the 
vault of st. clare. their solitud and easi access render these 
cavern favour to your designs. give antonia the soporif draught 
thi evening: eight and forti hour after she ha drank it, life will 
reviv to her bosom. she will then be absolut in your power: she 
will find all resist unavailing, and necess will compel her to 
receiv you in her arms.' 

'antonia will be in my power!' exclaim the monk; 'matilda, you 
transport me! At length then, happi will be mine, and that 
happi will be matilda' gift, will be the gift of friendship! 

I shall clasp antonia in my arms, far from everi pri eye, from everi 
torment intruder! I shall sigh out my soul upon her bosom; shall 
teach her young heart the first rudiment of pleasure, and revel 
uncontroul in the endless varieti of her charms! and shall thi 
delight inde by mine? shall I give the rein to my desires, and 
gratifi everi wild tumultu wish? oh! matilda, how can I express to 
you my gratitude?' 

'bi profit by my counsels. ambrosio, I live but to serv you: 

your interest and happi are equal mine. Be your person antonia's, 
but to your friendship and your heart I still assert my claim. 
contribut to your form now my onli pleasure. should my exert 
procur the gratif of your wishes, I shall consid my troubl 
to be ampli repaid. but let us lose no time. the liquor of which I 
spoke is onli to be found in st. clare' laboratory. hasten then to 
the prioress; request of her admiss to the laboratory, and it will 
not be denied. there is a closet at the lower end of the great room, 
fill with liquid of differ colour and qualities. the bottl in 
question stand by itself upon the third shelf on the left. It 
contain a greenish liquor: fill a small phial with it when you are 
unobserved, and antonia is your own.' 

the monk hesit not to adopt thi infam plan. hi desires, but 
too violent before, had acquir fresh vigour from the sight of 
antonia. As He sat by her bedside, accid had discov to him some 
of those charm which till then had been conceal from him: He found 
them even more perfect, than hi ardent imagin had pictur them. 
sometim her white and polish arm wa display in arrang the 
pillow: sometim a sudden movement discov part of her swell 
bosom: but whereev the new-found charm present itself, there 
rest the friar' glote eyes. scarc could He master himself 
suffici to conceal hi desir from antonia and her vigil 
duenna. inflam by the remembr of these beauties, He enter into 
matilda' scheme without hesitation. 

No sooner were matin over than He bent hi cours toward the convent 
of st. clare: hi arriv threw the whole sisterhood into the utmost 
amazement. the prioress wa sensibl of the honour done her convent by 
hi pay it hi first visit, and strove to express her gratitud by 
everi possibl attention. He wa parad through the garden, shown all 
the reliqu of saint and martyrs, and treat with as much respect 
and distinct as had He been the pope himself. On hi part, ambrosio 
receiv the domina' civil veri graciously, and strove to remov 
her surpriz at hi have broken through hi resolution. He stated, 
that among hi penitents, ill prevent mani from quit their 
houses. these were exactli the peopl who most need hi advic and 
the comfort of religion: mani represent had been made to him 
upon thi account, and though highli repugn to hi own wishes, He 
had found it absolut necessari for the servic of heaven to chang 
hi determination, and quit hi belov retirement. the prioress 
applaud hi zeal in hi profess and hi chariti toward mankind: 
she declar that madrid wa happi in possess a man so perfect and 
irreproachable. In such discourse, the friar at length reach the 
laboratory. He found the closet: the bottl stood in the place which 
matilda had described, and the monk seiz an opportun to fill hi 
phial unobserv with the soporif liquor. then have partaken of a 
collat in the refectory, He retir from the convent pleas with 
the success of hi visit, and leav the nun delight by the honour 
confer upon them. 

He wait till even befor He took the road to antonia' dwelling. 
jacintha welcom him with transport, and besought him not to forget 
hi promis to pass the night in the haunt chamber: that promis He 
now repeated. He found antonia toler well, but still harp upon 
the ghost' prediction. flora move not from her lady' bed, and by 
symptom yet stronger than on the former night testifi her dislik to 
the abbot' presence. still ambrosio affect not to observ them. 
the physician arrived, while He wa convers with antonia. It wa 
dark already; light were call for, and flora wa compel to 
descend for them herself. however, as she left a third person in the 
room, and expect to be absent but a few minutes, she believ that 
she risqu noth in quit her post. No sooner had she left the 
room, than ambrosio move toward the table, on which stood antonia' 
medicine: It wa place in a recess of the window. the physician 
seat in an armed-chair, and employ in question hi patient, paid 
no attent to the proceed of the monk. ambrosio seiz the 
opportunity: He drew out the fatal phial, and let a few drop fall 
into the medicine. He then hastili left the table, and return to the 
seat which He had quitted. when flora made her appear with lights, 
everi thing seem to be exactli as she had left it. 

the physician declar that antonia might quit her chamber the next day 
with perfect safety. He recommend her follow the same 
prescript which, on the night before, had procur her a refresh 
sleep: flora repli that the draught stood readi upon the table: He 
advis the patient to take it without delay, and then retired. flora 
pour the medicin into a cup and present it to her mistress. At 
that moment ambrosio' courag fail him. might not matilda have 
deceiv him? might not jealousi have persuad her to destroy her 
rival, and substitut poison in the room of an opiate? thi idea 
appear so reason that He wa on the point of prevent her from 
swallow the medicine. hi resolut wa adopt too late: the cup 
wa alreadi emptied, and antonia restor it into flora' hands. No 
remedi wa now to be found: ambrosio could onli expect the moment 
impatiently, destin to decid upon antonia' life or death, upon hi 
own happi or despair. 

dread to creat suspicion by hi stay, or betray himself by hi 
mind' agitation, He took leav of hi victim, and withdrew from the 
room. antonia part from him with less cordial than on the former 
night. flora had repres to her mistress that to admit hi visit 
wa to disobey her mother' orders: she describ to her hi emot 
on enter the room, and the fire which sparkl in hi eye while He 
gaze upon her. thi had escap antonia' observation, but not her 
attendant's; who explain the monk' design and their probabl 
consequ in term much clearer than elvira's, though not quit so 
delicate, had succeed in alarm her young lady, and persuad her 
to treat him more distantli than she had done hitherto. the idea of 
obey her mother' will at onc determin antonia. though she 
griev at lose hi society, she conquer herself suffici to 
receiv the monk with some degre of reserv and coldness. she thank 
him with respect and gratitud for hi former visits, but did not 
invit hi repeat them in future. It now wa not the friar' 
interest to solicit admiss to her presence, and He took leav of her 
as if not design to return. fulli persuad that the acquaint 
which she dread wa now at an end, flora wa so much work upon by 
hi easi complianc that she began to doubt the justic of her 
suspicions. As she light him down stairs, she thank him for have 
endeavour to root out from antonia' mind her superstiti terror 
of the spectre' prediction: she added, that as He seem interest 
in donna antonia' welfare, should ani chang take place in her 
situation, she would be care to let him know it. the monk in 
repli took pain to rais hi voice, hope that jacintha would hear 
it. In thi He succeeded; As He reach the foot of the stair with 
hi conductress, the landladi fail not to make her appearance. 

'whi sure you are not go away, reverend father?' cri she; 'did 
you not promis to pass the night in the haunt chamber? christ jesus! 
I shall be left alon with the ghost, and a fine pickl I shall be in 
by morning! Do all I could, say all I could, that obstin old brute, 
simon gonzalez, refus to marri me today; and befor tomorrow comes, I 
suppose, I shall be torn to pieces, by the ghosts, and goblins, and 
devils, and what not! for god' sake, your holiness, do not leav me in 
such a woeful condition! On my bend knee I beseech you to keep your 
promise: watch thi night in the haunt chamber; lay the apparit 
in the red sea, and jacintha rememb you in her prayer to the last 
day of her existence!' 

thi request ambrosio expect and desired; yet He affect to rais 
objections, and to seem unwil to keep hi word. He told jacintha 
that the ghost exist nowher but in her own brain, and that her 
insist upon hi stay all night in the hous wa ridicul and 
useless. jacintha wa obstinate: she wa not to be convinced, and 
press him so urgent not to leav her a prey to the devil, that at 
length He grant her request. all thi show of resist impos not 
upon flora, who wa natur of a suspici temper. she suspect 
the monk to be act a part veri contrari to hi own inclinations, and 
that He wish for no better than to remain where He was. she even 
went so far as to believ that jacintha wa in hi interest; and the 
poor old woman wa immedi set down, as no better than a procuress. 
while she applaud herself for have penetr into thi plot 
against her lady' honour, she resolv in secret to render it 
fruitless. 

'so then,' said she to the abbot with a look half-satir and half 
indignant; 'so then you mean to stay here tonight? Do so, in god' 
name! nobodi will prevent you. sit up to watch for the ghost' 
arrival: I shall sit up too, and the lord grant that I may see noth 
wors than a ghost! I quit not donna antonia' bedsid dure thi 
bless night: let me see ani one dare to enter the room, and be He 
mortal or immortal, be He ghost, devil, or man, I warrant hi repent 
that ever He cross the threshold!' 

thi hint wa suffici strong, and ambrosio understood it meaning. 
but instead of show that He perceiv her suspicions; He repli 
mildli that He approv the duenna' precautions, and advis her to 
persever in her intention. this, she assur him faith that He 
might depend upon her doing. jacintha then conduct him into the 
chamber where the ghost had appeared, and flora return to her lady's. 

jacintha open the door of the haunt room with a trembl hand: 
she ventur to peep in; but the wealth of india would not have tempt 
her to cross the threshold. she gave the taper to the monk, wish him 
well through the adventure, and hasten to be gone. ambrosio entered. 
He bolt the door, place the light upon the table, and seat himself 
in the chair which on the former night had sustain antonia. In spite 
of matilda' assur that the spectr wa a mere creation of fancy, 
hi mind wa impress with a certain mysteri horror. He in vain 
endeavour to shake it off. the silenc of the night, the stori of 
the apparition, the chamber wainscot with dark oak pannells, the 
recollect which it brought with it of the murder elvira, and hi 
incertitud respect the natur of the drop given by him to antonia, 
made him feel uneasi at hi present situation. but He thought much 
less of the spectre, than of the poison. should He have destroy the 
onli object which render life dear to him; should the ghost' 
predict prove true; should antonia in three day be no more, and He 
the wretch caus of her death ...... the supposit wa too 
horribl to dwell upon. He drove away these dread images, and as 
often they present themselv again befor him. matilda had assur 
him that the effect of the opiat would be speedy. He listen with 
fear, yet with eagerness, expect to hear some disturb in the 
adjoin chamber. all wa still silent. He conclud that the drop 
had not begun to operate. great wa the stake, for which He now 
played: A moment would suffic to decid upon hi miseri or happiness. 
matilda had taught him the mean of ascertain that life wa not 
extinct for ever: upon thi assay depend all hi hopes. with everi 
instant hi impati redoubled; hi terror grew more lively, hi 
anxieti more awake. unabl to bear thi state of incertitude, He 
endeavour to divert it by substitut the thought of other to hi 
own. the books, as wa befor mentioned, were rang upon shelv near 
the table: thi stood exactli opposit to the bed, which wa place in 
an alcov near the closet door. ambrosio took down a volume, and 
seat himself by the table: but hi attent wander from the page 
befor him. antonia' imag and that of the murder elvira persist 
to forc themselv befor hi imagination. still He continu to 
read, though hi eye ran over the charact without hi mind be 
consciou of their import. such wa hi occupation, when He fanci 
that He heard a footstep. He turn hi head, but nobodi wa to be 
seen. 

He resum hi book; but in a few minut after the same sound wa 
repeated, and follow by a rustl nois close behind him. He now 
start from hi seat, and look round him, perceiv the closet door 
stand half-unclosed. On hi first enter the room He had tri to 
open it, but found it bolt on the inside. 

'how is this?' said He to himself; 'how come thi door unfastened?' 

He advanc toward it: He push it open, and look into the closet: 
No one wa there. while He stood irresolute, He thought that He 
distinguish a groan in the adjac chamber: It wa antonia's, 
and He suppos that the drop began to take effect: but upon 
listen more attentively, He found the nois to be caus by 
jacintha, who had fallen asleep by the lady' bedside, and wa snore 
most lustily. ambrosio drew back, and return to the other room, 
muse upon the sudden open of the closet door, for which He strove 
in vain to account. 

He pace the chamber up and down in silence. At length He stopped, and 
the bed attract hi attention. the curtain of the recess wa but 
half-drawn. He sigh involuntarily. 

'that bed,' said He in a low voice, 'that bed wa elvira's! there ha 
she past mani a quiet night, for she wa good and innocent. how sound 
must have been her sleep! and yet now she sleep sounder! doe she 
inde sleep? oh! god grant that she may! what if she rose from her 
grave at thi sad and silent hour? what if she broke the bond of the 
tomb, and glide angrili befor my blast eyes? oh! I never could 
support the sight! again to see her form distort by die agonies, 
her blood-swollen veins, her livid countenance, her eye burst from 
their socket with pain! To hear her speak of futur punishment, 
menac me with heaven' vengeance, tax me with the crime I have 
committed, with those I am go to commit ..... great god! what is 
that?' 

As He utter these words, hi eye which were fix upon the bed, saw 
the curtain shaken gentli backward and forwards. the apparit wa 
recal to hi mind, and He almost fanci that He beheld elvira' 
visionari form reclin upon the bed. A few moment consider 
suffic to reassur him. 

'it wa onli the wind,' said he, recov himself. 

again He pace the chamber; but an involuntari movement of awe and 
inquietud constantli led hi eye toward the alcove. He drew near it 
with irresolution. He paus befor He ascend the few step which led 
to it. He put out hi hand thrice to remov the curtain, and as often 
drew it back. 

'absurd terrors!' He cri at length, asham of hi own weakness---- 

hastili he mount the steps; when a figur drest in white start from 
the alcove, and glide by him, made with precipit toward the 
closet. mad and despair now suppli the monk with that courage, 
of which He had till then been destitute. He flew down the steps, 
pursu the apparition, and attempt to grasp it. 

'ghost, or devil, I hold you!' He exclaimed, and seiz the spectr by 
the arm. 

'oh! christ jesus!' cri a shrill voice; 'holi father, how you gripe 
me! I protest that I meant no harm!' 

thi address, as well as the arm which He held, convinc the abbot 
that the suppos ghost wa substanti flesh and blood. He drew the 
intrud toward the table, and hold up the light, discov the 
featur of ...... madona flora! 

incens at have been betray by thi trifl caus into fear so 
ridiculous, He ask her sternly, what busi had brought her to that 
chamber. flora, asham at be found out, and terrifi at the 
sever of ambrosio' looks, fell upon her knees, and promis to make 
a full confession. 

'I protest, reverend father,' said she, 'that I am quit griev at 
have disturb you: noth wa further from my intention. I meant 
to get out of the room as quietli as I got in; and had you been 
ignor that I watch you, you know, it would have been the same 
thing as if I had not watch you at all. To be sure, I did veri wrong 
in be a spi upon you, that I cannot deny; but lord! your reverence, 
how can a poor weak woman resist curiosity? mine wa so strong to know 
what you were doing, that I could not but tri to get a littl peep, 
without ani bodi know ani thing about it. So with that I left old 
dame jacintha sit by my lady' bed, and I ventur to steal into 
the closet. be unwil to interrupt you, I content myself at 
first with put my eye to the keyhole; but as I could see noth by 
thi means, I undrew the bolt, and while your back wa turn to the 
alcove, I whipt me in softli and silently. here I lay snug behind the 
curtain, till your rever found me out, and seiz me ere I had time 
to regain the closet door. thi is the whole truth, I assur you, holi 
father, and I beg your pardon a thousand time for my impertinence.' 

dure thi speech the abbot had time to recollect himself: He wa 
satisfi with read the penit spi a lectur upon the danger of 
curiosity, and the mean of the action in which she had been just 
discovered. flora declar herself fulli persuad that she had done 
wrong; she promis never to be guilti of the same fault again, and wa 
retir veri humbl and contrit to antonia' chamber, when the closet 
door wa suddenli thrown open, and in rush jacintha pale and out of 
breath. 

'oh! father! father!' she cri in a voic almost choak with 
terror; 'what shall I do! what shall I do! here is a fine piec of 
work! noth but misfortunes! noth but dead people, and die 
people! oh! I shall go distracted! I shall go distracted!' 

'speak! speak!' cri flora and the monk at the same time; 'what ha 
happened? what is the matter?' 

'oh! I shall have anoth cors in my house! some witch ha certainli 
cast a spell upon it, upon me, and upon all about me! poor donna 
antonia! there she lie in just such convulsions, as kill her 
mother! the ghost told her true! I am sure, the ghost ha told her 
true!' 

flora ran, or rather flew to her lady' chamber: ambrosio follow her, 
hi bosom trembl with hope and apprehension. they found antonia as 
jacintha had described, torn by rack convuls from which they in 
vain endeavour to reliev her. the monk dispatch jacintha to the 
abbey in all haste, and commiss her to bring father pablo back 
with her, without lose a moment. 

'I will go for him,' repli jacintha, 'and tell him to come hither; 
but as to bring him myself, I shall do no such thing. I am sure that 
the hous is bewitched, and burn me if ever I set foot in it again.' 

with thi resolut she set out for the monastery, and deliv to 
father pablo the abbot' orders. she then betook herself to the hous 
of old simon gonzalez, whom she resolv never to quit, till she had 
made him her husband, and hi dwell her own. 

father pablo had no sooner beheld antonia, than He pronounc her 
incurable. the convuls continu for an hour: dure that time 
her agoni were much milder than those which her groan creat in the 
abbot' heart. her everi pang seem a dagger in hi bosom, and He 
curs himself a thousand time for have adopt so barbar a 
project. the hour be expired, by degre the fit becam less 
frequent, and antonia less agitated. she felt that her dissolut wa 
approaching, and that noth could save her. 

'worthi ambrosio,' she said in a feebl voice, while she press hi 
hand to her lips; 'I am now at liberti to express, how grate is my 
heart for your attent and kindness. I am upon the bed of death; yet 
an hour, and I shall be no more. I may therefor acknowledg without 
restraint, that to relinquish your societi wa veri pain to me: but 
such wa the will of a parent, and I dare not disobey. I die without 
repugnance: there are few, who will lament my leav them; there are 
few, whom I lament to leave. among those few, I lament for none more 
than for yourself; but we shall meet again, ambrosio! We shall one day 
meet in heaven: there shall our friendship be renewed, and my mother 
shall view it with pleasure!' 

she paused. the abbot shudder when she mention elvira: antonia 
imput hi emot to piti and concern for her. 

'you are griev for me, father,' she continued; 'ah! sigh not for my 
loss. I have no crime to repent, at least none of which I am 
conscious, and I restor my soul without fear to him from whom I 
receiv it. I have but few request to make: yet let me hope that 
what few I have shall be granted. let a solemn mass be said for my 
soul' repose, and anoth for that of my belov mother. not that I 
doubt her rest in her grave: I am now convinc that my reason 
wandered, and the falsehood of the ghost' predict is suffici to 
prove my error. but everi one ha some failing: My mother may have 
had hers, though I knew them not: I therefor wish a mass to be 
celebr for her repose, and the expenc may be defray by the 
littl wealth of which I am possessed. whatev may then remain, I 
bequeath to my aunt leonella. when I am dead, let the marqui de la 
cisterna know that hi brother' unhappi famili can no longer 
importun him. but disappoint make me unjust: they tell me that 
He is ill, and perhap had it been in hi power, He wish to have 
protect me. tell him then, father, onli that I am dead, and that if 
He had ani fault to me, I forgav him from my heart. thi done, I have 
noth more to ask for, than your prayers: promis to rememb my 
requests, and I shall resign my life without a pang or sorrow.' 

ambrosio engag to compli with her desires, and proceed to give her 
absolution. everi moment announc the approach of antonia' fate: 
her sight failed; her heart beat sluggishly; her finger stiffened, and 
grew cold, and at two in the morn she expir without a groan. As 
soon as the breath had forsaken her body, father pablo retired, 
sincer affect at the melancholi scene. On her part, flora gave 
way to the most unbridl sorrow. 

far differ concern employ ambrosio: He sought for the puls 
whose throbbing, so matilda had assur him, would prove antonia' 
death but temporal. He found it; He press it; It palpit beneath 
hi hand, and hi heart wa fill with ecstacy. however, He care 
conceal hi satisfact at the success of hi plan. He assum a 
melancholi air, and address himself to flora, warn her against 
abandon herself to fruitless sorrow. her tear were too sincer to 
permit her listen to hi counsels, and she continu to weep 
unceasingly. 

the friar withdrew, first promis to give order himself about the 
funeral, which, out of consider for jacintha as He pretended, 
should take place with all expedition. plung in grief for the loss 
of her belov mistress, flora scarc attend to what He said. 
ambrosio hasten to command the burial. He obtain permiss from 
the prioress, that the cors should be deposit in st. clare' 
sepulchre: and on the friday morning, everi proper and need ceremoni 
be performed, antonia' bodi wa commit to the tomb. 

On the same day leonella arriv at madrid, intend to present her 
young husband to elvira. variou circumst had oblig her to 
defer her journey from tuesday to friday, and she had no opportun of 
make thi alter in her plan known to her sister. As her heart 
wa truli affectionate, and as she had ever entertain a sincer 
regard for elvira and her daughter, her surpriz at hear of their 
sudden and melancholi fate wa fulli equal by her sorrow and 
disappointment. ambrosio sent to inform her of antonia' bequest: At 
her solication, He promised, as soon as elvira' trifl debt were 
discharged, to transmit to her the remainder. thi be settled, no 
other busi detain leonella in madrid, and she return to cordova 
with all diligence. 



chapter iii 

oh! could I worship aught beneath the sky 
that earth hath seen or fanci could devise, 
thine altar, sacr liberty, should stand, 
built by no mercenari vulgar hand, 
with fragrant turf, and flower as wild and fair, 
As ever dress a bank, or scent summer air. 
cowper. 

hi whole attent bent upon bring to justic the assassin of hi 
sister, lorenzo littl thought how sever hi interest wa suffer 
in anoth quarter. As wa befor mentioned, He return not to madrid 
till the even of that day on which antonia wa buried. signifi to 
the grand inquisitor the order of the cardinal-duk (a ceremoni not to 
be neglected, when a member of the church wa to be arrest publicly) 
commun hi design to hi uncl and don ramirez, and assembl a 
troop of attend suffici to prevent opposition, furnish him 
with full occup dure the few hour preced midnight. 
consequently, He had no opportun to enquir about hi mistress, and 
wa perfectli ignor both of her death and her mother's. 

the marqui wa by no mean out of danger: hi delirium wa gone, but 
had left him so much exhaust that the physician declin pronounc 
upon the consequ like to ensue. As for raymond himself, He 
wish for noth more earnestli than to join agn in the grave. 
exist wa hate to him: He saw noth in the world deserv 
hi attention; and He hope to hear that agn wa revenged, and 
himself given over in the same moment. 

follow by raymond' ardent prayer for success, lorenzo wa at the 
gate of st. clare a full hour befor the time appoint by the mother 
st. ursula. He wa accompani by hi uncle, by don ramirez de mello, 
and a parti of chosen archers. though in consider number their 
appear creat no surprize: A great crowd wa alreadi assembl 
befor the convent doors, in order to wit the procession. It wa 
natur suppos that lorenzo and hi attend were conduct 
thither by the same design. the duke of medina be recognised, the 
peopl drew back, and made way for hi parti to advance. lorenzo 
place himself opposit to the great gate, through which the pilgrim 
were to pass. convinc that the prioress could not escap him, He 
wait patient for her appearance, which she wa expect to make 
exactli at midnight. 

the nun were employ in religi duti establish in honour of st. 
clare, and to which no prophan wa ever admitted. the chapel window 
were illuminated. As they stood on the outside, the auditor heard the 
full swell of the organ, accompani by a choru of femal voices, rise 
upon the still of the night. thi die away, and wa succeed by a 
singl strain of harmony: It wa the voic of her who wa destin to 
sustain in the process the charact of st. clare. for thi offic 
the most beauti virgin of madrid wa alway selected, and she upon 
whom the choic fell esteem it as the highest of honours. while 
listen to the music, whose melodi distanc onli seem to render 
sweeter, the audienc wa wrap up in profound attention. univers 
silenc prevail through the crowd, and everi heart wa fill with 
rever for religion. everi heart but lorenzo's. consciou that 
among those who chaunt the prais of their god so sweetly, there 
were some who cloak with devot the foulest sins, their hymn 
inspir him with detest at their hypocrisy. He had long observ 
with disapprob and contempt the superstit which govern 
madrid' inhabitants. hi good sens had point out to him the 
artific of the monks, and the gross absurd of their miracles, 
wonders, and supposititi reliques. He blush to see hi countrymen 
the dupe of decept so ridiculous, and onli wish for an 
opportun to free them from their monkish fetters. that opportunity, 
so long desir in vain, wa at length present to him. He resolv 
not to let it slip, but to set befor the peopl in glare colour how 
enorm were the abus but too frequent practis in monasteries, 
and how unjustli public esteem wa bestow indiscrimin upon all 
who wore a religi habit. He long for the moment destin to 
unmask the hypocrites, and convinc hi countrymen that a sanctifi 
exterior doe not alway hide a virtuou heart. 

the servic lasted, till midnight wa announc by the convent bell. 
that sound be heard, the music ceased: the voic die away softly, 
and soon after the light disappear from the chapel windows. 
lorenzo' heart beat high, when He found the execut of hi plan to 
be at hand. from the natur superstit of the peopl He had 
prepar himself for some resistance. but He trust that the mother 
st. ursula would bring good reason to justifi hi proceeding. He had 
forc with him to repel the first impuls of the populace, till hi 
argument should be heard: hi onli fear wa lest the domina, 
suspect hi design, should have spirit away the nun on whose 
deposit everi thing depended. unless the mother st. ursula should 
be present, He could onli accus the prioress upon suspicion; and thi 
reflect gave him some littl apprehens for the success of hi 
enterprize. the tranquil which seem to reign through the convent 
in some degre re-assur him: still He expect the moment eagerly, 
when the presenc of hi alli should depriv him of the power of 
doubting. 

the abbey of capuchin wa onli separ from the convent by the 
garden and cemetery. the monk had been invit to assist at the 
pilgrimage. they now arrived, march two by two with light torch 
in their hands, and chaunt hymn in honour of st. clare. father 
pablo wa at their head, the abbot have excus himself from 
attending. the peopl made way for the holi train, and the friar 
place themselv in rank on either side of the great gates. A few 
minut suffic to arrang the order of the procession. thi be 
settled, the convent door were thrown open, and again the femal 
choru sound in full melody. first appear a band of choristers: 
As soon as they had passed, the monk fell in two by two, and follow 
with step slow and measured. next came the novices; they bore no 
tapers, as did the professed, but move on with eye bent downwards, 
and seem to be occupi by tell their beads. To them succeed a 
young and love girl, who repres st. lucia: she held a golden 
bason in which were two eyes: her own were cover by a velvet 
bandage, and she wa conduct by anoth nun habit as an angel. she 
wa follow by st. catherine, a palm-branch in one hand, a flame 
sword in the other: she wa robe in white, and her brow wa 
ornament with a sparkl diadem. after her appear st. genevieve, 
surround by a number of imps, who put themselv into grotesqu 
attitudes, draw her by the robe, and sport round her with antic 
gestures, endeavour to distract her attent from the book, on which 
her eye were constantli fixed. these merri devil greatli entertain 
the spectators, who testifi their pleasur by repeat burst of 
laughter. the prioress had been care to select a nun whose 
disposit wa natur solemn and saturnine. she had everi reason 
to be satisfi with her choice: the drolleri of the imp were 
entir thrown away, and st. geneviev move on without discompos a 
muscle. 

each of these saint wa separ from the other by a band of 
choristers, exalt her prais in their hymns, but declar her to be 
veri much inferior to st. clare, the convent' avow patroness. these 
have passed, a long train of nun appeared, bear like the 
chorist each a burn taper. next came the reliqu of st. clare, 
inclos in vase equal preciou for their materi and workmanship: 
but they attract not lorenzo' attention. the nun who bore the heart 
occupi him entirely. accord to theodore' description, He doubt 
not her be the mother st. ursula. she seem to look round with 
anxiety. As He stood foremost in the rank by which the process 
past, her eye caught lorenzo's. A flush of joy overspread her till 
then pallid cheek. she turn to her companion eagerly. 

'we are safe!' He heard her whisper; ''ti her brother!' 

hi heart be now at ease, lorenzo gaze with tranquil upon the 
remaind of the show. now appear it most brilliant ornament. It 
wa a machin fashion like a throne, rich with jewel and dazzl 
with light. It roll onward upon conceal wheels, and wa guid by 
sever love children, dress as seraphs. the summit wa cover 
with silver clouds, upon which reclin the most beauti form that 
eye ever witnessed. It wa a damsel repres st. clare: her dress 
wa of inestim price, and round her head a wreath of diamond 
form an artifici glory: but all these ornament yield to the 
lustr of her charms. As she advanced, a murmur of delight ran through 
the crowd. even lorenzo confess secretly, that He never beheld more 
perfect beauty, and had not hi heart been antonia's, it must have 
fallen a sacrific to thi enchant girl. As it was, He consid 
her onli as a fine statue: she obtain from him no tribut save cold 
admiration, and when she had pass him, He thought of her no more. 

'who is she?' ask a by-stand in lorenzo' hearing. 

'one whose beauti you must often have heard celebrated. her name is 
virginia de villa-franca: she is a pension of st. clare' convent, a 
relat of the prioress, and ha been select with justic as the 
ornament of the procession.' 

the throne move onwards. It wa follow by the prioress herself: 
she march at the head of the remain nun with a devout and 
sanctifi air, and close the procession. she move on slowly: her 
eye were rais to heaven: her counten calm and tranquil seem 
abstract from all sublunari things, and no featur betray her 
secret pride at display the pomp and opul of her convent. she 
pass along, accompani by the prayer and benedict of the 
populace: but how great wa the gener confus and surprize, when 
don ramirez start forward, challeng her as hi prisoner. 

for a moment amaz held the domina silent and immoveable: but no 
sooner did she recov herself, than she exclaim against sacrileg 
and impiety, and call the peopl to rescu a daughter of the church. 
they were eagerli prepar to obey her; when don ramirez, protect by 
the archer from their rage, command them to forbear, and threaten 
them with the severest vengeanc of the inquisition. At that dread 
word everi arm fell, everi sword shrunk back into it scabbard. the 
prioress herself turn pale, and trembled. the gener silenc 
convinc her that she had noth to hope but from innocence, and she 
besought don ramirez in a faulter voice, to inform her of what crime 
she wa accused. 

'that you shall know in time,' repli he; 'but first I must secur the 
mother st. ursula.' 

'the mother st. ursula?' repeat the domina faintly. 

At thi moment cast her eye round, she saw near her lorenzo and the 
duke, who had follow don ramirez. 

'ah! great god!' she cried, clasp her hand togeth with a frantic 
air; 'I am betrayed!' 

'betrayed?' repli st. ursula, who now arriv conduct by some of 
the archers, and follow by the nun her companion in the procession: 
'not betrayed, but discovered. In me recognis your accuser: you know 
not how well I am instruct in your guilt!--segnor!' she continued, 
turn to don ramirez; 'I commit myself to your custody. I charg the 
prioress of st. clare with murder, and stake my life for the justic of 
my accusation.' 

A gener cri of surpriz wa utter by the whole audience, and an 
explan wa demand loudly. the trembl nuns, terrifi at the 
nois and univers confusion, had dispersed, and fled differ ways. 
some regain the convent; other sought refug in the dwell of 
their relations; and many, onli sensibl of their present danger, and 
anxiou to escap from the tumult, ran through the streets, and 
wandered, they knew not whither. the love virginia wa one of the 
first to fly: and in order that she might be better seen and heard, 
the peopl desir that st. ursula should harangu them from the vacant 
throne. the nun complied; she ascend the glitter machine, and 
then address the surround multitud as follows. 

'howev strang and unseemli may appear my conduct, when consid to 
be adopt by a femal and a nun, necess will justifi it most fully. 
A secret, an horribl secret weigh heavi upon my soul: No rest can be 
mine till I have reveal it to the world, and satisfi that innoc 
blood which call from the grave for vengeance. much have I dare to 
gain thi opportun of lighten my conscience. had I fail in my 
attempt to reveal the crime, had the domina but suspect that the 
mysteri wa none to me, my ruin wa inevitable. angel who watch 
unceasingli over those who deserv their favour, have enabl me to 
escap detection: I am now at liberti to relat a tale, whose 
circumst will freez everi honest soul with horror. mine is the 
task to rend the veil from hypocrisy, and show misguid parent to 
what danger the woman is exposed, who fall under the sway of a 
monast tyrant. 

'among the votari of st. clare, none wa more lovely, none more 
gentle, than agn de medina. I knew her well; she entrust to me 
everi secret of her heart; I wa her friend and confident, and I love 
her with sincer affection. nor wa I singular in my attachment. her 
pieti unfeigned, her willing to oblige, and her angel 
disposition, render her the darl of all that wa estim in the 
convent. the prioress herself, proud, scrupul and forbidding, could 
not refus agn that tribut of approb which she bestow upon no 
one else. everi one ha some fault: alas! agn had her weakness! 
she violat the law of our order, and incur the inveter hate of 
the unforgiv domina. st. clare' rule are severe: but grown 
antiqu and neglected, mani of late year have either been 
forgotten, or chang by univers consent into milder punishments. 
the penance, adjudg to the crime of agnes, wa most cruel, most 
inhuman! the law had been long exploded: alas! It still existed, and 
the reveng prioress now determin to reviv it. 

thi law decre that the offend should be plung into a privat 
dungeon, expressli constitut to hide from the world for ever the 
victim of cruelti and tyrann superstition. In thi dread abod 
she wa to lead a perpetu solitude, depriv of all society, and 
believ to be dead by those whom affect might have prompt to 
attempt her rescue. thu wa she to languish out the remaind of her 
days, with no other food than bread and water, and no other comfort 
than the free indulg of her tears.' 

the indign creat by thi account wa so violent, as for some 
moment to interrupt st. ursula' narrative. when the disturb 
ceased, and silenc again prevail through the assembly, she continu 
her discourse, while at everi word the domina' counten betray 
her increas terrors. 

'A council of the twelv elder nun wa called: I wa of the number. 
the prioress in exagger colour describ the offenc of agnes, and 
scrupl not to propos the reviv of thi almost forgotten law. To 
the shame of our sex be it spoken, that either so absolut wa the 
domina' will in the convent, or so much had disappointment, solitude, 
and self-deni harden their heart and sower their temper that 
thi barbar propos wa assent to by nine voic out of the 
twelve. I wa not one of the nine. frequent opportun had 
convinc me of the virtu of agnes, and I love and piti her most 
sincerely. the mother bertha and cornelia join my party: We made 
the strongest opposit possible, and the superior found herself 
compel to chang her intention. In spite of the major in her 
favour, she fear to break with us openly. she knew that support by 
the medina family, our forc would be too strong for her to cope with: 
and she also knew that after be onc imprison and suppos dead, 
should agn be discovered, her ruin would be inevitable. she 
therefor gave up her design, though which much reluctance. she 
demand some day to reflect upon a mode of punish which might be 
agreeabl to the whole community; and she promised, that as soon as her 
resolut wa fixed, the same council should be again summoned. two 
day pass away: On the even of the third it wa announc that on 
the next day agn should be examined; and that accord to her 
behaviour on that occasion, her punish should be either 
strengthen or mitigated. 

'on the night preced thi examination, I stole to the cell of agn 
at an hour when I suppos the other nun to be buri in sleep. I 
comfort her to the best of my power: I bad her take courage, told 
her to reli upon the support of her friends, and taught her certain 
signs, by which I might instruct her to answer the domina' question 
by an assent or negative. consciou that her enemi would strive to 
confuse, embarrass, and daunt her, I fear her be ensnar into 
some confess prejudici to her interests. be anxiou to keep my 
visit secret, I stay with agn but a short time. I bad her not let 
her spirit be cast down; I mingl my tear with those which stream 
down her cheek, embrac her fondly, and wa on the point of retiring, 
when I heard the sound of step approach the cell. I start back. 
A curtain which veil a larg crucifix offer me a retreat, and I 
hasten to place myself behind it. the door opened. the prioress 
entered, follow by four other nuns. they advanc toward the bed of 
agnes. the superior reproach her with her error in the bitterest 
terms: she told her that she wa a disgrac to the convent, that she 
wa resolv to deliv the world and herself from such a monster, and 
command her to drink the content of a goblet now present to her by 
one of the nuns. awar of the fatal properti of the liquor, and 
trembl to find herself upon the brink of eternity, the unhappi girl 
strove to excit the domina' piti by the most affect prayers. 

she su for life in term which might have melt the heart of a 
fiend: she promis to submit patient to ani punishment, to shame, 
imprisonment, and torture, might she but be permit to live! oh! 
might she but live anoth month, or week, or day! her merciless enemi 
listen to her complaint unmoved: she told her that at first she 
meant to have spare her life, and that if she had alter her 
intention, she had to thank the opposit of her friends. she 
continu to insist upon her swallow the poison: she bad her 
recommend herself to the almighty' mercy, not to hers, and assur her 
that in an hour she would be number with the dead. perceiv that 
it wa vain to implor thi unfeel woman, she attempt to spring 
from her bed, and call for assistance: she hoped, if she could not 
escap the fate announc to her, at least to have wit of the 
violenc committed. the prioress guess her design. she seiz her 
forcibl by the arm, and push her back upon her pillow. At the same 
time draw a dagger, and place it at the breast of the unfortun 
agnes, she protest that if she utter a singl cry, or hesit a 
singl moment to drink the poison, she would pierc her heart that 
instant. alreadi half-dead with fear, she could make no further 
resistance. the nun approach with the fatal goblet. the domina 
oblig her to take it, and swallow the contents. she drank, and the 
horrid deed wa accomplished. the nun then seat themselv round 
the bed. they answer her groan with reproaches; they interrupt 
with sarcasm the prayer in which she recommend her part soul to 
mercy: they threaten her with heaven' vengeanc and etern 
perdition: they bad her despair of pardon, and strow with yet sharper 
thorn death' pain pillow. such were the suffer of thi young 
unfortunate, till releas by fate from the malic of her tormentors. 
she expir in horror of the past, in fear for the future; and her 
agoni were such as must have ampli gratifi the hate and vengeanc 
of her enemies. As soon as her victim ceas to breathe, the domina 
retired, and wa follow by her accomplices. 

'it wa now that I ventur from my concealment. I dare not to assist 
my unhappi friend, awar that without preserv her, I should onli 
have brought on myself the same destruction. shock and terrifi 
beyond express at thi horrid scene, scarc had I suffici 
strength to regain my cell. As I reach the door of that of agnes, I 
ventur to look toward the bed, on which lay her lifeless body, onc 
so love and so sweet! I breath a prayer for her depart spirit, 
and vow to reveng her death by the shame and punish of her 
assassins. with danger and difficulti have I kept my oath. I unwarili 
drop some word at the funer of agnes, while thrown off my guard 
by excess grief, which alarm the guilti conscienc of the 
prioress. My everi action wa observed; My everi step wa traced. I 
wa constantli surround by the superior' spies. It wa long befor 
I could find the mean of convey to the unhappi girl' relat an 
intim of my secret. It wa given out that agn had expir 
suddenly: thi account wa credit not onli by her friend in madrid, 
but even by those within the convent. the poison had left no mark 
upon her body: No one suspect the true caus of her death, and it 
remain unknown to all, save the assassin and myself. 

'I have no more to say: for what I have alreadi said, I will answer 
with my life. I repeat that the prioress is a murderess; that she ha 
driven from the world, perhap from heaven, an unfortun whose 
offenc wa light and venial; that she ha abus the power intrust 
to her hands, and ha been a tyrant, a barbarian, and an hypocrite. I 
also accus the four nuns, violante, camilla, alix, and mariana, as 
be her accomplices, and equal criminal.' 

here st. ursula end her narrative. It creat horror and surpriz 
throughout: but when she relat the inhuman murder of agnes, the 
indign of the mob wa so audibl testified, that it wa scarc 
possibl to hear the conclusion. thi confus increas with everi 
moment: At length a multitud of voic exclaim that the prioress 
should be given up to their fury. To thi don ramirez refus to 
consent positively. even lorenzo bad the peopl rememb that she had 
undergon no trial, and advis them to leav her punish to the 
inquisition. all represent were fruitless: the disturb grew 
still more violent, and the populac more exasperated. In vain did 
ramirez attempt to convey hi prison out of the throng. wherev He 
turned, a band of rioter bar hi passage, and demand her be 
deliv over to them more loudli than before. ramirez order hi 
attend to cut their way through the multitude: oppress by 
numbers, it wa imposs for them to draw their swords. He 
threaten the mob with the vengeanc of the inquisition: but in thi 
moment of popular phrenzi even thi dread name had lost it effect. 
though regret for hi sister made him look upon the prioress with 
abhorrence, lorenzo could not help piti a woman in a situat so 
terrible: but in spite of all hi exertions, and those of the duke, of 
don ramirez, and the archers, the peopl continu to press onwards. 
they forc a passag through the guard who protect their destin 
victim, drag her from her shelter, and proceed to take upon her a 
most summari and cruel vengeance. wild with terror, and scarc 
know what she said, the wretch woman shriek for a moment' 
mercy: she protest that she wa innoc of the death of agnes, and 
could clear herself from the suspicion beyond the power of doubt. the 
rioter heed noth but the gratif of their barbar 
vengeance. they refus to listen to her: they show her everi sort 
of insult, load her with mud and filth, and call her by the most 
opprobri appellations. they tore her one from another, and each new 
tormentor wa more savag than the former. they stifl with howl and 
execr her shrill cri for mercy; and drag her through the 
streets, spurn her, trampl her, and treat her with everi 
speci of cruelti which hate or vindict furi could invent. At 
length a flint, aim by some well-direct hand, struck her full upon 
the temple. she sank upon the ground bath in blood, and in a few 
minut termin her miser existence. yet though she no longer 
felt their insults, the rioter still exercis their impot rage 
upon her lifeless body. they beat it, trod upon it, and ill-us it, 
till it becam no more than a mass of flesh, unsightly, shapeless, and 
disgusting. 

unabl to prevent thi shock event, lorenzo and hi friend had 
beheld it with the utmost horror: but they were rouz from their 
compel inactivity, on hear that the mob wa attack the convent 
of st. clare. the incens populace, confound the innoc with the 
guilty, had resolv to sacrific all the nun of that order to their 
rage, and not to leav one stone of the build upon another. alarm 
at thi intelligence, they hasten to the convent, resolv to defend 
it if possible, or at least to rescu the inhabit from the furi of 
the rioters. most of the nun had fled, but a few still remain in 
their habitation. their situat wa truli dangerous. however, as 
they had taken the precaut of fasten the inner gates, with thi 
assist lorenzo hope to repel the mob, till don ramirez should 
return to him with a more suffici force. 

have been conduct by the former disturb to the distanc of some 
street from the convent, He did not immedi reach it: when He 
arrived, the throng surround it wa so excess as to prevent hi 
approach the gates. In the interim, the populac besieg the 
build with persev rage: they batter the walls, threw light 
torch in at the windows, and swore that by break of day not a nun of 
st. clare' order should be left alive. lorenzo had just succeed in 
pierc hi way through the crowd, when one of the gate wa forc 
open. the rioter pour into the interior part of the building, where 
they exercis their vengeanc upon everi thing which found itself in 
their passage. they broke the furnitur into pieces, tore down the 
pictures, destroy the reliques, and in their hatr of her servant 
forgot all respect to the saint. some employ themselv in search 
out the nuns, other in pull down part of the convent, and other 
again in set fire to the pictur and valuabl furnitur which it 
contained. these latter produc the most decis desolation: inde 
the consequ of their action were more sudden than themselv had 
expect or wished. the flame rise from the burn pile caught 
part of the building, which be old and dry, the conflagr spread 
with rapid from room to room. the wall were soon shaken by the 
devour element: the column gave way: the roof came tumbl down 
upon the rioters, and crush mani of them beneath their weight. 
noth wa to be heard but shriek and groans; the convent wa wrap 
in flames, and the whole present a scene of devast and horror. 

lorenzo wa shock at have been the cause, howev innocent, of thi 
fright disturbance: He endeavour to repair hi fault by 
protect the helpless inhabit of the convent. He enter it with 
the mob, and exert himself to repress the prevail fury, till the 
sudden and alarm progress of the flame compel him to provid for 
hi own safety. the peopl now hurri out, as eagerli as they had 
befor throng in; but their number clog up the doorway, and the 
fire gain upon them rapidly, mani of them perish ere they had time 
to effect their escape. lorenzo' good fortun direct him to a small 
door in a farther aisl of the chapel. the bolt wa alreadi undrawn: 
He open the door, and found himself at the foot of st. clare' 
sepulchre. 

here He stop to breathe. the duke and some of hi attend had 
follow him, and thu were in secur for the present. they now 
consulted, what step they should take to escap from thi scene of 
disturbance: but their deliber were consider interrupt by 
the sight of volum of fire rise from amidst the convent' massi 
walls, by the nois of some heavi arch tumbl down in ruins, or by 
the mingl shriek of the nun and rioters, either suffoc in the 
press, perish in the flames, or crush beneath the weight of the 
fall mansion. 

lorenzo enquired, whither the wicket led? He wa answered, to the 
garden of the capuchins, and it wa resolv to explor an outlet upon 
that side. accordingli the duke rais the latch, and pass into the 
adjoin cemetery. the attend follow without ceremony. 
lorenzo, be the last, wa also on the point of quit the 
colonnade, when He saw the door of the sepulchr open softly. 
someon look out, but on perceiv stranger utter a loud shriek, 
start back again, and flew down the marbl stairs. 

'what can thi mean?' cri lorenzo; 'here is some mysteri concealed. 
follow me without delay!' 

thu saying, He hasten into the sepulchre, and pursu the person who 
continu to fli befor him. the duke knew not the caus of hi 
exclamation, but suppos that He had good reason for it, he follow 
him without hesitation. the other did the same, and the whole parti 
soon arriv at the foot of the stairs. 

the upper door have been left open, the neighbour flame dart 
from abov a suffici light to enabl lorenzo' catch a glanc of 
the fugit run through the long passag and distant vaults: but 
when a sudden turn depriv him of thi assistance, total dark 
succeeded, and He could onli trace the object of hi enquiri by the 
faint echo of retir feet. the pursuer were now compel to 
proceed with caution: As well as they could judge, the fugit also 
seem to slacken pace, for they heard the step follow each other at 
longer intervals. they at length were bewild by the labyrinth of 
passages, and dispers in variou directions. carri away by hi 
eager to clear up thi mystery, and to penetr into which He wa 
impel by a movement secret and unaccountable, lorenzo heed not 
thi circumst till He found himself in total solitude. the nois of 
footstep had ceased. all wa silent around, and no clue offer 
itself to guid him to the fli person. He stop to reflect on the 
mean most like to aid hi pursuit. He wa persuad that no common 
caus would have induc the fugit to seek that dreari place at an 
hour so unusual: the cri which He had heard, seem utter in a voic 
of terror, and He wa convinc that some mysteri wa attach to thi 
event. after some minut past in hesit He continu to proceed, 
feel hi way along the wall of the passage. He had alreadi past 
some time in thi slow progress, when He descri a spark of light 
glimmer at a distance. guid by thi observation, and have drawn 
hi sword, He bent hi step toward the place, whenc the beam seem 
to be emitted. 

It proceed from the lamp which flame befor st. clare' statue. 
befor it stood sever females, their white garment stream in the 
blast, as it howl along the vault dungeons. curiou to know what 
had brought them togeth in thi melancholi spot, lorenzo drew near 
with precaution. the stranger seem earnestli engag in 
conversation. they heard not lorenzo' steps, and He approach 
unobserved, till He could hear their voic distinctly. 

'I protest,' continu she who wa speak when He arrived, and to 
whom the rest were listen with great attention; 'I protest, that I 
saw them with my own eyes. I flew down the steps; they pursu me, and 
I escap fall into their hand with difficulty. had it not been 
for the lamp, I should never have found you.' 

'and what could bring them hither?' said anoth in a trembl voice; 
'do you think that they were look for us?' 

'god grant that my fear may be false,' rejoin the first; 'but I 
doubt they are murderers! If they discov us, we are lost! As for me, 
my fate is certain: My affin to the prioress will be a suffici 
crime to condemn me; and though till now these vault have afford me 
a retreat.......' 

here look up, her eye fell upon lorenzo, who had continu to 
approach softly. 

'the murderers!' she cried-- 

she start away from the statue' pedest on which she had been 
seated, and attempt to escap by flight. her companion at the same 
moment utter a terrifi scream, while lorenzo arrest the fugit 
by the arm. frighten and desper she sank upon her knee befor 
him. 

'spare me!' she exclaimed; 'for christ' sake, spare me! I am 
innocent, indeed, I am!' 

while she spoke, her voic wa almost choak with fear. the beam of 
the lamp dart full upon her face which wa unveiled, lorenzo 
recogn the beauti virginia de villa-franca. He hasten to 
rais her from the ground, and besought her to take courage. He 
promis to protect her from the rioters, assur her that her retreat 
wa still a secret, and that she might depend upon hi readi to 
defend her to the last drop of hi blood. dure thi conversation, 
the nun had thrown themselv into variou attitudes: one knelt, and 
address herself to heaven; anoth hid her face in the lap of her 
neighbour; some listen motionless with fear to the discours of the 
suppos assassin; while other embrac the statu of st. clare, and 
implor her protect with frantic cries. On perceiv their 
mistake, they crowd round lorenzo and heap benedict on him by 
dozens. He found that, on hear the threat of the mob, and 
terrifi by the cruelti which from the convent tower they had seen 
inflict on the superior, mani of the pension and nun had taken 
refug in the sepulchre. among the former wa to be reckon the 
love virginia. nearli relat to the prioress, she had more reason 
than the rest to dread the rioters, and now besought lorenzo earnestli 
not to abandon her to their rage. her companions, most of whom were 
women of nobl family, made the same request, which He readili granted. 
He promis not to quit them, till He had seen each of them safe in the 
arm of her relations: but He advis their defer to quit the 
sepulchr for some time longer, when the popular furi should be 
somewhat calmed, and the arriv of militari forc have dispers the 
multitude. 

'would to god!' cri virginia, 'that I were alreadi safe in my 
mother' embraces! how say you, segnor; will it be long, ere we may 
leav thi place? everi moment that I pass here, I pass in torture!' 

'I hope, not long,' said he; 'but till you can proceed with security, 
thi sepulchr will prove an impenetr asylum. here you run no 
risqu of a discovery, and I would advis your remain quiet for the 
next two or three hours.' 

'two or three hours?' exclaim sister helena; 'if I stay anoth hour 
in these vaults, I shall expir with fear! not the wealth of world 
should bribe me to undergo again what I have suffer sinc my come 
hither. bless virgin! To be in thi melancholi place in the middl 
of night, surround by the moulder bodi of my deceas 
companions, and expect everi moment to be torn in piec by their 
ghost who wander about me, and complain, and groan, and wail in 
accent that make my blood run cold, ..... christ jesus! It is 
enough to drive me to madness!' 

'excus me,' repli lorenzo, 'if I am surpriz that while menac by 
real woe you are capabl of yield to imaginari dangers. these 
terror are pueril and groundless: combat them, holi sister; I have 
promis to guard you from the rioters, but against the attack of 
superstit you must depend for protect upon yourself. the idea of 
ghost is ridicul in the extreme; and if you continu to be sway 
by ideal terror ...' 

'ideal?' exclaim the nun with one voice; 'whi we heard it ourselves, 
segnor! everi one of us heard it! It wa frequent repeated, and it 
sound everi time more melancholi and deep. you will never persuad me 
that we could all have been deceived. not we, indeed; no, no; had the 
nois been mere creat by fanci ....' 

'hark! hark!' interrupt virginia in a voic of terror; 'god preserv 
us! there it is again!' 

the nun clasp their hand together, and sank upon their knees. 

lorenzo look round him eagerly, and wa on the point of yield to 
the fear which alreadi had possess the women. univers silenc 
prevailed. He examin the vault, but noth wa to be seen. He now 
prepar to address the nuns, and ridicul their childish 
apprehensions, when hi attent wa arrest by a deep and long-drawn 
groan. 

'what wa that?' He cried, and started. 

'there, segnor!' said helena; 'now you must be convinced! you have 
heard the nois yourself! now judge, whether our terror are 
imaginary. sinc we have been here, that groan ha been repeat 
almost everi five minutes. doubtless, it proce from some soul in 
pain, who wish to be pray out of purgatory: but none of us here 
dare ask it the question. As for me, were I to see an apparition, the 
fright, I am veri certain, would kill me out of hand.' 

As she said this, a second groan wa heard yet more distinctly. the 
nun cross themselves, and hasten to repeat their prayer against 
evil spirits. lorenzo listen attentively. He even thought that He 
could distinguish sounds, as of one speak in complaint; but distanc 
render them inarticulate. the nois seem to come from the midst of 
the small vault in which He and the nun then were, and which a 
multitud of passag branch out in variou directions, form into 
a sort of star. lorenzo' curios which wa ever awake, made him 
anxiou to solv thi mystery. He desir that silenc might be kept. 
the nun obey him. all wa hushed, till the gener still wa 
again disturb by the groaning, which wa repeat sever time 
successively. He perceiv it to be most audible, when upon follow 
the sound He wa conduct close to the shrine of st. clare: 

'the nois come from hence,' said he; 'whose is thi statue?' 

helena, to whom He address the question, paus for a moment. 
suddenli she clap her hand together. 

'aye!' cri she, 'it must be so. I have discov the mean of 
these groans.' 

the nun crowd round her, and besought her eagerli to explain 
herself. she grave repli that for time immemori the statu had 
been famou for perform miracles: from thi she infer that the 
saint wa concern at the conflagr of a convent which she 
protected, and express her grief by audibl lamentations. not have 
equal faith in the miracul saint, lorenzo did not think thi 
solut of the mysteri quit so satisfactory, as the nuns, who 
subscrib to it without hesitation. In one point, 'ti true, that He 
agre with helena. 

He suspect that the groan proceed from the statue: the more He 
listened, the more wa He confirm in thi idea. He drew nearer to 
the image, design to inspect it more closely: but perceiv hi 
intention, the nun besought him for god' sake to desist, sinc if He 
touch the statue, hi death wa inevitable. 

'and in what consist the danger?' said he. 

'mother of god! In what?' repli helena, ever eager to relat a 
miracul adventure; 'if you had onli heard the hundredth part of 
those marvel stori about thi statu which the domina use to 
recount! she assur us often and often, that if we onli dare to lay 
a finger upon it, we might expect the most fatal consequences. among 
other thing she told us that a robber have enter these vault by 
night, He observ yonder ruby, whose valu is inestimable. Do you see 
it, segnor? It sparkl upon the third finger of the hand, in which 
she hold a crown of thorns. thi jewel natur excit the 
villain' cupidity. He resolv to make himself master of it. for 
thi purpos He ascend the pedestal: He support himself by 
grasp the saint' right arm, and extend hi own toward the ring. 
what wa hi surprize, when He saw the statue' hand rais in a 
postur of menace, and heard her lip pronounc hi etern perdition! 
penetr with awe and consternation, He desist from hi attempt, 
and prepar to quit the sepulchre. In thi He also failed. flight 
wa deni him. He found it imposs to disengag the hand, which 
rest upon the right arm of the statue. In vain did He struggle: He 
remain fix to the image, till the insupport and fieri anguish 
which dart itself through hi veins, compel hi shriek for 
assistance. 

the sepulchr wa now fill with spectators. the villain confess 
hi sacrilege, and wa onli releas by the separ of hi hand from 
hi body. It ha remain ever sinc fasten to the image. the 
robber turn hermit, and led ever after an exemplari life: but yet 
the saint' decre wa performed, and tradit say that He continu 
to haunt thi sepulchre, and implor st. clare' pardon with groan and 
lamentations. now I think of it, those which we have just heard, may 
veri possibl have been utter by the ghost of thi sinner: but of 
thi I will not be positive. all that I can say is, that sinc that 
time no one ha ever dare to touch the statue: then do not be 
foolhardy, good segnor! for the love of heaven, give up your design, 
nor expos yourself unnecessarili to certain destruction.' 

not be convinc that hi destruct would be so certain as helena 
seem to think it, lorenzo persist in hi resolution. the nun 
besought him to desist in piteou terms, and even point out the 
robber' hand, which in effect wa still visibl upon the arm of the 
statue. thi proof, as they imagined, must convinc him. It wa veri 
far from do so; and they were greatli scandal when he declar 
hi suspicion that the dri and shrivel finger had been place 
there by order of the prioress. In spite of their prayer and threat 
He approach the statue. He sprang over the iron rail which defend 
it, and the saint underw a thorough examination. the imag at first 
appear to be of stone, but prove on further inspect to be form 
of no more solid materi than colour wood. He shook it, and 
attempt to move it; but it appear to be of a piec with the base 
which it stood upon. He examin it over and over: still no clue 
guid him to the solut of thi mystery, for which the nun were 
becom equal solicitous, when they saw that He touch the statu 
with impunity. He paused, and listened: the groan were repeat at 
intervals, and He wa convinc of be in the spot nearest to them. 
He muse upon thi singular event, and ran over the statu with 
enquir eyes. suddenli they rest upon the shrivel hand. It 
struck him, that so particular an injunct wa not given without 
cause, not to touch the arm of the image. He again ascend the 
pedestal; He examin the object of hi attention, and discov a 
small knob of iron conceal between the saint' shoulder and what wa 
suppos to have been the hand of the robber. thi observ 
delight him. He appli hi finger to the knob, and press it down 
forcibly. immedi a rumbl nois wa heard within the statue, as 
if a chain tightli stretch wa fli back. startl at the sound the 
timid nun start away, prepar to hasten from the vault at the first 
appear of danger. all remain quiet and still, they again 
gather round lorenzo, and beheld hi proceed with anxiou 
curiosity. 

find that noth follow thi discovery, He descended. As He took 
hi hand from the saint, she trembl beneath hi touch. thi creat 
new terror in the spectators, who believ the statu to be animated. 
lorenzo' idea upon the subject were wide different. He easili 
comprehend that the nois which He had heard, wa occas by hi 
have loosen a chain which attach the imag to it pedestal. He 
onc more attempt to move it, and succeed without much exertion. 
He place it upon the ground, and then perceiv the pedest to be 
hollow, and cover at the open with an heavi iron grate. 

thi excit such gener curios that the sister forgot both their 
real and imaginari dangers. lorenzo proceed to rais the grate, in 
which the nun assist him to the utmost of their strength. the 
attempt wa accomplish with littl difficulty. A deep abyss now 
present itself befor them, whose thick obscur the eye strove in 
vain to pierce. the ray of the lamp were too feebl to be of much 
assistance. noth wa discernible, save a flight of rough unshapen 
step which sank into the yawn gulph and were soon lost in darkness. 
the groan were heard no more; but all believ them to have ascend 
from thi cavern. As He bent over it, lorenzo fanci that He 
distinguish someth bright twinkl through the gloom. He gaze 
attent upon the spot where it show itself, and wa convinc 
that He saw a small spark of light, now visible, now disappearing. He 
commun thi circumst to the nuns: they also perceiv the 
spark; but when He declar hi intent to descend into the cave, 
they unit to oppos hi resolution. all their remonstr could not 
prevail on him to alter it. none of them had courag enough to 
accompani him; neither could He think of depriv them of the lamp. 
alon therefore, and in darkness, He prepar to pursu hi design, 
while the nun were content to offer up prayer for hi success and 
safety. 

the step were so narrow and uneven, that to descend them wa like 
walk down the side of a precipice. the obscur by which He wa 
surround render hi foot insecure. He wa oblig to proceed 
with great caution, lest He should miss the step and fall into the 
gulph below him. thi He wa sever time on the point of doing. 
however, He arriv sooner upon solid ground than He had expected: He 
now found that the thick dark and impenetr mist which reign 
through the cavern had deceiv him into the belief of it be much 
more profound than it prove upon inspection. He reach the foot of 
the stair unhurt: He now stopped, and look round for the spark 
which had befor caught hi attention. He sought it in vain: all wa 
dark and gloomy. He listen for the groans; but hi ear caught no 
sound, except the distant murmur of the nun above, as in low voic 
they repeat their ave-marias. He stood irresolut to which side He 
should address hi steps. At all event He determin to proceed: He 
did so, but slowly, fear lest instead of approaching, He should be 
retir from the object of hi search. the groan seem to announc 
one in pain, or at least in sorrow, and He hope to have the power of 
reliev the mourner' calamities. A plaintiv tone, sound at no 
great distance, at length reach hi hearing; He bent hi cours 
joy toward it. It becam more audibl as He advanced; and He 
soon beheld again the spark of light, which a low project wall had 
hitherto conceal from him. 

It proceed from a small lamp which wa place upon an heap of stones, 
and whose faint and melancholi ray serv rather to point out, than 
dispel the horror of a narrow gloomi dungeon form in one side of 
the cavern; It also show sever other recess of similar 
construction, but whose depth wa buri in obscurity. coldli play 
the light upon the damp walls, whose dew-stain surfac gave back a 
feebl reflection. A thick and pestilenti fog cloud the height of 
the vault dungeon. As lorenzo advanced, He felt a pierc chill 
spread itself through hi veins. the frequent groan still engag him 
to move forwards. He turn toward them, and by the lamp' glimmer 
beam beheld in a corner of thi loathsom abode, a creatur stretch 
upon a bed of straw, so wretched, so emaciated, so pale, that He 
doubt to think her woman. she wa half-naked: her long dishevel 
hair fell in disord over her face, and almost entir conceal it. 
one wast arm hung listlessli upon a tatter rug which cover her 
convuls and shiver limbs: the other wa wrap round a small 
bundle, and held it close to her bosom. A larg rosari lay near her: 
opposit to her wa a crucifix, on which she bent her sunk eye 
fixedly, and by her side stood a basket and a small earthen pitcher. 

lorenzo stopped: He wa petrifi with horror. He gaze upon the 
miser object with disgust and pity. He trembl at the spectacle; 
He grew sick at heart: hi strength fail him, and hi limb were 
unabl to support hi weight. He wa oblig to lean against the low 
wall which wa near him, unabl to go forward, or to address the 
sufferer. she cast her eye toward the staircase: the wall conceal 
lorenzo, and she observ him not. 

'no one comes!' she at length murmured. 

As she spoke, her voic wa hollow, and rattl in her throat: she 
sigh bitterly. 

'no one comes!' she repeated; 'no! they have forgotten me! they will 
come no more!' 

she paus for a moment: then continu mournfully. 

'two days! two long, long days, and yet no food! and yet no hope, no 
comfort! foolish woman! how can I wish to lengthen a life so 
wretched! yet such a death! O! god! To perish by such a death! To 
linger out such age in torture! till now, I knew not what it wa to 
hunger! hark! no. No one comes! they will come no more!' 

she wa silent. she shivered, and drew the rug over her nake 
shoulders. 

'I am veri cold! I am still unus to the damp of thi dungeon! 

'ti strange: but no matter. colder shall I soon be, and yet not feel 
it--i shall be cold, cold as thou art!' 

she look at the bundl which lay upon her breast. she bent over it, 
and kiss it: then drew back hastily, and shudder with disgust. 

'it wa onc so sweet! It would have been so lovely, so like him! I 
have lost it for ever! how a few day have chang it! I should not 
know it again myself! yet it is dear to me! god! how dear! I will 
forget what it is: I will onli rememb what it was, and love it as 
well, as when it wa so sweet! so lovely! so like him! I thought that 
I had wept away all my tears, but here is one still lingering.' 

she wipe her eye with a tress of her hair. she put out her hand for 
the pitcher, and reach it with difficulty. she cast into it a look 
of hopeless enquiry. she sighed, and replac it upon the ground. 

'quit a void! not a drop! not one drop left to cool my scorched-up 
burn palate! now would I give treasur for a draught of water! 
and they are god' servants, who make me suffer thus! they think 
themselv holy, while they tortur me like fiends! they are cruel and 
unfeeling; and 'ti they who bid me repent; and 'ti they, who threaten 
me with etern perdition! saviour, saviour! you think not so!' 

she again fix her eye upon the crucifix, took her rosary, and while 
she told her beads, the quick motion of her lip declar her to be 
pray with fervency. 

while He listen to her melancholi accents, lorenzo' sensibl 
becam yet more violent affected. the first sight of such miseri had 
given a sensibl shock to hi feelings: but that be past, He now 
advanc toward the captive. she heard hi steps, and utter a cri 
of joy, drop the rosary. 

'hark! hark! hark!' she cried: 'some one comes!' 

she strove to rais herself, but her strength wa unequ to the 
attempt: she fell back, and as she sank again upon the bed of straw, 
lorenzo heard the rattl of heavi chains. He still approached, while 
the prison thu continued. 

'i it you, camilla? you are come then at last? oh! it wa time! I 
thought that you had forsaken me; that I wa doom to perish of 
hunger. give me to drink, camilla, for pity' sake! I am faint with 
long fasting, and grown so weak that I cannot rais myself from the 
ground. good camilla, give me to drink, lest I expir befor you!' 

fear that surpriz in her enfeebl state might be fatal, lorenzo 
wa at a loss how to address her. 

'it is not camilla,' said He at length, speak in a slow and gentl 
voice. 

'who is it then?' repli the sufferer: 'alix, perhaps, or violante. 
My eye are grown so dim and feebl that I cannot distinguish your 
features. but whichev it is, if your breast is sensibl of the least 
compassion, if you are not more cruel than wolv and tigers, take piti 
on my sufferings. you know that I am die for want of sustenance. 
thi is the third day, sinc these lip have receiv nourishment. Do 
you bring me food? Or come you onli to announc my death, and learn 
how long I have yet to exist in agony?' 

'you mistak my business,' repli lorenzo; 'I am no emissari of the 
cruel prioress. I piti your sorrows, and come hither to reliev them.' 

'to reliev them?' repeat the captive; 'said you, to reliev them?' 

At the same time start from the ground, and support herself upon 
her hands, she gaze upon the stranger earnestly. 

'great god! It is no illusion! A man! speak! who are you? what 
bring you hither? come you to save me, to restor me to liberty, to 
life and light? oh! speak, speak quickly, lest I encourag an hope 
whose disappoint will destroy me.' 

'be calm!' repli lorenzo in a voic sooth and compassionate; 'the 
domina of whose cruelti you complain, ha alreadi paid the forfeit of 
her offences: you have noth more to fear from her. 

A few minut will restor you to liberty, and the embrac of your 
friend from whom you have been secluded. you may reli upon my 
protection. give me your hand, and be not fearful. let me conduct you 
where you may receiv those attent which your feebl state 
requires.' 

'oh! yes! yes! yes!' cri the prison with an exult shriek; 
'there is a god then, and a just one! joy! joy! I shall onc more 
breath the fresh air, and view the light of the gloriou sunbeams! I 
will go with you! stranger, I will go with you! oh! heaven will bless 
you for piti an unfortunate! but thi too must go with me,' she 
ad point to the small bundl which she still clasp to her 
bosom; 'I cannot part with this. I will bear it away: It shall 
convinc the world how dread are the abod so fals term 
religious. good stranger, lend me your hand to rise: I am faint with 
want, and sorrow, and sickness, and my forc have quit forsaken me! 
so, that is well!' 

As lorenzo stoop to rais her, the beam of the lamp struck full upon 
hi face. 

'almighti god!' she exclaimed; 'i it possible! that look! those 
features! oh! yes, it is, it is .....' 

she extend her arm to throw them round him; but her enfeebl frame 
wa unabl to sustain the emot which agit her bosom. she 
fainted, and again sank upon the bed of straw. 

lorenzo wa surpriz at her last exclamation. He thought that He had 
befor heard such accent as her hollow voic had just formed, but 
where He could not remember. He saw that in her danger situat 
immedi physic aid wa absolut necessary, and He hasten to 
convey her from the dungeon. He wa at first prevent from do so 
by a strong chain fasten round the prisoner' body, and fix her to 
the neighbour wall. however, hi natur strength be aid by 
anxieti to reliev the unfortunate, He soon forc out the stapl to 
which one end of the chain wa attached. then take the captiv in hi 
arms, He bent hi cours toward the staircase. the ray of the lamp 
above, as well as the murmur of femal voices, guid hi steps. He 
gain the stairs, and in a few minut after arriv at the iron-grate. 

the nun dure hi absenc had been terribl torment by curios 
and apprehension: they were equal surpriz and delight on see 
him suddenli emerg from the cave. everi heart wa fill with 
compass for the miser creatur whom He bore in hi arms. while 
the nuns, and virginia in particular, employ themselv in strive 
to recal her to her senses, lorenzo relat in few word the manner of 
hi find her. He then observ to them that by thi time the tumult 
must have been quelled, and that He could now conduct them to their 
friend without danger. all were eager to quit the sepulchre: still 
to prevent all possibl of ill-usage, they besought lorenzo to 
ventur out first alone, and examin whether the coast wa clear. with 
thi request He complied. helena offer to conduct him to the 
staircase, and they were on the point of departing, when a strong light 
flash from sever passag upon the adjac walls. At the same 
time step were heard of peopl approach hastily, and whose number 
seem to be considerable. the nun were greatli alarm at thi 
circumstance: they suppos their retreat to be discovered, and the 
rioter to be advanc in pursuit of them. hastili quit the 
prison who remain insensible, they crowd round lorenzo, and 
claim hi promis to protect them. virginia alon forgot her own 
danger by strive to reliev the sorrow of another. she support 
the sufferer' head upon her knees, bath her templ with 
rose-water, chafe her cold hands, and sprinkl her face with tear 
which were drawn from her by compassion. the stranger approach 
nearer, lorenzo wa enabl to dispel the fear of the suppliants. hi 
name, pronounc by a number of voic among which He distinguish the 
duke's, peal along the vaults, and convinc him that He wa the 
object of their search. He commun thi intellig to the nuns, 
who receiv it with rapture. A few moment after confirm hi idea. 
don ramirez, as well as the duke, appeared, follow by attend with 
torches. they had been seek him through the vaults, in order to let 
him know that the mob wa dispersed, and the riot entir over. 
lorenzo recount briefli hi adventur in the cavern, and explain 
how much the unknown wa in want of medic assistance. He besought 
the duke to take charg of her, as well as of the nun and pensioners. 

'a for me,' said he, 'other care demand my attention. while you with 
one half of the archer convey these ladi to their respect homes, 
I wish the other half to be left with me. I will examin the cavern 
below, and pervad the most secret recess of the sepulchre. I cannot 
rest till convinc that yonder wretch victim wa the onli one 
confin by superstit in these vaults.' 

the duke applaud hi intention. don ramirez offer to assist him in 
hi enquiry, and hi propos wa accept with gratitude. 

the nun have made their acknowledg to lorenzo, commit 
themselv to the care of hi uncle, and were conduct from the 
sepulchre. virginia request that the unknown might be given to her 
in charge, and promis to let lorenzo know whenev she wa 
suffici recov to accept hi visits. In truth, she made thi 
promis more from consider for herself than for either lorenzo or 
the captive. she had wit hi politeness, gentleness, and 
intrepid with sensibl emotion. she wish earnestli to preserv 
hi acquaintance; and in addit to the sentiment of piti which the 
prison excited, she hope that her attent to thi unfortun 
would rais her a degre in the esteem of lorenzo. she had no occas 
to troubl herself upon thi head. the kind alreadi display by 
her and the tender concern which she had shown for the suffer had 
gain her an exalt place in hi good graces. while occupi in 
allevi the captive' sorrows, the natur of her employ adorn 
her with new charms, and render her beauti a thousand time more 
interesting. lorenzo view her with admir and delight: He 
consid her as a minist angel descend to the aid of afflict 
innocence; nor could hi heart have resist her attractions, had it 
not been steel by the remembr of antonia. 

the duke now convey the nun in safeti to the dwell of their 
respect friends. the rescu prison wa still insens and gave 
no sign of life, except by occasion groans. she wa born upon a 
sort of litter; virginia, who wa constantli by the side of it, wa 
apprehens that exhaust by long abstinence, and shaken by the 
sudden chang from bond and dark to liberti and light, her frame 
would never get the better of the shock. lorenzo and don ramirez still 
remain in the sepulchre. after deliber upon their proceedings, 
it wa resolv that to prevent lose time, the archer should be 
divid into two bodies: that with one don ramirez should examin the 
cavern, while lorenzo with the other might penetr into the further 
vaults. thi be arranged, and hi follow be provid with 
torches, don ramirez advanc to the cavern. He had alreadi descend 
some step when He heard peopl approach hastili from the interior 
part of the sepulchre. thi surpriz him, and He quit the cave 
precipitately. 

'do you hear footsteps?' said lorenzo; 'let us bend our cours toward 
them. 'ti from thi side that they seem to proceed.' 

At that moment a loud and pierc shriek induc him to quicken hi 
steps. 

'help! help, for god' sake! cri a voice, whose melodi tone 
penetr lorenzo' heart with terror. 

He flew toward the cri with the rapid of lightning, and wa 
follow by don ramirez with equal swiftness. 



chapter IV 

great heaven! how frail thi creatur man is made! 
how by himself insens betrayed! 
In our own strength unhappili secure, 
too littl cautiou of the advers power, 
On pleasure' floweri brink we idli stray, 
master as yet of our return way: 
till the strong gust of rage passion rise, 
till the dire tempest mingl earth and skies, 
and swift into the boundless ocean borne, 
our foolish confid too late we mourn: 
round our devot head the billow beat, 
and from our troubl view the lessen land retreat. 
prior. 


all thi while, ambrosio wa unconsci of the dread scene which 
were pass so near. the execut of hi design upon antonia 
employ hi everi thought. hitherto, He wa satisfi with the 
success of hi plans. antonia had drank the opiate, wa buri in the 
vault of st. clare, and absolut in hi disposal. matilda, who wa 
well acquaint with the natur and effect of the soporif medicine, 
had comput that it would not ceas to oper till one in the 
morning. for that hour He wait with impatience. the festiv of st. 
clare present him with a favour opportun of consumm hi 
crime. He wa certain that the friar and nun would be engag in the 
procession, and that He had no caus to dread an interruption: from 
appear himself at the head of hi monks, He had desir to be 
excused. He doubt not, that be beyond the reach of help, cut off 
from all the world, and total in hi power, antonia would compli with 
hi desires. the affect which she had ever exprest for him, 
warrant thi persuasion: but He resolv that should she prove 
obstinate, no consider whatev should prevent him from enjoy 
her. secur from a discovery, He shudder not at the idea of 
employ force: If He felt ani repugnance, it aros not from a 
principl of shame or compassion, but from hi feel for antonia the 
most sincer and ardent affection, and wish to owe her favour to no 
one but herself. 

the monk quit the abbey at midnight. matilda wa among the 
choristers, and led the chaunt. ambrosio wa left by himself, and at 
liberti to pursu hi own inclinations. convinc that no one remain 
behind to watch hi motions, or disturb hi pleasures, He now hasten 
to the western aisles. hi heart beat with hope not unmingl with 
anxiety, He cross the garden, unlock the door which admit him 
into the cemetery, and in a few minut He stood befor the vaults. 
here He paused. 

He look round him with suspicion, consciou that hi busi wa 
unfit for ani other eye. As He stood in hesitation, He heard the 
melancholi shriek of the screech-owl: the wind rattl loudli against 
the window of the adjac convent, and as the current swept by him, 
bore with it the faint note of the chaunt of choristers. He open 
the door cautiously, as if fear to be overheard: He entered; and 
close it again after him. guid by hi lamp, He thread the long 
passages, in whose wind matilda had instruct him, and reach the 
privat vault which contain hi sleep mistress. 

it entranc wa by no mean easi to discover: but thi wa no 
obstacl to ambrosio, who at the time of antonia' funer had observ 
it too care to be deceived. He found the door, which wa 
unfastened, push it open, and descend into the dungeon. He 
approach the humbl tomb in which antonia reposed. He had provid 
himself with an iron crow and a pick-axe; but thi precaut wa 
unnecessary. the grate wa slightli fasten on the outside: He 
rais it, and place the lamp upon it ridge, bent silent over the 
tomb. By the side of three putrid half-corrupt bodi lay the 
sleep beauty. A live red, the forerunn of return animation, 
had alreadi spread itself over her cheek; and as wrap in her shroud 
she reclin upon her funer bier, she seem to smile at the imag 
of death around her. while He gaze upon their rot bone and 
disgust figures, who perhap were onc as sweet and lovely, ambrosio 
thought upon elvira, by him reduc to the same state. As the memori of 
that horrid act glanc upon hi mind, it wa cloud with a gloomi 
horror. yet it serv but to strengthen hi resolut to destroy 
antonia' honour. 

'for your sake, fatal beauty!' murmur the monk, while gaze on hi 
devot prey; 'for your sake, have I commit thi murder, and sold 
myself to etern tortures. now you are in my power: the produc of my 
guilt will at least be mine. hope not that your prayer breath in 
tone of unequal melody, your bright eye fill with tears, and 
your hand lift in supplication, as when seek in penit the 
virgin' pardon; hope not that your move innocence, your beauteou 
grief, or all your suppliant art shall ransom you from my embraces. 
befor the break of day, mine you must, and mine you shall be!' 

He lift her still motionless from the tomb: He seat himself upon a 
bank of stone, and support her in hi arms, watch impati for 
the symptom of return animation. scarc could He command hi 
passion sufficiently, to restrain himself from enjoy her while yet 
insensible. hi natur lust wa increas in ardour by the 
difficulti which had oppos hi satisfi it: As also by hi long 
abstin from woman, sinc from the moment of resign her claim to 
hi love, matilda had exil him from her arm for ever. 

'I am no prostitute, ambrosio;' had she told him, when in the full 
of hi lust He demand her favour with more than usual earnestness; 
'I am now no more than your friend, and will not be your mistress. 
ceas then to solicit my compli with desires, which insult me. 
while your heart wa mine, I glori in your embraces: those happi 
time are past: My person is becom indiffer to you, and 'ti 
necessity, not love, which make you seek my enjoyment. I cannot yield 
to a request so humili to my pride.' 

suddenli depriv of pleasures, the use of which had made them an 
absolut want, the monk felt thi restraint severely. natur 
addict to the gratif of the senses, in the full vigour of 
manhood, and heat of blood, He had suffer hi tempera to acquir 
such ascend that hi lust wa becom madness. Of hi fond for 
antonia, none but the grosser particl remained: He long for the 
possess of her person; and even the gloom of the vault, the 
surround silence, and the resist which He expect from her, 
seem to give a fresh edg to hi fierc and unbridl desires. 

gradual He felt the bosom which rest against his, glow with 
return warmth. her heart throb again; her blood flow swifter, 
and her lip moved. At length she open her eyes, but still opprest 
and bewild by the effect of the strong opiate, she close them 
again immediately. ambrosio watch her narrowly, nor permit a 
movement to escap him. perceiv that she wa fulli restor to 
existence, He caught her in raptur to hi bosom, and close press 
hi lip to hers. the sudden of hi action suffic to dissip 
the fume which obscur antonia' reason. she hastili rais herself, 
and cast a wild look round her. the strang imag which present 
themselv on everi side contribut to confus her. she put her hand 
to her head, as if to settl her disord imagination. At length she 
took it away, and threw her eye through the dungeon a second time. 
they fix upon the abbot' face. 

'where am i?' she said abruptly. 'how came I here? where is my 
mother? methought, I saw her! oh! a dream, a dread dread dream 
told me ...... but where am I? let me go! I cannot stay here!' 

she attempt to rise, but the monk prevent her. 

'be calm, love antonia!' He replied; 'no danger is near you: confid 
in my protection. whi do you gaze on me so earnestly? Do you not know 
me? not know your friend? ambrosio?' 

'ambrosio? My friend? oh! yes, yes; I rememb ...... but whi 
am I here? who ha brought me? whi are you with me? oh! flora bad me 
bewar .....! here are noth but graves, and tombs, and 
skeletons! thi place frighten me! good ambrosio take me away from 
it, for it recal my fear dream! methought I wa dead, and laid in 
my grave! good ambrosio, take me from hence. will you not? oh! will 
you not? Do not look on me thus! 

your flame eye terrifi me! spare me, father! oh! spare me for god' 
sake!' 

'whi these terrors, antonia?' rejoin the abbot, fold her in hi 
arms, and cover her bosom with kiss which she in vain struggl to 
avoid: 'what fear you from me, from one who ador you? what matter 
it where you are? thi sepulchr seem to me love' bower; thi gloom 
is the friendli night of mysteri which He spread over our delights! 
such do I think it, and such must my antonia. yes, my sweet girl! 
yes! your vein shall glow with fire which circl in mine, and my 
transport shall be doubl by your share them!' 

while He spoke thus, He repeat hi embraces, and permit himself 
the most indec liberties. even antonia' ignor wa not proof 
against the freedom of hi behaviour. she wa sensibl of her danger, 
forc herself from hi arms, and her shroud be her onli garment, 
she wrap it close round her. 

'unhand me, father!' she cried, her honest indign temper by 
alarm at her unprotect position; 'whi have you brought me to thi 
place? it appear freez me with horror! convey me from hence, 
if you have the least sens of piti and humanity! let me return to the 
hous which I have quit I know not how; but stay here one moment 
longer, I neither will, or ought.' 

though the monk wa somewhat startl by the resolut tone in which 
thi speech wa delivered, it produc upon him no other effect than 
surprize. He caught her hand, forc her upon hi knee, and gaze 
upon her with glote eyes, He thu repli to her. 

'compos yourself, antonia. resist is unavailing, and I need 
disavow my passion for you no longer. you are imagin dead: societi 
is for ever lost to you. I possess you here alone; you are absolut 
in my power, and I burn with desir which I must either gratifi or 
die: but I would owe my happi to yourself. My love girl! My 
ador antonia! let me instruct you in joy to which you are still a 
stranger, and teach you to feel those pleasur in my arm which I must 
soon enjoy in yours. nay, thi struggl is childish,' He continued, 
see her repel hi caresses, and endeavour to escap from hi grasp; 
'no aid is near: neither heaven or earth shall save you from my 
embraces. yet whi reject pleasur so sweet, so rapturous? No one 
observ us: our love will be a secret to all the world: love and 
opportun invit your give loos to your passions. yield to them, 
my antonia! yield to them, my love girl! throw your arm thu 
fondli round me; join your lip thu close to mine! amidst all her 
gifts, ha natur deni her most precious, the sensibl of 
pleasure? oh! impossible! everi feature, look, and motion declar 
you form to bless, and to be bless yourself! turn not on me those 
supplic eyes: consult your own charms; they will tell you that I 
am proof against entreaty. can I relinquish these limb so white, so 
soft, so delicate; these swell breasts, round, full, and elastic! 
these lip fraught with such inexhaust sweetness? can I relinquish 
these treasures, and leav them to another' enjoyment? no, antonia; 
never, never! I swear it by thi kiss, and this! and this!' 

with everi moment the friar' passion becam more ardent, and antonia' 
terror more intense. she struggl to disengag herself from hi arms: 
her exert were unsuccessful; and find that ambrosio' conduct 
becam still freer, she shriek for assist with all her strength. 
the aspect of the vault, the pale glimmer of the lamp, the 
surround obscurity, the sight of the tomb, and the object of 
mortal which met her eye on either side, were ill-calcul to 
inspir her with those emot by which the friar wa agitated. even 
hi caress terrifi her from their fury, and creat no other 
sentiment than fear. On the contrary, her alarm, her evid disgust, 
and incess opposition, seem onli to inflam the monk' desires, 
and suppli hi brutal with addit strength. antonia' shriek 
were unheard: yet she continu them, nor abandon her endeavour to 
escape, till exhaust and out of breath she sank from hi arm upon 
her knees, and onc more had recours to prayer and supplications. 
thi attempt had no better success than the former. On the contrary, 
take advantag of her situation, the ravish threw himself by her 
side: He clasp her to hi bosom almost lifeless with terror, and 
faint with struggling. He stifl her cri with kisses, treat her 
with the rude of an unprincipl barbarian, proceed from freedom 
to freedom, and in the violenc of hi lust delirium, wound and 
bruis her tender limbs. heedless of her tears, cri and entreaties, 
He gradual made himself master of her person, and desist not from 
hi prey, till He had accomplish hi crime and the dishonour of 
antonia. 

scarc had He succeed in hi design than He shudder at himself 
and the mean by which it wa effected. the veri excess of hi former 
eager to possess antonia now contribut to inspir him with 
disgust; and a secret impuls made him feel how base and unmanli wa 
the crime which He had just committed. He start hastili from her 
arms. she, who so late had been the object of hi adoration, now 
rais no other sentiment in hi heart than avers and rage. He 
turn away from her; or if hi eye rest upon her figur 
involuntarily, it wa onli to dart upon her look of hate. the 
unfortun had faint ere the complet of her disgrace: she onli 
recov life to be sensibl of her misfortune. she remain stretch 
upon the earth in silent despair: the tear chase each other slowli 
down her cheeks, and her bosom heav with frequent sobs. oppress 
with grief, she continu for some time in thi state of torpidity. At 
length she rose with difficulty, and drag her feebl step toward 
the door, prepar to quit the dungeon. 

the sound of her footstep rouz the monk from hi sullen apathy. 
start from the tomb against which He reclined, while hi eye 
wander over the imag of corrupt contain in it, He pursu the 
victim of hi brutality, and soon overtook her. He seiz her by the 
arm, and violent forc her back into the dungeon. 

'whither go you?' He cri in a stern voice; 'return thi instant!' 

antonia trembl at the furi of hi countenance. 

'what, would you more?' she said with timidity: 'i not my ruin 
compleated? Am I not undone, undon for ever? Is not your cruelti 
contented, or have I yet more to suffer? let me depart. let me return 
to my home, and weep unrestrain my shame and my affliction!' 

'return to your home?' repeat the monk, with bitter and contemptu 
mockery; then suddenli hi eye flame with passion, 'what? that you 
may denounc me to the world? that you may proclaim me an hypocrite, a 
ravisher, a betrayer, a monster of cruelty, lust, and ingratitude? no, 
no, no! I know well the whole weight of my offences; well that your 
complaint would be too just, and my crime too notorious! you shall 
not from henc to tell madrid that I am a villain; that my conscienc 
is load with sin which make me despair of heaven' pardon. wretch 
girl, you must stay here with me! here amidst these lone tombs, 
these imag of death, these rot loathsom corrupt bodies! here 
shall you stay, and wit my sufferings; wit what it is to die in 
the horror of despondency, and breath the last groan in blasphemi and 
curses! and who am I to thank for this? what seduc me into crimes, 
whose bare remembr make me shudder? fatal witch! wa it not thi 
beauty? have you not plung my soul into infamy? have you not made 
me a perjur hypocrite, a ravisher, an assassin! nay, at thi moment, 
doe not that angel look bid me despair of god' forgiveness? oh! when 
I stand befor hi judgment-throne, that look will suffic to damn me! 
you will tell my judg that you were happy, till I saw you; that you 
were innocent, till I pollut you! you will come with those tear 
eyes, those cheek pale and ghastly, those hand lift in 
supplication, as when you sought from me that merci which I gave not! 
then will my perdit be certain! then will come your mother' ghost, 
and hurl me down into the dwell of fiends, and flames, and furies, 
and everlast torments! and 'ti you, who will accus me! 'ti you, 
who will caus my etern anguish! you, wretch girl! you! you!' 

As He thunder out these words, He violent grasp antonia' arm, 
and spurn the earth with deliri fury. 

suppos hi brain to be turned, antonia sank in terror upon her 
knees: she lift up her hands, and her voic almost die away, ere 
she could give it utterance. 

'spare me! spare me!' she murmur with difficulty. 

'silence!' cri the friar madly, and dash her upon the ground---- 

He quit her, and pace the dungeon with a wild and disord air. 
hi eye roll fearfully: antonia trembl whenev she met their 
gaze. He seem to medit on someth horrible, and she gave up all 
hope of escap from the sepulchr with life. yet in harbour thi 
idea, she did him injustice. amidst the horror and disgust to which 
hi soul wa a prey, piti for hi victim still held a place in it. the 
storm of passion onc over, He would have given world had He possest 
them, to have restor to her that innoc of which hi unbridl 
lust had depriv her. Of the desir which had urg him to the 
crime, no trace wa left in hi bosom: the wealth of india would not 
have tempt him to a second enjoy of her person. hi natur 
seem to revolt at the veri idea, and fain would He have wipe from 
hi memori the scene which had just past. As hi gloomi rage abated, 
in proport did hi compass augment for antonia. He stopped, and 
would have spoken to her word of comfort; but He knew not from whenc 
to draw them, and remain gaze upon her with mourn wildness. her 
situat seem so hopeless, so woebegone, as to baffl mortal power 
to reliev her. what could He do for her? her peac of mind wa lost, 
her honour irrepar ruined. she wa cut off for ever from society, 
nor dare He give her back to it. He wa consciou that were she to 
appear in the world again, hi guilt would be revealed, and hi 
punish inevitable. To one so laden with crimes, death came arm 
with doubl terrors. yet should He restor antonia to light, and stand 
the chanc of her betray him, how miser a prospect would present 
itself befor her. she could never hope to be credit established; 
she would be mark with infamy, and condemn to sorrow and solitud 
for the remaind of her existence. what wa the alternative? A 
resolut far more terribl for antonia, but which at least would 
insur the abbot' safety. He determin to leav the world persuad 
of her death, and to retain her a captiv in thi gloomi prison: there 
He propos to visit her everi night, to bring her food, to profess hi 
penitence, and mingl hi tear with hers. the monk felt that thi 
resolut wa unjust and cruel; but it wa hi onli mean to prevent 
antonia from publish hi guilt and her own infamy. should He 
releas her, He could not depend upon her silence: hi offenc wa too 
flagrant to permit hi hope for her forgiveness. besides, her 
reappear would excit univers curiosity, and the violenc of her 
afflict would prevent her from conceal it cause. He determin 
therefore, that antonia should remain a prison in the dungeon. 

He approach her with confus paint on hi countenance. He rais 
her from the ground. her hand trembled, as He took it, and He drop 
it again as if He had touch a serpent. natur seem to recoil at 
the touch. He felt himself at onc repuls from and attract toward 
her, yet could account for neither sentiment. there wa someth in 
her look which penetr him with horror; and though hi understand 
wa still ignor of it, conscienc point out to him the whole 
extent of hi crime. In hurri accent yet the gentlest He could find, 
while hi eye wa averted, and hi voic scarc audible, He strove to 
consol her under a misfortun which now could not be avoided. He 
declar himself sincer penitent, and that He would gladli shed a 
drop of hi blood, for everi tear which hi barbar had forc from 
her. wretch and hopeless, antonia listen to him in silent grief: 
but when He announc her confin in the sepulchre, that dread 
doom to which even death seem prefer rous her from her 
insens at once. To linger out a life of miseri in a narrow 
loathsom cell, known to exist by no human be save her ravisher, 
surround by moulder corses, breath the pestilenti air of 
corruption, never more to behold the light, or drink the pure gale of 
heaven, the idea wa more terribl than she could support. It conquer 
even her abhorr of the friar. again she sank upon her knees: she 
besought hi compass in term the most pathet and urgent. she 
promised, would He but restor her to liberty, to conceal her injuri 
from the world; to assign ani reason for her reappear which He 
might judg proper; and in order to prevent the least suspicion from 
fall upon him, she offer to quit madrid immediately. her 
entreati were so urgent as to make a consider impress upon the 
monk. He reflect that as her person no longer excit hi desires, 
He had no interest in keep her conceal as He had at first 
intended; that He wa ad a fresh injuri to those which she had 
alreadi suffered; and that if she adher to her promises, whether she 
wa confin or at liberty, hi life and reput were equal 
secure. On the other hand, He trembl lest in her afflict antonia 
should unintent break her engagement; or that her excess 
simplic and ignor of deceit should permit some one more art 
to surpriz her secret. howev well-found were these apprehensions, 
compassion, and a sincer wish to repair hi fault as much as possibl 
solicit hi compli with the prayer of hi suppliant. the 
difficulti of colour antonia' unexpect return to life, after her 
suppos death and public interment, wa the onli point which kept him 
irresolute. He wa still ponder on the mean of remov thi 
obstacle, when He heard the sound of feet approach with 
precipitation. the door of the vault wa thrown open, and matilda 
rush in, evid much confus and terrified. 

On see a stranger enter, antonia utter a cri of joy: but her 
hope of receiv succour from him were soon dissipated. the suppos 
novice, without express the least surpriz at find a woman alon 
with the monk, in so strang a place, and at so late an hour, address 
him thu without lose a moment. 

'what is to be done, ambrosio? We are lost, unless some speedi mean 
is found of dispel the rioters. ambrosio, the convent of st. clare 
is on fire; the prioress ha fallen a victim to the furi of the mob. 
alreadi is the abbey menac with a similar fate. alarm at the 
threat of the people, the monk seek for you everywhere. they imagin 
that your author alon will suffic to calm thi disturbance. No 
one know what is becom of you, and your absenc creat univers 
astonish and despair. I profit by the confusion, and fled hither 
to warn you of the danger.' 

'thi will soon be remedied,' answer the abbot; 'I will hasten back 
to my cell: a trivial reason will account for my have been missed.' 

'impossible!' rejoin matilda: 'the sepulchr is fill with archers. 
lorenzo de medina, with sever offic of the inquisition, search 
through the vaults, and pervad everi passage. you will be 
intercept in your flight; your reason for be at thi late hour in 
the sepulchr will be examined; antonia will be found, and then you are 
undon for ever!' 

'lorenzo de medina? offic of the inquisition? what bring them 
here? seek they for me? Am I then suspected? oh! speak, matilda! 
answer me, in pity!' 

'a yet they do not think of you, but I fear that they will ere long. 
your onli chanc of escap their notic rest upon the difficulti of 
explor thi vault. the door is art hidden: 

hapli it may not be observed, and we may remain conceal till the 
search is over.' 

'but antonia ..... should the inquisitor draw near, and her cri 
be heard ....' 

'thu I remov that danger!' interrupt matilda. 

At the same time draw a poignard, she rush upon her devot prey. 

'hold! hold!' cri ambrosio, seiz her hand, and wrest from it 
the alreadi lift weapon. 'what would you do, cruel woman? the 
unfortun ha alreadi suffer but too much, thank to your 
pernici consels! would to god that I had never follow them! 
would to god that I had never seen your face!' 

matilda dart upon him a look of scorn. 

'absurd!' she exclaim with an air of passion and majesti which 
impress the monk with awe. 'after rob her of all that made it 
dear, can you fear to depriv her of a life so miserable? but 'ti 
well! let her live to convinc you of your folly. I abandon you to 
your evil destiny! I disclaim your alliance! who trembl to commit 
so insignific a crime, deserv not my protection. hark! hark! 
ambrosio; hear you not the archers? they come, and your destruct is 
inevitable!' 

At thi moment the abbot heard the sound of distant voices. He flew to 
close the door on whose conceal hi safeti depended, and which 
matilda had neglect to fasten. ere He could reach it, He saw antonia 
glide suddenli by him, rush through the door, and fli toward the nois 
with the swift of an arrow. she had listen attent to 
matilda: she heard lorenzo' name mentioned, and resolv to risqu 
everi thing to throw herself under hi protection. the door wa open. 
the sound convinc her that the archer could be at no great 
distance. she muster up her littl remain strength, rush by the 
monk ere He perceiv her design, and bent her cours rapidli toward 
the voices. As soon as He recov from hi first surprize, the abbot 
fail not to pursu her. In vain did antonia redoubl her speed, and 
stretch everi nerv to the utmost. her enemi gain upon her everi 
moment: she heard hi step close after her, and felt the heat of hi 
breath glow upon her neck. He overtook her; He twist hi hand in the 
ringlet of her stream hair, and attempt to drag her back with him 
to the dungeon. antonia resist with all her strength: she fold 
her arm round a pillar which support the roof, and shriek loudli 
for assistance. In vain did the monk strive to threaten her to silence. 

'help!' she continu to exclaim; 'help! help! for god' sake!' 

quicken by her cries, the sound of footstep wa heard approaching. 
the abbot expect everi moment to see the inquisitor arrive. antonia 
still resisted, and He now enforc her silenc by mean the most 
horribl and inhuman. He still grasp matilda' dagger: without 
allow himself a moment' reflection, He rais it, and plung it 
twice in the bosom of antonia! she shrieked, and sank upon the ground. 
the monk endeavour to bear her away with him, but she still embrac 
the pillar firmly. At that instant the light of approach torch 
flash upon the walls. dread a discovery, ambrosio wa compel 
to abandon hi victim, and hastili fled back to the vault, where He had 
left matilda. 

He fled not unobserved. don ramirez happen to arriv the first, 
perceiv a femal bleed upon the ground, and a man fli from the 
spot, whose confus betray him for the murderer. He instantli 
pursu the fugit with some part of the archers, while the other 
remain with lorenzo to protect the wound stranger. they rais her, 
and support her in their arms. she had faint from excess of pain, 
but soon gave sign of return life. she open her eyes, and on 
lift up her head, the quantiti of fair hair fell back which till 
then had obscur her features. 

'god almighty! It is antonia!' 

such wa lorenzo' exclamation, while He snatch her from the 
attendant' arms, and clasp her in hi own. 

though aim by an uncertain hand, the poignard had answer but too 
well the purpos of it employer. the wound were mortal, and antonia 
wa consciou that she never could recover. yet the few moment which 
remain for her were moment of happiness. the concern exprest upon 
lorenzo' countenance, the frantic fond of hi complaints, and hi 
earnest enquiri respect her wounds, convinc her beyond a doubt 
that hi affect were her own. she would not be remov from the 
vaults, fear lest motion should onli hasten her death; and she wa 
unwil to lose those moment which she past in receiv proof of 
lorenzo' love, and assur him of her own. she told him that had she 
still been undefil she might have lament the loss of life; but that 
depriv of honour and brand with shame, death wa to her a blessing: 
she could not have been hi wife, and that hope be deni her, she 
resign herself to the grave without one sigh of regret. she bad him 
take courage, conjur him not to abandon himself to fruitless sorrow, 
and declar that she mourn to leav noth in the whole world but 
him. while everi sweet accent increas rather than lighten 
lorenzo' grief, she continu to convers with him till the moment of 
dissolution. her voic grew faint and scarc audible; A thick cloud 
spread itself over her eyes; her heart beat slow and irregular, and 
everi instant seem to announc that her fate wa near at hand. 

she lay, her head reclin upon lorenzo' bosom, and her lip still 
murmur to him word of comfort. she wa interrupt by the convent 
bell, as toll at a distance, it struck the hour. suddenli antonia' 
eye sparkl with celesti brightness: her frame seem to have 
receiv new strength and animation. she start from her lover' arms. 

'three o'clock!' she cried; 'mother, I come!' 

she clasp her hands, and sank lifeless upon the ground. lorenzo in 
agoni threw himself besid her: He tore hi hair, beat hi breast, and 
refus to be separ from the corse. At length hi forc be 
exhausted, He suffer himself to be led from the vault, and wa 
convey to the palac de medina scarc more aliv than the 
unfortun antonia. 

In the meanwhile, though close pursued, ambrosio succeed in 
regain the vault. the door wa alreadi fasten when don ramirez 
arrived, and much time elapsed, ere the fugitive' retreat wa 
discovered. but noth can resist perseverance. though so art 
concealed, the door could not escap the vigil of the archers. 
they forc it open, and enter the vault to the infinit dismay of 
ambrosio and hi companion. the monk' confusion, hi attempt to hide 
himself, hi rapid flight, and the blood sprinkl upon hi cloaths, 
left no room to doubt hi be antonia' murderer. but when He wa 
recogn for the immacul ambrosio, 'the man of holiness,' the idol 
of madrid, the faculti of the spectat were chain up in surprize, 
and scarc could they persuad themselv that what they saw wa no 
vision. the abbot strove not to vindic himself, but preserv a 
sullen silence. He wa secur and bound. the same precaut wa 
taken with matilda: her cowl be removed, the delicaci of her 
featur and profus of her golden hair betray her sex, and thi 
incid creat fresh amazement. the dagger wa also found in the 
tomb, where the monk had thrown it; and the dungeon have undergon a 
thorough search, the two culprit were convey to the prison of the 
inquisition. 

don ramirez took care that the populac should remain ignor both of 
the crime and profess of the captives. He fear a repetit of 
the riot which had follow the apprehend the prioress of st. 
clare. He content himself with state to the capuchin the guilt of 
their superior. To avoid the shame of a public accusation, and 
dread the popular furi from which they had alreadi save their abbey 
with much difficulty, the monk readili permit the inquisitor to 
search their mansion without noise. No fresh discoveri were made. 
the effect found in the abbot' and matilda' cell were seized, and 
carri to the inquisit to be produc in evidence. everi thing 
els remain in it former position, and order and tranquil onc 
more prevail through madrid. 

st. clare' convent wa complet ruin by the unit ravag of the 
mob and conflagration. noth remain of it but the princip walls, 
whose thick and solid had preserv them from the flames. the 
nun who had belong to it were oblig in consequ to dispers 
themselv into other societies: but the prejudic against them ran 
high, and the superior were veri unwil to admit them. however, 
most of them be relat to famili the most distinguish for their 
riches, birth and power, the sever convent were compel to receiv 
them, though they did it with a veri ill grace. thi prejudic wa 
extrem fals and unjustifiable: after a close investigation, it wa 
prove that all in the convent were persuad of the death of agnes, 
except the four nun whom st. ursula had point out. these had fallen 
victim to the popular fury; as had also sever who were perfectli 
innoc and unconsci of the whole affair. blind by resentment, 
the mob had sacrif everi nun who fell into their hands: they who 
escap were entir indebt to the duke de medina' prudenc and 
moderation. Of thi they were conscious, and felt for that nobleman a 
proper sens of gratitude. 

virginia wa not the most spare of her thanks: she wish equal to 
make a proper return for hi attentions, and to obtain the good grace 
of lorenzo' uncle. In thi she easili succeeded. 

the duke beheld her beauti with wonder and admiration; and while hi 
eye were enchant with her form, the sweet of her manner and her 
tender concern for the suffer nun prepossess hi heart in her 
favour. thi virginia had discern enough to perceive, and she 
redoubl her attent to the invalid. when He part from her at the 
door of her father' palace, the duke entreat permiss to enquir 
occasion after her health. hi request wa readili granted: 
virginia assur him that the marqui de villa-franca would be proud of 
an opportun to thank him in person for the protect afford to 
her. they now separated, He enchant with her beauti and gentleness, 
and she much pleas with him and more with hi nephew. 

On enter the palace, virginia' first care wa to summon the famili 
physician, and take care of her unknown charge. her mother hasten to 
share with her the charit office. alarm by the riots, and 
trembl for hi daughter' safety, who wa hi onli child, the 
marqui had flown to st. clare' convent, and wa still employ in 
seek her. messeng were now dispatch on all side to inform him 
that He would find her safe at hi hotel, and desir him to hasten 
thither immediately. hi absenc gave virginia liberti to bestow her 
whole attent upon her patient; and though much disord herself by 
the adventur of the night, no persuas could induc her to quit the 
bedsid of the sufferer. her constitut be much enfeebl by want 
and sorrow, it wa some time befor the stranger wa restor to her 
senses. she found great difficulti in swallow the medicin 
prescrib to her: but thi obstacl be removed, she easili 
conquer her diseas which proceed from noth but weakness. the 
attent which wa paid her, the wholesom food to which she had been 
long a stranger, and her joy at be restor to liberty, to society, 
and, as she dare to hope, to love, all thi combin to her speedi 
re-establishment. 

from the first moment of know her, her melancholi situation, her 
suffer almost unparallel had engag the affect of her 
amiabl hostess: virginia felt for her the most live interest; but 
how wa she delighted, when her guest be suffici recov to 
relat her history, she recogn in the captiv nun the sister of 
lorenzo! 

thi victim of monast cruelti wa inde no other than the 
unfortun agnes. dure her abod in the convent, she had been well 
known to virginia: but her emaci form, her featur alter by 
affliction, her death univers credited, and her overgrown and 
mat hair which hung over her face and bosom in disord at first had 
prevent her be recollected. the prioress had put everi artific 
in practic to induc virginia to take the veil; for the heiress of 
villa-franca would have been no despic acquisition. her seem 
kind and unremit attent so far succeed that her young 
relat began to think serious upon compliance. better instruct 
in the disgust and ennui of a monast life, agn had penetr the 
design of the domina: she trembl for the innoc girl, and 
endeavour to make her sensibl of her error. she paint in their 
true colour the numer inconveni attach to a convent, the 
continu restraint, the low jealousies, the petti intrigues, the 
servil court and gross flatteri expect by the superior. she then 
bad virginia reflect on the brilliant prospect which present itself 
befor her: the idol of her parents, the admir of madrid, endow 
by natur and educ with everi perfect of person and mind, she 
might look forward to an establish the most fortunate. her rich 
furnish her with the mean of exercis in their fullest extent, 
chariti and benevolence, those virtu so dear to her; and her stay in 
the world would enabl her discov object worthi her protection, 
which could not be done in the seclus of a convent. 

her persuas induc virginia to lay asid all thought of the veil: 
but anoth argument, not use by agnes, had more weight with her than 
all the other put together. she had seen lorenzo, when He visit hi 
sister at the grate. hi person pleas her, and her convers 
with agn gener use to termin in some question about her 
brother. she, who dote upon lorenzo, wish for no better than an 
opportun to trumpet out hi praise. she spoke of him in term of 
rapture; and to convinc her auditor how just were hi sentiments, how 
cultiv hi mind, and eleg hi expressions, she show her at 
differ time the letter which she receiv from him. she soon 
perceiv that from these commun the heart of her young friend 
had imbib impressions, which she wa far from intend to give, but 
wa truli happi to discover. she could not have wish her brother a 
more desir union: heiress of villa-franca, virtuous, affectionate, 
beautiful, and accomplished, virginia seem calcul to make him 
happy. she sound her brother upon the subject, though without 
mention name or circumstances. He assur her in hi answer that 
hi heart and hand were total disengaged, and she thought that upon 
these ground she might proceed without danger. she in consequ 
endeavour to strengthen the dawn passion of her friend. lorenzo 
wa made the constant topic of her discourse; and the avid with 
which her auditor listened, the sigh which frequent escap from her 
bosom, and the eager with which upon ani digress she brought 
back the convers to the subject whenc it had wandered, suffic 
to convinc agn that her brother' address would be far from 
disagreeable. she at length ventur to mention her wish to the 
duke: though a stranger to the ladi herself, He knew enough of her 
situat to think her worthi hi nephew' hand. It wa agre between 
him and hi niece, that she should insinu the idea to lorenzo, and 
she onli wait hi return to madrid to propos her friend to him as 
hi bride. the unfortun event which took place in the interim, 
prevent her from execut her design. virginia wept her loss 
sincerely, both as a companion, and as the onli person to whom she 
could speak of lorenzo. her passion continu to prey upon her heart 
in secret, and she had almost determin to confess her sentiment to 
her mother, when accid onc more threw their object in her way. the 
sight of him so near her, hi politeness, hi compassion, hi 
intrepidity, had combin to give new ardour to her affection. when 
she now found her friend and advoc restor to her, she look upon 
her as a gift from heaven; she ventur to cherish the hope of be 
unit to lorenzo, and resolv to use with him hi sister' influence. 

suppos that befor her death agn might possibl have made the 
proposal, the duke had place all hi nephew' hint of marriag to 
virginia' account: consequently, He gave them the most favour 
reception. On return to hi hotel, the relat given him of 
antonia' death, and lorenzo' behaviour on the occasion, made evid 
hi mistake. He lament the circumstances; but the unhappi girl be 
effectu out of the way, He trust that hi design would yet be 
executed. 'ti true that lorenzo' situat just then ill-suit him 
for a bridegroom. hi hope disappoint at the moment when He 
expect to realiz them, and the dread and sudden death of hi 
mistress had affect him veri severely. the duke found him upon the 
bed of sickness. hi attend express seriou apprehens for 
hi life; but the uncl entertain not the same fears. He wa of 
opinion, and not unwisely, that 'men have died, and worm have eat 
them; but not for love!' He therefor flatter himself that howev 
deep might be the impress made upon hi nephew' heart, time and 
virginia would be abl to effac it. He now hasten to the afflict 
youth, and endeavour to consol him: He sympathis in hi distress, 
but encourag him to resist the encroach of despair. He allow 
that He could not but feel shock at an event so terrible, nor could 
He blame hi sensibility; but He besought him not to torment himself 
with vain regrets, and rather to struggl with affliction, and preserv 
hi life, if not for hi own sake, at least for the sake of those who 
were fondli attach to him. while He labour thu to make lorenzo 
forget antonia' loss, the duke paid hi court assidu to virginia, 
and seiz everi opportun to advanc hi nephew' interest in her 
heart. 

It may easili be expect that agn wa not long without enquir 
after don raymond. she wa shock to hear the wretch situat to 
which grief had reduc him; yet she could not help exult secretly, 
when she reflected, that hi ill prove the sincer of hi love. 
the duke undertook the offic himself, of announc to the invalid the 
happi which await him. though He omit no precaut to 
prepar him for such an event, at thi sudden chang from despair to 
happi raymond' transport were so violent, as nearli to have 
prove fatal to him. these onc passed, the tranquil of hi mind, 
the assur of felicity, and abov all the presenc of agnes, (who 
wa no sooner reestablish by the care of virginia and the 
marchioness, than she hasten to attend her lover) soon enabl him to 
overcom the effect of hi late dread malady. the calm of hi soul 
commun itself to hi body, and He recov with such rapid as 
to creat univers surprize. 

No so lorenzo. antonia' death accompani with such terribl 
circumst weigh upon hi mind heavily. He wa worn down to a 
shadow. noth could give him pleasure. He wa persuad with 
difficulti to swallow nourish suffici for the support of life, 
and a consumpt wa apprehended. the societi of agn form hi 
onli comfort. though accid had never permit their be much 
together, He entertain for her a sincer friendship and attachment. 
perceiv how necessari she wa to him, she seldom quit hi 
chamber. she listen to hi complaint with unweari attention, and 
sooth him by the gentl of her manners, and by sympathis with 
hi distress. she still inhabit the palac de villa-franca, the 
possessor of which treat her with mark affection. the duke had 
intim to the marqui hi wish respect virginia. the match wa 
unexceptionable: lorenzo wa heir to hi uncle' immens property, and 
wa distinguish in madrid for hi agreeabl person, extens 
knowledge, and proprieti of conduct: add to this, that the marchio 
had discov how strong wa her daughter' prepossess in hi 
favour. 

In consequ the duke' propos wa accept without hesitation: 
everi precaut wa taken to induc lorenzo' see the ladi with 
those sentiment which she so well merit to excite. In her visit to 
her brother agn wa frequent accompani by the marchioness; and as 
soon as He wa abl to move into hi antichamber, virginia under her 
mother' protect wa sometim permit to express her wish for 
hi recovery. thi she did with such delicacy, the manner in which she 
mention antonia wa so tender and soothing, and when she lament her 
rival' melancholi fate, her bright eye shone so beauti through her 
tears, that lorenzo could not behold, or listen to her without emotion. 
hi relations, as well as the lady, perceiv that with everi day her 
societi seem to give him fresh pleasure, and that He spoke of her in 
term of stronger admiration. however, they prudent kept their 
observ to themselves. No word wa drop which might lead him 
to suspect their designs. they continu their former conduct and 
attention, and left time to ripen into a warmer sentiment the 
friendship which He alreadi felt for virginia. 

In the mean while, her visit becam more frequent; and latterli there 
wa scarc a day, of which she did not pass some part by the side of 
lorenzo' couch. He gradual regain hi strength, but the progress 
of hi recoveri wa slow and doubtful. one even He seem to be in 
better spirit than usual: agn and her lover, the duke, virginia, 
and her parent were sit round him. He now for the first time 
entreat hi sister to inform him how she had escap the effect of 
the poison which st. ursula had seen her swallow. fear of recal 
those scene to hi mind in which antonia had perished, she had 
hitherto conceal from him the histori of her sufferings. As He now 
start the subject himself, and think that perhap the narr of 
her sorrow might draw him from the contempl of those on which He 
dwelt too constantly, she immedi compli with hi request. the 
rest of the compani had alreadi heard her story; but the interest which 
all present felt for it heroin made them anxiou to hear it repeated. 
the whole societi second lorenzo' entreaties, agn obeyed. she 
first recount the discoveri which had taken place in the abbey 
chapel, the domina' resentment, and the midnight scene of which st. 
ursula had been a conceal witness. though the nun had alreadi 
describ thi latter event, agn now relat it more circumstanti 
and at large: after which she proceed in her narr as follows. 

conclus of the histori of agn de medina 

My suppos death wa attend with the greatest agonies. those 
moment which I believ my last, were embitt by the domina' 
assur that I could not escap perdition; and as my eye closed, I 
heard her rage exhal itself in curs on my offence. the horror of 
thi situation, of a death-b from which hope wa banished, of a sleep 
from which I wa onli to wake to find myself the prey of flame and 
furies, wa more dread than I can describe. when anim reviv 
in me, my soul wa still impress with these terribl ideas: I look 
round with fear, expect to behold the minist of divin vengeance. 
for the first hour, my sens were so bewildered, and my brain so 
dizzy, that I strove in vain to arrang the strang imag which 
float in wild confus befor me. If I endeavour to rais myself 
from the ground, the wander of my head deceiv me. everi thing 
around me seem to rock, and I sank onc more upon the earth. My weak 
and dazzl eye were unabl to bear a nearer approach to a gleam of 
light which I saw trembl abov me. I wa compel to close them 
again, and remain motionless in the same posture. 

A full hour elapsed, befor I wa suffici myself to examin the 
surround objects. when I did examin them, what terror fill my 
bosom I found myself extend upon a sort of wicker couch: It had six 
handl to it, which doubtless had serv the nun to convey me to my 
grave. I wa cover with a linen cloth: 

sever fade flower were strown over me: On one side lay a small 
wooden crucifix; On the other, a rosari of larg beads. four low narrow 
wall confin me. the top wa also covered, and in it wa practis a 
small grate door: through thi wa admit the littl air which 
circul in thi miser place. A faint glimmer of light which 
stream through the bars, permit me to distinguish the surround 
horrors. I wa opprest by a noisom suffoc smell; and perceiv 
that the grate door wa unfastened, I thought that I might possibl 
effect my escape. As I rais myself with thi design, my hand rest 
upon someth soft: I grasp it, and advanc it toward the light. 
almighti god! what wa my disgust, my consternation! In spite of it 
putridity, and the worm which prey upon it, I perceiv a corrupt 
human head, and recognis the featur of a nun who had die some 
month before! 

I threw it from me, and sank almost lifeless upon my bier. 

when my strength returned, thi circumstance, and the conscious of 
be surround by the loathsom and moulder bodi of my 
companions, increas my desir to escap from my fear prison. I 
again move toward the light. the grate door wa within my reach: I 
lift it without difficulty; probabl it had been left unclos to 
facilit my quit the dungeon. aid myself by the irregular 
of the wall some of whose stone project beyond the rest, I 
contriv to ascend them, and drag myself out of my prison. I now 
found myself in a vault toler spacious. sever tombs, similar in 
appear to that whenc I had just escaped, were rang along the 
side in order, and seem to be consider sunk within the earth. A 
sepulchr lamp wa suspend from the roof by an iron chain, and shed 
a gloomi light through the dungeon. emblem of death were seen on 
everi side: skulls, shoulder-blades, thigh-bones, and other leav 
of mortal were scatter upon the dewi ground. each tomb wa 
ornament with a larg crucifix, and in one corner stood a wooden 
statu of st. clare. To these object I at first paid no attention: A 
door, the onli outlet from the vault, had attract my eyes. I 
hasten toward it, have wrap my winding-sheet close round me. 
I push against the door, and to my inexpress terror found that it 
wa fasten on the outside. 

I guess immedi that the prioress, mistak the natur of the 
liquor which she had compel me to drink, instead of poison had 
administ a strong opiate. from thi I conclud that be to all 
appear dead I had receiv the rite of burial; and that depriv 
of the power of make my exist known, it would be my fate to 
expir of hunger. thi idea penetr me with horror, not mere for 
my own sake, but that of the innoc creature, who still live within 
my bosom. I again endeavour to open the door, but it resist all my 
efforts. I stretch my voic to the extent of it compass, and 
shriek for aid: I wa remot from the hear of everi one: No 
friendli voic repli to mine. A profound and melancholi silenc 
prevail through the vault, and I despair of liberty. My long 
abstin from food now began to torment me. the tortur which 
hunger inflict on me, were the most pain and insupportable: yet 
they seem to increas with everi hour which past over my head. 
sometim I threw myself upon the ground, and roll upon it wild and 
desperate: sometim start up, I return to the door, again strove 
to forc it open, and repeat my fruitless cri for succour. often 
wa I on the point of strike my templ against the sharp corner of 
some monument, dash out my brains, and thu termin my woe at 
once; but still the remembr of my babi vanquish my resolution: I 
trembl at a deed which equal endang my child' exist and my 
own. then would I vent my anguish in loud exclam and passion 
complaints; and then again my strength fail me, silent and hopeless 
I would sit me down upon the base of st. clare' statue, fold my arms, 
and abandon myself to sullen despair. thu pass sever wretch 
hours. death advanc toward me with rapid strides, and I expect 
that everi succeed moment would be that of my dissolution. suddenli 
a neighbour tomb caught my eye: A basket stood upon it, which till 
then I had not observed. I start from my seat: I made toward it as 
swiftli as my exhaust frame would permit. how eagerli did I seiz 
the basket, on find it to contain a loaf of coars bread and a small 
bottl of water. 

I threw myself with avid upon these humbl aliments. they had to all 
appear been place in the vault for sever days; the bread wa 
hard, and the water tainted; yet never did I tast food to me so 
delicious. when the crave of appetit were satisfied, I busi 
myself with conjectur upon thi new circumstance: I debat whether 
the basket had been place there with a view to my necessity. hope 
answer my doubt in the affirmative. yet who could guess me to be in 
need of such assistance? If my exist wa known, whi wa I detain 
in thi gloomi vault? If I wa kept a prisoner, what meant the 
ceremoni of commit me to the tomb? Or if I wa doom to perish 
with hunger, to whose piti wa I indebt for provis place within 
my reach? A friend would not have kept my dread punish a 
secret; neither did it seem probabl that an enemi would have taken 
pain to suppli me with the mean of existence. upon the whole I wa 
inclin to think that the domina' design upon my life had been 
discov by some one of my partizan in the convent, who had found 
mean to substitut an opiat for poison: that she had furnish me 
with food to support me, till she could effect my delivery: and that 
she wa then employ in give intellig to my relat of my 
danger, and point out a way to releas me from captivity. yet whi 
then wa the qualiti of my provis so coarse? how could my friend 
have enter the vault without the domina' knowledge? and if she had 
entered, whi wa the door fasten so carefully? these reflect 
stagger me: yet still thi idea wa the most favour to my hopes, 
and I dwelt upon it in preference. 

My medit were interrupt by the sound of distant footsteps. 
they approached, but slowly. ray of light now dart through the 
crevic of the door. uncertain whether the person who advanc came 
to reliev me, or were conduct by some other motiv to the vault, I 
fail not to attract their notic by loud cri for help. still the 
sound drew near: the light grew stronger: At length with 
inexpress pleasur I heard the key turn in the lock. persuad 
that my deliver wa at hand, I flew toward the door with a shriek 
of joy. It opened: but all my hope of escap die away, when the 
prioress appear follow by the same four nuns, who had been 
wit of my suppos death. they bore torch in their hands, and 
gaze upon me in fear silence. 

I start back in terror. the domina descend into the vault, as did 
also her companions. she bent upon me a stern resent eye, but 
express no surpriz at find me still living. she took the seat 
which I had just quitted: the door wa again closed, and the nun 
rang themselv behind their superior, while the glare of their 
torches, dim by the vapour and damp of the vault, gild with 
cold beam the surround monuments. for some moment all preserv a 
dead and solemn silence. I stood at some distanc from the prioress. 
At length she beckon me to advance. trembl at the sever of her 
aspect my strength scarc suffic me to obey her. I drew near, but my 
limb were unabl to support their burthen. I sank upon my knees; I 
clasp my hands, and lift them up to her for mercy, but had no power 
to articul a syllable. 

she gaze upon me with angri eyes. 

'do I see a penitent, or a criminal?' she said at length; 'are those 
hand rais in contrit for your crimes, or in fear of meet their 
punishment? Do those tear acknowledg the justic of your doom, or 
onli solicit mitig of your sufferings? I fear me, 'ti the 
latter!' 

she paused, but kept her eye still fixt upon mine. 

'take courage;' she continued: 'I wish not for your death, but your 
repentance. the draught which I administered, wa no poison, but an 
opiate. My intent in deceiv you wa to make you feel the agoni 
of a guilti conscience, had death overtaken you suddenli while your 
crime were still unrepented. you have suffer those agonies: I have 
brought you to be familiar with the sharp of death, and I trust 
that your momentari anguish will prove to you an etern benefit. It 
is not my design to destroy your immort soul; or bid you seek the 
grave, burthen with the weight of sin unexpiated. no, daughter, far 
from it: I will purifi you with wholesom chastisement, and furnish 
you with full leisur for contrit and remorse. hear then my 
sentence; the ill-judg zeal of your friend delay it execution, 
but cannot now prevent it. all madrid believ you to be no more; your 
relat are thoroughli persuad of your death, and the nun your 
partizan have assist at your funeral. your exist can never be 
suspected; I have taken such precautions, as must render it an 
impenetr mystery. then abandon all thought of a world from which 
you are etern separated, and employ the few hour which are allow 
you, in prepar for the next.' 

thi exordium led me to expect someth terrible. I trembled, and 
would have spoken to deprec her wrath: but a motion of the domina 
command me to be silent. she proceeded. 

'though of late year unjustli neglected, and now oppos by mani of 
our misguid sisters, (whom heaven convert!) it is my intent to 
reviv the law of our order in their full force. that against 
incontin is severe, but no more than so monstrou an offenc 
demands: submit to it, daughter, without resistance; you will find the 
benefit of patienc and resign in a better life than this. listen 
then to the sentenc of st. clare. beneath these vault there exist 
prisons, intend to receiv such crimin as yourself: art is 
their entranc concealed, and she who enter them, must resign all 
hope of liberty. thither must you now be conveyed. food shall be 
suppli you, but not suffici for the indulg of appetite: you 
shall have just enough to keep togeth bodi and soul, and it qualiti 
shall be the simplest and coarsest. weep, daughter, weep, and moisten 
your bread with your tears: god know that you have ampl caus for 
sorrow! chain down in one of these secret dungeons, shut out from 
the world and light for ever, with no comfort but religion, no societi 
but repentance, thu must you groan away the remaind of your days. 
such are st. clare' orders; submit to them without repining. follow 
me!' 

thunderstruck at thi barbar decree, my littl remain strength 
abandon me. I answer onli by fall at her feet, and bath them 
with tears. the domina, unmov by my affliction, rose from her seat 
with a state air. she repeat her command in an absolut tone: 
but my excess faint made me unabl to obey her. mariana and 
alix rais me from the ground, and carri me forward in their arms. 
the prioress move on, lean upon violante, and camilla preced her 
with a torch. thu pass our sad process along the passages, in 
silenc onli broken by my sigh and groans. We stop befor the 
princip shrine of st. clare. the statu wa remov from it 
pedestal, though how I knew not. the nun afterward rais an iron 
grate till then conceal by the image, and let it fall on the other 
side with a loud crash. the aw sound, repeat by the vault above, 
and cavern below me, rouz me from the despond apathi in which I 
had been plunged. I look befor me: An abyss present itself to my 
affright eyes, and a steep and narrow staircase, whither my 
conductor were lead me. I shrieked, and start back. I implor 
compassion, rent the air with my cries, and summon both heaven and 
earth to my assistance. In vain! I wa hurri down the staircase, and 
forc into one of the cell which line the cavern' sides. 

My blood ran cold, as I gaze upon thi melancholi abode. the cold 
vapour hover in the air, the wall green with damp, the bed of 
straw so forlorn and comfortless, the chain destin to bind me for 
ever to my prison, and the reptil of everi descript which as the 
torch advanc toward them, I descri hurri to their retreats, 
struck my heart with terror almost too exquisit for natur to bear. 
driven by despair to madness, I burst suddenli from the nun who held 
me: I threw myself upon my knee befor the prioress, and besought her 
merci in the most passion and frantic terms. 

'if not on me,' said I, 'look at least with piti on that innoc 
being, whose life is attach to mine! great is my crime, but let not 
my child suffer for it! My babi ha commit no fault: oh! spare me 
for the sake of my unborn offspring, whom ere it tast life your 
sever doom to destruction!' 

the prioress drew back haughtily: she forc her habit from my grasp, 
as if my touch had been contagious. 

'what?' she exclaim with an exasper air; 'what? dare you plead 
for the produc of your shame? shall a creatur be permit to live, 
conceiv in guilt so monstrous? abandon woman, speak for him no 
more! better that the wretch should perish than live: begotten in 
perjury, incontinence, and pollution, It cannot fail to prove a prodigi 
of vice. hear me, thou guilty! expect no merci from me either for 
yourself, or brat. rather pray that death may seiz you befor you 
produc it; Or if it must see the light, that it eye may immedi 
be close again for ever! No aid shall be given you in your labour; 
bring your offspr into the world yourself, feed it yourself, nurs 
it yourself, buri it yourself: god grant that the latter may happen 
soon, lest you receiv comfort from the fruit of your iniquity!' 

thi inhuman speech, the threat which it contained, the dread 
suffer foretold to me by the domina, and her prayer for my 
infant' death, on whom though unborn I alreadi doated, were more than 
my exhaust frame could support. utter a deep groan, I fell 
senseless at the feet of my unrel enemy. I know not how long I 
remain in thi situation; but I imagin that some time must have 
elaps befor my recovery, sinc it suffic the prioress and her nun 
to quit the cavern. when my sens returned, I found myself in silenc 
and solitude. I heard not even the retir footstep of my 
persecutors. all wa hushed, and all wa dreadful! I had been thrown 
upon the bed of straw: the heavi chain which I had alreadi eye with 
terror, wa wound around my waist, and fasten me to the wall. A lamp 
glimmer with dull, melancholi ray through my dungeon, permit my 
distinguish all it horrors: It wa separ from the cavern by a 
low and irregular wall of stone: A larg chasm wa left open in it 
which form the entrance, for door there wa none. A leaden crucifix 
wa in front of my straw couch. A tatter rug lay near me, as did 
also a chaplet of beads; and not far from me stood a pitcher of water, 
and a wicker basket contain a small loaf, and a bottl of oil to 
suppli my lamp. 

with a despond eye did I examin thi scene of suffering: when I 
reflect that I wa doom to pass in it the remaind of my days, my 
heart wa rent with bitter anguish. I had onc been taught to look 
forward to a lot so different! At one time my prospect had appear 
so bright, so flattering! now all wa lost to me. friends, comfort, 
society, happiness, in one moment I wa depriv of all! dead to the 
world, dead to pleasure, I live to noth but the sens of misery. 
how fair did that world seem to me, from which I wa for ever excluded! 
how mani love object did it contain, whom I never should behold 
again! As I threw a look of terror round my prison, as I shrunk from 
the cut wind which howl through my subterran dwelling, the 
chang seem so striking, so abrupt, that I doubt it reality. 

that the duke de medina' niece, that the destin bride of the marqui 
de la cisternas, one bred up in affluence, relat to the noblest 
famili in spain, and rich in a multitud of affection friends, 
that she should in one moment becom a captive, separ from the 
world for ever, weigh down with chains, and reduc to support life 
with the coarsest aliments, appear a chang so sudden and incredible, 
that I believ myself the sport of some fright vision. it 
continu convinc me of my mistak with but too much certainty. 
everi morn my hope were disappointed. At length I abandon all 
idea of escaping: I resign myself to my fate, and onli expect 
liberti when she came the companion of death. 

My mental anguish, and the dread scene in which I had been an 
actress, advanc the period of my labour. In solitud and misery, 
abandon by all, unassist by art, uncomfort by friendship, with 
pang which if wit would have touch the hardest heart, wa I 
deliv of my wretch burthen. It came aliv into the world; but I 
knew not how to treat it, or by what mean to preserv it existence. 
I could onli bath it with tears, warm it in my bosom, and offer up 
prayer for it safety. I wa soon depriv of thi mourn 
employment: the want of proper attendance, my ignor how to nurs 
it, the bitter cold of the dungeon, and the unwholesom air which 
inflat it lungs, termin my sweet babe' short and pain 
existence. It expir in a few hour after it birth, and I wit 
it death with agoni which beggar all description. 

but my grief wa unavailing. My infant wa no more; nor could all my 
sigh impart to it littl tender frame the breath of a moment. I rent 
my winding-sheet, and wrap in it my love child. I place it on my 
bosom, it soft arm fold round my neck, and it pale cold cheek 
rest upon mine. thu did it lifeless limb repose, while I cover 
it with kisses, talk to it, wept, and moan over it without 
remission, day or night. camilla enter my prison regularli onc everi 
twenty-four hours, to bring me food. In spite of her flinti nature, 
she could not behold thi spectacl unmoved. she fear that grief so 
excess would at length turn my brain, and in truth I wa not alway 
in my proper senses. from a principl of compass she urg me to 
permit the cors to be buried: but to thi I never would consent. I 
vow not to part with it while I had life: it presenc wa my onli 
comfort, and no persuas could induc me to give it up. It soon 
becam a mass of putridity, and to everi eye wa a loathsom and 
disgust object; To everi eye but a mother's. In vain did human 
feel bid me recoil from thi emblem of mortal with repugnance: 
I withstood, and vanquish that repugnance. I persist in hold my 
infant to my bosom, in lament it, love it, ador it! hour after 
hour have I pass upon my sorri couch, contempl what had onc 
been my child: I endeavour to retrac it featur through the livid 
corruption, with which they were overspread: dure my confin thi 
sad occup wa my onli delight; and at that time world should not 
have bribe me to give it up. even when releas from my prison, I 
brought away my child in my arms. the represent of my two kind 
friends,"--(her she took the hand of the marchio and virginia, 
and press them altern to her lips)--"at length persuad me to 
resign my unhappi infant to the grave. yet I part from it with 
reluctance: however, reason at length prevailed; I suffer it to be 
taken from me, and it now repos in consecr ground. 

I befor mention that regularli onc a day camilla brought me food. 
she sought not to embitt my sorrow with reproach: she bad me, 'ti 
true, resign all hope of liberti and worldli happiness; but she 
encourag me to bear with patienc my temporari distress, and advis 
me to draw comfort from religion. 

My situat evid affect her more than she ventur to express: 
but she believ that to extenu my fault would make me less anxiou 
to repent it. often while her lip paint the enorm of my guilt in 
glare colours, her eye betrayed, how sensibl she wa to my 
sufferings. In fact I am certain that none of my tormentors, (for the 
three other nun enter my prison occasionally) were so much actuat 
by the spirit of oppress cruelti as by the idea that to afflict my 
bodi wa the onli way to preserv my soul. nay, even thi persuas 
might not have had such weight with them, and they might have thought 
my punish too severe, had not their good disposit been represt 
by blind obedi to their superior. her resent exist in full 
force. My project of elop have been discov by the abbot of 
the capuchins, she suppos herself lower in hi opinion by my 
disgrace, and in consequ her hate wa inveterate. she told the 
nun to whose custodi I wa commit that my fault wa of the most 
heinou nature, that no suffer could equal the offence, and that 
noth could save me from etern perdit but punish my guilt 
with the utmost severity. the superior' word is an oracl to but too 
mani of a convent' inhabitants. the nun believ whatev the 
prioress chose to assert: though contradict by reason and charity, 
they hesit not to admit the truth of her arguments. they follow 
her injunct to the veri letter, and were fulli persuad that to 
treat me with lenity, or to show the least piti for my woes, would be a 
direct mean to destroy my chanc for salvation. 

camilla, be most employ about me, wa particularli charg by the 
prioress to treat me with harshness. In complianc with these orders, 
she frequent strove to convinc me, how just wa my punishment, and 
how enorm wa my crime: she bad me think myself too happi in save 
my soul by mortifi my body, and even threaten me sometim with 
etern perdition. yet as I befor observed, she alway conclud by 
word of encourag and comfort; and though utter by camilla' 
lips, I easili recognis the domina' expressions. once, and onc 
only, the prioress visit me in my dungeon. she then treat me with 
the most unrel cruelty: she load me with reproaches, taunt 
me with my frailty, and when I implor her mercy, told me to ask it of 
heaven, sinc I deserv none on earth. she even gaze upon my 
lifeless infant without emotion; and when she left me, I heard her 
charg camilla to increas the hardship of my captivity. unfeel 
woman! but let me check my resentment: she ha expiat her error by 
her sad and unexpect death. peac be with her; and may her crime be 
forgiven in heaven, as I forgiv her my suffer on earth! 

thu did I drag on a miser existence. far from grow familiar 
with my prison, I beheld it everi moment with new horror. the cold 
seem more pierc and bitter, the air more thick and pestilential. 
My frame becam weak, feverish, and emaciated. I wa unabl to rise 
from the bed of straw, and exercis my limb in the narrow limits, to 
which the length of my chain permit me to move. though exhausted, 
faint, and weary, I trembl to profit by the approach of sleep: My 
slumber were constantli interrupt by some obnoxi insect crawl 
over me. 

sometim I felt the bloat toad, hideou and pamper with the 
poison vapour of the dungeon, drag hi loathsom length along 
my bosom: sometim the quick cold lizard rouz me leav hi slimi 
track upon my face, and entangl itself in the tress of my wild and 
mat hair: often have I at wake found my finger ring with the 
long worm which bred in the corrupt flesh of my infant. At such 
time I shriek with terror and disgust, and while I shook off the 
reptile, trembl with all a woman' weakness. 

such wa my situation, when camilla wa suddenli taken ill. A 
danger fever, suppos to be infectious, confin her to her bed. 
everi one except the lay-sist appoint to nurs her, avoid her 
with caution, and fear to catch the disease. she wa perfectli 
delirious, and by no mean capabl of attend to me. the domina and 
the nun admit to the mystery, had latterli given me over entir 
to camilla' care: In consequence, they busi themselv no more 
about me; and occupi by prepar for the approach festival, it is 
more than probabl that I never onc enter into their thoughts. Of 
the reason of camilla' negligence, I have been inform sinc my 
releas by the mother st. ursula; At that time I wa veri far from 
suspect it cause. On the contrary, I wait for my gaoler' 
appear at first with impatience, and afterward with despair. one 
day pass away; anoth follow it; the third arrived. still no 
camilla! still no food! I knew the laps of time by the wast of my 
lamp, to suppli which fortun a week' suppli of oil had been left 
me. I supposed, either that the nun had forgotten me, or that the 
domina had order them to let me perish. the latter idea seem the 
most probable; yet so natur is the love of life, that I trembl to 
find it true. though embitt by everi speci of misery, my 
exist wa still dear to me, and I dread to lose it. everi 
succeed minut prove to me that I must abandon all hope of relief. 
I wa becom an absolut skeleton: My eye alreadi fail me, and my 
limb were begin to stiffen. I could onli express my anguish, and 
the pang of that hunger which gnaw my heart-strings, by frequent 
groans, whose melancholi sound the vault roof of the dungeon 
re-echoed. I resign myself to my fate: I alreadi expect the 
moment of dissolution, when my guardian angel, when my belov brother 
arriv in time to save me. My sight grown dim and feebl at first 
refus to recogn him; and when I did distinguish hi features, the 
sudden burst of raptur wa too much for me to bear. I wa overpow 
by the swell of joy at onc more behold a friend, and that a friend 
so dear to me. natur could not support my emotions, and took her 
refug in insensibility. 

you alreadi know, what are my oblig to the famili of 
villa-franca: but what you cannot know is the extent of my gratitude, 
boundless as the excel of my benefactors. lorenzo! raymond! 
name so dear to me! teach me to bear with fortitud thi sudden 
transit from miseri to bliss. So late a captive, opprest with 
chains, perish with hunger, suffer everi inconveni of cold 
and want, hidden from the light, exclud from society, hopeless, 
neglected, and as I feared, forgotten; now restor to life and 
liberty, enjoy all the comfort of affluenc and ease, surround by 
those who are most love by me, and on the point of becom hi bride 
who ha long been wed to my heart, my happi is so exquisite, so 
perfect, that scarc can my brain sustain the weight. one onli wish 
remain ungratified: It is to see my brother in hi former health, and 
to know that antonia' memori is buri in her grave. 

grant thi prayer, I have noth more to desire. I trust, that my 
past suffer have purchas from heaven the pardon of my momentari 
weakness. that I have offended, offend greatli and grievously, I am 
fulli conscious; but let not my husband, becaus He onc conquer my 
virtue, doubt the proprieti of my futur conduct. I have been frail 
and full of error: but I yield not to the warmth of constitution; 
raymond, affect for you betray me. I wa too confid of my 
strength; but I depend no less on your honour than my own. I had 
vow never to see you more: had it not been for the consequ of 
that unguard moment, my resolut had been kept. fate will it 
otherwise, and I cannot but rejoic at it decree. still my conduct 
ha been highli blameable, and while I attempt to justifi myself, I 
blush at recollect my imprudence. let me then dismiss the 
ungrat subject; first assur you, raymond, that you shall have no 
caus to repent our union, and that the more culpabl have been the 
error of your mistress, the more exemplari shall be the conduct of 
your wife. 

here agn ceased, and the marqui repli to her address in term 
equal sincer and affectionate. lorenzo express hi satisfact at 
the prospect of be so close connect with a man for whom He had 
ever entertain the highest esteem. the pope' bull had fulli and 
effectu releas agn from her religi engagements: the 
marriag wa therefor celebr as soon as the need prepar 
had been made, for the marqui wish to have the ceremoni perform 
with all possibl splendour and publicity. thi be over, and the 
bride have receiv the compliment of madrid, she depart with don 
raymond for hi castl in andalusia: lorenzo accompani them, as did 
also the marchio de villa-franca and her love daughter. It is 
needless to say that theodor wa of the party, and would be imposs 
to describ hi joy at hi master' marriage. previou to hi 
departure, the marquis, to aton in some measur for hi past neglect, 
made some enquiri rel to elvira. find that she as well as her 
daughter had receiv mani servic from leonella and jacintha, He 
show hi respect to the memori of hi sister-in-law by make the two 
women handsom presents. lorenzo follow hi example--leonella wa 
highli flatter by the attent of noblemen so distinguished, and 
jacintha bless the hour on which her hous wa bewitched. 

On her side, agn fail not to reward her convent friends. the worthi 
mother st. ursula, to whom she owe her liberty, wa name at her 
request superintend of 'the ladi of charity:' thi wa one of the 
best and most opul societi throughout spain. bertha and cornelia 
not choos to quit their friend, were appoint to princip charg 
in the same establishment. As to the nun who had aid the domina in 
persecut agnes, camilla be confin by ill to her bed, had 
perish in the flame which consum st. clare' convent. mariana, 
alix, and violante, as well as two more, had fallen victim to the 
popular rage. the three other who in council had support the 
domina' sentence, were sever reprimanded, and banish to religi 
hous in obscur and distant provinces: here they languish away a 
few years, asham of their former weakness, and shun by their 
companion with avers and contempt. 

nor wa the fidel of flora permit to go unrewarded. her wish 
be consulted, she declar herself impati to revisit her nativ 
land. In consequence, a passag wa procur for her to cuba, where 
she arriv in safety, load with the present of raymond and lorenzo. 

the debt of gratitud discharged, agn wa at liberti to pursu her 
favourit plan. lodg in the same house, lorenzo and virginia were 
etern together. the more He saw of her, the more wa He convinc 
of her merit. On her part, she laid herself out to please, and not to 
succeed wa for her impossible. 

lorenzo wit with admir her beauti person, eleg 
manners, innumer talents, and sweet disposition: He wa also much 
flatter by her prejudic in hi favour, which she had not suffici 
art to conceal. however, hi sentiment partook not of that ardent 
charact which had mark hi affect for antonia. the imag of 
that love and unfortun girl still live in hi heart, and baffl 
all virginia' effort to displac it. still when the duke propos to 
him the match, which He wish to earnestli to take place, hi nephew 
did not reject the offer. the urgent supplic of hi friends, and 
the lady' merit conquer hi repugn to enter into new 
engagements. He propos himself to the marqui de villa-franca, and 
wa accept with joy and gratitude. virginia becam hi wife, nor did 
she ever give him caus to repent hi choice. hi esteem increas for 
her daily. her unremit endeavour to pleas him could not but 
succeed. hi affect assum stronger and warmer colours. antonia' 
imag wa gradual effac from hi bosom; and virginia becam sole 
mistress of that heart, which she well deserv to possess without a 
partner. 

the remain year of raymond and agnes, of lorenzo and virginia, were 
happi as can be those allot to mortals, born to be the prey of 
grief, and sport of disappointment. the exquisit sorrow with which 
they had been afflicted, made them think lightli of everi succeed 
woe. they had felt the sharpest dart in misfortune' quiver; those 
which remain appear blunt in comparison. have weather fate' 
heaviest storms, they look calmli upon it terrors: or if ever they 
felt affliction' casual gales, they seem to them gentl as zephyr 
which breath over summer-seas. 



chapter V 

----he wa a fell despight fiend: 
hell hold none wors in bale bower below: 
By pride, and wit, and rage, and rancor keened; 
Of man alike, if good or bad the foe. 
thomson. 

On the day follow antonia' death, all madrid wa a scene of 
constern and amazement. An archer who had wit the adventur 
in the sepulchr had indiscreetli relat the circumst of the 
murder: He had also name the perpetrator. the confus wa without 
exampl which thi intellig rais among the devotees. most of 
them disbeliev it, and went themselv to the abbey to ascertain the 
fact. anxiou to avoid the shame to which their superior' ill-conduct 
expos the whole brotherhood, the monk assur the visitor that 
ambrosio wa prevent from receiv them as usual by noth but 
illness. thi attempt wa unsuccessful: the same excus be repeat 
day after day, the archer' stori gradual obtain confidence. hi 
partizan abandon him: No one entertain a doubt of hi guilt; and 
they who befor had been the warmest in hi prais were now the most 
vocifer in hi condemnation. 

while hi innoc or guilt wa debat in madrid with the utmost 
acrimony, ambrosio wa a prey to the pang of consciou villainy, and 
the terror of punish impend over him. when He look back to 
the emin on which He had late stood, univers honour and 
respected, at peac with the world and with himself, scarc could He 
believ that He wa inde the culprit whose crime and whose fate He 
trembl to envisage. but a few week had elapsed, sinc He wa pure 
and virtuous, court by the wisest and noblest in madrid, and regard 
by the peopl with a rever that approach idolatry: He now saw 
himself stain with the most loath and monstrou sins, the object of 
univers execration, a prison of the holi office, and probabl 
doom to perish in tortur the most severe. He could not hope to 
deceiv hi judges: the proof of hi guilt were too strong. hi 
be in the sepulchr at so late an hour, hi confus at the 
discovery, the dagger which in hi first alarm He own had been 
conceal by him, and the blood which had spirt upon hi habit from 
antonia' wound, suffici mark him out for the assassin. He 
wait with agoni for the day of examination: He had no resourc to 
comfort him in hi distress. religion could not inspir him with 
fortitude: If He read the book of moral which were put into hi 
hands, He saw in them noth but the enorm of hi offences; If he 
attempt to pray, He recollect that He deserv not heaven' 
protection, and believ hi crime so monstrou as to baffl even 
god' infinit goodness. for everi other sinner He thought there might 
be hope, but for him there could be none. shudder at the past, 
anguish by the present, and dread the future, thu pass He the 
few day preced that which wa mark for hi trial. 

that day arrived. At nine in the morn hi prison door wa unlocked, 
and hi gaoler entering, command him to follow him. He obey with 
trembling. He wa conduct into a spaciou hall, hung with black 
cloth. At the tabl sat three grave, stern-look men, also habit in 
black: one wa the grand inquisitor, whom the import of thi caus 
had induc to examin into it himself. At a smaller tabl at a littl 
distanc sat the secretary, provid with all necessari implement for 
writing. ambrosio wa beckon to advance, and take hi station at the 
lower end of the table. As hi eye glanc downwards, He perceiv 
variou iron instrument lie scatter upon the floor. their form 
were unknown to him, but apprehens immedi guess them to be 
engin of torture. He turn pale, and with difficulti prevent 
himself from sink upon the ground. 

profound silenc prevailed, except when the inquisitor whisper a few 
word among themselv mysteriously. near an hour past away, and with 
everi second of it ambrosio' fear grew more poignant. At length a 
small door, opposit to that by which He had enter the hall, grate 
heavili upon it hinges. An offic appeared, and wa immedi 
follow by the beauti matilda. her hair hung about her face wildly; 
her cheek were pale, and her eye sunk and hollow. she threw a 
melancholi look upon ambrosio: He repli by one of avers and 
reproach. she wa place opposit to him. A bell then sound thrice. 
It wa the signal for open the court, and the inquisitor enter 
upon their office. 

In these trial neither the accus is mentioned, or the name of the 
accuser. the prison are onli asked, whether they will confess: If 
they repli that have no crime they can make no confession, they are 
put to the tortur without delay. thi is repeat at intervals, 
either till the suspect avow themselv culpable, or the persever 
of the examin is worn out and exhausted: but without a direct 
acknowledg of their guilt, the inquisit never pronounc the 
final doom of it prisoners. 

In gener much time is suffer to elaps without their be 
questioned: but ambrosio' trial had been hastened, on account of a 
solemn auto da Fe which would take place in a few days, and in which 
the inquisitor meant thi distinguish culprit to perform a part, and 
give a strike testimoni of their vigilance. 

the abbot wa not mere accus of rape and murder: the crime of 
sorceri wa laid to hi charge, as well as to matilda's. she had been 
seiz as an accomplic in antonia' assassination. On search her 
cell, variou suspici book and instrument were found which 
justifi the accus brought against her. To crimin the monk, 
the constel mirror wa produced, which matilda had accident 
left in hi chamber. the strang figur engrav upon it caught the 
attent of don ramirez, while search the abbot' cell: In 
consequence, He carri it away with him. It wa shown to the grand 
inquisitor, who have consid it for some time, took off a small 
golden cross which hung at hi girdle, and laid it upon the mirror. 
instantli a loud nois wa heard, resembl a clap of thunder, and the 
steel shiver into a thousand pieces. thi circumst confirm the 
suspicion of the monk' have dealt in magic: It wa even suppos 
that hi former influenc over the mind of the peopl wa entir to 
be ascrib to witchcraft. 

determin to make him confess not onli the crime which He had 
committed, but those also of which He wa innocent, the inquisitor 
began their examination. though dread the tortures, as He dread 
death still more which would consign him to etern torments, the abbot 
assert hi puriti in a voic bold and resolute. matilda follow hi 
example, but spoke with fear and trembling. have in vain exhort 
him to confess, the inquisitor order the monk to be put to the 
question. the decre wa immedi executed. ambrosio suffer the 
most excruci pang that ever were invent by human cruelty: yet 
so dread is death when guilt accompani it, that He had suffici 
fortitud to persist in hi disavowal. hi agoni were redoubl in 
consequence: nor wa He releas till faint from excess of pain, 
insens rescu him from the hand of hi tormentors. 

matilda wa next order to the torture: but terrifi by the sight of 
the friar' sufferings, her courag total desert her. she sank 
upon her knees, acknowledg her correspond with infern spirits, 
and that she had wit the monk' assassin of antonia: but as 
to the crime of sorcery, she declar herself the sole criminal, and 
ambrosio perfectli innocent. the latter assert met with no credit. 
the abbot had recov hi sens in time to hear the confess of 
hi accomplice: but He wa too much enfeebl by what He had alreadi 
undergon to be capabl at that time of sustain new torments. 

He wa command back to hi cell, but first inform that as soon as 
He had gain strength sufficient, He must prepar himself for a second 
examination. the inquisitor hope that He would then be less harden 
and obstinate. To matilda it wa announc that she must expiat her 
crime in fire on the approach auto da fe. all her tear and 
entreati could procur no mitig of her doom, and she wa drag 
by forc from the hall of trial. 

return to hi dungeon, the suffer of ambrosio' bodi were far 
more support than those of hi mind. hi disloc limbs, the 
nail torn from hi hand and feet, and hi finger mash and broken 
by the pressur of screws, were far surpass in anguish by the 
agit of hi soul and vehem of hi terrors. He saw that, 
guilti or innocent, hi judg were bent upon condemn him: the 
remembr of what hi denial had alreadi cost him terrifi him at 
the idea of be again appli to the question, and almost engag him 
to confess hi crimes. then again the consequ of hi confess 
flash befor him, and render him onc more irresolute. hi death 
would be inevitable, and that a death the most dreadful: He had 
listen to matilda' doom, and doubt not that a similar wa reserv 
for him. He shudder at the approach auto da fe, at the idea of 
perish in flames, and onli escap from indur torment to pass 
into other more subtil and ever-lasting! with affright did He bend 
hi mind' eye on the space beyond the grave; nor could hide from 
himself how justli he ought to dread heaven' vengeance. In thi 
labyrinth of terrors, fain would He have taken hi refug in the gloom 
of atheism: fain would He have deni the soul' immortality; have 
persuad himself that when hi eye onc closed, they would never more 
open, and that the same moment would annihil hi soul and body. 
even thi resourc wa refus to him. To permit hi be blind to 
the fallaci of thi belief, hi knowledg wa too extensive, hi 
understand too solid and just. He could not help feel the 
exist of a god. those truths, onc hi comfort, now present 
themselv befor him in the clearest light; but they onli serv to 
drive him to distraction. they destroy hi ill-ground hope of 
escap punishment; and dispel by the irresist bright of 
truth and convinction, philosophy' deceit vapour fade away like a 
dream. 

In anguish almost too great for mortal frame to bear, He expect the 
time when He wa again to be examined. He busi himself in plan 
ineffectu scheme for escap both present and futur punishment. 
Of the first there wa no possibility; Of the second despair made him 
neglect the onli means. while reason forc him to acknowledg a god' 
existence, conscienc made him doubt the infin of hi goodness. He 
disbeliev that a sinner like him could find mercy. He had not been 
deceiv into error: ignor could furnish him with no excuse. He 
had seen vice in her true colours; befor He commit hi crimes, He 
had comput everi scrupl of their weight; and yet he had commit 
them. 

'pardon?' He would cri in an access of phrenzi 'oh! there can be none 
for me!' 

persuad of this, instead of humbl himself in penitence, of 
deplor hi guilt, and employ hi few remain hour in 
deprec heaven' wrath, He abandon himself to the transport of 
desper rage; He sorrow for the punish of hi crimes, not their 
commission; and exhal hi bosom' anguish in idl sighs, in vain 
lamentations, in blasphemi and despair. As the few beam of day which 
pierc through the bar of hi prison window gradual disappeared, 
and their place wa suppli by the pale and glimmer lamp, He felt 
hi terror redouble, and hi idea becom more gloomy, more solemn, 
more despondent. He dread the approach of sleep: No sooner did hi 
eye close, weari with tear and watching, than the dread vision 
seem to be realis on which hi mind had dwelt dure the day. He 
found himself in sulphur realm and burn caverns, surround by 
fiend appoint hi tormentors, and who drove him through a varieti of 
tortures, each of which wa more dread than the former. amidst 
these dismal scene wander the ghost of elvira and her daughter. 
they reproach him with their deaths, recount hi crime to the 
daemons, and urg them to inflict torment of cruelti yet more 
refined. such were the pictur which float befor hi eye in 
sleep: they vanish not till hi repos wa disturb by excess of 
agony. then would He start from the ground on which He had stretch 
himself, hi brow run down with cold sweat, hi eye wild and 
phrenzied; and He onli exchang the terribl certainti for surmiz 
scarc more supportable. He pace hi dungeon with disord steps; 
He gaze with terror upon the surround darkness, and often did He 
cry, 

'oh! fear is night to the guilty!' 

the day of hi second examin wa at hand. He had been compel 
to swallow cordials, whose virtu were calcul to restor hi 
bodili strength, and enabl him to support the question longer. On the 
night preced thi dread day, hi fear for the morrow permit 
him not to sleep. hi terror were so violent, as nearli to annihil 
hi mental powers. He sat like one stupefi near the tabl on which 
hi lamp wa burn dimly. despair chain up hi faculti in 
idiotism, and He remain for some hours, unabl to speak or move, or 
inde to think. 

'look up, ambrosio!' said a voic in accent well-known to him-- 

the monk started, and rais hi melancholi eyes. matilda stood befor 
him. she had quit her religi habit. she now wore a femal 
dress, at onc eleg and splendid: A profus of diamond blaze 
upon her robes, and her hair wa confin by a coronet of roses. In 
her right hand she held a small book: A live express of pleasur 
beam upon her countenance; but still it wa mingl with a wild 
imperi majesti which inspir the monk with awe, and represt in some 
measur hi transport at see her. 

'you here, matilda?' He at length exclaimed; 'how have you gain 
entrance? where are your chains? what mean thi magnificence, and 
the joy which sparkl in your eyes? have our judg relented? Is 
there a chanc of my escaping? answer me for pity, and tell me, what I 
have to hope, or fear.' 

'ambrosio!' she repli with an air of command dignity; 'I have 
baffl the inquisition' fury. I am free: A few moment will place 
kingdom between these dungeon and me. yet I purchas my liberti at a 
dear, at a dread price! dare you pay the same, ambrosio? dare you 
spring without fear over the bound which separ men from 
angels?--y are silent.--y look upon me with eye of suspicion and 
alarm--i read your thought and confess their justice. yes, ambrosio; 
I have sacrif all for life and liberty. I am no longer a candid 
for heaven! I have renounc god' service, and am enlist beneath 
the banner of hi foes. the deed is past recall: yet were it in my 
power to go back, I would not. oh! my friend, to expir in such 
torments! To die amidst curs and execrations! To bear the insult of 
an exasper mob! To be expos to all the mortif of shame 
and infamy! who can reflect without horror on such a doom? let me 
then exult in my exchange. I have sold distant and uncertain happi 
for present and secure: I have preserv a life which otherwis I had 
lost in torture; and I have obtain the power of procur everi bliss 
which can make that life delicious! the infern spirit obey me as 
their sovereign: By their aid shall my day be past in everi 
refin of luxuri and voluptuousness. I will enjoy unrestrain the 
gratif of my senses: everi passion shall be indulged, even to 
satiety; then will I bid my servant invent new pleasures, to reviv 
and stimul my glut appetites! I go impati to exercis my 
newly-gain dominion. I pant to be at liberty. noth should hold me 
one moment longer in thi abhor abode, but the hope of persuad 
you to follow my example. ambrosio, I still love you: our mutual 
guilt and danger have render you dearer to me than ever, and I would 
fain save you from impend destruction. summon then your resolut 
to your aid; and renounc for immedi and certain benefit the hope 
of a salvation, difficult to obtain, and perhap altogeth erroneous. 
shake off the prejudic of vulgar souls; abandon a god who ha 
abandon you, and rais yourself to the level of superior beings!' 

she paus for the monk' reply: He shuddered, while He gave it. 

'matilda!' He said after a long silenc in a low and unsteadi voice; 
'what price gave you for liberty?' 

she answer him firm and dauntless. 

'ambrosio, it wa my soul!' 

'wretch woman, what have you done? pass but a few years, and how 
dread will be your sufferings!' 

'weak man, pass but thi night, and how dread will be your own! Do 
you rememb what you have alreadi endured? tomorrow you must bear 
torment doubli exquisite. Do you rememb the horror of a fieri 
punishment? In two day you must be led a victim to the stake! what 
then will becom of you? still dare you hope for pardon? still are 
you beguil with vision of salvation? think upon your crimes! think 
upon your lust, your perjury, inhumanity, and hypocrisy! think upon 
the innoc blood which cri to the throne of god for vengeance, and 
then hope for mercy! then dream of heaven, and sigh for world of 
light, and realm of peac and pleasure! absurd! open your eyes, 
ambrosio, and be prudent. hell is your lot; you are doom to etern 
perdition; nought lie beyond your grave but a gulph of devour 
flames. and will you then speed toward that hell? will you clasp that 
perdit in your arms, ere 'ti needful? will you plung into those 
flame while you still have the power to shun them? 'ti a madman' 
action. no, no, ambrosio: let us for awhil fli from divin 
vengeance. Be advis by me; purchas by one moment' courag the 
bliss of years; enjoy the present, and forget that a futur lag 
behind.' 

'matilda, your counsel are dangerous: I dare not, I will not follow 
them. I must not give up my claim to salvation. monstrou are my 
crimes; but god is merciful, and I will not despair of pardon.' 

'i such your resolution? I have no more to say. I speed to joy and 
liberty, and abandon you to death and etern torments.' 

'yet stay one moment, matilda! you command the infern daemons: 

you can forc open these prison doors; you can releas me from these 
chain which weigh me down. save me, I conjur you, and bear me from 
these fear abodes!' 

'you ask the onli boon beyond my power to bestow. I am forbidden to 
assist a churchman and a partizan of god: renounc those titles, and 
command me.' 

'I will not sell my soul to perdition.' 

'persist in your obstinacy, till you find yourself at the stake: then 
will you repent your error, and sigh for escap when the moment is gone 
by. I quit you. yet ere the hour of death arriv should wisdom 
enlighten you, listen to the mean of repair your present fault. I 
leav with you thi book. read the four first line of the seventh 
page backwards: the spirit whom you have alreadi onc beheld will 
immedi appear to you. If you are wise, we shall meet again: If 
not, farewel for ever!' 

she let the book fall upon the ground. A cloud of blue fire wrap 
itself round her: she wave her hand to ambrosio, and disappeared. 
the momentari glare which the flame pour through the dungeon, on 
dissip suddenly, seem to have increas it natur gloom. the 
solitari lamp scarc gave light suffici to guid the monk to a 
chair. He threw himself into hi seat, fold hi arms, and lean 
hi head upon the table, sank into reflect perplex and 
unconnected. 

He wa still in thi attitud when the open of the prison door 
rouz him from hi stupor. He wa summon to appear befor the grand 
inquisitor. He rose, and follow hi gaoler with pain steps. He 
wa led into the same hall, place befor the same examiners, and wa 
again interrog whether He would confess. He repli as before, that 
have no crimes, He could acknowledg none: but when the execution 
prepar to put him to the question, when He saw the engin of 
torture, and rememb the pang which they had alreadi inflicted, hi 
resolut fail him entirely. forget the consequences, and onli 
anxiou to escap the terror of the present moment, He made an ampl 
confession. He disclos everi circumst of hi guilt, and own 
not mere the crime with which He wa charged, but those of which He 
had never been suspected. be interrog as to matilda' flight 
which had creat much confusion, He confess that she had sold 
herself to satan, and that she wa indebt to sorceri for her escape. 
He still assur hi judg that for hi own part He had never enter 
into ani compact with the infern spirits; but the threat of be 
tortur made him declar himself to be a sorcerer, and heretic, and 
whatev other titl the inquisitor chose to fix upon him. In 
consequ of thi avowal, hi sentenc wa immedi pronounced. 
He wa order to prepar himself to perish in the auto da fe, which 
wa to be solemn at twelv o'clock that night. thi hour wa 
chosen from the idea that the horror of the flame be heighten by 
the gloom of midnight, the execut would have a greater effect upon 
the mind of the people. 

ambrosio rather dead than aliv wa left alon in hi dungeon. the 
moment in which thi terribl decre wa pronounc had nearli prove 
that of hi dissolution. He look forward to the morrow with despair, 
and hi terror increas with the approach of midnight. sometim He 
wa buri in gloomi silence: At other He rave with deliri 
passion, wrung hi hands, and curs the hour when He first beheld the 
light. In one of these moment hi eye rest upon matilda' 
mysteri gift. hi transport of rage were instantli suspended. He 
look earnestli at the book; He took it up, but immedi threw it 
from him with horror. He walk rapidli up and down hi dungeon: then 
stopped, and again fix hi eye on the spot where the book had 
fallen. He reflect that here at least wa a resourc from the fate 
which He dreaded. He stooped, and took it up a second time. 

He remain for some time trembl and irresolute: He long to tri 
the charm, yet fear it consequences. the recollect of hi 
sentenc at length fix hi indecision. He open the volume; but hi 
agit wa so great that He at first sought in vain for the page 
mention by matilda. asham of himself, He call all hi courag to 
hi aid. He turn to the seventh leaf. He began to read it aloud; 
but hi eye frequent wander from the book, while He anxious cast 
them round in search of the spirit, whom He wished, yet dread to 
behold. still He persist in hi design; and with a voic unassur 
and frequent interruptions, He contriv to finish the four first line 
of the page. 

they were in a language, whose import wa total unknown to him. 

scarc had He pronounc the last word when the effect of the charm 
were evident. A loud burst of thunder wa heard; the prison shook to 
it veri foundations; A blaze of lightn flash through the cell; 
and in the next moment, born upon sulphur whirl-winds, lucif 
stood befor him a second time. but He came not as when at matilda' 
summon He borrow the seraph' form to deceiv ambrosio. He appear 
in all that ugli which sinc hi fall from heaven had been hi 
portion: hi blast limb still bore mark of the almighty' thunder: 
A swarthi dark spread itself over hi gigant form: hi hand and 
feet were arm with long talons: furi glare in hi eyes, which might 
have struck the bravest heart with terror: over hi huge shoulder 
wave two enorm sabl wings; and hi hair wa suppli by live 
snakes, which twine themselv round hi brow with fright 
hissings. In one hand He held a roll of parchment, and in the other an 
iron pen. still the lightn flash around him, and the thunder with 
repeat bursts, seem to announc the dissolut of nature. 

terrifi at an apparit so differ from what He had expected, 
ambrosio remain gaze upon the fiend, depriv of the power of 
utterance. the thunder had ceas to roll: univers silenc reign 
through the dungeon. 

'for what am I summon hither?' said the daemon, in a voic which 
sulphur fog had damp to hoarseness-- 

At the sound natur seem to tremble: A violent earthquak rock the 
ground, accompani by a fresh burst of thunder, louder and more 
appal than the first. 

ambrosio wa long unabl to answer the daemon' demand. 

'I am condemn to die;' He said with a faint voice, hi blood run 
cold, while He gaze upon hi dread visitor. 'save me! bear me 
from hence!' 

'shall the reward of my servic be paid me? dare you embrac my 
cause? will you be mine, bodi and soul? are you prepar to renounc 
him who made you, and him who die for you? answer but "yes" and 
lucif is your slave.' 

'will no less price content you? can noth satisfi you but my 
etern ruin? spirit, you ask too much. yet convey me from thi 
dungeon: Be my servant for one hour, and I will be your for a 
thousand years. will not thi offer suffice?' 

'it will not. I must have your soul; must have it mine, and mine for 
ever.' 

'insati daemon, I will not doom myself to endless torments. I will 
not give up my hope of be one day pardoned.' 

'you will not? On what chimaera rest then your hopes? short-sight 
mortal! miser wretch! are you not guilty? are you not infam in 
the eye of men and angels. can such enorm sin be forgiven? hope 
you to escap my power? your fate is alreadi pronounced. the etern 
ha abandon you; mine you are mark in the book of destiny, and mine 
you must and shall be!' 

'fiend, 'ti false! infinit is the almighty' mercy, and the penit 
shall meet hi forgiveness. My crime are monstrous, but I will not 
despair of pardon: haply, when they have receiv due chastisement....' 

'chastisement? wa purgatori meant for guilt like yours? hope you 
that your offenc shall be bought off by prayer of superstiti 
dotard and drone monks? ambrosio, be wise! mine you must be: you 
are doom to flames, but may shun them for the present. sign thi 
parchment: I will bear you from hence, and you may pass your remain 
year in bliss and liberty. enjoy your existence: indulg in everi 
pleasur to which appetit may lead you: but from the moment that it 
quit your body, rememb that your soul belong to me, and that I will 
not be defraud of my right.' 

the monk wa silent; but hi look declar that the tempter' word 
were not thrown away. He reflect on the condit propos with 
horror: On the other hand, He believ himself doom to perdit and 
that, by refus the daemon' succour, He onli hasten tortur which 
He never could escape. the fiend saw that hi resolut wa shaken: 
He renew hi instances, and endeavour to fix the abbot' 
indecision. He describ the agoni of death in the most terrif 
colours; and He work so power upon ambrosio' despair and fear 
that He prevail upon him to receiv the parchment. He then struck 
the iron pen which He held into a vein of the monk' left hand. It 
pierc deep, and wa instantli fill with blood; yet ambrosio felt no 
pain from the wound. the pen wa put into hi hand: It trembled. the 
wretch place the parchment on the tabl befor him, and prepar to 
sign it. suddenli He held hi hand: He start away hastily, and 
threw the pen upon the table. 

'what am I doing?' He cried--then turn to the fiend with a desper 
air, 'leav me! begone! I will not sign the parchment.' 

'fool!' exclaim the disappoint daemon, dart look so furiou as 
penetr the friar' soul with horror; 'thu am I trifl with? Go 
then! rave in agony, expir in tortures, and then learn the extent of 
the eternal' mercy! but bewar how you make me again your mock! call 
me no more till resolv to accept my offers! summon me a second time 
to dismiss me thu idly, and these talon shall rend you into a 
thousand pieces! speak yet again; will you sign the parchment?' 

'I will not! leav me! away!' 

instantli the thunder wa heard to roll horribly: onc more the earth 
trembl with violence: the dungeon resound with loud shrieks, and 
the daemon fled with blasphemi and curses. 

At first, the monk rejoic at have resist the seducer' arts, and 
obtain a triumph over mankind' enemy: but as the hour of punish 
drew near, hi former terror reviv in hi heart. their momentari 
repos seem to have given them fresh vigour. the nearer that the 
time approached, the more did He dread appear befor the throne of 
god. He shudder to think how soon He must be plung into eternity; 
how soon meet the eye of hi creator, whom He had so grievous 
offended. the bell announc midnight: It wa the signal for be 
led to the stake! As He listen to the first stroke, the blood ceas 
to circul in the abbot' veins: He heard death and tortur murmur 
in each succeed sound. He expect to see the archer enter hi 
prison; and as the bell forbor to toll, he seiz the magic volum in 
a fit of despair. He open it, turn hastili to the seventh page, 
and as if fear to allow himself a moment' thought ran over the 
fatal line with rapidity. accompani by hi former terrors, lucif 
again stood befor the trembler. 

'you have summon me,' said the fiend; 'are you determin to be wise? 
will you accept my conditions? you know them already. renounc your 
claim to salvation, make over to me your soul, and I bear you from thi 
dungeon instantly. yet is it time. resolve, or it will be too late. 
will you sign the parchment?' 

'I must!--fat urg me! I accept your conditions.' 

'sign the parchment!' repli the daemon in an exult tone. 

the contract and the bloodi pen still lay upon the table. ambrosio drew 
near it. He prepar to sign hi name. A moment' reflect made him 
hesitate. 

'hark!' cri the tempter; 'they come! Be quick! sign the parchment, 
and I bear you from henc thi moment.' 

In effect, the archer were heard approaching, appoint to lead 
ambrosio to the stake. the sound encourag the monk in hi resolution. 

'what is the import of thi writing?' said he. 

'it make your soul over to me for ever, and without reserve.' 

'what am I to receiv in exchange?' 

'mi protection, and releas from thi dungeon. sign it, and thi 
instant I bear you away.' 

ambrosio took up the pen; He set it to the parchment. again hi courag 
fail him: He felt a pang of terror at hi heart, and onc more threw 
the pen upon the table. 

'weak and puerile!' cri the exasper fiend: 'away with thi folly! 
sign the write thi instant, or I sacrific you to my rage!' 

At thi moment the bolt of the outward door wa drawn back. the 
prison heard the rattl of chains; the heavi bar fell; the archer 
were on the point of entering. work up to phrenzi by the urgent 
danger, shrink from the approach of death, terrifi by the daemon' 
threats, and see no other mean to escap destruction, the wretch 
monk complied. He sign the fatal contract, and gave it hastili into 
the evil spirit' hands, whose eyes, as He receiv the gift, glare 
with malici rapture. 

'take it!' said the god-abandoned; 'now then save me! snatch me from 
hence!' 

'hold! Do you freeli and absolut renounc your creator and hi son?' 

'I do! I do!' 

'do you make over your soul to me for ever?' 

'for ever!' 

'without reserv or subterfuge? without futur appeal to the divin 
mercy?' 

the last chain fell from the door of the prison: the key wa heard 
turn in the lock: alreadi the iron door grate heavili upon it 
rusti hinges. 

'I am your for ever and irrevocably!' cri the monk wild with terror: 
'I abandon all claim to salvation! I own no power but yours! hark! 
hark! they come! oh! save me! bear me away!' 

'I have triumphed! you are mine past reprieve, and I fulfil my 
promise.' 

while He spoke, the door unclosed. instantli the daemon grasp one of 
ambrosio' arms, spread hi broad pinions, and sprang with him into the 
air. the roof open as they soar upwards, and close again when 
they had quit the dungeon. 

In the meanwhile, the gaoler wa thrown into the utmost surpriz by the 
disappear of hi prisoner. though neither He nor the archer were 
in time to wit the monk' escape, a sulphur smell prevail 
through the prison suffici inform them by whose aid He had been 
liberated. they hasten to make their report to the grand inquisitor. 
the story, how a sorcer had been carri away by the devil, wa soon 
nois about madrid; and for some day the whole citi wa employ in 
discuss the subject. gradual it ceas to be the topic of 
conversation: other adventur aros whose novelti engag univers 
attention; and ambrosio wa soon forgotten as totally, as if He never 
had existed. while thi wa passing, the monk support by hi 
infern guide, travers the air with the rapid of an arrow, and a 
few moment place him upon a precipice' brink, the steepest in sierra 
morena. 

though rescu from the inquisition, ambrosio as yet wa insens of 
the bless of liberty. the damn contract weigh heavi upon hi 
mind; and the scene in which He had been a princip actor had left 
behind them such impress as render hi heart the seat of anarchi 
and confusion. the object now befor hi eyes, and which the full 
moon sail through cloud permit him to examine, were 
ill-calcul to inspir that calm, of which He stood so much in need. 
the disord of hi imagin wa increas by the wild of the 
surround scenery; By the gloomi cavern and steep rocks, rise 
abov each other, and divid the pass clouds; solitari cluster of 
tree scatter here and there, among whose thick-twin branch the 
wind of night sigh hoars and mournfully; the shrill cri of 
mountain eagles, who had built their nest among these lone desarts; 
the stun roar of torrents, as swell by late rain they rush 
violent down tremend precipices; and the dark water of a silent 
sluggish stream which faintli reflect the moonbeams, and bath the 
rock' base on which ambrosio stood. the abbot cast round him a look 
of terror. hi infern conductor wa still by hi side, and eye him 
with a look of mingl malice, exultation, and contempt. 

'whither have you brought me?' said the monk at length in an hollow 
trembl voice: 'whi am I place in thi melancholi scene? bear me 
from it quickly! carri me to matilda!' 

the fiend repli not, but continu to gaze upon him in silence. 

ambrosio could not sustain hi glance; He turn away hi eyes, while 
thu spoke the daemon: 

'I have him then in my power! thi model of piety! thi be without 
reproach! thi mortal who place hi puni virtu on a level with 
those of angels. He is mine! irrevocably, etern mine! companion 
of my sufferings! denizen of hell! how grate will be my present!' 

He paused; then address himself to the monk---- 

'carri you to matilda?' He continued, repeat ambrosio' words: 

'wretch! you shall soon be with her! you well deserv a place near her, 
for hell boast no miscreant more guilti than yourself. 

hark, ambrosio, while I unveil your crimes! you have shed the blood of 
two innocents; antonia and elvira perish by your hand. that antonia 
whom you violated, wa your sister! that elvira whom you murdered, gave 
you birth! tremble, abandon hypocrite! inhuman parricide! incestu 
ravisher! trembl at the extent of your offences! and you it wa who 
thought yourself proof against temptation, absolv from human 
frailties, and free from error and vice! Is pride then a virtue? Is 
inhuman no fault? know, vain man! that I long have mark you for 
my prey: I watch the movement of your heart; I saw that you were 
virtuou from vanity, not principle, and I seiz the fit moment of 
seduction. I observ your blind idolatri of the madona' picture. I 
bad a subordin but crafti spirit assum a similar form, and you 
eagerli yield to the blandish of matilda. your pride wa 
gratifi by her flattery; your lust onli need an opportun to 
break forth; you ran into the snare blindly, and scrupl not to commit 
a crime which you blame in anoth with unfeel severity. It wa I 
who threw matilda in your way; It wa I who gave you entranc to 
antonia' chamber; It wa I who caus the dagger to be given you which 
pierc your sister' bosom; and it wa I who warn elvira in dream 
of your design upon her daughter, and thus, by prevent your 
profit by her sleep, compel you to add rape as well as incest to 
the catalogu of your crimes. hear, hear, ambrosio! had you resist 
me one minut longer, you had save your bodi and soul. the guard whom 
you heard at your prison door came to signifi your pardon. but I had 
alreadi triumphed: My plot had alreadi succeeded. scarc could I 
propos crime so quick as you perform them. you are mine, and 
heaven itself cannot rescu you from my power. hope not that your 
penit will make void our contract. here is your bond sign with 
your blood; you have given up your claim to mercy, and noth can 
restor to you the right which you have foolishli resigned. believ 
you that your secret thought escap me? no, no, I read them all! 
you trust that you should still have time for repentance. I saw your 
artifice, knew it falsity, and rejoic in deceiv the deceiver! 
you are mine beyond reprieve: I burn to possess my right, and aliv 
you quit not these mountains.' 

dure the daemon' speech, ambrosio had been stupefi by terror and 
surprize. thi last declar rouz him. 

'not quit these mountain alive?' He exclaimed: 'perfidious, what mean 
you? have you forgotten our contract?' 

the fiend answer by a malici laugh: 

'our contract? have I not perform my part? what more did I promis 
than to save you from your prison? have I not done so? are you not 
safe from the inquisition--saf from all but from me? fool that you 
were to confid yourself to a devil! whi did you not stipul for 
life, and power, and pleasure? then all would have been granted: now, 
your reflect come too late. miscreant, prepar for death; you have 
not mani hour to live!' 

On hear thi sentence, dread were the feel of the devot 
wretch! He sank upon hi knees, and rais hi hand toward heaven. 
the fiend read hi intent and prevent it-- 

'what?' He cried, dart at him a look of fury: 'dare you still 
implor the eternal' mercy? would you feign penitence, and again act 
an hypocrite' part? villain, resign your hope of pardon. thu I 
secur my prey!' 

As He said this, dart hi talon into the monk' shaven crown, He 
sprang with him from the rock. the cave and mountain rang with 
ambrosio' shrieks. the daemon continu to soar aloft, till reach a 
dread height, He releas the sufferer. headlong fell the monk 
through the airi waste; the sharp point of a rock receiv him; and He 
roll from precipic to precipice, till bruis and mangl He rest 
on the river' banks. life still exist in hi miser frame: He 
attempt in vain to rais himself; hi broken and disloc limb 
refus to perform their office, nor wa He abl to quit the spot where 
He had first fallen. the sun now rose abov the horizon; it scorch 
beam dart full upon the head of the expir sinner. myriad of 
insect were call forth by the warmth; they drank the blood which 
trickl from ambrosio' wounds; He had no power to drive them from 
him, and they fasten upon hi sores, dart their sting into hi 
body, cover him with their multitudes, and inflict on him tortur 
the most exquisit and insupportable. the eagl of the rock tore hi 
flesh piecemeal, and dug out hi eyebal with their crook beaks. A 
burn thirst torment him; He heard the river' murmur as it roll 
besid him, but strove in vain to drag himself toward the sound. 
blind, maimed, helpless, and despairing, vent hi rage in blasphemi 
and curses, execr hi existence, yet dread the arriv of death 
destin to yield him up to greater torments, six miser day did 
the villain languish. On the seventh a violent storm arose: the wind 
in furi rent up rock and forests: the sky wa now black with clouds, 
now sheet with fire: the rain fell in torrents; It swell the 
stream; the wave overflow their banks; they reach the spot where 
ambrosio lay, and when they abat carri with them into the river the 
cors of the despair monk. 










end of the project gutenberg ebook of the monk; a romance, by M. G. lewi 

*** end OF thi project gutenberg ebook the monk; A romanc *** 

***** thi file should be name 601.txt or 601.zip ***** 
thi and all associ file of variou format will be found in: 
http://www.gutenberg.org/6/0/601/ 

produc by charl keller. html version by Al haines. 

updat edit will replac the previou one--th old edit 
will be renamed. 

creat the work from public domain print edit mean that no 
one own a unit state copyright in these works, so the foundat 
(and you!) can copi and distribut it in the unit state without 
permiss and without pay copyright royalties. special rules, 
set forth in the gener term of use part of thi license, appli to 
copi and distribut project gutenberg-tm electron work to 
protect the project gutenberg-tm concept and trademark. project 
gutenberg is a regist trademark, and may not be use if you 
charg for the ebooks, unless you receiv specif permission. If you 
do not charg anyth for copi of thi ebook, compli with the 
rule is veri easy. you may use thi ebook for nearli ani purpos 
such as creation of deriv works, reports, perform and 
research. they may be modifi and print and given away--y may do 
practic anyth with public domain ebooks. redistribut is 
subject to the trademark license, especi commerci 
redistribution. 



*** start: full licens *** 

the full project gutenberg licens 
pleas read thi befor you distribut OR use thi work 

To protect the project gutenberg-tm mission of promot the free 
distribut of electron works, by use or distribut thi work 
(or ani other work associ in ani way with the phrase "project 
gutenberg"), you agre to compli with all the term of the full project 
gutenberg-tm licens (avail with thi file or onlin at 
http://gutenberg.net/license). 


section 1. gener term of use and redistribut project gutenberg-tm 
electron work 

1.a. By read or use ani part of thi project gutenberg-tm 
electron work, you indic that you have read, understand, agre to 
and accept all the term of thi licens and intellectu properti 
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agre to abid by all 
the term of thi agreement, you must ceas use and return or destroy 
all copi of project gutenberg-tm electron work in your possession. 
If you paid a fee for obtain a copi of or access to a project 
gutenberg-tm electron work and you do not agre to be bound by the 
term of thi agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or 
entiti to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.e.8. 

1.b. "project gutenberg" is a regist trademark. It may onli be 
use on or associ in ani way with an electron work by peopl who 
agre to be bound by the term of thi agreement. there are a few 
thing that you can do with most project gutenberg-tm electron work 
even without compli with the full term of thi agreement. see 
paragraph 1.c below. there are a lot of thing you can do with project 
gutenberg-tm electron work if you follow the term of thi agreement 
and help preserv free futur access to project gutenberg-tm electron 
works. see paragraph 1.e below. 

1.c. the project gutenberg literari archiv foundat ("the foundation" 
or pglaf), own a compil copyright in the collect of project 
gutenberg-tm electron works. nearli all the individu work in the 
collect are in the public domain in the unit states. If an 
individu work is in the public domain in the unit state and you are 
locat in the unit states, we do not claim a right to prevent you from 
copying, distributing, performing, display or creat deriv 
work base on the work as long as all refer to project gutenberg 
are removed. Of course, we hope that you will support the project 
gutenberg-tm mission of promot free access to electron work by 
freeli share project gutenberg-tm work in complianc with the term of 
thi agreement for keep the project gutenberg-tm name associ with 
the work. you can easili compli with the term of thi agreement by 
keep thi work in the same format with it attach full project 
gutenberg-tm licens when you share it without charg with others. 

1.d. the copyright law of the place where you are locat also govern 
what you can do with thi work. copyright law in most countri are in 
a constant state of change. If you are outsid the unit states, check 
the law of your countri in addit to the term of thi agreement 
befor downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distribut or 
creat deriv work base on thi work or ani other project 
gutenberg-tm work. the foundat make no represent concern 
the copyright statu of ani work in ani countri outsid the unit 
states. 

1.e. unless you have remov all refer to project gutenberg: 

1.e.1. the follow sentence, with activ link to, or other immedi 
access to, the full project gutenberg-tm licens must appear promin 
whenev ani copi of a project gutenberg-tm work (ani work on which the 
phrase "project gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "project 
gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed, 
copi or distributed: 

thi ebook is for the use of anyon anywher at no cost and with 
almost no restrict whatsoever. you may copi it, give it away or 
re-us it under the term of the project gutenberg licens includ 
with thi ebook or onlin at www.gutenberg.net 

1.e.2. If an individu project gutenberg-tm electron work is deriv 
from the public domain (doe not contain a notic indic that it is 
post with permiss of the copyright holder), the work can be copi 
and distribut to anyon in the unit state without pay ani fee 
or charges. If you are redistribut or provid access to a work 
with the phrase "project gutenberg" associ with or appear on the 
work, you must compli either with the requir of paragraph 1.e.1 
through 1.e.7 or obtain permiss for the use of the work and the 
project gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraph 1.e.8 or 
1.e.9. 

1.e.3. If an individu project gutenberg-tm electron work is post 
with the permiss of the copyright holder, your use and distribut 
must compli with both paragraph 1.e.1 through 1.e.7 and ani addit 
term impos by the copyright holder. addit term will be link 
to the project gutenberg-tm licens for all work post with the 
permiss of the copyright holder found at the begin of thi work. 

1.e.4. Do not unlink or detach or remov the full project gutenberg-tm 
licens term from thi work, or ani file contain a part of thi 
work or ani other work associ with project gutenberg-tm. 

1.e.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribut or redistribut thi 
electron work, or ani part of thi electron work, without 
promin display the sentenc set forth in paragraph 1.e.1 with 
activ link or immedi access to the full term of the project 
gutenberg-tm license. 

1.e.6. you may convert to and distribut thi work in ani binary, 
compressed, mark up, nonproprietari or proprietari form, includ ani 
word process or hypertext form. however, if you provid access to or 
distribut copi of a project gutenberg-tm work in a format other than 
"plain vanilla ascii" or other format use in the offici version 
post on the offici project gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net), 
you must, at no addit cost, fee or expens to the user, provid a 
copy, a mean of export a copy, or a mean of obtain a copi upon 
request, of the work in it origin "plain vanilla ascii" or other 
form. ani altern format must includ the full project gutenberg-tm 
licens as specifi in paragraph 1.e.1. 

1.e.7. Do not charg a fee for access to, viewing, displaying, 
performing, copi or distribut ani project gutenberg-tm work 
unless you compli with paragraph 1.e.8 or 1.e.9. 

1.e.8. you may charg a reason fee for copi of or provid 
access to or distribut project gutenberg-tm electron work provid 
that 

- you pay a royalti fee of 20% of the gross profit you deriv from 
the use of project gutenberg-tm work calcul use the method 
you alreadi use to calcul your applic taxes. the fee is 
owe to the owner of the project gutenberg-tm trademark, but he 
ha agre to donat royalti under thi paragraph to the 
project gutenberg literari archiv foundation. royalti payment 
must be paid within 60 day follow each date on which you 
prepar (or are legal requir to prepare) your period tax 
returns. royalti payment should be clearli mark as such and 
sent to the project gutenberg literari archiv foundat at the 
address specifi in section 4, "inform about donat to 
the project gutenberg literari archiv foundation." 

- you provid a full refund of ani money paid by a user who notifi 
you in write (or by e-mail) within 30 day of receipt that s/he 
doe not agre to the term of the full project gutenberg-tm 
license. you must requir such a user to return or 
destroy all copi of the work possess in a physic medium 
and discontinu all use of and all access to other copi of 
project gutenberg-tm works. 

- you provide, in accord with paragraph 1.f.3, a full refund of ani 
money paid for a work or a replac copy, if a defect in the 
electron work is discov and report to you within 90 day 
of receipt of the work. 

- you compli with all other term of thi agreement for free 
distribut of project gutenberg-tm works. 

1.e.9. If you wish to charg a fee or distribut a project gutenberg-tm 
electron work or group of work on differ term than are set 
forth in thi agreement, you must obtain permiss in write from 
both the project gutenberg literari archiv foundat and michael 
hart, the owner of the project gutenberg-tm trademark. contact the 
foundat as set forth in section 3 below. 

1.f. 

1.f.1. project gutenberg volunt and employe expend consider 
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcrib and proofread 
public domain work in creat the project gutenberg-tm 
collection. despit these efforts, project gutenberg-tm electron 
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain 
"defects," such as, but not limit to, incomplete, inaccur or 
corrupt data, transcript errors, a copyright or other intellectu 
properti infringement, a defect or damag disk or other medium, a 
comput virus, or comput code that damag or cannot be read by 
your equipment. 

1.f.2. limit warranty, disclaim OF damag - except for the "right 
of replac or refund" describ in paragraph 1.f.3, the project 
gutenberg literari archiv foundation, the owner of the project 
gutenberg-tm trademark, and ani other parti distribut a project 
gutenberg-tm electron work under thi agreement, disclaim all 
liabil to you for damages, cost and expenses, includ legal 
fees. you agre that you have NO remedi for negligence, strict 
liability, breach OF warranti OR breach OF contract except those 
provid IN paragraph f3. you agre that the foundation, the 
trademark owner, and ani distributor under thi agreement will not BE 
liabl TO you for actual, direct, indirect, consequential, punit OR 
incident damag even IF you give notic OF the possibl OF such 
damage. 

1.f.3. limit right OF replac OR refund - If you discov a 
defect in thi electron work within 90 day of receiv it, you can 
receiv a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by send a 
written explan to the person you receiv the work from. If you 
receiv the work on a physic medium, you must return the medium with 
your written explanation. the person or entiti that provid you with 
the defect work may elect to provid a replac copi in lieu of a 
refund. If you receiv the work electronically, the person or entiti 
provid it to you may choos to give you a second opportun to 
receiv the work electron in lieu of a refund. If the second copi 
is also defective, you may demand a refund in write without further 
opportun to fix the problem. 

1.f.4. except for the limit right of replac or refund set forth 
in paragraph 1.f.3, thi work is provid to you 'as-is' with NO other 
warranti OF ani kind, express OR implied, includ but not limit TO 
warranti OF merchant OR fit for ani purpose. 

1.f.5. some state do not allow disclaim of certain impli 
warranti or the exclus or limit of certain type of damages. 
If ani disclaim or limit set forth in thi agreement violat the 
law of the state applic to thi agreement, the agreement shall be 
interpret to make the maximum disclaim or limit permit by 
the applic state law. the invalid or unenforc of ani 
provis of thi agreement shall not void the remain provisions. 

1.f.6. indemn - you agre to indemnifi and hold the foundation, the 
trademark owner, ani agent or employe of the foundation, anyon 
provid copi of project gutenberg-tm electron work in accord 
with thi agreement, and ani volunt associ with the production, 
promot and distribut of project gutenberg-tm electron works, 
harmless from all liability, cost and expenses, includ legal fees, 
that aris directli or indirectli from ani of the follow which you do 
or caus to occur: (a) distribut of thi or ani project gutenberg-tm 
work, (b) alteration, modification, or addit or delet to ani 
project gutenberg-tm work, and (c) ani defect you cause. 


section 2. inform about the mission of project gutenberg-tm 

project gutenberg-tm is synonym with the free distribut of 
electron work in format readabl by the widest varieti of comput 
includ obsolete, old, middle-ag and new computers. It exist 
becaus of the effort of hundr of volunt and donat from 
peopl in all walk of life. 

volunt and financi support to provid volunt with the 
assist they need, is critic to reach project gutenberg-tm' 
goal and ensur that the project gutenberg-tm collect will 
remain freeli avail for gener to come. In 2001, the project 
gutenberg literari archiv foundat wa creat to provid a secur 
and perman futur for project gutenberg-tm and futur generations. 
To learn more about the project gutenberg literari archiv foundat 
and how your effort and donat can help, see section 3 and 4 
and the foundat web page at http://www.pglaf.org. 


section 3. inform about the project gutenberg literari archiv 
foundat 

the project gutenberg literari archiv foundat is a non profit 
501(c)(3) educ corpor organ under the law of the 
state of mississippi and grant tax exempt statu by the intern 
revenu service. the foundation' ein or feder tax identif 
number is 64-6221541. it 501(c)(3) letter is post at 
http://pglaf.org/fundraising. contribut to the project gutenberg 
literari archiv foundat are tax deduct to the full extent 
permit by u.s. feder law and your state' laws. 

the foundation' princip offic is locat at 4557 melan dr. S. 
fairbanks, ak, 99712., but it volunt and employe are scatter 
throughout numer locations. it busi offic is locat at 
809 north 1500 west, salt lake city, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email 
business@pglaf.org. email contact link and up to date contact 
inform can be found at the foundation' web site and offici 
page at http://pglaf.org 

for addit contact information: 
dr. gregori B. newbi 
chief execut and director 
gbnewby@pglaf.org 


section 4. inform about donat to the project gutenberg 
literari archiv foundat 

project gutenberg-tm depend upon and cannot surviv without wide 
spread public support and donat to carri out it mission of 
increas the number of public domain and licens work that can be 
freeli distribut in machin readabl form access by the widest 
array of equip includ outdat equipment. mani small donat 
($1 to $5,000) are particularli import to maintain tax exempt 
statu with the irs. 

the foundat is commit to compli with the law regul 
chariti and charit donat in all 50 state of the unit 
states. complianc requir are not uniform and it take a 
consider effort, much paperwork and mani fee to meet and keep up 
with these requirements. We do not solicit donat in locat 
where we have not receiv written confirm of compliance. To 
send donat or determin the statu of complianc for ani 
particular state visit http://pglaf.org 

while we cannot and do not solicit contribut from state where we 
have not met the solicit requirements, we know of no prohibit 
against accept unsolicit donat from donor in such state who 
approach us with offer to donate. 

intern donat are grate accepted, but we cannot make 
ani statement concern tax treatment of donat receiv from 
outsid the unit states. u.s. law alon swamp our small staff. 

pleas check the project gutenberg web page for current donat 
method and addresses. donat are accept in a number of other 
way includ includ checks, onlin payment and credit card 
donations. To donate, pleas visit: http://pglaf.org/don 


section 5. gener inform about project gutenberg-tm electron 
works. 

professor michael S. hart is the origin of the project gutenberg-tm 
concept of a librari of electron work that could be freeli share 
with anyone. for thirti years, he produc and distribut project 
gutenberg-tm ebook with onli a loos network of volunt support. 


project gutenberg-tm ebook are often creat from sever print 
editions, all of which are confirm as public domain in the u.s. 
unless a copyright notic is included. thus, we do not necessarili 
keep ebook in complianc with ani particular paper edition. 


most peopl start at our web site which ha the main PG search facility: 

http://www.gutenberg.net 

thi web site includ inform about project gutenberg-tm, 
includ how to make donat to the project gutenberg literari 
archiv foundation, how to help produc our new ebooks, and how to 
subscrib to our email newslett to hear about new ebooks. 
