project gutenberg' wieland; or the transformation, by charl brockden brown 

thi ebook is for the use of anyon anywher at no cost and with 
almost no restrict whatsoever. you may copi it, give it away or 
re-us it under the term of the project gutenberg licens includ 
with thi ebook or onlin at www.gutenberg.org 


title: wieland; or the transform 
An american tale 

author: charl brockden brown 

post date: august 7, 2008 [ebook #792] 
releas date: january, 1997 

language: english 


*** start OF thi project gutenberg ebook wieland; OR the transform *** 










wieland; OR the transform 

An american tale 

by charl brockden brown 




from virtue' bliss path away 
the double-tongu are sure to stray; 
good is a forth-right journey still, 
and mazi path but lead to ill. 


advertisement. 

the follow work is deliv to the world as the first of a seri 
of performances, which the favor recept of thi will induc the 
writer to publish. hi purpos is neither selfish nor temporary, 
but aim at the illustr of some import branch of the moral 
constitut of man. whether thi tale will be class with the ordinari 
or frivol sourc of amusement, or be rank with the few product 
whose use secur to them a last reputation, the reader must 
be permit to decide. 

the incid relat are extraordinari and rare. some of them, perhaps, 
approach as nearli to the natur of miracl as can be done by that 
which is not truli miraculous. It is hope that intellig reader will 
not disapprov of the manner in which appear are solved, but that 
the solut will be found to correspond with the known principl of 
human nature. the power which the princip person is said to possess 
can scarc be deni to be real. It must be acknowledg to be 
extrem rare; but no fact, equal uncommon, is support by the same 
strength of histor evidence. 

some reader may think the conduct of the younger wieland impossible. In 
support of it possibl the writer must appeal to physician and to 
men convers with the latent spring and occasion pervers of 
the human mind. It will not be object that the instanc of similar 
delus are rare, becaus it is the busi of moral painter to 
exhibit their subject in it most instruct and memor forms. If 
histori furnish one parallel fact, it is a suffici vindic of 
the writer; but most reader will probabl recollect an authent case, 
remark similar to that of wieland. 

It will be necessari to add, that thi narr is addressed, in an 
epistolari form, by the ladi whose stori it contains, to a small 
number of friends, whose curiosity, with regard to it, had been greatli 
awakened. It may likewis be mentioned, that these event took 
place between the conclus of the french and the begin of the 
revolutionari war. the memoir of carwin, allud to at the conclus 
of the work, will be publish or suppress accord to the recept 
which is given to the present attempt. 

C. B. B. septemb 3, 1798. 



chapter I 


I feel littl reluct in compli with your request. you know not 
fulli the caus of my sorrows. you are a stranger to the depth of my 
distresses. henc your effort at consol must necessarili fail. yet 
the tale that I am go to tell is not intend as a claim upon your 
sympathy. In the midst of my despair, I do not disdain to contribut 
what littl I can to the benefit of mankind. I acknowledg your right to 
be inform of the event that have late happen in my family. make 
what use of the tale you shall think proper. If it be commun 
to the world, it will inculc the duti of avoid deceit. It will 
exemplifi the forc of earli impressions, and show the immeasur 
evil that flow from an erron or imperfect discipline. 

My state is not destitut of tranquillity. the sentiment that dictat 
my feel is not hope. futur ha no power over my thoughts. To all 
that is to come I am perfectli indifferent. with regard to myself, I 
have noth more to fear. fate ha done it worst. henceforth, I am 
callou to misfortune. 

I address no supplic to the deity. the power that govern the 
cours of human affair ha chosen hi path. the decre that ascertain 
the condit of my life, admit of no recal. No doubt it squar with 
the maxim of etern equity. that is neither to be question nor 
deni by me. It suffic that the past is exempt from mutation. the 
storm that tore up our happiness, and chang into dreari and desert 
the bloom scene of our existence, is lull into grim repose; but 
not until the victim wa transfix and mangled; till everi obstacl wa 
dissip by it rage; till everi remnant of good wa wrest from our 
grasp and exterminated. 

how will your wonder, and that of your companions, be excit by my 
story! everi sentiment will yield to your amazement. If my testimoni 
were without corroborations, you would reject it as incredible. the 
experi of no human be can furnish a parallel: that I, beyond the 
rest of mankind, should be reserv for a destini without alleviation, 
and without example! listen to my narrative, and then say what it is 
that ha made me deserv to be place on thi dread eminence, if, 
indeed, everi faculti be not suspend in wonder that I am still alive, 
and am abl to relat it. My father' ancestri wa nobl on the patern 
side; but hi mother wa the daughter of a merchant. My grand-fath wa 
a younger brother, and a nativ of saxony. He wa placed, when he had 
reach the suitabl age, at a german college. dure the vacations, 
he employ himself in travers the neighbour territory. On one 
occas it wa hi fortun to visit hamburg. He form an acquaint 
with leonard weise, a merchant of that city, and wa a frequent guest 
at hi house. the merchant had an onli daughter, for whom hi guest 
speedili contract an affection; and, in spite of parent menac and 
prohibitions, he, in due season, becam her husband. 

By thi act he mortal offend hi relations. thenceforward he wa 
entir disown and reject by them. they refus to contribut ani 
thing to hi support. all intercours ceased, and he receiv from them 
mere that treatment to which an absolut stranger, or detest enemy, 
would be entitled. 

He found an asylum in the hous of hi new father, whose temper wa 
kind, and whose pride wa flatter by thi alliance. the nobil of 
hi birth wa put in the balanc against hi poverty. weis conceiv 
himself, on the whole, to have act with the highest discretion, in 
thu dispos of hi child. My grand-fath found it incumb on him 
to search out some mode of independ subsistence. hi youth had 
been eagerli devot to literatur and music. these had hitherto been 
cultiv mere as sourc of amusement. they were now convert into 
the mean of gain. At thi period there were few work of tast in 
the saxon dialect. My ancestor may be consid as the founder of the 
german theatre. the modern poet of the same name is sprung from the same 
family, and, perhaps, surpass but little, in the fruit of hi 
invention, or the sound of hi taste, the elder wieland. hi life 
wa spent in the composit of sonata and dramat pieces. they were 
not unpopular, but mere afford him a scanti subsistence. He die 
in the bloom of hi life, and wa quickli follow to the grave by hi 
wife. their onli child wa taken under the protect of the merchant. 
At an earli age he wa apprent to a london trader, and pass seven 
year of mercantil servitude. 

My father wa not fortun in the charact of him under whose care 
he wa now placed. He wa treat with rigor, and full employ wa 
provid for everi hour of hi time. hi duti were labori and 
mechanical. He had been educ with a view to thi profession, and, 
therefore, wa not torment with unsatisfi desires. He did not hold 
hi present occup in abhorrence, becaus they withheld him from 
path more floweri and more smooth, but he found in unintermit 
labour, and in the stern of hi master, suffici occas for 
discontent. No opportun of recreat were allow him. He spent 
all hi time pent up in a gloomi apartment, or travers narrow and 
crowd streets. hi food wa coarse, and hi lodg humble. hi heart 
gradual contract a habit of moros and gloomi reflection. He could 
not accur defin what wa want to hi happiness. He wa not 
tortur by comparison drawn between hi own situat and that 
of others. hi state wa such as suit hi age and hi view as to 
fortune. He did not imagin himself treat with extraordinari or 
unjustifi rigor. In thi respect he suppos the condit of 
others, bound like himself to mercantil service, to resembl hi own; 
yet everi engag wa irksome, and everi hour tediou in it lapse. 

In thi state of mind he chanc to light upon a book written by one of 
the teacher of the albigenses, or french protestants. He entertain no 
relish for books, and wa wholli unconsci of ani power they possess 
to delight or instruct. thi volum had lain for year in a corner of 
hi garret, half buri in dust and rubbish. He had mark it as it lay; 
had thrown it, as hi occas required, from one spot to another; but 
had felt no inclin to examin it contents, or even to inquir what 
wa the subject of which it treated. 

one sunday afternoon, be induc to retir for a few minut to hi 
garret, hi eye wa attract by a page of thi book, which, by some 
accident, had been open and place full in hi view. He wa seat on 
the edg of hi bed, and wa employ in repair a rent in some part 
of hi clothes. hi eye were not confin to hi work, but occasion 
wandering, light at length upon the page. the word "seek and ye 
shall find," were those that first offer themselv to hi notice. 
hi curios wa rous by these so far as to prompt him to proceed. 
As soon as he finish hi work, he took up the book and turn to 
the first page. the further he read, the more induc he found to 
continue, and he regret the declin of the light which oblig him 
for the present to close it. 

the book contain an exposit of the doctrin of the sect of 
camissards, and an histor account of it origin. hi mind wa in a 
state peculiarli fit for the recept of devot sentiments. the 
crave which had haunt him wa now suppli with an object. hi mind 
wa at no loss for a theme of meditation. On day of business, he rose 
at the dawn, and retir to hi chamber not till late at night. He now 
suppli himself with candles, and employ hi nocturn and sunday 
hour in studi thi book. it, of course, abound with allus to 
the bible. all it conclus were deduc from the sacr text. thi 
wa the fountain, beyond which it wa unnecessari to trace the stream of 
religi truth; but it wa hi duti to trace it thu far. 

A bibl wa easili procured, and he ardent enter on the studi of it. 
hi understand had receiv a particular direction. all hi reveri 
were fashion in the same mould. hi progress toward the format of 
hi creed wa rapid. everi fact and sentiment in thi book were view 
through a medium which the write of the camissard apostl had 
suggested. hi construct of the text were hasty, and form on a 
narrow scale. everi thing wa view in a disconnect position. one 
action and one precept were not employ to illustr and restrict 
the mean of another. henc aros a thousand scrupl to which he had 
hitherto been a stranger. He wa altern agit by fear and by 
ecstacy. He imagin himself beset by the snare of a spiritu foe, and 
that hi secur lay in ceaseless watch and prayer. 

hi morals, which had never been loose, were now model by a stricter 
standard. the empir of religi duti extend itself to hi looks, 
gestures, and phrases. all leviti of speech, and neglig of 
behaviour, were proscribed. hi air wa mourn and contemplative. 
He labour to keep aliv a sentiment of fear, and a belief of 
the awe-cr presenc of the deity. idea foreign to thi were 
sedul excluded. To suffer their intrus wa a crime against the 
divin majesti inexpi but by day and week of the keenest agonies. 

No materi variat had occur in the laps of two years. everi day 
confirm him in hi present mode of think and acting. It wa to 
be expect that the tide of hi emot would sometim recede, that 
interv of despond and doubt would occur; but these gradual were 
more rare, and of shorter duration; and he, at last, arriv at a state 
consider uniform in thi respect. 

hi apprenticeship wa now almost expired. On hi arriv of age he 
becam entitled, by the will of my grand-father, to a small sum. thi 
sum would hardli suffic to set him afloat as a trader in hi present 
situation, and he had noth to expect from the generos of hi 
master. resid in england had, besides, becom almost impossible, 
on account of hi religi tenets. In addit to these motiv for 
seek a new habitation, there wa anoth of the most imperi and 
irresist necessity. He had imbib an opinion that it wa hi duti 
to dissemin the truth of the gospel among the unbeliev nations. 
He wa terrifi at first by the peril and hardship to which the life 
of a missionari is exposed. thi cowardic made him dilig in the 
invent of object and excuses; but he found it imposs wholli 
to shake off the belief that such wa the injunct of hi duty. 
the belief, after everi new conflict with hi passions, acquir new 
strength; and, at length, he form a resolut of compli with what 
he deem the will of heaven. 

the north-american indian natur present themselv as the first 
object for thi speci of benevolence. As soon as hi servitud 
expired, he convert hi littl fortun into money, and embark for 
philadelphia. here hi fear were revived, and a nearer survey of savag 
manner onc more shook hi resolution. for a while he relinquish hi 
purpose, and purchas a farm on schuylkill, within a few mile of the 
city, set himself down to the cultiv of it. the cheap of land, 
and the servic of african slaves, which were then in gener use, 
gave him who wa poor in europ all the advantag of wealth. He pass 
fourteen year in a thrifti and labori manner. In thi time new 
objects, new employments, and new associ appear to have nearli 
obliter the devout impress of hi youth. He now becam 
acquaint with a woman of a meek and quiet disposition, and of slender 
acquir like himself. He proffer hi hand and wa accepted. 

hi previou industri had now enabl him to dispens with person 
labour, and direct attent to hi own concerns. He enjoy leisure, 
and wa visit afresh by devot contemplation. the read of the 
scriptures, and other religi books, becam onc more hi favorit 
employment. hi ancient belief rel to the convers of the savag 
tribes, wa reviv with uncommon energy. To the former obstacl were 
now ad the plead of parent and conjug love. the struggl 
wa long and vehement; but hi sens of duti would not be stifl or 
enfeebled, and final triumph over everi impediment. 

hi effort were attend with no perman success. hi exhort 
had sometim a temporari power, but more frequent were repel with 
insult and derision. In pursuit of thi object he encount the most 
immin perils, and underw incred fatigues, hunger, sickness, 
and solitude. the licenc of savag passion, and the artific of hi 
deprav countrymen, all oppos themselv to hi progress. hi courag 
did not forsak him till there appear no reason ground to hope for 
success. He desist not till hi heart wa reliev from the suppos 
oblig to persevere. with hi constitut somewhat decayed, he at 
length return to hi family. An interv of tranquil succeeded. He 
wa frugal, regular, and strict in the perform of domest duties. 
He alli himself with no sect, becaus he perfectli agre with none. 
social worship is that by which they are all distinguished; but thi 
articl found no place in hi creed. He rigidli interpret that precept 
which enjoin us, when we worship, to retir into solitude, and shut 
out everi speci of society. accord to him devot wa not onli a 
silent office, but must be perform alone. An hour at noon, and an hour 
at midnight were thu appropriated. 

At the distanc of three hundr yard from hi house, on the top of a 
rock whose side were steep, rugged, and encumb with dwarf cedar 
and stoni asperities, he built what to a common eye would have seem a 
summer-house. the eastern verg of thi precipic wa sixti feet abov 
the river which flow at it foot. the view befor it consist of a 
transpar current, fluctuat and rippl in a rocki channel, and 
bound by a rise scene of cornfield and orchards. the edific wa 
slight and airy. It wa no more than a circular area, twelv feet in 
diameter, whose floor wa the rock, clear of moss and shrubs, and 
exactli levelled, edg by twelv tuscan columns, and cover by an 
undul dome. My father furnish the dimens and outlines, but 
allow the artist whom he employ to complet the structur on hi own 
plan. It wa without seat, table, or ornament of ani kind. 

thi wa the templ of hi deity. twice in twenty-four hour he repair 
hither, unaccompani by ani human being. noth but physic inabl 
to move wa allow to obstruct or postpon thi visit. He did not exact 
from hi famili complianc with hi example. few men, equal sincer 
in their faith, were as spare in their censur and restrictions, 
with respect to the conduct of others, as my father. the charact of 
my mother wa no less devout; but her educ had habitu her to 
a differ mode of worship. the loneli of their dwell prevent 
her from join ani establish congregation; but she wa punctual in 
the offic of prayer, and in the perform of hymn to her saviour, 
after the manner of the discipl of zinzendorf. My father refus 
to interfer in her arrangements. hi own system wa embrac not, 
accur speaking, becaus it wa the best, but becaus it had been 
expressli prescrib to him. other modes, if practis by other persons, 
might be equal acceptable. 

hi deport to other wa full of chariti and mildness. A sad 
perpetu overspread hi features, but wa unmingl with stern or 
discontent. the tone of hi voice, hi gestures, hi step were all in 
tranquil unison. hi conduct wa characteris by a certain forbear 
and humility, which secur the esteem of those to whom hi tenet were 
most obnoxious. they might call him a fanat and a dreamer, but they 
could not deni their vener to hi invinc candour and invari 
integrity. hi own belief of rectitud wa the foundat of hi 
happiness. this, however, wa destin to find an end. 

suddenli the sad that constantli attend him wa deepened. sighs, 
and even tears, sometim escap him. To the expostul of hi wife 
he seldom answer ani thing. when he design to be communicative, he 
hint that hi peac of mind wa flown, in consequ of deviat 
from hi duty. A command had been laid upon him, which he had delay to 
perform. He felt as if a certain period of hesit and reluct 
had been allow him, but that thi period wa passed. He wa no 
longer permit to obey. the duti assign to him wa transferred, in 
consequ of hi disobedience, to another, and all that remain wa 
to endur the penalty. 

He did not describ thi penalty. It appear to be noth more for 
some time than a sens of wrong. thi wa suffici acute, and wa 
aggrav by the belief that hi offenc wa incap of expiation. No 
one could contempl the agoni which he seem to suffer without the 
deepest compassion. time, instead of lighten the burthen, appear to 
add to it. At length he hint to hi wife, that hi end wa near. hi 
imagin did not prefigur the mode or the time of hi decease, but 
wa fraught with an incur persuas that hi death wa at hand. He 
wa likewis haunt by the belief that the kind of death that await 
him wa strang and terrible. hi anticip were thu far vagu and 
indefinite; but they suffic to poison everi moment of hi being, and 
devot him to ceaseless anguish. 



chapter II 


earli in the morn of a sultri day in august, he left mettingen, to go 
to the city. He had seldom pass a day from home sinc hi return from 
the shore of the ohio. some urgent engag at thi time existed, 
which would not admit of further delay. He return in the evening, but 
appear to be greatli oppress with fatigue. hi silenc and deject 
were likewis in a more than ordinari degre conspicuous. My mother' 
brother, whose profess wa that of a surgeon, chanc to spend thi 
night at our house. It wa from him that I have frequent receiv an 
exact account of the mourn catastroph that followed. 

As the even advanced, my father' inquietud increased. He sat with 
hi famili as usual, but took no part in their conversation. He appear 
fulli engross by hi own reflections. occasion hi counten 
exhibit token of alarm; he gaze stedfastli and wildli at the 
ceiling; and the exert of hi companion were scarc suffici 
to interrupt hi reverie. On recov from these fits, he express no 
surprize; but press hi hand to hi head, complained, in a tremul 
and terrifi tone, that hi brain wa scorch to cinders. He would 
then betray mark of insupport anxiety. 

My uncl perceived, by hi pulse, that he wa indisposed, but in no 
alarm degree, and ascrib appear chiefli to the work of hi 
mind. He exhort him to recollect and composure, but in vain. At the 
hour of repos he readili retir to hi chamber. At the persuas of 
my mother he even undress and went to bed. noth could abat hi 
restlessness. He check her tender expostul with some sternness. 
"be silent," said he, "for that which I feel there is but one cure, 
and that will shortli come. you can help me nothing. look to your own 
condition, and pray to god to strengthen you under the calam that 
await you." "what am I to fear?" she answered. "what terribl disast 
is it that you think of?" "peace--a yet I know it not myself, but come 
it will, and shortly." she repeat her inquiri and doubts; but he 
suddenli put an end to the discourse, by a stern command to be silent. 

she had never befor known him in thi mood. hitherto all wa benign in 
hi deportment. her heart wa pierc with sorrow at the contempl 
of thi change. she wa utterli unabl to account for it, or to figur 
to herself the speci of disast that wa menaced. 

contrari to custom, the lamp, instead of be place on the hearth, wa 
left upon the table. over it against the wall there hung a small clock, 
so contriv as to strike a veri hard stroke at the end of everi sixth 
hour. that which wa now approach wa the signal for retir to the 
fane at which he address hi devotions. long habit had occas him 
to be alway awak at thi hour, and the toll wa instantli obeyed. 

now frequent and anxiou glanc were cast at the clock. not a singl 
movement of the index appear to escap hi notice. As the hour verg 
toward twelv hi anxieti visibl augmented. the trepid of my 
mother kept pace with those of her husband; but she wa intimid 
into silence. all that wa left to her wa to watch everi chang of hi 
features, and give vent to her sympathi in tears. 

At length the hour wa spent, and the clock tolled. the sound appear 
to commun a shock to everi part of my father' frame. He rose 
immediately, and threw over himself a loos gown. even thi offic 
wa perform with difficulty, for hi joint trembled, and hi teeth 
chatter with dismay. At thi hour hi duti call him to the rock, and 
my mother natur conclud that it wa thither he intend to repair. 
yet these incid were so uncommon, as to fill her with astonish 
and foreboding. she saw him leav the room, and heard hi step as they 
hastili descend the stairs. she half resolv to rise and pursu him, 
but the wild of the scheme quickli suggest itself. He wa go 
to a place whither no power on earth could induc him to suffer an 
attendant. 

the window of her chamber look toward the rock. the atmospher wa 
clear and calm, but the edific could not be discov at that distanc 
through the dusk. My mother' anxieti would not allow her to remain 
where she was. she rose, and seat herself at the window. she strain 
her sight to get a view of the dome, and of the path that led to it. the 
first paint itself with suffici distinct on her fancy, but 
wa undistinguish by the eye from the rocki mass on which it wa 
erected. the second could be imperfectli seen; but her husband had 
alreadi passed, or had taken a differ direction. 

what wa it that she feared? some disast impend over her husband or 
herself. He had predict evils, but profess himself ignor of what 
natur they were. when were they to come? wa thi night, or thi hour 
to wit the accomplishment? she wa tortur with impatience, and 
uncertainty. all her fear were at present link to hi person, and she 
gaze at the clock, with nearli as much eager as my father had done, 
in expect of the next hour. 

An half hour pass away in thi state of suspence. her eye were fix 
upon the rock; suddenli it wa illuminated. A light proceed from the 
edifice, made everi part of the scene visible. A gleam diffus itself 
over the intermedi space, and instantli a loud report, like the 
explos of a mine, followed. she utter an involuntari shriek, but 
the new sound that greet her ear, quickli conquer her surprise. 
they were pierc shrieks, and utter without intermission. the gleam 
which had diffus themselv far and wide were in a moment withdrawn, 
but the interior of the edific wa fill with rays. 

the first suggest wa that a pistol wa discharged, and that the 
structur wa on fire. she did not allow herself time to medit a 
second thought, but rush into the entri and knock loudli at the door 
of her brother' chamber. My uncl had been previous rous by the 
noise, and instantli flew to the window. He also imagin what he saw 
to be fire. the loud and vehement shriek which succeed the first 
explosion, seem to be an invoc of succour. the incid wa 
inexplicable; but he could not fail to perceiv the proprieti of 
hasten to the spot. He wa unbolt the door, when hi sister' 
voic wa heard on the outsid conjur him to come forth. 

He obey the summon with all the speed in hi power. He stop not 
to question her, but hurri down stair and across the meadow which lay 
between the hous and the rock. the shriek were no longer to be heard; 
but a blaze light wa clearli discern between the column of the 
temple. irregular steps, hewn in the stone, led him to the summit. On 
three sides, thi edific touch the veri verg of the cliff. On the 
fourth side, which might be regard as the front, there wa an area 
of small extent, to which the rude staircas conduct you. My uncl 
speedili gain thi spot. hi strength wa for a moment exhaust 
by hi haste. He paus to rest himself. meanwhil he bent the most 
vigil attent toward the object befor him. 

within the column he beheld what he could no better describe, than 
by say that it resembl a cloud impregn with light. It had 
the bright of flame, but wa without it upward motion. It did not 
occupi the whole area, and rose but a few feet abov the floor. No 
part of the build wa on fire. thi appear wa astonishing. He 
approach the temple. As he went forward the light retired, and, when 
he put hi feet within the apartment, utterli vanished. the sudden 
of thi transit increas the dark that succeed in a tenfold 
degree. fear and wonder render him powerless. An occurr like this, 
in a place assign to devotion, wa adapt to intimid the stoutest 
heart. 

hi wander thought were recal by the groan of one near him. 
hi sight gradual recov it power, and he wa abl to discern my 
father stretch on the floor. At that moment, my mother and servant 
arriv with a lanthorn, and enabl my uncl to examin more close 
thi scene. My father, when he left the house, besid a loos upper 
vest and slippers, wore a shirt and drawers. now he wa naked, hi skin 
throughout the greater part of hi bodi wa scorch and bruised. hi 
right arm exhibit mark as of have been struck by some heavi body. 
hi cloth had been removed, and it wa not immedi perceiv that 
they were reduc to ashes. hi slipper and hi hair were untouched. 

He wa remov to hi chamber, and the requisit attent paid to hi 
wounds, which gradual becam more painful. A mortif speedili 
shew itself in the arm, which had been most hurt. soon after, the 
other wound part exhibit the like appearance. 

immedi subsequ to thi disaster, my father seem nearli in 
a state of insensibility. He wa passiv under everi operation. He 
scarc open hi eyes, and wa with difficulti prevail upon to 
answer the question that were put to him. By hi imperfect account, it 
appeared, that while engag in silent orisons, with thought full 
of confus and anxiety, a faint gleam suddenli shot athwart the 
apartment. hi fanci immedi pictur to itself, a person bear 
a lamp. It seem to come from behind. He wa in the act of turn to 
examin the visitant, when hi right arm receiv a blow from a heavi 
club. At the same instant, a veri bright spark wa seen to light upon 
hi clothes. In a moment, the whole wa reduc to ashes. thi wa the 
sum of the inform which he chose to give. there wa somewhat in 
hi manner that indic an imperfect tale. My uncl wa inclin to 
believ that half the truth had been suppressed. 

meanwhile, the diseas thu wonder generated, betray more 
terribl symptoms. fever and delirium termin in letharg slumber, 
which, in the cours of two hours, gave place to death. yet not till 
insupport exhal and crawl putrefact had driven from hi 
chamber and the hous everi one whom their duti did not detain. 

such wa the end of my father. none sure wa ever more mysterious. 
when we recollect hi gloomi anticip and unconquer anxiety; 
the secur from human malic which hi character, the place, and the 
condit of the times, might be suppos to confer; the puriti and 
cloudless of the atmosphere, which render it imposs that 
lightn wa the cause; what are the conclus that we must form? 

the prelus gleam, the blow upon hi arm, the fatal spark, the 
explos heard so far, the fieri cloud that environ him, without 
detriment to the structure, though compos of combust materials, 
the sudden vanish of thi cloud at my uncle' approach--what is the 
infer to be drawn from these facts? their truth cannot be doubted. 
My uncle' testimoni is peculiarli worthi of credit, becaus no man' 
temper is more sceptical, and hi belief is unalter attach to 
natur causes. 

I wa at thi time a child of six year of age. the impress that 
were then made upon me, can never be effaced. I wa ill qualifi to 
judg respect what wa then passing; but as I advanc in age, and 
becam more fulli acquaint with these facts, they often becam the 
subject of my thoughts. their resembl to recent event reviv them 
with new forc in my memory, and made me more anxiou to explain them. 
wa thi the penalti of disobedience? thi the stroke of a vindict 
and invis hand? Is it a fresh proof that the divin ruler interfer 
in human affairs, medit an end, selects, and commiss hi agents, 
and enforces, by unequivoc sanctions, submiss to hi will? or, wa 
it mere the irregular expans of the fluid that impart warmth to 
our heart and our blood, caus by the fatigu of the preced day, or 
flowing, by establish laws, from the condit of hi thoughts? [*] 


* A case, in it symptom exactli parallel to this, is 
publish in one of the journal of florence. see, likewise, 
similar case report by messrs. meril and muraire, in 
the "journal de medicine," for februari and may, 1783. the 
research of maffei and fontana have thrown some light upon 
thi subject. 



chapter iii 


the shock which thi disastr occurr occas to my mother, wa 
the foundat of a diseas which carri her, in a few months, to the 
grave. My brother and myself were children at thi time, and were now 
reduc to the condit of orphans. the properti which our parent left 
wa by no mean inconsiderable. It wa entrust to faith hands, 
till we should arriv at a suitabl age. meanwhile, our educ wa 
assign to a maiden aunt who resid in the city, and whose tender 
made us in a short time ceas to regret that we had lost a mother. 

the year that succeed were tranquil and happy. our live were 
molest by few of those care that are incid to childhood. By 
accid more than design, the indulg and yield temper of our 
aunt wa mingl with resolut and stedfastness. she seldom deviat 
into either extrem of rigour or lenity. our social pleasur were 
subject to no unreason restraints. We were instruct in most 
branch of use knowledge, and were save from the corrupt and 
tyranni of colleg and boarding-schools. 

our companion were chiefli select from the children of our 
neighbours. between one of these and my brother, there quickli grew the 
most affection intimacy. her name wa catharin pleyel. she wa rich, 
beautiful, and contriv to blend the most bewitch soft with 
the most exuber vivacity. the tie by which my brother and she were 
united, seem to add forc to the love which I bore her, and which 
wa ampli returned. between her and myself there wa everi circumst 
tend to produc and foster friendship. our sex and age were the same. 
We live within sight of each other' abode. our temper were remark 
congenial, and the superintend of our educ not onli prescrib 
to us the same pursuits, but allow us to cultiv them together. 

everi day ad strength to the tripl bond that unit us. We 
gradual withdrew ourselv from the societi of others, and found everi 
moment irksom that wa not devot to each other. My brother' advanc 
in age made no chang in our situation. It wa determin that hi 
profess should be agriculture. hi fortun exempt him from the 
necess of person labour. the task to be perform by him wa 
noth more than superintendance. the skill that wa demand by thi 
wa mere theoretical, and wa furnish by casual inspection, or 
by closet study. the attent that wa paid to thi subject did not 
seclud him for ani long time from us, on whom time had no other effect 
than to augment our impati in the absenc of each other and of 
him. our tasks, our walks, our music, were seldom perform but in each 
other' company. 

It wa easi to see that catharin and my brother were born for each 
other. the passion which they mutual entertain quickli broke those 
bound which extrem youth had set to it; confess were made or 
extorted, and their union wa postpon onli till my brother had 
pass hi minority. the previou laps of two year wa constantli and 
use employed. 

O my brother! but the task I have set myself let me perform with 
steadiness. the felic of that period wa mar by no gloomi 
anticipations. the future, like the present, wa serene. time wa 
suppos to have onli new delight in store. I mean not to dwell on 
previou incid longer than is necessari to illustr or explain 
the great event that have sinc happened. the nuptial day at length 
arrived. My brother took possess of the hous in which he wa born, 
and here the long protract marriag wa solemnized. 

My father' properti wa equal divid between us. A neat dwelling, 
situat on the bank of the river, three quarter of a mile from my 
brother's, wa now occupi by me. these domain were called, from the 
name of the first possessor, mettingen. I can scarc account for my 
refus to take up my abod with him, unless it were from a disposit 
to be an economist of pleasure. self-denial, season exercised, is 
one mean of enhanc our gratifications. I was, beside, desir of 
administ a fund, and regul an household, of my own. the short 
distanc allow us to exchang visit as often as we pleased. the 
walk from one mansion to the other wa no undelight prelud to our 
interviews. I wa sometim their visitant, and they, as frequently, 
were my guests. 

our educ had been model by no religi standard. We were left 
to the guidanc of our own understanding, and the casual impress 
which societi might make upon us. My friend' temper, as well as my own, 
exempt us from much anxieti on thi account. It must not be suppos 
that we were without religion, but with us it wa the product of 
live feelings, excit by reflect on our own happiness, and by the 
grandeur of extern nature. We sought not a basi for our faith, in 
the weigh of proofs, and the dissect of creeds. our devot wa 
a mix and casual sentiment, seldom verbal expressed, or solicit 
sought, or care retained. In the midst of present enjoyment, 
no thought wa bestow on the future. As a consol in calam 
religion is dear. but calam wa yet at a distance, and it onli 
tendenc wa to heighten enjoy which need not thi addit to 
satisfi everi craving. 

My brother' situat wa somewhat different. hi deport wa grave, 
considerate, and thoughtful. I will not say whether he wa indebt to 
sublim view for thi disposition. human life, in hi opinion, wa 
made up of changeabl elements, and the principl of duti were not 
easili unfolded. the future, either as anterior, or subsequ to death, 
wa a scene that requir some prepar and provis to be made for 
it. these posit we could not deny, but what distinguish him wa a 
propens to rumin on these truths. the imag that visit us were 
blithsom and gay, but those with which he wa most familiar were of 
an opposit hue. they did not gener afflict and fear, but they 
diffus over hi behaviour a certain air of forethought and sobriety. 
the princip effect of thi temper wa visibl in hi featur and 
tones. these, in general, bespok a sort of thrill melancholy. I 
scarc ever knew him to laugh. He never accompani the lawless mirth 
of hi companion with more than a smile, but hi conduct wa the same 
as ours. 

He partook of our occup and amus with a zeal not less than 
ours, but of a differ kind. the divers in our temper wa never 
the parent of discord, and wa scarc a topic of regret. the scene 
wa variegated, but not tarnish or disord by it. It hinder the 
element in which we move from stagnating. some agit and concuss 
is requisit to the due exercis of human understanding. In hi studies, 
he pursu an auster and more arduou path. He wa much convers 
with the histori of religi opinions, and took pain to ascertain 
their validity. He deem it indispens to examin the ground of 
hi belief, to settl the relat between motiv and actions, the 
criterion of merit, and the kind and properti of evidence. 

there wa an obviou resembl between him and my father, in their 
concept of the import of certain topics, and in the light in 
which the vicissitud of human life were accustom to be viewed. 
their charact were similar, but the mind of the son wa enrich by 
science, and embellish with literature. 

the templ wa no longer assign to it ancient use. from an italian 
adventurer, who erron imagin that he could find employ 
for hi skill, and sale for hi sculptur in america, my brother had 
purchas a bust of cicero. He profess to have copi thi piec from 
an antiqu dug up with hi own hand in the environ of modena. Of the 
truth of hi assert we were not qualifi to judge; but the marbl 
wa pure and polished, and we were content to admir the performance, 
without wait for the sanction of connoisseurs. We hire the same 
artist to hew a suitabl pedest from a neighbour quarry. thi wa 
place in the temple, and the bust rest upon it. opposit to thi wa 
a harpsichord, shelter by a temporari roof from the weather. thi wa 
the place of resort in the even of summer. here we sung, and talked, 
and read, and occasion banqueted. everi joyou and tender scene most 
dear to my memory, is connect with thi edifice. here the perform 
of our music and poetic ancestor were rehearsed. here my brother' 
children receiv the rudiment of their education; here a thousand 
conversations, pregnant with delight and improvement, took place; and 
here the social affect were accustom to expand, and the tear of 
delici sympathi to be shed. 

My brother wa an indefatig student. the author whom he read were 
numerous, but the chief object of hi vener wa cicero. He wa 
never tire of con and rehears hi productions. To understand 
them wa not sufficient. He wa anxiou to discov the gestur and 
cadenc with which they ought to be delivered. He wa veri scrupul 
in select a true scheme of pronunci for the latin tongue, and in 
adapt it to the word of hi darl writer. hi favorit occup 
consist in embellish hi rhetor with all the proprieti of 
gesticul and utterance. 

not content with this, he wa dilig in settl and restor the 
puriti of the text. for thi end, he collect all the edit and 
commentari that could be procured, and employ month of sever studi 
in explor and compar them. He never betray more satisfact 
than when he made a discoveri of thi kind. 

It wa not till the addit of henri pleyel, my friend' onli brother, 
to our society, that hi passion for roman eloqu wa countenanc 
and foster by a sympathi of tastes. thi young man had been some year 
in europe. We had separ at a veri earli age, and he wa now return 
to spend the remaind of hi day among us. 

our circl wa greatli enliven by the access of a new member. hi 
convers abound with novelty. hi gaieti wa almost boisterous, 
but wa capabl of yield to a grave deport when the occas 
requir it. hi discern wa acute, but he wa prone to view everi 
object mere as suppli materi for mirth. hi concept 
were ardent but ludicrous, and hi memory, aided, as he honestli 
acknowledged, by hi invention, wa an inexhaust fund of 
entertainment. 

hi resid wa at the same distanc below the citi as our wa above, 
but there seldom pass a day without our be favour with a visit. 
My brother and he were endow with the same attach to the latin 
writers; and pleyel wa not behind hi friend in hi knowledg of the 
histori and metaphys of religion. their creeds, however, were in mani 
respect opposite. where one discov onli confirm of hi faith, 
the other could find noth but reason for doubt. moral necessity, 
and calvinist inspiration, were the prop on which my brother thought 
proper to repose. pleyel wa the champion of intellectu liberty, and 
reject all guidanc but that of hi reason. their discuss were 
frequent, but, be manag with candour as well as with skill, they 
were alway listen to by us with avid and benefit. 

pleyel, like hi new friends, wa fond of music and poetry. henceforth 
our concert consist of two violins, an harpsichord, and three voices. 
We were frequent remind how much happi depend upon society. 
thi new friend, though, befor hi arrival, we were sensibl of no 
vacuity, could not now be spared. hi departur would occas a void 
which noth could fill, and which would produc insupport regret. 
even my brother, though hi opinion were hourli assailed, and even the 
divin of cicero contested, wa captiv with hi friend, and laid 
asid some part of hi ancient graviti at pleyel' approach. 



chapter IV 


six year of uninterrupt happi had roll away, sinc my brother' 
marriage. the sound of war had been heard, but it wa at such a distanc 
as to enhanc our enjoy by afford object of comparison. the 
indian were repuls on the one side, and canada wa conquer on the 
other. revolut and battles, howev calamit to those who occupi 
the scene, contribut in some sort to our happiness, by agit our 
mind with curiosity, and furnish caus of patriot exultation. 
four children, three of whom were of an age to compensate, by their 
person and mental progress, the care of which they had been, at a 
more helpless age, the objects, exercis my brother' tenderness. the 
fourth wa a charm babe that promis to display the imag of her 
mother, and enjoy perfect health. To these were ad a sweet girl 
fourteen year old, who wa love by all of us, with an affect more 
than parental. 

her mother' stori wa a mourn one. she had come hither from england 
when thi child wa an infant, alone, without friends, and without 
money. she appear to have embark in a hasti and clandestin 
manner. she pass three year of solitud and anguish under my aunt' 
protection, and die a martyr to woe; the sourc of which she could, by 
no importunities, be prevail upon to unfold. her educ and manner 
bespok her to be of no mean birth. her last moment were render 
serene, by the assur she receiv from my aunt, that her daughter 
should experi the same protect that had been extend to herself. 

On my brother' marriage, it wa agre that she should make a part of 
hi family. I cannot do justic to the attract of thi girl. perhap 
the tender she excit might partli origin in her person 
resembl to her mother, whose charact and misfortun were 
still fresh in our remembrance. she wa habitu pensive, and thi 
circumst tend to remind the spectat of her friendless condition; 
and yet that epithet wa sure misappli in thi case. thi be wa 
cherish by those with whom she now resided, with unspeak fondness. 
everi exert wa made to enlarg and improv her mind. her safeti 
wa the object of a solicitud that almost exceed the bound of 
discretion. our affect inde could scarc transcend her merits. 
she never met my eye, or occur to my reflections, without excit 
a kind of enthusiasm. her softness, her intelligence, her equanimity, 
never shall I see surpassed. I have often shed tear of pleasur at her 
approach, and press her to my bosom in an agoni of fondness. 

while everi day wa ad to the charm of her person, and the store 
of her mind, there occur an event which threaten to depriv us 
of her. An offic of some rank, who had been disabl by a wound 
at quebec, had employ himself, sinc the ratif of peace, in 
travel through the colonies. He remain a consider period at 
philadelphia, but wa at last prepar for hi departure. No one had 
been more frequent honour with hi visit than mrs. baynton, a 
worthi ladi with whom our famili were intimate. He went to her hous 
with a view to perform a farewel visit, and wa on the point of take 
hi leave, when I and my young friend enter the apartment. It is 
imposs to describ the emot of the stranger, when he fix hi 
eye upon my companion. He wa motionless with surprise. He wa unabl 
to conceal hi feelings, but sat silent gaze at the spectacl befor 
him. At length he turn to mrs. baynton, and more by hi look and 
gestur than by words, besought her for an explan of the scene. 
He seiz the hand of the girl, who, in her turn, wa surpris by hi 
behaviour, and draw her forward, said in an eager and faulter 
tone, who is she? whenc doe she come? what is her name? 

the answer that were given onli increas the confus of hi 
thoughts. He wa success told, that she wa the daughter of one 
whose name wa louisa conway, who arriv among us at such a time, who 
sedul conceal her parentage, and the motiv of her flight, whose 
incur grief had final destroy her, and who had left thi child 
under the protect of her friends. have heard the tale, he melt 
into tears, eagerli clasp the young ladi in hi arms, and call 
himself her father. when the tumult excit in hi breast by thi 
unlooked-for meet were somewhat subsided, he gratifi our curios 
by relat the follow incidents. 

"miss conway wa the onli daughter of a banker in london, who discharg 
toward her everi duti of an affection father. He had chanc to fall 
into her company, had been subdu by her attractions, had tender her 
hi hand, and been joy accept both by parent and child. hi wife 
had given him everi proof of the fondest attachment. her father, who 
possess immens wealth, treat him with distinguish respect, 
liber suppli hi wants, and had made one condit of hi consent 
to their union, a resolut to take up their abod with him. 

"they had pass three year of conjug felicity, which had been 
augment by the birth of thi child; when hi profession duti call 
him into germany. It wa not without an arduou struggle, that she wa 
persuad to relinquish the design of accompani him through all the 
toil and peril of war. No part wa ever more distressful. they 
strove to alleviate, by frequent letters, the evil of their lot. those 
of hi wife, breath noth but anxieti for hi safety, and impati 
of hi absence. At length, a new arrang wa made, and he wa 
oblig to repair from westphalia to canada. one advantag attend thi 
change. It afford him an opportun of meet hi family. hi 
wife anticip thi interview, with no less raptur than himself. He 
hurri to london, and the moment he alight from the stage-coach, ran 
with all speed to mr. conway' house. 

"it wa an hous of mourning. hi father wa overwhelm with grief, and 
incap of answer hi inquiries. the servants, sorrow and mute, 
were equal refractory. He explor the house, and call on the name 
of hi wife and daughter, but hi summon wa fruitless. At length, 
thi new disast wa explained. two day befor hi arrival, hi wife' 
chamber wa found empty. No search, howev dilig and anxious, could 
trace her steps. No caus could be assign for her disappearance. the 
mother and child had fled away together. 

"new exert were made, her chamber and cabinet were ransacked, but 
no vestig wa found serv to inform them as to the motiv of her 
flight, whether it had been voluntari or otherwise, and in what corner 
of the kingdom or of the world she wa concealed. who shall describ the 
sorrow and amaz of the husband? hi restlessness, hi vicissitud 
of hope and fear, and hi ultim despair? hi duti call him to 
america. He had been in thi city, and had frequent pass the door of 
the hous in which hi wife, at that moment, resided. her father had not 
remit hi exert to elucid thi pain mystery, but they had 
failed. thi disappoint hasten hi death; in consequ of which, 
louisa' father becam possessor of hi immens property." 

thi tale wa a copiou theme of speculation. A thousand question were 
start and discuss in our domest circle, respect the motiv 
that influenc mrs. stuart to abandon her country. It did not appear 
that her proceed wa involuntary. We recal and review everi 
particular that had fallen under our own observation. By none of these 
were we furnish with a clue. her conduct, after the most rigor 
scrutiny, still remain an impenetr secret. On a nearer view, major 
stuart prove himself a man of most amiabl character. hi attach 
to louisa appear hourli to increase. she wa no stranger to the 
sentiment suitabl to her new character. she could not but readili 
embrac the scheme which wa propos to her, to return with her father 
to england. thi scheme hi regard for her induc him, however, to 
postpone. some time wa necessari to prepar her for so great a chang 
and enabl her to think without agoni of her separ from us. 

I wa not without hope of prevail on her father entir to 
relinquish thi unwelcom design. meanwhile, he pursu hi travel 
through the southern colonies, and hi daughter continu with us. 
louisa and my brother frequent receiv letter from him, which 
indic a mind of no common order. they were fill with amus 
details, and profound reflections. while here, he often partook of 
our even convers at the temple; and sinc hi departure, hi 
correspond had frequent suppli us with topic of discourse. 

one afternoon in may, the bland of the air, and bright of the 
verdure, induc us to assemble, earlier than usual, in the temple. 
We femal were busi at the needle, while my brother and pleyel were 
bandi quotat and syllogisms. the point discuss wa the merit of 
the orat for cluentius, as descriptive, first, of the geniu of the 
speaker; and, secondly, of the manner of the times. pleyel labour to 
extenu both these speci of merit, and task hi ingenuity, to shew 
that the orat had embrac a bad cause; or, at least, a doubt one. 
He urged, that to reli on the exagger of an advocate, or to 
make the pictur of a singl famili a model from which to sketch the 
condit of a nation, wa absurd. the controversi wa suddenli divert 
into a new channel, by a misquotation. pleyel accus hi companion of 
say "polliciatur" when he should have said "polliceretur." noth 
would decid the contest, but an appeal to the volume. My brother wa 
return to the hous for thi purpose, when a servant met him with 
a letter from major stuart. He immedi return to read it in our 
company. 

besid affection compliment to us, and patern benedict 
on louisa, hi letter contain a descript of a waterfal on the 
monongahela. A sudden gust of rain falling, we were compel to remov 
to the house. the storm pass away, and a radiant moon-light succeeded. 
there wa no motion to resum our seat in the temple. We therefor 
remain where we were, and engag in sprightli conversation. the 
letter late receiv natur suggest the topic. A parallel wa 
drawn between the cataract there described, and one which pleyel had 
discov among the alp of glarus. In the state of the former, some 
particular wa mentioned, the truth of which wa questionable. To settl 
the disput which thenc arose, it wa propos to have recours to the 
letter. My brother search for it in hi pocket. It wa no where to be 
found. At length, he rememb to have left it in the temple, and he 
determin to go in search of it. hi wife, pleyel, louisa, and myself, 
remain where we were. 

In a few minut he returned. I wa somewhat interest in the dispute, 
and wa therefor impati for hi return; yet, as I heard him 
ascend the stairs, I could not but remark, that he had execut hi 
intent with remark dispatch. My eye were fix upon him on hi 
entrance. methought he brought with him look consider differ 
from those with which he departed. wonder, and a slight portion of 
anxieti were mingl in them. hi eye seem to be in search of some 
object. they pass quickli from one person to another, till they rest 
on hi wife. she wa seat in a careless attitud on the sofa, in the 
same spot as before. she had the same muslin in her hand, by which her 
attent wa chiefli engrossed. 

the moment he saw her, hi perplex visibl increased. He quietli 
seat himself, and fix hi eye on the floor, appear to be 
absorb in meditation. these singular suspend the inquiri which 
I wa prepar to make respect the letter. In a short time, the 
compani relinquish the subject which engag them, and direct their 
attent to wieland. they thought that he onli wait for a paus in 
the discourse, to produc the letter. the paus wa uninterrupt by 
him. At length pleyel said, "well, I suppos you have found the letter." 

"no," said he, without ani abat of hi gravity, and look 
stedfastli at hi wife, "I did not mount the hill."--"whi 
not?"--"catharine, have you not move from that spot sinc I left the 
room?"--sh wa affect with the solemn of hi manner, and lay 
down her work, answer in a tone of surprise, "no; whi do you ask that 
question?"--hi eye were again fix upon the floor, and he did not 
immedi answer. At length, he said, look round upon us, "i it 
true that catharin did not follow me to the hill? that she did not just 
now enter the room?"--w assur him, with one voice, that she had not 
been absent for a moment, and inquir into the motiv of hi questions. 

"your assurances," said he, "are solemn and unanimous; and yet I must 
deni credit to your assertions, or disbeliev the testimoni of my 
senses, which inform me, when I wa half way up the hill, that 
catharin wa at the bottom." 

We were confound at thi declaration. pleyel ralli him with great 
leviti on hi behaviour. He listen to hi friend with calmness, but 
without ani relax of features. 

"one thing," said he with emphasis, "i true; either I heard my 
wife' voic at the bottom of the hill, or I do not hear your voic at 
present." 

"truly," return pleyel, "it is a sad dilemma to which you have reduc 
yourself. certain it is, if our eye can give us certainti that your 
wife ha been sit in that spot dure everi moment of your absence. 
you have heard her voice, you say, upon the hill. In general, her voice, 
like her temper, is all softness. To be heard across the room, she is 
oblig to exert herself. while you were gone, if I mistak not, she did 
not utter a word. clara and I had all the talk to ourselves. still it 
may be that she held a whisper confer with you on the hill; but 
tell us the particulars." 

"the conference," said he, "wa short; and far from be carri on in 
a whisper. you know with what intent I left the house. half way to 
the rock, the moon wa for a moment hidden from us by a cloud. I never 
knew the air to be more bland and more calm. In thi interv I glanc 
at the temple, and thought I saw a glimmer between the columns. It 
wa so faint, that it would not perhap have been visible, if the moon 
had not been shrowded. I look again, but saw nothing. I never visit 
thi build alone, or at night, without be remind of the fate 
of my father. there wa noth wonder in thi appearance; yet it 
suggest someth more than mere solitud and dark in the same 
place would have done. 

"I kept on my way. the imag that haunt me were solemn; and I 
entertain an imperfect curiosity, but no fear, as to the natur of 
thi object. I had ascend the hill littl more than half way, when a 
voic call me from behind. the accent were clear, distinct, powerful, 
and were uttered, as I fulli believed, by my wife. her voic is 
not commonli so loud. she ha seldom occas to exert it, but, 
nevertheless, I have sometim heard her call with forc and eagerness. 
If my ear wa not deceived, it wa her voic which I heard. 

"stop, go no further. there is danger in your path." the sudden 
and unexpected of thi warning, the tone of alarm with which it wa 
given, and, abov all, the persuas that it wa my wife who spoke, 
were enough to disconcert and make me pause. I turn and listen to 
assur myself that I wa not mistaken. the deepest silenc succeeded. At 
length, I spoke in my turn. who calls? is it you, catharine? I stop 
and present receiv an answer. "yes, it is I; go not up; return 
instantly; you are want at the house." still the voic wa 
catharine's, and still it proceed from the foot of the stairs. 

"what could I do? the warn wa mysterious. To be utter by catharin 
at a place, and on an occas like these, enhanc the mystery. I could 
do noth but obey. accordingly, I trod back my steps, expect that 
she wait for me at the bottom of the hill. when I reach the 
bottom, no one wa visible. the moon-light wa onc more univers and 
brilliant, and yet, as far as I could see no human or move figur 
wa discernible. If she had return to the house, she must have use 
wondrou expedit to have pass alreadi beyond the reach of my eye. 
I exert my voice, but in vain. To my repeat exclamations, no answer 
wa returned. 

"rumin on these incidents, I return hither. there wa no room 
to doubt that I had heard my wife' voice; attend incid were not 
easili explained; but you now assur me that noth extraordinari ha 
happen to urg my return, and that my wife ha not move from her 
seat." 

such wa my brother' narrative. It wa heard by us with differ 
emotions. pleyel did not scrupl to regard the whole as a decept of 
the senses. perhap a voic had been heard; but wieland' imagin 
had misl him in suppos a resembl to that of hi wife, and 
give such a signif to the sounds. accord to hi custom 
he spoke what he thought. sometimes, he made it the theme of grave 
discussion, but more frequent treat it with ridicule. He did not 
believ that sober reason would convinc hi friend, and gaiety, he 
thought, wa use to take away the solemn which, in a mind like 
wieland's, an accid of thi kind wa calcul to produce. 

pleyel propos to go in search of the letter. He went and speedili 
returned, bear it in hi hand. He had found it open on the pedestal; 
and neither voic nor visag had risen to imped hi design. 

catharin wa endow with an uncommon portion of good sense; but her 
mind wa accessible, on thi quarter, to wonder and panic. that her 
voic should be thu inexplic and unwarrant assumed, wa a 
sourc of no small disquietude. she admit the plausibl of the 
argument by which pleyel endeavour to prove, that thi wa no more 
than an auricular deception; but thi convict wa sure to be shaken, 
when she turn her eye upon her husband, and perceiv that pleyel' 
logic wa far from have produc the same effect upon him. 

As to myself, my attent wa engag by thi occurrence. I could not 
fail to perceiv a shadowi resembl between it and my father' death. 
On the latter event, I had frequent reflected; my reflect never 
conduct me to certainty, but the doubt that exist were not of a 
torment kind. I could not deni that the event wa miraculous, and 
yet I wa invinc avers to that method of solution. My wonder wa 
excit by the inscrut of the cause, but my wonder wa unmix 
with sorrow or fear. It begat in me a thrilling, and not unpleas 
solemnity. similar to these were the sensat produc by the recent 
adventure. 

but it effect upon my brother' imagin wa of chief moment. 
all that wa desir was, that it should be regard by him with 
indifference. the worst effect that could flow, wa not inde veri 
formidable. yet I could not bear to think that hi sens should be the 
victim of such delusion. It argu a diseas condit of hi frame, 
which might show itself hereaft in more danger symptoms. the will 
is the tool of the understanding, which must fashion it conclus 
on the notic of sense. If the sens be depraved, it is imposs to 
calcul the evil that may flow from the consequ deduct of the 
understanding. 

I said, thi man is of an ardent and melancholi character. those idea 
which, in others, are casual or obscure, which are entertain in 
moment of abstract and solitude, and easili escap when the scene is 
changed, have obtain an immov hold upon hi mind. the conclus 
which long habit ha render familiar, and, in some sort, palpabl to 
hi intellect, are drawn from the deepest sources. all hi action and 
practic sentiment are link with long and abstrus deduct 
from the system of divin govern and the law of our intellectu 
constitution. He is, in some respects, an enthusiast, but is fortifi 
in hi belief by innumer argument and subtilties. 

hi father' death wa alway regard by him as flow from a direct 
and supernatur decree. It visit hi medit often than it did 
mine. the trace which it left were more gloomi and permanent. thi new 
incid had a visibl effect in augment hi gravity. He wa less 
dispos than formerli to convers and reading. when we sift hi 
thoughts, they were gener found to have a relation, more or less 
direct, with thi incident. It wa difficult to ascertain the exact 
speci of impress which it made upon him. He never introduc the 
subject into conversation, and listen with a silent and half-seri 
smile to the satir effus of pleyel. 

one even we chanc to be alon togeth in the temple. I seiz that 
opportun of investig the state of hi thoughts. after a pause, 
which he seem in no wise inclin to interrupt, I spoke to him--"how 
almost palpabl is thi dark; yet a ray from abov would dispel it." 
"ay," said wieland, with fervor, "not onli the physical, but moral night 
would be dispelled." "but why," said I, "must the divin will address 
it precept to the eye?" He smile significantly. "true," said he, "the 
understand ha other avenues." "you have never," said I, approach 
nearer to the point--"you have never told me in what way you consid 
the late extraordinari incident." "there is no determin way in which 
the subject can be viewed. here is an effect, but the caus is utterli 
inscrutable. To suppos a decept will not do. such is possible, but 
there are twenti other supposit more probable. they must all be set 
asid befor we reach that point." "what are these twenti suppositions?" 
"it is needless to mention them. they are onli less improb than 
pleyel's. time may convert one of them into certainty. till then it is 
useless to expati on them." 



chapter V 


some time had elaps when there happen anoth occurrence, still more 
remarkable. pleyel, on hi return from europe, brought inform of 
consider import to my brother. My ancestor were nobl saxons, 
and possess larg domain in lusatia. the prussian war had destroy 
those person whose right to these estat preclud my brother's. 
pleyel had been exact in hi inquiries, and had discov that, by the 
law of male-primogeniture, my brother' claim were superior to those 
of ani other person now living. noth wa want but hi presenc in 
that country, and a legal applic to establish thi claim. 

pleyel strenuous recommend thi measure. the advantag he thought 
attend it were numerous, and it would argu the utmost folli to 
neglect them. contrari to hi expect he found my brother avers 
to the scheme. slight efforts, he, at first, thought would subdu hi 
reluctance; but he found thi avers by no mean slight. the interest 
that he took in the happi of hi friend and hi sister, and hi own 
partial to the saxon soil, from which he had likewis sprung, and 
where he had spent sever year of hi youth, made him redoubl hi 
exert to win wieland' consent. for thi end he employ everi 
argument that hi invent could suggest. He painted, in attract 
colours, the state of manner and govern in that country, the 
secur of civil rights, and the freedom of religi sentiments. He 
dwelt on the privileg of wealth and rank, and drew from the servil 
condit of one class, an argument in favor of hi scheme, sinc the 
revenu and power annex to a german princip afford so larg a 
field for benevolence. the evil flow from thi power, in malign 
hands, wa proport to the good that would aris from the virtuou 
use of it. hence, wieland, in forbear to claim hi own, withheld all 
the posit felic that would accru to hi vassal from hi success, 
and hazard all the miseri that would redound from a less enlighten 
proprietor. 

It wa easi for my brother to repel these arguments, and to shew that no 
spot on the globe enjoy equal secur and liberti to that which he 
at present inhabited. that if the saxon had noth to fear from 
mis-government, the extern caus of havoc and alarm were numer and 
manifest. the recent devast commit by the prussian furnish 
a specimen of these. the horror of war would alway impend over them, 
till germani were seiz and divid by austrian and prussian tyrants; 
an event which he strongli suspect wa at no great distance. but 
set these consider aside, wa it laudabl to grasp at wealth 
and power even when they were within our reach? were not these the two 
great sourc of depravity? what secur had he, that in thi chang 
of place and condition, he should not degener into a tyrant and 
voluptuary? power and rich were chiefli to be dread on account of 
their tendenc to deprav the possessor. He held them in abhorrence, not 
onli as instrument of miseri to others, but to him on whom they 
were conferred. besides, rich were comparative, and wa he not rich 
already? He live at present in the bosom of secur and luxury. all 
the instrument of pleasure, on which hi reason or imagin set ani 
value, were within hi reach. but these he must forego, for the sake of 
advantag which, whatev were their value, were as yet uncertain. In 
pursuit of an imaginari addit to hi wealth, he must reduc himself 
to poverty, he must exchang present certainti for what wa distant 
and contingent; for who know not that the law is a system of expence, 
delay and uncertainty? If he should embrac thi scheme, it would lay 
him under the necess of make a voyag to europe, and remain for 
a certain period, separ from hi family. He must undergo the peril 
and discomfort of the ocean; he must divest himself of all domest 
pleasures; he must depriv hi wife of her companion, and hi children 
of a father and instructor, and all for what? for the ambigu 
advantag which overgrown wealth and flagiti tyranni have to bestow? 
for a precari possess in a land of turbul and war? advantages, 
which will not certainli be gained, and of which the acquisition, if it 
were sure, is necessarili distant. 

pleyel wa enamour of hi scheme on account of it intrins benefits, 
but, likewise, for other reasons. hi abod at leipsig made that countri 
appear to him like home. He wa connect with thi place by mani social 
ties. while there he had not escap the amor contagion. but the 
lady, though her heart wa impress in hi favor, wa compel to 
bestow her hand upon another. death had remov thi impediment, and 
he wa now invit by the ladi herself to return. thi he wa of cours 
determin to do, but wa anxiou to obtain the compani of wieland; 
he could not bear to think of an etern separ from hi present 
associates. their interest, he thought, would be no less promot by the 
chang than hi own. henc he wa importun and indefatig in hi 
argument and solicitations. 

He knew that he could not hope for mine or hi sister' readi 
concurr in thi scheme. should the subject be mention to us, we 
should leagu our effort against him, and strengthen that reluct 
in wieland which alreadi wa suffici difficult to conquer. he, 
therefore, anxious conceal from us hi purpose. If wieland were 
previous enlist in hi cause, he would find it a less difficult task 
to overcom our aversion. My brother wa silent on thi subject, becaus 
he believ himself in no danger of chang hi opinion, and he wa 
will to save us from ani uneasiness. the mere mention of such 
a scheme, and the possibl of hi embrac it, he knew, would 
consider impair our tranquillity. 

one day, about three week subsequ to the mysteri call, it wa 
agre that the famili should be my guests. seldom had a day been pass 
by us, of more seren enjoyment. pleyel had promis us hi company, but 
we did not see him till the sun had nearli declined. He brought with 
him a counten that betoken disappoint and vexation. He did not 
wait for our inquiries, but immedi explain the cause. two day 
befor a packet had arriv from hamburgh, by which he had flatter 
himself with the expect of receiv letters, but no letter had 
arrived. I never saw him so much subdu by an untoward event. hi 
thought were employ in account for the silenc of hi friends. 
He wa seiz with the torment of jealousy, and suspect noth less 
than the infidel of her to whom he had devot hi heart. the silenc 
must have been concerted. her sickness, or absence, or death, would have 
increas the certainti of some one' have written. No supposit 
could be form but that hi mistress had grown indifferent, or that she 
had transfer her affect to another. the miscarriag of a letter 
wa hardli within the reach of possibility. from leipsig to hamburgh, 
and from hamburgh hither, the convey wa expos to no hazard. 

He had been so long detain in america chiefli in consequ of 
wieland' avers to the scheme which he proposed. He now becam more 
impati than ever to return to europe. when he reflect that, by hi 
delays, he had probabl forfeit the affect of hi mistress, hi 
sensat amount to agony. It onli remained, by hi speedi departure, 
to repair, if possible, or prevent so intoler an evil. alreadi he 
had half resolv to embark in thi veri ship which, he wa informed, 
would set out in a few week on her return. 

meanwhil he determin to make a new attempt to shake the resolut of 
wieland. the even wa somewhat advanc when he invit the latter 
to walk abroad with him. the invit wa accepted, and they left 
catharine, louisa and me, to amus ourselv by the best mean in our 
power. dure thi walk, pleyel renew the subject that wa nearest 
hi heart. He re-urg all hi former arguments, and place them in more 
forcibl lights. 

they promis to return shortly; but hour after hour passed, and they 
made not their appearance. engag in sprightli conversation, it wa not 
till the clock struck twelv that we were remind of the laps of time. 
the absenc of our friend excit some uneasi apprehensions. We were 
express our fears, and compar our conjectur as to what might be 
the cause, when they enter together. there were indic in their 
counten that struck me mute. these were unnot by catharine, who 
wa eager to express her surpriz and curios at the length of their 
walk. As they listen to her, I remark that their surpriz wa not 
less than ours. they gaze in silenc on each other, and on her. I 
watch their looks, but could not understand the emot that were 
written in them. 

these appear divert catharine' inquiri into a new channel. 
what did they mean, she asked, by their silence, and by their thu 
gaze wildli at each other, and at her? pleyel profit by thi hint, 
and assum an air of indifference, frame some trifl excuse, at the 
same time dart signific glanc at wieland, as if to caution him 
against disclos the truth. My brother said nothing, but deliv 
himself up to meditation. I likewis wa silent, but burn with 
impati to fathom thi mystery. present my brother and hi wife, 
and louisa, return home. pleyel proposed, of hi own accord, to be 
my guest for the night. thi circumstance, in addit to those which 
preceded, gave new edg to my wonder. 

As soon as we were left alone, pleyel' counten assum an air of 
seriousness, and even consternation, which I had never befor beheld in 
him. the step with which he measur the floor betoken the troubl of 
hi thoughts. My inquiri were suspend by the hope that he would give 
me the inform that I want without the importun of questions. 
I wait some time, but the confus of hi thought appear in no 
degre to abate. At length I mention the apprehens which their 
unusu absenc had occasioned, and which were increas by their 
behaviour sinc their return, and solicit an explanation. He stop 
when I began to speak, and look stedfastli at me. when I had done, 
he said, to me, in a tone which faulter through the vehem of hi 
emotions, "how were you employ dure our absence?" "in turn over 
the della crusca dictionary, and talk on differ subjects; but 
just befor your entrance, we were torment ourselv with omen and 
prognostick rel to your absence." "catherin wa with you the 
whole time?" "yes." "but are you sure?" "most sure. she wa not absent a 
moment." He stood, for a time, as if to assur himself of my sincerity. 
then, clinch hi hands, and wildli lift them abov hi head, "lo," 
cri he, "I have news to tell you. the baro de stolberg is dead?" 

thi wa her whom he loved. I wa not surpris at the agit which 
he betrayed. "but how wa the inform procured? how wa the truth 
of thi news connect with the circumst of catharine' remain in 
our company?" He wa for some time inattent to my questions. when he 
spoke, it seem mere a continu of the reveri into which he had 
been plunged. 

"and yet it might be a mere deception. but could both of us in that 
case have been deceived? A rare and prodigi coincidence! bare not 
impossible. and yet, if the accent be oracular--theresa is dead. no, 
no," continu he, cover hi face with hi hands, and in a tone half 
broken into sobs, "I cannot believ it. she ha not written, but if 
she were dead, the faith bertrand would have given me the earliest 
information. and yet if he knew hi master, he must have easili guess 
at the effect of such tidings. In piti to me he wa silent." 

"clara, forgiv me; to you, thi behaviour is mysterious. I will explain 
as well as I am able. but say not a word to catharine. her strength of 
mind is inferior to your's. she will, besides, have more reason to be 
startled. she is wieland' angel." 

pleyel proceed to inform me, for the first time, of the scheme which 
he had pressed, with so much earnestness, on my brother. He enumer 
the object which had been made, and the industri with which he 
had endeavour to confut them. He mention the effect upon hi 
resolut produc by the failur of a letter. "dure our late walk," 
continu he, "I introduc the subject that wa nearest my heart. 
I re-urg all my former arguments, and place them in more forcibl 
lights. wieland wa still refractory. He expati on the peril of 
wealth and power, on the sacred of conjug and parent duties, and 
the happi of mediocrity. 

"no wonder that the time passed, unperceived, away. our whole soul were 
engag in thi cause. sever time we came to the foot of the rock; 
as soon as we perceiv it, we chang our course, but never fail to 
termin our circuit and deviou rambl at thi spot. At length your 
brother observed, 'we seem to be led hither by a kind of fatality. sinc 
we are so near, let us ascend and rest ourselv a while. If you are not 
weari of thi argument we will resum it there.' 

"I tacitli consented. We mount the stairs, and draw the sofa in 
front of the river, we seat ourselv upon it. I took up the thread of 
our discours where we had drop it. I ridicul hi dread of the sea, 
and hi attach to home. I kept on in thi strain, so congeni with 
my disposition, for some time, uninterrupt by him. At length, he said 
to me, "suppos now that I, whom argument ha not convinced, should 
yield to ridicule, and should agre that your scheme is eligible; what 
will you have gained? nothing. you have other enemi besid myself to 
encounter. when you have vanquish me, your toil ha scarc begun. 
there are my sister and wife, with whom it will remain for you to 
maintain the contest. and trust me, they are adversari whom all your 
forc and stratagem will never subdue." I insinu that they would 
model themselv by hi will: that catharin would think obedi her 
duty. He answered, with some quickness, "you mistake. their concurr 
is indispensable. It is not my custom to exact sacrific of thi kind. 
I live to be their protector and friend, and not their tyrant and foe. 
If my wife shall deem her happiness, and that of her children, most 
consult by remain where she is, here she shall remain." "but," said 
I, "when she know your pleasure, will she not conform to it?" befor 
my friend had time to answer thi question, a neg wa clearli and 
distinctli utter from anoth quarter. It did not come from one side 
or the other, from befor us or behind. whenc then did it come? By 
whose organ wa it fashioned? 

"if ani uncertainti had exist with regard to these particulars, it 
would have been remov by a deliber and equal distinct repetit 
of the same monosyllable, "no." the voic wa my sister's. It appear 
to come from the roof. I start from my seat. catharine, exclaim I, 
where are you? No answer wa returned. I search the room, and the 
area befor it, but in vain. your brother wa motionless in hi seat. 
I return to him, and place myself again by hi side. My astonish 
wa not less than his." 

"well," said he, at length, "what think you of this? thi is the 
self-sam voic which I formerli heard; you are now convinc that my 
ear were well informed." 

"yes," said I, "this, it is plain, is no fiction of the fancy." We again 
sunk into mutual and thought silence. A recollect of the hour, and 
of the length of our absence, made me at last propos to return. We 
rose up for thi purpose. In do this, my mind revert to the 
contempl of my own condition. "yes," said I aloud, but without 
particularli address myself to wieland, "mi resolut is taken. I 
cannot hope to prevail with my friend to accompani me. they may doze 
away their day on the bank of schuylkill, but as to me, I go in the 
next vessel; I will fli to her presence, and demand the reason of thi 
extraordinari silence." 

"I had scarc finish the sentence, when the same mysteri voic 
exclaimed, "you shall not go. the seal of death is on her lips. her 
silenc is the silenc of the tomb." think of the effect which accent 
like these must have had upon me. I shudder as I listened. As soon as 
I recov from my first amazement, "who is it that speaks?" said I, 
"whenc did you procur these dismal tidings?" I did not wait long for 
an answer. "from a sourc that cannot fail. Be satisfied. she is dead." 
you may justli be surprised, that, in the circumst in which I heard 
the tidings, and notwithstand the mysteri which environ him by whom 
they were imparted, I could give an undivid attent to the facts, 
which were the subject of our dialogue. I eagerli inquired, when and 
where did she die? what wa the caus of her death? wa her death 
absolut certain? An answer wa return onli to the last of these 
questions. "yes," wa pronounc by the same voice; but it now sound 
from a greater distance, and the deepest silenc wa all the return made 
to my subsequ interrogatories. 

"it wa my sister' voice; but it could not be utter by her; and yet, 
if not by her, by whom wa it uttered? when we return hither, and 
discov you together, the doubt that had previous exist wa 
removed. It wa manifest that the intim came not from her. yet if 
not from her, from whom could it come? are the circumst attend 
the impart of thi news proof that the tide are true? god forbid 
that they should be true." 

here pleyel sunk into anxiou silence, and gave me leisur to rumin 
on thi inexplic event. I am at a loss to describ the sensat 
that affect me. I am not fear of shadows. the tale of apparit 
and enchant did not possess that power over my belief which could 
even render them interesting. I saw noth in them but ignor and 
folly, and wa a stranger even to that terror which is pleasing. but 
thi incid wa differ from ani that I had ever befor known. here 
were proof of a sensibl and intellig existence, which could not 
be denied. here wa inform obtain and impart by mean 
unquestion super-human. 

that there are consciou beings, besid ourselves, in existence, whose 
mode of activ and inform surpass our own, can scarc be 
denied. Is there a glimps afford us into a world of these superior 
beings? My heart wa scarc larg enough to give admitt to 
so swell a thought. An awe, the sweetest and most solemn that 
imagin can conceive, pervad my whole frame. It forsook me not 
when I part from pleyel and retir to my chamber. An impuls wa 
given to my spirit utterli incompat with sleep. I pass the night 
wake and full of meditation. I wa impress with the belief of 
mysterious, but not of malign agency. hitherto noth had occur 
to persuad me that thi airi minist wa busi to evil rather than to 
good purposes. On the contrary, the idea of superior virtu had alway 
been associ in my mind with that of superior power. the warn 
that had thu been heard appear to have been prompt by benefic 
intentions. My brother had been hinder by thi voic from ascend 
the hill. He wa told that danger lurk in hi path, and hi obedi 
to the intim had perhap save him from a destini similar to that 
of my father. 

pleyel had been rescu from torment uncertainty, and from the 
hazard and fatigu of a fruitless voyage, by the same interposition. 
It had assur him of the death of hi theresa. 

thi woman wa then dead. A confirm of the tidings, if true, would 
speedili arrive. wa thi confirm to be deprec or desired? 
By her death, the tie that attach him to europe, wa taken away. 
henceforward everi motiv would combin to retain him in hi nativ 
country, and we were rescu from the deep regret that would accompani 
hi hopeless absenc from us. propiti wa the spirit that impart 
these tidings. propiti he would perhap have been, if he had been 
instrument in producing, as well as in commun the tide of 
her death. propiti to us, the friend of pleyel, to whom ha therebi 
been secur the enjoy of hi society; and not unpropiti to 
himself; for though thi object of hi love be snatch away, is there 
not anoth who is abl and will to consol him for her loss? 

twenti day after this, anoth vessel arriv from the same port. In 
thi interval, pleyel, for the most part, estrang himself from hi old 
companions. He wa becom the prey of a gloomi and unsoci grief. 
hi walk were limit to the bank of the delaware. thi bank is an 
artifici one. reed and the river are on one side, and a wateri marsh 
on the other, in that part which bound hi lands, and which extend 
from the mouth of hollander' creek to that of schuylkill. No scene can 
be imagin less entic to a lover of the picturesqu than this. the 
shore is deform with mud, and incumb with a forest of reeds. the 
fields, in most seasons, are mire; but when they afford a firm footing, 
the ditch by which they are bound and intersected, are mantl with 
stagnat green, and emit the most noxiou exhalations. health is no 
less a stranger to those seat than pleasure. spring and autumn are sure 
to be accompani with agu and biliou remittents. 

the scene which environ our dwell at mettingen constitut the 
revers of this. schuylkil wa here a pure and translucid current, 
broken into wild and ceaseless music by rocki points, murmur on a 
sandi margin, and reflect on it surface, bank of all varieti of 
height and degre of declivity. these bank were chequer by patch 
of dark verdur and shapeless mass of white marble, and crown by 
cops of cedar, or by the regular magnific of orchards, which, at 
thi season, were in blossom, and were prodig of odours. the ground 
which reced from the river wa scoop into valley and dales. it 
beauti were enhanc by the horticultur skill of my brother, who 
bedeck thi exquisit assemblag of slope and rise with everi 
speci of veget ornament, from the giant arm of the oak to the 
cluster tendril of the honey-suckle. 

To screen him from the unwholesom air of hi own residence, it had 
been propos to pleyel to spend the month of spring with us. He had 
appar acquiesc in thi proposal; but the late event induc him 
to chang hi purpose. He wa onli to be seen by visit him in hi 
retirements. hi gaieti had flown, and everi passion wa absorb in 
eager to procur tide from saxony. I have mention the arriv 
of anoth vessel from the elbe. He descri her earli one morn as 
he wa pass along the skirt of the river. she wa easili recognized, 
be the ship in which he had perform hi first voyag to germany. 
He immedi went on board, but found no letter direct to him. 
thi omiss was, in some degree, compens by meet with an old 
acquaint among the passengers, who had till late been a resid 
in leipsig. thi person put an end to all suspens respect the fate 
of theresa, by relat the particular of her death and funeral. 

thu wa the truth of the former intim attested. No longer devour 
by suspense, the grief of pleyel wa not long in yield to the 
influenc of society. He gave himself up onc more to our company. hi 
vivac had inde been damped; but even in thi respect he wa a more 
accept companion than formerly, sinc hi serious wa neither 
incommun nor sullen. 

these incidents, for a time, occupi all our thoughts. In me they 
produc a sentiment not unal to pleasure, and more speedili than in 
the case of my friend were intermix with other topics. My brother wa 
particularli affect by them. It wa easi to perceiv that most of hi 
medit were tinctur from thi source. To thi wa to be ascrib 
a design in which hi pen was, at thi period, engaged, of collect 
and investig the fact which relat to that mysteri personage, 
the daemon of socrates. 

My brother' skill in greek and roman learn wa exceed by that of 
few, and no doubt the world would have accept a treatis upon thi 
subject from hi hand with avidity; but alas! thi and everi other 
scheme of felic and honor, were doom to sudden blast and hopeless 
extermination. 



chapter VI 


I now come to the mention of a person with whose name the most turbul 
sensat are connected. It is with a shudder reluct that I 
enter on the provinc of describ him. now it is that I begin to 
perceiv the difficulti of the task which I have undertaken; but it 
would be weak to shrink from it. My blood is congealed: and my 
finger are palsi when I call up hi image. shame upon my cowardli and 
infirm heart! hitherto I have proceed with some degre of composure, 
but now I must pause. I mean not that dire remembr shall subdu my 
courag or baffl my design, but thi weak cannot be immedi 
conquered. I must desist for a littl while. 

I have taken a few turn in my chamber, and have gather strength 
enough to proceed. yet have I not project a task beyond my power to 
execute? If thus, on the veri threshold of the scene, my knee faulter 
and I sink, how shall I support myself, when I rush into the midst of 
horror such as no heart ha hitherto conceived, nor tongu related? I 
sicken and recoil at the prospect, and yet my irresolut is momentary. 
I have not form thi design upon slight grounds, and though I may at 
time paus and hesitate, I will not be final divert from it. 

and thou, O most fatal and potent of mankind, in what term shall I 
describ thee? what word are adequ to the just delin of thi 
character? how shall I detail the mean which render the secreci of 
thi purpos unfathomable? but I will not anticipate. let me recov 
if possible, a sober strain. let me keep down the flood of passion that 
would render me precipit or powerless. let me stifl the agoni that 
are awaken by thi name. let me, for a time, regard thee as a be 
of no terribl attributes. let me tear myself from contempl of 
the evil of which it is but too certain that thou wast the author, and 
limit my view to those harmless appear which attend thi entranc 
on the stage. 

one sunni afternoon, I wa stand in the door of my house, when I 
mark a person pass close to the edg of the bank that wa in 
front. hi pace wa a careless and linger one, and had none of that 
grace and eas which distinguish a person with certain advantag 
of educ from a clown. hi gait wa rustic and aukward. hi form wa 
ungainli and disproportioned. shoulder broad and square, breast sunken, 
hi head drooping, hi bodi of uniform breadth, support by long and 
lank legs, were the ingredi of hi frame. hi garb wa not ill 
adapt to such a figure. A slouch hat, tarnish by the weather, a 
coat of thick grey cloth, cut and wrought, as it seemed, by a countri 
tailor, blue worst stockings, and shoe fasten by thongs, and deepli 
discolour by dust, which brush had never disturbed, constitut hi 
dress. 

there wa noth remark in these appearances; they were frequent 
to be met with on the road, and in the harvest field. I cannot tell whi 
I gaze upon them, on thi occasion, with more than ordinari attention, 
unless it were that such figur were seldom seen by me, except on the 
road or field. thi lawn wa onli travers by men whose view were 
direct to the pleasur of the walk, or the grandeur of the scenery. 

He pass slowli along, frequent pausing, as if to examin the 
prospect more deliberately, but never turn hi eye toward the house, 
so as to allow me a view of hi countenance. presently, he enter a 
cops at a small distance, and disappeared. My eye follow him while 
he remain in sight. If hi imag remain for ani durat in my fanci 
after hi departure, it wa becaus no other object occur suffici 
to expel it. 

I continu in the same spot for half an hour, vaguely, and by fits, 
contempl the imag of thi wanderer, and drawing, from outward 
appearances, those infer with respect to the intellectu histori 
of thi person, which experi afford us. I reflect on the 
allianc which commonli subsist between ignor and the practic 
of agriculture, and indulg myself in airi specul as to the 
influenc of progress knowledg in dissolv thi alliance, and 
embodi the dream of the poets. I ask whi the plough and the hoe 
might not becom the trade of everi human being, and how thi 
trade might be made conduc to, or, at least, consist with the 
acquisit of wisdom and eloquence. 

weari with these reflections, I return to the kitchen to perform some 
household office. I had usual but one servant, and she wa a girl 
about my own age. I wa busi near the chimney, and she wa employ near 
the door of the apartment, when some one knocked. the door wa open by 
her, and she wa immedi address with "pry'thee, good girl, canst 
thou suppli a thirsti man with a glass of buttermilk?" she answer 
that there wa none in the house. "aye, but there is some in the dairi 
yonder. thou knowest as well as I, though herm never taught thee, that 
though everi dairi be an house, everi hous is not a dairy." To 
thi speech, though she understood onli a part of it, she repli 
by repeat her assurances, that she had none to give. "well then," 
rejoin the stranger, "for charity' sweet sake, hand me forth a cup 
of cold water." the girl said she would go to the spring and fetch it. 
"nay, give me the cup, and suffer me to help myself. neither manacl 
nor lame, I should merit burial in the maw of carrion crows, if I laid 
thi task upon thee." she gave him the cup, and he turn to go to the 
spring. 

I listen to thi dialogu in silence. the word utter by the person 
without, affect me as somewhat singular, but what chiefli render 
them remarkable, wa the tone that accompani them. It wa wholli new. 
My brother' voic and pleyel' were music and energetic. I had fondli 
imagined, that, in thi respect, they were surpass by none. now my 
mistak wa detected. I cannot pretend to commun the impress 
that wa made upon me by these accents, or to depict the degre in which 
forc and sweet were blend in them. they were articul with a 
distinct that wa unexampl in my experience. but thi wa not all. 
the voic wa not onli melliflu and clear, but the emphasi wa so 
just, and the modul so impassioned, that it seem as if an heart 
of stone could not fail of be move by it. It impart to me an 
emot altogeth involuntari and incontroulable. when he utter the 
word "for charity' sweet sake," I drop the cloth that I held in 
my hand, my heart overflow with sympathy, and my eye with unbidden 
tears. 

thi descript will appear to you trifl or incredible. the 
import of these circumst will be manifest in the sequel. 
the manner in which I wa affect on thi occasion, was, to my own 
apprehension, a subject of astonishment. the tone were inde such as 
I never heard before; but that they should, in an instant, as it were, 
dissolv me in tears, will not easili be believ by others, and can 
scarc be comprehend by myself. 

It will be readili suppos that I wa somewhat inquisit as to the 
person and demeanour of our visitant. after a moment' pause, I step 
to the door and look after him. judg my surprize, when I beheld the 
self-sam figur that had appear an half hour befor upon the bank. My 
fanci had conjur up a veri differ image. A form, and attitude, and 
garb, were instantli creat worthi to accompani such elocution; but 
thi person was, in all visibl respects, the revers of thi phantom. 
strang as it may seem, I could not speedili reconcil myself to thi 
disappointment. instead of return to my employment, I threw myself 
in a chair that wa place opposit the door, and sunk into a fit of 
musing. 

My attent was, in a few minutes, recal by the stranger, who 
return with the empti cup in hi hand. I had not thought of the 
circumstance, or should certainli have chosen a differ seat. He no 
sooner shew himself, than a confus sens of impropriety, ad to 
the sudden of the interview, for which, not have foreseen it, 
I had made no preparation, threw me into a state of the most pain 
embarrassment. He brought with him a placid brow; but no sooner had he 
cast hi eye upon me, than hi face wa as glowingli suffus as 
my own. He place the cup upon the bench, stammer out thanks, and 
retired. 

It wa some time befor I could recov my wont composure. I had 
snatch a view of the stranger' countenance. the impress that it 
made wa vivid and indelible. hi cheek were pallid and lank, hi eye 
sunken, hi forehead overshadow by coars straggl hairs, hi teeth 
larg and irregular, though sound and brilliantli white, and hi chin 
discolour by a tetter. hi skin wa of coars grain, and sallow hue. 
everi featur wa wide of beauty, and the outlin of hi face remind 
you of an invert cone. 

and yet hi forehead, so far as shaggi lock would allow it to be seen, 
hi eye lustrous black, and possessing, in the midst of haggardness, 
a radianc inexpress seren and potent, and someth in the rest of 
hi features, which it would be in vain to describe, but which serv to 
betoken a mind of the highest order, were essenti ingredi in the 
portrait. this, in the effect which immedi flow from it, I count 
among the most extraordinari incid of my life. thi face, seen for 
a moment, continu for hour to occupi my fancy, to the exclus of 
almost everi other image. I had purpos to spend the even with my 
brother, but I could not resist the inclin of form a sketch 
upon paper of thi memor visage. whether my hand wa aid by ani 
peculiar inspiration, or I wa deceiv by my own fond conceptions, thi 
portrait, though hastili executed, appear unexception to my own 
taste. 

I place it at all distances, and in all lights; my eye were rivet 
upon it. half the night pass away in wake and in contempl 
of thi picture. So flexible, and yet so stubborn, is the human mind. 
So obedi to impuls the most transient and brief, and yet so 
unalter observ of the direct which is given to it! how littl 
did I then forese the termin of that chain, of which thi may be 
regard as the first link? 

next day aros in dark and storm. torrent of rain fell dure 
the whole day, attend with incess thunder, which reverber in 
stun echo from the opposit declivity. the inclem of the air 
would not allow me to walk-out. I had, indeed, no inclin to leav 
my apartment. I betook myself to the contempl of thi portrait, 
whose attract time had rather enhanc than diminished. I laid asid 
my usual occupations, and seat myself at a window, consum the day 
in altern look out upon the storm, and gaze at the pictur 
which lay upon a tabl befor me. you will, perhaps, deem thi conduct 
somewhat singular, and ascrib it to certain peculiar of temper. I 
am not awar of ani such peculiarities. I can account for my devot to 
thi imag no otherwise, than by suppos that it properti were 
rare and prodigious. perhap you will suspect that such were the 
first inroad of a passion incid to everi femal heart, and 
which frequent gain a foot by mean even more slight, and more 
improb than these. I shall not controvert the reason of the 
suspicion, but leav you at liberti to draw, from my narrative, what 
conclus you please. 

night at length returned, and the storm ceased. the air wa onc more 
clear and calm, and bore an affect contrast to that uproar of the 
element by which it had been preceded. I spent the darksom hours, as 
I spent the day, contempl and seat at the window. whi wa my mind 
absorb in thought omin and dreary? whi did my bosom heav with 
sighs, and my eye overflow with tears? wa the tempest that had just 
past a signal of the ruin which impend over me? My soul fondli dwelt 
upon the imag of my brother and hi children, yet they onli increas 
the mourn of my contemplations. the smile of the charm babe 
were as bland as formerly. the same digniti sat on the brow of their 
father, and yet I thought of them with anguish. someth whisper 
that the happi we at present enjoy wa set on mutabl foundations. 
death must happen to all. whether our felic wa to be subvert by it 
to-morrow, or whether it wa ordain that we should lay down our head 
full of year and of honor, wa a question that no human be could 
solve. At other times, these idea seldom intruded. I either forbor to 
reflect upon the destini that is reserv for all men, or the reflect 
wa mix up with imag that disrob it of terror; but now the 
uncertainti of life occur to me without ani of it usual and 
allevi accompaniments. I said to myself, we must die. sooner or 
later, we must disappear for ever from the face of the earth. whatev 
be the link that hold us to life, they must be broken. thi scene 
of exist is, in all it parts, calamitous. the greater number is 
oppress with immedi evils, and those, the tide of whose fortun is 
full, how small is their portion of enjoyment, sinc they know that it 
will terminate. 

for some time I indulg myself, without reluctance, in these gloomi 
thoughts; but at length, the deject which they produc becam 
insupport painful. I endeavour to dissip it with music. I had 
all my grand-father' melodi as well as poetri by rote. I now light 
by chanc on a ballad, which commemor the fate of a german cavalier, 
who fell at the sieg of nice under godfrey of bouillon. My choic wa 
unfortunate, for the scene of violenc and carnag which were here 
wildli but forcibl pourtrayed, onli suggest to my thought a new 
topic in the horror of war. 

I sought refuge, but ineffectually, in sleep. My mind wa throng by 
vivid, but confus images, and no effort that I made wa suffici to 
drive them away. In thi situat I heard the clock, which hung in 
the room, give the signal for twelve. It wa the same instrument which 
formerli hung in my father' chamber, and which, on account of it 
be hi workmanship, wa regarded, by everi one of our family, with 
veneration. It had fallen to me, in the divis of hi property, and 
wa place in thi asylum. the sound awaken a seri of reflections, 
respect hi death. I wa not allow to pursu them; for scarc 
had the vibrat ceased, when my attent wa attract by a whisper, 
which, at first, appear to proceed from lip that were laid close to 
my ear. 

No wonder that a circumst like thi startl me. In the first 
impuls of my terror, I utter a slight scream, and shrunk to the 
opposit side of the bed. In a moment, however, I recov from my 
trepidation. I wa habitu indiffer to all the caus of fear, 
by which the major are afflicted. I entertain no apprehens 
of either ghost or robbers. our secur had never been molest by 
either, and I made use of no mean to prevent or counterwork their 
machinations. My tranquillity, on thi occasion, wa quickli retrieved. 
the whisper evid proceed from one who wa post at my bed-side. 
the first idea that suggest itself was, that it wa utter by the 
girl who live with me as a servant. perhaps, somewhat had alarm her, 
or she wa sick, and had come to request my assistance. By whisper in 
my ear, she intend to rous without alarm me. 

full of thi persuasion, I called; "judith," said I, "i it you? what 
do you want? Is there ani thing the matter with you?" No answer wa 
returned. I repeat my inquiry, but equal in vain. cloudi as wa the 
atmosphere, and curtain as my bed was, noth wa visible. I withdrew 
the curtain, and lean my head on my elbow, I listen with the 
deepest attent to catch some new sound. meanwhile, I ran over in my 
thoughts, everi circumst that could assist my conjectures. 

My habit wa a wooden edifice, consist of two stories. In each 
stori were two rooms, separ by an entry, or middl passage, with 
which they commun by opposit doors. the passage, on the lower 
story, had door at the two ends, and a stair-case. window answer to 
the door on the upper story. annex to this, on the eastern side, were 
wings, divided, in like manner, into an upper and lower room; one of 
them compriz a kitchen, and chamber abov it for the servant, and 
communicated, on both stories, with the parlour adjoin it below, 
and the chamber adjoin it above. the opposit wing is of smaller 
dimensions, the room not be abov eight feet square. the lower of 
these wa use as a depositori of household implements, the upper wa a 
closet in which I deposit my book and papers. they had but one inlet, 
which wa from the room adjoining. there wa no window in the lower one, 
and in the upper, a small apertur which commun light and air, but 
would scarc admit the body. the door which led into this, wa close 
to my bed-head, and wa alway locked, but when I myself wa within. the 
avenu below were accustom to be close and bolt at nights. 

the maid wa my onli companion, and she could not reach my chamber 
without previous pass through the opposit chamber, and the middl 
passage, of which, however, the door were usual unfastened. If she 
had occas thi noise, she would have answer my repeat calls. 
No other conclusion, therefore, wa left me, but that I had mistaken the 
sounds, and that my imagin had transform some casual nois into 
the voic of a human creature. satisfi with thi solution, I wa 
prepar to relinquish my listen attitude, when my ear wa again 
salut with a new and yet louder whispering. It appeared, as before, 
to issu from lip that touch my pillow. A second effort of attention, 
however, clearli shew me, that the sound issu from within the 
closet, the door of which wa not more than eight inch from my pillow. 

thi second interrupt occas a shock less vehement than the 
former. I started, but gave no audibl token of alarm. I wa so much 
mistress of my feelings, as to continu listen to what should be 
said. the whisper wa distinct, hoarse, and utter so as to shew that 
the speaker wa desir of be heard by some one near, but, at the 
same time, studiou to avoid be overheard by ani other. 

"stop, stop, I say; madman as you are! there are better mean than that. 
curs upon your rashness! there is no need to shoot." 

such were the word utter in a tone of eager and anger, within so 
small a distanc of my pillow. what construct could I put upon 
them? My heart began to palpit with dread of some unknown danger. 
presently, anoth voice, but equal near me, wa heard whisper in 
answer. "whi not? I will draw a trigger in thi business, but perdit 
be my lot if I do more." To this, the first voic returned, in a tone 
which rage had heighten in a small degre abov a whisper, "coward! 
stand aside, and see me do it. I will grasp her throat; I will do her 
busi in an instant; she shall not have time so much as to groan." 
what wonder that I wa petrifi by sound so dreadful! murder 
lurk in my closet. they were plan the mean of my destruction. one 
resolv to shoot, and the other menac suffocation. their mean be 
chosen, they would forthwith break the door. flight instantli suggest 
itself as most elig in circumst so perilous. I deliber not 
a moment; but, fear ad wing to my speed, I leap out of bed, and 
scantili robe as I was, rush out of the chamber, down stairs, and 
into the open air. I can hardli recollect the process of turn 
keys, and withdraw bolts. My terror urg me forward with almost a 
mechan impulse. I stop not till I reach my brother' door. 
I had not gain the threshold, when, exhaust by the violenc of my 
emotions, and by my speed, I sunk down in a fit. 

how long I remain in thi situat I know not. when I recovered, I 
found myself stretch on a bed, surround by my sister and her 
femal servants. I wa astonish at the scene befor me, but gradual 
recov the recollect of what had happened. I answer their 
importun inquiri as well as I wa able. My brother and pleyel, 
whom the storm of the preced day chanc to detain here, inform 
themselv of everi particular, proceed with light and weapon to my 
desert habitation. they enter my chamber and my closet, and found 
everi thing in it proper place and customari order. the door of the 
closet wa locked, and appear not to have been open in my absence. 
they went to judith' apartment. they found her asleep and in safety. 
pleyel' caution induc him to forbear alarm the girl; and find 
her wholli ignor of what had passed, they direct her to return to 
her chamber. they then fasten the doors, and returned. 

My friend were dispos to regard thi transact as a dream. that 
person should be actual immur in thi closet, to which, in the 
circumst of the time, access from without or within wa appar 
impossible, they could not serious believe. that ani human be 
had intend murder, unless it were to cover a scheme of pillage, wa 
incredible; but that no such design had been formed, wa evid 
from the secur in which the furnitur of the hous and the closet 
remained. 

I revolv everi incid and express that had occurred. My 
sens assur me of the truth of them, and yet their abrupt and 
improb made me, in my turn, somewhat incredulous. the adventur 
had made a deep impress on my fancy, and it wa not till after a 
week' abod at my brother's, that I resolv to resum the possess 
of my own dwelling. there wa anoth circumst that enhanc the 
mysteri of thi event. after my recoveri it wa obviou to 
inquir by what mean the attent of the famili had been drawn to my 
situation. I had fallen befor I had reach the threshold, or wa abl 
to give ani signal. My brother related, that while thi wa transact 
in my chamber, he himself wa awake, in consequ of some slight 
indisposition, and lay, accord to hi custom, muse on some favorit 
topic. suddenli the silence, which wa remark profound, wa broken 
by a voic of most pierc shrillness, that seem to be utter by one 
in the hall below hi chamber. "awake! arise!" it exclaimed: "hasten to 
succour one that is die at your door." 

thi summon wa effectual. there wa no one in the hous who wa not 
rous by it. pleyel wa the first to obey, and my brother overtook him 
befor he reach the hall. what wa the gener astonish when your 
friend wa discov stretch upon the grass befor the door, pale, 
ghastly, and with everi mark of death! 

thi wa the third instanc of a voice, exert for the benefit of thi 
littl community. the agent wa no less inscrut in this, than in the 
former case. when I rumin upon these events, my soul wa suspend 
in wonder and awe. wa I realli deceiv in imagin that I heard the 
closet conversation? I wa no longer at liberti to question the realiti 
of those accent which had formerli recal my brother from the hill; 
which had impart tide of the death of the german ladi to pleyel; 
and which had late summon them to my assistance. 

but how wa I to regard thi midnight conversation? hoars and manlik 
voic confer on the mean of death, so near my bed, and at such 
an hour! how had my ancient secur vanished! that dwelling, which had 
hitherto been an inviol asylum, wa now beset with danger to my 
life. that solitude, formerli so dear to me, could no longer be endured. 
pleyel, who had consent to resid with us dure the month of spring, 
lodg in the vacant chamber, in order to quiet my alarms. He treat 
my fear with ridicule, and in a short time veri slight trace of them 
remained: but as it wa wholli indiffer to him whether hi night 
were pass at my hous or at my brother's, thi arrang gave 
gener satisfaction. 



chapter vii 


I will not enumer the variou inquiri and conjectur which these 
incid occasioned. after all our efforts, we came no nearer to 
dispel the mist in which they were involved; and time, instead of 
facilit a solution, onli accumul our doubts. In the midst of 
thought excit by these events, I wa not unmind of my interview 
with the stranger. I relat the particulars, and shew the portrait to 
my friends. pleyel recollect to have met with a figur resembl 
my descript in the city; but neither hi face or garb made the same 
impress upon him that it made upon me. It wa a hint to ralli me upon 
my prepossessions, and to amus us with a thousand ludicr anecdot 
which he had collect in hi travels. He made no scrupl to charg me 
with be in love; and threaten to inform the swain, when he met him, 
of hi good fortune. 

pleyel' temper made him suscept of no durabl impressions. hi 
convers wa occasion visit by gleam of hi ancient vivacity; 
but, though hi impetuos wa sometim inconvenient, there wa 
noth to dread from hi malice. I had no fear that my charact or 
digniti would suffer in hi hands, and wa not heartili displeas when 
he declar hi intent of profit by hi first meet with the 
stranger to introduc him to our acquaintance. 

some week after thi I had spent a toilsom day, and, as the sun 
declined, found myself dispos to seek relief in a walk. the river 
bank is, at thi part of it, and for some consider space upward, 
so rug and steep as not to be easili descended. In a recess of thi 
declivity, near the southern verg of my littl demesne, wa place a 
slight building, with seat and lattices. from a crevic of the rock, 
to which thi edific wa attached, there burst forth a stream of the 
purest water, which, leap from ledg to ledge, for the space of sixti 
feet, produc a fresh in the air, and a murmur, the most delici 
and sooth imaginable. these, ad to the odour of the cedar 
which embow it, and of the honey-suckl which cluster among the 
lattices, render thi my favorit retreat in summer. 

On thi occas I repair hither. My spirit droop through the 
fatigu of long attention, and I threw myself upon a bench, in a state, 
both mental and personally, of the utmost supineness. the lull 
sound of the waterfall, the fragranc and the dusk combin to becalm 
my spirits, and, in a short time, to sink me into sleep. either the 
uneasi of my posture, or some slight indisposit molest my 
repos with dream of no cheer hue. after variou incoher 
had taken their turn to occupi my fancy, I at length imagin myself 
walking, in the even twilight, to my brother' habitation. A pit, 
methought, had been dug in the path I had taken, of which I wa not 
aware. As I carelessli pursu my walk, I thought I saw my brother, 
stand at some distanc befor me, beckon and call me to make 
haste. He stood on the opposit edg of the gulph. I mend my pace, and 
one step more would have plung me into thi abyss, had not some 
one from behind caught suddenli my arm, and exclaimed, in a voic of 
eager and terror, "hold! hold!" 

the sound broke my sleep, and I found myself, at the next moment, 
stand on my feet, and surround by the deepest darkness. imag 
so terrif and forcibl disabl me, for a time, from distinguish 
between sleep and wakefulness, and withheld from me the knowledg of my 
actual condition. My first panic were succeed by the perturb of 
surprize, to find myself alon in the open air, and immers in so deep 
a gloom. I slowli recollect the incid of the afternoon, and how 
I came hither. I could not estim the time, but saw the proprieti of 
return with speed to the house. My faculti were still too confused, 
and the dark too intense, to allow me immedi to find my way up 
the steep. I sat down, therefore, to recov myself, and to reflect upon 
my situation. 

thi wa no sooner done, than a low voic wa heard from behind the 
lattice, on the side where I sat. between the rock and the lattic wa a 
chasm not wide enough to admit a human body; yet, in thi chasm he that 
spoke appear to be stationed. "attend! attend! but be not terrified." 

I start and exclaimed, "good heavens! what is that? who are you?" 

"A friend; one come, not to injure, but to save you; fear nothing." 

thi voic wa immedi recogn to be the same with one of 
those which I had heard in the closet; it wa the voic of him who had 
propos to shoot, rather than to strangle, hi victim. My terror made 
me, at once, mute and motionless. He continued, "I leagu to murder 
you. I repent. mark my bidding, and be safe. avoid thi spot. the snare 
of death encompass it. elsewher danger will be distant; but thi spot, 
shun it as you valu your life. mark me further; profit by thi warning, 
but divulg it not. If a syllabl of what ha pass escap you, your 
doom is sealed. rememb your father, and be faithful." 

here the accent ceased, and left me overwhelm with dismay. I wa 
fraught with the persuasion, that dure everi moment I remain here, 
my life wa endangered; but I could not take a step without hazard of 
fall to the bottom of the precipice. the path, lead to the summit, 
wa short, but rug and intricate. even star-light wa exclud by the 
umbrage, and not the faintest gleam wa afford to guid my steps. what 
should I do? To depart or remain wa equal and emin perilous. 

In thi state of uncertainty, I perceiv a ray flit across the gloom 
and disappear. anoth succeeded, which wa stronger, and remain for 
a pass moment. It glitter on the shrub that were scatter at the 
entrance, and gleam continu to succeed gleam for a few seconds, till 
they, finally, gave place to unintermit darkness. 

the first visit of thi light call up a train of horror in my 
mind; destruct impend over thi spot; the voic which I had late 
heard had warn me to retire, and had menac me with the fate of my 
father if I refused. I wa desirous, but unable, to obey; these gleam 
were such as prelud the stroke by which he fell; the hour, perhaps, 
wa the same--i shudder as if I had beheld, suspend over me, the 
extermin sword. 

present a new and stronger illumin burst through the lattic 
on the right hand, and a voice, from the edg of the precipic above, 
call out my name. It wa pleyel. joy did I recogn hi accents; 
but such wa the tumult of my thought that I had not power to answer 
him till he had frequent repeat hi summons. I hurried, at length, 
from the fatal spot, and, direct by the lanthorn which he bore, 
ascend the hill. 

pale and breathless, it wa with difficulti I could support myself. He 
anxious inquir into the caus of my affright, and the motiv of my 
unusu absence. He had return from my brother' at a late hour, and 
wa inform by judith, that I had walk out befor sun-set, and had 
not yet returned. thi intellig wa somewhat alarming. He wait 
some time; but, my absenc continuing, he had set out in search of me. 
He had explor the neighbourhood with the utmost care, but, receiv 
no tide of me, he wa prepar to acquaint my brother with thi 
circumstance, when he recollect the summer-hous on the bank, and 
conceiv it possibl that some accid had detain me there. He again 
inquir into the caus of thi detention, and of that confus and 
dismay which my look testified. 

I told him that I had stroll hither in the afternoon, that sleep had 
overtaken me as I sat, and that I had awaken a few minut befor 
hi arrival. I could tell him no more. In the present impetuos of my 
thoughts, I wa almost dubious, whether the pit, into which my brother 
had endeavour to entic me, and the voic that talk through the 
lattice, were not part of the same dream. I remembered, likewise, the 
charg of secrecy, and the penalti denounced, if I should rashli divulg 
what I had heard. for these reasons, I wa silent on that subject, and 
shut myself in my chamber, deliv myself up to contemplation. 

what I have relat will, no doubt, appear to you a fable. you will 
believ that calam ha subvert my reason, and that I am amus 
you with the chimera of my brain, instead of fact that have realli 
happened. I shall not be surpriz or offended, if these be your 
suspicions. I know not, indeed, how you can deni them admission. for, if 
to me, the immedi witness, they were fertil of perplex and doubt, 
how must they affect anoth to whom they are recommend onli by 
my testimony? It wa onli by subsequ events, that I wa fulli and 
incontest assur of the verac of my senses. 

meanwhil what wa I to think? I had been assur that a design had been 
form against my life. the ruffian had leagu to murder me. whom had 
I offended? who wa there with whom I had ever maintain intercourse, 
who wa capabl of harbour such atroci purposes? 

My temper wa the revers of cruel and imperious. My heart wa touch 
with sympathi for the children of misfortune. but thi sympathi wa not 
a barren sentiment. My purse, scanti as it was, wa ever open, and my 
hand ever active, to reliev distress. mani were the wretch whom 
my person exert had extric from want and disease, and who 
reward me with their gratitude. there wa no face which lower at my 
approach, and no lip which utter imprec in my hearing. On the 
contrary, there wa none, over whose fate I had exert ani influence, 
or to whom I wa known by reputation, who did not greet me with smiles, 
and dismiss me with proof of veneration; yet did not my sens assur 
me that a plot wa laid against my life? 

I am not destitut of courage. I have shewn myself delib and calm 
in the midst of peril. I have hazard my own life, for the preserv 
of another, but now wa I confus and panic struck. I have not live 
so as to fear death, yet to perish by an unseen and secret stroke, to be 
mangl by the knife of an assassin wa a thought at which I shuddered; 
what had I done to deserv to be made the victim of malign passions? 

but soft! wa I not assured, that my life wa safe in all place but 
one? and whi wa the treason limit to take effect in thi spot? I 
wa everi where equal defenceless. My hous and chamber were, at all 
times, accessible. danger still impend over me; the bloodi purpos wa 
still entertained, but the hand that wa to execut it, wa powerless in 
all place but one! 

here I had remain for the last four or five hours, without the mean 
of resist or defence, yet I had not been attacked. A human be wa 
at hand, who wa consciou of my presence, and warn me hereaft to 
avoid thi retreat. hi voic wa not absolut new, but had I never 
heard it but onc before? but whi did he prohibit me from relat 
thi incid to others, and what speci of death will be award if I 
disobey? 

He talk of my father. He intimated, that disclosur would pull upon my 
head, the same destruction. wa then the death of my father, portent 
and inexplic as it was, the consequ of human machinations? It 
should seem, that thi be is appris of the true natur of thi 
event, and is consciou of the mean that led to it. whether it shall 
likewis fall upon me, depend upon the observ of silence. wa it 
the infract of a similar command, that brought so horribl a penalti 
upon my father? 

such were the reflect that haunt me dure the night, and which 
effectu depriv me of sleep. next morning, at breakfast, pleyel 
relat an event which my disappear had hinder him from mention 
the night before. earli the preced morning, hi occas call him 
to the city; he had step into a coffee-hous to while away an hour; 
here he had met a person whose appear instantli bespok him to be 
the same whose hasti visit I have mentioned, and whose extraordinari 
visag and tone had so power affect me. On an attent survey, 
however, he proved, likewise, to be one with whom my friend had had some 
intercours in europe. thi authoris the liberti of accost him, and 
after some conversation, mindful, as pleyel said, of the foot which 
thi stranger had gain in my heart, he had ventur to invit him 
to mettingen. the invit had been cheer accepted, and a visit 
promis on the afternoon of the next day. 

thi inform excit no sober emot in my breast. I was, of 
course, eager to be inform as to the circumst of their ancient 
intercourse. when, and where had they met? what knew he of the life and 
charact of thi man? 

In answer to my inquiries, he inform me that, three year before, 
he wa a travel in spain. He had made an excurs from valencia to 
murviedro, with a view to inspect the remain of roman magnificence, 
scatter in the environ of that town. while travers the scite 
of the theatr of old saguntum, he light upon thi man, seat on a 
stone, and deepli engag in perus the work of the deacon marti. A 
short convers ensued, which prove the stranger to be english. they 
return to valencia together. 

hi garb, aspect, and deportment, were wholli spanish. A resid of 
three year in the country, indefatig attent to the language, 
and a studiou conform with the custom of the people, had made him 
indistinguish from a native, when he chose to assum that character. 
pleyel found him to be connected, on the foot of friendship and 
respect, with mani emin merchant in that city. He had embrac the 
cathol religion, and adopt a spanish name instead of hi own, which 
wa carwin, and devot himself to the literatur and religion of hi 
new country. He pursu no profession, but subsist on remitt from 
england. 

while pleyel remain in valencia, carwin betray no avers to 
intercourse, and the former found no small attract in the societi of 
thi new acquaintance. On gener topic he wa highli intellig and 
communicative. He had visit everi corner of spain, and could furnish 
the most accur detail respect it ancient and present state. 
On topic of religion and of hi own history, previou to hi 
transform into a spaniard, he wa invari silent. you could 
mere gather from hi discours that he wa english, and that he wa 
well acquaint with the neighbour countries. 

hi charact excit consider curios in thi observer. It wa 
not easi to reconcil hi convers to the romish faith, with those 
proof of knowledg and capac that were exhibit by him on differ 
occasions. A suspicion was, sometimes, admitted, that hi belief wa 
counterfeit for some polit purpose. the most care observation, 
however, produc no discovery. hi manner were, at all times, harmless 
and inartificial, and hi habit those of a lover of contempl and 
seclusion. He appear to have contract an affect for pleyel, who 
wa not slow to return it. 

My friend, after a month' resid in thi city, return into france, 
and, sinc that period, had heard noth concern carwin till hi 
appear at mettingen. 

On thi occas carwin had receiv pleyel' greet with a certain 
distanc and solemn to which the latter had not been accustomed. He 
had wave notic the inquiri of pleyel respect hi desert 
of spain, in which he had formerli declar that it wa hi purpos to 
spend hi life. He had assidu divert the attent of the latter 
to indiffer topics, but wa still, on everi theme, as eloqu and 
judici as formerly. whi he had assum the garb of a rustic, pleyel 
wa unabl to conjecture. perhap it might be poverty, perhap he wa 
sway by motiv which it wa hi interest to conceal, but which were 
connect with consequ of the utmost moment. 

such wa the sum of my friend' information. I wa not sorri to be left 
alon dure the greater part of thi day. everi employ wa irksom 
which did not leav me at liberti to meditate. I had now a new subject 
on which to exercis my thoughts. befor even I should be usher 
into hi presence, and listen to those tone whose magic and thrill 
power I had alreadi experienced. but with what new imag would he then 
be accompanied? 

carwin wa an adher to the romish faith, yet wa an englishman by 
birth, and, perhaps, a protest by education. He had adopt spain for 
hi country, and had intim a design to spend hi day there, yet now 
wa an inhabit of thi district, and disguis by the habili of 
a clown! what could have obliter the impress of hi youth, and 
made him abjur hi religion and hi country? what subsequ event had 
introduc so total a chang in hi plans? In withdraw from spain, 
had he revert to the religion of hi ancestors; or wa it true, that 
hi former convers wa deceitful, and that hi conduct had been 
sway by motiv which it wa prudent to conceal? 

hour were consum in revolv these ideas. My medit were 
intense; and, when the seri wa broken, I began to reflect with 
astonish on my situation. from the death of my parents, till the 
commenc of thi year, my life had been seren and blissful, beyond 
the ordinari portion of humanity; but, now, my bosom wa corrod by 
anxiety. I wa visit by dread of unknown dangers, and the futur wa 
a scene over which cloud rolled, and thunder muttered. I compar the 
caus with the effect, and they seem disproport to each other. 
all unaware, and in a manner which I had no power to explain, I wa 
push from my immov and lofti station, and cast upon a sea of 
troubles. 

I determin to be my brother' visit on thi evening, yet my 
resolv were not unattend with waver and reluctance. pleyel' 
insinu that I wa in love, affected, in no degree, my belief, yet 
the conscious that thi wa the opinion of one who would, probably, 
be present at our introduct to each other, would excit all that 
confus which the passion itself is apt to produce. thi would confirm 
him in hi error, and call forth new railleries. hi mirth, when exert 
upon thi topic, wa the sourc of the bitterest vexation. had he been 
awar of it influenc upon my happiness, hi temper would not have 
allow him to persist; but thi influence, it wa my chief endeavour 
to conceal. that the belief of my have bestow my heart upon another, 
produc in my friend none but ludicr sensations, wa the true caus 
of my distress; but if thi had been discov by him, my distress 
would have been unspeak aggravated. 



chapter viii 


As soon as even arrived, I perform my visit. carwin made one of the 
company, into which I wa ushered. appear were the same as when I 
befor beheld him. hi garb wa equal neglig and rustic. I gaze 
upon hi counten with new curiosity. My situat wa such as to 
enabl me to bestow upon it a deliber examination. view at more 
leisure, it lost none of it wonder properties. I could not deni my 
homag to the intellig express in it, but wa wholli uncertain, 
whether he were an object to be dread or adored, and whether hi 
power had been exert to evil or to good. 

He wa spare in discourse; but whatev he said wa pregnant with 
meaning, and utter with rectitud of articulation, and forc of 
emphasis, of which I had entertain no concept previous to my 
knowledg of him. notwithstand the uncouth of hi garb, hi 
manner were not unpolished. all topic were handl by him with skill, 
and without pedantri or affectation. He utter no sentiment calcul 
to produc a disadvantag impression: on the contrary, hi 
observ denot a mind aliv to everi gener and heroic feeling. 
they were introduc without parade, and accompani with that degre of 
earnest which indic sincerity. 

He part from us not till late, refus an invit to spend the 
night here, but readili consent to repeat hi visit. hi visit 
were frequent repeated. each day introduc us to a more intim 
acquaint with hi sentiments, but left us wholli in the dark, 
concern that about which we were most inquisitive. He studious 
avoid all mention of hi past or present situation. even the place of 
hi abod in the citi he conceal from us. 

our sphere, in thi respect, be somewhat limited, and the 
intellectu endow of thi man be indisput great, hi 
deport wa more dilig marked, and copious comment on by 
us, than you, perhaps, will think the circumst warranted. not a 
gesture, or glance, or accent, that wa not, in our privat assemblies, 
discussed, and infer deduc from it. It may well be thought that 
he model hi behaviour by an uncommon standard, when, with all our 
opportun and accuraci of observation, we were able, for a long 
time, to gather no satisfactori information. He afford us no ground on 
which to build even a plausibl conjecture. 

there is a degre of familiar which take place between constant 
associates, that justifi the neglig of mani rule of which, in 
an earlier period of their intercourse, polit requir the exact 
observance. inquiri into our condit are allow when they are 
prompt by a disinterest concern for our welfare; and thi solicitud 
is not onli pardonable, but may justli be demand from those who chuse 
us for their companions. thi state of thing wa more slow to arriv 
on thi occas than on most others, on account of the graviti and 
lofti of thi man' behaviour. 

pleyel, however, began, at length, to employ regular mean for thi end. 
He occasion allud to the circumst in which they had formerli 
met, and remark the incongru between the religion and habit 
of a spaniard, with those of a nativ of britain. He express 
hi astonish at meet our guest in thi corner of the globe, 
especi as, when they part in spain, he wa taught to believ that 
carwin should never leav that country. He insinuated, that a chang 
so great must have been prompt by motiv of a singular and moment 
kind. 

No answer, or an answer wide of the purpose, wa gener made to these 
insinuations. briton and spaniards, he said, are votari of the same 
deity, and squar their faith by the same precepts; their idea are 
drawn from the same fountain of literature, and they speak dialect of 
the same tongue; their govern and law have more resembl than 
differences; they were formerli provinc of the same civil, and till 
lately, of the same religious, empire. 

As to the motiv which induc men to chang the place of their abode, 
these must unavoid be fleet and mutable. If not bound to one spot 
by conjug or parent ties, or by the natur of that employ to 
which we are indebt for subsistence, the induc to chang are far 
more numer and powerful, than opposit inducements. 

He spoke as if desir of shew that he wa not awar of the tendenc 
of pleyel' remarks; yet, certain token were apparent, that prove him 
by no mean want in penetration. these token were to be read in hi 
countenance, and not in hi words. when ani thing wa said, indic 
curios in us, the gloom of hi counten wa deepened, hi eye 
sunk to the ground, and hi wont air wa not resum without visibl 
struggle. hence, it wa obviou to infer, that some incid of 
hi life were reflect on by him with regret; and that, sinc these 
incid were care concealed, and even that regret which flow 
from them labori stifled, they had not been mere disastrous. the 
secreci that wa observ appear not design to provok or baffl the 
inquisitive, but wa prompt by the shame, or by the prudenc of guilt. 

these ideas, which were adopt by pleyel and my brother, as well as 
myself, hinder us from employ more direct mean for accomplish 
our wishes. question might have been put in such terms, that no room 
should be left for the pretenc of misapprehension, and if modesti 
mere had been the obstacle, such question would not have been 
wanting; but we considered, that, if the disclosur were product of 
pain or disgrace, it wa inhuman to extort it. 

amidst the variou topic that were discuss in hi presence, allus 
were, of course, made to the inexplic event that had late 
happened. At those times, the word and look of thi man were object 
of my particular attention. the subject wa extraordinary; and ani 
one whose experi or reflect could throw ani light upon it, wa 
entitl to my gratitude. As thi man wa enlighten by read and 
travel, I listen with eager to the remark which he should make. 

At first, I entertain a kind of apprehension, that the tale would be 
heard by him with incredul and secret ridicule. I had formerli heard 
stori that resembl thi in some of their mysteri circumstances, 
but they were, commonly, heard by me with contempt. I wa doubtful, 
whether the same impress would not now be made on the mind of our 
guest; but I wa mistaken in my fears. 

He heard them with seriousness, and without ani mark either of 
surpriz or incredulity. He pursued, with visibl pleasure, that kind 
of disquisit which wa natur suggest by them. hi fanci wa 
emin vigor and prolific, and if he did not persuad us, that 
human be are, sometimes, admit to a sensibl intercours with the 
author of nature, he, at least, won over our inclin to the cause. 
He mere deduced, from hi own reasonings, that such intercours 
wa probable; but confess that, though he wa acquaint with mani 
instanc somewhat similar to those which had been relat by us, none 
of them were perfectli exempt from the suspicion of human agency. 

On be request to relat these instances, he amus us with mani 
curiou details. hi narr were construct with so much skill, 
and rehears with so much energy, that all the effect of a dramat 
exhibit were frequent produc by them. those that were most 
coher and most minute, and, of consequence, least entitl to credit, 
were yet render probabl by the exquisit art of thi rhetorician. for 
everi difficulti that wa suggested, a readi and plausibl solut 
wa furnished. mysteri voic had alway a share in produc 
the catastrophe, but they were alway to be explain on some known 
principles, either as reflect into a focus, or commun through 
a tube. I could not but remark that hi narratives, howev complex or 
marvellous, contain no instanc suffici parallel to those that 
had befallen ourselves, and in which the solut wa applic to our 
own case. 

My brother wa a much more sanguin reason than our guest. even 
in some of the fact which were relat by carwin, he maintain the 
probabl of celesti interference, when the latter wa dispos to 
deni it, and had found, as he imagined, footstep of an human agent. 
pleyel wa by no mean equal credulous. He scrupl not to deni faith 
to ani testimoni but that of hi senses, and allow the fact which had 
late been support by thi testimony, not to mould hi belief, but 
mere to give birth to doubts. 

It wa soon observ that carwin adopted, in some degree, a similar 
distinction. A tale of thi kind, relat by others, he would believe, 
provid it wa explic upon known principles; but that such notic 
were actual commun by be of an higher order, he would 
believ onli when hi own ear were assail in a manner which could not 
be otherwis account for. civil forbad him to contradict my brother 
or myself, but hi understand refus to acquiesc in our testimony. 
besides, he wa dispos to question whether the voic heard in the 
temple, at the foot of the hill, and in my closet, were not realli 
utter by human organs. On thi supposit he wa desir to explain 
how the effect wa produced. 

He answered, that the power of mimickri wa veri common. catharine' 
voic might easili be imit by one at the foot of the hill, who would 
find no difficulti in eluding, by flight, the search of wieland. the 
tide of the death of the saxon ladi were utter by one near at hand, 
who overheard the conversation, who conjectur her death, and whose 
conjectur happen to accord with the truth. that the voic appear to 
come from the ciel wa to be consid as an illus of the fancy. 
the cri for help, heard in the hall on the night of my adventure, wa to 
be ascrib to an human creature, who actual stood in the hall when he 
utter it. It wa of no moment, he said, that we could not explain by 
what motiv he that made the signal wa led hither. how imperfectli 
acquaint were we with the condit and design of the be that 
surround us? the citi wa near at hand, and thousand might there 
exist whose power and purpos might easili explain whatev wa 
mysteri in thi transaction. As to the closet dialogue, he wa 
oblig to adopt one of two suppositions, and affirm either that it wa 
fashion in my own fancy, or that it actual took place between two 
person in the closet. 

such wa carwin' mode of explain these appearances. It is such, 
perhaps, as would commend itself as most plausibl to the most sagaci 
minds, but it wa insuffici to impart convict to us. As to the 
treason that wa medit against me, it wa doubtless just to conclud 
that it wa either real or imaginary; but that it wa real wa attest 
by the mysteri warn in the summer-house, the secret of which I had 
hitherto lock up in my own breast. 

A month pass away in thi kind of intercourse. As to carwin, our 
ignor wa in no degre enlighten respect hi genuin charact 
and views. appear were uniform. No man possess a larger store of 
knowledge, or a greater degre of skill in the commun of it to 
others; henc he wa regard as an inestim addit to our society. 
consid the distanc of my brother' hous from the city, he wa 
frequent prevail upon to pass the night where he spent the evening. 
two day seldom elaps without a visit from him; henc he wa regard 
as a kind of inmat of the house. He enter and depart without 
ceremony. when he arriv he receiv an unaffect welcome, and when he 
chose to retire, no importun were use to induc him to remain. 

the templ wa the princip scene of our social enjoyments; yet the 
felic that we tast when assembl in thi asylum, wa but the 
gleam of a former sun-shine. carwin never part with hi gravity. 
the inscrut of hi character, and the uncertainti whether hi 
fellowship tend to good or to evil, were seldom absent from our minds. 
thi circumst power contribut to sadden us. 

My heart wa the seat of grow disquietudes. thi chang in one who 
had formerli been character by all the exuber of soul, could 
not fail to be remark by my friends. My brother wa alway a pattern 
of solemnity. My sister wa clay, mould by the circumst in which 
she happen to be placed. there wa but one whose deport remain 
to be describ as be of import to our happiness. had pleyel 
likewis dismiss hi vivacity? 

He wa as whimsic and jest as ever, but he wa not happy. the 
truth, in thi respect, wa of too much import to me not to make me 
a vigil observer. hi mirth wa easili perceiv to be the fruit 
of exertion. when hi thought wander from the company, an air of 
dissatisfact and impati stole across hi features. even the 
punctual and frequenc of hi visit were somewhat lessened. It may 
be suppos that my own uneasi wa heighten by these tokens; but, 
strang as it may seem, I found, in the present state of my mind, no 
relief but in the persuas that pleyel wa unhappy. 

that unhappiness, indeed, depended, for it valu in my eyes, on the 
caus that produc it. It did not aris from the death of the saxon 
lady: it wa not a contagi eman from the counten of wieland 
or carwin. there wa but one other sourc whenc it could flow. A 
nameless ecstaci thrill through my frame when ani new proof occur 
that the ambigu of my behaviour wa the cause. 



chapter IX 


My brother had receiv a new book from germany. It wa a tragedy, and 
the first attempt of a saxon poet, of whom my brother had been taught to 
entertain the highest expectations. the exploit of zisca, the bohemian 
hero, were woven into a dramat seri and connection. accord to 
german custom, it wa minut and diffuse, and dictat by an adventur 
and lawless fancy. It wa a chain of audaci acts, and unheard-of 
disasters. the moat fortress, and the thicket; the ambush and the 
battle; and the conflict of headlong passions, were pourtray in 
wild numbers, and with terrif energy. An afternoon wa set apart to 
rehears thi performance. the languag wa familiar to all of us but 
carwin, whose company, therefore, wa tacitli dispens with. 

the morn previou to thi intend rehearsal, I spent at home. My 
mind wa occupi with reflect rel to my own situation. the 
sentiment which live with chief energi in my heart, wa connect 
with the imag of pleyel. In the midst of my anguish, I had not been 
destitut of consolation. hi late deport had given spring to my 
hopes. wa not the hour at hand, which should render me the happiest 
of human creatures? He suspect that I look with favor eye upon 
carwin. henc aros disquietudes, which he struggl in vain to conceal. 
He love me, but wa hopeless that hi love would be compensated. Is it 
not time, said I, to rectifi thi error? but by what mean is thi to be 
effected? It can onli be done by a chang of deport in me; but how 
must I demean myself for thi purpose? 

I must not speak. neither eyes, nor lips, must impart the information. 
He must not be assur that my heart is his, previou to the tender of 
hi own; but he must be convinc that it ha not been given to another; 
he must be suppli with space whereon to build a doubt as to the true 
state of my affections; he must be prompt to avow himself. the line 
of delic propriety; how hard it is, not to fall short, and not to 
overleap it! 

thi afternoon we shall meet at the temple. We shall not separ till 
late. It will be hi provinc to accompani me home. the airi expans is 
without a speck. thi breez is usual stedfast, and it promis of 
a bland and cloudless evening, may be trusted. the moon will rise at 
eleven, and at that hour, we shall wind along thi bank. possibl that 
hour may decid my fate. If suitabl encourag be given, pleyel will 
reveal hi soul to me; and I, ere I reach thi threshold, will be made 
the happiest of beings. and is thi good to be mine? add wing to thi 
speed, sweet evening; and thou, moon, I charg thee, shroud thi beam at 
the moment when my pleyel whisper love. I would not for the world, that 
the burn blushes, and the mount raptur of that moment, should be 
visible. 

but what encourag is wanting? I must be regard of insurmount 
limits. yet when mind are imbu with a genuin sympathy, are not word 
and look superfluous? are not motion and touch suffici to impart 
feel such as mine? ha he not eye me at moments, when the pressur 
of hi hand ha thrown me into tumults, and wa it possibl that he 
mistook the impetuos of love, for the eloqu of indignation? 

but the hasten even will decide. would it were come! and yet I 
shudder at it near approach. An interview that must thu terminate, is 
sure to be wish for by me; and yet it is not without it terrors. 
would to heaven it were come and gone! 

I feel no reluctance, my friend to be thu explicit. time was, when 
these emot would be hidden with immeasur solicitude, from everi 
human eye. alas! these airi and fleet impuls of shame are gone. My 
scrupl were preposter and criminal. they are bred in all hearts, by 
a pervers and viciou education, and they would still have maintain 
their place in my heart, had not my portion been set in misery. My 
error have taught me thu much wisdom; that those sentiment which we 
ought not to disclose, it is crimin to harbour. 

It wa propos to begin the rehears at four o'clock; I count the 
minut as they passed; their flight wa at onc too rapid and too slow; 
my sensat were of an excruci kind; I could tast no food, nor 
appli to ani task, nor enjoy a moment' repose: when the hour arrived, I 
hasten to my brother's. 

pleyel wa not there. He had not yet come. On ordinari occasions, he wa 
emin for punctuality. He had testifi great eager to share 
in the pleasur of thi rehearsal. He wa to divid the task with my 
brother, and, in task like these, he alway engag with peculiar 
zeal. hi elocut wa less sweet than sonorous; and, therefore, 
better adapt than the melliflu of hi friend, to the outrag 
vehem of thi drama. 

what could detain him? perhap he linger through forgetfulness. yet 
thi wa incredible. never had hi memori been known to fail upon even 
more trivial occasions. not less imposs wa it, that the scheme had 
lost it attractions, and that he staid, becaus hi come would afford 
him no gratification. but whi should we expect him to adher to the 
minute? 

An half hour elapsed, but pleyel wa still at a distance. perhap he had 
misunderstood the hour which had been proposed. perhap he had conceiv 
that to-morrow, and not to-day, had been select for thi purpose: 
but no. A review of preced circumst demonstr that such 
misapprehens wa impossible; for he had himself propos thi day, 
and thi hour. thi day, hi attent would not otherwis be occupied; 
but to-morrow, an indispens engag wa foreseen, by which all 
hi time would be engrossed: hi detention, therefore, must be owe 
to some unforeseen and extraordinari event. our conjectur were vague, 
tumultuous, and sometim fearful. hi sick and hi death might 
possibl have detain him. 

tortur with suspense, we sat gaze at each other, and at the path 
which led from the road. everi horseman that pass was, for a moment, 
imagin to be him. hour succeed hour, and the sun, gradual 
declining, at length, disappeared. everi signal of hi come prove 
fallacious, and our hope were at length dismissed. hi absenc affect 
my friend in no insupport degree. they should be obliged, they 
said, to defer thi undertak till the morrow; and, perhaps, their 
impati curios would compel them to dispens entir with hi 
presence. No doubt, some harmless occurr had divert him from 
hi purpose; and they trust that they should receiv a satisfactori 
account of him in the morning. 

It may be suppos that thi disappoint affect me in a veri 
differ manner. I turn asid my head to conceal my tears. I fled 
into solitude, to give vent to my reproaches, without interrupt 
or restraint. My heart wa readi to burst with indign and grief. 
pleyel wa not the onli object of my keen but unjust upbraiding. deepli 
did I execr my own folly. thu fallen into ruin wa the gay fabric 
which I had reared! thu had my golden vision melt into air! 

how fondli did I dream that pleyel wa a lover! If he were, would he 
have suffer ani obstacl to hinder hi coming? blind and infatu 
man! I exclaimed. thou sportest with happiness. the good that is 
offer thee, thou hast the insol and folli to refuse. well, I will 
henceforth intrust my felic to no one' keep but my own. 

the first agoni of thi disappoint would not allow me to be 
reason or just. everi ground on which I had built the persuas 
that pleyel wa not unimpress in my favor, appear to vanish. It 
seem as if I had been misl into thi opinion, by the most palpabl 
illusions. 

I made some trifl excuse, and returned, much earlier than I expected, 
to my own house. I retir earli to my chamber, without design to 
sleep. I place myself at a window, and gave the rein to reflection. 

the hate and degrad impuls which had late controul me were, 
in some degree, removed. new deject succeeded, but wa now produc 
by contempl my late behaviour. sure that passion is worthi to 
be abhor which obscur our understanding, and urg us to the 
commiss of injustice. what right had I to expect hi attendance? 
had I not demean myself like one indiffer to hi happiness, and as 
have bestow my regard upon another? hi absenc might be prompt 
by the love which I consid hi absenc as a proof that he wanted. 
He came not becaus the sight of me, the spectacl of my cold or 
aversion, contribut to hi despair. whi should I prolong, by hypocrisi 
or silence, hi miseri as well as my own? whi not deal with him 
explicitly, and assur him of the truth? 

you will hardli believ that, in obedi to thi suggestion, I rose 
for the purpos of order a light, that I might instantli make thi 
confess in a letter. A second thought shew me the rash of thi 
scheme, and I wonder by what infirm of mind I could be betray 
into a momentari approb of it. I saw with the utmost clear that 
a confess like that would be the most remediless and unpardon 
outrag upon the digniti of my sex, and utterli unworthi of that passion 
which controul me. 

I resum my seat and my musing. To account for the absenc of pleyel 
becam onc more the scope of my conjectures. how mani incid might 
occur to rais an insuper impedi in hi way? when I wa a child, 
a scheme of pleasure, in which he and hi sister were parties, had been, 
in like manner, frustrat by hi absence; but hi absence, in that 
instance, had been occas by hi fall from a boat into the river, 
in consequ of which he had run the most immin hazard of be 
drowned. here wa a second disappoint endur by the same persons, 
and produc by hi failure. might it not origin in the same cause? 
had he not design to cross the river that morn to make some 
necessari purchas in jersey? He had preconcert to return to hi 
own hous to dinner; but, perhaps, some disast had befallen him. 
experi had taught me the insecur of a canoe, and that wa the 
onli kind of boat which pleyel used: I was, likewise, actuat by 
an hereditari dread of water. these circumst combin to bestow 
consider plausibl on thi conjecture; but the constern 
with which I began to be seiz wa allay by reflecting, that if 
thi disast had happen my brother would have receiv the speediest 
inform of it. the consol which thi idea impart wa ravish 
from me by a new thought. thi disast might have happened, and hi 
famili not be appriz of it. the first intellig of hi fate may 
be commun by the livid corps which the tide may cast, mani day 
hence, upon the shore. 

thu wa I distress by opposit conjectures: thu wa I torment by 
phantom of my own creation. It wa not alway thus. I can ascertain the 
date when my mind becam the victim of thi imbecility; perhap it wa 
coeval with the inroad of a fatal passion; a passion that will never 
rank me in the number of it eulogists; it wa alon suffici to the 
extermin of my peace: it wa itself a plenteou sourc of 
calamity, and need not the concurr of other evil to take away the 
attract of existence, and dig for me an untim grave. 

the state of my mind natur introduc a train of reflect upon 
the danger and care which inevit beset an human being. By no 
violent transit wa I led to ponder on the turbul life and 
mysteri end of my father. I cherished, with the utmost veneration, 
the memori of thi man, and everi reliqu connect with hi fate wa 
preserv with the most scrupul care. among these wa to be number 
a manuscript, contain memoir of hi own life. the narr wa by 
no mean recommend by it eloquence; but neither did all it valu 
flow from my relationship to the author. it stile had an unaffect and 
picturesqu simplicity. the great varieti and circumstanti display of 
the incidents, togeth with their intrins importance, as descript 
of human manner and passions, made it the most use book in my 
collection. It wa late; but be sensibl of no inclin to sleep, 
I resolv to betak myself to the perus of it. 

To do thi it wa requisit to procur a light. the girl had long sinc 
retir to her chamber: it wa therefor proper to wait upon myself. 
A lamp, and the mean of light it, were onli to be found in the 
kitchen. thither I resolv forthwith to repair; but the light wa of 
use mere to enabl me to read the book. I knew the shelf and the spot 
where it stood. whether I took down the book, or prepar the lamp in 
the first place, appear to be a matter of no moment. the latter wa 
preferred, and, leav my seat, I approach the closet in which, as I 
mention formerly, my book and paper were deposited. 

suddenli the remembr of what had late pass in thi closet 
occurred. whether midnight wa approaching, or had passed, I knew not. I 
was, as then, alone, and defenceless. the wind wa in that direct 
in which, aid by the deathlik repos of nature, it brought to me 
the murmur of the water-fall. thi wa mingl with that solemn and 
enchant sound, which a breez produc among the leav of pines. the 
word of that mysteri dialogue, their fear import, and the wild 
excess to which I wa transport by my terrors, fill my imagin 
anew. My step faultered, and I stood a moment to recov myself. 

I prevail on myself at length to move toward the closet. I touch 
the lock, but my finger were powerless; I wa visit afresh by 
unconquer apprehensions. A sort of belief dart into my mind, that 
some be wa conceal within, whose purpos were evil. I began to 
contend with those fears, when it occur to me that I might, without 
impropriety, go for a lamp previous to open the closet. I reced 
a few steps; but befor I reach my chamber door my thought took a new 
direction. motion seem to produc a mechan influenc upon me. I 
wa asham of my weakness. besides, what aid could be afford me by a 
lamp? 

My fear had pictur to themselv no precis object. It would be 
difficult to depict, in words, the ingredi and hue of that phantom 
which haunt me. An hand invis and of preternatur strength, 
lift by human passions, and select my life for it aim, were part 
of thi terrif image. all place were alik access to thi foe, or 
if hi empir were restrict by local bounds, those bound were utterli 
inscrut by me. but had I not been told by some one in leagu with 
thi enemy, that everi place but the recess in the bank wa exempt from 
danger? I return to the closet, and onc more put my hand upon the 
lock. O! may my ear lose their sensibility, ere they be again assail 
by a shriek so terrible! not mere my understand wa subdu by the 
sound: it act on my nerv like an edg of steel. It appear to cut 
asund the fibr of my brain, and rack everi joint with agony. 

the cry, loud and pierc as it was, wa nevertheless human. No 
articul wa ever more distinct. the breath which accompani it did 
not fan my hair, yet did everi circumst combin to persuad me that 
the lip which utter it touch my veri shoulder. 

"hold! hold!" were the word of thi tremend prohibition, in whose 
tone the whole soul seem to be wrap up, and everi energi convert 
into eager and terror. 

shuddering, I dash myself against the wall, and by the same 
involuntari impulse, turn my face backward to examin the mysteri 
monitor. the moon-light stream into each window, and everi corner of 
the room wa conspicuous, and yet I beheld nothing! 

the interv wa too brief to be artifici measured, between the 
utter of these words, and my scrutini direct to the quarter whenc 
they came. yet if a human be had been there, could he fail to have 
been visible? which of my sens wa the prey of a fatal illusion? the 
shock which the sound produc wa still felt in everi part of my frame. 
the sound, therefore, could not but be a genuin commotion. but that I 
had heard it, wa not more true than that the be who utter it wa 
station at my right ear; yet my attend wa invisible. 

I cannot describ the state of my thought at that moment. surpriz 
had master my faculties. My frame shook, and the vital current wa 
congealed. I wa consciou onli to the vehem of my sensations. thi 
condit could not be lasting. like a tide, which suddenli mount to 
an overwhelm height, and then gradual subsides, my confus slowli 
gave place to order, and my tumult to a calm. I wa abl to deliber 
and move. I resum my feet, and advanc into the midst of the room. 
upward, and behind, and on each side, I threw penetr glances. I wa 
not satisfi with one examination. He that hitherto refus to be 
seen, might chang hi purpose, and on the next survey be clearli 
distinguishable. 

solitud impos least restraint upon the fancy. dark is less fertil 
of imag than the feebl lustr of the moon. I wa alone, and the wall 
were chequer by shadowi forms. As the moon pass behind a cloud and 
emerged, these shadow seem to be endow with life, and to move. the 
apart wa open to the breeze, and the curtain wa occasion 
blown from it ordinari position. thi motion wa not unaccompani with 
sound. I fail not to snatch a look, and to listen when thi motion 
and thi sound occurred. My belief that my monitor wa post near, 
wa strong, and instantli convert these appear to token of hi 
presence, and yet I could discern nothing. 

when my thought were at length permit to revert to the past, the 
first idea that occur wa the resembl between the word of the 
voic which I had just heard, and those which had termin my dream in 
the summer-house. there are mean by which we are abl to distinguish a 
substanc from a shadow, a realiti from the phantom of a dream. the pit, 
my brother beckon me forward, the seizur of my arm, and the voic 
behind, were sure imaginary. that these incid were fashion in my 
sleep, is support by the same indubit evid that compel me to 
believ myself awak at present; yet the word and the voic were the 
same. then, by some inexplic contrivance, I wa awar of the danger, 
while my action and sensat were those of one wholli unacquaint 
with it. now, wa it not equal true that my action and persuas 
were at war? had not the belief, that evil lurk in the closet, gain 
admittance, and had not my action betoken an unwarrant security? 
To obviat the effect of my infatuation, the same mean had been used. 

In my dream, he that tempt me to my destruction, wa my brother. death 
wa ambush in my path. from what evil wa I now rescued? what minist 
or implement of ill wa shut up in thi recess? who wa it whose 
suffoc grasp I wa to feel, should I dare to enter it? what 
monstrou concept is this? my brother! 

no; protection, and not injuri is hi province. strang and terribl 
chimera! yet it would not be suddenli dismissed. It wa sure no vulgar 
agenc that gave thi form to my fears. He to whom all part of time are 
equal present, whom no conting approaches, wa the author of that 
spell which now seiz upon me. life wa dear to me. No consider 
wa present that enjoin me to relinquish it. sacr duti combin 
with everi spontan sentiment to endear to me my being. should I not 
shudder when my be wa endangered? but what emot should possess me 
when the arm lift aginst me wa wieland's? 

idea exist in our mind that can be account for by no establish 
laws. whi did I dream that my brother wa my foe? whi but becaus an 
omen of my fate wa ordain to be communicated? yet what salutari end 
did it serve? did it arm me with caution to elude, or fortitud to bear 
the evil to which I wa reserved? My present thought were, no 
doubt, indebt for their hue to the similitud exist between these 
incid and those of my dream. sure it wa phrenzi that dictat my 
deed. that a ruffian wa hidden in the closet, wa an idea, the genuin 
tendenc of which wa to urg me to flight. such had been the effect 
formerli produced. had my mind been simpli occupi with thi thought at 
present, no doubt, the same impuls would have been experienced; but 
now it wa my brother whom I wa irresist persuad to regard as the 
contriv of that ill of which I had been forewarned. thi persuas 
did not extenu my fear or my danger. whi then did I again approach 
the closet and withdraw the bolt? My resolut wa instantli conceived, 
and execut without faultering. 

the door wa form of light materials. the lock, of simpl structure, 
easili forew it hold. It open into the room, and commonli move 
upon it hinges, after be unfastened, without ani effort of mine. 
thi effort, however, wa bestow upon the present occasion. It wa 
my purpos to open it with quickness, but the exert which I made wa 
ineffectual. It refus to open. 

At anoth time, thi circumst would not have look with a face of 
mystery. I should have suppos some casual obstruction, and repeat my 
effort to surmount it. but now my mind wa access to no conjectur 
but one. the door wa hinder from open by human force. surely, here 
wa new caus for affright. thi wa confirm proper to decid my 
conduct. now wa all ground of hesit taken away. what could be 
suppos but that I desert the chamber and the house? that I at least 
endeavour no longer to withdraw the door? 

have I not said that my action were dictat by phrenzy? My reason had 
forborne, for a time, to suggest or to sway my resolves. I reiter 
my endeavours. I exert all my forc to overcom the obstacle, but in 
vain. the strength that wa exert to keep it shut, wa superior to 
mine. 

A casual observ might, perhaps, applaud the audaci of thi 
conduct. whence, but from an habitu defianc of danger, could my 
persever arise? I have alreadi assigned, as distinctli as I am able, 
the caus of it. the frantic concept that my brother wa within, that 
the resist made to my design wa exert by him, had root itself 
in my mind. you will comprehend the height of thi infatuation, when 
I tell you, that, find all my exert vain, I betook myself to 
exclamations. sure I wa utterli bereft of understanding. 

now had I arriv at the crisi of my fate. "o! hinder not the door to 
open," I exclaimed, in a tone that had less of fear than of grief in 
it. "I know you well. come forth, but harm me not. I beseech you come 
forth." 

I had taken my hand from the lock, and remov to a small distanc from 
the door. I had scarc utter these words, when the door swung upon 
it hinges, and display to my view the interior of the closet. whoever 
wa within, wa shroud in darkness. A few second pass without 
interrupt of the silence. I knew not what to expect or to fear. My 
eye would not stray from the recess. presently, a deep sigh wa heard. 
the quarter from which it came heighten the eager of my gaze. some 
one approach from the farther end. I quickli perceiv the outlin 
of a human figure. it step were irresolut and slow. I recoil as it 
advanced. 

By come at length within the verg of the room, hi form wa clearli 
distinguishable. I had prefigur to myself a veri differ personage. 
the face that present itself wa the last that I should desir to meet 
at an hour, and in a place like this. My wonder wa stifl by my fears. 
assassin had lurk in thi recess. some divin voic warn me of 
danger, that at thi moment await me. I had spurn the intimation, 
and challeng my adversary. 

I recal the mysteri counten and dubiou charact of carwin. 
what motiv but atroci one could guid hi step hither? I wa 
alone. My habit suit the hour, and the place, and the warmth of the 
season. all succour wa remote. He had place himself between me and the 
door. My frame shook with the vehem of my apprehensions. 

yet I wa not wholli lost to myself: I vigilantli mark hi demeanour. 
hi look were grave, but not without perturbation. what speci of 
inquietud it betrayed, the light wa not strong enough to enabl me 
to discover. He stood still; but hi eye wander from one object to 
another. when these power organ were fix upon me, I shrunk into 
myself. At length, he broke silence. earnestness, and not embarrassment, 
wa in hi tone. He advanc close to me while he spoke. 

"what voic wa that which late address you?" 

He paus for an answer; but observ my trepidation, he resumed, with 
undiminish solemnity: "be not terrified. whoever he was, he hast done 
you an import service. I need not ask you if it were the voic of 
a companion. that sound wa beyond the compass of human organs. the 
knowledg that enabl him to tell you who wa in the closet, wa 
obtain by incomprehens means. 

"you knew that carwin wa there. were you not appriz of hi intents? 
the same power could impart the one as well as the other. yet, know 
these, you persisted. audaci girl! but, perhaps, you confid in hi 
guardianship. your confid wa just. with succour like thi at hand 
you may safe defi me. 

"he is my etern foe; the baffler of my best concert schemes. twice 
have you been save by hi accurs interposition. but for him I should 
long ere now have born away the spoil of your honor." 

He look at me with greater stedfast than before. I becam everi 
moment more anxiou for my safety. It wa with difficulti I stammer 
out an entreati that he would instantli depart, or suffer me to do so. 
He paid no regard to my request, but proceed in a more impass 
manner. 

"what is it you fear? have I not told you, you are safe? ha not one 
in whom you more reason place trust assur you of it? even if I 
execut my purpose, what injuri is done? your prejudic will call it 
by that name, but it merit it not. I wa impel by a sentiment that 
doe you honor; a sentiment, that would sanctifi my deed; but, whatev 
it be, you are safe. Be thi chimera still worshipped; I will do noth 
to pollut it." there he stopped. 

the accent and gestur of thi man left me drain of all courage. 
surely, on no other occas should I have been thu pusillanimous. My 
state I regard as a hopeless one. I wa wholli at the merci of thi 
being. whichev way I turn my eyes, I saw no avenu by which I might 
escape. the resourc of my person strength, my ingenuity, and my 
eloquence, I estim at nothing. the digniti of virtue, and the forc 
of truth, I had been accustom to celebrate; and had frequent vaunt 
of the conquest which I should make with their assistance. 

I use to suppos that certain evil could never befal a be in 
possess of a sound mind; that true virtu suppli us with energi 
which vice can never resist; that it wa alway in our power to 
obstruct, by hi own death, the design of an enemi who aim at less 
than our life. how wa it that a sentiment like despair had now invad 
me, and that I trust to the protect of chance, or to the piti of my 
persecutor? 

hi word impart some notion of the injuri which he had meditated. He 
talk of obstacl that had risen in hi way. He had relinquish hi 
design. these sourc suppli me with slender consolation. there wa no 
secur but in hi absence. when I look at myself, when I reflect 
on the hour and the place, I wa overpow by horror and dejection. 

He wa silent, museful, and inattent to my situation, yet made no 
motion to depart. I wa silent in my turn. what could I say? I wa 
confid that reason in thi contest would be impotent. I must owe my 
safeti to hi own suggestions. whatev purpos brought him hither, he 
had chang it. whi then did he remain? hi resolut might fluctuate, 
and the paus of a few minut restor to him hi first resolutions. 

yet wa not thi the man whom we had treat with unweari kindness? 
whose societi wa endear to us by hi intellectu elev and 
accomplishments? who had a thousand time expati on the use 
and beauti of virtue? whi should such a one be dreaded? If I could have 
forgotten the circumst in which our interview had taken place, I 
might have treat hi word as jests. presently, he resumed: 

"fear me not: the space that sever us is small, and all visibl succour 
is distant. you believ yourself complet in my power; that you stand 
upon the brink of ruin. such are your groundless fears. I cannot lift 
a finger to hurt you. easier it would be to stop the moon in her cours 
than to injur you. the power that protect you would crumbl my sinews, 
and reduc me to a heap of ash in a moment, if I were to harbour a 
thought hostil to your safety. thu are appear at length solved. 
littl did I expect that they origin hence. what a portion is 
assign to you? scan by the eye of thi intelligence, your path 
will be without pit to swallow, or snare to entangl you. environ by 
the arm of thi protection, all artific will be frustrated, and all 
malic repelled." 

here succeed a new pause. I wa still observ of everi gestur and 
look. the tranquil solemn that had late possess hi counten 
gave way to a new expression. all now wa trepid and anxiety. 

"I must be gone," said he in a falter accent. "whi do I linger here? 
I will not ask your forgiveness. I see that your terror are invincible. 
your pardon will be extort by fear, and not dictat by compassion. I 
must fli from you forever. He that could plot against your honor, must 
expect from you and your friend persecut and death. I must doom 
myself to endless exile." 

say this, he hastili left the room. I listen while he descend the 
stairs, and, unbolt the outer door, went forth. I did not follow him 
with my eyes, as the moon-light would have enabl me to do. reliev by 
hi absence, and exhaust by the conflict of my fears, I threw myself 
on a chair, and resign myself to those bewild idea which 
incid like these could not fail to produce. 



chapter X 


order could not readili be introduc into my thoughts. the voic still 
rung in my ears. everi accent that wa utter by carwin wa fresh in my 
remembrance. hi unwelcom approach, the recognit of hi person, hi 
hasti departure, produc a complex impress on my mind which no word 
can delineate. I strove to give a slower motion to my thoughts, and to 
regul a confus which becam painful; but my effort were nugatory. 
I cover my eye with my hand, and sat, I know not how long, without 
power to arrang or utter my conceptions. 

I had remain for hours, as I believed, in absolut solitude. No 
thought of person danger had molest my tranquillity. I had made 
no prepar for defence. what wa it that suggest the design of 
perus my father' manuscript? if, instead of this, I had retir 
to bed, and to sleep, to what fate might I not have been reserved? the 
ruffian, who must almost have suppress hi breath to screen himself 
from discovery, would have notic thi signal, and I should have 
awaken onli to perish with affright, and to abhor myself. could I have 
remain unconsci of my danger? could I have tranquilli slept in the 
midst of so deadli a snare? 

and who wa he that threaten to destroy me? By what mean could he 
hide himself in thi closet? sure he is gift with supernatur 
power. such is the enemi of whose attempt I wa forewarned. daili I had 
seen him and convers with him. noth could be discern through the 
impenetr veil of hi duplicity. when busi in conjectures, as to 
the author of the evil that wa threatened, my mind did not light, for 
a moment, upon hi image. yet ha he not avow himself my enemy? whi 
should he be here if he had not medit evil? 

He confess that thi ha been hi second attempt. what wa the scene 
of hi former conspiracy? wa it not he whose whisper betray him? Am 
I deceived; or wa there not a faint resembl between the voic of 
thi man and that which talk of grasp my throat, and extinguish 
my life in a moment? then he had a colleagu in hi crime; now he 
is alone. then death wa the scope of hi thoughts; now an injuri 
unspeak more dreadful. how thank should I be to the power that 
ha interpos to save me! 

that power is invisible. It is subject to the cogniz of one of my 
senses. what are the mean that will inform me of what natur it is? 
He ha set himself to counterwork the machin of thi man, who had 
menac destruct to all that is dear to me, and whose cun had 
surmount everi human impediment. there wa none to rescu me from 
hi grasp. My rash even hasten the complet of hi scheme, and 
preclud him from the benefit of deliberation. I had rob him of the 
power to repent and forbear. had I been appriz of the danger, I should 
have regard my conduct as the mean of render my escap from it 
impossible. such, likewise, seem to have been the fear of my invis 
protector. els whi that startl intreati to refrain from open the 
closet? By what inexplic infatu wa I compel to proceed? 

yet my conduct wa wise. carwin, unabl to comprehend my folly, ascrib 
my behaviour to my knowledge. He conceiv himself previous detected, 
and such detect be possibl to flow onli from MY heavenli friend, 
and hi enemy, hi fear acquir addit strength. 

He is appriz of the natur and intent of thi being. perhap he 
is a human agent. yet, on that supposit hi atchiev are 
incredible. whi should I be select as the object of hi care; or, if 
a mere mortal, should I not recogn some one, whom, benefit impart 
and receiv had prompt to love me? what were the limit and durat 
of hi guardianship? wa the geniu of my birth entrust by divin 
benign with thi province? are human faculti adequ to 
receiv stronger proof of the exist of unfett and benefic 
intellig than I have received? 

but who wa thi man' coadjutor? the voic that acknowledg an 
allianc in treacheri with carwin warn me to avoid the summer-house. 
He assur me that there onli my safeti wa endangered. hi assurance, 
as it now appears, wa fallacious. wa there not deceit in hi 
admonition? wa hi compact realli annulled? some purpos was, perhaps, 
to be accomplish by prevent my futur visit to that spot. whi wa 
I enjoin silenc to others, on the subject of thi admonition, unless 
it were for some unauthor and guilti purpose? 

No one but myself wa accustom to visit it. backward, it wa hidden 
from distant view by the rock, and in front, it wa screen from all 
examination, by creep plants, and the branch of cedars. what 
recess could be more propiti to secrecy? the spirit which haunt it 
formerli wa pure and rapturous. It wa a fane sacr to the memori 
of infantil days, and to bliss imagin of the future! what a 
gloomi revers had succeed sinc the omin arriv of thi stranger! 
now, perhaps, it is the scene of hi meditations. purpos fraught with 
horror, that shun the light, and contempl the pollut of innocence, 
are here engendered, and fostered, and rear to maturity. 

such were the idea that, dure the night, were tumultu revolv 
by me. I review everi convers in which carwin had born a part. 
I studi to discov the true infer deduc from hi deport 
and word with regard to hi former adventur and actual views. I 
ponder on the comment which he made on the relat which I had given 
of the closet dialogue. No new idea suggest themselv in the cours 
of thi review. My expect had, from the first, been disappoint 
on the small degre of surpriz which thi narr excit in him. He 
never explicitli declar hi opinion as to the natur of those voices, 
or decid whether they were real or visionary. He recommend no 
measur of caution or prevention. 

but what measur were now to be taken? wa the danger which threaten 
me at an end? had I noth more to fear? I wa lonely, and without 
mean of defence. I could not calcul the motiv and regul the 
footstep of thi person. what certainti wa there, that he would not 
re-assum hi purposes, and swiftli return to the execut of them? 

thi idea cover me onc more with dismay. how deepli did I regret the 
solitud in which I wa placed, and how ardent did I desir the return 
of day! but neither of these inconveni were suscept of remedy. 
At first, it occur to me to summon my servant, and make her spend the 
night in my chamber; but the inefficaci of thi expedi to enhanc my 
safeti wa easili seen. onc I resolv to leav the house, and retir 
to my brother's, but wa deter by reflect on the unseason 
of the hour, on the alarm which my arrival, and the account which I 
should be oblig to give, might occasion, and on the danger to which I 
might expos myself in the way thither. I began, likewise, to consid 
carwin' return to molest me as exceedingli improbable. He had 
relinquished, of hi own accord, hi design, and depart without 
compulsion. "surely," said I, "there is omnipot in the caus that 
chang the view of a man like carwin. the divin that shield me 
from hi attempt will take suitabl care of my futur safety. thu to 
yield to my fear is to deserv that they should be real." 

scarc had I utter these words, when my attent wa startl by 
the sound of footsteps. they denot some one step into the piazza 
in front of my house. My new-born confid wa extinguish in a 
moment. carwin, I thought, had repent hi departure, and wa hastili 
returning. the possibl that hi return wa prompt by intent 
consist with my safety, found no place in my mind. imag of 
violat and murder assail me anew, and the terror which succeed 
almost incapacit me from take ani measur for my defence. It wa 
an impuls of which I wa scarc conscious, that made me fasten the 
lock and draw the bolt of my chamber door. have done this, I threw 
myself on a seat; for I trembl to a degre which disabl me from 
standing, and my soul wa so perfectli absorb in the act of listening, 
that almost the vital motion were stopped. 

the door below creak on it hinges. It wa not again thrust to, but 
appear to remain open. footstep entered, travers the entry, and 
began to mount the stairs. how I detest the folli of not pursu the 
man when he withdrew, and bolt after him the outer door! might he not 
conceiv thi omiss to be a proof that my angel had desert me, and 
be therebi fortifi in guilt? 

everi step on the stairs, which brought him nearer to my chamber, ad 
vigor to my desperation. the evil with which I wa menac wa to be at 
ani rate eluded. how littl did I preconc the conduct which, in an 
exig like this, I should be prone to adopt. you will suppos that 
deliber and despair would have suggest the same cours of action, 
and that I should have, unhesitatingly, resort to the best mean of 
person defenc within my power. A penknif lay open upon my table. I 
rememb that it wa there, and seiz it. for what purpos you will 
scarc inquire. It will be immedi suppos that I meant it for my 
last refuge, and that if all other mean should fail, I should plung it 
into the heart of my ravisher. 

I have lost all faith in the stedfast of human resolves. It wa thu 
that in period of calm I had determin to act. No cowardic had been 
held by me in greater abhorr than that which prompt an injur 
femal to destroy, not her injur ere the injuri wa perpetrated, but 
herself when it wa without remedy. yet now thi penknif appear to 
me of no other use than to baffl my assailant, and prevent the crime 
by destroy myself. To deliber at such a time wa impossible; but 
among the tumultu suggest of the moment, I do not recollect that 
it onc occur to me to use it as an instrument of direct defence. the 
step had now reach the second floor. everi footfal acceler the 
completion, without augmenting, the certainti of evil. the conscious 
that the door wa fast, now that noth but that wa interpos between 
me and danger, wa a sourc of some consolation. I cast my eye toward 
the window. this, likewise, wa a new suggestion. If the door should 
give way, it wa my sudden resolut to throw myself from the window. 
it height from the ground, which wa cover beneath by a brick 
pavement, would insur my destruction; but I thought not of that. 

when opposit to my door the footstep ceased. wa he listen whether 
my fear were allayed, and my caution were asleep? did he hope to take 
me by surprize? yet, if so, whi did he allow so mani noisi signal to 
betray hi approach? present the step were again heard to approach 
the door. An hand wa laid upon the lock, and the latch pull back. did 
he imagin it possibl that I should fail to secur the door? A slight 
effort wa made to push it open, as if all bolt be withdrawn, a 
slight effort onli wa required. 

I no sooner perceiv this, than I move swiftli toward the window. 
carwin' frame might be said to be all muscle. hi strength and activ 
had appeared, in variou instances, to be prodigious. A slight exert 
of hi forc would demolish the door. would not that exert be made? 
too sure it would; but, at the same moment that thi obstacl should 
yield, and he should enter the apartment, my determin wa form to 
leap from the window. My sens were still bound to thi object. I gaze 
at the door in momentari expect that the assault would be made. the 
paus continued. the person without wa irresolut and motionless. 

suddenly, it occur to me that carwin might conceiv me to have fled. 
that I had not betaken myself to flight was, indeed, the least probabl 
of all conclusions. In thi persuas he must have been confirm on 
find the lower door unfastened, and the chamber door locked. wa 
it not wise to foster thi persuasion? should I maintain deep silence, 
this, in addit to other circumstances, might encourag the belief, 
and he would onc more depart. everi new reflect ad plausibl 
to thi reasoning. It wa present more strongli enforced, when I 
notic footstep withdraw from the door. the blood onc more flow 
back to my heart, and a dawn of exult began to rise: but my joy wa 
short lived. instead of descend the stairs, he pass to the door of 
the opposit chamber, open it, and have entered, shut it after him 
with a violenc that shook the house. 

how wa I to interpret thi circumstance? for what end could he have 
enter thi chamber? did the violenc with which he close the door 
testifi the depth of hi vexation? thi room wa usual occupi by 
pleyel. wa carwin awar of hi absenc on thi night? could he be 
suspect of a design so sordid as pillage? If thi were hi view there 
were no mean in my power to frustrat it. It behov me to seiz the 
first opportun to escape; but if my escap were suppos by my 
enemi to have been alreadi effected, no asylum wa more secur than the 
present. how could my passag from the hous be accomplish without 
nois that might incit him to pursu me? 

utterli at a loss to account for hi go into pleyel' chamber, I 
wait in instant expect of hear him come forth. all, however, 
wa profoundli still. I listen in vain for a consider period, to 
catch the sound of the door when it should again be opened. there wa 
no other avenu by which he could escape, but a door which led into the 
girl' chamber. would ani evil from thi quarter befal the girl? 

henc aros a new train of apprehensions. they mere ad to the 
turbul and agoni of my reflections. whatev evil impend over her, 
I had no power to avert it. seclus and silenc were the onli mean of 
save myself from the peril of thi fatal night. what solemn vow did 
I put up, that if I should onc more behold the light of day, I would 
never trust myself again within the threshold of thi dwelling! 

minut linger after minute, but no token wa given that carwin had 
return to the passage. what, I again asked, could detain him in thi 
room? wa it possibl that he had returned, and glided, unperceived, 
away? I wa speedili awar of the difficulti that attend an enterpr 
like this; and yet, as if by that mean I were capabl of gain ani 
inform on that head, I cast anxiou look from the window. 

the object that first attract my attent wa an human figur 
stand on the edg of the bank. perhap my penetr wa assist 
by my hopes. Be that as it will, the figur of carwin wa clearli 
distinguishable. from the obscur of my station, it wa imposs 
that I should be discern by him, and yet he scarc suffer me to 
catch a glimps of him. He turn and went down the steep, which, in 
thi part, wa not difficult to be scaled. 

My conjectur then had been right. carwin ha softli open the door, 
descend the stairs, and issu forth. that I should not have overheard 
hi steps, wa onli less incred than that my eye had deceiv me. 
but what wa now to be done? the hous wa at length deliv from thi 
detest inmate. By one avenu might he again re-enter. wa it not wise 
to bar the lower door? perhap he had gone out by the kitchen door. for 
thi end, he must have pass through judith' chamber. these entranc 
be close and bolted, as great secur wa gain as wa compat 
with my lone condition. 

the proprieti of these measur wa too manifest not to make me struggl 
success with my fears. yet I open my own door with the utmost 
caution, and descend as if I were afraid that carwin had been still 
immur in pleyel' chamber. the outer door wa a-jar. I shut, with 
trembl eagerness, and drew everi bolt that append to it. I then 
pass with light and less cautiou step through the parlour, but wa 
surpriz to discov that the kitchen door wa secure. I wa compel 
to acquiesc in the first conjectur that carwin had escap through the 
entry. 

My heart wa now somewhat eas of the load of apprehension. I return 
onc more to my chamber, the door of which I wa care to lock. It wa 
no time to think of repose. the moon-light began alreadi to fade befor 
the light of the day. the approach of morn wa betoken by the usual 
signals. I muse upon the event of thi night, and determin to take 
up my abod henceforth at my brother's. whether I should inform him 
of what had happen wa a question which seem to demand some 
consideration. My safeti unquestion requir that I should abandon 
my present habitation. 

As my thought began to flow with fewer impediments, the imag of 
pleyel, and the dubious of hi condition, again recur to me. I 
again ran over the possibl caus of hi absenc on the preced day. 
My mind wa attun to melancholy. I dwelt, with an obstinaci for which 
I could not account, on the idea of hi death. I paint to myself hi 
struggl with the billows, and hi last appearance. I imagin myself 
a midnight wander on the shore, and to have stumbl on hi corpse, 
which the tide had cast up. these dreari imag affect me even to 
tears. I endeavour not to restrain them. they impart a relief which 
I had not anticipated. the more copious they flowed, the more did 
my gener sensat appear to subsid into calm, and a certain 
restless give way to repose. 

perhaps, reliev by thi effusion, the slumber so much want might 
have stolen on my senses, had there been no new caus of alarm. 



chapter XI 


I wa arous from thi stupor by sound that evid aros in the 
next chamber. wa it possibl that I had been mistaken in the figur 
which I had seen on the bank? or had carwin, by some inscrut means, 
penetr onc more into thi chamber? the opposit door opened; 
footstep came forth, and the person, advanc to mine, knocked. 

So unexpect an incid rob me of all presenc of mind, and, 
start up, I involuntarili exclaimed, "who is there?" An answer wa 
immedi given. the voice, to my inexpress astonishment, wa 
pleyel's. 

"it is I. have you risen? If you have not, make haste; I want three 
minut convers with you in the parlour--i will wait for you 
there." say thi he retir from the door. 

should I confid in the testimoni of my ears? If that were true, it wa 
pleyel that had been hitherto immur in the opposit chamber: he whom 
my rueful fanci had depict in so mani ruinou and ghastli shapes: he 
whose footstep had been listen to with such inquietude! what is man, 
that knowledg is so sparingli confer upon him! that hi heart should 
be wrung with distress, and hi frame be exanim with fear, though 
hi safeti be encompass with impregn walls! what are the bound 
of human imbecility! He that warn me of the presenc of my foe refus 
the intim by which so mani rack fear would have been precluded. 

yet who would have imagin the arriv of pleyel at such an hour? hi 
tone wa despond and anxious. whi thi unseason summons? and whi 
thi hasti departure? some tide he, perhaps, bear of mysteri and 
unwelcom import. 

My impati would not allow me to consum much time in deliberation: I 
hasten down. pleyel I found stand at a window, with eye cast 
down as in meditation, and arm fold on hi breast. everi line in 
hi counten wa pregnant with sorrow. To thi wa ad a certain 
wan and air of fatigue. the last time I had seen him appear 
had been the revers of these. I wa startl at the change. the first 
impuls wa to question him as to the cause. thi impuls wa supplant 
by some degre of confusion, flow from a conscious that love had 
too large, and, as it might prove, a percept share in creat thi 
impulse. I wa silent. 

present he rais hi eye and fix them upon me. I read in them an 
anguish altogeth ineffable. never had I wit a like demeanour 
in pleyel. never, indeed, had I observ an human counten in which 
grief wa more legibl inscribed. He seem struggl for utterance; 
but hi struggl be fruitless, he shook hi head and turn away 
from me. 

My impati would not allow me to be longer silent: "what," said I, 
"for heaven' sake, my friend, what is the matter?" 

He start at the sound of my voice. hi looks, for a moment, becam 
convuls with an emot veri differ from grief. hi accent were 
broken with rage. 

"the matter--o wretch!--thu exquisit fashioned--on whom natur 
seem to have exhaust all her graces; with charm so aw and 
so pure! how art thou fallen! from what height fallen! A ruin so 
complete--so unheard of!" 

hi word were again choak by emotion. grief and piti were again 
mingl in hi features. He resumed, in a tone half suffoc by sobs: 

"but whi should I upbraid thee? could I restor to thee what thou hast 
lost; effac thi curs stain; snatch thee from the jaw of thi fiend; 
I would do it. yet what will avail my efforts? I have not arm with 
which to contend with so consummate, so fright a depravity. 

"evid less than thi would onli have excit resent and scorn. 
the wretch who should have breath a suspicion injuri to thi honor, 
would have been regard without anger; not hatr or envi could have 
prompt him; it would mere be an argument of madness. that my eyes, 
that my ears, should bear wit to thi fall! By no other way could 
detest convict be imparted. 

"whi do I summon thee to thi conference? whi expos myself to thi 
derision? here admonit and entreati are vain. thou knowest him 
already, for a murder and thief. I had thought to have been the first 
to disclos to thee hi infamy; to have warn thee of the pit to 
which thou art hastening; but thi eye are open in vain. O foul and 
insupport disgrace! 

"there is but one path. I know you will disappear together. In thi ruin, 
how will the felic and honor of multitud be involved! but it must 
come. thi scene shall not be blot by hi presence. No doubt thou 
wilt shortli see thi detest paramour. thi scene will be again 
pollut by a midnight assignation. inform him of hi danger; tell him 
that hi crime are known; let him fli far and instantli from thi spot, 
if he desir to avoid the fate which menac him in ireland. 

"and wilt thou not stay behind?--but shame upon my weakness. I know 
not what I would say.--i have done what I purposed. To stay longer, to 
expostulate, to beseech, to enumer the consequ of thi act--what 
end can it serv but to blazon thi infami and embitt our woes? and 
yet, O think, think ere it be too late, on the distress which thi 
flight will entail upon us; on the base, grovelling, and atroci 
charact of the wretch to whom thou hast sold thi honor. but what 
is this? Is not thi effronteri impenetrable, and thi heart thoroughli 
cankered? O most specious, and most proflig of women!" 

say this, he rush out of the house. I saw him in a few moment 
hurri along the path which led to my brother's. I had no power to 
prevent hi going, or to recall, or to follow him. the accent I had 
heard were calcul to confound and bewilder. I look around me to 
assur myself that the scene wa real. I move that I might banish the 
doubt that I wa awake. such enorm imput from the mouth of 
pleyel! To be stigmat with the name of wanton and profligate! To 
be charg with the sacrific of honor! with midnight meet with a 
wretch known to be a murder and thief! with an intent to fli in hi 
company! 

what I had heard wa sure the dictat of phrenzy, or it wa built 
upon some fatal, some incomprehens mistake. after the horror of the 
night; after undergo peril so immin from thi man, to be summon 
to an interview like this; to find pleyel fraught with a belief that, 
instead of have chosen death as a refug from the violenc of thi 
man, I had hug hi base to my heart, had sacrif for him my 
purity, my spotless name, my friendships, and my fortune! that even 
mad could engend accus like these wa not to be believed. 

what evid could possibl suggest concept so wild? after the 
unlooked-for interview with carwin in my chamber, he retired. could 
pleyel have observ hi exit? It wa not long after that pleyel himself 
entered. did he build on thi incident, hi odiou conclusions? could 
the long seri of my action and sentiment grant me no exempt from 
suspicion so foul? wa it not more ration to infer that carwin' 
design had been illicit; that my life had been endang by the furi 
of one whom, by some means, he had discov to be an assassin and 
robber; that my honor had been assailed, not by blandishments, but by 
violence? 

He ha judg me without hearing. He ha drawn from dubiou appearances, 
conclus the most improb and unjust. He ha load me with all 
outrag epithets. He ha rank me with prostitut and thieves. I 
cannot pardon thee, pleyel, for thi injustice. thi understand must 
be hurt. If it be not, if thi conduct wa sober and deliberate, I can 
never forgiv an outrag so unmanly, and so gross. 

these thought gradual gave place to others. pleyel wa possess by 
some momentari phrenzy: appear had led him into palpabl errors. 
whenc could hi sagac have contract thi blindness? wa it not 
love? previous assur of my affect for carwin, distract with 
grief and jealousy, and impel hither at that late hour by some 
unknown instigation, hi imagin transform shadow into monsters, 
and plung him into these deplor errors. 

thi idea wa not unattend with consolation. My soul wa divid 
between indign at hi injustice, and delight on account of the 
sourc from which I conceiv it to spring. for a long time they would 
allow admiss to no other thoughts. surpriz is an emot that 
enfeebles, not invigorates. all my medit were accompani 
with wonder. I rambl with vagueness, or clung to one imag with an 
obstinaci which suffici testifi the madden influenc of late 
transactions. 

gradual I proceed to reflect upon the consequ of pleyel' 
mistake, and on the measur I should take to guard myself against 
futur injuri from carwin. should I suffer thi mistak to be detect 
by time? when hi passion should subside, would he not perceiv the 
flagranc of hi injustice, and hasten to aton for it? did it not 
becom my charact to testifi resent for languag and treatment so 
opprobrious? wrapt up in the conscious of innocence, and confid 
in the influenc of time and reflect to confut so groundless a 
charge, it wa my provinc to be passiv and silent. 

As to the violenc medit by carwin, and the mean of elud them, 
the path to be taken by me wa obvious. I resolv to tell the tale to 
my brother, and regul myself by hi advice. for thi end, when the 
morn wa somewhat advanced, I took the way to hi house. My sister 
wa engag in her customari occupations. As soon as I appeared, she 
remark a chang in my looks. I wa not will to alarm her by the 
inform which I had to communicate. her health wa in that condit 
which render a disastr tale particularli unsuitable. I forbor a 
direct answer to her inquiries, and inquired, in my turn, for wieland. 

"why," said she, "I suspect someth mysteri and unpleas ha 
happen thi morning. scarc had we risen when pleyel drop among 
us. what could have prompt him to make us so earli and so unseason 
a visit I cannot tell. To judg from the disord of hi dress, and 
hi countenance, someth of an extraordinari natur ha occurred. He 
permit me mere to know that he had slept none, nor even undressed, 
dure the past night. He took your brother to walk with him. some 
topic must have deepli engag them, for wieland did not return till 
the breakfast hour wa passed, and return alone. hi disturb wa 
excessive; but he would not listen to my importunities, or tell me 
what had happened. I gather from hint which he let fall, that your 
situat was, in some way, the cause: yet he assur me that you were 
at your own house, alive, in good health, and in perfect safety. He 
scarc ate a morsel, and immedi after breakfast went out again. 
He would not inform me whither he wa going, but mention that he 
probabl might not return befor night." 

I wa equal astonish and alarm by thi information. pleyel had 
told hi tale to my brother, and had, by a plausibl and exagger 
picture, instil into him unfavor thought of me. yet would not 
the more correct judgment of wieland perceiv and expos the fallaci of 
hi conclusions? perhap hi uneasi might aris from some insight 
into the charact of carwin, and from apprehens for my safety. the 
appear by which pleyel had been misled, might induc him likewis 
to believ that I entertain an indiscreet, though not dishonor 
affect for carwin. such were the conjectur rapidli formed. I wa 
inexpress anxiou to chang them into certainty. for thi end 
an interview with my brother wa desirable. He wa gone, no one knew 
whither, and wa not expect speedili to return. I had no clue by which 
to trace hi footsteps. 

My anxieti could not be conceal from my sister. they heighten 
her solicitud to be acquaint with the cause. there were mani reason 
persuad me to silence: at least, till I had seen my brother, it would 
be an act of inexcus temer to unfold what had late passed. No 
other expedi for elud her importun occur to me, but that 
of return to my own house. I recollect my determin to becom a 
tenant of thi roof. I mention it to her. she joy acced to thi 
proposal, and suffer me, with less reluctance, to depart, when I told 
her that it wa with a view to collect and send to my new dwell what 
articl would be immedi use to me. 

onc more I return to the hous which had been the scene of so 
much turbul and danger. I wa at no great distanc from it when 
I observ my brother come out. On see me he stopped, and after 
ascertaining, as it seemed, which way I wa going, he return into the 
hous befor me. I sincer rejoic at thi event, and I hasten to 
set things, if possible, on their right footing. 

hi brow wa by no mean express of those vehement emot with 
which pleyel had been agitated. I drew a favor omen from thi 
circumstance. without delay I began the conversation. 

"I have been to look for you," said I, "but wa told by catharin that 
pleyel had engag you on some import and disagre affair. befor 
hi interview with you he spent a few minut with me. these minut he 
employ in upbraid me for crime and intent with which I am by 
no mean chargeable. I believ him to have taken up hi opinion on 
veri insuffici grounds. hi behaviour wa in the highest degre 
precipit and unjust, and, until I receiv some atonement, I shall 
treat him, in my turn, with that contempt which he justli merits: 
meanwhil I am fear that he ha prejud my brother against me. 
that is an evil which I most anxious deprecate, and which I shall 
inde exert myself to remove. ha he made me the subject of thi 
morning' conversation?" 

My brother' counten testifi no surpriz at my address. the 
benign of hi look were no wise diminished. 

"it is true," said he, "your conduct wa the subject of our discourse. I 
am your friend, as well as your brother. there is no human be whom I 
love with more tenderness, and whose welfar is nearer my heart. judg 
then with what emot I listen to pleyel' story. I expect and 
desir you to vindic yourself from aspers so foul, if vindic 
be possible." 

the tone with which he utter the last word affect me deeply. "if 
vindic be possible!" repeat I. "from what you know, do you deem a 
formal vindic necessary? can you harbour for a moment the belief of 
my guilt?" 

He shook hi head with an air of acut anguish. "I have struggled," said 
he, "to dismiss that belief. you speak befor a judg who will profit by 
ani pretenc to acquit you: who is readi to question hi own sens when 
they plead against you." 

these word incit a new set of thought in my mind. I began to suspect 
that pleyel had built hi accus on some foundat unknown to me. 
"I may be a stranger to the ground of your belief. pleyel load me 
with indec and virul invectives, but he withheld from me the fact 
that gener hi suspicions. event took place last night of which 
some of the circumst were of an ambigu nature. I conceiv that 
these might possibl have fallen under hi cognizance, and that, view 
through the mist of prejudic and passion, they suppli a pretenc 
for hi conduct, but believ that your more unbiass judgment would 
estim them at their just value. perhap hi tale ha been differ 
from what I suspect it to be. listen then to my narrative. If there be 
ani thing in hi stori inconsist with mine, hi stori is false." 

I then proceed to a circumstanti relat of the incid of the 
last night. wieland listen with deep attention. have finished, 
"this," continu I, "i the truth; you see in what circumst an 
interview took place between carwin and me. He remain for hour in my 
closet, and for some minut in my chamber. He depart without hast or 
interruption. If pleyel mark him as he left the house, and it is 
not imposs that he did, infer injuri to my charact might 
suggest themselv to him. In admit them, he gave proof of less 
discern and less candor than I onc ascrib to him." 

"hi proofs," said wieland, after a consider pause, "are different. 
that he should be deceived, is not possible. that he himself is not the 
deceiver, could not be believed, if hi testimoni were not inconsist 
with yours; but the doubt which I entertain are now removed. your 
tale, some part of it, is marvellous; the voic which exclaim against 
your rash in approach the closet, your persist notwithstand 
that prohibition, your belief that I wa the ruffian, and your 
subsequ conduct, are believ by me, becaus I have known you from 
childhood, becaus a thousand instanc have attest your veracity, and 
becaus noth less than my own hear and vision would convinc me, 
in opposit to her own assertions, that my sister had fallen into 
wicked like this." 

I threw my arm around him, and bath hi cheek with my tears. "that," 
said I, "i spoken like my brother. but what are the proofs?" 

He replied--"pleyel inform me that, in go to your house, hi 
attent wa attract by two voices. the person speak sat beneath 
the bank out of sight. these persons, judg by their voices, were 
carwin and you. I will not repeat the dialogue. If my sister wa the 
female, pleyel wa justifi in conclud you to be, indeed, one of the 
most proflig of women. hence, hi accus of you, and hi effort 
to obtain my concurr to a plan by which an etern separ should 
be brought about between my sister and thi man." 

I made wieland repeat thi recital. here, indeed, wa a tale to fill me 
with terribl foreboding. I had vainli thought that my safeti could be 
suffici secur by door and bars, but thi is a foe from whose 
grasp no power of divin can save me! hi artific will ever lay my 
fame and happi at hi mercy. how shall I counterwork hi plots, or 
detect hi coadjutor? He ha taught some vile and abandon femal to 
mimic my voice. pleyel' ear were the wit of my dishonor. thi 
is the midnight assign to which he alluded. thu is the silenc 
he maintain when attempt to open the door of my chamber, account 
for. He suppos me absent, and meant, perhaps, had my apart been 
accessible, to leav in it some accus memorial. 

pleyel wa no longer equal culpable. the sincer of hi anguish, the 
depth of hi despair, I rememb with some tendenc to gratitude. 
yet wa he not precipitate? wa the conjectur that my part wa play 
by some mimic so utterli untenable? instanc of thi faculti are 
common. the wicked of carwin must, in hi opinion, have been 
adequ to such contrivances, and yet the supposit of my guilt wa 
adopt in prefer to that. 

but how wa thi error to be unveiled? what but my own assert had I 
to throw in the balanc against it? would thi be permit to outweigh 
the testimoni of hi senses? I had no wit to prove my exist 
in anoth place. the real event of that night are marvellous. few, to 
whom they should be related, would scrupl to discredit them. pleyel is 
sceptic in a transcend degree. I cannot summon carwin to my bar, 
and make him the attestor of my innocence, and the accus of himself. 

My brother saw and comprehend my distress. He wa unacquainted, 
however, with the full extent of it. He knew not by how mani motiv 
I wa incit to retriev the good opinion of pleyel. He endeavor 
to consol me. some new event, he said, would occur to disentangl the 
maze. He did not question the influenc of my eloquence, if I thought 
proper to exert it. whi not seek an interview with pleyel, and exact 
from him a minut relation, in which someth may be met with serv 
to destroy the probabl of the whole? 

I caught, with eagerness, at thi hope; but my alacr wa damp by 
new reflections. should I, perfect in thi respect, and unblemish as 
I was, thrust myself, uncalled, into hi presence, and make my felic 
depend upon hi arbitrari verdict? 

"if you chuse to seek an interview," continu wieland, "you must make 
haste, for pleyel inform me of hi intent to set out thi even 
or to-morrow on a long journey." 

No intellig wa less expect or less welcom than this. I had 
thrown myself in a window seat; but now, start on my feet, I 
exclaimed, "good heavens! what is it you say? a journey? whither? when?" 

"I cannot say whither. It is a sudden resolut I believe. I did not 
hear of it till thi morning. He promis to write to me as soon as he 
is settled." 

I need no further inform as to the caus and issu of thi 
journey. the scheme of happi to which he had devot hi thought 
wa blast by the discoveri of last night. My prefer of another, 
and my unworthi to be ani longer the object of hi adoration, were 
evinc by the same act and in the same moment. the thought of utter 
desertion, a desert origin in such a cause, wa the prelud to 
distraction. that pleyel should abandon me forever, becaus I wa blind 
to hi excellence, becaus I covet pollution, and wed infamy, when, 
on the contrary, my heart wa the shrine of all purity, and beat onli 
for hi sake, wa a destini which, as long as my life wa in my own 
hands, I would by no mean consent to endure. 

I rememb that thi evil wa still preventable; that thi fatal 
journey it wa still in my power to procrastinate, or, perhaps, to 
occas it to be laid aside. there were no impedi to a visit: I 
onli dread lest the interview should be too long delayed. My brother 
befriend my impatience, and readili consent to furnish me with a 
chais and servant to attend me. My purpos wa to go immedi to 
pleyel' farm, where hi engag usual detain him dure the 
day. 



chapter xii 


My way lay through the city. I had scarc enter it when I wa seiz 
with a gener sensat of sickness. everi object grew dim and swam 
befor my sight. It wa with difficulti I prevent myself from sink 
to the bottom of the carriage. I order myself to be carri to mrs. 
baynton's, in hope that an interv of repos would invigor and 
refresh me. My distract thought would allow me but littl rest. 
grow somewhat better in the afternoon, I resum my journey. 

My contempl were limit to a few objects. I regard my success, 
in the purpos which I had in view, as consider doubtful. I 
depended, in some degree, on the suggest of the moment, and on the 
materi which pleyel himself should furnish me. when I reflect on 
the natur of the accusation, I burn with disdain. would not truth, 
and the conscious of innocence, render me triumphant? should I not 
cast from me, with irresist force, such atroci imputations? 

what an entir and mourn chang ha been effect in a few hours! the 
gulf that separ man from insect is not wider than that which sever 
the pollut from the chast among women. yesterday and to-day I am the 
same. there is a degre of deprav to which it is imposs for me 
to sink; yet, in the apprehens of another, my ancient and intim 
associate, the perpetu wit of my actions, and partak of my 
thoughts, I had ceas to be the same. My integr wa tarnish 
and wither in hi eyes. I wa the colleagu of a murderer, and the 
paramour of a thief! 

hi opinion wa not destitut of evidence: yet what proof could 
reason avail to establish an opinion like this? If the sentiment 
correspond not with the voic that wa heard, the evid wa 
deficient; but thi want of correspond would have been suppos by 
me if I had been the auditor and pleyel the criminal. but mimicri might 
still more plausibl have been employ to explain the scene. alas! it 
is the fate of clara wieland to fall into the hand of a precipit and 
inexor judge. 

but what, O man of mischief! is the tendenc of thi thoughts? frustrat 
in thi first design, thou wilt not forego the immol of thi victim. 
To extermin my reput wa all that remain to thee, and thi my 
guardian ha permitted. To dispossess pleyel of thi prejudic may be 
impossible; but if that be effected, it cannot be suppos that thi 
wile are exhausted; thi cun will discov innumer avenu to 
the accomplish of thi malign purpose. 

whi should I enter the list against thee? would to heaven I could 
disarm thi vengeanc by my deprecations! when I think of all the 
resourc with which natur and educ have suppli thee; that thi 
form is a combin of steeli fibr and organ of exquisit ductil 
and boundless compass, actuat by an intellig gift with infinit 
endowments, and comprehend all knowledge, I perceiv that my doom 
is fixed. what obstacl will be abl to divert thi zeal or repel thi 
efforts? that be who ha hitherto protect me ha born testimoni to 
the formid of thi attempts, sinc noth less than supernatur 
interfer could check thi career. 

muse on these thoughts, I arrived, toward the close of the day, at 
pleyel' house. A month before, I had travers the same path; but how 
differ were my sensations! now I wa seek the presenc of one who 
regard me as the most degener of human kind. I wa to plead the 
caus of my innocence, against wit the most explicit and unerring, 
of those which support the fabric of human knowledge. the nearer I 
approach the crisis, the more did my confid decay. when the chais 
stop at the door, my strength refus to support me, and I threw 
myself into the arm of an ancient femal domestic. I had not courag to 
inquir whether her master wa at home. I wa torment with fear that 
the project journey wa alreadi undertaken. these fear were removed, 
by her ask me whether she should call her young master, who had just 
gone into hi own room. I wa somewhat reviv by thi intelligence, and 
resolv immedi to seek him there. 

In my confus of mind, I neglect to knock at the door, but enter 
hi apart without previou notice. thi abrupt wa altogeth 
involuntary. absorb in reflect of such unspeak moment, I had 
no leisur to heed the niceti of punctilio. I discov him stand 
with hi back toward the entrance. A small trunk, with it lid raised, 
wa befor him in which it seem as if he had been busi in pack 
hi clothes. the moment of my entrance, he wa employ in gaze at 
someth which he held in hi hand. 

I imagin that I fulli comprehend thi scene. the imag which he held 
befor him, and by which hi attent wa so deepli engaged, I doubt 
not to be my own. these prepar for hi journey, the caus to which 
it wa to be imputed, the hopeless of success in the undertak on 
which I had entered, rush at onc upon my feelings, and dissolv me 
into a flood of tears. 

startl by thi sound, he drop the lid of the trunk and turned. the 
solemn sad that previous overspread hi countenance, gave 
sudden way to an attitud and look of the most vehement astonishment. 
perceiv me unabl to uphold myself, he step toward me without 
speaking, and support me by hi arm. the kind of thi action 
call forth a new effus from my eyes. weep wa a solac to 
which, at that time, I had not grown familiar, and which, therefore, 
wa peculiarli delicious. indign wa no longer to be read in the 
featur of my friend. they were pregnant with a mixtur of wonder and 
pity. their express wa easili interpreted. thi visit, and these 
tears, were token of my penitence. the wretch whom he had stigmat 
as incur and obdur wicked, now shew herself suscept of 
remorse, and had come to confess her guilt. 

thi persuas had no tendenc to comfort me. It onli shew me, with 
new evidence, the difficulti of the task which I had assign myself. We 
were mutual silent. I had less power and less inclin than ever to 
speak. I extric myself from hi hold, and threw myself on a sofa. 
He place himself by my side, and appear to wait with impati and 
anxieti for some begin of the conversation. what could I say? If my 
mind had suggest ani thing suitabl to the occasion, my utter wa 
suffoc by tears. 

frequent he attempt to speak, but seem deter by some degre of 
uncertainti as to the true natur of the scene. At length, in falter 
accent he spoke: 

"mi friend! would to heaven I were still permit to call you by that 
name. the imag that I onc ador exist onli in my fancy; but though 
I cannot hope to see it realized, you may not be total insens to 
the horror of that gulf into which you are about to plunge. what heart 
is forev exempt from the goad of compunct and the influx of 
laudabl propensities? 

"I thought you accomplish and wise beyond the rest of women. not a 
sentiment you uttered, not a look you assumed, that were not, in 
my apprehension, fraught with the sublim of rectitud and the 
illumin of genius. deceit ha some bounds. your educ could 
not be without influence. A vigor understand cannot be utterli 
devoid of virtue; but you could not counterfeit the power of invent 
and reasoning. I wa rash in my invectives. I will not, but with life, 
relinquish all hope of you. I will shut out everi proof that would tell 
me that your heart is incur diseased. 

"you come to restor me onc more to happiness; to convinc me that you 
have torn her mask from vice, and feel noth but abhorr for the 
part you have hitherto acted." 

At these word my equanim forsook me. for a moment I forgot the 
evid from which pleyel' opinion were derived, the benevol of 
hi remonstrances, and the grief which hi accent bespoke; I wa fill 
with indign and horror at charg so black; I shrunk back and 
dart at him a look of disdain and anger. My passion suppli me with 
words. 

"what detest infatu wa it that led me hither! whi do I 
patient endur these horribl insults! My offenc exist onli in 
your own distemp imagination: you are leagu with the traitor who 
assail my life: you have vow the destruct of my peac and honor. 
I deserv infami for listen to calumni so base!" 

these word were heard by pleyel without visibl resentment. hi 
counten relaps into it former gloom; but he did not even look at 
me. the idea which had given place to my angri emot returned, and 
onc more melt me into tears. "o!" I exclaimed, in a voic broken by 
sobs, "what a task is mine! compel to hearken to charg which I feel 
to be false, but which I know to be believ by him that utter them; 
believ too not without evidence, which, though fallacious, is not 
unplausible. 

"I came hither not to confess, but to vindicate. I know the sourc 
of your opinions. wieland ha inform me on what your suspicion are 
built. these suspicion are foster by you as certainties; the tenor 
of my life, of all my convers and letters, afford me no security; 
everi sentiment that my tongu and my pen have uttered, bear testimoni 
to the rectitud of my mind; but thi testimoni is rejected. I am 
condemn as brutal profligate: I am class with the stupidli and 
sordidli wicked. 

"and where are the proof that must justifi so foul and so improb 
an accusation? you have overheard a midnight conference. voic have 
salut your ear, in which you imagin yourself to have recogn 
mine, and that of a detect villain. the sentiment express were 
not allow to outweigh the casual or concert resembl of voice. 
sentiment the revers of all those whose influenc my former life had 
attested, denot a mind pollut by grovel vices, and enter 
into compact with that of a thief and a murderer. the natur of these 
sentiment did not enabl you to detect the cheat, did not suggest to 
you the possibl that my voic had been counterfeit by another. 

"you were precipit and prone to condemn. instead of rush on the 
impostors, and compar the evid of sight with that of hearing, you 
stood aloof, or you fled. My innoc would not now have stood in 
need of vindication, if thi conduct had been pursued. that you did not 
pursu it, your present thought incontest prove. yet thi conduct 
might sure have been expect from pleyel. that he would not hastili 
imput the blackest of crimes, that he would not coupl my name with 
infamy, and cover me with ruin for inadequ or slight reasons, might 
reason have been expected." the sob which convuls my bosom would 
not suffer me to proceed. 

pleyel wa for a moment affected. He look at me with some express 
of doubt; but thi quickli gave place to a mourn solemnity. He fix 
hi eye on the floor as in reverie, and spoke: 

"two hour henc I am gone. shall I carri away with me the sorrow that 
is now my guest? or shall that sorrow be accumul tenfold? what is 
she that is now befor me? shall everi hour suppli me with new proof of 
a wicked beyond example? alreadi I deem her the most abandon and 
detest of human creatures. her come and her tear impart a gleam 
of hope, but that gleam ha vanished." 

He now fix hi eye upon me, and everi muscl in hi face trembled. 
hi tone wa hollow and terrible--"th knowest that I wa a wit of 
your interview, yet thou comest hither to upbraid me for injustice! thou 
canst look me in the face and say that I am deceived!--an inscrut 
provid ha fashion thee for some end. thou wilt live, no doubt, to 
fulfil the purpos of thi maker, if he repent not of hi workmanship, 
and send not hi vengeanc to extermin thee, ere the measur of thi 
day be full. sure noth in the shape of man can vie with thee! 

"but I thought I had stifl thi fury. I am not constitut thi judge. 
My offic is to piti and amend, and not to punish and revile. I deem 
myself exempt from all tempestu passions. I had almost persuad 
myself to weep over thi fall; but I am frail as dust, and mutabl as 
water; I am calm, I am compassion onli in thi absence.--mak thi 
house, thi room, thi abod as long as thou wilt, but forgiv me if I 
prefer solitud for the short time dure which I shall stay." say 
this, he motion as if to leav the apartment. 

the stormi passion of thi man affect me by sympathy. I ceas to 
weep. I wa motionless and speechless with agony. I sat with my hand 
clasped, mute gaze after him as he withdrew. I desir to detain 
him, but wa unabl to make ani effort for that purpose, till he had 
pass out of the room. I then utter an involuntari and pierc 
cry--"pleyel! art thou gone? gone forever?" 

At thi summon he hastili returned. He beheld me wild, pale, gasp 
for breath, and my head alreadi sink on my bosom. A pain dizzi 
seiz me, and I faint away. 

when I recovered, I found myself stretch on a bed in the outer 
apartment, and pleyel, with two femal servant stand besid it. all 
the furi and scorn which the counten of the former late expressed, 
had now disappeared, and wa succeed by the most tender anxiety. As 
soon as he perceiv that my sens were return to me, he clasp hi 
hands, and exclaimed, "god be thanked! you are onc more alive. I had 
almost despair of your recovery. I fear I have been precipit and 
unjust. My sens must have been the victim of some inexplic and 
momentari phrenzy. forgiv me, I beseech you, forgiv my reproaches. I 
would purchas convict of your purity, at the price of my exist 
here and hereafter." 

He onc more, in a tone of the most fervent tenderness, besought me to 
be composed, and then left me to the care of the women. 



chapter xiii 


here wa wrought a surpriz chang in my friend. what wa it that 
had shaken convict so firm? had ani thing occur dure my fit, 
adequ to produc so total an alteration? My attend inform me 
that he had not left my apartment; that the unusu durat of my fit, 
and the failure, for a time, of all the mean use for my recovery, had 
fill him with grief and dismay. did he regard the effect which hi 
reproach had produc as a proof of my sincerity? 

In thi state of mind, I littl regard my languor of body. I rose 
and request an interview with him befor my departure, on which I wa 
resolved, notwithstand hi earnest solicit to spend the night 
at hi house. He compli with my request. the tender which he had 
late betrayed, had now disappeared, and he onc more relaps into a 
chill solemnity. 

I told him that I wa prepar to return to my brother's; that I had 
come hither to vindic my innoc from the foul aspers which he 
had cast upon it. My pride had not taken refug in silenc or distance. 
I had not reli upon time, or the suggest of hi cooler thoughts, to 
confut hi charges. consciou as I wa that I wa perfectli guiltless, 
and entertain some valu for hi good opinion, I could not prevail 
upon myself to believ that my effort to make my innoc manifest, 
would be fruitless. advers appear might be numer and specious, 
but they were unquestion false. I wa will to believ him 
sincere, that he made no charg which he himself did not believe; but 
these charg were destitut of truth. the ground of hi opinion were 
fallacious; and I desir an opportun of detect their fallacy. 
I entreat him to be explicit, and to give me a detail of what he had 
heard, and what he had seen. 

At these words, my companion' counten grew darker. He appear 
to be struggl with hi rage. He open hi lip to speak, but hi 
accent die away ere they were formed. thi conflict last for some 
minutes, but hi fortitud wa final successful. He spoke as follows: 

"I would fain put an end to thi hate scene: what I shall say, will 
be breath idli and unprofit consumed. the clearest narr will 
add noth to your present knowledge. you are acquaint with the 
ground of my opinion, and yet you avow yourself innocent: whi then 
should I rehears these grounds? you are appriz of the charact of 
carwin: whi then should I enumer the discoveri which I have made 
respect him? yet, sinc it is your request; since, consid the 
limited of human faculties, some error may possibl lurk in those 
appear which I have witnessed, I will briefli relat what I know. 

"need I dwell upon the impress which your convers and 
deport origin made upon me? We part in childhood; but our 
intercourse, by letter, wa copiou and uninterrupted. how fondli did I 
anticip a meet with one whom her letter had previous taught 
me to consid as the first of women, and how fulli realiz were the 
expect that I had formed! 

"here, said I, is a being, after whom sage may model their transcend 
intelligence, and painters, their ideal beauty. here is exemplified, 
that union between intellect and form, which ha hitherto exist onli 
in the concept of the poet. I have watch your eyes; my attent 
ha hung upon your lips. I have question whether the enchant of 
your voic were more conspicu in the intricaci of melody, or the 
emphasi of rhetoric. I have mark the transit of your discourse, 
the felic of your expression, your refin argumentation, and 
glow imagery; and been forc to acknowledge, that all delight were 
meagr and contemptible, compar with those connect with the 
audienc and sight of you. I have contempl your principles, and been 
astonish at the solid of their foundation, and the perfect of 
their structure. I have trace you to your home. I have view you in 
relat to your servants, to your family, to your neighbours, and to 
the world. I have seen by what skil arrang you facilit 
the perform of the most arduou and complic duties; what daili 
access of strength your judici disciplin bestow upon 
your memory; what correct and abund of knowledg wa daili 
experienc by your unweari applic to books, and to writing. 
If she that possess so much in the bloom of youth, will go on 
accumul her stores, what, said I, is the pictur she will display 
at a matur age? 

"you know not the accuraci of my observation. I wa desir that other 
should profit by an exampl so rare. I therefor note down, in writing, 
everi particular of your conduct. I wa anxiou to benefit by an 
opportun so seldom afford us. I labour not to omit the slightest 
shade, or the most petti line in your portrait. here there wa no other 
task incumb on me but to copy; there wa no need to exagger or 
overlook, in order to produc a more unexception pattern. here wa 
a combin of harmoni and graces, incap of diminut or 
access without injuri to it completeness. 

"I found no end and no bound to my task. No display of a scene like 
thi could be chargeabl with redund or superfluity. even the colour 
of a shoe, the knot of a ribband, or your attitud in pluck a 
rose, were of moment to be recorded. even the arrang of your 
breakfast-t and your toilet have been ampli displayed. 

"I know that mankind are more easili entic to virtu by exampl than 
by precept. I know that the absolut of a model, when suppli by 
invention, diminish it salutari influence, sinc it is useless, we 
think, to strive after that which we know to be beyond our reach. but 
the pictur which I drew wa not a phantom; as a model, it wa devoid 
of imperfection; and to aspir to that height which had been realli 
attained, wa by no mean unreasonable. I had anoth and more 
interest object in view. one exist who claim all my tenderness. 
here, in all it parts, wa a model worthi of assidu study, and 
indefatig imitation. I call upon her, as she wish to secur and 
enhanc my esteem, to mould her thoughts, her words, her countenance, 
her actions, by thi pattern. 

"the task wa exuber of pleasure, and I wa deepli engag in it, 
when an imp of mischief wa let loos in the form of carwin. I admir 
hi power and accomplishments. I did not wonder that they were admir 
by you. On the rectitud of your judgement, however, I reli to keep 
thi admir within discreet and scrupul bounds. I assur myself, 
that the strang of hi deportment, and the obscur of hi life, 
would teach you caution. Of all errors, my knowledg of your charact 
inform me that thi wa least like to befal you. 

"you were power affect by hi first appearance; you were 
bewitch by hi counten and hi tones; your descript wa ardent 
and pathetic: I listen to you with some emot of surprize. the 
portrait you drew in hi absence, and the intens with which you muse 
upon it, were new and unexpect incidents. they bespok a sensibl 
somewhat too vivid; but from which, while subject to the guidanc of 
an understand like yours, there wa noth to dread. 

"A more direct intercours took place between you. I need not apolog 
for the solicitud which I entertain for your safety. He that gift 
me with percept of excellence, compel me to love it. In the midst 
of danger and pain, my contempl have ever been cheer by your 
image. everi object in competit with you, wa worthless and trivial. 
No price wa too great by which your safeti could be purchased. for 
that end, the sacrific of ease, of health, and even of life, would 
cheer have been made by me. what wonder then, that I scrutin 
the sentiment and deport of thi man with ceaseless vigilance; 
that I watch your word and your look when he wa present; and that I 
extract caus for the deepest inquietudes, from everi token which you 
gave of have put your happi into thi man' keeping? 

"I wa cautiou in deciding. I recal the variou convers in 
which the topic of love and marriag had been discussed. As a woman, 
young, beautiful, and independent, it behov you to have fortifi 
your mind with just principl on thi subject. your principl were 
emin just. had not their rectitud and their firm been attest 
by your treatment of that speciou seduc dashwood? these principles, 
I wa prone to believe, exempt you from danger in thi new state of 
things. I wa not the last to pay my homag to the unrival capacity, 
insinuation, and eloqu of thi man. I have disguised, but could 
never stifl the conviction, that hi eye and voic had a witchcraft 
in them, which render him truli formidable: but I reflect on the 
ambigu express of hi countenance--an ambigu which you were the 
first to remark; on the cloud which obscur hi character; and on the 
suspici natur of that conceal which he studied; and conclud 
you to be safe. I deni the obviou construct to appearances. I 
refer your conduct to some principl which had not been hitherto 
disclosed, but which wa reconcil with those alreadi known. 

"I wa not suffer to remain long in thi suspence. one evening, you 
may recollect, I came to your house, where it wa my purpose, as usual, 
to lodge, somewhat earlier than ordinary. I spi a light in your 
chamber as I approach from the outside, and on inquir of judith, 
wa inform that you were writing. As your kinsman and friend, and 
fellow-lodger, I thought I had a right to be familiar. you were in your 
chamber, but your employ and the time were such as to make it no 
infract of decorum to follow you thither. the spirit of mischiev 
gaieti possess me. I proceed on tiptoe. you did not perceiv 
my entrance; and I advanc softli till I wa abl to overlook your 
shoulder. 

"I had gone thu far in error, and had no power to recede. how 
cautious should we guard against the first inroad of temptation! I 
knew that to pri into your paper wa criminal; but I reflect that 
no sentiment of your wa of a natur which made it your interest to 
conceal it. you wrote much more than you permit your friend to 
peruse. My curios wa strong, and I had onli to throw a glanc upon 
the paper, to secur it gratification. I should never have deliber 
commit an act like this. the slightest obstacl would have repel 
me; but my eye glanc almost spontan upon the paper. I caught 
onli part of sentences; but my eye comprehend more at a glance, 
becaus the charact were short-hand. I light on the word 
summer-house, midnight, and made out a passag which spoke of the 
proprieti and of the effect to be expect from anoth interview. 
all thi pass in less than a moment. I then check myself, and made 
myself known to you, by a tap upon your shoulder. 

"I could pardon and account for some trifl alarm; but your 
trepid and blush were excessive. you hurri the paper out of 
sight, and seem too anxiou to discov whether I knew the content to 
allow yourself to make ani inquiries. I wonder at these appear 
of consternation, but did not reason on them until I had retired. when 
alone, these incid suggest themselv to my reflect anew. 

"to what scene, or what interview, I asked, did you allude? your 
disappear on a former evening, my trace you to the recess in the 
bank, your silenc on my first and second call, your vagu answer and 
invinc embarrassment, when you, at length, ascend the hill, I 
recollect with new surprize. could thi be the summerhous allud to? 
A certain timid and conscious had gener attend you, when 
thi incid and thi recess had been the subject of conversation. 
nay, I imagin that the last time that adventur wa mentioned, which 
happen in the presenc of carwin, the counten of the latter 
betray some emotion. could the interview have been with him? 

"thi wa an idea calcul to rous everi faculti to contemplation. 
An interview at that hour, in thi darksom retreat, with a man of thi 
mysteri but formid character; a clandestin interview, and one 
which you afterward endeavour with so much solicitud to conceal! It 
wa a fear and portent occurrence. I could not measur hi power, 
or fathom hi designs. had he rifl from you the secret of your love, 
and reconcil you to conceal and noctur meetings? I scarc ever 
spent a night of more inquietude. 

"I knew not how to act. the ascertain of thi man' charact 
and view seem to be, in the first place, necessary. had he openli 
prefer hi suit to you, we should have been impow to make 
direct inquiries; but sinc he had chosen thi obscur path, it seem 
reason to infer that hi charact wa exceptionable. it, at 
least, subject us to the necess of resort to other mean of 
information. yet the improb that you should commit a deed of such 
rashness, made me reflect anew upon the insuffici of those ground 
on which my suspicion had been built, and almost to condemn myself for 
harbour them. 

"though it wa mere conjectur that the interview spoken of had taken 
place with carwin, yet two idea occur to involv me in the most 
pain doubts. thi man' reason might be so specious, and 
hi artific so profound, that, aid by the passion which you had 
conceiv for him, he had final succeeded; or hi situat might be 
such as to justifi the secreci which you maintained. In neither case did 
my wildest reveri suggest to me, that your honor had been forfeited. 

"I could not talk with you on thi subject. If the imput wa false, 
it atroci would have justli drawn upon me your resentment, and 
I must have explain by what fact it had been suggested. If it were 
true, no benefit would follow from the mention of it. you had chosen 
to conceal it for some reasons, and whether these reason were true or 
false, it wa proper to discov and remov them in the first place. 
finally, I acquiesc in the least pain supposition, trammel as it 
wa with perplexities, that carwin wa upright, and that, if the reason 
of your silenc were known, they would be found to be just." 



chapter xiv 


"three day have elaps sinc thi occurrence. I have been haunt by 
perpetu inquietude. To bring myself to regard carwin without terror, 
and to acquiesc in the belief of your safety, wa impossible. yet to 
put an end to my doubts, seem to be impracticable. If some light could 
be reflect on the actual situat of thi man, a direct path would 
present itself. If he were, contrari to the tenor of hi conversation, 
cun and malignant, to appriz you of this, would be to place you in 
security. If he were mere unfortun and innocent, most readili would 
I espous hi cause; and if hi intent were upright with regard to 
you, most eagerli would I sanctifi your choic by my approbation. 

"it would be vain to call upon carwin for an avow of hi deeds. It wa 
better to know nothing, than to be deceiv by an art tale. what he 
wa unwil to communicate, and thi unwilling had been repeatedli 
manifested, could never be extort from him. importun might be 
appeased, or impostur effect by fallaci representations. To the 
rest of the world he wa unknown. I had often made him the subject of 
discourse; but a glimps of hi figur in the street wa the sum of 
their knowledg who knew most. none had ever seen him before, and 
receiv as new, the inform which my intercours with him in 
valencia, and my present intercourse, enabl me to give. 

"wieland wa your brother. If he had realli made you the object of hi 
courtship, wa not a brother author to interfer and demand from him 
the confess of hi views? yet what were the ground on which I had 
rear thi supposition? would they justifi a measur like this? sure 
not. 

"in the cours of my restless meditations, it occur to me, at length, 
that my duti requir me to speak to you, to confess the indecorum of 
which I had been guilty, and to state the reflect to which it had 
led me. I wa prompt by no mean or selfish views. the heart within my 
breast wa not more preciou than your safety: most cheer would 
I have interpos my life between you and danger. would you cherish 
resent at my conduct? when acquaint with the motiv which 
produc it, it would not onli exempt me from censure, but entitl me to 
gratitude. 

"yesterday had been select for the rehears of the newly-import 
tragedy. I promis to be present. the state of my thought but littl 
qualifi me for a perform or auditor in such a scene; but I reflect 
that, after it wa finished, I should return home with you, and should 
then enjoy an opportun of discours with you fulli on thi topic. 
My resolut wa not form without a remnant of doubt, as to it 
propriety. when I left thi hous to perform the visit I had promised, 
my mind wa full of apprehens and despondency. the dubious of 
the event of our conversation, fear that my interfer wa too late to 
secur your peace, and the uncertainti to which hope gave birth, whether 
I had not er in believ you devot to thi man, or, at least, in 
imagin that he had obtain your consent to midnight conferences, 
distract me with contradictori opinions, and repugn emotions. 

"I can assign no reason for call at mrs. baynton's. I had seen her 
in the morning, and knew her to be well. the concert hour had nearli 
arrived, and yet I turn up the street which lead to her house, and 
dismount at her door. I enter the parlour and threw myself in a 
chair. I saw and inquir for no one. My whole frame wa overpow 
by dreari and comfortless sensations. one idea possess me wholly; 
the inexpress import of unveil the design and charact of 
carwin, and the utter improb that thi ever would be effected. 
some instinct induc me to lay my hand upon a newspaper. I had perus 
all the gener intellig it contain in the morning, and at the 
same spot. the act wa rather mechan than voluntary. 

"I threw a languid glanc at the first column that present itself. 
the first word which I read, began with the offer of a reward of three 
hundr guinea for the apprehens of a convict under sentenc of 
death, who had escap from newgat prison in dublin. good heaven! how 
everi fibr of my frame tingl when I proceed to read that the name 
of the crimin wa franci carwin! 

"the descript of hi person and address were minute. hi stature, 
hair, complexion, the extraordinari posit and arrang of hi 
features, hi aukward and disproportion form, hi gestur and gait, 
correspond perfectli with those of our mysteri visitant. He had 
been found guilti in two indictments. one for the murder of the ladi 
jane conway, and the other for a robberi commit on the person of the 
honor mr. ludloe. 

"I repeatedli perus thi passage. the idea which flow in upon my 
mind, affect me like an instant transit from death to life. the 
purpos dearest to my heart wa thu effected, at a time and by mean 
the least of all other within the scope of my foresight. but what 
purpose? carwin wa detected. act of the blackest and most sordid 
guilt had been commit by him. here wa evid which impart to 
my understand the most lumin certainty. the name, visage, and 
deportment, were the same. between the time of hi escape, and hi 
appear among us, there wa a suffici agreement. such wa the 
man with whom I suspect you to maintain a clandestin correspondence. 
should I not hast to snatch you from the talon of thi vulture? should 
I see you rush to the verg of a dizzi precipice, and not stretch 
forth a hand to pull you back? I had no need to deliberate. I thrust the 
paper in my pocket, and resolv to obtain an immedi confer with 
you. for a time, no other imag made it way to my understanding. At 
length, it occur to me, that though the inform I possess 
was, in one sense, sufficient, yet if more could be obtained, more wa 
desirable. thi passag wa copi from a british paper; part of it 
only, perhaps, wa transcribed. the printer wa in possess of the 
original. 

"toward hi hous I immedi turn my horse' head. He produc the 
paper, but I found noth more than had alreadi been seen. while busi 
in perus it, the printer stood by my side. He notic the object 
of which I wa in search. "aye," said he, "that is a strang affair. I 
should never have met with it, had not mr. hallet sent to me the paper, 
with a particular request to republish that advertisement." 

"mr. hallet! what reason could he have for make thi request? had 
the paper sent to him been accompani by ani inform respect 
the convict? had he person or extraordinari reason for desir it 
republication? thi wa to be known onli in one way. I speed to 
hi house. In answer to my interrogations, he told me that ludlo had 
formerli been in america, and that dure hi resid in thi 
city, consider intercours had taken place between them. henc a 
confid arose, which ha sinc been kept aliv by occasion letters. 
He had late receiv a letter from him, enclos the newspap from 
which thi extract had been made. He put it into my hands, and point 
out the passag which relat to carwin. 

"ludlo confirm the fact of hi convict and escape; and adds, that 
he had reason to believ him to have embark for america. He describ 
him in gener terms, as the most incomprehens and formid among 
men; as engag in schemes, reason suspect to be, in the highest 
degree, criminal, but such as no human intellig is abl to unravel: 
that hi end are pursu by mean which leav it in doubt whether he be 
not in leagu with some infern spirit: that hi crime have hitherto 
been perpetr with the aid of some unknown but desper accomplices: 
that he wage a perpetu war against the happi of mankind, and set 
hi engin of destruct at work against everi object that present 
itself. 

"thi is the substanc of the letter. hallet express some surpriz 
at the curios which wa manifest by me on thi occasion. I wa too 
much absorb by the idea suggest by thi letter, to pay attent to 
hi remarks. I shudder with the apprehens of the evil to which our 
indiscreet familiar with thi man had probabl expos us. I burnt 
with impati to see you, and to do what in me lay to avert the 
calam which threaten us. It wa alreadi five o'clock. night wa 
hastening, and there wa no time to be lost. On leav mr. hallet' 
house, who should meet me in the street, but bertrand, the servant whom 
I left in germany. hi appear and accoutr bespok him to have 
just alight from a toilsom and long journey. I wa not wholli without 
expect of see him about thi time, but no one wa then more 
distant from my thoughts. you know what reason I have for anxieti 
respect scene with which thi man wa conversant. carwin wa for a 
moment forgotten. In answer to my vehement inquiries, bertrand produc 
a copiou packet. I shall not at present mention it contents, nor the 
measur which they oblig me to adopt. I bestow a brief perus on 
these papers, and have given some direct to bertrand, resum 
my purpos with regard to you. My hors I wa oblig to resign to my 
servant, he be charg with a commiss that requir speed. the 
clock had struck ten, and mettingen wa five mile distant. I wa 
to journey thither on foot. these circumst onli ad to my 
expedition. 

"a I pass swiftli along, I review all the incid accompani 
the appear and deport of that man among us. late event have 
been inexplic and mysteri beyond ani of which I have either read 
or heard. these event were coeval with carwin' introduction. I am 
unabl to explain their origin and mutual dependance; but I do not, on 
that account, believ them to have a supernatur origin. Is not thi 
man the agent? some of them seem to be propitious; but what should 
I think of those threat of assassin with which you were late 
alarmed? bloodsh is the trade, and horror is the element of thi man. 
the process by which the sympathi of natur are extinguish in 
our hearts, by which evil is made our good, and by which we are made 
suscept of no activ but in the infliction, and no joy but in the 
spectacl of woes, is an obviou process. As to an allianc with evil 
geniuses, the power and the malic of daemon have been a thousand time 
exemplifi in human beings. there are no devil but those which are 
begotten upon selfishness, and rear by cunning. 

"now, indeed, the scene wa changed. It wa not hi secret poniard 
that I dreaded. It wa onli the success of hi effort to make you a 
confeder in your own destruction, to make your will the instrument by 
which he might bereav you of liberti and honor. 

"I took, as usual, the path through your brother' ground. I rang 
with celer and silenc along the bank. I approach the fence, which 
divid wieland' estat from yours. the recess in the bank be near 
thi line, it be necessari for me to pass near it, my mind be 
taint with inveter suspicion concern you; suspicion which were 
indebt for their strength to incid connect with thi spot; what 
wonder that it seiz upon my thoughts! "I leap on the fence; but 
befor I descend on the opposit side, I paus to survey the scene. 
leav drop with dew, and glisten in the moon' rays, with no 
move object to molest the deep repose, fill me with secur 
and hope. I left the station at length, and tend forward. you were 
probabl at rest. how should I commun without alarm you, the 
intellig of my arrival? An immedi interview wa to be procured. 
I could not bear to think that a minut should be lost by remiss 
or hesitation. should I knock at the door? or should I stand under your 
chamber windows, which I perceiv to be open, and awaken you by my 
calls? 

"these reflect employ me, as I pass opposit to the 
summer-house. I had scarc gone by, when my ear caught a sound unusu 
at thi time and place. It wa almost too faint and too transient to 
allow me a distinct percept of it. I stop to listen; present 
it wa heard again, and now it wa somewhat in a louder key. It wa 
laughter; and unquestion produc by a femal voice. that voic wa 
familiar to my senses. It wa yours. 

"whenc it came, I wa at first at a loss to conjecture; but thi 
uncertainti vanish when it wa heard the third time. I threw back my 
eye toward the recess. everi other organ and limb wa useless to me. 
I did not reason on the subject. I did not, in a direct manner, draw 
my conclus from the hour, the place, the hilar which thi sound 
betokened, and the circumst of have a companion, which it no less 
incontest proved. In an instant, as it were, my heart wa invad 
with cold, and the puls of life at a stand. 

"whi should I go further? whi should I return? should I not hurri to a 
distanc from a sound, which, though formerli so sweet and delectable, 
wa now more hideou than the shriek of owls? 

"I had no time to yield to thi impulse. the thought of approach and 
listen occur to me. I had no doubt of which I wa conscious. yet 
my certainti wa capabl of increase. I wa likewis stimul by a 
sentiment that partook of rage. I wa govern by an half-form and 
tempestu resolut to break in upon your interview, and strike you 
dead with my upbraiding. 

"I approach with the utmost caution. when I reach the edg of the 
bank immedi abov the summer-house, I thought I heard voic from 
below, as busi in conversation. the step in the rock are clear of 
bushi impediments. they allow me to descend into a caviti besid 
the build without be detected. thu to lie in wait could onli be 
justifi by the moment of the occasion." 

here pleyel paus in hi narrative, and fix hi eye upon me. 
situat as I was, my horror and astonish at thi tale gave way to 
compass for the anguish which the counten of my friend betrayed. 
I reflect on hi forc of understanding. I reflect on the power of 
my enemy. I could easili divin the substanc of the convers that 
wa overheard. carwin had construct hi plot in a manner suit to the 
charact of those whom he had select for hi victims. I saw that the 
convict of pleyel were immutable. I forbor to struggl against the 
storm, becaus I saw that all struggl would be fruitless. I wa calm; 
but my calm wa the torpor of despair, and not the tranquil of 
fortitude. It wa calm invinc by ani thing that hi grief and 
hi furi could suggest to pleyel. He resumed-- 

"woman! wilt thou hear me further? shall I go on to repeat the 
conversation? Is it shame that make thee tongue-tied? shall I go on? or 
art thou satisfi with what ha been alreadi said?" 

I bow my head. "go on," said I. "I make not thi request in the hope 
of undeceiv you. I shall no longer contend with my own weakness. the 
storm is let loose, and I shall peaceabl submit to be driven by it 
fury. but go on. thi confer will end onli with afford me a 
clearer foresight of my destiny; but that will be some satisfaction, and 
I will not part without it." 

why, on hear these words, did pleyel hesitate? did some unlooked-for 
doubt insinu itself into hi mind? wa hi belief suddenli shaken 
by my looks, or my words, or by some newli recollect circumstance? 
whencesoev it arose, it could not endur the test of deliberation. In 
a few minut the flame of resent wa again light up in hi bosom. 
He proceed with hi accustom vehemence-- 

"I hate myself for thi folly. I can find no apolog for thi tale. yet 
I am irresist impel to relat it. she that hear me is appriz 
of everi particular. I have onli to repeat to her her own words. she 
will listen with a tranquil air, and the spectacl of her obduraci will 
drive me to some desper act. whi then should I persist! yet persist I 
must." 

again he paused. "no," said he, "it is imposs to repeat your avow 
of love, your appeal to former confess of your tenderness, to 
former deed of dishonor, to the circumst of the first interview 
that took place between you. It wa on that night when I trace you to 
thi recess. thither had he entic you, and there had you ratifi an 
unhallow compact by admit him-- 

"great god! thou witnessedst the agoni that tore my bosom at that 
moment! thou witnessedst my effort to repel the testimoni of my ears! 
It wa in vain that you dwelt upon the confus which my unlooked-for 
summon excit in you; the tardi with which a suitabl excus 
occur to you; your resent that my impertin intrus had 
put an end to that charm interview: A disappoint for which you 
endeavour to compens yourself, by the frequenc and durat of 
subsequ meetings. 

"in vain you dwelt upon incid of which you onli could be conscious; 
incid that occur on occas on which none besid your own 
famili were witnesses. In vain wa your discours character by 
peculiar inimit of sentiment and language. My convict wa 
effect onli by an accumul of the same tokens. I yield not but 
to evid which took away the power to withhold my faith. 

"mi sight wa of no use to me. beneath so thick an umbrage, the dark 
wa intense. hear wa the onli avenu to information, which the 
circumst allow to be open. I wa couch within three feet 
of you. whi should I approach nearer? I could not contend with your 
betrayer. what could be the purpos of a contest? you stood in no need 
of a protector. what could I do, but retir from the spot overwhelm 
with confus and dismay? I sought my chamber, and endeavour to 
regain my composure. the door of the house, which I found open, your 
subsequ entrance, closing, and fasten it, and go into your 
chamber, which had been thu long deserted, were onli confirm of 
the truth. 

"whi should I paint the tempestu fluctuat of my thought between 
grief and revenge, between rage and despair? whi should I repeat my vow 
of etern implac and persecution, and the speedi recant of 
these vows? 

"I have said enough. you have dismiss me from a place in your esteem. 
what I think, and what I feel, is of no import in your eyes. may 
the duti which I owe myself enabl me to forget your existence. In a 
few minut I go hence. Be the maker of your fortune, and may advers 
instruct you in that wisdom, which educ wa unabl to impart to 
you." 

those were the last word which pleyel uttered. He left the room, and 
my new emot enabl me to wit hi departur without ani appar 
loss of composure. As I sat alone, I rumin on these incidents. 
noth wa more evid than that I had taken an etern leav of 
happiness. life wa a worthless thing, separ from that good which had 
now been wrest from me; yet the sentiment that now possess me had no 
tendenc to palsi my exertions, and overbear my strength. I notic that 
the light wa declining, and perceiv the proprieti of leav thi 
house. I place myself again in the chaise, and return slowli toward 
the city. 



chapter XV 


befor I reach the citi it wa dusk. It wa my purpos to spend the 
night at mettingen. I wa not solicitous, as long as I wa attend by 
a faith servant, to be there at an earli hour. My exhaust strength 
requir me to take some refreshment. with thi view, and in order to 
pay respect to one whose affect for me wa truli maternal, I stop 
at mrs. baynton's. she wa absent from home; but I had scarc enter 
the hous when one of her domest present me a letter. I open and 
read as follows: 


"to clara wieland, 

"what shall I say to extenu the misconduct of last night? It is my 
duti to repair it to the utmost of my power, but the onli way in which 
it can be repaired, you will not, I fear, be prevail on to adopt. It 
is by grant me an interview, at your own house, at eleven o'clock 
thi night. I have no mean of remov ani fear that you may entertain 
of my designs, but my simpl and solemn declarations. these, after what 
ha pass between us, you may deem unworthi of confidence. I cannot 
help it. My folli and rash ha left me no other resource. I will 
be at your door by that hour. If you chuse to admit me to a conference, 
provid that confer ha no witnesses, I will disclos to you 
particulars, the knowledg of which is of the utmost import to your 
happiness. farewell. 

"carwin." 


what a letter wa this! A man known to be an assassin and robber; one 
capabl of plot against my life and my fame; detect lurk in 
my chamber, and avow design the most flagiti and dreadful, now 
solicit me to grant him a midnight interview! To admit him alon into 
my presence! could he make thi request with the expect of my 
compliance? what had he seen in me, that could justifi him in admit 
so wild a belief? yet thi request is prefer with the utmost gravity. 
It is not accompani by an appear of uncommon earnestness. had 
the misconduct to which he allud been a slight incivility, and the 
interview request to take place in the midst of my friends, there 
would have been no extravag in the tenor of thi letter; but, as it 
was, the writer had sure been bereft of hi reason. 

I perus thi epistl frequently. the request it contain might be 
call audaci or stupid, if it had been made by a differ person; 
but from carwin, who could not be unawar of the effect which it must 
natur produce, and of the manner in which it would unavoid be 
treated, it wa perfectli inexplicable. He must have count on the 
success of some plot, in order to extort my assent. none of those 
motiv by which I am usual govern would ever have persuad me to 
meet ani one of hi sex, at the time and place which he had prescribed. 
much less would I consent to a meet with a man, taint with the 
most detest crimes, and by whose art my own safeti had been so 
immin endangered, and my happi irretriev destroyed. I 
shudder at the idea that such a meet wa possible. I felt some 
reluct to approach a spot which he still visit and haunted. 

such were the idea which first suggest themselv on the perus of 
the letter. meanwhile, I resum my journey. My thought still dwelt 
upon the same topic. gradual from rumin on thi epistle, I 
revert to my interview with pleyel. I recal the particular of the 
dialogu to which he had been an auditor. My heart sunk anew on view 
the inextric complex of thi deception, and the inauspici 
concurr of events, which tend to confirm him in hi error. when 
he approach my chamber door, my terror kept me mute. He put hi ear, 
perhaps, to the crevice, but it caught the sound of noth human. had 
I called, or made ani token that denot some one to be within, word 
would have ensued; and as omnipres wa impossible, thi discovery, 
and the artless narr of what had just passed, would have save me 
from hi murder invectives. He went into hi chamber, and after some 
interval, I stole across the entri and down the stairs, with 
inaud steps. have secur the outer doors, I return with less 
circumspection. He heard me not when I descended; but my return step 
were easili distinguished. now he thought wa the guilti interview at 
an end. In what other way wa it possibl for him to constru these 
signals? 

how fallaci and precipit wa my decision! carwin' plot owe it 
success to a coincid of event scarc credible. the balanc wa 
sway from it equipois by a hair. had I even begun the convers 
with an account of what befel me in my chamber, my previou interview 
with wieland would have taught him to suspect me of imposture; yet, if 
I were discours with thi ruffian, when pleyel touch the lock of my 
chamber door, and when he shut hi own door with so much violence, how, 
he might ask, should I be abl to relat these incidents? perhap he 
had withheld the knowledg of these circumst from my brother, from 
whom, therefore, I could not obtain it, so that my innoc would have 
thu been irresist demonstrated. 

the first impuls which flow from these idea wa to return upon my 
steps, and demand onc more an interview; but he wa gone: hi part 
declar were remembered. 

pleyel, I exclaimed, thou art gone for ever! are thi mistak beyond 
the reach of detection? Am I helpless in the midst of thi snare? 
the plotter is at hand. He even speak in the style of penitence. He 
solicit an interview which he promis shall end in the disclosur of 
someth moment to my happiness. what can he say which will avail to 
turn asid thi evil? but whi should hi remors be feigned? I have 
done him no injury. hi wicked is fertil onli of despair; and the 
billow of remors will some time overbear him. whi may not thi event 
have alreadi taken place? whi should I refus to see him? 

thi idea wa present, as it were, for a moment. I suddenli recoil 
from it, confound at that frenzi which could give even momentari 
harbour to such a scheme; yet present it returned. At length I even 
conceiv it to deserv deliberation. I question whether it wa 
not proper to admit, at a lone spot, in a sacr hour, thi man of 
tremend and inscrut attributes, thi perform of horrid deeds, 
and whose presenc wa predict to call down unheard-of and unutter 
horrors. 

what wa it that sway me? I felt myself divest of the power to will 
contrari to the motiv that determin me to seek hi presence. My mind 
seem to be split into separ parts, and these part to have 
enter into furiou and implac contention. these tumult gradual 
subsided. the reason whi I should confid in that interposit which 
had hitherto defend me; in those token of compunct which thi 
letter contained; in the efficaci of thi interview to restor it 
spotless to my character, and banish all illus from the mind of 
my friend, continu acquir new evid and new strength. 

what should I fear in hi presence? thi wa unlik an artific intend 
to betray me into hi hands. If it were an artifice, what purpos would 
it serve? the freedom of my mind wa untouched, and that freedom would 
defi the assault of blandish or magic. forc wa I not abl to 
repel. On the former occas my courage, it is true, had fail at the 
immin approach of danger; but then I had not enjoy opportun of 
deliberation; I had foreseen nothing; I wa sunk into imbecil by my 
previou thoughts; I had been the victim of recent disappoint 
and anticip ills: wit my infatu in open the closet in 
opposit to divin injunctions. 

now, perhaps, my courag wa the offspr of a no less er 
principle. pleyel wa for ever lost to me. I strove in vain to assum 
hi person, and suppress my resentment; I strove in vain to believ in 
the assuag influenc of time, to look forward to the birth-day of new 
hopes, and the re-exalt of that luminary, of whose effulg I 
had so long and so liber partaken. 

what had I to suffer wors than wa alreadi inflicted? 

wa not carwin my foe? I owe my untim fate to hi treason. instead 
of fli from hi presence, ought I not to devot all my faculti to 
the gain of an interview, and compel him to repair the ill of 
which he ha been the author? whi should I suppos him impregn 
to argument? have I not reason on my side, and the power of impart 
conviction? cannot he be made to see the justic of unravel the maze 
in which pleyel is bewildered? 

He may, at least, be access to fear. ha he noth to fear from 
the rage of an injur woman? but suppos him inaccess to such 
inducements; suppos him to persist in all hi flagiti purposes; are 
not the mean of defenc and resist in my power? 

In the progress of such thoughts, wa the resolut at last formed. I 
hope that the interview wa sought by him for a laudabl end; but, be 
that as it would, I trust that, by energi of reason or of action, I 
should render it auspicious, or, at least, harmless. 

such a determin must unavoid fluctuate. the poet' chao wa 
no unapt emblem of the state of my mind. A torment wa awaken in my 
bosom, which I foresaw would end onli when thi interview wa past, and 
it consequ fulli experienced. henc my impati for the arriv 
of the hour which had been prescrib by carwin. 

meanwhile, my medit were tumultu active. new impedi 
to the execut of the scheme were speedili suggested. I had appriz 
catharin of my intent to spend thi and mani futur night with her. 
her husband wa inform of thi arrangement, and had zealous approv 
it. eleven o'clock exceed their hour of retiring. what excus should 
I form for chang my plan? should I shew thi letter to wieland, and 
submit myself to hi direction? but I knew in what way he would decide. 
He would fervent dissuad me from going. nay, would he not do more? 
He wa appriz of the offenc of carwin, and of the reward offer 
for hi apprehension. would he not seiz thi opportun of execut 
justic on a criminal? 

thi idea wa new. I wa plung onc more into doubt. did not equiti 
enjoin me thu to facilit hi arrest? no. I disdain the offic of 
betrayer. carwin wa unappr of hi danger, and hi intent were 
possibl beneficent. should I station guard about the house, and 
make an act, intend perhap for my benefit, instrument to hi own 
destruction? wieland might be justifi in thu employ the knowledg 
which I should impart, but I, by impart it, should pollut myself 
with more hate crime than those undeservedli imput to me. thi 
scheme, therefore, I unhesitatingli rejected. the view with which 
I should return to my own house, it would therefor be necessari to 
conceal. yet some pretext must be invented. I had never been initi 
into the trade of lying. yet what but falshood wa a deliber 
suppress of the truth? To deceiv by silenc or by word is the same. 

yet what would a lie avail me? what pretext would justifi thi chang in 
my plan? would it not tend to confirm the imput of pleyel? that 
I should voluntarili return to an hous in which honor and life had so 
late been endangered, could be explain in no way favor to my 
integrity. 

these reflections, if they did not change, at least suspend my 
decision. In thi state of uncertainti I alight at the hut. We gave 
thi name to the hous tenant by the farmer and hi servants, and 
which wa situat on the verg of my brother' ground, and at a 
consider distanc from the mansion. the path to the mansion wa 
plant by a doubl row of walnuts. along thi path I proceed alone. 
I enter the parlour, in which wa a light just expir in the socket. 
there wa no one in the room. I perceiv by the clock that stood 
against the wall, that it wa near eleven. the late of the hour 
startl me. what had becom of the family? they were usual retir 
an hour befor this; but the unextinguish taper, and the unbar 
door were indic that they had not retired. I again return to the 
hall, and pass from one room to another, but still encount not a 
human being. 

I imagin that, perhaps, the laps of a few minut would explain 
these appearances. meanwhil I reflect that the preconcert hour had 
arrived. carwin wa perhap wait my approach. should I immedi 
retir to my own house, no one would be appriz of my proceeding. nay, 
the interview might pass, and I be enabl to return in half an hour. 
henc no necess would aris for dissimulation. 

I wa so far influenc by these view that I rose to execut thi 
design; but again the unusu condit of the hous occur to me, and 
some vagu solicitud as to the condit of the family. I wa nearli 
certain that my brother had not retired; but by what motiv he could 
be induc to desert hi hous thu unseason I could by no mean 
divine. louisa conway, at least, wa at home and had, probably, retir 
to her chamber; perhap she wa abl to impart the inform I wanted. 

I went to her chamber, and found her asleep. she wa delight and 
surpriz at my arrival, and told me with how much impati and 
anxieti my brother and hi wife had wait my coming. they were fear 
that some mishap had befallen me, and had remain up longer than the 
usual period. notwithstand the late of the hour, catharin would 
not resign the hope of see me. louisa said she had left them both in 
the parlour, and she knew of no caus for their absence. 

As yet I wa not without solicitud on account of their person safety. 
I wa far from be perfectli at eas on that head, but entertain no 
distinct concept of the danger that impend over them. perhap to 
beguil the moment of my long protract stay, they had gone to 
walk upon the bank. the atmosphere, though illumin onli by the 
star-light, wa remark serene. meanwhil the desir of an 
interview with carwin again returned, and I final resolv to seek it. 

I pass with doubt and hasti step along the path. My dwelling, seen 
at a distance, wa gloomi and desolate. It had no inhabitant, for my 
servant, in consequ of my new arrangement, had gone to mettingen. 
the temer of thi attempt began to shew itself in more vivid colour 
to my understanding. whoever ha point steel is not without arms; yet 
what must have been the state of my mind when I could meditate, without 
shuddering, on the use of a murder weapon, and believ myself secur 
mere becaus I wa capabl of be made so by the death of another? 
yet thi wa not my state. I felt as if I wa rush into deadli toils, 
without the power of paus or receding. 



chapter xvi 


As soon as I arriv in sight of the front of the house, my attent 
wa excit by a light from the window of my own chamber. No appear 
could be less explicable. A meet wa expect with carwin, but that 
he pre-occupi my chamber, and had suppli himself with light, wa not 
to be believed. what motiv could influenc him to adopt thi conduct? 
could I proceed until thi wa explained? perhaps, if I should proceed 
to a distanc in front, some one would be visible. A sidelong but feebl 
beam from the window, fell upon the pini cops which skirt the bank. 
As I eye it, it suddenli becam mutable, and after flit to and fro, 
for a short time, it vanished. I turn my eye again toward the window, 
and perceiv that the light wa still there; but the chang which I had 
notic wa occas by a chang in the posit of the lamp or candl 
within. hence, that some person wa there wa an unavoid inference. 

I paus to deliber on the proprieti of advancing. might I not 
advanc cautiously, and, therefore, without danger? might I not knock at 
the door, or call, and be appriz of the natur of my visit befor I 
entered? I approach and listen at the door, but could hear nothing. 
I knock at first timidly, but afterward with loudness. My signal 
were unnoticed. I step back and looked, but the light wa no longer 
discernible. wa it suddenli extinguish by a human agent? what purpos 
but conceal wa intended? whi wa the illumin produced, to be 
thu suddenli brought to an end? and why, sinc some one wa there, had 
silenc been observed? 

these were questions, the solut of which may be readili suppos 
to be entangl with danger. would not thi danger, when measur by a 
woman' fears, expand into gigant dimensions? menac of death; the 
stun exert of a warn voice; the known and unknown attribut 
of carwin; our recent interview in thi chamber; the pre-appoint of 
a meet at thi place and hour, all throng into my memory. what wa 
to be done? 

courag is no definit or stedfast principle. let that man who shall 
purpos to assign motiv to the action of another, blush at hi 
folli and forbear. not more presumptu would it be to attempt the 
classif of all nature, and the scan of suprem intelligence. 
I gaze for a minut at the window, and fix my eyes, for a second 
minute, on the ground. I drew forth from my pocket, and opened, a 
penknife. this, said I, be my safe-guard and avenger. the assail 
shall perish, or myself shall fall. I had lock up the hous in the 
morning, but had the key of the kitchen door in my pocket. I, therefore, 
determin to gain access behind. thither I hastened, unlock and 
entered. all wa lonely, darksome, and waste. familiar as I wa with 
everi part of my dwelling, I easili found my way to a closet, drew forth 
a taper, a flint, tinder, and steel, and, in a moment as it were, gave 
myself the guidanc and protect of light. 

what purpos did I meditate? should I explor my way to my chamber, and 
confront the be who had dare to intrud into thi recess, and had 
labour for concealment? By put out the light did he seek to hide 
himself, or mean onli to circumv my incauti steps? yet wa it 
not more probabl that he desir my absenc by thu encourag the 
supposit that the hous wa unoccupied? I would see thi man in spite 
of all impediments; ere I died, I would see hi face, and summon him 
to penit and retribution; no matter at what cost an interview wa 
purchased. reput and life might be wrest from me by another, but 
my rectitud and honor were in my own keeping, and were safe. 

I proceed to the foot of the stairs. At such a crisi my thought 
may be suppos at no liberti to range; yet vagu imag rush into my 
mind, of the mysteri interposit which had been experienc on the 
last night. My case, at present, wa not dissimilar; and, if my angel 
were not weari of fruitless exert to save, might not a new warn 
be expected? who could say whether hi silenc were ascrib to the 
absenc of danger, or to hi own absence? 

In thi state of mind, no wonder that a shiver cold crept through 
my veins; that my paus wa prolonged; and, that a fear glanc wa 
thrown backward. 

alas! my heart droops, and my finger are enervated; my idea are 
vivid, but my languag is faint: now know I what it is to entertain 
incommunic sentiments. the chain of subsequ incid is drawn 
through my mind, and be link with those which forewent, by turn 
rous up agoni and sink me into hopelessness. 

yet I will persist to the end. My narr may be invad by inaccuraci 
and confusion; but if I live no longer, I will, at least, live to 
complet it. what but ambiguities, abruptnesses, and dark transitions, 
can be expect from the historian who is, at the same time, the 
suffer of these disasters? 

I have said that I cast a look behind. some object wa expect to be 
seen, or whi should I have gaze in that direction? two sens were at 
onc assailed. the same pierc exclam of hold! hold! wa utter 
within the same distanc of my ear. thi it wa that I heard. the airi 
undulation, and the shock given to my nerves, were real. whether the 
spectacl which I beheld exist in my fanci or without, might be 
doubted. I had not close the door of the apart I had just left. the 
stair-case, at the foot of which I stood, wa eight or ten feet from 
the door, and attach to the wall through which the door led. My view, 
therefore, wa sidelong, and took in no part of the room. 

through thi apertur wa an head thrust and drawn back with so much 
swiftness, that the immedi convict was, that thu much of a form, 
ordinarili invisible, had been unshrowded. the face wa turn toward 
me. everi muscl wa tense; the forehead and brow were drawn into 
vehement expression; the lip were stretch as in the act of shrieking, 
and the eye emit sparks, which, no doubt, if I had been unattend 
by a light, would have illumin like the corusc of a meteor. 
the sound and the vision were present, and depart togeth at the 
same instant; but the cri wa blown into my ear, while the face wa mani 
pace distant. 

thi face wa well suit to a be whose perform exceed the 
standard of humanity, and yet it featur were akin to those I had 
befor seen. the imag of carwin wa blend in a thousand way with the 
stream of my thoughts. thi visag was, perhaps, pourtray by my fancy. 
If so, it will excit no surpriz that some of hi lineament were now 
discovered. yet affin were few and unconspicuous, and were lost 
amidst the blaze of opposit qualities. 

what conclus could I form? Be the face human or not, the intim 
wa impart from above. experi had evinc the benign of that 
be who gave it. onc he had interpos to shield me from harm, and 
subsequ event demonstr the use of that interposition. now 
wa I again warn to forbear. I wa hurri to the verg of the same 
gulf, and the same power wa exert to recal my steps. wa it possibl 
for me not to obey? wa I capabl of hold on in the same peril 
career? yes. even of thi I wa capable! 

the intim wa imperfect: it gave no form to my danger, and 
prescrib no limit to my caution. I had formerli neglect it, and yet 
escaped. might I not trust to the same issue? thi idea might possess, 
though imperceptibly, some influence. I persisted; but it wa not mere 
on thi account. I cannot delin the motiv that led me on. I now 
speak as if no remnant of doubt exist in my mind as to the supern 
origin of these sounds; but thi is owe to the imperfect of my 
language, for I onli mean that the belief wa more permanent, and 
visit more frequent my sober medit than it opposite. the 
immedi effect serv onli to undermin the foundat of my 
judgment and precipit my resolutions. 

I must either advanc or return. I chose the former, and began to ascend 
the stairs. the silenc underw no second interruption. My chamber 
door wa closed, but unlocked, and, aid by vehement effort of my 
courage, I open and look in. 

No hideou or uncommon object wa discernible. the danger, indeed, might 
easili have lurk out of sight, have sprung upon me as I entered, and 
have rent me with hi iron talons; but I wa blind to thi fate, and 
advanced, though cautiously, into the room. 

still everi thing wore it accustom aspect. neither lamp nor candl 
wa to be found. now, for the first time, suspicion were suggest as 
to the natur of the light which I had seen. wa it possibl to have 
been the companion of that supernatur visage; a meteor refulg 
produc at the will of him to whom that visag belonged, and 
partak of the natur of that which accompani my father' death? 

the closet wa near, and I rememb the complic horror of which 
it had been productive. here, perhaps, wa inclos the sourc of my 
peril, and the gratif of my curiosity. should I adventur onc 
more to explor it recesses? thi wa a resolut not easili formed. I 
wa suspend in thought: when glanc my eye on a table, I perceiv a 
written paper. carwin' hand wa instantli recognized, and snatch up 
the paper, I read as follows:-- 

"there wa folli in expect your complianc with my invitation. judg 
how I wa disappoint in find anoth in your place. I have 
waited, but to wait ani longer would be perilous. I shall still seek an 
interview, but it must be at a differ time and place: meanwhile, 
I will write this--how will you bear--how inexplic will be thi 
transaction!--an event so unexpected--a sight so horrible!" 

such wa thi abrupt and unsatisfactori script. the ink wa yet moist, 
the hand wa that of carwin. henc it wa to be infer that he had 
thi moment left the apartment, or wa still in it. I look back, on 
the sudden expect of see him behind me. 

what other did he mean? what transact had taken place advers to my 
expectations? what sight wa about to be exhibited? I look around 
me onc more, but saw noth which indic strangeness. again I 
rememb the closet, and wa resolv to seek in that the solut 
of these mysteries. here, perhaps, wa inclos the scene destin to 
awaken my horror and baffl my foresight. 

I have alreadi said, that the entranc into thi closet wa besid my 
bed, which, on two sides, wa close shrowd by curtains. On that side 
nearest the closet, the curtain wa raised. As I pass along I cast my 
eye thither. I started, and look again. I bore a light in my hand, and 
brought it nearer my eyes, in order to dispel ani illus mist that 
might have hover befor them. onc more I fix my eye upon the bed, 
in hope that thi more stedfast scrutini would annihil the object 
which befor seem to be there. 

thi then wa the sight which carwin had predicted! thi wa the event 
which my understand wa to find inexplicable! thi wa the fate 
which had been reserv for me, but which, by some untoward chance, had 
befallen on another! 

I had not been terrifi by empti menaces. violat and death await 
my entranc into thi chamber. some inscrut chanc had led her 
hither befor me, and the merciless fang of which I wa design to 
be the prey, had mistaken their victim, and had fix themselv in her 
heart. but where wa my safety? wa the mischief exhaust or flown? the 
step of the assassin had just been here; they could not be far off; in 
a moment he would rush into my presence, and I should perish under the 
same pollut and suffoc grasp! 

My frame shook, and my knee were unabl to support me. I gaze 
altern at the closet door and at the door of my room. At one of 
these avenu would enter the extermin of my honor and my life. I 
wa prepar for defence; but now that danger wa imminent, my mean 
of defence, and my power to use them were gone. I wa not qualified, by 
educ and experience, to encount peril like these: or, perhaps, 
I wa powerless becaus I wa again assault by surprize, and had not 
fortifi my mind by foresight and previou reflect against a scene 
like this. 

fear for my own safeti again yield place to reflect on the scene 
befor me. I fix my eye upon her countenance. My sister' well-known 
and belov featur could not be conceal by convuls or lividness. 
what dire illus led thee hither? bereft of thee, what hold on 
happi remain to thi offspr and thi spouse? To lose thee by a 
common fate would have been suffici hard; but thu suddenli to 
perish--to becom the prey of thi ghastli death! how will a spectacl 
like thi be endur by wieland? To die beneath hi grasp would not 
satisfi thi enemy. thi wa merci to the evil which he previous made 
thee suffer! after these evil death wa a boon which thou besoughtest 
him to grant. He entertain no enmiti against thee: I wa the object of 
hi treason; but by some tremend mistak hi furi wa misplaced. but 
how comest thou hither? and where wa wieland in thi hour of distress? 

I approach the corpse: I lift the still flexibl hand, and kiss 
the lip which were breathless. her flow draperi wa discomposed. 
I restor it to order, and seat myself on the bed, again fix 
stedfast eye upon her countenance. I cannot distinctli recollect the 
rumin of that moment. I saw confusedly, but forcibly, that everi 
hope wa extinguish with the life of catharine. all happi and 
digniti must henceforth be banish from the hous and name of wieland: 
all that remain wa to linger out in agoni a short existence; and 
leav to the world a monument of blast hope and changeabl fortune. 
pleyel wa alreadi lost to me; yet, while catharin live life wa not 
a detest possession: but now, sever from the companion of my 
infancy, the partak of all my thoughts, my cares, and my wishes, I 
wa like one set afloat upon a stormi sea, and hang hi safeti upon a 
plank; night wa close upon him, and an unexpect surg had torn him 
from hi hold and overwhelm him forever. 



chapter xvii 


I had no inclin nor power to move from thi spot. for more than an 
hour, my faculti and limb seem to be depriv of all activity. 
the door below creak on it hinges, and step ascend the stairs. My 
wander and confus thought were instantli recal by these sounds, 
and drop the curtain of the bed, I move to a part of the room 
where ani one who enter should be visible; such are the vibrat of 
sentiment, that notwithstand the seem fulfil of my fears, 
and increas of my danger, I wa conscious, on thi occasion, to no 
turbul but that of curiosity. 

At length he enter the apartment, and I recogn my brother. It wa 
the same wieland whom I had ever seen. yet hi featur were pervad by 
a new expression. I suppos him unacquaint with the fate of hi wife, 
and hi appear confirm thi persuasion. A brow expand into 
exult I had hitherto never seen in him, yet such a brow did he now 
wear. not onli wa he unappr of the disast that had happened, 
but some joyou occurr had betided. what a revers wa prepar to 
annihil hi transitori bliss! No husband ever doat more fondly, for 
no wife ever claim so boundless a devotion. I wa not uncertain as to 
the effect to flow from the discoveri of her fate. I confid not at 
all in the effort of hi reason or hi piety. there were few evil 
which hi mode of think would not disarm of their sting; but here, 
all opiat to grief, and all compel of patienc were vain. thi 
spectacl would be unavoid follow by the outrag of desperation, 
and a rush to death. 

for the present, I neglect to ask myself what motiv brought him 
hither. I wa onli fear of the effect to flow from the sight of the 
dead. yet could it be long conceal from him? some time and speedili 
he would obtain thi knowledge. No stratagem could consider or 
use prolong hi ignorance. all that could be sought wa to take 
away the abrupt of the change, and shut out the confus of 
despair, and the inroad of madness: but I knew my brother, and knew 
that all exert to consol him would be fruitless. 

what could I say? I wa mute, and pour forth those tear on hi 
account, which my own unhappi had been unabl to extort. In the 
midst of my tears, I wa not unobserv of hi motions. these were of 
a natur to rous some other sentiment than grief or, at least, to mix 
with it a portion of astonishment. 

hi counten suddenli becam troubled. hi hand were clasp with a 
forc that left the print of hi nail in hi flesh. hi eye were fix 
on my feet. hi brain seem to swell beyond it continent. He did not 
ceas to breathe, but hi breath wa stifl into groans. I had never 
wit the hurrican of human passions. My element had, till lately, 
been all sunshin and calm. I wa unconvers with the altitud and 
energi of sentiment, and wa transfix with inexplic horror by 
the symptom which I now beheld. 

after a silenc and a conflict which I could not interpret, he lift 
hi eye to heaven, and in broken accent exclaimed, "thi is too much! 
ani victim but this, and thi will be done. have I not suffici 
attest my faith and my obedience? she that is gone, they that have 
perished, were link with my soul by tie which onli thi command would 
have broken; but here is sanctiti and excel surpass human. thi 
workmanship is thine, and it cannot be thi will to heap it into ruins." 

here suddenli unclasp hi hands, he struck one of them against hi 
forehead, and continued--"wretch! who made thee quicksight in the 
council of thi maker? deliver from mortal fetter is award to 
thi being, and thou art the minist of thi decree." 

So saying, wieland advanc toward me. hi word and hi motion were 
without meaning, except on one supposition. the death of catharin wa 
alreadi known to him, and that knowledge, as might have been suspected, 
had destroy hi reason. I had fear noth less; but now that I 
beheld the extinct of a mind the most lumin and penetr that 
ever dignifi the human form, my sensat were fraught with new and 
insupport anguish. 

I had not time to reflect in what way my own safeti would be effect by 
thi revolution, or what I had to dread from the wild concept of a 
madman. He advanc toward me. some hollow nois were waft by the 
breeze. confus clamour were succeed by mani feet travers the 
grass, and then crowd into the piazza. 

these sound suspend my brother' purpose, and he stood to listen. the 
signal multipli and grew louder; perceiv this, he turn from me, 
and hurri out of my sight. all about me wa pregnant with motiv to 
astonishment. My sister' corpse, wieland' frantic demeanour, and, at 
length, thi crowd of visit so littl accord with my foresight, 
that my mental progress wa stopped. the impuls had ceas which wa 
accustom to give motion and order to my thoughts. 

footstep throng upon the stairs, and present mani face shew 
themselv within the door of my apartment. these look were full of 
alarm and watchfulness. they pri into corner as if in search of 
some fugitive; next their gaze wa fix upon me, and betoken all the 
vehem of terror and pity. for a time I question whether these were 
not shape and face like that which I had seen at the bottom of the 
stairs, creatur of my fanci or airi existences. My eye wander from 
one to another, till at length it fell on a counten which I well 
knew. It wa that of mr. hallet. thi man wa a distant kinsman of my 
mother, vener for hi age, hi uprightness, and sagacity. He had 
long discharg the function of a magistr and good citizen. If ani 
terror remained, hi presenc wa suffici to dispel them. 

He approached, took my hand with a compassion air, and said in a low 
voice, "where, my dear clara, are your brother and sister?" I made no 
answer, but point to the bed. hi attend drew asid the curtain, 
and while their eye glare with horror at the spectacl which they 
beheld, those of mr. hallet overflow with tears. 

after consider pause, he onc more turn to me. "mi dear girl, 
thi sight is not for you. can you confid in my care, and that of mrs. 
baynton's? We will see perform all that circumst require." 

I made strenuou opposit to thi request. I insist on remain 
near her till she were interred. hi remonstrances, however, and my own 
feelings, shew me the proprieti of a temporari dereliction. louisa 
stood in need of a comforter, and my brother' children of a nurse. My 
unhappi brother wa himself an object of solicitud and care. At length, 
I consent to relinquish the corpse, and go to my brother's, whose 
house, I said, would need mistress, and hi children a parent. 

dure thi discourse, my vener friend struggl with hi tears, but 
my last intim call them forth with fresh violence. meanwhile, 
hi attend stood round in mourn silence, gaze on me and at each 
other. I repeat my resolution, and rose to execut it; but he took my 
hand to detain me. hi counten betray irresolut and reluctance. 
I request him to state the reason of hi opposit to thi measure. 
I entreat him to be explicit. I told him that my brother had just been 
there, and that I knew hi condition. thi misfortun had driven him 
to madness, and hi offspr must not want a protector. If he chose, 
I would resign wieland to hi care; but hi innoc and helpless babe 
stood in instant need of nurs and mother, and these offic I would by 
no mean allow anoth to perform while I had life. 

everi word that I utter seem to augment hi perplex and distress. 
At last he said, "I think, clara, I have entitl myself to some regard 
from you. you have profess your willing to oblig me. now I call 
upon you to confer upon me the highest oblig in your power. permit 
mrs. baynton to have the manag of your brother' hous for two or 
three days; then it shall be your to act in it as you please. No matter 
what are my motiv in make thi request: perhap I think your 
age, your sex, or the distress which thi disast must occasion, 
incapacit you for the office. sure you have no doubt of mrs. 
baynton' tender or discretion." new idea now rush into my mind. 
I fix my eye stedfastli on mr. hallet. "are they well?" said I. "i 
louisa well? are benjamin, and william, and constantine, and littl 
clara, are they safe? tell me truly, I beseech you!" 

"they are well," he replied; "they are perfectli safe." 

"fear no effemin weak in me: I can bear to hear the truth. tell 
me truly, are they well?" 

He again assur me that they were well. 

"what then," resum I, "do you fear? Is it possibl for ani calam to 
disqualifi me for perform my duti to these helpless innocents? I 
am will to divid the care of them with mrs. baynton; I shall be 
grate for her sympathi and aid; but what should I be to desert them 
at an hour like this!" 

I will cut short thi distress dialogue. I still persist in my 
purpose, and he still persist in hi opposition. thi excit my 
suspicion anew; but these were remov by solemn declar of their 
safety. I could not explain thi conduct in my friend; but at length 
consent to go to the city, provid I should see them for a few 
minut at present, and should return on the morrow. 

even thi arrang wa object to. At length he told me they were 
remov to the city. whi were they removed, I asked, and whither? My 
importun would not now be eluded. My suspicion were roused, and no 
evas or artific wa suffici to allay them. mani of the audienc 
began to give vent to their emot in tears. mr. hallet himself seem 
as if the conflict were too hard to be longer sustained. someth 
whisper to my heart that havoc had been wider than I now witnessed. 
I suspect thi conceal to aris from apprehens of the 
effect which a knowledg of the truth would produc in me. I onc 
more entreat him to inform me truli of their state. To enforc my 
entreaties, I put on an air of insensibility. "I can guess," said I, 
"what ha happened--they are inde beyond the reach of injury, for they 
are dead! Is it not so?" My voic falter in spite of my courag 
efforts. 

"yes," said he, "they are dead! dead by the same fate, and by the same 
hand, with their mother!" 

"dead!" repli I; "what, all?" 

"all!" repli he: "he spare not one!" 

allow me, my friends, to close my eye upon the after-scene. whi should 
I protract a tale which I alreadi begin to feel is too long? over thi 
scene at least let me pass lightly. here, indeed, my narr would be 
imperfect. all wa tempestu commot in my heart and in my brain. I 
have no memori for ought but unconsci transit and rueful sights. 
I wa ingeni and indefatig in the invent of torments. I would 
not dispens with ani spectacl adapt to exasper my grief. each 
pale and mangl form I crush to my bosom. louisa, whom I love with 
so ineff a passion, wa deni to me at first, but my obstinaci 
conquer their reluctance. 

they led the way into a darken hall. A lamp pendant from the ceil 
wa uncovered, and they point to a table. the assassin had defraud 
me of my last and miser consolation. I sought not in her visage, for 
the ting of the morning, and the lustr of heaven. these had vanish 
with life; but I hope for liberti to print a last kiss upon her lips. 
thi wa deni me; for such had been the merciless blow that destroy 
her, that not a lineament remained! 

I wa carri henc to the city. mrs. hallet wa my companion and my 
nurse. whi should I dwell upon the rage of fever, and the effus 
of delirium? carwin wa the phantom that pursu my dreams, the giant 
oppressor under whose arm I wa for ever on the point of be crushed. 
strenuou muscl were requir to hinder my flight, and heart of steel 
to withstand the eloqu of my fears. In vain I call upon them to 
look upward, to mark hi sparkl rage and scowl contempt. all I 
sought wa to fli from the stroke that wa lifted. then I heap upon my 
guard the most vehement reproaches, or betook myself to wail on the 
hapless of my condition. 

thi malady, at length, declined, and my weep friend began to look 
for my restoration. slowly, and with intermit beams, memori revisit 
me. the scene that I had wit were revived, becam the theme 
of deliber and deduction, and call forth the effus of more 
ration sorrow. 



chapter xviii 


I had imperfectli recov my strength, when I wa inform of the 
arriv of my mother' brother, thoma cambridge. ten year since, he 
went to europe, and wa a surgeon in the british forc in germany, 
dure the whole of the late war. after it conclusion, some connect 
that he had form with an irish officer, made him retir into ireland. 
intercours had been punctual maintain by letter with hi sister' 
children, and hope were given that he would shortli return to hi 
nativ country, and pass hi old age in our society. He wa now in an 
evil hour arrived. 

I desir an interview with him for numer and urgent reasons. with 
the first return of my understand I had anxious sought inform 
of the fate of my brother. dure the cours of my diseas I had never 
seen him; and vagu and unsatisfactori answer were return to all my 
inquires. I had vehement interrog mrs. hallet and her husband, and 
solicit an interview with thi unfortun man; but they mysteri 
insinu that hi reason wa still unsettled, and that hi 
circumst render an interview impossible. their reserv on the 
particular of thi destruction, and the author of it, wa equal 
invincible. 

for some time, find all my effort fruitless, I had desist from 
direct inquiri and solicitations, determined, as soon as my strength 
wa suffici renewed, to pursu other mean of dispel my 
uncertainty. In thi state of thing my uncle' arriv and intent to 
visit me were announced. I almost shudder to behold the face of thi 
man. when I reflect on the disast that had befallen us, I wa half 
unwil to wit that deject and grief which would be disclos 
in hi countenance. but I believ that all transact had been 
thoroughli disclos to him, and confid in my importun to extort 
from him the knowledg that I sought. 

I had no doubt as to the person of our enemy; but the motiv that urg 
him to perpetr these horrors, the mean that he used, and hi present 
condition, were total unknown. It wa reason to expect some 
inform on thi head, from my uncle. I therefor wait hi come 
with impatience. At length, in the dusk of the evening, and in my 
solitari chamber, thi meet took place. 

thi man wa our nearest relation, and had ever treat us with the 
affect of a parent. our meeting, therefore, could not be without 
overflow tender and gloomi joy. He rather encourag than 
restrain the tear that I pour out in hi arms, and took upon 
himself the task of comforter. allus to recent disast could not 
be long omitted. one topic facilit the admiss of another. At 
length, I mention and deplor the ignor in which I had been 
kept respect my brother' destiny, and the circumst of our 
misfortunes. I entreat him to tell me what wa wieland' condition, 
and what progress had been made in detect or punish the author of 
thi unheard-of devastation. 

"the author!" said he; "do you know the author?" 

"alas!" I answered, "I am too well acquaint with him. the stori of 
the ground of my suspicion would be pain and too long. I am not 
appriz of the extent of your present knowledge. there are none but 
wieland, pleyel, and myself, who are abl to relat certain facts." 

"spare yourself the pain," said he. "all that wieland and pleyel can 
communicate, I know already. If ani thing of moment ha fallen within 
your own exclus knowledge, and the relat be not too arduou for 
your present strength, I confess I am desir of hear it. perhap 
you allud to one by the name of carwin. I will anticip your 
curios by saying, that sinc these disasters, no one ha seen or 
heard of him. hi agenc is, therefore, a mysteri still unsolved." 

I readili compli with hi request, and relat as distinctli as 
I could, though in gener terms, the event transact in the 
summer-hous and my chamber. He listen without appar surpriz 
to the tale of pleyel' error and suspicions, and with augment 
seriousness, to my narr of the warn and inexplic vision, 
and the letter found upon the table. I wait for hi comments. 

"you gather from this," said he, "that carwin is the author of all thi 
misery." 

"i it not," answer I, "an unavoid inference? but what know you 
respect it? wa it possibl to execut thi mischief without wit 
or coadjutor? I beseech you to relat to me, when and whi mr. hallet wa 
summon to the scene, and by whom thi disast wa first suspect 
or discovered. surely, suspicion must have fallen upon some one, and 
pursuit wa made." 

My uncl rose from hi seat, and travers the floor with hasti steps. 
hi eye were fix upon the ground, and he seem buri in perplexity. 
At length he paused, and said with an emphat tone, "it is true; the 
instrument is known. carwin may have plotted, but the execut wa 
another's. that other is found, and hi deed is ascertained." 

"good heaven!" I exclaimed, "what say you? wa not carwin the assassin? 
could ani hand but hi have carri into act thi dread purpose?" 

"have I not said," return he, "that the perform wa another's? 
carwin, perhaps, or heaven, or insanity, prompt the murderer; but 
carwin is unknown. the actual perform has, long since, been call 
to judgment and convicted, and is, at thi moment, at the bottom of a 
dungeon load with chains." 

I lift my hand and eyes. "who then is thi assassin? By what means, 
and whither wa he traced? what is the testimoni of hi guilt?" 

"hi own, corrobor with that of a servant-maid who spi the murder 
of the children from a closet where she wa concealed. the magistr 
return from your dwell to your brother's. He wa employ in 
hear and record the testimoni of the onli witness, when the 
crimin himself, unexpected, unsolicited, unsought, enter the hall, 
acknowledg hi guilt, and render himself up to justice. 

"he ha sinc been summon to the bar. the audienc wa compos of 
thousand whom rumour of thi wonder event had attract from the 
greatest distance. A long and imparti examin wa made, and the 
prison wa call upon for hi defence. In complianc with thi call 
he deliv an ampl relat of hi motiv and actions." there he 
stopped. 

I besought him to say who thi crimin was, and what the instig 
that compel him. My uncl wa silent. I urg thi inquiri with new 
force. I revert to my own knowledge, and sought in thi some basi to 
conjecture. I ran over the scanti catalogu of the men whom I knew; I 
light on no one who wa qualifi for minist to malic like this. 
again I resort to importunity. had I ever seen the criminal? wa it 
sheer cruelty, or diabol reveng that produc thi overthrow? 

He survey me, for a consider time, and listen to my 
interrog in silence. At length he spoke: "clara, I have known thee 
by report, and in some degre by observation. thou art a be of no 
vulgar sort. thi friend have hitherto treat thee as a child. they 
meant well, but, perhaps, they were unacquaint with thi strength. I 
assur myself that noth will surpass thi fortitude. 

"thou art anxiou to know the destroy of thi family, hi actions, and 
hi motives. shall I call him to thi presence, and permit him to confess 
befor thee? shall I make him the narrat of hi own tale?" 

I start on my feet, and look round me with fear glances, as if 
the murder wa close at hand. "what do you mean?" said I; "put an end, 
I beseech you, to thi suspence." 

"be not alarmed; you will never more behold the face of thi criminal, 
unless he be gift with supernatur strength, and sever like thread 
the constraint of link and bolts. I have said that the assassin wa 
arraign at the bar, and that the trial end with a summon from the 
judg to confess or to vindic hi actions. A repli wa immedi 
made with signific of gesture, and a tranquil majesty, which denot 
less of human than godhead. judges, advoc and auditor were 
panic-struck and breathless with attention. one of the hearer 
faith record the speech. there it is," continu he, put a 
roll of paper in my hand, "you may read it at your leisure." 

with these word my uncl left me alone. My curios refus me a 
moment' delay. I open the papers, and read as follows. 



chapter xix 


"theodor wieland, the prison at the bar, wa now call upon for hi 
defence. He look around him for some time in silence, and with a mild 
countenance. At length he spoke: 

"it is strange; I am known to my judg and my auditors. who is there 
present a stranger to the charact of wieland? who know him not as an 
husband--a a father--a a friend? yet here am I arraign as criminal. 
I am charg with diabol malice; I am accus of the murder of my 
wife and my children! 

"it is true, they were slain by me; they all perish by my hand. 
the task of vindic is ignoble. what is it that I am call to 
vindicate? and befor whom? 

"you know that they are dead, and that they were kill by me. what more 
would you have? would you extort from me a statement of my motives? have 
you fail to discov them already? you charg me with malice; but your 
eye are not shut; your reason is still vigorous; your memori ha not 
forsaken you. you know whom it is that you thu charge. the habit of 
hi life are known to you; hi treatment of hi wife and hi 
offspr is known to you; the sound of hi integrity, and the 
unchang of hi principles, are familiar to your apprehension; 
yet you persist in thi charge! you lead me hither manacl as a felon; 
you deem me worthi of a vile and torment death! 

"who are they whom I have devot to death? My wife--th littl ones, 
that drew their be from me--that creatur who, as she surpass 
them in excellence, claim a larger affect than those whom natur 
affin bound to my heart. think ye that malic could have urg me 
to thi deed? hide your audaci front from the scrutini of heaven. 
take refug in some cavern unvisit by human eyes. Ye may deplor your 
wicked or folly, but ye cannot expiat it. 

"think not that I speak for your sakes. hug to your heart thi 
detest infatuation. deem me still a murderer, and drag me to 
untim death. I make not an effort to dispel your illusion: I utter 
not a word to cure you of your sanguinari folly: but there are probabl 
some in thi assembl who have come from far: for their sakes, whose 
distanc ha disabl them from know me, I will tell what I have 
done, and why. 

"it is needless to say that god is the object of my suprem passion. 
I have cherished, in hi presence, a singl and upright heart. I have 
thirst for the knowledg of hi will. I have burnt with ardour to 
approv my faith and my obedience. 

"mi day have been spent in search for the revel of that will; 
but my day have been mournful, becaus my search failed. I solicit 
direction: I turn on everi side where glimmer of light could be 
discovered. I have not been wholli uninformed; but my knowledg ha 
alway stop short of certainty. dissatisfact ha insinu 
itself into all my thoughts. My purpos have been pure; my wish 
indefatigable; but not till late were these purpos thoroughli 
accomplished, and these wish fulli gratified. 

"I thank thee, my father, for thi bounty; that thou didst not ask a less 
sacrific than this; that thou placedst me in a condit to testifi my 
submiss to thi will! what have I withheld which it wa thi pleasur 
to exact? now may I, with dauntless and erect eye, claim my reward, 
sinc I have given thee the treasur of my soul. 

"I wa at my own house: it wa late in the evening: my sister had gone 
to the city, but propos to return. It wa in expect of her return 
that my wife and I delay go to bed beyond the usual hour; the rest 
of the family, however, were retired. 

"mi mind wa contempl and calm; not wholli devoid of apprehens 
on account of my sister' safety. recent events, not easili explained, 
had suggest the exist of some danger; but thi danger wa 
without a distinct form in our imagination, and scarc ruffl our 
tranquillity. 

"time passed, and my sister did not arrive; her hous is at some 
distanc from mine, and though her arrang had been made with a 
view to resid with us, it wa possibl that, through forgetfulness, 
or the occurr of unforeseen emergencies, she had return to her own 
dwelling. 

"henc it wa conceiv proper that I should ascertain the truth by 
go thither. I went. On my way my mind wa full of these idea 
which relat to my intellectu condition. In the torrent of fervid 
conceptions, I lost sight of my purpose. some time I stood still; 
some time I wander from my path, and experienc some difficulty, on 
recov from my fit of musing, to regain it. 

"the seri of my thought is easili traced. At first everi vein beat 
with raptur known onli to the man whose parent and conjug love 
is without limits, and the cup of whose desires, immens as it is, 
overflow with gratification. I know not whi emot that were 
perpetu visit should now have recur with unusu energy. the 
transit wa not new from sensat of joy to a conscious of 
gratitude. the author of my be wa likewis the dispens of everi 
gift with which that be wa embellished. the servic to which a 
benefactor like thi wa entitled, could not be circumscribed. My social 
sentiment were indebt to their allianc with devot for all their 
value. all passion are base, all joy feeble, all energi malignant, 
which are not drawn from thi source. 

"for a time, my contempl soar abov earth and it inhabitants. 
I stretch forth my hands; I lift my eyes, and exclaimed, O! that I 
might be admit to thi presence; that mine were the suprem delight of 
know thi will, and of perform it! the bliss privileg of direct 
commun with thee, and of listen to the audibl enunci of 
thi pleasure! 

"what task would I not undertake, what privat would I not cheer 
endure, to testifi my love of thee? alas! thou hidest thyself from my 
view: glimps onli of thi excel and beauti are afford me. would 
that a momentari eman from thi glori would visit me! that some 
unambigu token of thi presenc would salut my senses! 

"in thi mood, I enter the hous of my sister. It wa vacant. scarc 
had I regain recollect of the purpos that brought me hither. 
thought of a differ tendenc had such absolut possess of my 
mind, that the relat of time and space were almost obliter from 
my understanding. these wanderings, however, were restrained, and I 
ascend to her chamber. 

"I had no light, and might have known by extern observation, that 
the hous wa without ani inhabitant. with this, however, I wa 
not satisfied. I enter the room, and the object of my search not 
appearing, I prepar to return. 

"the dark requir some caution in descend the stair. I stretch 
my hand to seiz the balustrad by which I might regul my steps. 
how shall I describ the lustre, which, at that moment, burst upon my 
vision! 

"I wa dazzled. My organ were bereav of their activity. My eye-lid 
were half-closed, and my hand withdrawn from the balustrade. A nameless 
fear chill my veins, and I stood motionless. thi irradi did not 
retir or lessen. It seem as if some power effulg cover me 
like a mantle. 

"I open my eye and found all about me lumin and glowing. It wa 
the element of heaven that flow around. noth but a fieri stream wa 
at first visible; but, anon, a shrill voic from behind call upon me 
to attend. 

"I turned: It is forbidden to describ what I saw: words, indeed, would 
be want to the task. the lineament of that being, whose veil wa now 
lifted, and whose visag beam upon my sight, no hue of pencil or of 
languag can pourtray. 

"a it spoke, the accent thrill to my heart. "thi prayer are heard. 
In proof of thi faith, render me thi wife. thi is the victim I chuse. 
call her hither, and here let her fall."--th sound, and visage, and 
light vanish at once. 

"what demand wa this? the blood of catharin wa to be shed! My wife 
wa to perish by my hand! I sought opportun to attest my virtue. 
littl did I expect that a proof like thi would have been demanded. 

"mi wife! I exclaimed: O god! substitut some other victim. make me 
not the butcher of my wife. My own blood is cheap. thi will I pour 
out befor thee with a will heart; but spare, I beseech thee, thi 
preciou life, or commiss some other than her husband to perform the 
bloodi deed. 

"in vain. the condit were prescribed; the decre had gone forth, and 
noth remain but to execut it. I rush out of the hous and across 
the intermedi fields, and stop not till I enter my own parlour. 
"mi wife had remain here dure my absence, in anxiou expect of 
my return with some tide of her sister. I had none to communicate. 
for a time, I wa breathless with my speed: this, and the tremor 
that shook my frame, and the wild of my looks, alarm her. she 
immedi suspect some disast to have happen to her friend, and 
her own speech wa as much overpow by emot as mine. 

"she wa silent, but her look manifest her impati to hear what I 
had to communicate. I spoke, but with so much precipit as scarc 
to be understood; catch her, at the same time, by the arm, and 
forcibl pull her from her seat. 

"come along with me: fly: wast not a moment: time will be lost, and the 
deed will be omitted. tarri not; question not; but fli with me! 

"thi deport ad afresh to her alarms. her eye pursu mine, and 
she said, "what is the matter? for god' sake what is the matter? where 
would you have me go?" 

"mi eye were fix upon her counten while she spoke. I thought 
upon her virtues; I view her as the mother of my babes: as my wife: 
I recal the purpos for which I thu urg her attendance. My heart 
faltered, and I saw that I must rous to thi work all my faculties. the 
danger of the least delay wa imminent. 

"I look away from her, and again exert my force, drew her toward 
the door--'you must go with me--inde you must.' 

"in her fright she half-resist my efforts, and again exclaimed, 'good 
heaven! what is it you mean? where go? what ha happened? have you found 
clara?" 

"follow me, and you will see," I answered, still urg her reluct 
step forward. 

"what phrenzi ha seiz you? someth must need have happened. Is she 
sick? have you found her?" 

"come and see. follow me, and know for yourself." 

"still she expostul and besought me to explain thi mysteri 
behaviour. I could not trust myself to answer her; to look at her; but 
grasp her arm, I drew her after me. she hesitated, rather through 
confus of mind than from unwilling to accompani me. thi 
confus gradual abated, and she move forward, but with irresolut 
footsteps, and continu exclam of wonder and terror. her 
interrog Of "what wa the matter?" and "whither wa I going?" were 
ceaseless and vehement. 

"it wa the scope of my effort not to think; to keep up a conflict and 
uproar in my mind in which all order and distinct should be lost; 
to escap from the sensat produc by her voice. I was, therefore, 
silent. I strove to abridg thi interv by my haste, and to wast all 
my attent in furiou gesticulations. 

"in thi state of mind we reach my sister' door. she look at the 
window and saw that all wa desolate--"whi come we here? there is no 
bodi here. I will not go in." 

"still I wa dumb; but open the door, I drew her into the entry. thi 
wa the allot scene: here she wa to fall. I let go her hand, and 
press my palm against my forehead, made one mighti effort to work up 
my soul to the deed. 

"in vain; it would not be; my courag wa appalled; my arm nerveless: 
I mutter prayer that my strength might be aid from above. they 
avail nothing. 

"horror diffus itself over me. thi convict of my cowardice, my 
rebellion, fasten upon me, and I stood rigid and cold as marble. from 
thi state I wa somewhat reliev by my wife' voice, who renew her 
supplic to be told whi we came hither, and what wa the fate of my 
sister. 

"what could I answer? My word were broken and inarticulate. her fear 
natur acquir forc from the observ of these symptoms; but 
these fear were misplaced. the onli infer she deduc from my 
conduct was, that some terribl mishap had befallen clara. 

"she wrung her hands, and exclaim in an agony, "O tell me, where is 
she? what ha becom of her? Is she sick? dead? Is she in her chamber? O 
let me go thither and know the worst!" 

"thi propos set my thought onc more in motion. perhap what my 
rebelli heart refus to perform here, I might obtain strength enough 
to execut elsewhere. 

"come then," said I, "let us go." 

"I will, but not in the dark. We must first procur a light." 

"fli then and procur it; but I charg you, linger not. I will await for 
your return. 

"while she wa gone, I strode along the entry. the fell of a gloomi 
hurrican but faintli resembl the discord that reign in my mind. To 
omit thi sacrific must not be; yet my sinew had refus to perform 
it. No altern wa offered. To rebel against the mandat wa 
impossible; but obedi would render me the execution of my wife. My 
will wa strong, but my limb refus their office. 

"she return with a light; I led the way to the chamber; she look 
round her; she lift the curtain of the bed; she saw nothing. 

"at length, she fix inquir eye upon me. the light now enabl her 
to discov in my visag what dark had hitherto concealed. her 
care were now transfer from my sister to myself, and she said in 
a tremul voice, "wieland! you are not well: what ail you? can I do 
noth for you?" 

"that accent and look so win should disarm me of my resolution, 
wa to be expected. My thought were thrown anew into anarchy. I spread 
my hand befor my eye that I might not see her, and answer onli by 
groans. she took my other hand between her's, and press it to her 
heart, spoke with that voic which had ever sway my will, and waft 
away sorrow. 

"mi friend! my soul' friend! tell me thi caus of grief. Do I not merit 
to partak with thee in thi cares? Am I not thi wife?" 

"thi wa too much. I broke from her embrace, and retir to a corner 
of the room. In thi pause, courag wa onc more infus into me. I 
resolv to execut my duty. she follow me, and renew her passion 
entreati to know the caus of my distress. 

"I rais my head and regard her with stedfast looks. I mutter 
someth about death, and the injunct of my duty. At these word 
she shrunk back, and look at me with a new express of anguish. 
after a pause, she clasp her hands, and exclaimed-- 

"O wieland! wieland! god grant that I am mistaken; but sure someth 
is wrong. I see it: it is too plain: thou art undone--lost to me and 
to thyself." At the same time she gaze on my featur with intensest 
anxiety, in hope that differ symptom would take place. I repli to 
her with vehemence-- 

"undone! no; my duti is known, and I thank my god that my cowardic is 
now vanquished, and I have power to fulfil it. catharine! I piti the 
weak of thi nature: I piti thee, but must not spare. thi life is 
claim from my hands: thou must die!" 

"fear wa now ad to her grief. 'what mean you? whi talk you of death? 
bethink yourself, wieland: bethink yourself, and thi fit will pass. O 
whi came I hither! whi did you drag me hither?' 

"I brought thee hither to fulfil a divin command. I am appoint thi 
destroyer, and destroy thee I must." say thi I seiz her wrists. 
she shriek aloud, and endeavour to free herself from my grasp; but 
her effort were vain. 

"surely, sure wieland, thou dost not mean it. Am I not thi wife? and 
wouldst thou kill me? thou wilt not; and yet--i see--thou art wieland 
no longer! A furi resistless and horribl possess thee--spar 
me--spare--help--help--" 

"till her breath wa stop she shriek for help--for mercy. when 
she could speak no longer, her gestures, her look appeal to my 
compassion. My accurs hand wa irresolut and tremulous. I meant 
thi death to be sudden, thi struggl to be brief. alas! my heart wa 
infirm; my resolv mutable. thrice I slacken my grasp, and life kept 
it hold, though in the midst of pangs. her eye-bal start from their 
sockets. grim and distort took place of all that use to bewitch 
me into transport, and subdu me into reverence. 

"I wa commiss to kill thee, but not to torment thee with the 
foresight of thi death; not to multipli thi fears, and prolong thi 
agonies. haggard, and pale, and lifeless, at length thou ceasedst to 
contend with thi destiny. 

"thi wa a moment of triumph. thu had I success subdu the 
stubborn of human passions: the victim which had been demand wa 
given: the deed wa done past recal. 

"I lift the corps in my arm and laid it on the bed. I gaze upon 
it with delight. such wa the elat of my thoughts, that I even broke 
into laughter. I clap my hand and exclaimed, 'it is done! My sacr 
duti is fulfilled! To that I have sacrificed, O my god! thi last and 
best gift, my wife!' 

"for a while I thu soar abov frailty. I imagin I had set myself 
forev beyond the reach of selfishness; but my imagin were false. 
thi raptur quickli subsided. I look again at my wife. My joyou 
ebullit vanished, and I ask myself who it wa whom I saw? 
methought it could not be catharine. It could not be the woman who had 
lodg for year in my heart; who had slept, nightly, in my bosom; who 
had born in her womb, who had foster at her breast, the be who 
call me father; whom I had watch with delight, and cherish with a 
fond ever new and perpetu growing: it could not be the same. 

"where wa her bloom! these deadli and blood-suffus orb but ill 
resembl the azur and exstat tender of her eyes. the lucid stream 
that meander over that bosom, the glow of love that wa wont to sit 
upon that cheek, are much unlik these livid stain and thi hideou 
deformity. alas! these were the trace of agony; the gripe of the 
assassin had been here! 

"I will not dwell upon my laps into desper and outrag sorrow. 
the breath of heaven that sustain me wa withdrawn and I sunk into 
mere man. I leap from the floor: I dash my head against the wall: 
I utter scream of horror: I pant after torment and pain. etern 
fire, and the bicker of hell, compar with what I felt, were music 
and a bed of roses. 

"I thank my god that thi degeneraci wa transient, that he deign onc 
more to rais me aloft. I thought upon what I had done as a sacrific to 
duty, and wa calm. My wife wa dead; but I reflected, that though thi 
sourc of human consol wa closed, yet other were still open. If 
the transport of an husband were no more, the feel of a father had 
still scope for exercise. when remembr of their mother should excit 
too keen a pang, I would look upon them, and BE comforted. 

"while I revolv these ideas, new warmth flow in upon my heart--i wa 
wrong. these feel were the growth of selfishness. Of thi I wa 
not aware, and to dispel the mist that obscur my perceptions, a new 
effulg and a new mandat were necessary. 

"from these thought I wa recal by a ray that wa shot into the 
room. A voic spake like that which I had befor heard--'thou hast done 
well; but all is not done--th sacrific is incomplete--thi children 
must be offered--they must perish with their mother!--'" 



chapter XX 


will you wonder that I read no farther? will you not rather be 
astonish that I read thu far? what power support me through such a 
task I know not. perhap the doubt from which I could not disengag 
my mind, that the scene here depict wa a dream, contribut to my 
perseverance. In vain the solemn introduct of my uncle, hi appeal 
to my fortitude, and allus to someth monstrou in the event 
he wa about to disclose; in vain the distress perplexity, the 
mysteri silenc and ambigu answer of my attendants, especi 
when the condit of my brother wa the theme of my inquiries, were 
remembered. I recal the interview with wieland in my chamber, hi 
preternatur tranquil succeed by burst of passion and menac 
actions. all these coincid with the tenor of thi paper. 

catharin and her children, and louisa were dead. the act that destroy 
them was, in the highest degree, inhuman. It wa worthi of savag 
train to murder, and exult in agonies. 

who wa the perform of the deed? wieland! My brother! the husband 
and the father! that man of gentl virtu and invinc benignity! 
placabl and mild--an idol of peace! surely, said I, it is a dream. 
for mani day have I been vex with frenzy. it dominion is still felt; 
but new form are call up to diversifi and augment my torments. 

the paper drop from my hand, and my eye follow it. I shrunk back, 
as if to avoid some petrifi influenc that approach me. My tongu 
wa mute; all the function of natur were at a stand, and I sunk upon 
the floor lifeless. the nois of my fall, as I afterward heard, alarm 
my uncle, who wa in a lower apartment, and whose apprehens had 
detain him. He hasten to my chamber, and administ the assist 
which my condit required. when I open my eye I beheld him befor 
me. hi skill as a reason as well as a physician, wa exert to 
obviat the injuri effect of thi disclosure; but he had wrongli 
estim the strength of my bodi or of my mind. thi new shock brought 
me onc more to the brink of the grave, and my maladi wa much more 
difficult to subdu than at first. 

I will not dwell upon the long train of dreari sensations, and the 
hideou confus of my understanding. time slowli restor it 
customari firm to my frame, and order to my thoughts. the imag 
impress upon my mind by thi fatal paper were somewhat effac by my 
malady. they were obscur and disjoint like the part of a dream. I 
wa desir of free my imagin from thi chaos. for thi end I 
question my uncle, who wa my constant companion. He wa intimid 
by the issu of hi first experiment, and took pain to elud or 
discourag my inquiry. My impetuos some time compel him to have 
resort to misrepresent and untruths. 

time effect that end, perhaps, in a more benefici manner. In the 
cours of my medit the recollect of the past gradual becam 
more distinct. I revolv them, however, in silence, and be no longer 
accompani with surprize, they did not exercis a death-deal 
power. I had discontinu the perus of the paper in the midst of 
the narrative; but what I read, combin with inform elsewher 
obtained, threw, perhaps, a suffici light upon these detest 
transactions; yet my curios wa not inactive. I desir to perus the 
remainder. 

My eager to know the particular of thi tale wa mingl and abat 
by my antipathi to the scene which would be disclosed. henc I employ 
no mean to effect my purpose. I desir knowledge, and, at the same 
time, shrunk back from receiv the boon. 

one morning, be left alone, I rose from my bed, and went to a drawer 
where my finer cloth use to be kept. I open it, and thi fatal 
paper salut my sight. I snatch it involuntarily, and withdrew to a 
chair. I debated, for a few minutes, whether I should open and read. now 
that my fortitud wa put to trial, it failed. I felt myself incap 
of deliber survey a scene of so much horror. I wa prompt to 
return it to it place, but thi resolut gave way, and I determin 
to perus some part of it. I turn over the leav till I came near the 
conclusion. the narr of the crimin wa finished. the verdict of 
guilti reluctantli pronounc by the jury, and the accus interrog 
whi sentenc of death should not pass. the answer wa brief, solemn, and 
emphatical. 

"no. I have noth to say. My tale ha been told. My motiv have 
been truli stated. If my judg are unabl to discern the puriti of my 
intentions, or to credit the statement of them, which I have just made; 
if they see not that my deed wa enjoin by heaven; that obedi wa 
the test of perfect virtue, and the extinct of selfish and error, 
they must pronounc me a murderer. 

"they refus to credit my tale; they imput my act to the influenc of 
daemons; they account me an exampl of the highest wicked of which 
human natur is capable; they doom me to death and infamy. have I power 
to escap thi evil? If I have, be sure I will exert it. I will not 
accept evil at their hand, when I am entitl to good; I will suffer 
onli when I cannot elud suffering. 

"you say that I am guilty. impiou and rash! thu to usurp the 
prerog of your maker! to set up your bound view and halt 
reason, as the measur of truth! 

"thou, omnipot and holy! thou knowest that my action were 
conform to thi will. I know not what is crime; what action are 
evil in their ultim and comprehens tendenc or what are good. thi 
knowledge, as thi power, is unlimited. I have taken thee for my guide, 
and cannot err. To the arm of thi protection, I entrust my safety. In 
the award of thi justice, I confid for my recompense. 

"come death when it will, I am safe. let calumni and abhorr pursu 
me among men; I shall not be defraud of my dues. the peac of virtue, 
and the glori of obedience, will be my portion hereafter." 

here end the speaker. I withdrew my eye from the page; but befor I 
had time to reflect on what I had read, mr. cambridg enter the 
room. He quickli perceiv how I had been employed, and betray some 
solicitud respect the condit of my mind. 

hi fears, however, were superfluous. what I had read, threw me into a 
state not easili described. anguish and fury, however, had no part in 
it. My faculti were chain up in wonder and awe. just then, I wa 
unabl to speak. I look at my friend with an air of inquisitiveness, 
and point at the roll. He comprehend my inquiry, and answer me 
with look of gloomi acquiescence. after some time, my thought found 
their way to my lips. 

such then were the act of my brother. such were hi words. for thi 
he wa condemn to die: To die upon the gallows! A fate, cruel and 
unmerited! and is it so? continu I, struggl for utterance, which 
thi new idea made difficult; is he--dead! 

"no. He is alive. there could be no doubt as to the caus of these 
excesses. they origin in sudden madness; but that mad continues. 
and he is condemn to perpetu imprisonment." 

"madness, say you? are you sure? were not these sights, and these 
sounds, realli seen and heard?" 

My uncl wa surpriz at my question. He look at me with appar 
inquietude. "can you doubt," said he, "that these were illusions? doe 
heaven, think you, interfer for such ends?" 

"O no; I think it not. heaven cannot stimul to such unheard-of 
outrage. the agent wa not good, but evil." 

"nay, my dear girl," said my friend, "lay asid these fancies. neither 
angel nor devil had ani part in thi affair." 

"you misunderstand me," I answered; "I believ the agenc to be extern 
and real, but not supernatural." 

"indeed!" said he, in an accent of surprize. "whom do you then suppos 
to be the agent?" 

"I know not. all is wilder conjecture. I cannot forget carwin. I 
cannot banish the suspicion that he wa the setter of these snares. but 
how can we suppos it to be madness? did insan ever befor assum 
thi form?" 

"frequently. the illusion, in thi case, wa more dread in it 
consequences, than ani that ha come to my knowledge; but, I repeat that 
similar illus are not rare. did you never hear of an instanc which 
occur in your mother' family?" 

"no. I beseech you relat it. My grandfather' death I have understood 
to have been extraordinary, but I know not in what respect. A brother, 
to whom he wa much attached, die in hi youth, and this, as I have 
heard, influenced, in some remark way, the fate of my grandfather; 
but I am unacquaint with particulars." 

"on the death of that brother," resum my friend, "mi father wa seiz 
with dejection, which wa found to flow from two sources. He not onli 
griev for the loss of a friend, but entertain the belief that hi 
own death would be inevit consequ on that of hi brother. He 
wait from day to day in expect of the stroke which he predict 
wa speedili to fall upon him. gradually, however, he recov hi 
cheer and confidence. He married, and perform hi part in 
the world with spirit and activity. At the end of twenty-on year it 
happen that he spent the summer with hi famili at an hous which he 
possess on the sea coast in cornwall. It wa at no great distanc 
from a cliff which overhung the ocean, and rose into the air to a great 
height. the summit wa level and secure, and easili ascend on the land 
side. the compani frequent repair hither in clear weather, invit 
by it pure air and extens prospects. one even in june my father, 
with hi wife and some friends, chanc to be on thi spot. everi one 
wa happy, and my father' imagin seem particularli aliv to the 
grandeur of the scenery. 

"suddenly, however, hi limb trembl and hi featur betray alarm. 
He threw himself into the attitud of one listening. He gaze earnestli 
in a direct in which noth wa visibl to hi friends. thi last 
for a minute; then turn to hi companions, he told them that hi 
brother had just deliv to him a summons, which must be instantli 
obeyed. He then took an hasti and solemn leav of each person, and, 
befor their surpriz would allow them to understand the scene, he 
rush to the edg of the cliff, threw himself headlong, and wa seen no 
more. 

"in the cours of my practic in the german army, mani cases, equal 
remarkable, have occurred. unquestion the illus were maniacal, 
though the vulgar thought otherwise. they are all reduc to one 
class, [*] and are not more difficult of explic and cure than most 
affect of our frame." 

thi opinion my uncl endeavoured, by variou means, to impress upon me. 
I listen to hi reason and illustr with silent respect. My 
astonish wa great on find proof of an influenc of which I 
had suppos there were no examples; but I wa far from account for 
appear in my uncle' manner. idea throng into my mind which I 
wa unabl to disjoin or to regulate. I reflect that thi madness, 
if mad it were, had affect pleyel and myself as well as wieland. 
pleyel had heard a mysteri voice. I had seen and heard. A form had 
show itself to me as well as to wieland. the disclosur had been 
made in the same spot. the appear wa equal complet and equal 
prodigi in both instances. whatev supposit I should adopt, had 
I not equal reason to tremble? what wa my secur against influenc 
equal terrif and equal irresistable? 

It would be vain to attempt to describ the state of mind which thi 
idea produced. I wonder at the chang which a moment had affect 
in my brother' condition. now wa I stupifi with tenfold wonder in 
contempl myself. wa I not likewis transform from ration and 
human into a creatur of nameless and fear attributes? wa I not 
transport to the brink of the same abyss? ere a new day should come, 
my hand might be embru in blood, and my remain life be consign 
to a dungeon and chains. 

with moral sensibl like mine, no wonder that thi new dread wa more 
insupport than the anguish I had late endured. grief carri it 
own antidot along with it. when thought becom mere a vehicl of 
pain, it progress must be stopped. death is a cure which natur or 
ourselv must administer: To thi cure I now look forward with gloomi 
satisfaction. 

My silenc could not conceal from my uncl the state of my thoughts. 
He made unweari effort to divert my attent from view so 
pregnant with danger. hi efforts, aid by time, were in some measur 
successful. confid in the strength of my resolution, and in the 
health state of my faculties, wa onc more revived. I wa abl 
to devot my thought to my brother' state, and the caus of thi 
disaster proceeding. 

My opinion were the sport of etern change. some time I conceiv the 
apparit to be more than human. I had no ground on which to build a 
disbelief. I could not deni faith to the evid of my religion; 
the testimoni of men wa loud and unanimous: both these concur 
to persuad me that evil spirit existed, and that their energi wa 
frequent exert in the system of the world. 

these idea connect themselv with the imag of carwin. where is the 
proof, said I, that daemon may not be subject to the controul of men? 
thi truth may be distort and debas in the mind of the ignorant. 
the dogma of the vulgar, with regard to thi subject, are glaringli 
absurd; but though these may justli be neglect by the wise, we are 
scarc justifi in total reject the possibl that men may 
obtain supernatur aid. 

the dream of superstit are worthi of contempt. witchcraft, it 
instrument and miracles, the compact ratifi by a bloodi signature, 
the apparatu of sulpher smell and thunder explosions, are 
monstrou and chimerical. these have no part in the scene over which the 
geniu of carwin presides. that consciou beings, dissimilar from human, 
but moral and voluntari agent as we are, some where exist, can scarc 
be denied. that their aid may be employ to benign or malign 
purposes, cannot be disproved. 

dark rest upon the design of thi man. the extent of hi power is 
unknown; but is there not evid that it ha been now exerted? 

I recur to my own experience. here carwin had actual appear upon 
the stage; but thi wa in a human character. A voic and a form were 
discovered; but one wa appar exerted, and the other disclosed, not 
to befriend, but to counteract carwin' designs. there were token of 
hostility, and not of alliance, between them. carwin wa the miscreant 
whose project were resist by a minist of heaven. how can thi be 
reconcil to the stratagem which ruin my brother? there the agenc 
wa at onc preternatur and malignant. 

the recollect of thi fact led my thought into a new channel. the 
malign of that influenc which govern my brother had hitherto been 
no subject of doubt. hi wife and children were destroyed; they had 
expir in agoni and fear; yet wa it indisput certain that their 
murder wa criminal? He wa acquit at the tribun of hi own 
conscience; hi behaviour at hi trial and since, wa faith 
report to me; appear were uniform; not for a moment did he lay 
asid the majesti of virtue; he repel all invect by appeal to 
the deity, and to the tenor of hi past life; sure there wa truth in 
thi appeal: none but a command from heaven could have sway hi will; 
and noth but uner proof of divin approb could sustain hi 
mind in it present elevation. 


* mania mutabilis. see darwin' zoonomia, vol. ii. class iii. 
1.2. where similar case are stated. 



chapter xxi 


such, for some time, wa the cours of my meditations. My weakness, and 
my avers to be point at as an object of surpriz or compassion, 
prevent me from go into public. I studious avoid the visit of 
those who came to express their sympathy, or gratifi their curiosity. 
My uncl wa my princip companion. noth more power tend to 
consol me than hi conversation. 

with regard to pleyel, my feel seem to have undergon a total 
revolution. It often happen that one passion supplant another. late 
disast had rent my heart, and now that the wound wa in some degre 
closed, the love which I had cherish for thi man seem likewis to 
have vanished. 

hitherto, indeed, I had had no caus for despair. I wa innoc of that 
offenc which had estrang him from my presence. I might reason 
expect that my innoc would at some time be irresist 
demonstrated, and hi affect for me be reviv with hi esteem. now 
my avers to be thought culpabl by him continued, but wa unattend 
with the same impatience. I desir the remov of hi suspicions, 
not for the sake of regain hi love, but becaus I delight in the 
vener of so excel a man, and becaus he himself would deriv 
pleasur from convict of my integrity. 

My uncl had earli inform me that pleyel and he had seen each other, 
sinc the return of the latter from europe. amidst the topic of their 
conversation, I discov that pleyel had care omit the mention 
of those event which had drawn upon me so much abhorrence. I could 
not account for hi silenc on thi subject. perhap time or some new 
discoveri had alter or shaken hi opinion. perhap he wa unwilling, 
though I were guilty, to injur me in the opinion of my vener 
kinsman. I understood that he had frequent visit me dure 
my disease, had watch mani success night by my bedside, and 
manifest the utmost anxieti on my account. 

the journey which he wa prepar to take, at the termin of our 
last interview, the catastroph of the ensu night induc him to 
delay. the motiv of thi journey I had, till now, total mistaken. 
they were explain to me by my uncle, whose tale excit my 
astonish without awaken my regret. In a differ state of mind, 
it would have ad unspeak to my distress, but now it wa more 
a sourc of pleasur than pain. this, perhaps, is not the least 
extraordinari of the fact contain in thi narrative. It will excit 
less wonder when I add, that my indiffer wa temporary, and that the 
laps of a few day shew me that my feel were deaden for a time, 
rather than final extinguished. 

theresa de stolberg wa alive. she had conceiv the resolut of 
seek her lover in america. To conceal her flight, she had caus the 
report of her death to be propagated. she put herself under the conduct 
of bertrand, the faith servant of pleyel. the pacquet which the 
latter receiv from the hand of hi servant, contain the tide of 
her safe arriv at boston, and to meet her there wa the purpos of hi 
journey. 

thi discoveri had set thi man' charact in a new light. I had 
mistaken the heroism of friendship for the phrenzi of love. He who 
had gain my affections, may be suppos to have previous entitl 
himself to my reverence; but the leviti which had formerli character 
the behaviour of thi man, tend to obscur the great of hi 
sentiments. I did not fail to remark, that sinc thi ladi wa still 
alive, the voic in the templ which assert her death, must either 
have been intend to deceive, or have been itself deceived. the latter 
supposit wa inconsist with the notion of a spiritual, and the 
former with that of a benevol being. 

when my diseas abated, pleyel had forborn hi visits, and had late 
set out upon thi journey. thi amount to a proof that my guilt wa 
still believ by him. I wa griev for hi errors, but trust that my 
vindic would, sooner or later, be made. 

meanwhile, tumultu thought were again set afloat by a propos 
made to me by my uncle. He imagin that new air would restor my 
languish constitution, and a vari success of object tend to 
repair the shock which my mind had received. for thi end, he propos 
to me to take up my abod with him in franc or italy. 

At a more prosper period, thi scheme would have pleas for it own 
sake. now my heart sicken at the prospect of nature. the world of man 
wa shrowd in miseri and blood, and constitut a loathsom spectacle. 
I willingli close my eye in sleep, and regret that the respit it 
afford me wa so short. I mark with satisfact the progress of 
decay in my frame, and consent to live, mere in the hope that 
the cours of natur would speedili reliev me from the burthen. 
nevertheless, as he persist in hi scheme, I concur in it mere 
becaus he wa entitl to my gratitude, and becaus my refus gave him 
pain. 

No sooner wa he inform of my consent, than he told me I must make 
immedi prepar to embark, as the ship in which he had engag 
a passag would be readi to depart in three days. thi expedit wa 
unexpected. there wa an impati in hi manner when he urg the 
necess of dispatch that excit my surprize. when I question him as 
to the caus of thi haste, he gener state reason which, at 
that time, I could not deni to be plausible; but which, on the review, 
appear insufficient. I suspect that the true motiv were concealed, 
and believ that these motiv had some connect with my brother' 
destiny. 

I now recollect that the inform respect wieland which had, 
from time to time, been impart to me, wa alway accompani with air 
of reserv and mysteriousness. what had appear suffici explicit 
at the time it wa uttered, I now rememb to have been falter 
and ambiguous. I wa resolv to remov my doubts, by visit the 
unfortun man in hi dungeon. 

heretofor the idea of thi visit had occur to me; but the horror 
of hi dwelling-place, hi wild yet placid physiognomy, hi neglect 
locks, the fetter which constrain hi limbs, terribl as they were in 
description, how could I endur to behold! 

now, however, that I wa prepar to take an everlast farewel of my 
country, now that an ocean wa henceforth to separ me from him, how 
could I part without an interview? I would examin hi situat with my 
own eyes. I would know whether the represent which had been made 
to me were true. perhap the sight of the sister whom he wa wont 
to love with a passion more than fraternal, might have an auspici 
influenc on hi malady. 

have form thi resolution, I wait to commun it to mr. 
cambridge. I wa awar that, without hi concurrence, I could not hope 
to carri it into execution, and could discov no object to which 
it wa liable. If I had not been deceiv as to hi condition, no 
inconveni could aris from thi proceeding. hi consent, therefore, 
would be the test of hi sincerity. 

I seiz thi opportun to state my wish on thi head. My suspicion 
were confirm by the manner in which my request affect him. after 
some pause, in which hi counten betray everi mark of perplexity, 
he said to me, "whi would you pay thi visit? what use purpos can it 
serve?" 

"we are preparing," said I, "to leav the countri forever: what kind of 
be should I be to leav behind me a brother in calam without even 
a part interview? indulg me for three minut in the sight of him. 
My heart will be much easier after I have look at him, and shed a few 
tear in hi presence." 

"I believ otherwise. the sight of him would onli augment your distress, 
without contributing, in ani degree, to hi benefit." 

"I know not that," return I. "sure the sympathi of hi sister, 
proof that her tender is as live as ever, must be a sourc 
of satisfact to him. At present he must regard all mankind as hi 
enemi and calumniators. hi sister he, probably, conceiv to partak 
in the gener infatuation, and to join in the cri of abhorr that 
is rais against him. To be undeceiv in thi respect, to be assur 
that, howev I may imput hi conduct to delusion, I still retain all 
my former affect for hi person, and vener for the puriti of hi 
motives, cannot but afford him pleasure. when he hear that I have left 
the country, without even the ceremoni attent of a visit, what 
will he think of me? hi magnanim may hinder him from repining, but 
he will sure consid my behaviour as savag and unfeeling. indeed, 
dear sir, I must pay thi visit. To embark with you without pay it, 
will be impossible. It may be of no servic to him, but will enabl me 
to acquit myself of what I cannot but esteem a duty. besides," continu 
I, "if it be a mere fit of insan that ha seiz him, may not my 
presenc chanc to have a salutari influence? the mere sight of me, it 
is not impossible, may rectifi hi perceptions." 

"ay," said my uncle, with some eagerness; "it is by no mean imposs 
that your interview may have that effect; and for that reason, beyond 
all others, would I dissuad you from it." 

I express my surpriz at thi declaration. "i it not to be desir 
that an error so fatal as thi should be rectified?" 

"I wonder at your question. reflect on the consequ of thi error. 
ha he not destroy the wife whom he loved, the children whom he 
idolized? what is it that enabl him to bear the remembrance, but the 
belief that he act as hi duti enjoined? would you rashli bereav him 
of thi belief? would you restor him to himself, and convinc him 
that he wa instig to thi dread outrag by a pervers of hi 
organs, or a delus from hell? 

"now hi vision are joyou and elate. He conceiv himself to have 
reach a loftier degre of virtue, than ani other human being. the 
merit of hi sacrific is onli enhanc in the eye of superior beings, 
by the detest that pursu him here, and the suffer to which he 
is condemned. the belief that even hi sister ha desert him, and 
gone over to hi enemies, add to hi sublim of feelings, and hi 
confid in divin approb and futur recompense. 

"let him be undeceiv in thi respect, and what flood of despair and 
of horror will overwhelm him! instead of glow approb and seren 
hope, will he not hate and tortur himself? self-violence, or a phrenzi 
far more savag and destruct than this, may be expect to succeed. I 
beseech you, therefore, to relinquish thi scheme. If you calmli reflect 
upon it, you will discov that your duti lie in care shun 
him." 

mr. cambridge' reason suggest view to my understanding, that had 
not hitherto occurred. I could not but admit their validity, but they 
shewed, in a new light, the depth of that misfortun in which my brother 
wa plunged. I wa silent and irresolute. 

presently, I considered, that whether wieland wa a maniac, a faith 
servant of hi god, the victim of hellish illusions, or the dupe of 
human imposture, wa by no mean certain. In thi state of my mind it 
becam me to be silent dure the visit that I projected. thi visit 
should be brief: I should be satisfi mere to snatch a look at him. 
admit that a chang in hi opinion were not to be desired, there 
wa no danger from the conduct which I should pursue, that thi chang 
should be wrought. 

but I could not conquer my uncle' avers to thi scheme. yet I 
persisted, and he found that to make me voluntarili relinquish it, it 
wa necessari to be more explicit than he had hitherto been. He took 
both my hands, and anxious examin my counten as he spoke, 
"clara," said he, "thi visit must not be paid. We must hasten with the 
utmost expedit from thi shore. It is folli to conceal the truth 
from you, and, sinc it is onli by disclos the truth that you can be 
prevail upon to lay asid thi project, the truth shall be told. 

"O my dear girl!" continu he with increas energi in hi accent, 
"your brother' phrenzi is, indeed, stupend and frightful. the soul 
that formerli actuat hi frame ha disappeared. the same form remains; 
but the wise and benevol wieland is no more. A furi that is rapaci 
of blood, that lift hi strength almost abov that of mortals, that 
bend all hi energi to the destruct of whatev wa onc dear to 
him, possess him wholly. 

"you must not enter hi dungeon; hi eye will no sooner be fix upon 
you, than an exert of hi forc will be made. He will shake off hi 
fetter in a moment, and rush upon you. No interposit will then be 
strong or quick enough to save you. 

"the phantom that ha urg him to the murder of catharin and her 
children is not yet appeased. your life, and that of pleyel, are exact 
from him by thi imaginari being. He is eager to compli with thi 
demand. twice he ha escap from hi prison. the first time, he no 
sooner found himself at liberty, than he hast to pleyel' house. It 
be midnight, the latter wa in bed. wieland penetr unobserv 
to hi chamber, and open hi curtain. happily, pleyel awok at the 
critic moment, and escap the furi of hi kinsman, by leap from 
hi chamber-window into the court. happily, he reach the ground 
without injury. alarm were given, and after dilig search, your 
brother wa found in a chamber of your house, whither, no doubt, he 
had sought you. hi chains, and the watch of hi guards, were 
redoubled; but again, by some miracle, he restor himself to liberty. 
He wa now incauti appriz of the place of your abode: and had not 
inform of hi escap been instantli given, your death would have 
been ad to the number of hi atroci acts. 

"you now see the danger of your project. you must not onli forbear to 
visit him, but if you would save him from the crime of embru hi 
hand in your blood, you must leav the country. there is no hope that 
hi maladi will end but with hi life, and no precaut will ensur 
your safety, but that of place the ocean between you. 

"I confess I came over with an intent to resid among you, but 
these disast have chang my views. your own safeti and my happi 
requir that you should accompani me in my return, and I entreat you to 
give your cheer concurr to thi measure." 

after these represent from my uncle, it wa imposs to retain 
my purpose. I readili consent to seclud myself from wieland' 
presence. I likewis acquiesc in the propos to go to europe; not 
that I ever expect to arriv there, but because, sinc my principl 
forbad me to assail my own life, chang had some tendenc to make 
support the few day which diseas should spare to me. 

what a tale had thu been unfolded! I wa hunt to death, not by 
one whom my misconduct had exasperated, who wa consciou of illicit 
motives, and who sought hi end by circumvent and surprize; but by 
one who deem himself commiss for thi act by heaven; who 
regard thi career of horror as the last refin of virtue; whose 
implac wa proport to the rever and love which he felt 
for me, and who wa inaccess to the fear of punish and ignominy! 

In vain should I endeavour to stay hi hand by urg the claim of 
a sister or friend: these were hi onli reason for pursu my 
destruction. had I been a stranger to hi blood; had I been the most 
worthless of human kind; my safeti had not been endangered. 

surely, said I, my fate is without example. the phrenzi which is charg 
upon my brother, must belong to myself. My foe is manacl and guarded; 
but I deriv no secur from these restraints. I live not in a 
commun of savages; yet, whether I sit or walk, go into crouds, 
or hide myself in solitude, my life is mark for a prey to inhuman 
violence; I am in perpetu danger of perishing; of perish under the 
grasp of a brother! 

I recollect the omen of thi destiny; I rememb the gulf to which 
my brother' invit had conduct me; I rememb that, when on the 
brink of danger, the author of my peril wa depict by my fear in 
hi form: thu realized, were the creatur of prophet sleep, and of 
wake terror! 

these imag were unavoid connect with that of carwin. In 
thi paroxysm of distress, my attent fasten on him as the grand 
deceiver; the author of thi black conspiracy; the intellig that 
govern in thi storm. 

some relief is afford in the midst of suffering, when it author is 
discov or imagined; and an object found on which we may pour out 
our indign and our vengeance. I ran over the event that had taken 
place sinc the origin of our intercours with him, and reflect on the 
tenor of that descript which wa receiv from ludloe. mix up with 
notion of supernatur agency, were the vehement suspicion which I 
entertained, that carwin wa the enemi whose machin had destroy 
us. 

I thirst for knowledg and for vengeance. I regard my hasti 
departur with reluctance, sinc it would remov me from the mean by 
which thi knowledg might be obtained, and thi vengeanc gratified. 
thi departur wa to take place in two days. At the end of two day 
I wa to bid an etern adieu to my nativ country. should I not pay a 
part visit to the scene of these disasters? should I not bedew with 
my tear the grave of my sister and her children? should I not explor 
their desol habitation, and gather from the sight of it wall and 
furnitur food for my etern melancholy? 

thi suggest wa succeed by a secret shuddering. some disastr 
influenc appear to overhang the scene. how mani memori should I 
meet with serv to recal the imag of those I had lost! 

I wa tempt to relinquish my design, when it occur to me that I 
had left among my paper a journal of transact in shorthand. I 
wa employ in thi manuscript on that night when pleyel' incauti 
curios tempt him to look over my shoulder. I wa then record my 
adventur in the recess, an imperfect sight of which led him into such 
fatal errors. 

I had regul the disposit of all my property. thi manuscript, 
however, which contain the most secret transact of my life, I wa 
desir of destroying. for thi end I must return to my house, and thi 
I immedi determin to do. 

I wa not will to expos myself to opposit from my friends, 
by mention my design; I therefor bespok the use of mr. hallet' 
chaise, under pretenc of enjoy an airing, as the day wa remark 
bright. 

thi request wa gladli compli with, and I direct the servant to 
conduct me to mettingen. I dismiss him at the gate, intend to use, 
in returning, a carriag belong to my brother. 



chapter xxii 


the inhabit of the hut receiv me with a mixtur of joy and 
surprize. their home welcome, and their artless sympathy, were 
grate to my feelings. In the midst of their inquiries, as to my 
health, they avoid all allus to the sourc of my malady. they were 
honest creatures, and I love them well. I particip in the tear 
which they shed when I mention to them my speedi departur for europe, 
and promis to acquaint them with my welfar dure my long absence. 

they express great surpriz when I inform them of my intent to 
visit my cottage. alarm and forebod overspread their features, and 
they attempt to dissuad me from visit an hous which they firmli 
believ to be haunt by a thousand ghastli apparitions. 

these apprehensions, however, had no power over my conduct. I took an 
irregular path which led me to my own house. all wa vacant and forlorn. 
A small enclosure, near which the path led, wa the burying-ground 
belong to the family. thi I wa oblig to pass. onc I had intend 
to enter it, and ponder on the emblem and inscript which my uncl 
had caus to be made on the tomb of catharin and her children; but 
now my heart falter as I approached, and I hasten forward, that 
distanc might conceal it from my view. 

when I approach the recess, my heart again sunk. I avert my eyes, 
and left it behind me as quickli as possible. silenc reign through 
my habitation, and a dark which close door and shutter produced. 
everi object wa connect with mine or my brother' history. I pass 
the entry, mount the stair, and unlock the door of my chamber. 
It wa with difficulti that I curb my fanci and smother my fears. 
slight movement and casual sound were transform into beckon 
shadow and call shapes. 

I proceed to the closet. I open and look round it with 
fearfulness. all thing were in their accustom order. I sought and 
found the manuscript where I wa use to deposit it. thi be secured, 
there wa noth to detain me; yet I stood and contempl awhil the 
furnitur and wall of my chamber. I rememb how long thi apart 
had been a sweet and tranquil asylum; I compar it former state with 
it present dreariness, and reflect that I now beheld it for the last 
time. 

here it wa that the incomprehens behaviour of carwin wa witnessed: 
thi the stage on which that enemi of man shew himself for a moment 
unmasked. here the menac of murder were waft to my ear; and here 
these menac were executed. 

these thought had a tendenc to take from me my self-command. My feebl 
limb refus to support me, and I sunk upon a chair. incoher and 
half-articul exclam escap my lips. the name of carwin wa 
uttered, and etern woes, woe like that which hi malic had entail 
upon us, were heap upon him. I invok all-se heaven to drag to 
light and to punish thi betrayer, and accus it provid for have 
thu long delay the retribut that wa due to so enorm a guilt. 

I have said that the window shutter were closed. A feebl light, 
however, found entranc through the crevices. A small window illumin 
the closet, and the door be closed, a dim ray stream through 
the key-hole. A kind of twilight wa thu created, suffici for the 
purpos of vision; but, at the same time, involv all minut object 
in obscurity. 

thi dark suit the colour of my thoughts. I sicken at the 
remembr of the past. the prospect of the futur excit my loathing. 
I mutter in a low voice, whi should I live longer? whi should I drag a 
miser being? all, for whom I ought to live, have perished. Am I not 
myself hunt to death? 

At that moment, my despair suddenli becam vigorous. My nerv were no 
longer unstrung. My powers, that had long been deadened, were revived. 
My bosom swell with a sudden energy, and the convict dart through 
my mind, that to end my torment was, at once, practic and wise. 

I knew how to find way to the recess of life. I could use a lancet 
with some skill, and could distinguish between vein and artery. By 
pierc deep into the latter, I should shun the evil which the futur 
had in store for me, and take refug from my woe in quiet death. 

I start on my feet, for my feebl wa gone, and hast to the 
closet. A lancet and other small instrument were preserv in a 
case which I had deposit here. inattent as I wa to foreign 
considerations, my ear were still open to ani sound of mysteri 
import that should occur. I thought I heard a step in the entry. My 
purpos wa suspended, and I cast an eager glanc at my chamber door, 
which wa open. No one appeared, unless the shadow which I discern 
upon the floor, wa the outlin of a man. If it were, I wa author 
to suspect that some one wa post close to the entrance, who possibl 
had overheard my exclamations. 

My teeth chattered, and a wild confus took place of my momentari 
calm. thu it wa when a terrif visag had disclos itself on a 
former night. thu it wa when the evil destini of wieland assum the 
lineament of someth human. what horrid apparit wa prepar to 
blast my sight? 

still I listen and gazed. not long, for the shadow moved; a foot, 
unshap and huge, wa thrust forward; a form advanc from it 
concealment, and stalk into the room. It wa carwin! while I had 
breath I shrieked. while I had power over my muscles, I motion with 
my hand that he should vanish. My exert could not last long; I sunk 
into a fit. 

O that thi grate oblivion had last for ever! too quickli I 
recov my senses. the power of distinct vision wa no sooner restor 
to me, than thi hate form again present itself, and I onc more 
relapsed. 

A second time, untoward natur recal me from the sleep of death. 
I found myself stretch upon the bed. when I had power to look up, I 
rememb onli that I had caus to fear. My distemp fanci fashion 
to itself no distinguish image. I threw a languid glanc round me; 
onc more my eye light upon carwin. 

He wa seat on the floor, hi back rest against the wall, hi knee 
were drawn up, and hi face wa buri in hi hands. that hi station 
wa at some distance, that hi attitud wa not menacing, that hi 
omin visag wa concealed, may account for my now escap a shock, 
violent as those which were past. I withdrew my eyes, but wa not again 
desert by my senses. 

On perceiv that I had recov my sensibility, he lift hi head. 
thi motion attract my attention. hi counten wa mild, but sorrow 
and astonish sat upon hi features. I avert my eye and feebli 
exclaimed--"o! fly--fli far and for ever!--i cannot behold you and 
live!" 

He did not rise upon hi feet, but clasp hi hands, and said in a 
tone of deprecation--"i will fly. I am becom a fiend, the sight of whom 
destroys. yet tell me my offence! you have link curs with my name; 
you ascrib to me a malic monstrou and infernal. I look around; all 
is loneli and desert! thi hous and your brother' are solitari and 
dismantled! you die away at the sight of me! My fear whisper that some 
deed of horror ha been perpetrated; that I am the undesign cause." 

what languag wa this? had he not avow himself a ravisher? had not 
thi chamber wit hi atroci purposes? I besought him with new 
vehem to go. 

He lift hi eyes--"great heaven! what have I done? I think I know 
the extent of my offences. I have acted, but my action have possibl 
effect more than I designed. thi fear ha brought me back from my 
retreat. I come to repair the evil of which my rash wa the cause, 
and to prevent more evil. I come to confess my errors." 

"wretch!" I cri when my suffoc emot would permit me to speak, 
"the ghost of my sister and her children, do they not rise to accus 
thee? who wa it that blast the intellect of wieland? who wa it 
that urg him to fury, and guid him to murder? who, but thou and the 
devil, with whom thou art confederated?" 

At these word a new spirit pervad hi countenance. hi eye onc more 
appeal to heaven. "if I have memory, if I have being, I am innocent. I 
intend no ill; but my folly, indirectli and remotely, may have caus 
it; but what word are these! your brother lunatic! hi children dead!" 

what should I infer from thi deportment? wa the ignor which these 
word impli real or pretended?--yet how could I imagin a mere human 
agenc in these events? but if the influenc wa preternatur or 
maniac in my brother' case, they must be equal so in my own. then 
I rememb that the voic exerted, wa to save me from carwin' 
attempts. these idea tend to abat my abhorr of thi man, and to 
detect the absurd of my accusations. 

"alas!" said I, "I have no one to accuse. leav me to my fate. fli from 
a scene stain with cruelty; devot to despair." 

carwin stood for a time muse and mournful. At length he said, "what 
ha happened? I came to expiat my crimes: let me know them in their 
full extent. I have horribl forebodings! what ha happened?" 

I wa silent; but recollect the intim given by thi man when he 
wa detect in my closet, which impli some knowledg of that power 
which interf in my favor, I eagerli inquired, "what wa that voic 
which call upon me to hold when I attempt to open the closet? what 
face wa that which I saw at the bottom of the stairs? answer me truly." 

"I came to confess the truth. your allus are horribl and strange. 
perhap I have but faint concept of the evil which my infatu 
ha produced; but what remain I will perform. It wa my voic that you 
heard! It wa my face that you saw!" 

for a moment I doubt whether my remembr of event were not 
confused. how could he be at onc station at my shoulder and shut up 
in my closet? how could he stand near me and yet be invisible? but if 
carwin' were the thrill voic and the fieri visag which I had heard 
and seen, then wa he the prompter of my brother, and the author of 
these dismal outrages. 

onc more I avert my eye and struggl for speech. "begone! thou man 
of mischief! remorseless and implac miscreant! begone!" 

"I will obey," said he in a disconsol voice; "yet, wretch as I am, 
am I unworthi to repair the evil that I have committed? I came as a 
repent criminal. It is you whom I have injured, and at your bar am 
I will to appear, and confess and expiat my crimes. I have deceiv 
you: I have sport with your terrors: I have plot to destroy your 
reputation. I come now to remov your errors; to set you beyond the 
reach of similar fears; to rebuild your fame as far as I am able. 

"thi is the amount of my guilt, and thi the fruit of my remorse. will 
you not hear me? listen to my confession, and then denounc punishment. 
all I ask is a patient audience." 

"what!" I replied, "wa not thine the voic that command my brother to 
imbru hi hand in the blood of hi children--to strangl that angel of 
sweet hi wife? ha he not vow my death, and the death of pleyel, 
at thi bidding? hast thou not made him the butcher of hi family; 
chang him who wa the glori of hi speci into wors than brute; 
rob him of reason, and consign the rest of hi day to fetter and 
stripes?" 

carwin' eye glared, and hi limb were petrifi at thi intelligence. 
No word were requisit to prove him guiltless of these enormities: at 
the time, however, I wa nearli insens to these exculpatori tokens. 
He walk to the farther end of the room, and have recov some 
degre of composure, he spoke-- 

"I am not thi villain; I have slain no one; I have prompt none to 
slay; I have handl a tool of wonder efficaci without malign 
intentions, but without caution; ampl will be the punish of my 
temerity, if my conduct ha contribut to thi evil." He paused.-- 

I likewis wa silent. I struggl to command myself so far as to listen 
to the tale which he should tell. observ this, he continued-- 

"you are not appriz of the exist of a power which I possess. I 
know not by what name to call it. [*] It enabl me to mimic exactli the 
voic of another, and to modifi the sound so that it shall appear to 
come from what quarter, and be utter at what distanc I please. 

"I know not that everi one possess thi power. perhaps, though a 
casual posit of my organ in my youth shew me that I possess 
it, it is an art which may be taught to all. would to god I had die 
unknow of the secret! It ha produc noth but degrad and 
calamity. 

"for a time the possess of so potent and stupend an endow 
elat me with pride. unfortifi by principle, subject to poverty, 
stimul by headlong passions, I made thi power engin subservi 
to the suppli of my wants, and the gratif of my vanity. I shall 
not mention how dilig I cultiv thi gift, which seem capabl 
of unlimit improvement; nor detail the variou occas on which 
it wa success exert to lead superstition, conquer avarice, or 
excit awe. 

"I left america, which is my nativ soil, in my youth. I have been 
engag in variou scene of life, in which my peculiar talent ha been 
exercis with more or less success. I wa final betray by one who 
call himself my friend, into act which cannot be justified, though 
they are suscept of apology. 

"the perfidi of thi man compel me to withdraw from europe. I 
return to my nativ country, uncertain whether silenc and obscur 
would save me from hi malice. I resid in the purlieu of the city. I 
put on the garb and assum the manner of a clown. 

"mi chief recreat wa walking. My princip haunt were the lawn 
and garden of mettingen. In thi delight region the luxuri 
of natur had been chasten by judici art, and each success 
contempl unfold new enchantments. 

"I wa studiou of seclusion: I wa satiat with the intercours of 
mankind, and discret requir me to shun their intercourse. for 
these reason I long avoid the observ of your family, and chiefli 
visit these precinct at night. 

"I wa never weari of admir the posit and ornament of the 
temple. mani a night have I pass under it roof, revolv no pleas 
meditations. when, in my frequent rambles, I perceiv thi apart 
wa occupied, I gave a differ direct to my steps. one evening, 
when a shower had just passed, judg by the silenc that no one 
wa within, I ascend to thi building. glanc carelessli round, I 
perceiv an open letter on the pedestal. To read it wa doubtless an 
offenc against politeness. Of thi offence, however, I wa guilty. 

"scarc had I gone half through when I wa alarm by the approach 
of your brother. To scrambl down the cliff on the opposit side 
wa impracticable. I wa unprepar to meet a stranger. besid 
the aukward attend such an interview in these circumstances, 
conceal wa necessari to my safety. A thousand time had I vow 
never again to employ the danger talent which I possessed; but such 
wa the forc of habit and the influenc of present convenience, that I 
use thi method of arrest hi progress and lead him back to the 
house, with hi errand, whatev it was, unperformed. I had often caught 
parts, from my station below, of your convers in thi place, and 
wa well acquaint with the voic of your sister. 

"some week after thi I wa again quietli seat in thi recess. the 
late of the hour secur me, as I thought, from all interruption. 
In this, however, I wa mistaken, for wieland and pleyel, as I judg by 
their voices, earnest in dispute, ascend the hill. 

"I wa not sensibl that ani inconveni could possibl have flow 
from my former exertion; yet it wa follow with compunction, becaus 
it wa a deviat from a path which I had assign to myself. now 
my avers to thi mean of escap wa enforc by an unauthor 
curiosity, and by the knowledg of a bushi hollow on the edg of the 
hill, where I should be safe from discovery. into thi hollow I thrust 
myself. 

"the proprieti of remov to europ wa the question eagerli discussed. 
pleyel intim that hi anxieti to go wa augment by the silenc 
of theresa de stolberg. the temptat to interfer in thi disput wa 
irresistible. In vain I contend with inveter habits. I disguis to 
myself the improprieti of my conduct, by recollect the benefit which 
it might produce. pleyel' propos wa unwise, yet it wa enforc 
with plausibl argument and indefatig zeal. your brother might be 
puzzl and wearied, but could not be convinced. I conceiv that 
to termin the controversi in favor of the latter wa confer a 
benefit on all parties. for thi end I profit by an open in the 
conversation, and assur them of catharine' irreconcil avers to 
the scheme, and of the death of the saxon baroness. the latter event 
wa mere a conjecture, but render extrem probabl by pleyel' 
representations. My purpose, you need not be told, wa effected. 

"mi passion for mystery, and a speci of imposture, which I deem 
harmless, wa thu awaken afresh. thi second laps into error made my 
recoveri more difficult. I cannot convey to you an adequ idea of 
the kind of gratif which I deriv from these exploits; yet I 
medit nothing. My view were bound to the pass moment, and 
commonli suggest by the momentari exigence. 

"I must not conceal ani thing. your principl teach you to abhor a 
voluptu temper; but, with whatev reluctance, I acknowledg thi 
temper to be mine. you imagin your servant judith to be innoc as 
well as beautiful; but you took her from a famili where hypocrisy, as 
well as licentiousness, wa wrought into a system. My attent wa 
captiv by her charms, and her principl were easili seen to be 
flexible. 

"deem me not capabl of the iniqu of seduction. your servant is not 
destitut of feminin and virtuou qualities; but she wa taught that 
the best use of her charm consist in the sale of them. My nocturn 
visit to mettingen were now prompt by a doubl view, and my 
correspond with your servant gave me, at all times, access to your 
house. 

"the second night after our interview, so brief and so littl foreseen 
by either of us, some daemon of mischief seiz me. accord to my 
companion' report, your perfect were littl less than divine. her 
uncouth but copiou narr convert you into an object of worship. 
she chiefli dwelt upon your courage, becaus she herself wa defici 
in that quality. you held apparit and goblin in contempt. you took 
no precaut against robbers. you were just as tranquil and secur in 
thi lone dwelling, as if you were in the midst of a crowd. henc a 
vagu project occur to me, to put thi courag to the test. A woman 
capabl of recollect in danger, of ward off groundless panics, 
of discern the true mode of proceeding, and profit by her best 
resources, is a prodigy. I wa desir of ascertain whether you were 
such an one. 

"mi expedi wa obviou and simple: I wa to counterfeit a murder 
dialogue; but thi wa to be so conduct that another, and not 
yourself, should appear to be the object. I wa not awar of the 
possibl that you should appropri these menac to yourself. had 
you been still and listened, you would have heard the struggl and 
prayer of the victim, who would likewis have appear to be shut up in 
the closet, and whose voic would have been judith's. thi scene would 
have been an appeal to your compassion; and the proof of cowardic 
or courag which I expect from you, would have been your remain 
inact in your bed, or your enter the closet with a view to assist 
the sufferer. some instanc which judith relat of your fearless 
and promptitud made me adopt the latter supposit with some degre of 
confidence. 

"bi the girl' direct I found a ladder, and mount to your closet 
window. thi is scarc larg enough to admit the head, but it answer 
my purpos too well. 

"I cannot express my confus and surpriz at your abrupt and 
precipit flight. I hastili remov the ladder; and, after some pause, 
curios and doubt of your safeti induc me to follow you. I found 
you stretch on the turf befor your brother' door, without sens or 
motion. I felt the deepest regret at thi unlooked-for consequ of 
my scheme. I knew not what to do to procur you relief. the idea of 
awaken the famili natur present itself. thi emerg wa 
critical, and there wa no time to deliberate. It wa a sudden thought 
that occurred. I put my lip to the key-hole, and sound an alarm which 
effectu rous the sleepers. My organ were natur forcible, and 
had been improv by long and assidu exercise. 

"long and bitterli did I repent of my scheme. I wa somewhat consol by 
reflect that my purpos had not been evil, and renew my fruitless 
vow never to attempt such danger experiments. for some time I 
adhered, with laudabl forbearance, to thi resolution. 

"mi life ha been a life of hardship and exposure. In the summer I 
prefer to make my bed of the smooth turf, or, at most, the shelter of a 
summer-hous suffices. In all my rambl I never found a spot in which 
so mani picturesqu beauti and rural delight were assembl as at 
mettingen. No corner of your littl domain unit fragranc and secreci 
in so perfect a degre as the recess in the bank. the odour of it 
leaves, the cool of it shade, and the music of it water-fall, 
had earli attract my attention. here my sad wa convert into 
peac melancholy--her my slumber were sound, and my pleasur 
enhanced. 

"a most free from interruption, I chose thi as the scene of my 
midnight interview with judith. one evening, as the sun declined, I wa 
seat here, when I wa alarm by your approach. It wa with difficulti 
that I effect my escap unnot by you. 

"at the customari hour, I return to your habitation, and wa made 
acquaint by judith, with your unusu absence. I half suspect the 
true cause, and felt uneasi at the danger there wa that I should be 
depriv of my retreat; or, at least, interrupt in the possess 
of it. the girl, likewise, inform me, that among your other 
singularities, it wa not uncommon for you to leav your bed, and walk 
forth for the sake of night-air and starlight contemplations. 

"I desir to prevent thi inconvenience. I found you easili sway 
by fear. I wa influenced, in my choic of means, by the facil and 
certainti of that to which I had been accustomed. all that I forsaw was, 
that, in future, thi spot would be cautious shun by you. 

"I enter the recess with the utmost caution, and discovered, by your 
breathings, in what condit you were. the unexpect interpret 
which you place upon my former proceeding, suggest my conduct on 
the present occasion. the mode in which heaven is said by the poet, to 
interfer for the prevent of crimes, [**] wa somewhat analog to my 
province, and never fail to occur to me at season like this. It 
wa requisit to break your slumbers, and for thi end I utter the 
power monosyllable, "hold! hold!" My purpos wa not prescrib by 
duty, yet sure it wa far from be atroci and inexpiable. To 
effect it, I utter what wa false, but it wa well suit to my 
purpose. noth less wa intend than to injur you. nay, the evil 
result from my former act, wa partli remov by assur you that in 
all place but thi you were safe. 


* biloquium, or ventrilocution. sound is vari accord to 
the variat of direct and distance. the art of the 
ventriloquist consist in modifi hi voic accord to 
all these variations, without chang hi place. see the 
work of the abb de la chappelle, in which are accur 
record the perform of one of these artists, and some 
ingenious, though unsatisfactori specul are given on 
the mean by which the effect are produced. thi power is, 
perhaps, given by nature, but is doubtless improvable, if 
not acquirable, by art. It may, possibly, consist in an 
unusu flexibl or exert of the bottom of the tongu 
and the uvula. that speech is produc by these alon must 
be granted, sinc anatomist mention two instanc of 
person speak without a tongue. In one case, the organ 
wa origin wanting, but it place wa suppli by a 
small tubercle, and the uvula wa perfect. In the other, the 
tongu wa destroy by disease, but probabl a small part 
of it remained. 

thi power is difficult to explain, but the fact is 
undeniable. experi shew that the human voic can 
imit the voic of all men and of all inferior animals. 
the sound of music instruments, and even nois from the 
contact of inanim substances, have been accur 
imitated. the mimicri of anim is notorious; and dr. 
burney (music travels) mention one who imit a flute 
and violin, so as to deceiv even hi ears. 


**--peep through the blanket of the dark, and cri hold! 
hold!--shakespeare. 



chapter xxiii 


"mi moral will appear to you far from rigid, yet my conduct will fall 
short of your suspicions. I am now to confess action less excusable, 
and yet sure they will not entitl me to the name of a desper or 
sordid criminal. 

"your hous wa rendered, by your frequent and long absences, easili 
access to my curiosity. My meet with pleyel wa the prelud to 
direct intercours with you. I had seen much of the world, but your 
charact exhibit a specimen of human power that wa wholli new to 
me. My intercours with your servant furnish me with curiou detail 
of your domest management. I wa of a differ sex: I wa not your 
husband; I wa not even your friend; yet my knowledg of you wa of that 
kind, which conjug intimaci can give, and, in some respects, more 
accurate. the observ of your domest wa guid by me. 

"you will not be surpriz that I should sometim profit by your 
absence, and adventur to examin with my own eyes, the interior of your 
chamber. upright and sincere, you use no watchfulness, and practis 
no precautions. I scrutin everi thing, and pri everi where. your 
closet wa usual locked, but it wa onc my fortun to find the key on 
a bureau. I open and found new scope for my curios in your books. 
one of these wa manuscript, and written in charact which essenti 
agre with a short-hand system which I had learn from a jesuit 
missionary. 

"I cannot justifi my conduct, yet my onli crime wa curiosity. I 
perus thi volum with eagerness. the intellect which it unveiled, wa 
brighter than my limit and feebl organ could bear. I wa natur 
inquisit as to your idea respect my deportment, and the mysteri 
that had late occurred. 

"you know what you have written. you know that in thi volum the key to 
your inmost soul wa contained. If I had been a profound and malign 
impostor, what plenteou materi were thu furnish me of stratagem 
and plots! 

"the coincid of your dream in the summer-hous with my exclamation, 
wa truli wonderful. the voic which warn you to forbear was, 
doubtless, mine; but mix by a common process of the fancy, with the 
train of visionari incidents. 

"I saw in a stronger light than ever, the danger of that 
instrument which I employed, and renew my resolut to abstain from 
the use of it in future; but I wa destin perpetu to violat my 
resolutions. By some pervers fate, I wa led into circumst in 
which the exert of my power wa the sole or the best mean of 
escape. 

"on that memor night on which our last interview took place, I 
came as usual to mettingen. I wa appriz of your engag at your 
brother's, from which you did not expect to return till late. some 
incid suggest the design of visit your chamber. among your book 
which I had not examined, might be someth tend to illustr 
your character, or the histori of your family. some intim had been 
drop by you in discourse, respect a perform of your father, in 
which some import transact in hi life wa recorded. 

"I wa desir of see thi book; and such wa my habitu attach 
to mystery, that I prefer the clandestin perus of it. such 
were the motiv that induc me to make thi attempt. judith had 
disappeared, and find the hous unoccupied, I suppli myself with a 
light, and proceed to your chamber. 

"I found it easy, on experiment, to lock and unlock your closet door 
without the aid of a key. I shut myself in thi recess, and wa busili 
explor your shelves, when I heard some one enter the room below. I 
wa at a loss who it could be, whether you or your servant. doubtful, 
however, as I was, I conceiv it prudent to extinguish the light. 
scarc wa thi done, when some one enter the chamber. the footstep 
were easili distinguish to be yours. 

"mi situat wa now full of danger and perplexity. for some time, I 
cherish the hope that you would leav the room so long as to afford 
me an opportun of escaping. As the hour passed, thi hope gradual 
desert me. It wa plain that you had retir for the night. 

"I knew not how soon you might find occas to enter the closet. I wa 
aliv to all the horror of detection, and rumin without ceasing, on 
the behaviour which it would be proper, in case of detection, to adopt. 
I wa unabl to discov ani consist method of account for my 
be thu immured. 

"it occur to me that I might withdraw you from your chamber for a few 
minutes, by counterfeit a voic from without. some messag from your 
brother might be delivered, requir your presenc at hi house. I wa 
deter from thi scheme by reflect on the resolut I had formed, 
and on the possibl evil that might result from it. besides, it wa 
not improb that you would speedili retir to bed, and then, by the 
exercis of suffici caution, I might hope to escap unobserved. 

"meanwhil I listen with the deepest anxieti to everi motion from 
without. I discov noth which betoken prepar for 
sleep. instead of thi I heard deep-drawn sighs, and occasion an 
half-express and mourn ejaculation. henc I infer that you were 
unhappy. the true state of your mind with regard to pleyel your own pen 
had disclosed; but I suppos you to be frame of such materials, that, 
though a momentari sad might affect you, you were impregn to ani 
perman and heartfelt grief. inquietud for my own safeti was, for a 
moment, suspend by sympathi with your distress. 

"to the former consider I wa quickli recal by a motion of your 
which indic I knew not what. I foster the persuas that you 
would now retir to bed; but present you approach the closet, and 
detect seem to be inevitable. you put your hand upon the lock. I 
had form no plan to extric myself from the dilemma in which the 
open of the door would involv me. I felt an irreconcil avers 
to detection. thu situated, I involuntarili seiz the door with a 
resolut to resist your effort to open it. 

"suddenli you reced from the door. thi deport wa inexplicable, 
but the relief it afford me wa quickli gone. you returned, and I onc 
more wa thrown into perplexity. the expedi that suggest itself wa 
precipit and inartificial. I exert my organ and call upon you TO 
hold. 

"that you should persist in spite of thi admonition, wa a subject of 
astonishment. I again resist your efforts; for the first expedi 
have failed, I knew not what other to resort to. In thi state, how 
wa my astonish increas when I heard your exclamations! 

"it wa now plain that you knew me to be within. further resist wa 
unavail and useless. the door opened, and I shrunk backward. seldom 
have I felt deeper mortification, and more pain perplexity. I did 
not consid that the truth would be less injuri than ani lie which I 
could hastili frame. consciou as I wa of a certain degre of guilt, 
I conceiv that you would form the most odiou suspicions. the truth 
would be imperfect, unless I were likewis to explain the mysteri 
admonit which had been given; but that explan wa of too great 
moment, and involv too extens consequ to make me suddenli 
resolv to give it. I wa awar that thi discoveri would associ 
itself in your mind, with the dialogu formerli heard in thi closet. 
thenc would your suspicion be aggravated, and to escap from these 
suspicion would be impossible. but the mere truth would be suffici 
opprobrious, and depriv me for ever of your good opinion. 

"thu wa I render desperate, and my mind rapidli pass to the 
contempl of the use that might be made of previou events. some 
good geniu would appear to you to have interpos to save you from 
injuri intend by me. why, I said, sinc I must sink in her opinion, 
should I not cherish thi belief? whi not person an enemy, and 
pretend that celesti interfer ha frustrat my schemes? I must 
fly, but let me leav wonder and fear behind me. elucid of the 
mysteri will alway be practicable. I shall do no injury, but mere 
talk of evil that wa designed, but is now past. 

"thu I extenu my conduct to myself, but I scarc expect that 
thi will be to you a suffici explic of the scene that followed. 
those habit which I have imbibed, the root passion which possess me 
for scatter around me amaz and fear, you enjoy no opportun 
of knowing. that a man should wantonli imput to himself the most 
flagiti designs, will hardli be credited, even though you reflect 
that my reput wa already, by my own folly, irretriev ruined; 
and that it wa alway in my power to commun the truth, and rectifi 
the mistake. 

"I left you to ponder on thi scene. My mind wa full of rapid 
and incongru ideas. compunction, self-upbraiding, hopelesness, 
satisfact at the view of those effect like to flow from my new 
scheme, misgiv as to the benefici result of thi scheme took 
possess of my mind, and seem to struggl for the mastery. 

"I had gone too far to recede. I had paint myself to you as an 
assassin and ravisher, withheld from guilt onli by a voic from heaven. 
I had thu revert into the path of error, and now, have gone thu 
far, my progress seem to be irrevocable. I said to myself, I must 
leav these precinct for ever. My act have blast my fame in the eye 
of the wielands. for the sake of creat a mysteri dread, I have 
made myself a villain. I may complet thi mysteri plan by some new 
imposture, but I cannot aggrav my suppos guilt. 

"mi resolut wa formed, and I wa swiftli rumin on the mean for 
execut it, when pleyel appear in sight. thi incid decid my 
conduct. It wa plain that pleyel wa a devot lover, but he was, at 
the same time, a man of cold resolv and exquisit sagacity. To deceiv 
him would be the sweetest triumph I had ever enjoyed. the decept 
would be momentary, but it would likewis be complete. that hi delus 
would so soon be rectified, wa a recommend to my scheme, for I 
esteem him too much to desir to entail upon him last agonies. 

"I had no time to reflect further, for he proceeded, with a quick 
step, toward the house. I wa hurri onward involuntarili and by a 
mechan impulse. I follow him as he pass the recess in the bank, 
and shrowd myself in that spot, I counterfeit sound which I knew 
would arrest hi steps. 

"he stopped, turned, listened, approached, and overheard a dialogu 
whose purpos wa to vanquish hi belief in a point where hi belief 
wa most difficult to vanquish. I exert all my power to imit your 
voice, your gener sentiments, and your language. be master, 
by mean of your journal, of your person histori and most secret 
thoughts, my effort were the more successful. when I review the tenor 
of thi dialogue, I cannot believ but that pleyel wa deluded. when I 
think of your character, and of the infer which thi dialogu wa 
intend to suggest, it seem incred that thi delus should be 
produced. 

"I spare not myself. I call myself murderer, thief, guilti of 
innumer perjuri and misdeeds: that you had debas yourself to the 
level of such an one, no evidence, methought, would suffic to convinc 
him who knew you so thoroughli as pleyel; and yet the impostur 
amount to proof which the most jealou scrutini would find to be 
unexceptionable. 

"he left hi station precipit and resum hi way to the house. I 
saw that the detect of hi error would be instantaneous, since, not 
have gone to bed, an immedi interview would take place between 
you. At first thi circumst wa consid with regret; but as time 
open my eye to the possibl consequ of thi scene, I regard it 
with pleasure. 

"in a short time the infatu which had led me thu far began to 
subside. the remembr of former reason and transact wa 
renewed. how often I had repent thi kind of exertion; how mani evil 
were produc by it which I had not foreseen; what occas for the 
bitterest remors it had administered, now pass through my mind. the 
black catalogu of stratagem wa now increased. I had inspir you with 
the most vehement terrors: I had fill your mind with faith in shadow 
and confid in dreams: I had deprav the imagin of pleyel: 
I had exhibit you to hi understand as devot to brutal 
gratif and consumm in hypocrisy. the evid which 
accompani thi delus would be irresist to one whose passion 
had pervert hi judgment, whose jealousi with regard to me had alreadi 
been excited, and who, therefore, would not fail to overr the forc 
of thi evidence. what fatal act of despair or of vengeanc might not 
thi error produce? 

"with regard to myself, I had act with a phrenzi that surpass 
belief. I had war against my peac and my fame: I had banish myself 
from the fellowship of vigor and pure minds: I wa self-expel 
from a scene which the munific of natur had adorn with unrival 
beauties, and from haunt in which all the muse and human had 
taken refuge. 

"I wa thu torn by conflict fear and tumultu regrets. the night 
pass away in thi state of confusion; and next morn in the gazett 
left at my obscur lodging, I read a descript and an offer of reward 
for the apprehens of my person. I wa said to have escap from 
an irish prison, in which I wa confin as an offend convict of 
enorm and complic crimes. 

"thi wa the work of an enemy, who, by falsehood and stratagem, had 
procur my condemnation. I was, indeed, a prisoner, but escaped, by the 
exert of my powers, the fate to which I wa doomed, but which I did 
not deserve. I had hope that the malic of my foe wa exhausted; but 
I now perceiv that my precaut had been wise, for that the 
intervent of an ocean wa insuffici for my security. 

"let me not dwell on the sensat which thi discoveri produced. I 
need not tell by what step I wa induc to seek an interview with 
you, for the purpos of disclos the truth, and repairing, as far as 
possible, the effect of my misconduct. It wa unavoid that thi 
gazett would fall into your hands, and that it would tend to confirm 
everi erron impression. 

"have gain thi interview, I purpos to seek some retreat in the 
wilderness, inaccess to your inquiri and to the malic of my foe, 
where I might henceforth employ myself in compos a faith narr 
of my actions. I design it as my vindic from the aspers that 
had rest on my character, and as a lesson to mankind on the evil of 
credul on the one hand, and of impostur on the other. 

"I wrote you a billet, which wa left at the hous of your friend, 
and which I knew would, by some means, speedili come to your hands. I 
entertain a faint hope that my invit would be compli with. I 
knew not what use you would make of the opportun which thi propos 
afford you of procur the seizur of my person; but thi fate I wa 
determin to avoid, and I had no doubt but due circumspection, and the 
exercis of the faculti which I possessed, would enabl me to avoid it. 

"I lurked, through the day, in the neighbourhood of mettingen: I 
approach your habit at the appoint hour: I enter it in 
silence, by a trap-door which led into the cellar. thi had formerli 
been bolt on the inside, but judith had, at an earli period in our 
intercourse, remov thi impediment. I ascend to the first floor, but 
met with no one, nor ani thing that indic the presenc of an human 
being. 

"I crept softli up stairs, and at length perceiv your chamber door 
to be opened, and a light to be within. It wa of moment to discov by 
whom thi light wa accompanied. I wa sensibl of the inconveni 
to which my be discov at your chamber door by ani one within 
would subject me; I therefor call out in my own voice, but so 
modifi that it should appear to ascend from the court below, 'who is 
in the chamber? Is it miss wieland?" 

"no answer wa return to thi summons. I listened, but no motion could 
be heard. after a paus I repeat my call, but no less ineffectually. 

"I now approach nearer the door, and adventur to look in. A light 
stood on the table, but noth human wa discernible. I enter 
cautiously, but all wa solitud and stillness. 

"I knew not what to conclude. If the hous were inhabited, my call would 
have been noticed; yet some suspicion insinu itself that silenc wa 
studious kept by person who intend to surpriz me. My approach had 
been wary, and the silenc that ensu my call had likewis preced it; 
a circumst that tend to dissip my fears. 

"at length it occur to me that judith might possibl be in her own 
room. I turn my step thither; but she wa not to be found. I pass 
into other rooms, and wa soon convinc that the hous wa total 
deserted. I return to your chamber, agit by vain surmis and 
opposit conjectures. the appoint hour had passed, and I dismiss the 
hope of an interview. 

"in thi state of thing I determin to leav a few line on your 
toilet, and prosecut my journey to the mountains. scarc had I taken 
the pen when I laid it aside, uncertain in what manner to address you. 
I rose from the tabl and walk across the floor. A glanc thrown upon 
the bed acquaint me with a spectacl to which my concept of horror 
had not yet reached. 

"in the midst of shudder and trepidation, the signal of your presenc 
in the court below recal me to myself. the deed wa newli done: 
I onli wa in the house: what had late happen justifi ani 
suspicions, howev enormous. It wa plain that thi catastroph wa 
unknown to you: I thought upon the wild commot which the discoveri 
would awaken in your breast: I found the confus of my own thought 
unconquerable, and perceiv that the end for which I sought an 
interview wa not now to be accomplished. 

"in thi state of thing it wa likewis expedi to conceal my be 
within. I put out the light and hurri down stairs. To my unspeak 
surprize, notwithstand everi motiv to fear, you light a candl and 
proceed to your chamber. 

"I retir to that room below from which a door lead into the cellar. 
thi door conceal me from your view as you passed. I thought upon the 
spectacl which wa about to present itself. In an exig so 
abrupt and so littl foreseen, I wa again subject to the empir 
of mechan and habitu impulses. I dread the effect which thi 
shock exhibition, burst on your unprepar senses, might produce. 

"thu actuated, I stept swiftli to the door, and thrust my head 
forward, onc more pronounc the mysteri interdiction. At that 
moment, by some untoward fate, your eye were cast back, and you saw 
me in the veri act of utterance. I fled through the darksom avenu at 
which I entered, cover with the shame of thi detection. 

"with diligence, stimul by a thousand ineff emotions, I pursu 
my intend journey. I have a brother whose farm is situat in the 
bosom of a fertil desert, near the sourc of the leheigh, and thither 
I now repaired." 



chapter xxiv 


"deepli did I rumin on the occurr that had just passed. noth 
excit my wonder so much as the mean by which you discov my be 
in the closet. thi discoveri appear to be made at the moment when you 
attempt to open it. how could you have otherwis remain so long in 
the chamber appar fearless and tranquil? and yet, have made 
thi discovery, how could you persist in drag me forth: persist in 
defianc of an interdict so emphat and solemn? 

"but your sister' death wa an event detest and ominous. she had 
been the victim of the most dread speci of assassination. how, in a 
state like yours, the murder intent could be generated, wa wholli 
inconceivable. 

"I did not relinquish my design of confess to you the part which I 
had sustain in your family, but I wa will to defer it till the 
task which I had set myself wa finished. that be done, I resum the 
resolution. the motiv to incit me to thi continu acquir 
force. the more I revolv the event happen at mettingen, the more 
insupport and omin my terror became. My wake hour and my 
sleep were vex by dismal presag and fright intimations. 

"catharin wa dead by violence. sure my malign star had not made 
me the caus of her death; yet had I not rashli set in motion a machine, 
over whose progress I had no controul, and which experi had shewn me 
wa infinit in power? everi day might add to the catalogu of horror 
of which thi wa the source, and a season disclosur of the truth 
might prevent numberless ills. 

"fraught with thi conception, I have turn my step hither. I find 
your brother' hous desolate: the furnitur removed, and the wall 
stain with damps. your own is in the same situation. your chamber is 
dismantl and dark, and you exhibit an imag of incur grief, and of 
rapid decay. 

"I have utter the truth. thi is the extent of my offences. you tell 
me an horrid tale of wieland be led to the destruct of hi wife 
and children, by some mysteri agent. you charg me with the guilt 
of thi agency; but I repeat that the amount of my guilt ha been truli 
stated. the perpetr of catharine' death wa unknown to me till now; 
nay, it is still unknown to me." 

At that moment, the close of a door in the kitchen wa distinctli 
heard by us. carwin start and paused. "there is some one coming. I 
must not be found here by my enemies, and need not, sinc my purpos is 
answered." 

I had drunk in, with the most vehement attention, everi word that he 
had uttered. I had no breath to interrupt hi tale by interrog 
or comments. the power that he spoke of wa hitherto unknown to me: it 
exist wa incredible; it wa suscept of no direct proof. 

He own that hi were the voic and face which I heard and saw. He 
attempt to give an human explan of these phantasms; but it is 
enough that he own himself to be the agent; hi tale is a lie, and hi 
natur devilish. As he deceiv me, he likewis deceiv my brother, and 
now do I behold the author of all our calamities! 

such were my thought when hi paus allow me to think. I should have 
bad him begon if the silenc had not been interrupted; but now I fear 
no more for myself; and the milki of my natur wa curdl into 
hatr and rancour. some one wa near, and thi enemi of god and 
man might possibl be brought to justice. I reflect not that the 
preternatur power which he had hitherto exerted, would avail to rescu 
him from ani toil in which hi feet might be entangled. meanwhile, 
looks, and not word of menac and abhorrence, were all that I could 
bestow. 

He did not depart. He seem dubious, whether, by pass out of the 
house, or by remain somewhat longer where he was, he should most 
endang hi safety. hi confus increas when step of one barefoot 
were heard upon the stairs. He threw anxiou glanc sometim at the 
closet, sometim at the window, and sometim at the chamber door, yet 
he wa detain by some inexplic fascination. He stood as if root 
to the spot. 

As to me, my soul wa burst with detest and revenge. I had 
no room for surmis and fear respect him that approached. It wa 
doubtless a human being, and would befriend me so far as to aid me in 
arrest thi offender. 

the stranger quickli enter the room. My eye and the eye of carwin 
were, at the same moment, dart upon him. A second glanc wa not 
need to inform us who he was. hi lock were tangled, and fell 
confusedli over hi forehead and ears. hi shirt wa of coars stuff, 
and open at the neck and breast. hi coat wa onc of bright and fine 
texture, but now torn and tarnish with dust. hi feet, hi legs, and 
hi arm were bare. hi featur were the seat of a wild and tranquil 
solemnity, but hi eye bespok inquietud and curiosity. 

He advanc with firm step, and look as in search of some one. He saw 
me and stopped. He bent hi sight on the floor, and clench hi hands, 
appear suddenli absorb in meditation. such were the figur and 
deport of wieland! such, in hi fallen state, were the aspect and 
guis of my brother! 

carwin did not fail to recogn the visitant. care for hi own safeti 
wa appar swallow up in the amaz which thi spectacl 
produced. hi station wa conspicuous, and he could not have escap the 
rove glanc of wieland; yet the latter seem total unconsci of 
hi presence. 

grief at thi scene of ruin and blast wa at first the onli sentiment 
of which I wa conscious. A fear still ensued. At length wieland, 
lift hi hands, which were lock in each other, to hi breast, 
exclaimed, "father! I thank thee. thi is thi guidance. hither thou hast 
led me, that I might perform thi will: yet let me not err: let me hear 
again thi messenger!" 

He stood for a minut as if listening; but recov from hi attitude, 
he continued--"it is not needed. dastardli wretch! thu etern 
question the behest of thi maker! weak in resolution! wayward in 
faith!" 

He advanc to me, and, after anoth pause, resumed: "poor girl! 
a dismal fate ha set it mark upon thee. thi life is demand as 
a sacrifice. prepar thee to die. make not my offic difficult by 
fruitless opposition. thi prayer might subdu stones; but none but he 
who enjoin my purpos can shake it." 

these word were a suffici explic of the scene. the natur of 
hi phrenzy, as describ by my uncle, wa remembered. I who had sought 
death, wa now thrill with horror becaus it wa near. death in 
thi form, death from the hand of a brother, wa thought upon with 
undescrib repugnance. 

In a state thu verg upon madness, my eye glanc upon carwin. hi 
astonish appear to have struck him motionless and dumb. My life 
wa in danger, and my brother' hand wa about to be embru in my 
blood. I firmli believ that carwin' wa the instigation. I could 
rescu me from thi abhor fate; I could dissip thi tremend 
illusion; I could save my brother from the perpetr of new horrors, 
by point out the devil who seduc him; to hesit a moment wa 
to perish. these thought gave strength to my limbs, and energi to my 
accents: I start on my feet. "O brother! spare me, spare thyself: 
there is thi betrayer. He counterfeit the voic and face of an angel, 
for the purpos of destroy thee and me. He ha thi moment confess 
it. He is abl to speak where he is not. He is leagu with hell, but 
will not avow it; yet he confess that the agenc wa his." 

My brother turn slowli hi eyes, and fix them upon carwin. everi 
joint in the frame of the latter trembled. hi complexion wa paler than 
a ghost's. hi eye dare not meet that of wieland, but wander with an 
air of distract from one space to another. 

"man," said my brother, in a voic total unlik that which he had 
use to me, "what art thou? the charg ha been made. answer it. 
the visage--th voice--at the bottom of these stairs--at the hour of 
eleven--to whom did they belong? To thee?" 

twice did carwin attempt to speak, but hi word die away upon hi 
lips. My brother resum in a tone of greater vehemence-- 

"thou falterest; falter is ominous; say ye or no: one word will 
suffice; but bewar of falsehood. wa it a stratagem of hell to 
overthrow my family? wast thou the agent?" 

I now saw that the wrath which had been prepar for me wa to be 
heap upon another. the tale that I heard from him, and hi present 
trepidations, were abund testimoni of hi guilt. but what if 
wieland should be undeceived! what if he shall find hi act to have 
proceed not from an heavenli prompter, but from human treachery! will 
not hi rage mount into whirlwind? will not he tare limb from limb thi 
devot wretch? 

instinct I recoil from thi image, but it gave place to another. 
carwin may be innocent, but the impetuos of hi judg may misconstru 
hi answer into a confess of guilt. wieland know not that 
mysteri voic and appear were likewis wit by me. carwin 
may be ignor of those which misl my brother. thu may hi answer 
unwarili betray himself to ruin. 

such might be the consequ of my frantic precipitation, and these, 
it wa necessary, if possible, to prevent. I attempt to speak, but 
wieland, turn suddenli upon me, command silence, in a tone furiou 
and terrible. My lip closed, and my tongu refus it office. 

"what art thou?" he resumed, address himself to carwin. "answer me; 
whose form--whos voice--wa it thi contrivance? answer me." 

the answer wa now given, but confusedli and scarc articulated. "I 
meant nothing--i intend no ill--if I understand--if I do not mistak 
you--it is too true--i did appear--in the entry--did speak. the 
contriv wa mine, but--" 

these word were no sooner uttered, than my brother ceas to wear the 
same aspect. hi eye were downcast: he wa motionless: hi respir 
becam hoarse, like that of a man in the agoni of death. carwin seem 
unabl to say more. He might have easili escaped, but the thought which 
occupi him relat to what wa horrid and unintellig in thi 
scene, and not to hi own danger. 

present the faculti of wieland, which, for a time, were chain 
up, were seiz with restless and trembling. He broke silence. the 
stoutest heart would have been appal by the tone in which he spoke. 
He address himself to carwin. 

"whi art thou here? who detain thee? Go and learn better. I will meet 
thee, but it must be at the bar of thi maker. there shall I bear wit 
against thee." 

perceiv that carwin did not obey, he continued; "dost thou wish me 
to complet the catalogu by thi death? thi life is a worthless thing. 
tempt me no more. I am but a man, and thi presenc may awaken a furi 
which may spurn my controul. begone!" 

carwin, irresolute, strive in vain for utterance, hi complexion 
pallid as death, hi knee beat one against another, slowli obey 
the mandat and withdrew. 



chapter xxv 


A few word more and I lay asid the pen for ever. yet whi should I not 
relinquish it now? all that I have said is preparatori to thi scene, 
and my fingers, tremul and cold as my heart, refus ani further 
exertion. thi must not be. let my last energi support me in the 
finish of thi task. then will I lay down my head in the lap of 
death. hush will be all my murmur in the sleep of the grave. 

everi sentiment ha perish in my bosom. even friendship is extinct. 
your love for me ha prompt me to thi task; but I would not have 
compli if it had not been a luxuri thu to feast upon my woes. I have 
justli calcul upon my remnant of strength. when I lay down the pen 
the taper of life will expire: my exist will termin with my tale. 

now that I wa left alon with wieland, the peril of my situat 
present themselv to my mind. that thi paroxysm should termin in 
havock and rage it wa reason to predict. the first suggest of my 
fear had been disprov by my experience. carwin had acknowledg hi 
offences, and yet had escaped. the vengeanc which I had harbour had 
not been admit by wieland, and yet the evil which I had endured, 
compar with those inflict on my brother, were as nothing. I thirst 
for hi blood, and wa torment with an insati appetit for hi 
destruction; yet my brother wa unmoved, and had dismiss him in 
safety. sure thou wast more than man, while I am sunk below the 
beasts. 

did I place a right construct on the conduct of wieland? wa the 
error that misl him so easili rectified? were view so vivid and faith 
so strenuou thu liabl to fade and to change? wa there not reason 
to doubt the accuraci of my perceptions? with imag like these wa 
my mind thronged, till the deport of my brother call away my 
attention. 

I saw hi lip move and hi eye cast up to heaven. then would he listen 
and look back, as if in expect of some one' appearance. thrice he 
repeat these gesticul and thi inaud prayer. each time the 
mist of confus and doubt seem to grow darker and to settl on hi 
understanding. I guess at the mean of these tokens. the word 
of carwin had shaken hi belief, and he wa employ in summon the 
messeng who had formerli commun with him, to attest the valu of 
those new doubts. In vain the summon wa repeated, for hi eye met 
noth but vacancy, and not a sound salut hi ear. 

He walk to the bed, gaze with eager at the pillow which had 
sustain the head of the breathless catharine, and then return to 
the place where I sat. I had no power to lift my eye to hi face: I wa 
dubiou of hi purpose: thi purpos might aim at my life. 

alas! noth but subject to danger, and exposur to temptation, 
can show us what we are. By thi test wa I now tried, and found to be 
cowardli and rash. men can deliber unti the thread of life, and of 
thi I had deem myself capable; yet now that I stood upon the brink 
of fate, that the knife of the sacrific wa aim at my heart, I 
shudder and betook myself to ani mean of escape, howev monstrous. 

can I bear to think--can I endur to relat the outrag which my heart 
meditated? where were my mean of safety? resist wa vain. not even 
the energi of despair could set me on a level with that strength which 
hi terrif prompter had bestow upon wieland. terror enabl us to 
perform incred feats; but terror wa not then the state of my mind: 
where then were my hope of rescue? 

methink it is too much. I stand aside, as it were, from myself; I 
estim my own deservings; a hatred, immort and inexorable, is my 
due. I listen to my own pleas, and find them empti and false: yes, I 
acknowledg that my guilt surpass that of all mankind: I confess that 
the curs of a world, and the frown of a deity, are inadequ to my 
demerits. Is there a thing in the world worthi of infinit abhorrence? 
It is I. what shall I say! I wa menaced, as I thought, with death, and, 
to elud thi evil, my hand wa readi to inflict death upon the menacer. 
In visit my house, I had made provis against the machin of 
carwin. In a fold of my dress an open penknif wa concealed. thi I 
now seiz and drew forth. It lurk out of view: but I now see that my 
state of mind would have render the deed inevit if my brother 
had lift hi hand. thi instrument of my preserv would have been 
plung into hi heart. 

O, insupport remembrance! hide thee from my view for a time; hide 
it from me that my heart wa black enough to medit the stab of a 
brother! a brother thu suprem in misery; thu tower in virtue! 

He wa probabl unconsci of my design, but present drew back. 
thi interv wa suffici to restor me to myself. the madness, the 
iniqu of that act which I had purpos rush upon my apprehension. 
for a moment I wa breathless with agony. At the next moment I recov 
my strength, and threw the knife with violenc on the floor. 

the sound awok my brother from hi reverie. He gaze altern at me 
and at the weapon. with a movement equal solemn he stoop and took 
it up. He place the blade in differ positions, scrutin it 
accurately, and maintaining, at the same time, a profound silence. 

again he look at me, but all that vehem and lofti of spirit 
which had so late character hi features, were flown. fallen 
muscles, a forehead contract into folds, eye dim with unbidden 
drops, and a rueful of aspect which no word can describe, were now 
visible. 

hi look touch into energi the same sympathi in me, and I pour 
forth a flood of tears. thi passion wa quickli check by fear, which 
had now, no longer, my own, but hi safeti for their object. I watch 
hi deport in silence. At length he spoke: 

"sister," said he, in an accent mourn and mild, "I have act poorli 
my part in thi world. what thinkest thou? shall I not do better in the 
next?" 

I could make no answer. the mild of hi tone astonish and 
encourag me. I continu to regard him with wist and anxiou looks. 

"I think," resum he, "I will try. My wife and my babe have gone 
before. happi wretches! I have sent you to repose, and ought not to 
linger behind." 

these word had a mean suffici intelligible. I look at the 
open knife in hi hand and shuddered, but knew not how to prevent the 
deed which I dreaded. He quickli notic my fears, and comprehend 
them. stretch toward me hi hand, with an air of increas 
mildness: "take it," said he: "fear not for thi own sake, nor for mine. 
the cup is gone by, and it transient inebri is succeed by the 
sober of truth. 

"thou angel whom I wa wont to worship! fearest thou, my sister, for 
thi life? onc it wa the scope of my labour to destroy thee, but I wa 
prompt to the deed by heaven; such, at least, wa my belief. thinkest 
thou that thi death wa sought to gratifi malevolence? no. I am pure 
from all stain. I believ that my god wa my mover! 

"neither thee nor myself have I caus to injure. I have done my duty, 
and sure there is merit in have sacrif to that, all that is dear 
to the heart of man. If a devil ha deceiv me, he came in the habit 
of an angel. If I erred, it wa not my judgment that deceiv me, but 
my senses. In thi sight, be of beings! I am still pure. still will I 
look for my reward in thi justice!" 

did my ear truli report these sounds? If I did not err, my brother wa 
restor to just perceptions. He knew himself to have been betray to 
the murder of hi wife and children, to have been the victim of infern 
artifice; yet he found consol in the rectitud of hi motives. He 
wa not devoid of sorrow, for thi wa written on hi countenance; but 
hi soul wa tranquil and sublime. 

perhap thi wa mere a transit of hi former mad into a new 
shape. perhap he had not yet awaken to the memori of the horror 
which he had perpetrated. infatu wretch that I was! To set myself up 
as a model by which to judg of my heroic brother! My reason taught 
me that hi conclus were right; but consciou of the impot of 
reason over my own conduct; consciou of my cowardli rash and my 
crimin despair, I doubt whether ani one could be stedfast and wise. 

such wa my weakness, that even in the midst of these thoughts, my 
mind glide into abhorr of carwin, and I utter in a low voice, O! 
carwin! carwin! what hast thou to answer for? 

My brother immedi notic the involuntari exclamation: "clara!" 
said he, "be thyself. equiti use to be a theme for thi eloquence. 
reduc it lesson to practice, and be just to that unfortun man. the 
instrument ha done it work, and I am satisfied. 

"I thank thee, my god, for thi last illumination! My enemi is thine 
also. I deem him to be man, the man with whom I have often communed; 
but now thi good ha unveil to me hi true nature. As the 
perform of thi behests, he is my friend." 

My heart began now to misgiv me. hi mourn aspect had gradual 
yield place to a seren brow. A new soul appear to actuat hi 
frame, and hi eye to beam with preternatur lustre. these symptom 
did not abate, and he continued: 

"clara! I must not leav thee in doubt. I know not what brought about 
thi interview with the be whom thou callest carwin. for a time, I wa 
guilti of thi error, and deduc from hi incoher confess that I 
had been made the victim of human malice. He left us at my bidding, and 
I put up a prayer that my doubt should be removed. thi eye were shut, 
and thi ear seal to the vision that answer my prayer. 

"I wa inde deceived. the form thou hast seen wa the incarn of 
a daemon. the visag and voic which urg me to the sacrific of my 
family, were his. now he person a human form: then he wa inviron 
with the lustr of heaven.-- 

"clara," he continued, advanc closer to me, "thi death must come. 
thi minist is evil, but he from whom hi commiss wa receiv is 
god. submit then with all thi wont resign to a decre that cannot 
be revers or resisted. mark the clock. three minut are allow to 
thee, in which to call up thi fortitude, and prepar thee for thi doom." 
there he stopped. 

even now, when thi scene exist onli in memory, when life and all it 
function have sunk into torpor, my puls throbs, and my hair uprise: 
my brow are knit, as then; and I gaze around me in distraction. I wa 
unconquer avers to death; but death, immin and full of agoni as 
that which wa threatened, wa nothing. thi wa not the onli or chief 
inspir of my fears. 

for him, not for myself, wa my soul tormented. I might die, and no 
crime, surpass the reach of mercy, would pursu me to the presenc 
of my judge; but my assassin would surviv to contempl hi deed, and 
that assassin wa wieland! 

wing to bear me beyond hi reach I had not. I could not vanish with a 
thought. the door wa open, but my murder wa interpos between 
that and me. Of self-def I wa incapable. the phrenzi that late 
prompt me to blood wa gone; my state wa desperate; my rescu wa 
impossible. 

the weight of these accumul thought could not be borne. My sight 
becam confused; my limb were seiz with convulsion; I spoke, but my 
word were half-formed:-- 

"spare me, my brother! look down, righteou judge! snatch me from thi 
fate! take away thi furi from him, or turn it elsewhere!" 

such wa the agoni of my thoughts, that I notic not step enter my 
apartment. supplic eye were cast upward, but when my prayer wa 
breathed, I onc more wildli gaze at the door. A form met my sight: I 
shudder as if the god whom I invok were present. It wa carwin that 
again intruded, and who stood befor me, erect in attitude, and stedfast 
in look! the sight of him awaken new and rapid thoughts. hi recent 
tale wa remembered: hi magic transit and mysteri energi of 
voice: whether he were infern or miraculous, or human, there wa no 
power and no need to decide. whether the contriv or not of thi spell, 
he wa abl to unbind it, and to check the furi of my brother. He had 
ascrib to himself intent not malignant. here now wa afford a 
test of hi truth. let him interpose, as from above; revok the 
savag decre which the mad of wieland ha assign to heaven, and 
extinguish for ever thi passion for blood! 

My mind detect at a glanc thi avenu to safety. the recommend 
it possess throng as it were together, and made but one impress 
on my intellect. remot effect and collater danger I saw not. 
perhap the paus of an instant had suffic to call them up. the 
improb that the influenc which govern wieland wa extern or 
human; the tendenc of thi stratagem to sanction so fatal an error, or 
substitut a more destruct rage in place of this; the suffici of 
carwin' mere muscular forc to counteract the efforts, and restrain 
the furi of wieland, might, at a second glance, have been discovered; 
but no second glanc wa allowed. My first thought hurri me to action, 
and, fix my eye upon carwin I exclaimed-- 

"O wretch! onc more hast thou come? let it be to abjur thi malice; to 
counterwork thi hellish stratagem; to turn from me and from my brother, 
thi desol rage! 

"testifi thi innoc or thi remorse: exert the power which pertain to 
thee, whatev they be, to turn asid thi ruin. thou art the author 
of these horrors! what have I done to deserv thu to die? how have I 
merit thi unrel persecution? I adjur thee, by that god whose 
voic thou hast dare to counterfeit, to save my life! 

"wilt thou then go? leav me! succourless!" 

carwin listen to my intreati unmoved, and turn from me. He seem 
to hesit a moment: then glide through the door. rage and despair 
stifl my utterance. the interv of respit wa passed; the pang 
reserv for me by wieland, were not to be endured; my thought rush 
again into anarchy. have receiv the knife from hi hand, I held it 
loos and without regard; but now it seiz again my attention, and I 
grasp it with force. 

He seem to notic not the entranc or exit of carwin. My gestur and 
the murder weapon appear to have escap hi notice. hi silenc 
wa unbroken; hi eye, fix upon the clock for a time, wa now 
withdrawn; furi kindl in everi feature; all that wa human in hi face 
gave way to an express supernatur and tremendous. I felt my left 
arm within hi grasp.-- 

even now I hesit to strike. I shrunk from hi assault, but in 
vain.-- 

here let me desist. whi should I rescu thi event from oblivion? whi 
should I paint thi detest conflict? whi not termin at onc thi 
seri of horrors?--hurri to the verg of the precipice, and cast myself 
for ever beyond remembr and beyond hope? 

still I live: with thi load upon my breast; with thi phantom to pursu 
my steps; with adder lodg in my bosom, and sting me to madness: 
still I consent to live! 

yes, I will rise abov the sphere of mortal passions: I will spurn at 
the cowardli remors that bid me seek impun in silence, or comfort 
in forgetfulness. My nerv shall be new strung to the task. have I not 
resolved? I will die. the gulph befor me is inevit and near. I will 
die, but then onli when my tale is at an end. 



chapter xxvi 


My right hand, grasp the unseen knife, wa still disengaged. It wa 
lift to strike. all my strength wa exhausted, but what wa suffici 
to the perform of thi deed. alreadi wa the energi awakened, 
and the impuls given, that should bear the fatal steel to hi heart, 
when--wieland shrunk back: hi hand wa withdrawn. breathless with 
affright and desperation, I stood, freed from hi grasp; unassailed; 
untouched. 

thu long had the power which controul the scene forborn to 
interfere; but now hi might wa irresistible, and wieland in a moment 
wa disarm of all hi purposes. A voice, louder than human organ 
could produce, shriller than languag can depict, burst from the 
ceiling, and command him--to hold! 

troubl and dismay succeed to the stedfast that had late been 
display in the look of wieland. hi eye rove from one quarter to 
another, with an express of doubt. He seem to wait for a further 
intimation. 

carwin' agenc wa here easili recognized. I had besought him to 
interpos in my defence. He had flown. I had imagin him deaf to my 
prayer, and resolut to see me perish: yet he disappear mere to 
devis and execut the mean of my relief. 

whi did he not forbear when thi end wa accomplished? whi did hi 
misjudg zeal and accurs precipit overpass that limit? Or meant 
he thu to crown the scene, and conduct hi inscrut plot to thi 
consummation? 

such idea were the fruit of subsequ contemplation. thi moment 
wa pregnant with fate. I had no power to reason. In the career of my 
tempestu thoughts, rent into pieces, as my mind was, by accumul 
horrors, carwin wa unseen and unsuspected. I partook of wieland' 
credulity, shook with hi amazement, and pant with hi awe. 

silenc took place for a moment; so much as allow the attent to 
recov it post. then new sound were utter from above. 

"man of errors! ceas to cherish thi delusion: not heaven or hell, but 
thi sens have misl thee to commit these acts. shake off thi phrenzy, 
and ascend into ration and human. Be lunat no longer." 

My brother open hi lip to speak. hi tone wa terrif and faint. He 
mutter an appeal to heaven. It wa difficult to comprehend the theme 
of hi inquiries. they impli doubt as to the natur of the impuls 
that hitherto had guid him, and question whether he had act in 
consequ of insan perceptions. 

To these interrogatori the voice, which now seem to hover at hi 
shoulder, loudli answer in the affirmative. then uninterrupt silenc 
ensued. 

fallen from hi lofti and heroic station; now final restor to the 
percept of truth; weigh to earth by the recollect of hi own 
deeds; consol no longer by a conscious of rectitude, for the 
loss of offspr and wife--a loss for which he wa indebt to hi own 
misguid hand; wieland wa transform at onc into the man OF sorrows! 

He reflect not that credit should be as reason deni to the last, 
as to ani former intimation; that one might as justli be ascrib to 
er or diseas sens as the other. He saw not that thi discoveri 
in no degre affect the integr of hi conduct; that hi motiv had 
lost none of their claim to the homag of mankind; that the prefer 
of suprem good, and the boundless energi of duty, were undiminish in 
hi bosom. 

It is not for me to pursu him through the ghastli chang of hi 
countenance. word he had none. now he sat upon the floor, motionless in 
all hi limbs, with hi eye glaze and fixed; a monument of woe. 

anon a spirit of tempestu but undesign activ seiz him. 
He rose from hi place and strode across the floor, totter and at 
random. hi eye were without moisture, and gleam with the fire 
that consum hi vitals. the muscl of hi face were agit by 
convulsion. hi lip moved, but no sound escap him. 

that natur should long sustain thi conflict wa not to be believed. 
My state wa littl differ from that of my brother. I entered, as it 
were, into hi thought. My heart wa visit and rent by hi pangs--oh 
that thi phrenzi had never been cured! that thi madness, with it 
bliss visions, would return! or, if that must not be, that thi scene 
would hasten to a close! that death would cover thee with hi oblivion! 

what can I wish for thee? thou who hast vie with the great preacher 
of thi faith in sanctiti of motives, and in elev abov sensual and 
selfish! thou whom thi fate ha chang into paricid and savage! can I 
wish for the continu of thi being? no. 

for a time hi movement seem destitut of purpose. If he walked; if 
he turned; if hi finger were entwin with each other; if hi hand 
were press against opposit side of hi head with a forc 
suffici to crush it into pieces; it wa to tear hi mind from 
self-contemplation; to wast hi thought on extern objects. 

speedili thi train wa broken. A beam appear to be dart into hi 
mind, which gave a purpos to hi efforts. An avenu to escap present 
itself; and now he eagerli gaze about him: when my thought becam 
engag by hi demeanour, my finger were stretch as by a mechan 
force, and the knife, no longer heed or of use, escap from my grasp, 
and fell unperceiv on the floor. hi eye now light upon it; he 
seiz it with the quick of thought. 

I shriek aloud, but it wa too late. He plung it to the hilt in hi 
neck; and hi life instantli escap with the stream that gush from 
the wound. He wa stretch at my feet; and my hand were sprinkl with 
hi blood as he fell. 

such wa thi last deed, my brother! for a spectacl like thi wa it 
my fate to be reserved! thi eye were closed--thi face ghastli with 
death--thi arms, and the spot where thou liedest, float in thi life' 
blood! these imag have not, for a moment, forsaken me. till I am 
breathless and cold, they must continu to hover in my sight. 

carwin, as I said, had left the room, but he still linger in the 
house. My voic summon him to my aid; but I scarc notic hi 
re-entrance, and now faintli recollect hi terrifi looks, hi broken 
exclamations, hi vehement avow of innocence, the effus of hi 
piti for me, and hi offer of assistance. 

I did not listen--i answer him not--i ceas to upbraid or accuse. hi 
guilt wa a point to which I wa indifferent. ruffian or devil, black 
as hell or bright as angels, thenceforth he wa noth to me. I wa 
incap of spare a look or a thought from the ruin that wa spread 
at my feet. 

when he left me, I wa scarc consciou of ani variat in the scene. 
He inform the inhabit of the hut of what had passed, and they flew 
to the spot. careless of hi own safety, he hast to the citi to inform 
my friend of my condition. 

My uncl speedili arriv at the house. the bodi of wieland wa remov 
from my presence, and they suppos that I would follow it; but no, my 
home is ascertained; here I have taken up my rest, and never will I go 
hence, till, like wieland, I am born to my grave. 

importun wa tri in vain: they threaten to remov me by 
violence--nay, violenc wa used; but my soul prize too dearli thi 
littl roof to endur to be bereav of it. forc should not 
prevail when the hoari lock and supplic tear of my uncl were 
ineffectual. My repugn to move gave birth to feroci and 
phrenzi when forc wa employed, and they were oblig to consent to my 
return. 

they besought me--they remonstrated--they appeal to everi duti that 
connect me with him that made me, and with my fellow-men--in vain. 
while I live I will not go hence. have I not fulfil my destiny? 

whi will ye torment me with your reason and reproofs? can ye restor 
to me the hope of my better days? can ye give me back catharin and her 
babes? can ye recal to life him who die at my feet? 

I will eat--i will drink--i will lie down and rise up at your 
bidding--al I ask is the choic of my abode. what is there unreason 
in thi demand? shortli will I be at peace. thi is the spot which I 
have chosen in which to breath my last sigh. deni me not, I beseech 
you, so slight a boon. 

talk not to me, O my rever friend! of carwin. He ha told thee hi 
tale, and thou exculpatest him from all direct concern in the fate of 
wieland. thi scene of havock wa produc by an illus of the senses. 
Be it so: I care not from what sourc these disast have flowed; it 
suffic that they have swallow up our hope and our existence. 

what hi agenc began, hi agenc conduct to a close. He intended, by 
the final effort of hi power, to rescu me and to banish hi illus 
from my brother. such is hi tale, concern the truth of which I care 
not. henceforth I foster but one wish--i ask onli quick deliver from 
life and all the ill that attend it.-- 

Go wretch! torment me not with thi presenc and thi prayers.--forg 
thee? will that avail thee when thi fate hour shall arrive? Be thou 
acquit at thi own tribunal, and thou needest not fear the verdict 
of others. If thi guilt be capabl of blacker hues, if hitherto thi 
conscienc be without stain, thi crime will be made more flagrant by 
thu violat my retreat. take thyself away from my sight if thou 
wouldest not behold my death! 

thou are gone! murmur and reluctant! and now my repos is coming--mi 
work is done! 



chapter xxvii 


[written three year after the foregoing, and date at montpellier.] 


I imagin that I had forev laid asid the pen; and that I should 
take up my abod in thi part of the world, wa of all event the least 
probable. My destini I believ to be accomplished, and I look forward 
to a speedi termin of my life with the fullest confidence. 

sure I had reason to be weari of existence, to be impati of everi 
tie which held me from the grave. I experienc thi impati in it 
fullest extent. I wa not onli enamour of death, but conceived, from 
the condit of my frame, that to shun it wa impossible, even though 
I had ardent desir it; yet here am I, a thousand leagu from my 
nativ soil, in full possess of life and of health, and not destitut 
of happiness. 

such is man. time will obliter the deepest impressions. grief the 
most vehement and hopeless, will gradual decay and wear itself out. 
argument may be employ in vain: everi moral prescript may be 
ineffectu tried: remonstrances, howev cogent or pathetic, shall 
have no power over the attention, or shall be repel with disdain; 
yet, as day follow day, the turbul of our emot shall subside, 
and our fluctuat be final succeed by a calm. 

perhaps, however, the conquest of despair wa chiefli owe to an 
accid which render my continu in my own hous impossible. At 
the conclus of my long, and, as I then supposed, my last letter to 
you, I mention my resolut to wait for death in the veri spot which 
had been the princip scene of my misfortunes. from thi resolut my 
friend exert themselv with the utmost zeal and persever to make 
me depart. they justli imagin that to be thu surround by memori 
of the fate of my family, would tend to foster my disease. A swift 
success of new objects, and the exclus of everi thing calcul 
to remind me of my loss, wa the onli method of cure. 

I refus to listen to their exhortations. great as my calam was, to 
be torn from thi asylum wa regard by me as an aggrav of it. By 
a pervers constitut of mind, he wa consid as my greatest enemi 
who sought to withdraw me from a scene which suppli etern food to my 
melancholy, and kept my despair from languishing. 

In relat the histori of these disast I deriv a similar speci 
of gratification. My uncl earnestli dissuad me from thi task; but 
hi remonstr were as fruitless on thi head as they had been on 
others. they would have withheld from me the implement of writing; but 
they quickli perceiv that to withstand would be more injuri than 
to compli with my wishes. have finish my tale, it seem as if the 
scene were closing. A fever lurk in my veins, and my strength wa 
gone. ani exertion, howev slight, wa attend with difficulty, and, 
at length, I refus to rise from my bed. 

I now see the infatu and injustic of my conduct in it true 
colours. I reflect upon the sensat and reason of that period 
with wonder and humiliation. that I should be insens to the claim 
and tear of my friends; that I should overlook the suggest of duty, 
and fli from that post in which onli I could be instrument to the 
benefit of others; that the exercis of the social and benefic 
affections, the contempl of natur and the acquisit of wisdom 
should not be seen to be mean of happi still within my reach, is, 
at thi time, scarc credible. 

It is true that I am now changed; but I have not the consol to 
reflect that my chang wa owe to my fortitud or to my capac for 
instruction. better thought grew up in my mind imperceptibly. I cannot 
but congratul myself on the change, though, perhaps, it mere argu 
a fickl of temper, and a defect of sensibility. 

after my narr wa end I betook myself to my bed, in the full 
belief that my career in thi world wa on the point of finishing. My 
uncl took up hi abod with me, and perform for me everi offic of 
nurse, physician and friend. one night, after some hour of restless 
and pain, I sunk into deep sleep. it tranquillity, however, wa of no 
long duration. My fanci becam suddenli distempered, and my brain wa 
turn into a theatr of uproar and confusion. It would not be easi to 
describ the wild and phantast incongru that pester me. 
My uncle, wieland, pleyel and carwin were success and moment 
discern amidst the storm. sometim I wa swallow up by whirlpools, 
or caught up in the air by half-seen and gigant forms, and thrown upon 
point rocks, or cast among the billows. sometim gleam of light 
were shot into a dark abyss, on the verg of which I wa standing, and 
enabl me to discover, for a moment, it enorm depth and hideou 
precipices. anon, I wa transport to some ridg of aetna, and made a 
terrifi spectat of it fieri torrent and it pillar of smoke. 

howev strang it may seem, I wa conscious, even dure my dream, of 
my real situation. I knew myself to be asleep, and struggl to break 
the spell, by muscular exertions. these did not avail, and I continu 
to suffer these abort creation till a loud voice, at my bed side, 
and some one shake me with violence, put an end to my reverie. My eye 
were unsealed, and I start from my pillow. 

My chamber wa fill with smoke, which, though in some degre luminous, 
would permit me to see nothing, and by which I wa nearli suffocated. 
the crackl of flames, and the deafen clamour of voic without, 
burst upon my ears. stun as I wa by thi hubbub, scorch with heat, 
and nearli choak by the accumul vapours, I wa unabl to think or 
act for my own preservation; I wa incapable, indeed, of comprehend 
my danger. 

I wa caught up, in an instant, by a pair of sinewi arms, born to the 
window, and carri down a ladder which had been place there. My 
uncl stood at the bottom and receiv me. I wa not fulli awar of my 
situat till I found myself shelter in the hut, and surround by 
it inhabitants. 

By neglect of the servant, some unextinguish ember had been place in 
a barrel in the cellar of the building. the barrel had caught fire; 
thi wa commun to the beam of the lower floor, and thenc to the 
upper part of the structure. It wa first discov by some person 
at a distance, who hasten to the spot and alarm my uncl and the 
servants. the flame had alreadi made consider progress, and my 
condit wa overlook till my escap wa render nearli impossible. 

My danger be known, and a ladder quickli procured, one of the 
spectat ascend to my chamber, and effect my deliver in the 
manner befor related. 

thi incident, disastr as it may at first seem, had, in reality, a 
benefici effect upon my feelings. I was, in some degree, rous from 
the stupor which had seiz my faculties. the monoton and gloomi 
seri of my thought wa broken. My habit wa level with the 
ground, and I wa oblig to seek a new one. A new train of images, 
disconnect with the fate of my family, forc itself on my attention, 
and a belief insens sprung up, that tranquillity, if not happiness, 
wa still within my reach. notwithstand the shock which my frame had 
endured, the anguish of my thought no sooner abat than I recov my 
health. 

I now willingli listen to my uncle' solicit to be the companion 
of hi voyage. prepar were easili made, and after a tediou 
passage, we set our feet on the shore of the ancient world. the memori 
of the past did not forsak me; but the melancholi which it generated, 
and the tear with which it fill my eyes, were not unprofitable. My 
curios wa revived, and I contemplated, with ardour, the spectacl of 
live manner and the monument of past ages. 

In proport as my heart wa reinstat in the possess of it 
ancient tranquillity, the sentiment which I had cherish with regard to 
pleyel returned. In a short time he wa unit to the saxon woman, 
and made hi resid in the neighbourhood of boston. I wa glad that 
circumst would not permit an interview to take place between us. I 
could not desir their misery; but I reap no pleasur from reflect 
on their happiness. time, and the exert of my fortitude, cure me, 
in some degree, of thi folly. I continu to love him, but my passion 
wa disguis to myself; I consid it mere as a more tender speci 
of friendship, and cherish it without compunction. 

through my uncle' exert a meet wa brought about between carwin 
and pleyel, and explan took place which restor me at onc to 
the good opinion of the latter. though separ so wide our 
correspond wa punctual and frequent, and pave the way for that 
union which can onli end with the death of one of us. 

In my letter to him I made no secret of my former sentiments. thi 
wa a theme on which I could talk without painful, though not without 
delic emotions. that knowledg which I should never have impart to 
a lover, I felt littl scrupl to commun to a friend. 

A year and an half elaps when theresa wa snatch from him by death, 
in the hour in which she gave him the first pledg of their mutual 
affection. thi event wa born by him with hi customari fortitude. It 
induc him, however, to make a chang in hi plans. He dispos of hi 
properti in america, and join my uncl and me, who had termin 
the wander of two year at montpellier, which will henceforth, I 
believe, be our perman abode. 

If you reflect upon that entir confid which had subsist from our 
infanc between pleyel and myself; on the passion that I had contracted, 
and which wa mere smother for a time; and on the esteem which wa 
mutual, you will not, perhaps, be surpriz that the renov of our 
intercours should give birth to that union which at present subsists. 
when the period had elaps necessari to weaken the remembr of 
theresa, to whom he had been bound by tie more of honor than of love, 
he tender hi affect to me. I need not add that the tender wa 
eagerli accepted. 

perhap you are somewhat interest in the fate of carwin. He saw, 
when too late, the danger of imposture. So much affect wa he by the 
catastroph to which he wa a witness, that he laid asid all regard to 
hi own safety. He sought my uncle, and confid to him the tale which 
he had just relat to me. He found a more imparti and indulg 
auditor in mr. cambridge, who imput to maniac illus the conduct 
of wieland, though he conceiv the previou and unseen agenc of 
carwin, to have indirectli but power predispos to thi deplor 
pervers of mind. 

It wa easi for carwin to elud the persecut of ludloe. It wa 
mere requisit to hide himself in a remot district of pennsylvania. 
this, when he part from us, he determin to do. He is now probabl 
engag in the harmless pursuit of agriculture, and may come to think, 
without insupport remorse, on the evil to which hi fatal talent 
have given birth. the innoc and use of hi futur life may, 
in some degree, aton for the miseri so rashli or so thoughtlessli 
inflicted. 

more urgent consider hinder me from mentioning, in the cours of 
my former mourn recital, ani particular respect the unfortun 
father of louisa conway. that man sure wa reserv to be a monument 
of caprici fortune. hi southern journi be finished, he return 
to philadelphia. befor he reach the citi he left the highway, and 
alight at my brother' door. contrari to hi expectation, no one came 
forth to welcom him, or hail hi approach. He attempt to enter the 
house, but bolt doors, bar windows, and a silenc broken onli by 
unansw calls, shew him that the mansion wa deserted. 

He proceed thenc to my habitation, which he found, in like manner, 
gloomi and tenantless. hi surpriz may be easili conceived. the rustic 
who occupi the hut told him an imperfect and incred tale. He 
hast to the city, and extort from mrs. baynton a full disclosur of 
late disasters. 

He wa inur to adversity, and recovered, after no long time, from 
the shock produc by thi disappoint of hi darl scheme. our 
intercours did not termin with hi departur from america. We have 
sinc met with him in france, and light ha at length been thrown upon 
the motiv which occas the disappear of hi wife, in the 
manner which I formerli relat to you. 

I have dwelt upon the ardour of their conjug attachment, and mention 
that no suspicion had ever glanc upon her purity. this, though 
the belief wa long cherished, recent discoveri have shewn to be 
questionable. No doubt her integr would have surviv to the present 
moment, if an extraordinari fate had not befallen her. 

major stuart had been engaged, while in germany, in a contest of 
honor with an aid de camp of the marqui of granby. hi adversari had 
propag a rumour injuri to hi character. A challeng wa sent; 
a meet ensued; and stuart wound and disarm the calumniator. the 
offenc wa aton for, and hi life secur by suitabl concessions. 

maxwell, that wa hi name, shortli after, in consequ of succeed 
to a rich inheritance, sold hi commiss and return to london. hi 
fortun wa speedili augment by an opul marriage. interest wa hi 
sole induc to thi marriage, though the ladi had been sway by a 
credul affection. the true state of hi heart wa quickli discovered, 
and a separation, by mutual consent, took place. the ladi withdrew to 
an estat in a distant county, and maxwel continu to consum hi time 
and fortun in the dissip of the capital. 

maxwell, though deceit and sensual, possess great forc of mind and 
speciou accomplishments. He contriv to mislead the gener mind of 
stuart, and to regain the esteem which hi misconduct, for a time, had 
forfeited. He wa recommend by her husband to the confid of mrs. 
stuart. maxwel wa stimul by revenge, and by a lawless passion, to 
convert thi confid into a sourc of guilt. 

the educ and capac of thi woman, the worth of her husband, the 
pledg of their allianc which time had produced, her matur in 
age and knowledg of the world--al combin to render thi attempt 
hopeless. maxwell, however, wa not easili discouraged. the most perfect 
being, he believed, must owe hi exempt from vice to the absenc of 
temptation. the impuls of love are so subtile, and the influenc of 
fals reasoning, when enforc by eloqu and passion, so unbounded, 
that no human virtu is secur from degeneracy. all art be tried, 
everi temptat be summon to hi aid, dissimul be carri 
to it utmost bound, maxwell, at length, nearli accomplish hi 
purpose. the lady' affect were withdrawn from her husband and 
transfer to him. she could not, as yet, be reconcil to dishonor. 
all effort to induc her to elop with him were ineffectual. she 
permit herself to love, and to avow her love; but at thi limit she 
stopped, and wa immoveable. 

henc thi revolut in her sentiment wa product onli of despair. 
her rectitud of principl preserv her from actual guilt, but could 
not restor to her her ancient affection, or save her from be the 
prey of remors and impractic wishes. her husband' absenc 
produc a state of suspense. this, however, approach to a period, 
and she receiv tide of hi intend return. maxwell, be likewis 
appriz of thi event, and have made a last and unsuccess effort 
to conquer her reluct to accompani him in a journey to italy, 
whither he pretend an invinc necess of going, left her to 
pursu the measur which despair might suggest. At the same time she 
receiv a letter from the wife of maxwell, unveil the true charact 
of thi man, and reveal fact which the artific of her seduc 
had hitherto conceal from her. mrs. maxwel had been prompt to thi 
disclosur by a knowledg of her husband' practices, with which hi own 
impetuos had made her acquainted. 

thi discovery, join to the delicaci of her scrupl and the anguish 
of remorse, induc her to abscond. thi scheme wa adopt in haste, 
but effect with consumm prudence. she fled, on the eve of her 
husband' arrival, in the disguis of a boy, and embark at falmouth in 
a packet bound for america. 

the histori of her disastr intercours with maxwell, the motiv 
induc her to forsak her country, and the measur she had taken 
to effect her design, were relat to mrs. maxwell, in repli to her 
communication. between these women an ancient intimaci and consider 
similitud of charact subsisted. thi disclosur wa accompani with 
solemn injunct of secrecy, and these injunct were, for a long 
time, faith observed. 

mrs. maxwell' abod wa situat on the bank of the wey. stuart wa 
her kinsman; their youth had been spent together; and maxwel wa in 
some degre indebt to the man whom he betrayed, for hi allianc with 
thi unfortun lady. her esteem for the charact of stuart had never 
been diminished. A meet between them wa occas by a tour which 
the latter had undertaken, in the year after hi return from america, 
to wale and the western counties. thi interview produc pleasur and 
regret in each. their own transact natur becam the topic of 
their conversation; and the untim fate of hi wife and daughter were 
relat by the guest. 

mrs. maxwell' regard for her friend, as well as for the safeti of her 
husband, persuad her to concealment; but the former be dead, 
and the latter be out of the kingdom, she ventur to produc mrs. 
stuart' letter, and to commun her own knowledg of the treacheri 
of maxwell. she had previous extort from her guest a promis not to 
pursu ani scheme of vengeance; but thi promis wa made while ignor 
of the full extent of maxwell' depravity, and hi passion refus to 
adher to it. 

At thi time my uncl and I resid at avignon. among the english 
resid there, and with whom we maintain a social intercourse, wa 
maxwell. thi man' talent and address render him a favorit both 
with my uncl and myself. He had even tender me hi hand in marriage; 
but thi be refused, he had sought and obtain permiss to 
continu with us the intercours of friendship. sinc a legal marriag 
wa impossible, no doubt, hi view were flagitious. whether he had 
relinquish these view I wa unabl to judge. 

He wa one in a larg circl at a villa in the environs, to which I had 
likewis been invited, when stuart abruptli enter the apartment. 
He wa recogn with genuin satisfact by me, and with seem 
pleasur by maxwell. In a short time, some affair of moment be 
pleaded, which requir an immedi and exclus interview, maxwel 
and he withdrew together. stuart and my uncl had been known to each 
other in the german army; and the purpos contempl by the former in 
thi long and hasti journey, wa confid to hi old friend. 

A defianc wa given and received, and the bank of a rivulet, about 
a leagu from the city, wa select as the scene of thi contest. My 
uncle, have exert himself in vain to prevent an hostil meeting, 
consent to attend them as a surgeon.--next morning, at sun-rise, wa 
the time chosen. 

I return earli in the even to my lodgings. preliminari be 
settl between the combatants, stuart had consent to spend the 
even with us, and did not retir till late. On the way to hi hotel 
he wa expos to no molestation, but just as he step within the 
portico, a swarthi and malign figur start from behind a column. 
and plung a stiletto into hi body. 

the author of thi treason could not certainli be discovered; but the 
detail commun by stuart, respect the histori of maxwell, 
natur point him out as an object of suspicion. No one express 
more concern, on account of thi disaster, than he; and he pretend 
an ardent zeal to vindic hi charact from the aspers that were 
cast upon it. thenceforth, however, I deni myself to hi visits; and 
shortli after he disappear from thi scene. 

few possess more estim qualities, and a better titl to happi 
and the tranquil honor of long life, than the mother and father of 
louisa conway: yet they were cut off in the bloom of their days; and 
their destini wa thu accomplish by the same hand. maxwel wa the 
instrument of their destruction, though the instrument wa appli to 
thi end in so differ a manner. 

I leav you to moral on thi tale. that virtu should becom the 
victim of treacheri is, no doubt, a mourn consideration; but it will 
not escap your notice, that the evil of which carwin and maxwel were 
the authors, owe their exist to the error of the sufferers. all 
effort would have been ineffectu to subvert the happi or shorten 
the exist of the stuarts, if their own frailti had not second 
these efforts. If the ladi had crush her disastr passion in the 
bud, and driven the seduc from her presence, when the tendenc of 
hi artific wa seen; if stuart had not admit the spirit of absurd 
revenge, we should not have had to deplor thi catastrophe. If wieland 
had frame juster notion of moral duty, and of the divin attributes; 
or if I had been gift with ordinari equanim or foresight, the 
double-tongu deceiv would have been baffl and repelled. 





end of the project gutenberg ebook of wieland; or the transformation, by 
charl brockden brown 

*** end OF thi project gutenberg ebook wieland; OR the transform *** 

***** thi file should be name 792.txt or 792.zip ***** 
thi and all associ file of variou format will be found in: 
http://www.gutenberg.org/7/9/792/ 



updat edit will replac the previou one--th old edit 
will be renamed. 

creat the work from public domain print edit mean that no 
one own a unit state copyright in these works, so the foundat 
(and you!) can copi and distribut it in the unit state without 
permiss and without pay copyright royalties. special rules, 
set forth in the gener term of use part of thi license, appli to 
copi and distribut project gutenberg-tm electron work to 
protect the project gutenberg-tm concept and trademark. project 
gutenberg is a regist trademark, and may not be use if you 
charg for the ebooks, unless you receiv specif permission. If you 
do not charg anyth for copi of thi ebook, compli with the 
rule is veri easy. you may use thi ebook for nearli ani purpos 
such as creation of deriv works, reports, perform and 
research. they may be modifi and print and given away--y may do 
practic anyth with public domain ebooks. redistribut is 
subject to the trademark license, especi commerci 
redistribution. 



*** start: full licens *** 

the full project gutenberg licens 
pleas read thi befor you distribut OR use thi work 

To protect the project gutenberg-tm mission of promot the free 
distribut of electron works, by use or distribut thi work 
(or ani other work associ in ani way with the phrase "project 
gutenberg"), you agre to compli with all the term of the full project 
gutenberg-tm licens (avail with thi file or onlin at 
http://gutenberg.org/license). 


section 1. gener term of use and redistribut project gutenberg-tm 
electron work 

1.a. By read or use ani part of thi project gutenberg-tm 
electron work, you indic that you have read, understand, agre to 
and accept all the term of thi licens and intellectu properti 
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agre to abid by all 
the term of thi agreement, you must ceas use and return or destroy 
all copi of project gutenberg-tm electron work in your possession. 
If you paid a fee for obtain a copi of or access to a project 
gutenberg-tm electron work and you do not agre to be bound by the 
term of thi agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or 
entiti to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.e.8. 

1.b. "project gutenberg" is a regist trademark. It may onli be 
use on or associ in ani way with an electron work by peopl who 
agre to be bound by the term of thi agreement. there are a few 
thing that you can do with most project gutenberg-tm electron work 
even without compli with the full term of thi agreement. see 
paragraph 1.c below. there are a lot of thing you can do with project 
gutenberg-tm electron work if you follow the term of thi agreement 
and help preserv free futur access to project gutenberg-tm electron 
works. see paragraph 1.e below. 

1.c. the project gutenberg literari archiv foundat ("the foundation" 
or pglaf), own a compil copyright in the collect of project 
gutenberg-tm electron works. nearli all the individu work in the 
collect are in the public domain in the unit states. If an 
individu work is in the public domain in the unit state and you are 
locat in the unit states, we do not claim a right to prevent you from 
copying, distributing, performing, display or creat deriv 
work base on the work as long as all refer to project gutenberg 
are removed. Of course, we hope that you will support the project 
gutenberg-tm mission of promot free access to electron work by 
freeli share project gutenberg-tm work in complianc with the term of 
thi agreement for keep the project gutenberg-tm name associ with 
the work. you can easili compli with the term of thi agreement by 
keep thi work in the same format with it attach full project 
gutenberg-tm licens when you share it without charg with others. 

1.d. the copyright law of the place where you are locat also govern 
what you can do with thi work. copyright law in most countri are in 
a constant state of change. If you are outsid the unit states, check 
the law of your countri in addit to the term of thi agreement 
befor downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distribut or 
creat deriv work base on thi work or ani other project 
gutenberg-tm work. the foundat make no represent concern 
the copyright statu of ani work in ani countri outsid the unit 
states. 

1.e. unless you have remov all refer to project gutenberg: 

1.e.1. the follow sentence, with activ link to, or other immedi 
access to, the full project gutenberg-tm licens must appear promin 
whenev ani copi of a project gutenberg-tm work (ani work on which the 
phrase "project gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "project 
gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed, 
copi or distributed: 

thi ebook is for the use of anyon anywher at no cost and with 
almost no restrict whatsoever. you may copi it, give it away or 
re-us it under the term of the project gutenberg licens includ 
with thi ebook or onlin at www.gutenberg.org 

1.e.2. If an individu project gutenberg-tm electron work is deriv 
from the public domain (doe not contain a notic indic that it is 
post with permiss of the copyright holder), the work can be copi 
and distribut to anyon in the unit state without pay ani fee 
or charges. If you are redistribut or provid access to a work 
with the phrase "project gutenberg" associ with or appear on the 
work, you must compli either with the requir of paragraph 1.e.1 
through 1.e.7 or obtain permiss for the use of the work and the 
project gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraph 1.e.8 or 
1.e.9. 

1.e.3. If an individu project gutenberg-tm electron work is post 
with the permiss of the copyright holder, your use and distribut 
must compli with both paragraph 1.e.1 through 1.e.7 and ani addit 
term impos by the copyright holder. addit term will be link 
to the project gutenberg-tm licens for all work post with the 
permiss of the copyright holder found at the begin of thi work. 

1.e.4. Do not unlink or detach or remov the full project gutenberg-tm 
licens term from thi work, or ani file contain a part of thi 
work or ani other work associ with project gutenberg-tm. 

1.e.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribut or redistribut thi 
electron work, or ani part of thi electron work, without 
promin display the sentenc set forth in paragraph 1.e.1 with 
activ link or immedi access to the full term of the project 
gutenberg-tm license. 

1.e.6. you may convert to and distribut thi work in ani binary, 
compressed, mark up, nonproprietari or proprietari form, includ ani 
word process or hypertext form. however, if you provid access to or 
distribut copi of a project gutenberg-tm work in a format other than 
"plain vanilla ascii" or other format use in the offici version 
post on the offici project gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org), 
you must, at no addit cost, fee or expens to the user, provid a 
copy, a mean of export a copy, or a mean of obtain a copi upon 
request, of the work in it origin "plain vanilla ascii" or other 
form. ani altern format must includ the full project gutenberg-tm 
licens as specifi in paragraph 1.e.1. 

1.e.7. Do not charg a fee for access to, viewing, displaying, 
performing, copi or distribut ani project gutenberg-tm work 
unless you compli with paragraph 1.e.8 or 1.e.9. 

1.e.8. you may charg a reason fee for copi of or provid 
access to or distribut project gutenberg-tm electron work provid 
that 

- you pay a royalti fee of 20% of the gross profit you deriv from 
the use of project gutenberg-tm work calcul use the method 
you alreadi use to calcul your applic taxes. the fee is 
owe to the owner of the project gutenberg-tm trademark, but he 
ha agre to donat royalti under thi paragraph to the 
project gutenberg literari archiv foundation. royalti payment 
must be paid within 60 day follow each date on which you 
prepar (or are legal requir to prepare) your period tax 
returns. royalti payment should be clearli mark as such and 
sent to the project gutenberg literari archiv foundat at the 
address specifi in section 4, "inform about donat to 
the project gutenberg literari archiv foundation." 

- you provid a full refund of ani money paid by a user who notifi 
you in write (or by e-mail) within 30 day of receipt that s/he 
doe not agre to the term of the full project gutenberg-tm 
license. you must requir such a user to return or 
destroy all copi of the work possess in a physic medium 
and discontinu all use of and all access to other copi of 
project gutenberg-tm works. 

- you provide, in accord with paragraph 1.f.3, a full refund of ani 
money paid for a work or a replac copy, if a defect in the 
electron work is discov and report to you within 90 day 
of receipt of the work. 

- you compli with all other term of thi agreement for free 
distribut of project gutenberg-tm works. 

1.e.9. If you wish to charg a fee or distribut a project gutenberg-tm 
electron work or group of work on differ term than are set 
forth in thi agreement, you must obtain permiss in write from 
both the project gutenberg literari archiv foundat and michael 
hart, the owner of the project gutenberg-tm trademark. contact the 
foundat as set forth in section 3 below. 

1.f. 

1.f.1. project gutenberg volunt and employe expend consider 
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcrib and proofread 
public domain work in creat the project gutenberg-tm 
collection. despit these efforts, project gutenberg-tm electron 
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain 
"defects," such as, but not limit to, incomplete, inaccur or 
corrupt data, transcript errors, a copyright or other intellectu 
properti infringement, a defect or damag disk or other medium, a 
comput virus, or comput code that damag or cannot be read by 
your equipment. 

1.f.2. limit warranty, disclaim OF damag - except for the "right 
of replac or refund" describ in paragraph 1.f.3, the project 
gutenberg literari archiv foundation, the owner of the project 
gutenberg-tm trademark, and ani other parti distribut a project 
gutenberg-tm electron work under thi agreement, disclaim all 
liabil to you for damages, cost and expenses, includ legal 
fees. you agre that you have NO remedi for negligence, strict 
liability, breach OF warranti OR breach OF contract except those 
provid IN paragraph f3. you agre that the foundation, the 
trademark owner, and ani distributor under thi agreement will not BE 
liabl TO you for actual, direct, indirect, consequential, punit OR 
incident damag even IF you give notic OF the possibl OF such 
damage. 

1.f.3. limit right OF replac OR refund - If you discov a 
defect in thi electron work within 90 day of receiv it, you can 
receiv a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by send a 
written explan to the person you receiv the work from. If you 
receiv the work on a physic medium, you must return the medium with 
your written explanation. the person or entiti that provid you with 
the defect work may elect to provid a replac copi in lieu of a 
refund. If you receiv the work electronically, the person or entiti 
provid it to you may choos to give you a second opportun to 
receiv the work electron in lieu of a refund. If the second copi 
is also defective, you may demand a refund in write without further 
opportun to fix the problem. 

1.f.4. except for the limit right of replac or refund set forth 
in paragraph 1.f.3, thi work is provid to you 'as-is' with NO other 
warranti OF ani kind, express OR implied, includ but not limit TO 
warranti OF merchant OR fit for ani purpose. 

1.f.5. some state do not allow disclaim of certain impli 
warranti or the exclus or limit of certain type of damages. 
If ani disclaim or limit set forth in thi agreement violat the 
law of the state applic to thi agreement, the agreement shall be 
interpret to make the maximum disclaim or limit permit by 
the applic state law. the invalid or unenforc of ani 
provis of thi agreement shall not void the remain provisions. 

1.f.6. indemn - you agre to indemnifi and hold the foundation, the 
trademark owner, ani agent or employe of the foundation, anyon 
provid copi of project gutenberg-tm electron work in accord 
with thi agreement, and ani volunt associ with the production, 
promot and distribut of project gutenberg-tm electron works, 
harmless from all liability, cost and expenses, includ legal fees, 
that aris directli or indirectli from ani of the follow which you do 
or caus to occur: (a) distribut of thi or ani project gutenberg-tm 
work, (b) alteration, modification, or addit or delet to ani 
project gutenberg-tm work, and (c) ani defect you cause. 


section 2. inform about the mission of project gutenberg-tm 

project gutenberg-tm is synonym with the free distribut of 
electron work in format readabl by the widest varieti of comput 
includ obsolete, old, middle-ag and new computers. It exist 
becaus of the effort of hundr of volunt and donat from 
peopl in all walk of life. 

volunt and financi support to provid volunt with the 
assist they need, is critic to reach project gutenberg-tm' 
goal and ensur that the project gutenberg-tm collect will 
remain freeli avail for gener to come. In 2001, the project 
gutenberg literari archiv foundat wa creat to provid a secur 
and perman futur for project gutenberg-tm and futur generations. 
To learn more about the project gutenberg literari archiv foundat 
and how your effort and donat can help, see section 3 and 4 
and the foundat web page at http://www.pglaf.org. 


section 3. inform about the project gutenberg literari archiv 
foundat 

the project gutenberg literari archiv foundat is a non profit 
501(c)(3) educ corpor organ under the law of the 
state of mississippi and grant tax exempt statu by the intern 
revenu service. the foundation' ein or feder tax identif 
number is 64-6221541. it 501(c)(3) letter is post at 
http://pglaf.org/fundraising. contribut to the project gutenberg 
literari archiv foundat are tax deduct to the full extent 
permit by u.s. feder law and your state' laws. 

the foundation' princip offic is locat at 4557 melan dr. S. 
fairbanks, ak, 99712., but it volunt and employe are scatter 
throughout numer locations. it busi offic is locat at 
809 north 1500 west, salt lake city, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email 
business@pglaf.org. email contact link and up to date contact 
inform can be found at the foundation' web site and offici 
page at http://pglaf.org 

for addit contact information: 
dr. gregori B. newbi 
chief execut and director 
gbnewby@pglaf.org 


section 4. inform about donat to the project gutenberg 
literari archiv foundat 

project gutenberg-tm depend upon and cannot surviv without wide 
spread public support and donat to carri out it mission of 
increas the number of public domain and licens work that can be 
freeli distribut in machin readabl form access by the widest 
array of equip includ outdat equipment. mani small donat 
($1 to $5,000) are particularli import to maintain tax exempt 
statu with the irs. 

the foundat is commit to compli with the law regul 
chariti and charit donat in all 50 state of the unit 
states. complianc requir are not uniform and it take a 
consider effort, much paperwork and mani fee to meet and keep up 
with these requirements. We do not solicit donat in locat 
where we have not receiv written confirm of compliance. To 
send donat or determin the statu of complianc for ani 
particular state visit http://pglaf.org 

while we cannot and do not solicit contribut from state where we 
have not met the solicit requirements, we know of no prohibit 
against accept unsolicit donat from donor in such state who 
approach us with offer to donate. 

intern donat are grate accepted, but we cannot make 
ani statement concern tax treatment of donat receiv from 
outsid the unit states. u.s. law alon swamp our small staff. 

pleas check the project gutenberg web page for current donat 
method and addresses. donat are accept in a number of other 
way includ checks, onlin payment and credit card donations. 
To donate, pleas visit: http://pglaf.org/don 


section 5. gener inform about project gutenberg-tm electron 
works. 

professor michael S. hart is the origin of the project gutenberg-tm 
concept of a librari of electron work that could be freeli share 
with anyone. for thirti years, he produc and distribut project 
gutenberg-tm ebook with onli a loos network of volunt support. 


project gutenberg-tm ebook are often creat from sever print 
editions, all of which are confirm as public domain in the u.s. 
unless a copyright notic is included. thus, we do not necessarili 
keep ebook in complianc with ani particular paper edition. 


most peopl start at our web site which ha the main PG search facility: 

http://www.gutenberg.org 

thi web site includ inform about project gutenberg-tm, 
includ how to make donat to the project gutenberg literari 
archiv foundation, how to help produc our new ebooks, and how to 
subscrib to our email newslett to hear about new ebooks. 
