the project gutenberg ebook of life blood, by thoma hoover 

thi ebook is for the use of anyon anywher at no cost and with 
almost no restrict whatsoever. you may copi it, give it away or 
re-us it under the term of the project gutenberg licens includ 
with thi ebook or onlin at www.gutenberg.org 

** thi is a copyright project gutenberg ebook, detail below ** 
** pleas follow the copyright guidelin in thi file. ** 

title: life blood 

author: thoma hoover 

releas date: novemb 14, 2010 [ebook #34318] 

language: english 


*** start OF thi project gutenberg ebook life blood *** 




produc by Al hain 









============================================================== 

thi work is licens under a 

creativ common attribut 3.0 unport license, 

http://creativecommons.org/ 

============================================================== 






life blood 

It lie hidden deep in the mist-shroud rain forest of central america. 

A place where a brilliant doctor fulfil dream for some--and creat 
chill nightmar for others. 

now, filmmak morgan jame is about to journey straight into the heart 
of a dark conspiracy. 

where a bizarr human experi come at a terribl price, and where 
she may be the next to pay with her . . . life blood 





book BY thoma hoover 



nonfict 

zen cultur 

the zen experi 



fiction 

the moghul 

caribbe 

wall street _samurai_ 

(the _samurai_ strategy) 

project daedalu 

project cyclop 

life blood 

syndrom 



all free as e-book at 

www.thomashoover.info 






pinnacl book are publish by 

kensington publish corp. 850 third avenu new york, NY 10022 

copyright © 2000 by thoma hoover 

all right reserved. 

first printing: december, 2000 10 987654321 

print in the unit state of america 

isbn: 0-7860-1313-3 



key words: 

thoma hoover (author) 

life blood (novel: medic thriller) 

In vitro, independ film, adoption, fertility, human eggs, guatemala, 
peten, maya, mayan pyramid, vision serpent, jaguar, baalum, mayan 
mothers, movi making, copal 






life blood 




chapter one 


new york, new york. A bliss spring morn beckoned, cloudless and 
blue and pure. I wa drive my high-mileag toyota down seventh 
avenue, head for the locat shoot that wa suppos to wind up 
princip photographi for my first featur film, _babi love_. It wa 
about the pain and joy of adoption. I guess direct your first 
featur is someth like give birth to your first child, but that 
get us way, way ahead of the story. 

My name, by the way, is morgan smyth james, after two grandmothers, and 
i'm thirty-eight and singl and strive to be etern optimistic. that 
morning, however, in spite of everyth else, I wa miss steve 
terribl and feel like i'd screw up essenti compon of my 
life. 

To tri for some perspective, let me say i'd alway plan to have a 
normal, love family. really. find an emot present soul mate 
who care about thing I care about--okay, slim and smart and 
spectacular in bed wouldn't be a minus--get marri on a lawn with lot 
of white rose some sunni june afternoon, work one or even two perfect 
kid into our fulfilling, give lives. but somehow i'd manag to have 
none of that. i'd mess up at everi turn. 

In realiti I had nobodi to blame but myself. eighteen year ago, just 
out of college, I turn down two realli nice guys. My bodi wa fertil 
and hormone-driven--wa it ever!--but grad school loom and my 
greatest fear (instead of, as now, my fondest hope) wa get 
"trapped" into motherhood. also, I had the youth delus that life 
wa forever. 

there was, in truth, one simpatico young director I met at nyu film 
school whom I would have marri in a minute, but after jason won my 
heart he dump me for hi undergradu sweetheart who had skill 
gotten herself knock up dure hi christma break. 

which wa when I first develop my fallback strategi for cope with 
bad news. after mope around in sweat for two days, cut class and 
hide in a reviv hous show a goddard retrospective, not 
understand half the french and too bleary-ey to read the 
subtitles, I decid to build a defens system. from that day on, i'd 
put all heartbreak in a special box, nail down the lid, and act as 
though it wasn't there. It work then and it still works, more or 
less, now. peopl sometim accus me of live in select denial 
(they'r right), but it make me one heck of a survivor. 

and someth else. I decid then and there to focu my life: i'd 
concentr on learn to make movi and let the famili part just 
play out naturally. I had the idea that wherea men' affect 
couldn't be controlled, a career could. even then I realiz it wa 
onli a partial truth, but I decid to go with it anyway. 

which bring us down to three year back. and a funni thing wa 
happening. almost without realiz it, i'd start linger in store 
to look at littl pink jumpers, begun gaze into the babi carriag 
that suddenli seem to be sprout everywhere. the phrase "mi baby" 
becam the most power one I could imagine, made my throat swell till 
i'd half choke. 

At which precis time, like a _deu ex machina_, enter steve abrams, 
the man who gave me hope. He came along just as I wa notic that 
infinit stream of wonder guy had dwindl down to relationship 
dropouts, men with distant eye and former wive in other states. We 
discov each other at the reopen oloffson hotel in haiti, where I 
wa shoot a documentari about voodoo and he wa photograph that 
country' ragged, plucki children for nation geographic. No 
ex-spouses, no need for psychic pampering. okay, he wasn't go to win 
a mr. univers contest ani time soon; he had a coupl of extra pound 
that, actually, I kind of liked. but he wa my age, had great brown 
eyes, sandi hair thin onli just a bit. No greek god but definit 
a man. He could tune a jeep carburetor with hi eye close or fix a 
cranki hotel lock, then recit byron (sort of) and proceed to snare the 
perfect chilean red for crawfish _etouffee_ (yes!). but I knew I love 
him when I realiz it wa more than ani of that. I felt as if i'd 
found the other half of myself. just one glanc across the tabl and we 
each knew what the other wa thinking, feeling. we'd laugh at the same 
instant, then as though on cue, half cri togeth over the miseri of 
that wretch island. sometim it wa almost eerie. and as for 
lovemaking, let me just say steve didn't need a how-to manual. We were 
made for each other. 

mayb it' un-pc to mention it, but I also felt safe around him. and I 
think he felt the same. We like that feeling. Us fend off the world. 

when we got back to new york, we had to see each other everi day. We 
still had separ apartments--thank to the new york real-est 
squeeze--but we were scout in our spare time for an afford loft 
in lower manhattan that could accommod steve' darkroom, my office, 
and--yes--a baby. We evolv into parents-to-be, price babi 
carriages. who could have predict it? the joy of share a need. It 
wa a total high. 

befor long we decid to stop wait for the perfect 

space. we'd start on the babi anyway, our first joint project--which, 
we believed, would onli be the first of many. 

but noth happened. over a year and still nothing. 

that wa when life began to feel like a cruel bait-and-switch. when you 
aren't ready, you can produc a babi in a momentari absence-of-mind, 
wherea onc you'r final an adult, accomplished, lots-to-off 
woman, readi to be the mother you wish you'd had, your bodi ha close 
down your baby-mak equip like an unus rust belt factory. 
fertil ha calculatingli abandon you for the sun belt of youth. 

"well," dr. hannah klein, my long-tim ob/gyn, declared, "our test all 
indic you'r both fertile, so just keep trying, under optimum 
conditions." 

optimum conditions. there follow almost a year of "optimum 
conditions." Do it upsid down; wait and have a cold shower while I 
take my temperature; no, not that way, not tonight. My mucu is 
thicker: quick! eventu we both began feel like laboratori rats. 
our once-incred love life drift into someth onli a boot-camp 
sergeant with nazi lean could be turn on by. 

I think that' what final caus steve to go over the edge. three 
month ago--a friday morn I shall never forget--h step out of my 
shower, swath himself in a white towel, and announc he wa go to 
central america to do a book. He need time to think. the move, he 
explained, wasn't about us. He realli want to spend a year down there 
with hi nikon, captur the region' tent process of 
democrat transition. besides, he wa begin to think we'd both 
gone a littl mental about the baby. 

out came that special box of heartbreak again. I consol myself we 
were just have a seventh-in stretch, but the wisdom in that box 
told me i'd somehow blown it. the babi we hadn't creat had becom a 
specter hover in the ether between us, ever a remind of failure. 

As a part gesture, the never-say-di long shot, he left a "deposit" 
with dr. klein--for her liquid-nitrogen womb-in-waiting--enough for two 
final intrauterin inseminations. later on today I wa go to see her 
and find out if our last and final attempt had stuck. but noth about 
my cycl wa give me ani hope. 

In the meantime, though, I had a movi to finish. We were shoot an 
interview at a five-stori condominium build in greenwich villag 
belong to a woman name carli grove, who'd recent adopted. her 
stori wa intriguing, but now--with my own hope of ever have a babi 
down to two out in the bottom of the ninth--well, now I had more than 
one reason for want to meet her. . . . 

when I arrived, I luck into a park space right in front. our 
secur guy, lou crenshaw, wa off today get some citi paperwork 
sort out, but my crew wa alreadi upstairs--a director I get to 
arriv at a decent hour, though later on I also get to do lone 
postproduct work till midnight--leav our three van 
double-parked, with a new york citi film board permit promin 
display insid each windshield. the building, formerli a hertz 
park garage, wa near the end of barrow street, face the hudson 
river, and wa fill with artist and entrepreneurs. 

the truth was, I want to get the interview on film as soon as 
possible. I wa more than a littl worri carli might decid to get 
cold feet and back out. she'd start to hedg when I had one last 
confirm chat with her last night, someth about a "no-disclosure" 
agreement she now rememb signing. thi had to be a one-take, 
all-or-noth shoot. 

which wa whi i'd sent down the full gang thi morning, not just the 
"key" personnel as i'd initi planned. lead my (motley) crew wa 
the director of photography, first cameraman roger drexel, a grizzl 
veteran with a ponytail who'd been with my producer, david roth and hi 
applecor productions, from back when he did beach movi and splatter 
films. He work with the product manager, erica cole, our lipstick 
lesbian, who coordin crew schedules. the second camera wa handl 
by greer seiber, recent of nyu film school, who wa so happi to have 
a job, ani job, she act as though david' previou string of 
low-budget, b-flick epic were remak of _gone with the wind_. 

scott ventri, anoth applecor old-timer, wa key grip, the guy who 
got the gear on and off the vans, set it up, and sign off on safeti 
regs. today he also wa respons for black out window and 
set up lights. the chief electrician, gaffer, wa ralph cafiero, 
who'd come down the previou day and temporarili hot-wir the circuit 
breaker in the apart to make sure there wa enough amperage. He and 
hi light "crew," anoth bright-ey (and cheap) nyu grad name 
paul nulty, had arriv thi morn ahead of everybodi els to 
pre-light the "set," a northeast corner of the apartment. 

i'm alway a littl hyper about sound, so i'd ask toni wills, who 
handl recording, to also come down the previou day and record the 
"tone" of the live room, the sound when there is no sound, in order 
to have it avail for editing. today he'd run the boom mike and be 
assist by sherri moran, hi latest girlfriend, who wa 
mixer/recordist. for carly' makeup and hair, I had arlen morris, an 
old friend from all the way back to my earli day as an AD on the 
soaps. . . . 

I rang carly' bell and she buzz me right up. 

she doubtless had a closet full of donna karan suits, but she came to 
the door in pre-fad jean and a stripe sweater. 

A success public agent, she wa petite, with dark hair and eye 
and an obviou don't-bug-m take on life. 

"come on in. My nanny' here to help keep kevin out of the way." she 
wa sound like she'd gotten her old spunk back, or so it seem at 
first. "i'v complet clear the live room." 

I look around the place, now a vision of setup pandemonium. "you'r 
sure thi is all right?" 

"well . . ." she wa bite at her lip. "mayb we ought to talk first, 
okay? but come on in. i'll probabl do it. mayb I just need a good 
reason to. . . ." 

As her voic trail off, I found myself mine my brain for a sale 
point. finally, out of the blue, I settl on one. "becaus you'r 
total crazy?" 

she laugh out loud. "not a bad start. I live in total madness. it' 
the definit of my life." 

I laugh too and look around. No kidding. her loft apart wa a 
wild mixtur of stair and galleri and levels--unconvent in 
everi way. also, it had a lot of in-your-fac decor, outrag 
posters, and african fertil masks, sign of a wonderful, irrever 
personality. then too, stuf anim and toy were strewn all over. 

"I can't realli afford the rent," she declared, see me survey the 
place, "but I need the space for kevin. i'v just join bloomingdale' 
anonymous. twelv step to shred your charg plates." 

her nanny, a jehovah' wit from jamaica name marci (who remind 
me of a cuddli voodoo doll, complet with cornrows), wa bring 
carly' littl boy kevin down from hi bath in the upstair bathroom. 

He wa definit adopted, sandy-hair and peachy, noth like 
carly' dark, sever strand and mediterranean skin. when marci put him 
down, he tri to walk, and I felt my envi ratchet upward a notch. he'd 
just start take tent steps, at eleven month old, and there 
wa still a frankenstein qualiti as he strode stiff-legged, arm out 
for balance. 

I walk over, pick him up, and gave him a kiss. He look like a 
scandinavian travel poster, a cherub vision, and I felt a great void 
grow where my heart had been. then marci reach out and pri him 
from me. I hate to let him go so much I almost pull him back. 

"you'r so lucky," I said to carly, feel a surg of yearning. "he' 
great." 

"you know," she said, "i'v been think about that 'no disclosure' 
thing children of light made me sign. that' their name, by the way. 
like a vow of silenc about them. they seem pretti seriou about it." 

dear god, I thought, don't let her chicken out. don't, don't. 

"so, we won't mention them. just never use their name." 

she stood a minute, mute, and then her eye grew determined. "no, i'v 
got a better idea. I like you. and I think more singl women ought to 
know about adoption. So you know what? I think i'll use their name all 
over the damn place. I paid what they asked, and for that I ought to 
be abl to do what I want. what are they go to do? come and steal 
kevin back?" 

then she sigh and stare at me. "maybe, though, you could run through 
again how exactli we fit into thi movie." 

I like to tell the stori to people, just to get their reaction. there 
are alway moment of doubt in the film-mak process when you wonder 
if the audienc for your pictur is go to consist entir of your 
immedi family, your backers, and your creditors. 

"well, as I tri to explain before, it' a fiction construct 
intend to feel like a documentary, about a career slave name gail 
crea who' base on a hundr women I know. she' got a great career, 
manag fund-rais for a major museum, and work is go great. but 
then one day she find herself suddenli daydream about babies, 
envi mothers. she yearn for someon to take care of, ha a 
recurr dream she' steal a babi out of a carriag on the street. 
it' demeaning." 

"god," carli said, "I know exactli what you'r talk about. i'v been 
there. have I ever." 

the truth was, I also knew it all too well. It wa poignant and 
demean at the same time. 

"anyway, gail' focus on career all through her twenties, and by her 
late thirti she' becom a seriou professional. but her person 
life is still on hold. she 'meet people' at work, or some other way, 
and she ha a coupl of long-stand relationship that final crater 
becaus the guys, make that commit-ophobes, 'need space.' along the 
way, there'r ghastli fix-up and dismal dinner with what seem like a 
hundr thousand misfits. she becom the date queen of new york, but 
eventu she realiz all the men she' meet are either assuag 
their midlif crise with some pneumat bombshel name bambi, or 
they'r divorc and whine and carri a ton of emot baggage. 
the fact is, she' becom the sensible, success profession she' 
been look for all thi time. thi all sort of seep in as back 
story." 

I perch on a stool at the breakfast bar and look down at my jeans, 
and notic that a rip wa start in the crotch. shit, back to 
cottag cheese. those horribl eight pound I could never get rid of. 

I cross my legs. "finally, after she get a coupl more promotions, 
she wake up one morn and realiz she' never go to have a 
family. all the stable, ration men have disappeared. like there' a 
black hole or something. nothing' left but the walk wounded. she 
conclud it' actual easier to get a babi than a decent guy--which 
is what she start tri to do. high concept: thi pictur is about 
how adopt a babi can enrich the life of a childless human be and, 
not coincidentally, bring joy to an orphan infant." 

I rememb when i'd first pitch it to david roth of applecore. hi 
respons had been; "definit art-house. probabl never get past the 
angelika. A wide releas is gonna be three screen where they serv 
ice cappuccino." 

I wa dead set to prove him wrong. 

"so," I wound up, "i'v shot the entir film, but now, think it 
over, i'v decid there' one last thing I need to do. As I go through 
the story, at everi step of the adopt process I want to cut to an 
interview, just talk heads, tight shot, of somebodi who actual 
went through it. nonfiction. the real-lif happi ending. and that' 
where you come in." 

what I wasn't tell her was, I wa increasingli concern the pictur 
might be slightli hollow without thi punch of real life. 

"well," carli declar with a grin, "mi end couldn't be happier." 

"okay, want to get started?" I look around at arlene, makeup, who 
alway seem to have more on her face than in her bag. I kid her 
about that a lot. but she wa actual the one who had found carly, 
bump into her at a gym in the village. 

"hey, let' go for it." arlen grinned. 

I turn back to carly. "so how' about we prep a littl while you'r 
get the 'natural' look?" 

In the back of my mind I knew what I want for the interview. 
someth like the feel I rememb from _the thin blue line_, 
where peopl engag in hamlet-lik monologu that told us more about 
them than they themselv knew, that let us realli know their secret 
and their fears. the interview wa never seen or heard. 

arlen ensconc carli at the dine room table, a weather countri 
french, where she'd alreadi unfold and plug in a mirror with 
lights. 

"have kevin ha been wonderful," carli began. "he' chang my life. 
sure, be a singl 'supermom' make for a lot of bad-hair days, but 
no matter how much I complain, it' worth everi burp." 

I thought momentarili about have her hold him dure the interview, 
but instantli decid it would be too distracting. kevin and hi 
wonder eye would command the camera. A kid thi cute in a scene 
wa noth less than grand larceny. 

He came toddl in now, drag a stuf brown bear. then he bang 
it head and tri to say it name. "benny." hi funny, awkward walk 
remind me a littl of lou crenshaw after a coupl of drinks. god, he 
wa fantastic. 

"come here, sweetie." I pick him up, inhal hi fresh babi scent, 
and want to hold him forever--whil he slam the bear against my 
face. thi child, I thought, is too good to be true. 

He wa wear a small bracelet around hi left ankle, a tini littl 
chain, with a small silver medallion attached. It look like the face 
of a cat. funny. carli didn't have a cat, wasn't a cat person, so whi 
the littl bracelet? and the back had a bunch of line and dots, like a 
jumbled-up mors code. 

ask her about that, I thought. but later. 

now carli wa caught up in the sound of her own voic and on a roll. 
while arlen continu with the makeup, move to her eyes, she bubbl 
on. 

"like I told you on the phone, I tri and tri to adopt, through a 
whole bunch of lawyers, but it wa a nightmare. one guy even help me 
put ad in newspap all around the country, but noth worked. I 
kept get scam by women who want thousand of dollar up front, 
then back out at the last minute." she wa get up, look 
intense. "let me have a minute. I want to make coffe for everybody." 

I follow her into the kitchen, which wa the "country" type with a 
faux granit counter and lot of copper-bottom pan hang from the 
ceiling. 

she wa right about the pain of adoption, which wa whi her stori wa 
such a burst of sunshine. As part of the start-up research for my 
picture, i'd actual gone to meet an adopt attorney out in 
brooklyn, a sleazy-look guy name frank brasco. i'd been pretend 
to be a client, to find out firsthand how tough it realli was. what I 
heard wa chilling. 

"I don't want to get your hope up," he'd declar for cheeri openers. 
"find a healthy, caucasian, american babi is virtual out of the 
question, so natur we focu on foreign-borns. all the same, it can 
take years, and there' incred paperwork. passport for the kid, an 
extend visa for you while you go there and then wait around to 
process everyth in triplicate. bribes, corruption, you can't 
imagine." He sigh and adjust hi toupee, as though the veri thought 
made him weary. "and that' just the foreign end. here you have the 
ins, the immigr and natur service. they give 
bean-count paper-push a bad name." He examin me closely. "not 
jewish, I take it. 'caus if that' what you'r look for, you may 
have to wait for the messiah." 

now, almost a year and a lot of experi later, I knew full well how 
right he was. which wa what made carly' stori so fantastic. 

"so how did you manag to get kevin? you said it onli took a few 
months?" 

"well, to go back to the beginning, I didn't start out want to 
adopt. but when the guy I wa plan to marri got cold feet--aft 
four and a half years, the louse--and there wa nobodi els on the 
horizon, I decid to just have a babi on my own. you know, find some 
smart, good-look hunk, seduc him, and get thing go the 
old-fashion way, or if that didn't work, then I figur i'd just go 
to a sperm bank. who need an actual man, right?" 

she took out a white and green bag of coffe beans, label balducci' 
on the side. I wa still hold kevin, who threw benni onto the floor, 
then began to sniffl and point. 

but carli seem not to notic as she shook the coffe bean into the 
grinder. "well, get a babi the fun way turn out to be moot, 
becaus it seem I have some kind of uterin condition--which meant I 
couldn't get pregnant, or even do an in vitro. bottom line, if I want 
a baby, I had to adopt." 

she press the button on the coffe grinder, send a blast of 
whir through the kitchen. In second it wa over and she wa 
tap the batch into her braun. "so that' when I start on the 
attorney thing, got work over good tri to adopt as a singl mom, 
and final heard about children of light." 

"the adopt organization? what do you know about them?" 

"tell you the main thing," she said, "they'r the place that can make 
it happen." she reach over and poke kevin' tummy. "right, big guy?" 

sure look that way. what a cutie. 

By now the spaciou live room had been turn into a mini film set, 
with two 35-mm panaflex camera set up, window blank out, light and 
filter in place, and a video camera and monitor. have test the 
boom mike and the tape recorder, toni and sherri were ready. 

carli announc to everybodi that coffe wa available, and I hand 
kevin over to marcy. then togeth we march into the live room. 

"okay," I told her, "we'r go to be filming, but ignor that fact. 
just look into the back of the camera and talk to it as though it were 
me." 

"hey." she grinned. "you'r deal with a pro. thi is my thing." 

I look around at the camera and the grips. "okay, guys. roll sound." 
there wa a retort as the clap stick use for synch whack out the 
start of the shoot. "scene one, take one, carli grove interview." 

she proceed to hit the ground running, recount in great detail her 
stori of mani disappointments. she final got to the point where she 
wa tri to adopt the babi of a woman in a memphi jail, and then 
even that fell through. 

"which wa when my main lawyer, chuck, just gave up and recommend I 
hock the famili silver, take a valium, and tri thi place call 
children of light. where you go when all els fails. So I gave them a 
call." 

"and what happened?" It sound too good to be true. "did they seem . . 
. in ani way unusual?" 

she look at me, as though puzzl by the question. then she shrug 
it off. "well, first they tri to get me to check into their 
clinic--it' thi place up the hudson--to let them see if my 
'condition' could be cure somehow, use hi special techniques." 

"his?" 

"goddard. dr. alex goddard. he' a kinda spacey guy, but he' the 
big-shot presid guru there." she rememb the camera and turn 
back to it. "I told hi staff I didn't have that kind of time, and 
anyway noth could be done. they were pretti insistent, so I 
eventu end up talk to the man himself. He sort of mesmer 
you, but I final said, forget it, it' adopt or nothing. So he 
just sent me back to the peons. checkbook time." 

I stare at her, hungri for details, but she didn't notice, just 
press on. 

"the money they wanted, I have to tell you, wa staggering. sixti 
thousand. and believ me, they don't give revolv credit." 

I thought about the figure. It wa the highest i'd heard for get a 
baby, but it wasn't total off-the-wall. terrif babi don't drop 
from trees. 

carli wa still go strong. "it took me almost half a year to 
scroung it together. A lot of credit line got maxed. but when I 
final did plunk down the loot, sure enough, I had kevin in less than 
three months. I don't even know where he came from. they took care of 
all that, but I do know it wa probabl out of the country, becaus of 
the blank in form I signed. but then, who cares? with a deal thi 
good, you don't press for details, right?" 

carli grove had a mutual love affair with the camera. the footag wa 
go to be fabulous. the onli problem was, it sound like an 
"infomercial" for the adopt miracl wrought by thi doctor name 
goddard. 

when the interview began to wind down, lose it punch, I suggest we 
call it a day. with the time push two o'clock, I want to get the 
film to the lab, get it developed, and take a look at the rushes. I 
also had a doctor' appointment, not to mention a meet with david to 
bring him up to speed on what I wa doing. but sure he wa go to 
be pleased. the interview, with carly' honest intensity, would give 
the pictur spine and guts. just as i'd hoped. 

you could alway tell by the reaction of the crew. even roger drexel, 
who usual hid hi thought somewher in hi scraggli beard, wa 
let hi eye sparkl behind hi panaflex. scott wa also grin 
as he struck the light and cafiero rip up the power lines, now 
tape to the floor. everybodi wa in wrap mode, flush with a great 
shoot. 

I follow carli into the kitchen, where marci wa feed kevin some 
gerber applesauce. the time had come, I thought, to spring the next big 
question, out of earshot of the crew. 

"I hate to put you on the spot, but do you know ani other women like 
you, single, who'v adopt through children of light?" I decid to 
experi with the truth. "god knows, depend on what happen in my 
own situation, i'm . . . i'm think I might even want to check them 
out for myself." 

"what do you mean?" she gave me a quick, concern look. 

"mayb i'd like to talk to them about adopt too." I realiz I wa 
babbling, my usual prelud to obsessing. 

carly' worri gaze eas up a bit, but she start twist at her 
hair. 

"well, I might have anoth name. when my lawyer first told me about 
them, he gave me the name of anoth woman who'd adopt from them, and 
I talk to her a littl about how they worked. she'd just gotten her 
baby, so I guess she wa about six month ahead of me in the process. 
her name wa . . . I think it wa paulin or paula or something. she' 
probabl not the kind of person who'd take their 'no disclosure' crap 
all that seriously. she wa adopt a girl, and she live somewher on 
the upper west side." 

"ani idea how I could find her?" 

"you know, she wrote kids' books, and I think she gave me her card. In 
case I ever need somebodi to do some YA copy. let me go look in my 
rolodex. I file her card under 'y' for young adult. right. it'll just 
take a second." 

the woman, whose name wa paula marks, live on west 83rd street. the 
busi card, a tast brown with a weav in the paper, describ 
her as an author. the address includ a "suite" number, which meant 
she work out of her apartment. 

"mind if I take down her phone number and address? i'd realli like to 
look her up. To see if her experi wa anyth remot like yours." 

carli gaze at her fingernail a second. "okay, but do me a favor. 
don't tell her how you got her number." she bit her lip, stalling. 
"it' one thing for me to talk to you myself. it' someth els 
entir to go stick my nose into other people' business." 

"look, i'll respect her privaci just as much as I respect yours." I 
paused, listen to what i'd just said. the promis sound pretti 
lame. i'd just film her, or hadn't she noticed? "look, let me call 
paula, see if she'll agre to be interview on camera. i'll keep your 
name entir out if it, I promise." 

she reach down and pluck kevin out of hi high chair, kiss him on 
hi applesauce-smear cheek, then hug him. "sorry. guess i'm be 
a littl paranoid. I shouldn't invit you here, then give you a hard 
time about what you'r go to do, or not do. I can't have it both 
ways." 

In the ensu tumult and confus of the wrap, I did manag to get 
one more item from carli grove. the address and phone number of 
children of light. but I complet forgot the one thing i'd been 
mean to ask about. that littl amulet, with the strang cat' face 
and the line and dot on the back. whi wa kevin wear it? and by 
the time I got to the street, surround by the clamor of crew and 
equipment, it seem too inconsequenti to go back and bother with. 




chapter two 


move on, my next stress-point wa to meet with my young boss, the 
afore-not david roth, who wa ceo and first oper kvetcher of 
applecor productions, a kinda-sexi guy whose heart wa deepli engaged, 
often unsuccessfully, with bottom lines. the issu was, i'd done 
today' shoot, the interview with carly, without troubl to secur 
hi okay. without, in fact, tell him zip--th reason be I wa 
afraid he wouldn't green-light the idea. now my next move wa to tri to 
convinc him what i'd just done wa brilliant. 

actual I like david a lot, and hope the occasion tangl we'd had 
over the film wouldn't stand in the way of a friendship. the truth is, 
you don't meet that mani interesting, stabl men in my line of work. 
our artist goal weren't alway in sync, but all the same, he'd done 
an enorm favor for somebodi close to me and for that i'd vow to 
walk through fire for him. 

when I march into hi cluttered, dimli lit office, my mind still 
churn over carly' strang adopt story, what I saw sent my 
problem-detector straight into the red. there, sit across from him, 
wa nichola russo, a five-seven smoothi in a charcoal brioni 
double-breasted, the gentleman david sometim refer to as nicki the 
purse. anoth land mine in my life. He oper off and on as 
applecore' "banker" when cash flow got dicey and real bank got 
nervous. It wa an arrang of last resort, sinc nicky' loan had 
to be servic at two percent a week. Do the numbers: He doubl hi 
money in a year. I knew too that put money out to independ 
filmmak wa part of nicky' attempt at a legitim front; the real 
cash went onto the street of hell' kitchen, just outsid our door, 
where he got five percent a week. and nicky' overdu notic were not 
sent through the mail. 

He also had a piec of a video distributorship, roma exotics, that 
reputedli special in . . . guess what. It wa all stuff I tri not 
to think about. 

I had a strong hunch what wa under discussion. the $350,000 david had 
borrow to finish my picture. we'd gotten the loan three month ago, 
when cash wa tight, and we both figur we could pay it back later in 
the year, after we got a backup cabl deal (though I wa ultim 
hope for a theatric distribution, my first). 

shit! what did nicki want? were we behind on the weekli juice? i'd 
sign on with david partli to help hi bottom line. wa I instead 
go to caus hi ruin? 

At the moment he had hi back to nicky, seem to be medit out the 
window he loved, it vista be the grimi facad that line the far 
west of fifty-eighth street. hi office, with it wide window and 
forest of freshli mist trees, told you he wa a plant nut. outsid it 
wa earli april, the cruelest month, but inside, with all the trees, 
spring wa in full cry. the place also felt like a storag room, with 
pile of script stack around everi pot. the offic normal smell 
like a greenhouse, but now the aroma wa one of high anxiety. 

david revolv back and look across the pot greenery, then broke 
into a reliev smile when he saw me. I could tell from hi faraway 
stare that he wa teeter on the verg of panic. 

"hey, come on in," he said. "nicky' just put a brand-new proposit 
on the table." 

david had a keen intelligence, caus me to sometim wonder if he wa 
in a line of work beneath him. (for that matter, mayb I wa too.) He 
wa dark-haired, trim, with seriou gray eye and strong cheekbones. 
thi morn he wa wear hi trademark black sweater, jeans, and 
white sneakers, a pictur of the seriou go-for-brok new york 
indy-prod hustler. he'd alreadi made and lost and made sever fortun 
in hi youth career. My onli sexual solac sinc steve left wa an 
occasion glanc at hi trim rear end. I also salut hi fiscal 
courage. hi congenit shortfall, I regret to say, wa in the matter 
of judgment. exhibit A: nichola russo' funni money. 

"nicky, you rememb morgan james, the director on thi project." 

"yeah, we met. 'bout four month back." nicki rose and offer hi 
manicur hand, a pictur of old world charm. hi dark hair wa part 
down the middl and hi brioni, which probabl fell off a truck 
somewher in the garment center, had button on the cuff that actual 
buttoned. "how ya doing?" 

"hi." I disengag myself as quickli as possible. the slimeball. 

again, whi wa he here? the way I understood it, we'd sign a 
legitimate, ironclad note. nicki wasn't exactli the chase manhattan 
bank, but I assum he wa a "man of honor," would live by ani deal 
david had with him. "do we have some kind of problem?" 

"nah," nicki said, "i'm think of it more in the way of an 
opportunity. dave, here, show me some of your pictur thi morning, 
and it ain't too bad. got me to thinking. you'r gonna need a video 
distributor. So mayb I could help you out." 

oh, shit and double-shit. I look at him, realiz what he had in 
mind. "how' that? applecor alreadi ha a video distributor. We use--" 

"yeah, well, like I wa tell dave, I got a nose thi picture' gonna 
do some seriou business." He tri a smile. "whenev I see one of 
these indi thing that don't add up for me, like thi one, I alway 
know it' a winner. what i'm tell you is, I think you got someth 
here. He say you'r figur on a cabl deal, and mayb a theatric 
release, but after that you gotta worri about video. i'm just think 
a way I could pitch in." 

pitch in? the last thing I need wa some skin-flick wiseguy get 
hi sticki hand on my picture. forget about it. 

"well, I don't realli see how. i'm shoot thi one by the book. i'v 
got a standard screen actor guild contract, and everyth is strictli 
by the rules. If we'r current on the loan, then . . ." I look at 
david, who appear to be run on empty. maybe, I thought, I didn't 
understand what wa at stake. what had nicki said to him? thi wa a 
man who could make peopl disappear with a phone call to guy nicknam 
after bodi parts. "look, let me talk to david about this. I don't know 
what--" 

"you two'r just gonna 'talk' about it?" russo' penetr eye 
dimmed. "now that' a littl disappointing, I gotta tell you, sinc I 
sent for my busi manager, eddi down there in the car, hope we 
could reach a meet of mind right here. sign a few things. roll that 
note i'm hold into a distribut deal and give everybodi one less 
worry." He turn in hi chair, bore in on me. "like, for instance, I 
check out your locat and I notic there ain't no teamster 
nowhere. all you got' a bunch of fuckin' mick scab drive them vans. 
now that can lead to circumstances. inadequ safeti procedures. Of 
course, that wouldn't have to be a concern if we wa partner together. 
then you'd have good security. the best." 

I look at david, who seem on the verg of a heart attack. whi wa 
he let thi even be discussed? get in bed with nicki russo and the 
next thing you know he' got somebodi hang you out the window by 
your ankles. 

besides, ten to one the guy wa bluffing, see if he could scare us. 

I refocused. "mr. russo, it may eas your mind to know that our 
secur is manag by a former agent for the fbi. He wa with them 
here in new york till about a year ago, when he came to us full time. 
hi name is agent lou crenshaw. you'r welcom to check him out. he' 
familiar with union issues, and he carri a .38. He also ha plenti of 
friend down at 26 feder plaza. So if you have ani linger concern 
about our secur procedures, whi don't you run it by him?" 

the mention of lou seem to brighten david' listless eyes. He lean 
back in hi chair and almost smiled. 

He had good reason. the favor he'd done for lou, and indirectli for me, 
wa enough to inspir etern loyalty. lou would face off against half 
of hell' kitchen for david roth. 

"that ain't the point, exactly," russo said, shift uncomfortably. 
"thing is, roma could do good distribut for you. We work with a lot 
of people." 

"then whi not submit a formal proposal? In writing. i'm in charg and 
that' how I do business. If your number work, then we can talk." 

"just tri to be helpful." He glare at me, then seem to dismiss my 
presence. I disappear from hi radar as though lift away by an 
alien spacecraft, and he turn back to david. "you know, dave, me and 
you'v kinda drift apart lately. old friend oughtn'ta do that. We 
ought to keep more in touch. I think we get along okay." 

In other words, get thi pushi broad out of my face. 

"it' just business, nicky," david said, tri to conjur an empti 
smile. "busi and pleasur don't alway mix." 

yes! david, tell the creep to leav us alone. tell him. 

"do busi with me ain't a pleasure?" nicki russo asked, hurt 
fill hi voice. he'd brought out a larg havana and wa roll it 
in between hi thumb and forefinger. "I figur we wa best friends. 
_paisans_." 

"we'r not _not_ friends, nicky. we'v just got differ goal in 
life. you know how it is." 

I work my way around behind hi desk and glanc out the window. the 
linger day wa begin to cloud over, a perfect match for my state 
of mind. after thi I had a late appoint with dr. hannah klein. I 
fear she wa go to end my babi hopes. 

"yeah, well," nicki russo said finally, rising, "I gotta be downtown in 
a littl while, so I guess we can talk about thi later." 

"okay, sure." david made a shrug sign. like: women! what can you 
do? then he got up too. "look, nicky, let me chew on this. mayb i'll 
get back to you." 

"yeah, you think about it, all right?" He rose without a further word 
and work hi way out the wide doubl doors, stumbl through the 
ficu forest as he struck a match to hi cigar. 

"david, don't sign anyth with him. don't. i'll handl the teamster 
stuff if it come up. I know how to talk to them." 

"okay, okay, calm down. He wa just see if he could push me. I know 
him. you call hi scam with that talk about lou. By tomorrow he'll 
forget about the whole thing." He look at me, hi eye not quit yet 
back in focus. "thanks. you can say thing to him i'd get cement shoe 
for. nicky' not realli readi for peopl like you. He ha thi macho 
front, but he doesn't know how to handl a profession woman with 
balls." 

"you'r welcome. I guess." balls? I ador those vulner male bits, 
but I prefer not to think of myself in those terms. truth was, nicki 
russo play a larg part in my person anxieties. "but I mean it. N. 
o." 

"I hear you," he said, sighing. then he snap back to the moment. "so 
where do thing stand otherwise?" 

i'd come for an after-the-fact green light of the day' shoot, but 
alreadi I wa think about hannah klein. "david, i'm go to find 
out in about an hour whether steve and I are ever go to have a baby. 
but truth I don't think i'm pregnant. I think it' over." It hurt 
to say it. He knew about steve and me--i'd written some languag on 
matern leav into my contract--and I think he wa mildli root for 
us. Or mayb not. 

"could be it' all for the best," he declared. he'd sat back down, 
pick up a pencil off hi desk to distract himself, and wa whirl 
it pensively, one of hi few habit that made me crazy. "mayb you were 
destin to make movies, not kids." 

I listen to hi tone of voice, know he often hid hi real feel 
with safe, sympathy-card sentiments. He rose to eloqu onli when 
noth much wa at stake. he'd even sent me flower and a mea-culpa 
note twice as a makeup after we'd had a disagr over cost and 
scheduling. and one of those times, I should have sent him flowers. 
sometim I wonder whi we work so well together. the truth was, we 
oper on veri differ wavelengths. 

some histori to illustrate. over the past eight years, befor I team 
up with david, i'd done three "highli praised" documentaries. but 
get to that point meant bust my behind for year and year at 
the lower end of the profession food chain. after nyu, I toil as a 
script supervisor on pb documentaries, about as close to grunt work as 
it comes. eventu I got a fling as a product assistant, 
assembl crews, but then the money dri up. (thank you, jess 
helms.) whereupon I decid to tri capitalism, work for three year 
as an AD on the soaps: first guid light, then As the world turns, 
then search for tomorrow. I can still hear the horribl music. then a 
connect got me a slot at a&e as a line producer. eight month later 
the seri got canceled, which wa when I decid the time had come to 
take my career into my own hands. I hock everi last credit card, went 
to japan, and made a documentary. the result: I wa an "overnight" 
success. men start address me by my name. 

My first film wa about the impact of zen on japanes business. As part 
of my research, I shave my head and live three month at a kyoto 
temple, eat bean curd three meal a day, after which I had enough 
credibl to land long interview with tokyo ceos. I then sold the 
edit footag to a&e. when it becam a critic hit, they financ a 
second film, about the mani god of india and how they impact 
everyth about the place. there, I also got caught up in the mystic 
sensual of ragas, indian classic music, and took up the violin 
(one of my major profession mistakes). next I move on to mexico' 
southern yucatan to film a day in the life of a maya villag for the 
discoveri channel. they want me to add some footag from guatemala, 
but I scout the countri and decid it wa too scary. instead, I 
spent sever month in haiti film voodoo rituals, again for a&e. 
and met steve. 

then one day I check my bank account and realiz that, financi 
speaking, I wa a "flop d'estime." I wa do the kind of work that 
doe more for your reput than your retir plan. I decid to 
go more mainstream and see what happened. but to do that I need a 
commerci partner, a backer. 

iron enough, when I first team up with david, he had 
bottom-lin problem too, but from the opposit direction. He wa busi 
disprov the adag that nobodi ever lost money underestim the 
tast of the american public. He knew someth wa wrong, but what? 

apparently, when he start out, somebodi told him cabl audienc 
possess an insati appetit for bare-skin-and-jiggle. hey, he 
figured, that stuff he could grind out in hi sleep. hi first, and 
last, epic in the skin genr wa _wet t-shirt weekend_, whose titl 
say it all. He explain the econom to me once, still baffl whi 
the pictur hadn't worked. he'd assum all you had to do wa find a 
bunch of nineteen-year-old who look like they'r sixteen, go 
nonunion someplac down south with a beach, and take care the wardrob 
trailer ha noth but string bikinis. "cost onli a million-eight to 
make," he declar with pride, "but everi penni is on the screen." 

He insist I watch it, perplex that it wa univers regard as a 
turkey. It wa a pain experience, so much so I actual began to 
wonder if hi heart wa realli in it. (the great schlockmeist 
secretli think they'r fellini; they'r oper at the top of their 
form, not conscious pandering.) 

chasten financially, he decid to move into low-budget 
action-adventure. hi efforts, most notabl _virtual cop_, had car 
chases, blue-screen explosions, bucket of fake blood. somebodi die 
creativ in everi scene. 

they did busi in asia and southern europe, but he wa dumbfound 
when nobodi at hbo or showtim would return hi calls. It gnaw at hi 
self-esteem. 

that wa the moment we found each other. he'd just conclud he need 
somebodi with a qualiti reput to give 

applecor an imag makeover, and i'd realiz I need somebodi who 
knew more than I did about the mechan of make and distribut 
independ films. 

We were an odd couple. I final shook hand on the partnership after 
he cave in and agre I could do anyth I wanted, so long as it 
look mainstream enough to get pick up by time-warn or somebodi 
els legit. well, quasi-legit. We both agre on no more bikini and no 
more film about place that requir cholera shots. It wa someth 
of a compromis on both our parts. 

thu far, though, we were get along. mayb luck wa part of it, but 
_babi love _wa still on schedul and on budget. and I alreadi had a 
deal nearli in the bag with lifetime, the women' channel, that would 
just about cover the costs. everyth after that would be gravy. 
again, hope hope. mayb not the theatric releas i'd been pray 
for, but good enough--so he had to smile and not give me a hard time 
about the money i'd just spent. had to, right? 

I took a deep breath. 

"david, I did a littl extra shoot thi morn that' kind of. . . 
outsid the plan. but it' realli important. want to hear about it?" 

"what! I thought you were finish with princip photography." He 
look disoriented, the deer in the headlights. hint of extra crew 
time alway had that effect on him. "you'r say thi wasn't in the 
budget?" 

"just listen first, okay?" like a politician, I avoid give him a 
direct answer. I told him about the interview with carli and the reason 
for it. 

"nice of you to share the news with me." hi eye narrowed. "I think 
we'v got some big-tim commun issu here." 

"look, don't worry. i'll figur out how to save some money somewher 
else." 

"morgy, befor we continu thi unnerv conversation, we'v got to 
have a seriou review of the matter of cash flow." He frowned, then 
went back to whirl the pencil, hi hair backlight from the wide 
window, hi eye focus on it stubbi eras as though he'd just 
discov a new strain of bacteria. "so let me break some news 
regard the current budget." 

He put down the pencil, adjust it locat on hi desk, and look 
up. "I didn't want to have to upset you, sinc the pictur seem to be 
go so well, but we'v drawn down almost all our cash. I actual 
think that' whi nicki wa here today, snif around, want to see 
a rough cut. he' got a keen nose for indi cash-flow trouble." 

"what are you saying?" It wa unsettl to see david turn so 
serious. "are we--?" 

"i'm say we can cover the payrol here, all our fix nut, even 
nicky' vig, for mayb six more weeks, if you and I don't pay 
ourselves. Of course, if we can get an advanc on some kind of cabl 
deal, that would tide us over more comfort till thi thing is in 
the can. but right now we'r sail pretti close on the wind. i'v bet 
applecor on your picture, morgan. We can't screw thi up." 

I swallow hard. I knew we were work on the edge, but I didn't know 
the edg wa down to six weeks. 

"david, i'm all but readi for postproduction. i'm just think I may 
need one more interview. just a one-day shoot. i'm go to make thi 
pictur work. you'll see." 

He sighed. "all right, if you think it' essential, get the footage. 
mayb I can even shake anoth fifti out of nicky, if I string him 
along about the distribut deal--don't look so alarmed, I won't go 
through with it. anyway, I can tell he' impress with the pictur so 
far. happi now?" 

no, I wasn't happy. what wa I go to do if hannah klein had bad 
news? adoption? I final wa face the fact i'd possibl been make 
a movi about myself all thi time. like yeats, pen hi own 
tombstone. "cast a cold eye, on life, on death. ." 

So whi not give him the whole story? 

"david, if it turn out steve and I can't have a baby, i'v begun 
think about tri to adopt." there it was. more pain. "mayb i'm 
about to becom the heroin of my own picture." 

He stare at me incredulously. 

"morgy, you of all peopl should know by now that adopt would take 
up all your energy, like a giant sponge. come on. i'v seen your 
dailies. I got it, about how hard it is. you tell me now you didn't 
get it?" 

He wa right. righter than he realized. but then I thought again about 
carli grove, who'd found kevin in no time at all, with zero hassles. 
the onli troubl part wa that it wa all so mysterious. . . . 

after I left david' office, I rememb I hadn't actual had lunch, 
so I grab two hot dog with sauerkraut (okay, it wa junk, but I 
secretli love kosher franks) and a diet pepsi to go, from one of the 
striped-umbrella vendors, then hail a cab clutch the grungi brown 
bag. 

I wa head for hannah klein' offic on the upper west side. and now 
I had anoth clock tick in addit to the biolog one. the big 
money clock in the sky wa suddenli on final countdown. 




chapter three 


It took onli a few minut for hannah klein' assistant, lori, to run 
the pregnanc test that confirm my suspicion and settl my future. 
steve' and my final attempt, anoth intrauterin insemin (iui, 
med-speak for an expens "turkey baster") with the last of hi 
deposit, had failed. the end. the bitter end. 

"morgan," hannah declared, stare over her desk, her raspi new york 
voic bore through me like a drill, "given how thi ha all turn 
out, mayb you ought to just start consid adoption--if have a 
child still mean that much to you." 

hannah klein wa push seventy, a chain smoker who should have been 
dead a decad ago, and she unfailingli spoke the truth. her gaze 
carri onli synthet solace, but I wa probabl her fifteenth patient 
of the day and mayb she wa run low on empathy. oddly, though, 
sit there in her office, miserable, I felt strang liberated. I 
ador the woman, a child of the holocaust, with layer of steel like a 
samurai sword, but I also love the thought of never again have to go 
through the humili of cower in her straight-back offic 
chair, like a so-so student on probat wait to receiv my fail 
grade. 

It wa now time to come to grip with what i'd known in my heart for a 
long time. god had made me a theoret function reproduct 
machin that just wouldn't kick over. translation: no cysts, fibroids, 
polyps, no ovulatori abnormalities. My uteru and fallopian tube were 
just fine, steve' sperm count were okay, but no babi wa swim 
into life insid me. 

sometimes, however, realiti ask too much. it' not easi get your 
mind around the idea that some part of your life is over, final over. 
the babi part. To admit that it' time to move on to plan B, whatev 
that is. such realiz can take a while, especi if you'v been 
live with high-level hope, no matter how irrational. 

"I frankli don't know what els we can do," she went on, project 
through my abyss of gloom. she wa shuffl paper on her ash-strewn 
desk, white hair in a bun, fine-tun grit in her voice. upper west 
side, a fifty-year fixture. she never wore perfume, but to me she 
alway smell faintli of rose mix with smoke. earthy. "asid from 
tri in vitro." 

we'd alreadi discuss that, but it wa definit the bottom level of 
hell. besides, I wa run out of money, and spirit. and now, with 
steve gone, the whole idea seem moot anyway. 

"so," she concluded, "bar that, we'v done everyth possible, run 
everi test there is, both on you and on your . . ." 

"steve," I insert into her pause. she seem to deliber block 
hi name at crucial moments. mayb she thought I could have done 
better. mayb a nice solid dentist who own a suit instead of some 
freelanc photo jock who show up for hi sperm count wear khaki 
safari shirts. well, let her deal with it. 

". . . and I can't find anything. sometimes, the bodi just won't 
cooperate. We may never know why. you'v got to face that. but still, 
adopt is alway an option." 

adoption. all along i'd told myself I didn't have the courage, or the 
heart. make movi is a full-tim job, not leav time to go fill 
out form and jump through hoop for year and years. and to cap it 
off, I wa just two year short of the big four-oh and financi 
struggling--hardli an adopt agency' profil of "ideal." 

but now, now i'd just discov carli grove and the miracl of 
children of light. So mayb there realli could be a way to adopt a 
beauti child with no hassles. mayb it would simplifi everyth to 
the point I could actual pull it off. could thi be my plan B? then 
what if steve came back? could we be a famili finally? 

I wasn't use to be that lucky. and I still want hannah klein' 
thoughts, a realiti test, which wa whi I press her on the point. 

"truthfully, do you think adopt is realli a workabl idea for 
somebodi like me? would i--?" 

"morgan, I know you'r make a film about the realiti of the 
adopt process. We both realiz it' not easy." she must have seen 
someth need in my eyes, becaus she continu on, ad detail, 
let the well-known fact convey the bad news. "a you'r well 
aware, find a young, healthy, american babi nowaday is all but 
impossible. At the veri least it can take years." she wa fiddl with 
some paper on her desk, avoid my eyes. then she stub out her 
cigarett in a gestur that seem intend to gain time. "and even if 
you'r will to take a babi that' foreign-born, there still can be 
plenti of heartbreak. that' just how it is." 

"i'd alway thought so too," I said. "it' actual the underli 
motif of my picture. but today I had an incred experience. I film 
an interview of a singl woman, earli forties, who just adopt a babi 
boy. It took less than three month and he' blond and blue-ey and 
perfect. I saw him, I held him, and I can assur you he' as american 
as peach cobbler. the way she tell it, the whole adopt process wa 
a snap. zero hassl and red tape." 

"that' most exceptional." she peer at me dubiously. "actual more 
like impossible. frankly, I don't believ it. thi child must have been 
kidnap or something. how old, exactly, wa he when she got him?" 

"I don't know. just a few weeks, I think." 

her eye bore in. "thi woman, whoever she is, wa very, veri lucky. 
If what she say is true." 

"the organ that got the babi for her is call children of 
light," I went on. "that' all I know, really. I think it' up the 
hudson somewhere, past the cloisters. have you ever heard of them?" 

dr. hannah klein, I knew, wa push three score and ten, had travel 
the world, seen virtual everyth worth seeing. In younger year she 
wa reput to have had torrid liaison with everi notabl european 
writer on the west side. her list of conquest read like an old new 
yorker masthead. If onli I look half that great at her age. but 
whatev else, she wa unflappable. good news or bad, she took it and 
gave it with grace. until thi moment. her eye regist undisguis 
dismay. 

"you can't mean it. not that place. all that so-cal new age . . . 
are you realli sure you want to get involv in someth like that?" 

I found myself deepli confused. were we talk about the same thing? 
then I rememb carli had said someth about an infertil clinic. 

"frankly, nobodi know the first thing about that man," hannah rage 
on. "all you get is hearsay. he' supposedli one of those 
alternative-medicin types, and a few peopl claim he' had some 
success, but it' all anecdotal. My own opinion is, it' what real 
physician call the 'placebo effect.' If a patient believ hard enough 
someth will happen, some of the time it actual might. for god' 
sake, i'm not even sure he' board-certified. Do yourself a favor and 
stay away. oftentimes, peopl like that do more harm than good." then 
her look turn inquisitive. "did you say he' provid children for 
adopt now? that' peculiar. when did he start that?" 

wa I hear some kind of profession jealousi slip out? hannah 
klein wa definit old school to the core. 

"he who?" I wa tri to rememb the name of the doctor carli had 
mentioned. "you mean--" 

"he say hi name is . . . what? goddard? yes, alex goddard. he's--" 

My pager chirped, interrupt her, and she paused, clearli annoyed. I 
look down to see a number I knew well. It had to be lou crenshaw, our 
aforement secur guard. he'd been off today, but there wa onli 
one reason he would page me: some kind of news from lenox hill. 

mayb it wa good news about sarah! My hope soared. 

Or mayb it wa bad. please, dear god. 

"i'm sorry, dr. klein. i'v got to go. right now. It could be a medic 
emergency." 

she nodded, then slid open the top drawer of her desk and hand me a 
list of adopt agencies. "all right, here, take thi and look it 
over. i'v dealt with some of them, letter of refer for patient 
like you." she must have realiz the insensit of that last quip, 
becaus she took my hand and squeez it, the closest we'd ever come to 
intimacy. "let me know if I can help you, morgan. really." 

grasp the lifeless paper, I ach for steve all over again. time 
like this, you need some support. I final glanc down at the list as 
I head out. sure enough, children of light wa nowher to be seen. 

whi not? I wondered. they'd found kevin, a love blond babi boy, for 
carly, a singl woman, in no time at all. they 

sound like miracle-makers, and if there wa ever a moment for 
miracles, thi wa it. shouldn't they at least have been given a 
footnote? 

I want to stalk right back and demand to know the real reason she wa 
so upset, but I truli didn't want to wast a moment. 

lou had page me from a pay phone--h didn't actual have a cell phone 
of hi own--and I recogn the number as belong to the phone next 
to the lenox hill hospital' third-floor nurses' station. when I tri 
it, however, it wa busy, so I decid to just get in my car and drive 
there as fast as I could. 

and as I battl the traffic down broadway, I realiz that by 
divert my mind from my own trivial miseri to the genuin tragedi of 
sarah, I wa actual get my perspect back. that wa one of the 
mani thing sarah had done for me over the years. 

all right. sarah and lou, who figur so larg in this, deserv a 
full-dress introduction, so obvious I should start by admit i'd 
known them all my life. lou wa my mother' half brother, three year 
younger than she was, who came along after my grandfath widow my 
grandmoth in a freak tractor rollov and she remarri a lifelong 
bachelor neighbor. (I have old snapshot of them, and I can tell you 
they all were cheerless, beady-ey american gothics.) i'd arrang for 
david to hire lou eight month earlier, not too long after I came to 
applecore. At that time he'd just taken earli retir from the fbi, 
becaus of an event that shook us all up pretti seriously. 

for some time now, lou' been a rumpled, willi loman figure, like a 
travel salesman on the skids, shirt fray at the collars, face 
tint from a truckload of earli times. over the past fifteen year i'd 
watch hi waist size travel from about thirty-thre inch to 
thirty-seven, and i'd guess it' been at least a decad sinc a barber 
ask him if he need ani off the top. natali rose, hi spirited, 
wiri wife of thirty-seven years, succumb to ovarian cancer seven 
year ago last september, and I know for a fact she wa the one who 
bought hi shirts, provid him with gener maintenance. 

My first memori of him were when he wa a counti sheriff in a littl 
burg call coleman, smack in the middl of texas, some fifty-f 
long, dusti mile from the ranch where I grew up. when I wa about 
fourteen, I rememb he gave up on that and move to dallas, there to 
enter train for the fbi. He eventu end up in new orleans, and 
then, after natali rose pass away and he more or less fell apart, he 
got transfer to new york, consid the eleph graveyard of an 
fbi career. 

probabl the reason I saw him as much as I did as a kid wa becaus of 
my cousin sarah, hi and rose' onli child. she wa six year younger 
than me, a lot when you'r kids, but we were veri special to each 
other, had a kind of bond that i'v never realli known with anybodi 
since. We spent a lot of time stay at each other' house, me the 
almost-grown-up, and truthfully, I love her helplessly, like a littl 
sister. I alway want to think she need me, which can be the most 
affirm feel in the world. I do know I need her. 

she wa now lie in a coma, and the way she got there wa the tragedi 
of my life, and lou's. To begin with, though, let me say sarah wa a 
pretti blond from the start, with sunshini hair that defin her as 
perpetu optimistic--and who wouldn't be, given the head she alway 
turned. (I was--am--blond too, though with eye more gray than her 
turquois blues, but for me blond' alway been, on balance, an 
affliction: sexist film produc assume, dammit, that you'r a fail 
showgirl, or worse. i'v actual dy it brunett from time to time in 
hope of be taken more seriously.) sarah and I had alway had our 
own special chemistry, like a composit of opposit to make a 
complete, whole human being. wherea I wa the rational, left-brain 
slave of the concrete, she wa a right-brain dweller in a world of 
what-might-be. for year and years, she seem to live in a dream 
univers of her own making, one of imagin and fanci states. 

once, when she wa five, lou hid in hi woodwork shop for a month 
and made an elabor cutaway dollhous to give her at christmas. but 
when I offer to help her find littl doll that would fit into it, 
she declar she onli want angel to live there. So we spent the rest 
of the winter--i drop everything--hunt down christma tree 
ornament that look like heavenli creatures. she'd swath them in 
tinsel and sit them in ball of cotton she said were littl clouds. 

I alway felt that just be around her open my life to new 
dimensions, but her dream exist constantli drove lou and rose to 
distraction. I think it wa one of the reason he never got as close to 
her as he wanted, and hi feel about that were deep frustration, 
and hurt. He love her so much, but he could never realli find a common 
wavelength. 

final she came down to earth enough to start college, and eventu 
she graduat from smu in biology, then enrol at columbia for 
premed. By then she wa interest in the work of the brain, in 
alter states. I didn't know if it wa just more pursuit of fantasy, 
but at least she wa go about it professionally. 

anyway, when lou got transfer to new york, he wa actual 
delighted, sinc it gave him a chanc to be closer to her. We all 
manag to get togeth for famili reunion pretti often, though lou 
and sarah were talk past each other half the time. 

then tragedi struck. she wa just finish her master's, and had been 
accept by cornel medical--l wa burst with pride--when he 
suggest they use her christma break to drive back down to texa 
together, there to visit rose' grave. (I think he realli want to 
show off hi bud doctor-to-b to the family.) sarah wa drive 
when they cross the state line into louisiana and were side-swip by 
a huge mack eighteen-wheeler, which wa in the process of jackknif 
across a frozen patch of interstate. they were thrown into the path of 
an oncom car, and when the blood and snow were cleared, a 
six-year-old girl in the other vehicl wa dead. 

the result wa sarah decid she'd taken a human life. her own minor 
facial cuts--which lou immedi had repair with plastic 
surgery--somehow evolv into a major disfigur of her soul. all 
her mental eccentricities, which had been lock up somewher when she 
start college, came back like a rush of demon loos from some 
pandora' box deep in her psyche. she drop out of school, and befor 
long she wa in the throe of a full-scal mental meltdown. she 
disappeared, and in the follow two year lou got exactli one card 
from her, postmark in san francisco with no return address. He 
carri it with him at all time and we both studi it often, puzzl 
over the new age astrolog symbol on the front. the brief note 
announc she'd acquir "divin energy" and wa live on a new plane 
of consciousness. 

then eight month ago, the state depart notifi lou she wa 
miss in guatemala. she'd overstay her visa and nobodi knew where 
she was. 

So how did her "new plane of consciousness" land her in central 
america? wa that part of the fantasi world she'd now return to? lou 
still work downtown at 26 feder plaza, but he immedi took a 
leav of absenc and, though he spoke not a syllabl of spanish, 
plung down there to look for her. 

He wa there a month, follow fals leads, till he final 

ran into a reverend ben jackson, late of a self-styl protest 
ministri in mississippi, who wa one of the ardent new evangel 
swarm over central america. the man mention that some chicl 
harvest in the northwest peten depart of guatemala had found a 
young woman in an old dugout cano on the guatemala side of the wide 
usumacinta river, near a tributari call the rio tigre, lodg in 
amongst overhang trees. she'd been struck on the head and presum 
set adrift somewher upriver, left for dead. she wa now in a coma, 
rest at jackson' "jesu es el hombre" clinic, also locat deep in 
the northwest peten rain forest. He had no idea who she was. 

lou rent a car and drove there, almost a day on unpav roads. It wa 
sarah. 

thu she wa no longer missing; she wa now the appar victim of an 
attempt murder. however, rather than be helpful, the local 
_policia_ appear annoy she'd been found, therebi reopen the 
matter. A blond _gringa _wa out hike somewher she had no busi 
be in the first place and trip and hit her head on something. 
where' the crime? 

lou brought her back to new york, use a medevac plane suppli by the 
state department, which, want no more cia-typ scandal of american 
nation be murder in guatemala, cooper with great dispatch. 

after that, he need a job that would afford him time flexibility, so 
he could be at her bedsid as much as possible. david wa look for a 
secur head, and I realiz it would be a perfect match. sinc we 
didn't realli need a full-tim person, lou could spend a lot of hour 
at lenox hill, watch over sarah. 

she wa just lie there now, no sign of consciousness, her bodi be 
kept aliv with IV i'd go by to visit her as much as I could, and 
almost as bad as see the comatos sarah wa see the grief in 
lou' eyes. He would sit there at the hospit everi day, sometim 
sever hour a day, finger an old engrav locket that carri her 
high-school graduat picture, just rub it through hi finger 
like a rosary. We alway made allow when he want to take time 
off dure one of our shoot schedules, figur mayb he wa help 
her. . . . 

As I turn east, to go crosstown, I thought again about sarah' 
condition. she and I look a lot alike, dens blond hair for one 
thing, but to see her now you'd scarc know it, sinc her had been 
clip down to noth by the hospital. her cheekbones, however, were 
still strong, a qualiti now exagger by her emaci state, and her 
eyes, which I had not seen in years, were a deep languid, turquois 
blue. but see her lie there inert, be kept aliv with tube and 
liquids, wear pressur pant to help circul blood through her 
legs, you'd scarc realiz she'd been a strikingli beauti woman 
befor the accident. 

what' worse, from what I knew, the horrif brain trauma that bring 
on a coma don't automat go away when you regain consciousness. If 
the coma is the result of a head injury, and if it last more than a 
few days, the chanc of regain all your mental function are up for 
grabs. lou onc said there' a scale of eight stage to full recovery. 
peopl who have short coma can sometim come out of them and go 
through those stage quickly--from initi eye movement to full mental 
faculties. others, who'v been under for month or longer can requir 
year to come back. sometim they can onli blink their eye to answer 
questions; sometim they babbl on incessantly. they can talk sense, 
or they can talk nonsense, incoher fantasies, even string of 
numbers. the brain is a complex, unpredict thing. . . 

I alway thought about thi as I took the elev up to lenox hill' 
third floor. the room where they kept sarah wa paint a pale, steril 
blue, and made even more depress by stark fluoresc lights. 
everyth wa chrome and baked-on enamel, includ the instrument 
whose crt screen report her bodili functions. none of the 
instruments, however, had ever shown the brain activ associ with 
consciousness. 

lou wa there when I walk in. He had a kind of wild in hi eyes, 
mayb what you get when you mix hope with despair. We hug each other 
and he said, "she had a moment, morgy. she knew me. i'm sure she did." 

then he told me in detail what had happened. A nurs pass sarah' 
room had happen to notic an unexpect flicker on one of her 
monitors. she'd immedi inform the nurses' station, where 
instruct includ lou' home number. 

he'd grab a cab and race there. when he got to her room, he push 
hi way past the caribbean nurs and bent over her, the first time he 
had hope a convers with her would be anyth but a monologue. 

"honey, can you hear me?" 

there wa no sign, save the faint flicker of an eyelid. 

It wa enough. hi own puls rocketed. 

"where' the damn doctor?" 

while the physician wa be summoned, he had a chanc to studi her. 
yes, there definit wa some movement behind her eyelids. and her 
regular breath had becom less measured, as though she were fight 
to overcom her autonom nervou system and challeng life on her own. 

final an overwork pakistani intern arrived. He proceed to fiddl 
with the monitors, do someth lou did not understand. then without 
warning--and certainli attribut to noth the physician did--sarah 
open her eyes. 

lou, who had not seen those eye for sever years, caught himself 
feast on their rich, aquat blue. He look into them, but they did 
not look back. they were focus on infinity, adrift in a lost sea of 
their own making. they stare at him a moment, then vanish again 
behind her eyelids. 

He told me all thi and then hi voic trail off, hi despair 
returning. . . . 

"lou, it' a start. whatev happen is bound to be slow. but thi 
could be the beginning. . . ." 

We both knew what I wa say wa peril close to wish 
thinking, but nobodi in the room wa under oath. for the moment, 
though, she wa back in her coma, as though noth had changed. 

I wait around until eight o'clock, when I final convinc myself 
that be there wa not do anybodi ani good. lou, I later learned, 
stay on till well past eleven, when they final had to send secur 
to evict him. 

okay, i'v been hold out on the most import detail. the truth is, 
I hardli knew what to make of it. At one point when I wa bend over 
sarah' seemingli unconsci face, her eye had click open for just 
a fleet moment, startl me the way those horror movi do when the 
"un-dead" suddenli come alive. lou wa in hi chair and didn't see it, 
didn't notic me jump. 

the last thing I want to do wa tell him about it, and I wa still 
shiver as I shove my key into the toyota' ignit and head for 
home. she'd look directli into my eyes, a flicker of recognition, and 
then came the fear. she sort of move her mouth, tri to speak, but 
all that came wa a silent scream, after which her eye went blank as 
death and close again. 

she knew me, I wa sure of it, but she had look through me and seen a 
remind of some horror now lock deep in her soul. 




chapter four 


lou took the next few day off to spend by sarah' side, but noth 
more happened. I repeatedli call him at the hospit to check on her, 
though it wa becom clear her brush with conscious had onli been 
an interlude. finally, I decid to show carly' rush to david (he 
love them) and tri to concentr on postproduct for the rest of 
the week and the weekend, anyth to make me not have to dwell on 
sarah' ghostlike, soundless cri of anguish. 

postproduction. when you'r shoot a picture, you have to make all 
kind of compromises; but in post, with luck and skill, you can 
transform that raw footag into art. you mix and cut the take till the 
perform are taut; you loop in rerecord dialogu where necessari 
to get just the right read of a line; the foley guy give you clear 
sound effect where the product sound is muddy; and you balanc the 
hue of red and blues, dark and light till you get just the right 
color tone. 

all of the polish that came with post still lay ahead. the first 
step wa to go through the rough cut and "spot" the film, mark 
place where the sound effect or dialogu would need to be replac 
with rerecord studio sound--which meant sever days, mayb weeks, of 
loop to edit out background nois and make the dialogu sound rich 
and crisp. for some of it, the actor would have to come back in and 
lip-synch themselves, which they alway hate. 

It wa daunting, to have to work back and forth between product 
sound track and loop tracks, blend altern takes. you had to 
figur on onli do about ten minut of film a day, and then, after 
all that, you had to get the "opticals" right, the fade-out and 
dissolv and, finally, the credit sequences. 

normally, onc I start post, I would have exactli ten week to 
accomplish all that befor the execut producer, david, got hi hand 
on my picture. that wa the prerog that wa part of the standard 
director' contract. now, though, I figur that wa out the window. 
with the money go fast, I had to produc a rough cut and get the 
pictur sold to cabl in six weeks, period. 

but first thing first. I deepli need at least one more 
interview--carly' wa too much of a happi one-note--which wa whi I 
need to shoot paula marks. It wa now on for thursday, today. 

the appoint had taken all weekend, includ a sunday brunch, to 
set up, but by that time I wa sure thi second mother would be 
perfect. she wa a tall, willowi woman, forty-three, who had let her 
hair start go to gray. honesty, it wa right there in her pale brown 
eyes. she wrote children' books, had never married--sh now believ 
she never would--and had decid to adopt a child becaus she had a lot 
of extra love she felt wa go to waste. differ from carli grove, 
maybe, but not in the matter of strength, and fearless independence. 

We arriv around ten a.m. to discov her apart wa in one of 
those sprawl prewar west side monoliths, thick plaster wall and a 
rabbit' warren of hall and foyers, legaci of an age befor "lofts" 
and open spaces. terribl cramp for shooting. but paula agre to let 
the blue-jean crew move her old, overstuf couch out of the live 
room, along with the pile of book that line the walls. 

anoth issu wa makeup. At first paula insist she didn't want any. 
never wore it, it wa deceitful, and she didn't want to appear on 
camera look like barbie. (small chanc of that, I thought. A littl 
war paint now and then might help your chanc of land a father for 
thi child.) eventu arlen persuad her that camera lie and the 
onli way to look like yourself is to enhanc those qualiti that make 
you you. It wa a thin argument, but arlen came from a long line of 
apparel proprietor who could unload sunlamp in the sahara. 

paula' adopt daughter rachel, who wa a year and a half old, wa 
run around the apartment, blond tress flowing, drag a doll 
she had name angie. except the name came out "ann-gee." she wa 
immedi adopt by the crew, and erica, the product manager, wa 
soon teach her how to play patty-cake. then rachel want to 
demonstr her new skill at eat spaghetti. In five minut she wa 
cover head to toe in ragu tomato sauce. 

when the panaflex wa final rolling, the stori paula spun out wa 
almost ident to the one told by carli grove. she'd spent hour with 
all the legal servic recommend by nysac, new york singl adopt 
children, listen to them describ a scenario of delay and paperwork 
and heartache. It could be done, but it could take years. look, she'd 
declared, i'll cash in my ira, do anything, just give me some hope. 
okay, they'd replied, tighten your belt, scare up sixti big ones, and 
go to see children of light. We hear stories. . . . 

soon after she call them, the sky had opened. A new age physician 
and teacher there, a man with strike eye name alex goddard, had 
made it happen. rachel wa her in just four months, no paperwork. 

sure, she declared, children of light wa expensive, but alex goddard 
wa a deepli spiritu man who realli took the time to get to know you, 
even practic beg you to come to hi clinic-commun and go 
through hi cours of mind-bodi fertil treatment. but when she 
insist she just want to adopt, he obligingli found rachel for her. 
how could she be anyth but grateful? she wa so happy, she want 
everybodi in the world to know about him. 

As she bubbl on, I found my attent wander to rachel, who'd just 
escap from the crew keep her in the kitchen and wa run 
through the live room, sing a song from sesam street. someth 
about the way she move wa veri evocative. 

where'v I seen her before? then it dawn on me. her walk made me 
think of kevin. actually, everyth about her remind me of kevin. 
were all kid start to look the same? god, I want them both. 

yeah, I thought, daydream of hold her, she' kevin all over 
again, clear as day. she' a dead ringer to be hi older sister. It 
feel veri strange. 

Or mayb I wa just see things. To some extent all babi look 
alike, right? that is, until you have one of your own. 

I had to swallow hard, to tri to collect my thoughts. carli and paula 
scarc even knew each other. If rachel realli wa kevin' sister, 
they'd never know anyth about it. 

incred . . . it wa just too big a coincidence. 

but still. . . and what about the film footage? show close-up of the 
kids, and anybodi not legal blind wa go to see the similarity. . 
. . 

whi would somebodi give up two children for adoption? I found myself 
wondering. give up one wa tragic enough. 

"cut." I wave at everybody. "take ten. We need to recharg here, take 
a break and stretch." 

paula wa caught off guard, in the middl of a sentence, and she let 
her voic trail off, puzzled. 

"hey, i'm sorri rachel came barg in," paula final said. "guess she 
broke everybody' concentration, huh?" 

"yeah, well, sometim we all need to lean back and take a fresh run at 
things." I call to rachel, who came trot over, spaghetti sauc 
still on her face, and pick her up. I felt at a loss about what to 
do. tell paula her daughter had a younger brother in the village, and 
she might fall apart. "I wa actual curiou about something. Do you 
know anyth about rachel' birth mother?" 

"I don't want to know. It would disrupt my life. and my peac of mind." 
her eye acquir a kind of sad mingl with anxiety. "i'm 
reconcil to the fact she probabl got into some kind of trouble, may 
not have exactli been nobel prize material, but i'm a big believ in 
nurtur over nature. that' whi I write book for kids. So I think 
rachel' go to end up be a lot more like me than like her real 
mother." 

brave words. but i'll bet you anyth the stori of rachel' mother is 
a lot more complic than you imagine. 

I glanc at my watch, the hour push four-thirty. time to call it a 
wrap. besides, if we shot ani more today, the crew would end up on 
overtime, and david wa get increasingli nervou about my extra 
costs. 

I also need a littl downtim to reflect. 

"look, I think i'v got enough footag to work with for now. let me 
just get the releas sign take thi film downtown, and get it 
processed. mayb we can come back for anoth shoot when I figur out 
exactli where thi is going." 

"anytime. just give me some notic and i'll tri to have the place 
clean up more next time." 

"don't worry. I like it to look real. just sign the releas and i'll 
take it from there." I wa about to set rachel back on the floor when 
someth caught in my sweater. look down, I realiz it wa a tini 
charm bracelet, with two littl medallion on it. one wa a littl red 
plastic like of pocahontas, the disney character, and the other wa 
a silver face of a cat, long and stylized. and on the back, those 
curiou line and dot again, onli these were arrang differ from 
those on the one carly' boy kevin had. 

"paula, what' this? thi cat. where'd you get it?" 

"oh, that." she smiled. "she wa wear it when I got her, on a littl 
silk cord around her waist, under her diaper. they told me it wa a 
gift from her real mother, a keepsake. sort of break your heart, but 
the way they said it, you want to keep it forever. . . ." 

At that moment erica wa just plug the phone back in, and the 
second she did, the old, black panason cordless began to ring. 

"hang on a sec," paula said. "let me get that. My agent is supposed--" 
she'd pick up the phone and wa plop back onto the couch. "hi." 

then her look turn blank. "no, of cours not." she fell into an 
uncomfort pause, look around at everybody. then she continued. 
"nobody' contact me." she halt again, her face white, and stare 
directli at me. I abruptli sens that I wa the topic of the 
conversation. "sure i'm sure. . . . yes, I rememb signing. . . . 
don't worry. i'd have no reason to. . . . okay, sure, i'll let you 
know." 

she click off the phone and look up with startl eyes. "it wa 
somebodi who said they work for children of light. she want to know 
if you'd contact me." her face collapsed. "you. she ask me 
specif about _you_. By name. how did--?" 

"I have no idea." My hand were grow cold. had carli told them about 
me? whi would she do that? "anyway, you handl it okay." 

which made me wonder. If children of light wa such a perfect 
organization, whi wa paula so frighten she immedi felt 
compel to lie, to swear she hadn't broken their rules? 

"right." her composur wa slowli come back. "look, now that I think 
about it, whi should they care? It doesn't make ani sense. they got 
their money." she turn to me. "let me have that release." 

she seiz the paper and endors it with a flourish. 

My puls wa still in overdrive, but I hug her, then signal the 
crew that shoot wa over for the day. 

"okay, everybody. time to wrap." 

the gang immedi began strike the light and roll up 
electr cords. they would take the equip back downtown and 
deliv the film to the lab, while I would head home. It had been a 
long day and lot of think wa needed. besides, it wa start to 
rain, a dismal spatter against paula' grimi windows, as the gray 
spring afternoon had begun darken toward sullen evening. 

"listen, I enjoy this." paula had taken rachel in her arm and wa 
stroke her blond hair. "I realli love talk about her. she' 
chang my life." 

I gave her anoth hug. "you'r great. and you'r go to be wonder 
in the film." If I use her. the whole thing wa get unnerving. 
"you have no idea how much you'v helped." then I said good-by to 
rachel, who respond with a perfect "bye, bye" through her haze of 
spaghetti sauce. 

okay, get the superintendent. crank up the freight elevator. get out of 
here. 

scott ventri, key grip, took charg of handl the gear, dictat 
which equip got load on first. I watch long enough to make sure 
everyth wa go okay, and then I join arlene, old friend and 
queen of outrag makeup, on the other elevator. 

"you notic it?" she whispered. the door had just closed. 

"notic what?" I knew full well what she wa talk about. but it just 
felt too bizarre. 

"those kid could almost be twins. that littl boy last week, and thi 
girl. they look just alike. it' spooky." 

"guess their parent couldn't figur out what wa caus those 
pregnancies. So they just kept have more babies." I decid to tri to 
insert some humor, deflect the conversation. "mayb we should tell 
paula and carly." 

"veri dumb." arlen bit at a long, red, fals fingernail, a perenni 
habit for as long as i'd known her. "we should mind our own business, 
that' what we should do." 

"work for me. but it also prove we were smart not to shoot ani 
footag of the kids. the whole world would realiz something' funny." 
then I had an idea. "want to come downtown to my place after we unload? 
have some deep thought over what all thi means?" 

first the kids, then the call. what wa thi guy alex goddard, whoever 
he was, up to? definit time to talk to somebody. . . . 

"gee, i'd love to," arlen wa saying, "but I can't. I gotta go out to 
kew garden for my mom and dad' anniversari tonight. their 
thirty-fifth, can you believe? Of course, I wa a veri late baby." she 
blink her dark, languid eyes, as though rehears the line for a 
downtown club. 

"A miracl of modern fertil science, right?" shit. arlene, I need 
you. 

"right." she giggled, then seem to studi the flash light on the 
elevator' control panel. "god, those kids, they'r too good to be 
true. i'd love to have one like that." she impati pound the 
number one a coupl of times, perhap hope to speed our creaki 
descent. "I can get bonk everi night of the week, but I can't get a 
seriou boyfriend. new york' club aren't exactli brim with the 
vine-covered-cottage-and-picket-f type. and as for the pick at 
work, given the kind of pictur david makes, forget it. last thing I 
need is some twenty-year-old pothead who think with hi wang." 

"i'm afraid i'm not help you much with thi one." i'd cast _babi 
love_ mostli with off-broadway unknowns. the actress mari gregg wa a 
veteran of joseph papp' origin public theater, the experiment 
enterpris downtown. the few male part all went to guy who were 
either gay or married. 

"oy, what can you do, right? If it happens, it happens." arlen watch 
the door begin to stutter open as we bump onto the lobbi level. then 
she zero in on me. "you realli want a kid too, don't you? I mean, 
that' whi you did thi script, right? which, by the way, is great. I 
mean the script." 

"I think most women do, down deep." 

she smiled. "well, if I ever have one, it' go to be the 
old-fashion way. it' a heck of a lot cheaper than adopting." she wa 
head out, into the front foyer. "not to mention more fun get 
there." 

On that I definit had to agree. 

the lobby' prewar look wa gray and dismal, and as we emerg onto the 
street, the rain had turn into a steadi downpour. lou wa off again 
today, down at the hospit with sarah, so i'd engag a doorman from a 
new co-op across the street to keep an eye on our vans. A crisp twenti 
had extract hi solemn promis to do just that. At the moment, 
however, he wa nowher to be seen. proving, I suppose, david' theori 
that we need our own secur guy at all locat shoots. 

lou, I thought, I hope you'r final get through to her. 

"no limo, but at least we get first call on the vans," arlen observed, 
her voic not hide the sarcasm. "just onc i'd 

like to work for somebodi who had seriou vip transportation." 

"david would walk befor he'd get a limo." 

We were head down the street, me dig out my keys, when I notic 
the man stand in the rain. He wa just behind our lead van, a 
three-year-old gray ford, wait for us. 

My first thought wa he must be connect to nicki russo, david' 
wiseguy banker, here to bust my chop over the teamster issue. screw 
him. just my luck he'd send somebodi the veri day lou wa not on hand. 
but then I realiz i'd guess wrong. the man wa more hispan than 
italian. He also wa short, solidli built, late fifti maybe, with 
intens eye and gray hair that circl hi bald pate like the dirti 
snow around a volcano' rim. As he move toward us, I thought I 
detect someth militari in hi bearing, not so much the crisp 
of a soldier but rather the authorit swagger of an officer. well, 
mayb a retir officer. 

"the paper on your windshield say you are film a movie," came a 
voic with a definit spanish accent. No greetings, no hiya, how'r you 
doin'? just the blunt statement. then, have establish what wa 
alreadi clear to all at hand, he continued. "it say the titl is _babi 
love_. whi are you make thi movi here?" 

that wa it. I glanc at arlene, who'd turn white as a sheet. you 
get a lot of onlook around a locat shoot, but not too mani who 
challeng your right to exist, which wa exactli what wa come 
through in hi menac tone. 

I hand arlen the keys. "here, go ahead and open up. i'll handl 
this." 

then I turn back to him. "what you saw in the windshield of the van 
is a new york citi film board permit. that' all the inform we are 
requir to provide. If you read it, you know everyth i'm oblig to 
tell you." I return hi stare. "however, if peopl ask nicely, i'm 
happi to answer their questions." 

"are you make thi movi about a person in thi building? your other 
film have been documentaries." 

god help me, I thought. Is thi what my fan are like? 

then it hit me. I don't know how i'd miss the connection, but now it 
just leapt out. first the phone call, then thi hood. somebodi wa 
track me. 

"i'm scout locations," I lied, feel a chill go through me. "we'r 
second unit for an action film, shoot some prep footag for the 
producers. doe the name arnold schwarzenegg mean anyth to you?" 

"then whi is the film about babies?" 

"that' meant to be a joke. rememb the movi _twins_? it' a joke 
title. Do you understand?" 

At that moment, paul nulti came barg out the door with a huge klieg 
light, follow by sever other member of the crew carri sound 
gear. our cordial tete-a-tet wa about to be disrupted. 

My new hispan friend saw them and abruptli drew up. that wa when I 
notic the shoulder holster under hi jacket, contain some sort of 
snub-nos pistol. 

jesus, I thought, thi must be what some kind of hire killer look 
like. that gun' not a prop. 

"I think you are lying." He close hi jacket and, ignor my crew, 
bore in relentlessli on me, hi eye dead and merciless. "that is a 
big mistake." 

It wa the first time in my life i'd ever stood next to a man who had a 
gun and wa deepli tick at me. he'd want me to see hi piece, just 
to make sure I took him seriously. He wasn't threaten me, per se. 
rather he wa let me know how strongli he care about what I wa 
doing. 

well, damn him, but I still wa scared. I might have manag to bluff 
nicki russo, but he wa a guy who oper by an age-old set of 
sicilian rules. thi thug didn't strike me as the rule-book type. 

hand shaking, I pull out my cell phone, flick it open, and punch 
in 911. 

"listen, if you'r threaten me with a gun, i'm call the cops. 
whatev problem you have with the new york film industry, you can 
explain it to them." 

new york' polic emerg number wa still ring as he abruptli 
turn and strode away. 

I click the phone shut and move to get out of the way as a trolley 
load with more gear wa roll past me down the sidewalk. 
unfortunately, I also took my eye off him for a second, and when I 
look up again, he seem to have disappear into the rain, though I 
did notic somebodi who could have been him get into a long black car 
well down the block and speed off toward broadway. 

"what did that creep want?" arlen asked, come back with the keys. 

I wa onli slowli return to reality, and it took me a few moment to 
form a coher answer through all the adrenalin surg into my brain. 

"I . . . I don't know. but I think i'd better warn everybodi to keep an 
eye out for strangers. he' . . . he' wound a littl tight, to put it 
mildly." I wa still shaking, which she fortun fail to notice. 
At that point, there seem no great reason to spook her with mention 
of the gun. 

"boy, he wasn't just some homeless junkie," she said. "he look like a 
heavi in one of david' old action pictures. all he need wa a 
mack-10." 

"right." jesus, arlene, I think he might have had one. "so let' get 
moving." 

As I watch the van be loaded, slowli calm down, I kept 
think about him. He wa undoubtedli connect to the phone call, but 
whi would anybodi be so worri about what I wa doing? I couldn't 
think of ani seriou reason. 

half an hour later we were all head downtown. along the rain-swept 
street the "all beef" hot-dog vendor cower under their 
red-and-yellow stripe umbrellas, while depart offic workers, 
briefcas perch abov their head as makeshift protection, scurri 
along the edg of build search for cabs. while arlen continu 
to chat nonstop, I tri to do a littl mental processing. and my mind 
kept drift back to the sight of littl rachel, and kevin. what 
perfect kids. the way she wa running. . . . 

hey, wait a minute. how could they be siblings? brother and sister? 
rachel wa almost exactli half a year older than kevin. biolog didn't 
work that way. No way could they be related, but still . . . they 
look so alike. 

I realiz arlen hadn't put it togeth about the ages. the 
brother/sist theori made absolut no sense. those kid were born 
six month apart. 

If that wasn't strang enough, whi did they both have those tini cat 
medallion with the line and dot on the back? which were actual 
kind of creepy, more like sacr amulet than littl toys. 

talk to lou. He might have some insights. 

no, better yet, go to the source. children of light. call alex 
goddard' adopt agenc or clinic or whatev it is and make an 
appointment. 




chapter five 


I wa feel a bit off center that evening, but I explain it away as 
mental overload, the rain, and the impli threats. that diagnosi got 
revis the next morn when I awok with a mind-numb headache, 
chill altern with a mild fever, and my chest feel like it wa 
caught in a compactor. It wa a so-cal common cold, but there wa 
noth common about my misery, which wa truli exceptional. 

I made a cup of echinacea tea and then wash down 2000 mg of vitamin C 
with some age orang juic from my fridge, after which I took a 
coupl of tylenol, put on yesterday' jeans, and head uptown to work. 
I also treat myself to a cab. 

when I settl into the clutter corner room that wa my office, I 
told myself thi wa not a day to make ani big decisions. just stick to 
matter that requir noth more than autopilot. 

the first thing I did wa call lou to check on sarah (no change), and 
then I told him about my hispan visitor. He made concern sound and 
promis to accompani me on ani further locat shoots. 

next I pull out my date book and punch in a phone number i'd 
scribbl in the back. i'd gotten it when I wa wind up my interview 
with carli grove. 

"children of light," said an unctuou voice. "thi is ramala." 

I hesit a moment befor give my name. they alreadi knew who I 
was; ramala or somebodi had call paula mark and ask about me. me. 
what would she do when she heard it wa your truli in the flesh? 

I tri to take a deep breath, work around the feel my lung were 
on fire, and identifi myself. 

ramala receiv the inform as though she'd never heard of me. 
mayb she hadn't. then I ask for an appoint with alex goddard. As 
soon as it wa convenient. 

"he leav hi saturday open," she said, more of the smiley voice, "so 
I could make a special appoint for you tomorrow. would ten a.m. be 
all right?" 

her accent wa the kind of delhi colonial-ruling-class you associ 
with expens silk sari and rubi bracelets, yet at the same time her 
voic had an overlay of that melodious, touchy-fe unctuous you 
hear on relax tapes. I half expect her to next say, inhal 
deepli and feel the love flow through the universe. In ani case, she 
couldn't have sound more open and forthcoming. 

I had to remind myself immedi that it wasn't true. given the 
inquisit phone call to paula marks, children of light wa an 
organ that deepli cherish it privacy. presum they had a 
reason, and that reason didn't necessarili have to be sinister, but 
still, I had everi reason to think they were upset about me and it made 
me paranoid. and now alex goddard immedi had time for a "special 
appointment." 

"ten o'clock will be fine," I said, just bare croak the word out 
of my chest. 

she gave me direct for reach the riverdal clinic, call 
quetzal manor, and hung up. I felt so miser I could bare rememb 
afterward what she'd said, but fortun i'd taken notes. 

quetzal manor. An odd choic for a name, i'd thought. 

some kind of bird sacr to the maya indian of central america. but 
then paula had mention at one point that he wa veri interest in 
indigen third world herb and remedies. So mayb it fit. 

but still, one big puzzl kept come back to haunt: how do you produc 
perfectli healthi sibl six month apart? (I actual call carli 
and paula back to verifi the ages.) the more I thought about kevin and 
rachel, the more I realiz they were so unmistak related. 

puzzl over that, I began to wonder if mayb I wa on the verg of 
uncov a blockbust documentary. could we be talk someth 
approach scienc fiction here? make documentaries, you'r alway 
on the lookout for the unexpected, the fresh. So how about an 
organ that could obtain beauti caucasian babi seemingli at 
will, includ peas-in-a-pod born a few month apart? I wa alreadi 
frame a pitch to david in my mind. 

anyway, the rest of the day, while I wa busi battl my cold with 
antihistamin and lot of hot soup, I mount a major phone inquiri 
just to make sure all the rule on adopt hadn't somehow chang when 
I wasn't looking. they hadn't. first off, to get a child in three or 
four months, you'd almost certainli have to go with foreign adoption. 
china wa everybody' flavor of the month, becaus they favor older 
parent and also becaus the one-child-per-famili polici there had 
end up produc a wide-scal abandon of girl (who were all 
those preciou boy go to marry? I often found myself wondering). 
however, the shift polit there made the process veri unreliable. 
A few months? don't even think about it. 

press on, I satisfi myself that the country-specif organ 
that found babi in the emerg part of the world all still work 
the same. cradl of hope special in orphan russian kids. children 
and families, inc., provid adopt for equadorian children. 
intern adopt assistance, inc., handl brazilian orphans. but 
they all were still fussy, and they could take ages. how about a 
brand-new healthi babi in just a few months? i'd ask. some kind of new 
fast track? the question wa alway taken as a joke. . . . 

I would be drive up to quetzal manor in my old toyota, and I dearli 
wish steve could somehow materi and be with me. In hi absence, 
however, I convinc lou to come along. I figur the chang of scene 
would do him good, and I also want the secur of have him with 
me, after the threaten phone call to paula and the hispan thug 
who'd accost me outsid her apart building. besides, it'd just be 
a coupl of hours. 

the next morning, as we trek up riversid drive, then the henri 
hudson parkway, the sky wa a flawless blue and the wide hudson seem 
like an ardent highway lead into the heart of america. still in 
elev spirit over sarah' momentari brush with consciousness, lou 
had notic less of a hangov than wa usual most mornings. mayb 
he wa look forward to a littl mental r&r. for my own part, I felt 
my curios growing. i'd gone to a lot of appoint over the years, 
but rare did I suspect the person I wa go to see alreadi knew 
more about me than I knew about them. 

after we cross the henri hudson bridge, we left the highway and 
head down a servic road that led toward the river. then there wa an 
impos gate, open, and a tree-shroud driveway. final the place 
loom in front of us. 

the physic appear of quetzal manor wa a studi in european 
grandeur, translat with a few extra frill from the new world. carli 
had told me it had onc been a carmelit convent, date from sometim 
in the middl of the last century, and it wa a monument to church 
authority, with endless arch of cut stone, turrets, gargoyles. As we 
were motor to the end of the long cobbleston drive, I felt as if I 
wa approach some gothic movi set. given it hover sens of 
regal authority, the place could easili have been a castle, but it 
seem more like a brood homag to mediev torture. let me just say 
it wa truli magisterial, yet also more than a littl creepy. 

As we park under a huge oak tree in front, I survey the facade, 
tri to marshal my strength. enough of my cold still linger that I 
didn't feel as if my mind wa work on all cylinders, and for a 
moment I mere sat looking, tri to breathe. 

"want me to go in with you?" lou ask finally. He wa examin the 
build suspiciously, like a detect survey a crime scene. 

I want him with me and then again I didn't. I long for the company, 
a protector, but I didn't want the complications, more thing to 
explain inside. final I made a snap decision. 

"whi don't you take a stroll around the grounds?" I suggested. "commun 
with nature. the fresh air will do you good. thi can't take long. 
mainli I just want to get some literatur and tri to gain a feel for 
the place." 

that wasn't entirely, or even partly, true. what I realli want to 
find out wa threefold: how did they manag to get beauti healthi 
caucasian babi for two singl women in just a few months; how could 
those babi be onli six month apart in age and still obvious be 
siblings; and (thi wa where my feel got complicated) could they 
get a babi for me the same way, never mind how they did it. It wa the 
third thing that actual bother me the most, sinc I wa far from 
sure I want to be a part of whatev wa go on. 

lou just shrug and lean back in hi seat. "take as 

long as you like. i'll just wait here in the car. i'm not the natur 
type." 

that wa certainli the case. 

I walk across the cobbleston to an arch entryway that had no 
door. I wonder at this--most convent are like a fortress--and then I 
realiz the front door had been removed, leav onli it ancient 
hing still bolt into the stones. perhap it wa intend to be a 
symbol of openness, invit you in. 

there wa no sign of anybody--th saccharine-vo ramala wa not on 
hand to greet me--so I just head on down a wide hallway, past a tabl 
of brochures. the place had been decor with expens good taste: 
tapestri all over the stone walls, perfect persian rugs, classic 
church statuary--al of it call forth power feel from deep in 
the psyche. 

then I enter a vast interior courtyard, where a central fountain 
splash cheerili in the midday light. the courtyard wa circl with a 
picturesqu galleri of cells, all with massiv wooden doors, most 
like room onc inhabit by chast sisters. 

the place did seem to be a clinic-commun now, just as paula had said. 
not nun thi time around, but rather new age acolyt whose tast ran 
more to secular music than to religi chants, as wit the 
cacophoni of sound that waft out from sever of the cells. onli it 
wasn't ani kind of convent music; it seem a mixtur of japanes 
flute, north indian ragas, african drumming. I like the ragas, even 
recogn my favorite, "bhairavi." 

then I spot someth that rivet my attention. At the back of the 
courtyard, just past a final wooden door, stood a huge south indian 
bronz statue, about five feet high, of the danc shiva. It appear 
to be presid over the arch way that led out into a dens natur 
garden behind the building. 

I walk across the cobbleston to examin and admir it. It seem an 
odd item to find here in the courtyard of a once-cloist convent. I 
wa so enthral I fail to hear the door behind me open. 

"do you find my shiva interesting, ms. james?" said a sooth voice, 
just bare audibl abov the chirp of birds. I think I caught a 
breath in my phlegm-lock chest, but then I turn to see a tall man 
dress in casual chino and a dark sweater. He wa trim, look to be 
in hi earli sixties, with a mane of salt-and-pepp hair and lean 
featur more craggi than handsome. but hi eye were everything, 
tell you he own the space around him, own in fact, the air he 
breathed. It had to be alex goddard. 

"yes," I answer almost befor I thought. "it just seem to be a 
littl out of place here." 

I wonder if he wa go to introduc himself. then I realiz that 
when you'r use to be the master of a privat domain, you probabl 
never think to bother with such trivial formalities. everybodi know 
who you are. 

"well," he said, hi voic disarmingli benign, "I suppos I must beg to 
differ. may I suggest you consid thi shiva for a moment and tri to 
imagin he' a real god?" 

"he is a real god" I said immedi feel patronized. noth make 
me angri faster. "in india, he's--" 

"yes," he said "I know you did a film about india--which I found quit 
extraordinary, by the way--but whi wouldn't the shiva fit right in 
here? you see, he' a veri modern, univers figure. He incorpor 
everyth that exist in the contemporari world. space, time, matter, 
and energy. As well as all of human psycholog and wisdom." 

"i'm awar of that," I said sens my piqu increase. We were not 
get off to a great start. 

"yes, well." He seem not to hear me. instead he start put on 
the leather jacket he'd had slung over hi shoulder. "notic that shiva 
ha four arms, and he' danc with one foot raised. he' also 
stand insid that great circl of flame, a sort of halo encompass 
hi whole body. that circl stand for the great, all-embrac 
materi universe, all of it. dark and light, good and evil. He know 
and control everything." 

hey, I realized, thi guy' got some kind of ident thing go with 
thi ancient indian god. 

He continu as he zip up the jacket. "shiva ha four arm because--" 

"let me tell you," I said, interrupt him. He look startled, 
clearli not accustom to a woman meet him on hi own ground. "he 
ha four hand becaus he ha a lot to do. that littl drum in hi 
upper right summon thing into existence. and there in hi upper left 
he hold a fire that destroys." 

goddard wa examin me curiously, but I just stare back and 
continued. 

"hi lower right hand is held up in a kind of benediction, as if to 
say, 'find your peac within,' and the lower left point down at hi 
feet, where one foot is plant on the back of that repuls littl 
dwarf there, the human ego. crush the ego and be free. the other foot 
is lift to signifi spiritu freedom." 

"you seem to know the shiva well." He broke into a grudg smile, as 
though we'd just met. chalk up round one as a draw. "i'm glad you came, 
ms. james. i'm a great admir of your work and I especi want to 
provid your orient personally. it' a genuin pleasur to meet 
you at last." 

At last? I took hi proffer hand and stared. all the question i'd 
been brood over for the past week sort of disappear into a memori 
file somewhere. instead all I could do wa focu in on him. 

meet carli and paula' miracl worker in the flesh made me recal 
someth aldou huxley onc observed. He declar that the kind of 
man, and they are almost alway men, who can control other with hi 
mind need to have certain qualiti the rest of us can onli envy. Of 
cours he ha to be intellig and have a rang of knowledg that can 
be use to impress people, but most of all, he ha to have a will of 
iron, an unswerv tenac of purpose, and an uncompromis 
self-confid about who he is, what he wants. thi mean a slightli 
remot manner, a glitter eye, and a sympathet gaze that bore in 
deepli on you one minute, then seem off in anoth realm, focus on 
infinity, the next. perhap most importantli of all, hi voic must be 
that of a pie piper, a soft yet penetr instrument that act 
directli on the unconsci of hi listeners. 

even though he wa do a casual number with me, my first impress 
of alex goddard wa that he perfectli embodi all those qualities. I 
also sens a fals note. what wa it? mayb he wa be just a littl 
too casual. 

"if you'r here about do a film," he began, "pleas be awar we do 
not encourag publicity. If you'v come becaus of your infertility, as 
ramala said you mention in your call, then I welcom you with open 
arms." 

well, he knew how to cut to the chase. and after hi phone call to tri 
to intimid paula marks, I wa well awar he didn't "encourag 
publicity." but now I also realiz he wouldn't be overli interest in 
my new idea of someday do a documentari on thi place. but then a 
lot of peopl say no at first and then come around. 

"I wa actual interest in neither," I said, feel my sinus 
about to close down permanently. "I wa actual hope to find out 
about your adopt service, how it works." 

"ah," he said, hi eye shift from intens scrutini to somewher 
lost in the ozone, "that' not someth I handl personally. In ani 
case, you first must come and particip in our program. then, if we 
fail to achiev your objectives, we can take the adopt matter under 
consideration." 

"I think i'd like to hear about it anyway." I took a deep breath, again 
grope for air. "for instance, where and how you get the children you 
place." 

"I see," he said calmly, as though my question were about the weather. 
then he secur hi coat tighter. "i'm thinking, how would you like to 
take a short walk? down to the river. We could get to know each other 
better." 

I just nodded, not look forward to the harsh wind that would assault 
my inflam sinuses. but mayb I wa get somewhere. 

As we start out through the stone archway and into the rear garden, 
which seem to extend for acres, he continued. 

"you seem to have a lot of question about what i'm do here. So let 
me tri and put my effort into perspective. As I like to point out to 
women when they first come here, we in the west are make do with onli 
half the world' medic knowledge. We ignor all of the east. there' 
also the wisdom of the indigen peopl here in the western 
hemisphere, the nativ americans. who are we to say they don't have a 
lot to teach?" He smiled, as though embarrass to be pass along 
such a commonplace. "for example, western medic practice, virtual 
until thi century, consist mainli of use leech to drain away 
'humors' in the blood. At the same time, the indigen peopl of thi 
contin knew more about the cur power of plants, even drugs, 
than europ ever dream of. yet they were deem savages." 

I wasn't sure where he wa leading, but the suprem self-confid 
with which he spoke had the effect of sweep me along. the engag 
eyes, the voice, the well-us design jacket, it all worked. He wa 
good, veri good. 

"so you see," he went on, "what i'v tri to achiev here at quetzal 
manor is to integr the knowledg of east and west, ancient and 
modern." 

"so what, exactly, do you--?" 

"well, first let me explain that I studi in the far east for over a 
decade, until I understood how to control the energi flow in the body, 
your chi. then I move to central america, where I learn all that is 
current known about nativ american practic and medicines. I still 
have a special place there, where I carri out pharmacolog research 
on the rare plant of that area, studi their effect on human 
fertility, on the origin of life. I have no time to wast on diseas 
and degeneration." 

We were well into hi eden-lik rear garden now, which had lot of 
herb and wa also part orchard. there were appl tree and other fruit 
tree I couldn't readili identify, all just start to show their 
first buds. when we came to the end, there wa a cobbleston path 
lead west. In what seem onli a few moments, we'd reach a line of 
bluff overlook the hudson. the earli spring wind wa cut into 
my face, caus my nostril to feel on fire. 

As we stood gaze down at the rippl water of the hudson below, 
where a lone sailboat wa caught in the breeze, the moment took on a 
timelessness, feel as though it could have been ani place, ani 
century. 

"incidentally," he went on, turn slightli to me, "are you familiar 
with the name asklepios?" 

I had to shake my head no. It sound vagu familiar, but . . . 

"he wa the ancient greek god of medicine. the physician who rever 
him held that sick could be cure use drug and potion that came 
from outsid the body, sinc they believ that' where diseas 
originated. now, of course, billion-dollar industri thrive by 
enhanc our arsen of antibiotics." 

I listen to this, wonder where he wa headed. then he told me. 

"there was, however, anoth school of heal at that time, those who 
honor the daughter of asklepios. she wa hygeia, their goddess of 
health. the hygeian believ that well origin from properli 
govern your own body. for them, the greatest servic of the 
physician wa to learn how we can work with our bodies. their ideal wa 
heal from within rather than intervent from without." 

again he wa studi me, as though tri to determin whether I wa 
go along with what he wa saying. 

"unfortunately," he continued, "the hygeian school more or less die 
out in the west. however, it live on in other places. for example, 
primit peopl have no manufactured, synthet drugs, so they use 
natur herb to enhanc their own immun system and stay healthy." 

He turn to studi the river, drop into silence. 

"mayb i'm miss something," I declar finally. hi hypnot voic 
had drawn me in, in spite of myself. "how doe thi relat to 
infertility?" 

He turn back and caught me with hi shine eyes. they seem to be 
give off heat of their own. "just as the bodi is intend to heal 
itself, so is a woman' womb meant to creat life. If she' childless, 
the reason more often than not is that her bodi is out of harmoni with 
itself. what I do here is seek out each woman' uniqu energi flow and 
attempt to restor them, use eastern practic and hygeian herbal 
therapies." 

"doe it alway succeed?" I abruptli wonder if hi techniqu might 
work for me. face it, western medicin had complet struck out. the 
problem was, the guy wa just a littl too smooth. 

"not always. some women' bodi are natur unresponsive, just as 
all organ are subject to random . . . irregularities. In those 
cases, I tri to provid her a child by other means." 

"you mean adoption," I suggested. 

"bi whatev mean seem appropriate," he repli cryptic 

"well, there' someth i'd like to understand. last week I met a 
woman who had adopt a babi boy through children of light. she got him 
in three months. such a thing is, accord to what I can find out, 
total unheard of. So how did you manag that?" 

He stare down at the river. "I thought i'd explain that adopt 
are not what we primarili do here. they'r provid onli as a last 
resort, in the few case where my regimen of hygeian therapi fails." 

"but in those cases, where do you find--?" 

"a i'v said befor we talk about adoption, first we need to satisfi 
ourselv that no other option are possible." then hi eye click 
into me. "if you could come back next saturday to begin your test and 
receiv an orientation, I could give you an opinion about your chanc 
of bear a child. It will requir a thorough examination, but I can 
usual tell with a good degre of certainti whether my program can 
help someon or not. it' realli important, though, that you stay at 
least . . ." He wa stare at me. "mind if I do someth that might 
reliev some of the symptom of that cold?" 

He reach out and touch my templ with hi long, lean fingers. then 
he place hi thumb just abov my eyebrow and press veri hard. 
after a long moment, he slowli move the pressur down to the bridg of 
my nose, then across under my eyes. final he put the heel of hi 
hand just abov my ear and press again. after a coupl of second 
he step away and continu talk as though noth had happened. 

"after I give you a full examination, we can discuss our next step." 
with that he turned, readi to head back. "now if you'll excus me, i'v 
got a lot of research data to organize." 

I guess he assum hi juggernaut of arcan medic theori had roll 
over me suffici that he could move on to other matters. I sens 
he realli want me to come back, but he wa care to wind down our 
mutual interview with a take-it-or-leave-it air. all the same, I felt 
intrigu as we move back through the garden and then into the 
courtyard. A baby. mayb he could make it happen for steve and me. In 
spite of myself, I felt a moment of hope. 

"thank you for coming," he said by way of farewell, just brush my 
hand, then turn and disappear through one of the ancient wooden 
door along the veranda, leav me alone. 

well, I thought, the calm voic and casual outfit are probabl just 
part of hi bedsid manner, but you can't be near alex goddard and not 
feel a definit sens of care control power. but is hi power 
be use for good? 

thi wa the man whose staff wa tri to deni me interview with 
mother who'd adopt through children of light. and what about the 
hispan hood with the gun? did alex goddard send him? If not, hi 
appear at paula' build wa one hell of a coincidence. So whi 
should I trust . . . 

that wa when I notic it. My linger cold had miracul 
vanished, inflam sinus and all. I wa breath normally, and even 
my chest felt cleared. 

My god, I thought, what did he do? hypnot me? It wa as though a 
week' heal had pass through my body. 

I had an epiphany, a moment that galvan your resolve. I had to do a 
documentari about thi man, to find out what he wa realli up to. he'd 
mention he had a place in central america. wa that the sourc of hi 
special techniques, some kind of ancient meso-american medic 
practic he'd discovered? 

He claim he didn't want ani publicity, but that' alway just an 
open move. when somebodi say that, what they realli mean is they 
don't want ani bad publicity; they just want to have final say about 
what you produce. there'r way to handl the problem. 

I liber a brochur from the hall tabl on my way out, think I 
would studi it soon. veri closely. I had a nose for a good story, and 
thi one felt right. 

when I got back to the car, lou wa nowher to be seen. he'd given me 
the impress he intend mere to sit there and doze while I went 
inside, but now he wa gone. 

then he appear emerg from the forest of trees. actually, there wa 
anoth build opposit the stone drive that I hadn't notic at 
first. hmmm, I thought, I wonder what that' all about. for some reason 
alex goddard hadn't offer me a tour; he'd taken me for a stroll in 
the opposit direction. . . . 

"that wa fast," lou said settl into the car. "you get what you came 
for?" 

the answer to that wa both ye and no. In a sens i'd gotten 
consider more than I bargain for. 

"he want me to come back," I said. "and I think I might do it. there' 
a lot more go on with alex goddard than you'd know from just look 
at thi place. the trick is to stay in control when you'r around him." 

I toss the brochur into lou' lap as I start the engine. He took 
it and immedi began look through it. 

lou, I knew, wa a man alway interest in fact and figures. As we 
head toward the parkway he wa pour through the brochur with 
intens interest, even as I tri to give him a brief repris of alex 
goddard' medic philosophy. 

"it say here hi patient come from all over the unit state and 
europe," he noted, final interrupt me. 

I found noth odd in that, and went back to rambl on about quetzal 
manor. give the place it due, it wa placid and tranquil and smack 
of the benign spiritu goddard claim to put so much stock in. 
still, I found it unsettling. 

however, lou, as usual, chose to see matter hi own way. he'd been 
studi the fine print at the back of the brochure, mumbl to 
himself, and then he emit a grunt of discovery. 

"ah, here' what I wa look for," he declared. "you know, as a 
regist new york state adopt agency, thi outfit ha got to 
divulg the number of babi they place dure their last yearli 
report period." 

"accord to him, he onli resort to adopt if he can't cure your 
infertil with hi special mind-bodi regimen," I remind him. "your 
energi flows--" 

"no shit," lou observed, then went on. "well, then I guess hi 
mind-body, energi flows, whatever, bullshit must fail a lot. becaus 
last year the number wa just under two hundred. So at sixti thou a 
pop, like it say here, we'r talk about twelv million smackeroo 
gross in a year. not a bad way to fail, huh?" 

I caught myself emit a soft whistl as he read out the number. 
there wa definit a lot more go on with alex goddard than met the 
eye. 

"so what' he do with all that dough?" lou mused. "better question 
still, where in the hell did he find two hundr fresh, orphan 
babies, all list here as caucasian? and get this: the age report 
at final process are all just a coupl of months, give or take." 

good questions, I thought. mayb that' the reason he doesn't want 
publicity; it sound a littl too commerci for a mind-bodi guru. 

My other thought was, with so mani babi somehow available, whi wa 
alex goddard so reluct to even discuss adopt with me? 

the answer, I wa sure, lay in the fact he alreadi knew more about me 
than I knew about him. He knew I wa make a film about adopt (how 
did he come by that knowledge? I kept wondering) and he wa concern 
he might be mention in it. I kept ask myself, why? 

On our drive back down the henri hudson parkway, I decid I wa 
definit look at a documentari in the making. I just had to decid 
whether to do it with or without hi cooperation. 




chapter six 


after I drop off lou at hi space in soho, where he wa hous 
sit for an estat now in the courts, I decid to head on home. the 
more I thought about alex goddard, the more I felt frustrat and even 
a littl angri that i'd complet fail to find out ani of the thing 
i'd want to learn about him. I replay our interview in my mind, got 
nowhere, and then decid to push away thought of quetzal manor for a 
while and dwell on someth else: sarah, my film, anything. 

It wa saturday, and unfortun I had no plan for the evening. 
translation: no steve. back to where I started. how mani million 
stori in the nake city, and I wa just so mani million plu one. 
it' not a jungl out there, it' a desert. 

the truth was, after steve took off, I hadn't realli been tri all 
that hard to pick myself up off the canva and look around. besides, I 
didn't want some other guy, I want him. ad to that, I somehow felt 
that when you'r on the short countdown for forty, you shouldn't have 
to be go out on blind dates, wonder whether that buttoned-down 
mba sit across from you in some trendi italian restaur think 
you'r a blimp (even though you skip lunch), tell yourself he' 
presentable, doesn't seem like a serial killer, ha a job, onli 
mention hi mother once, and could qualifi as an accept life' 
mate. there' no spark, but he' probabl quit nice. you wanli 
rememb that old barney' ad jingle, "select, don't settle," but at 
thi stage of life you'r readi to admit you'v flunk out in love 101 
and should just go with like. 

which wa one of the reason I miss steve so deeply. He wa a lover, 
but he wa also a best friend. and I wa run low on those. 

everi woman need a best pal. after my former best, betsy, marri joel 
aimes, off-broadway' latest contribut to dreamworks, and move to 
the coast with him, I wa notic a lot of empti evenings. In the old 
days, we could talk for hours. It wa funny, sinc we were actual 
veri different. betsy, who had forgotten more about cloth and makeup 
than most women would ever know, hung around the garment-cent 
showroom and alway came away with sampl of next season' couture, 
usual for a song. I envi her that, sinc I usual just pretend 
not to care and pull on anoth pair of jean everi morning. but she 
share my love of asian music. 

anyway, now she wa gone and I could tell we weren't work hard 
enough at stay in touch. she and joel had just move to a new 
apart and I didn't even have her latest phone number. . . . 

which brought me back to steve. i'd often wonder whi we were so 
alike, and i'd final decid it wa becaus we both start from the 
same place spiritually. In hi case, that place wa a crummi childhood 
in new haven--which he didn't want to talk about much because, I 
gathered, it wa as lone and depriv as my own, or at least as 
depressing. hi father had own a small candi store and had want all 
hi four children to becom "professionals." the oldest had becom a 
lawyer, the next a teacher. when steve' turn came, he wa told he 
should becom a doctor, or at the veri least, a dentist. 

didn't happen. he'd manag four year of preme at 

yale, but then he rebelled, cash in hi med-school scholarship, and 
went to pari to studi photography. the result wa he'd done what he 
wanted, been reason success at it, and hi father had never 
forgiven him. I think he wa still strive for the old man' approval, 
even after all the years, but I doubt he'd ever get it. steve wa a 
guy still come to grip with thing that couldn't be changed, but in 
the meantim he live in world that were as differ from hi own 
past as he could find. He deliber avoid middle-class comforts, 
and wa never happier than when he wa in some miser speck on the 
map where you couldn't drink the water. whatev els it was, it wasn't 
new haven. . . . 

think about him at that moment, I had an almost irresist desir 
to reach for my cell phone and call him. god, I miss him. did he miss 
me the same way? I want so much to hear him say it. 

I had a contact number for him in beliz city, an old, brit-lik hotel 
call the bellevue, where they still serv high tea, but I alway 
seem to call when he wa out somewher in the rain forest, shooting. 

Do it. don't be a wuss. 

but then I got cold feet. did I want him to think I wa chase after 
him? I didn't want to sound needi . . . though that wa exactli what I 
felt like at the moment. 

final I decid to just invent a phone conversation, recreat one 
from time past, one where we both felt secur enough to be flip. It 
wa someth I did more than i'd like to admit. usual there'd be 
eight ring at hi park slope loft and then a harri voice. yes. 
steve, talk to me. . . . 

"yo. thi is not a recording. I am just in a transcend plane. and if 
that' you, murray, i'll have the contact sheet there by six. patienc 
is a virtue." 

"honey, it' me. get out of the darkroom. get a life." 

"oh, hi, baby." final tune in. "i'm working. In a quest for 
unrel pictori truth. but mainli i'm think of you." 

"you'r printing, right? darling, it' lunch hour. don't you feel 
guilty, work all the time?" 

the truth was, it wa one of the reason I respect him so much. He 
even did hi own contacts. hi fervor match my drive. it' what made 
us perfect mates. 

"i'v got ton of guilt. but i'm tri to get past it. becom a full 
human person. Go back to the dawn of man. paint my face and danc in a 
thunderstorm." he'd pause, as though start to get oriented. "hey, 
look at the time. christ. i'v got a print shoot on thirty-eighth 
street at three." 

He wa chase a bit of fashion work to supplement hi on-again, 
off-again magazin assignments. 

"love," I said in my reverie, "can you come over tonight? I promis to 
make it worth your while. It involv a bubbl bath, champagne, rose 
everywhere, sensuou raga on the cd. and mayb some crispi oyster or 
something, sent in later on, just to keep us going." 

then i'd listen to the tone of hi voice, know he'd say ye but 
put more stock in how he said it. still, he alway gave hi line a 
good read. 

"then whi don't we aim for about nine?" i'd go on, blissful. "that 
ought to give me a chanc to get organized. and don't bring anyth 
except your lusciou self." the fantasi wa come togeth in my mind. 
think back, I realiz how much I miss him, all over again. . . . 

that wa when the phone on the armrest besid me rang for real. for a 
moment I wa so startl I almost hit the brakes. then I click it on, 
my mind still buzz about steve, and also, in spite of my resolve, 
about the curiou runaround i'd just gotten from alex goddard. 

"listen, there wa a messag on my machin when I came 

in. i'v got to go up to the hospital. right now." lou' voic wa 
brim with hope and exuberance. "they said sarah wa stirring. she' 
open her eye and start talking. they said she' not make much 
sense, but . . . oh, god." 

"that' wonderful." I felt my heart expand with life. for some 
reason, I had a flash of memori of her climb up into the ricketi 
littl tree house--well, more like a platform--i'd help her build in 
my thirteenth summer, no boy invit to assist. A year later that part 
had seem termin dumb. "i'll meet you there." 

I wa almost home, but I screech the car around and head east. 
race over, though, I tri not to wish for too much. I kept 
rememb all the stage to a complet recoveri and tell myself 
that whatev had happened, it wa onli the first step on a veri long, 
veri scari journey. . . . 

I hadn't realiz how scari till I walk into the room. lou, who had 
gotten there just minut befor I did, wa sit by her side, 
hold her hand, hi gaze transfix on her. she wa prop up 
slightli in her bed, two pillow fluf behind her head, stare 
dreamili at the ceiling. three attent middle-ag nurs were 
stand around the side of her bed, their eye wide, as though sarah 
were a ghost. I veri quickli realiz why. she wa spin out a 
fantasi that could onli come from a derang mind. had she regain 
conscious onli to talk madness? 

"lou, doe she recogn you?" I asked. 

He just shook hi head sadly, never take hi eye off her face. she 
wa weav in and out of reality, pausing, stuttering, uncertain of 
her incoher brain. once, when she'd fallen off a swing and got 
knock out for a brief moment, she came to talk nonsense. now she 
seem exactli the same way. 

"light ... so bright," she mumbled, start up again to recount what 
seem to be a faraway fantasy, ". . . like now. 

whi . . . whi are there light here?" her lip were move but her eye 
were still fix in a stare. then, with that last, odd question, her 
gaze began to dart about the room, look for someon who wasn't 
present. she settl on me for a moment, and I felt a chill from her 
plaintiv vulnerability. when I tri to look back as benignli and 
lovingli as possible, I couldn't help notic how drawn her cheek 
were, doubtless from the constant IV feeding, and again my heart went 
out. "i'm scared," she went on, "but--" 

"i'm here, honey," lou declared, bend over her, hi eye pained. "do 
you know who I am?" 

"the jade face . . . a mask," she babbl on, still ignor him. "all 
the colors. it' so . . . so beautiful." 

her hallucin didn't relat to anyth I could understand. she 
clearli wa off in anoth world, like when she wa a kid, weav the 
light of the room now into some kind of dream. I touch lou' 
shoulder and ask permiss to turn off the overhead fluorescents, 
but he just shrug me off, hi attent focus entir on her. 

hi eye had grown puzzled, as though he want to believ she wa 
return to ration but hi common sens wa tell him it wasn't 
true. 

I wa have a differ reaction. what she wa say wa random 
babblings, all right, but I wa begin to think she wa reliv 
someth she had actual seen. 

however, she wasn't through. 

"I want to pray, but . . . the white tunnel . . . is coming." she 
shuddered, then almost tri to smile. "take me . . ." 

she wa gone, her eyelid flutter uncontrollably. 

"honey, talk to me," lou pleaded. He wa crying, someth i'd never 
seen him do, someth I wa not even awar he wa capabl of. what he 
realli wa tri to say was, "come back." 

It wasn't happening. she stare blankli at the ceil for a moment, 
then slowli close her eyes, a shutter descend over her soul. 

"she'll be okay," I whisper to him, almost believ it. her brain 
had undergon a physic trauma, enough to caus a coma, but some kind 
of mental trauma must have preced it. wa she now tri to exorcis 
that as part of her path to recovery? 

the nurs in the room stirred, perhap not sure what to do. the 
overhead light were still dazzlingli bright, and I move to shut them 
off, leav onli a night-light behind the bed. perhap the light had 
brought her awake, but I wa convinc what she'd just gone through had 
tire her to the point that she would not reviv again that day. 

then one of the caribbean nurs came over and place her hand on lou' 
shoulder. she had an experienc face, full of self-confidence. 
someth about her inspir trust. 

"I wouldn't let thi upset you too much," she said, a love lilt in 
her voice. "what just happen may or may not mean anything. when 
patient first come out of a coma, they can sometim talk just fine, 
and yet not make ani sense. they rambl on about thing they dream of 
like they were real." then she smiled. "but it' a good first step. she 
could wake up perfectli fine tomorrow. just don't pay ani attent to 
what she say for a while. she' dream now." 

lou grunt as though he believ her. I nod in sympathy, though no 
one seem to notice. 

I also thought that although what sarah had said wa bizarre, it 
sound like someth more than a dream. Or had she gone back to her 
child-stat where imaginari world were real for her? 

then in the dim glare of her bed light, lou took a wrinkl blue 
booklet out of hi inner pocket and stare at it. I had to stare at it 
a moment befor I realiz it wa a passport. 

"what--?" 

"the american consul in merida, mexico, sent it up to 26 feder 
plaza yesterday, becaus my name and offic address are pencil on the 
insid cover as an emerg contact. the polic down there said 
somebody, some gringo tourist fly-fish way down on the usumacinta 
river, near where the rio tigr come in from guatemala, snag thi 
float in a plastic bag. He turn it in to the mexican author 
there, and it end up with our people." He open the passport and 
stare at it. "the photo and ID page is rip out, but it' definit 
sarah's." He hand it over. "guy I know downtown drop it off last 
night. i'm not sure if it ha anyth to tell us, but now, I wa 
hope it might help jog her memory." 

I took it, the cover so waterlog it color wa almost gone. however, 
it must have been kept dri in the plastic bag for at least some of it 
trip from wherever, sinc much of the damag seem recent. 

lou shook hi head stare wist at me. "I still don't know how she 
got down there. she wa in california. rememb that postcard? If she'd 
come back east, she'd have got in touch. wouldn't she?" hi eye 
plead for my agreement. 

I didn't know what to say, so I just shrugged. I want to be 
sympathetic, but I refus to lie outright. He took my ambival as 
assent as he pull out the locket contain her picture, hi 
talisman. He finger it for a moment, stare into space, and then he 
look down and open it, as if see her high school picture, from a 
time when she wa well, would somehow eas hi mind. 

"thi whole thing doesn't sound like her," he went on. "know what I 
think? she wa be held down there against her will." 

My heart went out to him, and I reach over and took the locket for a 
moment, feel the strong "src" engrav on it heart-shap face. 
"lou, she' go to come out of it. and when she does, she'll probabl 
explain everything. she' go to be okay ani day now, i'v got a 
hunch. A gut feeling." 

I had a gut feeling, all right, but not that she wa go to be fine. 
My real fear wa she wa go to wake up a fantasy-bound child again. 

then I hand the locket back. he'd seem to turn anxiou without it. 
He took the silver heart and just stare down at it. In the silenc 
that settl over us, I decid to take a closer look at the passport. 
I suppos lou had alreadi gone through it, but mayb he'd miss 
something. 

As I flip through the waterlog pages, I came across a smudgi 
imprint, cake with a thin layer of dri river clay, that wa almost 
too dim to be noticed. 

"lou, did you see this?" I held it under the light and beckon him 
over. "can you read it?" 

"probabl not without my specs." He took it and squint helplessly. 
"mi eye aren't get ani better." 

I took it back and rub at the page, clean it. It wa hard to make 
out, but it look like "delegacion de migracion, aeropuerto 
internacional, guatemala, c.a." 

"I think thi is a guatemalan tourist entri visa." I rais the 
passport up to backlight the page. "and see that faint bit there in the 
center? that' probabl her entri date. written in by hand." 

He took it and squint again. "I can't read the damn thing, but 
you'r right. there' some numbers, or something, scribbl in." 

I took it and rub the page till I could read it clearly. "it' march 
eleventh. and it wa last year." 

"hot damn, let me see that." He seiz it back and squint for a long 
moment, lift the page even closer to the light. "you'r right." He 
held it for a second more, then turn to me. "thi is final the 
thing I needed. now i'm damn well go to find out what she wa 
do down there." 

"how do you think you can do that?" I just look at him, my mind not 
quit take in what he'd just said. 

"the airlines." He almost grinned. "if they can keep track of 
everybody' damn frequent-fly mile for year and years, they 
undoubtedli got flight manifest store away somewher too. So my first 
step is to find out where she flew from." 

"but we don't know which--" 

"doesn't matter." He squint again at the passport. "now we know for 
sure she show up at the airport in guatemala citi on that date there. 
I know somebodi downtown, smooth black guy name john williams, the 
fbi' best comput nerd, who could bend a rule for me and do a littl 
b&e in cyberspace. He owe me a couple. so, if she wa on a manifest 
for a schedul flight into guatemala citi that day, he'll find it. 
then we'll know where she left from, who els wa on the plane." He 
tap the passport confid with hi forefinger. "mayb she wa 
travel with some scumbag I ought to look up and get to know better." 

"well, good luck." 

In a way I wa wonder if we weren't both now grasp for a miracle: 
me half-hop for a babi through some new age process of "centering," 
lou tri to reclaim sarah from her mental abyss with hi gruff love. 
but then again, miracl have been known to happen. 




chapter seven 


"quetzal manor could have the make of a great documentary," I wa 
explain to david roth. "I just need some more information-gath 
first, to get a better feel for what alex goddard is up to. So go 
back up there will be two bird with one stone. i'll learn more about 
him, and he might even be abl to tell me whi I haven't been abl to 
get pregnant." 

He wa frowning, hi usual skeptic self. "how long--?" 

"it' just for the weekend, or mayb a littl . . . i'm not sure 
exactly. I guess it depend on what kind of test he' go to run. 
but the thing is, I have to do it now, while he and I are still 
clicking. An 'iron is hot' kind of moment. the onli possibl problem 
might be if I have to push back my schedul for loop dialogu for 
_babi love _and then somebody' out of town." 

"you check with the sound studio to warn them about possibl 
rescheduling?" He want to appear to be fuming. but sinc he'd invit 
me down to hi tribeca loft at least onc everi three months, now that 
i'd final shown up, he also had a small gleam in hi eye. what did 
that mean? 

"yes, but i'v alreadi spot most of the work print, and i'v made 
tent date for peopl to come in. In a week and a half. 
everything' still on schedule." 

He lean back on hi white couch, as though tri to regroup. It wa 
saturday morn and i'd alreadi made the 

appoint to see alex goddard. I wa going. I probabl should have 
run it by david first, but damnit, it wa my life. 

truthfully, though, i'd been dread tell him all week, so to tri 
and make him as congeni as possible, i'd arrang to see him at home 
and relaxed. It seem to be working, more or less. 

"okay, okay, sometim I guess it' best to just go with your gut," he 
said, begin to calm down. he'd offer to whip up some brunch when 
I first arrived, and now I wa feel sorri i'd turn him down. I 
realli did like him. but, alas, onli as a friend. "befor I cave in 
totally, though, do me a favor and tell me some more about thi . . . 
documentary? what, exactly, make you think it's--" 

"everything." whereupon I laid on him the full stori of carli and 
paula, the children, and my encount with alex goddard. the onli thing 
I left out wa the stori of the hispan hood sinc I didn't think he 
could handl it. 

"thi quetzal manor sound like a funni operation," he declar 
solemnli when i'd finished. "I say the less you have to do with a place 
like that, the better. who know what' go on." 

"but, david that' what make it so interesting. the fact that it _is_ 
a 'funny' operation. I realli can see a documentari here, after babi 
love is in the can. but i'll never have a chanc if I don't get to know 
thi guy while i'v got a good excuse. that' how my busi works." 

"so you'r go to go back up there and . . . Is thi like go 
undercov or something?" 

"well . . ." what wa I go to say? I wa actual half begin to 
believ that alex goddard might be abl to figur out whi steve and I 
couldn't conceive. It wa certainli worth a few day of my life, 
documentari or no documentary. "look, I realli want to find out what' 
go on. for a lot of reasons." 

He sigh and sip at hi coffee. 

"morgy, thi ha got to be quick. nicki russo call again. the thing 
i'v learn about loan sharks, they keep your book better than you 
do. He know exactli how much money we'v got left and how long we can 
last. he' lick hi chops, get readi to eat us whole." 

"what did you tell him?" the veri thought of nicki gave me a chill. If 
we miss so much as a week on the juice, he'd have the legal right to 
just seiz my negative. when you'r desperate, you sign those kind of 
loans. 

"I told him someth I haven't even told you yet." He smile a wick 
grin. "I know you'v been schmooz lifetim about a cabl deal, but 
befor we put the ink to that, I want to finish some new talk i'v 
start with orion, their distribut people." 

I think I stop breath for a second or two. wa there a chanc for 
a theatric releas for _babi love_, not just a cabl deal? 

"when . . . you'v actual met with them? how--?" 

"late yesterday." He wa still grinning. "I ran into jerri reiner at 
morton' and pitch the picture. actually, I heard he wa in town, so 
I wore a tie and ambush him at lunch. He want to see a rough cut as 
soon as we'v got someth ready." 

"david, you'r an angel." I wa ecstatic. It wa more than i'd dare 
hope for. 

"so stay focused, for chrissake, and finish your picture. we'r thi 
close to save our collect asses, so don't blow it. i'v gone over 
all the schedul pretti carefully, and i'd guess we can spare a day or 
two, but if you drag thi out, i'm go to read you your contract, the 
fine print about due diligence, and then finish up the final cut 
myself. I mean it. don't make me do that." 

"don't you even think about that." never! "thi is my picture." 

"just business. If it' a choic between do what I gotta do, or 
have nicki russo chew me a new asshol and becom the silent partner 
in applecore, guess what it' gonna be." 

"david, you know I would never let that happen." I walk over and gave 
him the sweetest hug I knew how, still fill with joy. "and thank so 
much for tri to get us a theatrical. you don't know how much that 
mean to me." 

"hey, don't tri the charm bit on me. i'm serious. i'll cut you a 
weekend' slack, but then it' back to the salt mines. either thi 
picture' in the can insid of six weeks, or we'r both go to be 
look for new employment. So go the hell up there, do whatev it is 
you'r go to do, and then get thi damn pictur finished. there'l 
be plenti of time after that to worri about our next project. with luck 
we might even have the money for it." 

with that ultimatum still ring in my ears, I took my leav of david 
roth and head north, up the henri hudson parkway. My life wa get 
too roller-coast for words. . . . 

As I drove, I tri not to dwell on the practic aspect of what wa 
coming. It wa hard to imagin what test alex goddard could perform 
that hadn't alreadi been done by hannah klein. just think back over 
that dismal sequenc made me feel baby-despond all over again. 

when I first mention I wa think about tri to get pregnant, she 
look me over, perhap mental calcul my age and my prospects, 
and then made a light suggestion. 

"whi don't I give you a prescript for clomid. clomiphen citrat 
enhanc ovulation, and it might be a good idea in your case. you'r 
still young, morgan, but you'r no longer in the first blush of youth." 

I took it for six months, but noth happened. that wa the begin 
of my pregnanc depression. 

By that time, she'd decid I definit had a problem, so she began 
what she call an "infertil workup." the main thing wa to check my 
fallopian tube for blockag and look for ovulatori abnormalities. but 
everyth turn out to be fine. depress city. 

"well," she said, "mayb your bodi just _thinks_ you'v releas an 
ovum. We need to do an ultrasound scan to make doubli sure an ovarian 
follicl ha ruptur when it' schedul to and drop an egg." 

It turn out, however, that all those hormon stop-and-go signal 
were work just fine. In the meantime, steve and I were do it like 
bunni and still no pregnancy. 

okay, she then declared, the problem may be with your fallopian tube 
after all. time to test for abnormalities. "thi is not go to be 
fun. first we have to dilat your cervix, after which we inject a dye 
and follow it with x-ray as it move through the uteru and is eject 
out of your fallopian tubes. we'll know right away if there' ani kind 
of blockage. If there is something, we can go in and fix it." 

"sort of check out my pipes," I said, tri to come to grip with the 
procedure. I wa increasingli sink into despondency. 

she did it all, and for a while she suspect there might be some kind 
of anatom problem. which brought us to the next escal of 
invasiveness. 

"we'v got to go in and take a close-up look at everything," she said. 
"it' a procedur call laparoscopy. i'll have to make a small 
incis near your navel and insert a tini optic device. In your 
case, I want to combin it with what' call a hysteroscopy, which 
will allow me to see directli insid your uteru for polyp and 
fibroids." 

but again everyth look fine. I began to wonder what had happen 
to everybody' mother' warn you could get pregnant just let 
some pimpli guy put hi hand in your pants. 

prior to all this, I should add, steve had provid sampl of sperm to 
be test for number and vigor. (both were just fine.) then, toward the 
end of all the indignities, he actual paid to have some kind of test 
perform involv a hamster egg, to see if hi sperm wa live 
enough to penetr it. No wonder he final went over the edge. 

now I wa reduc to alex goddard. i'd brought a complet set of my 
medic test records, as ramala had request on the phone. i'd also 
brought a deep curios about what exactli he could do that hadn't 
alreadi been done. I further wonder how I wa go to talk steve 
into come back long enough to share in the project. As I motor up 
the driveway to quetzal manor, I told myself he love me still, want 
a babi as much as I did . . . well, let me be safe and say almost as 
much. the problem was, he wa so demor about the whole thing. and 
then what? what if noth happened? 

I start to park my car where I had the last time, then notic the 
place actual had a park lot. It wa locat off to the left side 
of the driveway, near the second, modern building, and wa more or less 
hidden in amongst the trees. the lot wa fill with a lot of 
late-model but inexpens cars, basic working-girl transportation, and 
it seem a better bet for long-term parking. 

the front lobby, which had been empti the first time I wa there, wa 
now a minimalist recept area, a long metal desk roll in from 
somewhere. I had the odd feel it wa there just for me. the woman 
behind the desk introduc herself as ramala, the same person i'd 
talk to twice on the phone. she look to be about my age, with long 
dark hair and quick asian eyes, punctuat by a profession smile. 

she knew my name, use it the minut she saw me, and then abruptli 
hand me a twenty-pag "application" to complete. 

"it' not just a formality," she explained, businesslik and earnest. 
"dr. goddard feel it' essenti that he come to know you as a person. 
he'll read thi carefully, believ me." 

she usher me to a chair that had a retract tabl for writing, 
then gave me a ballpoint pen. 

the document turn out to be the most prying, nosi thing i'd ever 
fill out. the page demand what amount to a mini life history. 
one of the thing that struck me as most strang wa the part ask 
for a ten-year employ and residenti history. If you'v move 
around as much as I have, work freelanc a lot, you'll understand how 
difficult it can be to reconstruct all those date and places, but I 
did my best. 

there were, of course, plenti of health question too. one page even 
ask whether there wa anyth out of the ordinari about my own 
birth: wa the deliveri difficult, a cesarean, a breach baby? It was, 
as noted, a life history. 

"whi doe he need all thi information?" I ask finally, feel the 
onset of carpal tunnel syndrom in my right wrist. "I brought all my 
medic records." 

ramala gave me a kindli smile, full of sympathy. 

"he must know you as a person. then everyth is possible. when I came 
here, I had given up on ever have a child, but I surrend myself 
to him and now my husband and I have twin boys, three year old. that' 
whi I stay to help him. hi program can work miracles, but you must 
give him your trust." 

well, I thought, I might as well go with the flow and see where it 
leads. 

when i'd finish the form, she took it back, along with the pen, then 
usher me into the wide central courtyard where i'd met alex goddard 
the first time. He wa nowher to be seen, but in the bright 
late-morn sunshin there wa a line of about twenti women, from late 
twenti to earli forties, all dress in white pajama-lik outfit of 
the kind you see in judo classes, do coordinated, slow-mot tai 
chi-lik exercises. they were intent, their eye fix on the fring 
of infinity. 

these must be some of hi acolytes, I thought, the one I heard in 
their nuns' cell the first time I wa here. what on earth doe all 
thi orient have to do with fertility? I then found myself 
wondering. i'v studi the far east enough to do "penetrating" 
documentari about it, and I still can't get pregnant. 

I took one look at them--non of them look at me--and my heart went 
out. they were so sincere, so sure of what they were doing. for 
somebodi who' alway question everything, like me, it wa touching, 
and mayb a littl daunt too. 

without a word, ramala led me past them and on to an entryway at the 
far end of the courtyard, past the giant danc shiva. the door wa 
huge and ornate, decor with beaten-copp filigree--much like one 
i'd seen in a mogul palac in northern india. definit awe-inspiring. 

she push open the door without ceremoni and there he was, dress in 
white and look for all the world like the miracl worker he claim 
to be. He seem to be medit in hi chair, but the moment I 
entered, hi deep eye snap open. 

"did you bring your records?" he asked, not get up. while I wa 
produc them from my briefcase, ramala discreetli disappeared. 

"pleas have a seat." He gestur me toward a wide chair. 

the room wa a steril babi blue, noth to see. No diplomas, no 
photos, nothing. 

except for another, smaller bronz statu of the danc shiva, pois 
on a silver-inlaid table. I also notic that hi own flow hair 
seem to match that of the bronz figure. 

yes, I thought, I wa right. that' who he think he is. and he ha 
complet power over the peopl around him. how mani chanc do you get 
to do a documentari about somebodi like this? I should have brought a 
betacam for some video. 

He studi my test record as a jewel might examin a diamond, hi 
seriou eye bore in as he flip through the pages. the rest of hi 
face, however, betray no particular interest. I final felt 
compel to break the awkward silence. 

"a you can see, i'v had everi test known to science. and none of them 
found anyth wrong." 

He just nodded, say nothing, and kept on reading. 

after a long, awkward silence, I decid to tri and open thing up a 
bit. 

"tell me, do you have ani children of your own?" 

the question seem to be one he didn't get ask too often, becaus he 
stop cold. 

"all those who come here are my children," he replied, put asid my 
records, dismiss finish with them. 

"well"--i point to them--"what do you think?" 

"I haven't examin you yet," he said, look up and smiling, inde 
beam with confidence. "noth in those record tell me anyth 
about what may be your problem. I look for differ thing than do 
most physicians." 

He fiddl with someth beneath hi desk, and the room wa abruptli 
fill with the sound of a hypnot drone. perhap it frequenc 
match one in my brain, becaus I instantli felt relax and full of 
hope. much better than muzak. then he rose and came over. 

Is he go to do my exam right here? I wondered. where' all the 
ob/gyn paraphernalia? the humili stirrups? 

stand in front of me, he gentli place hi hand on my heart, then 
bent over and seem to be listen to my chest. hi touch wa warm, 
then cold, then warm, but the overal effect wa to send a sens of 
well-b through my entir body. 

"you'r not breath normally," he said after a moment of unnerv 
silence. "I feel no harmony." 

how did he know that? but he wa right. I felt the way I had the first 
time I tri to sit in zen medit in kyoto. As then, my bodi wa 
relax but my wayward brain wa still coursing. 

"i'll try," I said, attempt to go along. what I realli wa feel 
wa the overwhelm sens of hi presence, draw me to him. 

next he move around behind me and cradl my head in hi hands, 
place hi long fingertip on my forehead, sort of the same way he'd 
done when I wa stand with him on the windi heath, nurs a killer 
cold. all the while, the drone seem to be increas to a piercing, 
overwhelm volume, as though a power electr forc were grow 
in the room, send me into an alpha state of relaxation. 

"what are you doing? Is thi how you do an exam for--?" 

"the medic test you had show there' noth wrong with your 
uteru or your fallopian tubes, noth that should inhibit conception. 
there' no need to pursu that ani further. but the mind and the bodi 
are a singl entiti that must be harmonized, must work as one. although 
each individu ha differ energi flows, I think my regimen here 
could be veri help to you. alreadi I can tell your problem is a 

self-inflict trauma that ha negat the natur condit wherein 
your mind and bodi work in unison." 

"what 'trauma'?" I asked. 

He didn't answer the question. instead he began massag my temples. 

"breath deeply. and do it slowly, veri slowly." 

As I did, I felt a kind of dizzi gradual come over me, the 
hypnot drone seem to take over my consciousness. instead of 
grow slower, my breath wa actual becom more rapid, as 
though i'd start to hyperventilate. but I no longer had ani control 
over it. My autonom nervou system had been hand over to him, as 
dizzi and a sens of disorient settl over me. the room 
around me began to swirl, and I felt my consciou mind, my will, 
slip out of my grasp. It wa the veri thing i'd vow not to let 
happen. 

the same thing had occur onc before, after I broke my collarbon in 
the pacif surf that slam a mexican beach south of puerto villarta. 
when a kindli mexican doctor wa later bind on a har to 
immobil my shoulder, the pain wa such that I momentarili pass out 
while sit on a stool in hi office. I didn't fall over or collapse; 
it just seem as though my mind, flee the incred pain, drift 
away in a haze of sensation. 

now the pastel blue wall of the room slowli fade to white, and then I 
wa somewher else, a univers away, surround by blank nothingness. I 
tri to focu on the bronz shiva directli across, but the ring of 
fire around him had becom actual flames. the onli realiti left wa the 
power touch of alex goddard' hand and a drone that could have been 
the music of the spheres. 




chapter eight 


sometim thereafter, in a reverie, I felt myself in a magic forest 
whose lush vine remind me of kerala in india. It wa a verdant, hazi 
paradise, anoth eden. A child wa with me, a child of my own, and I 
felt jubilation. I watch the child as she grew and becam a 
resplend orchid. 

but with childbear came pain, and I seem to be feel that pain 
as I took up the flower and held it, joy flow through me. 

then alex goddard drift into my dream, still all in white, and he wa 
gentl and care as he again move hi hand over me, leav numb 
in their wake. I thought I heard hi voic talk of the miracl that 
he would make for me. A miracl baby, a beauti flower of a child. I 
ask him how such a thing would happen. A miracle, he whisper back. 
It will be a miracle, just for you. when he said it, the orchid turn 
into the silver face of a cat, a vagu familiar image, smile 
benignly, then transmut back into a blossom. 

then he drift out of my dream much as he had come, a wisp of white, 
leav me hold the gorgeou flower against my breasts, which had 
begun to swell and spill out milk the color of gold. . . . 

A wet cool wash across my face, and--a I faintli heard the 
sound of bach' well-temp clavier, glenn gould' piano note crisp 
and clear--i open my eye to 

see ramala massag my brow with a damp cloth. she smile kindli and 
lovingli as she saw my eye open, then widen with astonishment. 

"what--?" 

"hey, how'r you doing? don't be alarmed. he' take great care of 
you." 

"what. . . where am i?" I lift my head off the pillow and tri to 
look around. I half expect steve to be there, but of cours he wasn't. 

"you'r here. At quetzal manor." she reach and did someth and the 
music slowli fade away. "don't worry. you'll be fine. I think the 
doctor wa tri to releas your chi, and when he did it wa too 
strong for you." 

"what day is it?" I felt complet disori my bear gone. 

"sunday. it' sunday morning." she reach and touch my brow as 
though give me a blessing. like, it' okay, really. 

At that moment, alex goddard stroll in, dress again in white. 

just as in the dream, I thought. 

"so, how' the patient?" He walk over--ey benign and caring--and 
lift my wrist, absent take my puls while he insert a digit 
thermomet in my ear. for a flashback moment he merg into, then 
emerg from, my dream. "you'r look fine. I have to say, though, 
you had quit a time yesterday." 

"all I rememb is pass out in your office," I mumbl glanc 
around at the gray plastic thermometer. and that strang dream, you 
tell me I would have a miracl baby. 

"you had an unusu reaction," he went on. "you rememb I spoke to you 
about mind-bodi harmony. you see what can happen when I redirect the 
flow of energy, chi, from your bodi to your mind." He smile and 
settl my wrist back onto the bed. "don't worry. I have a lot of hope 
for you. you'r go to do fine." 

He look satisfi as he consult the thermometer, then jot down 
my temperatur on a chart. he' alreadi start a medic record, I 
thought. why? 

"i'm . . . i'm wonder if thi realli is work out," I said. It wa 
dawn on me that I wa get into alex goddard' world a lot deeper 
and a lot faster than i'd expected. i'd come plan to be an observ 
and now I wa the one be observed. that wa exactli not how i'd 
intend it. maybe, I thought, if I back off and make a new run, I can 
keep us on equal footing. "perhap I ought to just go back to the citi 
for a few day and--" 

"i'd assum you came to begin the program." He look at me, a quick 
sad flood hi eyes. "you struck me as a person who would follow 
through." 

"I need to think thi over" I realli feel terrible, I thought, tri 
to rise up. what did he do to me? "mayb i'm just not right for your 
'program'?" the idea of a documentari had momentarili retreat far 
into the depth of my mind. 

"on the contrary." He smiled. "we'v shown that you'r veri responsive." 

"mayb that' it. mayb i'm too responsive." I rose and slip my feet 
off the bed. the motion brought a pierc pain in my abdomen. "ouch! 
what' . . ." I felt my pelvis, onli to find it wa veri sensitive. 

pull asid my bed shift, I gaze in disbelief at my lower abdomen. 
there were red spot just abov my pale blue panties. 

alex goddard modestli avert hi eyes. "I didn't want to say 
anything," he explain to the wall abov my head, "but you were in 
pretti delic shape there for a while. mild convulsions, and I think 
your digest system had gone into shock. the stomach is a center of 
energy, becaus it' constantli active. So I gave you some shot of 
muscl relaxant. noth serious. it' an unusu treatment, but i'v 
found it works. It . . . modul the energi flows. I also took a 
blood sampl for some tests, but the result were all normal." 

He then ask me about my menstrual cycle, exact days, say he want 
to make sure it wasn't just routin cramps. "the seizur you had pass 
almost as soon as it came, but you might actual have been 
hallucin a bit. you had a slight fever all night." 

"well . . ." someth like that had happen to me year ago in rural 
japan, when I stupidli ate some unwash green and my stomach went 
into shock. At one point a local doctor, chinese, wa tri 
acupuncture, which also left me sore. 

"noth to be worri about," he continued. "but if you'r the least 
bit concerned, mayb we ought to do a quick sonogram, take a sound 
picture. eas your mind that everything' okay." 

"that doesn't realli seem necessary," I said. for a clinic special 
in "energi flows" and "mind-body" programs, there wa a lot of modern 
equipment. odd. 

"won't do a bit of harm." He nod at ramala, who also seem to think 
it wa a good idea. "come on, help me walk her down to the lab." He 
turn back. "it' total noninvasive. you'll see for yourself that 
you'r fine." 

befor I could protest, I found myself walking, with some dizziness, 
down the hallway. thi part of quetzal manor, which I had not seen 
before, wa a sterile, high-tech clinic. I realiz I wa in a 
differ build from the old convent, probabl the new one i'd 
notic across the park lot, the one he hadn't bother to mention 
that first day. but all I could focu on were the blue wall and the 
new white tile of the floor. 

the sonogram wa as he describ it, quick and noninvasive. He rub 
the ultrasound wand over my abdomen, watch the pictur on a crt 
screen, which show my insides, a jumbl of organ that he seem to 
find extrem informative. 

"look." He pointed. "those line there are your fallopian tubes, and 
that' your uterus." He push a button to record a digit image. 
"seem like whatev wa upset your stomach is gone. obvious 
nothing' wrong here." 

"good," I said, "becaus I realli need to take a few day and think 
thi over." 

"you should stay," he said, reach to touch my hand. "I think the 
worst is well behind us. from here on, we can work together. In fact, 
what I actual wish you would do is come with me to my clinic in 
central america. it' truli a place of miracles." 

I assum he wa refer to the "special place" he'd mention dure 
our first interview. If quetzal manor wa on the exot side, I 
thought, what must that place be like? A documentari that took in the 
total of who and what he wa could be-- 

"in fact," he went on, "I just learn I have to be go there later 
today. A quick trip to catch up on some things. So thi would be an 
ideal time for you to come. We could go together." 

well, I thought, i'd love to see what els he' up to, but thi whole 
scene is get out of control. when I first met alex goddard, we had 
a power balance, but now he' definit call the shots. 

"I don't think i'm readi for that kind of commit yet." 

"a you wish." He smile with understanding. "but let me just say this. 
it' not go to be easy, but noth i'v seen so far suggest 
there' ani physic reason whi you can't have a child. We just need to 
get you in touch with the energi center in your body. right flow 
from that." 

"you realli think so?" In spite of myself I felt my hope rising, even 
though I had definit mix feel about hi kind of "holistic" 
medicine. 

"i'm virtual certain. but whether you want to continu with the 
program or not is a decis you'll have to make for yourself." 

"well, mayb when i'm feel better we can talk some more about it." I 
definit need to reconsid my game plan. "for now, I think i'd 
better just get my thing and--" 

"a you wish." He sighed. "your cloth are in your room. there' a 
closet in the corner by the window." 

I shot a glanc at him. "doe my blue cross cover this?" 

"on the house." A dismiss wave of hi hand, and anoth kindli smile. 

I wa still feel shaki as I move back down the vacant hallway, but 
I refus to let either of them help me. instead I left him to overse 
ramala as she shut down the equipment. 

oddly, the place still seem vacant except for me, though there wa a 
larg white door that appear to lead to anoth wing. what wa in 
there? I wondered. the question kept pile up. 

It soon turn out I wa wrong about the clinic be empty. when I 
reach the door to the room where i'd been, I thought I heard a 
shuffl sound inside. I push it open gingerli and saw the room wa 
dark. It hadn't been when I left. the shuffl noise--i realiz it 
wa somebodi close the venetian blinds--immedi stopped. 

I began feel along the wall for the light switch. 

"pleas leav it off," said a spacey femal voice. "it' nice when it' 
dark." 

As my eye becam accustom to the eeri half-light, I final made 
out a figure. It wa a short woman, childlik but probabl mid-twenties. 

"what are you do in here?" 

"I just want to, like, be with you." she'd done her dark hair in 
multipl braids, with a red glass bead at the end of each. "you'r 
special. We all know it. that' whi he brought you over here, to thi 
building. To be near them." 

"what do you mean, 'special'?" I asked, head for the closet and my 
black jeans. then I wondered. near who? 

now she wa reach into a fanni pack she had around her waist and 
take out a baggi fill with plastic vials. "these are herb i'v 
start grow here. I pick them for you. If you'll--" 

"slow down," I said, lift my jean off the hanger and start to 
struggl into them. final I took the baggie, move to the window, and 
tilt up the blind. insid it were clear plastic medicin bottl 
contain variou gray and green powder and flakes. 

My god, what' she tri to give me? and why? 

"listen," she went on, insistent. "take those. put two teaspoon of 
each in water you'v boil and drink it. everi day for a week. they'll 
make you strong. then you'll be--" 

"hey, i'm go to be just fine, really." I set them asid and studi 
her, still a ghostlik figur in the semi dark. there wa a wild in 
her eye that wa veri disturbing. 

At that moment, alex goddard appear in the doorway. He click on the 
light, look puzzled. 

"couldn't find the switch?" then he glanc around. "tara, did you get 
lost? I thought you were do your meditation. it' sunday. 
afterwards, though, you can weed the north herb box if you want." 

she nod silently, then grab the baggi and glide out, her brown 
eye fill with both rever and what seem like fear. 

"who wa that?" I asked, stare after her, feel unsettl by the 
whole experience. "she seem pretti intense." 

"tara' been pretti intens for some time, perhap for much of her 
life," he declar with a note of sad as he close the door behind 
her. "i'v not been abl to do anyth for her, but i'v let her stay 
on here sinc she ha nowher els to go. she love the gardens, so 
i'v let her work out there. It seem to improv her self-esteem, a 
kind of benign therapy, her own natur path toward centering." 

well, I thought, she certainli could use some "centering." 

"look, dr. goddard, let me get my things, and then i'v got to be 
going. I can't start on anyth right now. not the way i'm feeling. 
and visit your other clinic is complet out of the question, at 
least for the moment." 

"I have great hope for you," he said again, place a gentl hand on 
my shoulder. "i'm sorri we can't begin to work togeth immediately. 
but do promis me you'll reconsid and come back soon." 

"mayb when i'm feel better." keep the option open, I told myself. 
for a lot of reasons. 

"in that case, ramala can show you out. i'v arrang for her to give 
you some herbal extract from the rain forest that could well start you 
on the road to motherhood. whether you decid to come back or not, I 
know they'll help you." 

and he wa gone, a wisp of white move out the doorway. It wa onli 
then that I realiz i'd again been too preoccupi to ask him about 
kevin and rachel, the beauti sibl born six month apart. instead 
all I had left wa a memori of those penetr eyes. and the power, 
the absolut power. 




chapter nine 


after give me a small bag with two bottles, ramala led me out, and I 
discov I realli _had _been in a differ building, the one 
situat across the long-term park lot and all but hidden in the 
trees. It wa new, one-story, and probabl larger than it appear from 
the front. again I wonder what went on in there, sinc it seem so 
empty. 

check it out and soon, I told myself as I slip my key into the 
ignition. you'v got to find out a lot more about thi place. 

On the drive back to the city, my main thought wa that i'd lost a day 
of my life. it'd just sort of slip away. but that wasn't all. I also 
began to medit on the fact that alex goddard could have an immens 
influenc over my bodi (or wa it my mind?) with a simpl touch. give 
him hi due, he could definit make thing happen. first my cold and 
now this. perhap he could give me a child, if I got "centered," 
whatev that meant. but whi should I trust him? 

and there wa anoth problem. for a babi i'd need steve, the man I 
loved, the guy who'd promis to be with me through thick and thin. did 
he realli mean it? he'd have to fli in, which meant a seriou piec of 
chang for the airfare. finally, could he face anoth chanc of 
failure? My spirit sank at the prospect of have to ask him. were we 
both just go to be humili one more time? 

he'd made hi home base in belize, that littl rhode island of a 
countri abut big, bad guatemala. He like the fact they use 
english, more or less, as the offici languag and they hadn't gotten 
around to murder two hundr thousand maya, the way guatemala had. 
In a romant moment, i'd program hi beliz hotel number into the 
memori of my cell phone--th telephon down there are amazingli good, 
mayb the brit legacy--though i'd never actual tri it. (i'd call 
him from home about half a dozen times, but he wa rare there.) well, 
I thought, the time ha come. mayb it wa the sensual feel 
releas by all the chi flow around, but for some reason I found 
myself feel veri lonely. He hadn't call recently, though. . . . 

It took ten rings, but eventu the hotel answered. A moment later, 
they were tri hi room. I guess I wa half afraid a woman might pick 
up, but it wa him and there were no hush tone or cryptic 
monosyllables. I heav a minor sigh of reassurance. 

"baby, I can't believ it' you," he declared. "i'v actual been 
tri to reach you for a day now." 

"you final get around to miss me?" It wa so good to hear hi 
voice, full of life and energy. 

"all the time. never didn't. you'v just got to understand it' crazi 
down here. all last week I wa in honduras, haggl over permits. 
don't ask." He paused. "so, when are you come down? they'v got a 
nation park here that' a pure chunk of rain forest, jaguar 
everywhere." He laughed. "but forget that. If you come down, we'll 
never get out of the hotel. just room servic all day." 

"no immedi plans," I said, immedi wonder how I could swing 
it. "but you never know." 

I wasn't entir sure how to approach steve anymore. there wa 
someth about the abrupt way he took off that left thing up in the 
air. A tini sliver of uneasi wa slip into my head-over-heel 
trust, the camel' nose under the tent. 

"first the good news," I declared. "david' talk to orion about a 
theatric releas for _babi love_." 

steve knew how deepli I long for a theatrical--it would be my 
first--and he enthus appropriately. but he also knew I wouldn't call 
him earli sunday morn just to tell him that. there wa onli one 
other thing that would inspir such an unsoci act. 

"uh, should I be ask how the other babi project is going?" he said. 

for a moment I wasn't sure what to say, sinc I didn't realli even know 
myself. 

"still a work in progress," I said finally. then; "honey, i'v just 
been to see a doctor who' . . . well, he' a littl unconventional. 
and nervous-making. but everyth els ha failed." 

whereupon I gave him a quick, cell-phon summari of what i'd just been 
through at quetzal manor. 

"so are you go to go back eventually?" He sound uneasy. "for the 
full 'program'?" 

He had a way of zero in on essentials. the truth was, my babi hope 
and my sens of self-preserv were at war with each other. . . . 

"morgy, are you there?" 

"i'm here. and I guess the answer is, i'm still tri to decide. like 
I said, he' into eastern medicin and nativ american . . . i'm not 
sure what. but if I need you, are you still in the project?" 

"what do you mean?" 

"darlin', don't play dumb. you know exactli what I mean. could you come 
back if I need you? realli need you?" 

there wa a long pause, wherein the millisecond drag by like hours. 
tree were glide past, throw shadow on 

my windshield, and I still felt vagu dizzy. I also had a residu 
ach in my abdomen where alex goddard had given me those damn 
muscle-relax shots. whi wa I even consid go back? 

finally: "you'r not make thi easy, you know. down here, without our 
. . . project on the front burner everi day, i'v been reassess . . 
. well, a lot of things. If we had a baby, it would turn our live 
upsid down. I mean, it' not like we just bought a sheepdog and 
chip in on the grooming. thi is a human life we'r talk about. 
are we realli prepar to do justic to a child?" 

there it was. I didn't know whether I want to burst into tears, or 
strangl the man. 

"well, whi don't you just think about it," I told him. "thi doesn't 
sound like a convers we should be have on a cell phone." blast 
him. "if that' the way you feel now, then I might just have a babi on 
my own." how, I wasn't sure. i'd been so certain we were a couple, i'd 
not given it ani real thought. "or then again, I might just go ahead 
and adopt, with or without you." 

"look, i'm not say I won't do it. i'm just say it' not a trivial 
thing." He paused. "so where doe that leav us?" 

translation: second thoughts. 

"I don't know where that leav us, steve. In the shit, I guess. but 
i'd still like to know if I can count on you, or am I go to have to 
go to a sperm bank or something?" 

"jesus. let me think about this, okay? Do I have to answer you now?" 

"no. but i'm not go to wait forev either." 

"all right." then he paused. "morgy, I miss you. I realli do. I just 
need some time to think about our next step. are you sure you'r okay? 
you sound a littl out of it." 

"thank for asking. i'v just got a lot on my mind." 

turmoil, dismay, and hope, all toss together, that wa what I had on 
my mind. I realli didn't need mix signal from steve at the moment. 

A few more awkward pleasantri and I click off the phone, wipe the 
streak from my cheeks, and abruptli sens alex goddard' face 
float through my psyche. whi wa that? then I look down at the 
bottl on the seat besid me, the "herbal extracts" ramala had given 
me on the way out. what, I wondered, should I do about them? for that 
matter, what were they anyway? and what did they have to do with 
"centering"? If I start on hi homeopath treatments, what would I 
be get into? then I lectur myself: never take someth when you 
don't know what it is. 

hannah klein. that' who I should ask. 

I wa so focused, I push the number I had store for her in my phone 
memori befor I rememb it wa sunday. instead of get her 
office, I got an answer service. 

"do you want to leav the doctor a message?" a southern-sound voic 
enquired. 

without thinking, I heard myself declaring, "no, thi is an emergency." 

what am I saying? I ask myself. but befor I could take it back, 
hannah wa on the line. 

I know how intrud on I feel when an actor call me at home on sunday 
to bitch. better make thi good, I told myself. 

"I wa at an infertil clinic yesterday and pass out," I began. 
"and now I have some herb to take, but i'm . . . well, i'm not sure 
about them." 

"what 'clinic'?" she asked. there wa no reprimand for call her on 
sunday morning. 

when I told her about alex goddard, she said little, but she did not 
sound impressed. loom there between us like the dead eleph on the 
live room floor wa the fact that she'd specif warn me not to 
go near him. and after what had just happened, there wa a good case 
she might be right. 

"can I buy you brunch?" I final asked, hope to lure her back onto 
my case. "i'd realli like to show you these herb he gave me and get 
your opinion." 

"I wa just head out to zabar' to get something," she said, somewhat 
icily. well, I suppos she thought she had good reason. "i'll get some 
bagel and meet you at my office." 

sunday traffic on upper broadway wa light, and I luck out and found 
a park space roughli two block from her building. It wa one of the 
low-overhead "professional" type with a singl small elev and no 
doorman. when I got there, the lobbi wa empty. 

her suit wa on the third floor, and I rang the bell befor I realiz 
the door wa open. she wa back in her office, behind the recept 
area, take off her coat, when I march in. 

while she wa unwrap her sesam bagels, smoke sturgeon, and cream 
chees with chives, she got an earful. My feel wa i'd better talk 
fast, and I did. I told her everyth I could think of about what had 
happen to me at quetzal manor. I didn't expect her to make sens of 
it from my secondhand account, but I want to set the background for 
my next move. 

"when I wa leaving, hi assist gave me these two bottl of 
gel-caps. she said they'r special herbal extract he make from plant 
in the rain forest. Do you think I ought to take them?" 

I suspect I alreadi knew the answer. given her previous voic 
view on alex goddard, I doubt she would endors ani potion he might 
dispense. but plant medicin ha a long history. At least she might 
know if they present ani real danger. 

she wa schmear cream chees on the bagels, but she put down the 
plastic knife, took the two bottles, and examin them skeptically. 

"these are not 'herbal extracts,' " she declar give her first 
analysi befor even open them. "they'r both manufactur drugs. 
the gel-cap have name on them. it' a latin american pharmaceut 
company." 

then she open the first bottle, took out one of the caps, crush it 
between her fingers, and sniffed. 

"uh-huh, just what I thought." then she touch a pinch of the white 
powder to her tongue. "right." she made a face and wipe her tongu 
with a tissue. "except it' much stronger than the usual version. I can 
tell you right now that thi drug, in thi potency, is illeg in the 
u.s." 

what wa it? I wondered. cocaine? and how could she tell it potenc 
with just a taste? then I remind myself whi i'd come to her in the 
first place: she'd been around the track many, mani times. 

"it' gonadotropin," she said glare at me. like, you damn fool. 
"i'm virtual certain. the trade name here in the u.s. is pergonal, 
though that' not what thi is. thi is a much stronger concoction, and 
I can see some impurities." she settl the bottl onto her desk with 
what seem almost a shudder. "thi is the pharmaceut equival of 
hundred-and-ninety-proof moonshine." 

"what is it? what' it suppos it do?" jesus, I thought, what' he 
give me? 

"it' a hormon extract from the urin of menopaus women. It 
trigger a greater than normal egg product and release. it' 
sometim prescrib togeth with lupron, which caus your bodi to 
releas a similar hormone. look, if you want to tri pergonal, the real 
version, i'll write you a prescription, though I honestli don't think 
it' go to do you the slightest bit of good." 

I couldn't believ what I wa hearing. i'd almost been consid 
give alex goddard the benefit of the doubt, at least till I found out 
more about him, and now he hand me this. 

now we both were look at the other bottle. 

"what do you think that is?" I asked, pointing. 

she broke the plastic seal, open it, and look in. It too wa a 
white powder seal in gel-caps, and she gave one a sniff, then the 
tast test. 

"I have no idea." 

she set the bottl back on her desk, and I stare at it, terrifi of 
what it might be. final I got up my courag and reach for it. A 
white sticker had been wrap around it, with direct for take . 
. . whatev it wa . . . written on it. then I happen to notic that 
one corner show the edg of anoth label, one beneath the 
hand-appli first one. I lift a letter open off her desk and 
manag to get it under the outer label. with a littl scrape and 
tugging, I got it off. 

"doe thi mean anyth to you?" I ask her, hand it back. "it' 
in spanish, but the content seem to be hmg massone." 

"I don't believ it," she said, take the bottl as though lift a 
cobra. I even got the distinct feel she didn't want to leav ani 
fingerprint on it. "that' an even more power drug to stimul 
ovarian follicl and induc superovulation. it' highli illeg in 
thi country. anybodi who give these drug in combin to a patient 
is flirt with an ethic charge, or worse." 

I think I gasped. what wa he tri to put into my body? 

she settl the bottl back on the desk, her eye grow narrow. 
"sinc you say hi 'nurse' or assist or whatev she wa gave you 
this, I suppos there' alway the chanc she made an innoc mistake. 
but still, what' he do with thi stuff at all? they manufactur it 
down in mexico, and also, i'v heard, somewher in central america, but 
it' not approv in the u.s. anybodi who dispens thi to a patient 
is put their licens at risk." she paus to give me one of those 
looks. "assum alex goddard even ha a medic license. these 
'altern medicine' type sometim claim they answer to a higher 
power, they'r board-certifi by god." 

"I don't for a minut think it wa an 'innoc mistake.' " I wa 
begin to feel terribl betray and violated. I also wa get 
mad as hell, my fingertip tingling. "but whi would he give me these 
drug at all? did he somehow--?" 

"I think you'd better ask him," she said pass me a bagel pile high 
with cream chees and sturgeon. 

she bit into her own bagel and for a while we both just chew in 
silence. I, however, had just lost all my appetite. alex goddard who 
might well be my last chanc for a baby, had just dispens massiv 
dose of illeg drug to me. which, my longtim ob/gyn wa warn me, 
were both unnecessari and unethical. 

"what do you think I should do?" I ask finally, break the silenc 
but bare abl to get my voic out. 

she didn't say anything. she'd finish her bagel, and now she'd begun 
wrap up the contain of cream cheese, fold the wax paper back 
over the remain sturgeon. I thought her silent treatment wa her way 
of tell me my brunch consult wa over. she clearli wa 
exasper with me. 

"let me tell you a story," she said finally, as she care began 
put the leftov sturgeon back into the zabar' bag. "when I wa 
eight year old all the jew in our polish ghetto were starv becaus 
the nazi refus to give us food stamps. So my father bribe a nazi 
offic to let him go out into the countrysid to tri to buy some egg 
and flour, anything, just so we could eat. the farmer came that 
saturday morn in a horse-drawn wagon to pick up my father. At the 
last minute, I ask to go with him and he let me. that night the nazi 
liquid our entir ghetto, almost five thousand people. No one els 
in my famili survived. not my mother, not my two sisters, not anyone." 

her voic had becom total dispassionate, matter-of-fact, as though 
repress of the horror wa the onli way a sane person could deal with 
it. she could just as easili have been describ a countri outing as 
she continued. I did notice, however, that her east european accent had 
suddenli becom veri prominent, as though she wa return there in 
her thoughts. 

"when we learn what had happened, my father ask the farmer we were 
visit to go to a certain rural doctor we knew and beg him to give us 
some poison, so we could commit suicid befor the nazi got us too. 
the doctor, however, told him he had onli enough poison for hi own 
family. He did, however, give him a prescript for us. but when my 
father beg that farmer to go to a pharmaci and get the poison, he 
and hi entir famili refused. instead, they hid us in their barn for 
over a year, even though they knew it meant a fire squad if the nazi 
found us." she glare at me. "do you understand what i'm saying? they 
told us that if we want to do someth foolish becaus we were 
desperate, we would have to do it without their help." 

It wa the first time I ever knew her real story. I wa stunned. 

"what, exactly, are you drive at?" I think I alreadi knew. the long, 
trust relationship we'd share wa now teeter on the brink. By 
go to see alex goddard--even if it wa partli a research trip to 
check him out--i had disappoint her terribly. she'd lost respect for 
me. she thought I wa desper and about to embark on someth 
foolish. 

"i'm say do whatev you want." she got up and lift her coat off 
the corner rack. "but get those drug out of here. I don't want them 
anywher near thi office. I tri everyth legal there wa to get 
you pregnant. If that wasn't good enough for you and now you want to go 
to some quack, that' your affair. let me just warn you that combin 
gonadotropin and hmg masson at these dosag is like put your 
ovari on steroids; you get massiv egg product for a coupl of 
cycles, but the long-term damag could be severe. I strongli advis you 
against it, but if you insist and then start have complications, I 
would appreci not be involved." 

translation: If you start fool around with alex goddard, don't ever 
come back. 

It felt like a dagger in my chest. what wa I go to do? one thought: 
okay, so these drug aren't the way, but you couldn't help me get 
pregnant. all I did wa spend twenti thousand dollar on futil 
procedures. not to mention the heartbreak. 

"you know," I said finally, mayb a littl sharply, "I think we ought 
to be work together, not at cross-purposes." 

"you'r welcom to think what you like," she bristled. "but I have to 
tell you I don't appreci your tone." 

I guess i'd realli tick her off, and it hurt to do it. then, finally, 
her own reject of me wa sink in. 

"so that' it? you'r tell me if I tri anyth except exactli what 
you want me to, then just don't ever come back." 

"i'v said all I intend to." she wa resolut usher me toward the 
door, her eye abruptli blank. 

well, I told myself, go from anger to despair, then back to anger, 
whatev els I might think about alex goddard, at least he doesn't 
kick peopl out becaus of their problems, even a sad soul like tara. 

still, what about these illeg drugs? there I was, caught in the 
middle--between an honor woman who had failed, and alex goddard, 
who'd just live up to my worst suspicions. head down in the 
elevator, alone, I could still hear hannah klein' rejection, and 
warning, ring in my ears. mayb she had just confirm that still, 
small voic of ration lectur me from the back of my mind. 

I march out onto the empti sunday street of upper broadway, and when 
I got to the corner, I stood for a long moment look up at the 
pitiless blue of the sky. the sun wa there, but in my soul I felt all 
the light wa gone. 

final I open the first bottl and then, one by one, I began take 
out the gel-cap and drop them into the rainwat grate there at my 
feet, watch them bounc like the metal sphere in an old pinbal 
machin befor disappear into the dark below. when both bottl 
were empty, I toss them into the wire trash basket i'd been stand 
next to. 

the next time I saw alex goddard, he wa go to have a hell of a lot 
of explain to do. begin with whi he'd given me a glimmer of 
hope, onli to then cruelli snatch it back. I found myself hate him 
with all my being. 




chapter ten 


I head on back downtown, plan to take a bath, chang clothes, and 
then recalibr my game plan. maybe, I thought, I ought to just go up 
to the edit room at applecore, tri some rote work to help 
tranquil my thoughts. 

but first thing first. about halfway there, at thirty-eighth street, I 
pull over and double-park by a korean deli, and survey the 
flower they had out front, an array of multicolor bloom that 
virtual block entri to the doorway of the tini grocery. azaleas, 
chrysanthemums, birds-of-paradise, but I want the pink roses. At ten 
dollar a bunch, they seem the right touch. I dug out a twenti and 
pick two. 

still stand on the street, I pull them to me and inhal deeply. 
As far back as I could remember, i'd alway love the scent of roses. 
i'd never realli thought myself pretty, the natural-blond 
often-dyed-brown hair notwithstanding, but just have rose around 
somehow made me feel that way. I want to be engulf in them, 
especi ani time confus threaten to get the upper hand. 

five minut later and I wa at twenty-first street. i'd arrived. My 
refuge, my one-bedroom cocoon. time to collaps into a hot bath, wonder 
whi alex goddard had given me illeg drugs, and contempl roses. I 
wa look for a park space when my cell phone rang. no, don't 
bother, I told myself. enough intrus for one day. then I rememb 
i'd sprung for the caller-id feature, and I glanc down at the littl 
liquid crystal slot. It wa a number I happen to know, lou' place 
downtown. one eye still on the street, I reach over and pick it up. 

"final got you," he boomed. "where the heck are you?" 

"I just got home from--" 

"yeah, I know where you been. dave told me." He paused, as though he 
wa hold off on some import announcement. "hang on a sec. there' 
somebodi here might like to speak to you." 

I thought about lou' makeshift digs, lot of 
"heirloom"--worn-out--famili furnitur he'd lug along with him. 
sarah and I use to play on the couch, and it still had a dim mauv 
stain where i'd onc dump a glass of "grape" kool-aid on her head 
when she wa six. whatev else, definit not a soho look. 

then I heard a whisperi voice. 

"hi, morgy." 

It wa a tent utter i'd heard onli onc before, when she wa 
wake up after fall off a playground swing. she'd been knock out 
cold for a moment and i'd been frantic, wet a handkerchief in the 
nearbi fountain and desper rub it over her face. when she came 
to, she'd gaze up into my eye and greet me as though we'd just met. 

My god! 

befor I could recov and say anything, lou came back on. "we'r 
practic eat chicken-noodl soup. and we'r tri to do a littl 
talking. whi don't you come on down? she ask about you earlier thi 
morning, said, 'where' morgy?' " 

"lou! thi is incredible!" 

"you gotta believ in miracles, right? just come on down." 

"i she . . . god, you'v got it." My hope went into orbit as I 
click off the phone and rev my engine. 

I could have swamp him with a lot of question then and there, but I 
immedi decid I want to see her first, with my own eyes. I 
still couldn't quit believ it wa true. On the other hand, a weekend 
partial recoveri wa not total beyond the realm of medic 
possibility. with a coma, so littl is understood that anything' 
possible. lou wa right. thi wa definit a weekend of the 
unexpected. 

i'd been close to the death of peopl near to me, both my parent for 
starters, but i'd never been close to the restor of life. it' 
hard to explain the rush of joy when you think somebodi is gone for 
good and then they pop up again, like they'd never been lost. and with 
sarah that feel wa especi jarring. It wa almost as though some 
part of me had come back alive. 

the fact is, sinc sarah and I were both onli children, we'd identifi 
a lot with each other. true, we'd travel our separ paths, each 
looking, perhaps, for someth to fill the lone void in our live 
that a sibl might have taken. As a child of the dusty, empti plain 
of west texas, I didn't see other kid veri much dure the summer, and 
I made up reason whi she and I should visit each other as often as 
possible. 

once, when I wa plowing, turn over oat stubble--yes, my dad warili 
let me do that if I asked--i unearth a rabbit nest full of littl 
babi cottontails. sarah wa come to visit the next day, and I rescu 
the infant so we could play nursery. We fed them milk with littl 
eyedroppers, and befor long sarah decid she wa actual a 
reincarn mother rabbit. that wa when she becam a vegetarian, and 
she remain so--bi her account--til she finish college. It wa just 
anoth of those magic moment of childhood I end up share with her. 

I also sometim wondered, as you might have guessed, what it would'v 
been like to be born a boy. I wa definit a tomboy, had a real 
colli (mi own version of lassie), like to climb tree and dig hole 
in the hardscrabbl west texa earth. mayb that wa whi I felt so at 
home--fre associ now--when I film my documentari of the maya 
villag in mexico' yucatan. It wa hot and dri and lay under a 
pitiless sun, a blaze white bone in the sky that sear the spare 
landscape. none of my crew could understand how anybodi could bear to 
live in such a place, but to me it seem perfectli natural, almost 
like home. 

thought of which now made me sad. I onli wish my parent had live 
long enough to see that documentary. mayb then they'd have understood 
how terribl lone i'd been as a child, a loneli I share so 
deepli with sarah. would we ever be togeth again? 

On my hurri trip downtown, I kept wonder what I wa about to 
encounter. wa it go to be the fantasy-bound sarah of her girlhood, 
perhap the same sarah who'd spun out some stutter vision of a jade 
mask? Or would all that be past and would she again be the ambitious, 
sparkl pre-m student she'd becom when she wa in college? 

get to soho took onli about ten minutes, scant time to think. lou' 
place wa in what had onc been a garment factori sweatshop. he'd 
rent it from anoth agent at the bureau, who had inherit it from a 
cousin, a well-known downtown artist, late dead of aids. lou paid 
virtual no rent, wa there mainli to keep out squatters, and couldn't 
care less that he wa live in one of new york' trendier sections. 
all he knew wa that there wa plenti of room, and free park on the 
street for hi old buick. 

i'd been down mani time before. inside, the space wa still inhabit 
spiritu by the dead artist, with acryl paint spatter on wall 
and graffiti I didn't fulli understand in the bathroom. the place 
seem to be a broom-fre area, with layer of the past litter on the 
floor like an archaeolog excavation. and the old kool-aid-stain 
furniture, fit right in. 

what alway struck me, though, wa the number of photo of sarah. they 
were everywher in the open space, on tables, the desk, sever on the 
walls. mostli they were old, sever blown up and crop from 
snapshots, grainy. the space felt like a shrine to her memory. 

when lou let me in, I wa greet by a spectral face, a wheelchair, and 
a valiant attempt at smile normalcy. mayb lou thought it wa real, 
wa progress, but I wa immedi on guard. 

It wa sarah' eye that caught me. they pierc into my soul and we 
seem to click, just like always, onli thi time it wa as though all 
our life togeth pass between us. I had the sens she wa tri to 
tell me someth with her eye that went beyond words, that she wa 
tri to reach out to me, perhap to recaptur that share 
understand we'd had year ago. 

lou introduc me to a mrs. reilly, a kindly, irish-look practic 
nurs who wa part of the outpati packag the hospit provided. she 
wore a white uniform and wa around sixty, with short-bob gray hair 
and an air of total authority. she'd just finish feed sarah a bowl 
of soup, and wa brush out her crop blond hair, what there wa of 
it. 

mrs. reilli glanc at me, but never broke the rhythm of her strokes. 
"she' tire now, but she' alreadi stronger than she was." 

then lou spoke up. "they call me earli yesterday morning. but by the 
time I got around to tri to reach you, you'd vanished. So I rang 
dave and he told me where you were, up there with that crackpot." He 
wa grinning. no, make that beam like the famou cat. "bi last 
night, she wa walk with some help, so they said she might as well 
be here. like I said, it' a miracle." 

"you brought her home just thi morning?" I couldn't believ the 
hospit would discharg her so soon, but thi wa the hmo age of 
medic cost-cutting. 

"onli been here a coupl of hours." He point to a shini set of 
parallel steel rail in the corner. "that' for physic therapy. 
right now she can onli walk with somebodi on either side hold her, 
but in a few days, I figur . . ." hi voic trail off, as though he 
didn't want to tempt fortune. then he turn toward sarah. "in a few 
days, right, honey?" 

she nodded, then final spoke directli to me. "morgy, I want some 
clothes. please. I hate these horribl hospit things. I never want to 
see them again." 

I notic that she'd start crying, a line of tear down each 
emaci cheek. wa it someth to do with see me? I wondered. 
then she began tri to struggl out of the blue bed shift she wa 
wearing, though she didn't have the strength. 

"i'll get you someth great, sar, don't worry." I reach to stay her 
hand. It was, I thought, extraordinarili cold, even though the loft 
itself wa warm as toast. what kind of cloth should I buy for her? I 
found myself wondering. blous with buttons? pullovers? what could she 
manage? mayb i'd bring some item from home first and let her tri them 
out. We use to be about the same size, though now she wa all skin and 
bones. 

I move a chair next to her, took her other hand, and lean as close 
as I dared. I desper want to put my arm around her, but I 
wasn't sure how she would respond to my touch. her eyes, however, were 
clear and had never look a deeper blue. "sar, what' the matter? 
why'r you crying? you should be happy. your dad' right here and he 
love you and we'r go to take wonder care of you." 

"who? him?" she asked, look straight at lou, her blue eye like an 
unblink camera' lens. 

the plaintiv question took my breath away. hadn't they been talk 
for two days? 

"don't pay ani attent when she say thing like that," mrs. reilli 
declared, her voic just abov a whisper. "she' still not quit 
herself. she drift in and out." 

she seem to be drift in and out at the moment, though it wa 
mostli out. 

then she look directli at me, onli now her eye were lose their 
laser-lik focus, were start to seem glazed. "who'r you?" she 
reach out and touch my unwash hair, run her hand through the 
tangl strands. 

next she stare off, terrified, her eye full of fear. 

"the smoke," she whispered. "the knife. i'm next." 

abruptli she wa off again in the reveri that had enfold her that 
first time in the hospital. Or at least that wa what I guessed. 

"what are you talk about?" I felt like shake her, except I wa too 
shook-up myself. 

she turn back, and for a moment she just stare glassy-eyed, first at 
me, next at lou, and final at mrs. reilly. then she reach for a 
glass of orang juic on the tabl besid her. she look at it as 
though it were some potion, then slowli drank it off, not paus once. 
outside, a faint polic siren could be heard, and I wa afraid it wa 
distract her. anyway, someth told me her momentari séanc wa 
play out. her face had grown calm and rested, though I could bare 
repress a tremble. 

"whatev you think," I said finally, slip an arm around her 
shoulder, "we'r both right here. and we love you and we want to help 
you get better." 

she didn't say anyth more, just close her eye and drift away. 
but it wasn't back into a coma, sinc her breath wa grow 
heavier. I want to grab her and yell at her and demand that she come 
back to us, but I wa fear of what effect it might have. 

"what the hell wa she talk about?" lou ask finally, hi voic 
quavering. 

"I don't know," I said, as puzzl as he was. 

that wa when mrs. reilli spoke up. she wa the onli one not upset. 

"when they come out of a coma, sometim they'r not right for a 
while." she pat sarah' hand then gave it a solicit squeeze. "I 
onc had a man wake up and start talk about magic trip through the 
air, about how he wa a dual citizen of the earth and the sea. He wa 
talk like a lunatic. one day he would know hi family, and the next 
he would look at them and start scream they'd come to kill him. you 
just never know how these thing will go at first. but she'll be 
herself befor long." she lift sarah' limp hand up to her cheek, 
then kiss it. "you'r go to be all right, dear. i'v seen enough 
like you to know." 

"then what do you make of what she just said?" lou ask her, have 
given up on me. "earlier thi morn she wa fine. knew who I was, 
everything. then the minut morgan come in, she start make up that 
looni jabber." 

the sanguin mrs. reilli just shrug as if it didn't realli matter. 

for my own part, I didn't necessarili like him impli my arriv had 
caus her to relaps into her dream world of terror. It seem to me 
that whenev I show up, she start tri to tell me what wa 
realli eat away at her soul. 

well, I told myself finally, mayb she' regress back to when we were 
kids, when we onli had each other to share our secret with. what if 
we'v rebond in some new, spe 

cial way? It would be natural, actually. she' tri to reach out to 
me, like long ago. 

now she appear to be doze off, exhausted, her head tip downward 
toward her blue hospit shift. mrs. reilli took that as a hint, and 
slowli began wheel her toward the bedroom, leav me alon with lou. 

I glanc over at him, think more and more that I had to do 
something, track down what had happen to her. I want to do it for 
me, but even more for him. i'd never seen him so despondent. mayb it 
wa the thing scholar call the curs of rise expectations. back when 
she wa hardli more than a vegetable, he wa overjoy by a flicker 
eyelid. now that she wa talking, he want all of her back. instead, 
though, it seem as if she had return to us for a moment, onli to be 
snatch away again. I could tell it wa kill him. 

"look, i'm sorri that when I show up, she start go off the deep 
end." I want desper to help, but at that moment I felt 
powerless. "mayb I should just stay away for a while." 

"nah, she love have you here. don't worry. but anyway, dave said 
someth about you take a coupl of day off. mayb I can use that 
time to be here with her and settl her down." then he grimli took out 
her locket and rub it worn silver in hi fingers, hi eye brim 
with hi heartache. "thi is all just so damn confusing." 

wa he tell me, indirectly, that I should go away and leav them 
alone? first hannah klein reject me, and now _et tu_, lou? maybe, I 
thought, he' take out hi despair on me, blame me for her relapse. 
truthfully, I guess I wa blame myself a bit too. 

"listen, i'm go to go home now and leav you two alone," I said. 
"but whi don't you see if you can get her to talk some more? without me 
around, mayb she'll make more sense." 

"if she want to say something, i'll listen." He gave me a strong, 
absent embrace, hi eye still despondent. "but no way am I gonna start 
push her." 

I edg into the bedroom, unsur if I realli should, to say good-by to 
sarah and to give her one last hug. her eye were open again and she 
just stare at me for a second, then whisper a word I couldn't quit 
make out. It might have sound like "babylon," but that made no sens 
at all. final she cover her eye with her hand and turn away, 
gone from me, leav me more alon than i'd ever felt. 




chapter eleven 


head home, finally, I told myself to tri to calm down. I wa 
determin to help sarah get over her trauma, though truth I wa 
too tire to realli think straight at that moment. So instead I decid 
to let everyth rest for a few hour and tri for some distance. In 
fact, I began imagin myself in a hot bath, gaze at my now-wilt 
roses. home sweet home. 

mine wa a standard one-bedroom in a build that had been turn into 
a co-op five year earlier, the owner offer the individu 
apart to the tenants. i'd stay a renter, however, pass up the 
"low" insid price, $138,000, becaus I didn't realli have the money, 
and when I did have it someday I would want someth bigger. I wish 
I had more space--a real dine room and a bigger bathroom would do for 
starters, along with some place for more bookcases. and if a babi 
should someday miracul come along . . . 

i'd often thought you could tell a lot about somebodi from where and 
how they lived; it' reveal as a rorschach test. what, I often 
wondered, did my apart say about me? 

A decor might conclud i'd done up the place with love, then lazili 
let it go. they'd decid I care about nice things, but onc those nice 
thing were there, I neglect them. It would be true. 

i'd cover the wall of the live room with pale blue cloth, then 
hung a lot of frame pictur and old movi posters. okay, I like 
movies. for me even the poster are art. My couch wa an off-white, 
more like dirt-color actually, and cover with pillow for the 
"feminine" touch. i'd hope you'd have to look twice to realiz it wa 
actual a storag cabinet in disguise, with drawer along the bottom 
of the front. the floor wa polish hardwood, rug from india here and 
there, in sore need of a vacuuming, and even a coupl of deceas 
insect that'd been there for over a week. that sort of said it, I 
thought glumly. i'm a workahol slob. 

the bedroom reveal even more about me. the bed wa a brass 
four-poster, queen-size, partli cover by an heirloom quilt. It hadn't 
been made in a week. (who ha the time?) the room itself wa long and 
divid into area for work and sleep. opposit the bed itself wa an 
antiqu english desk, on which sat my old macintosh, and next to that 
wa my file cabinet, the indispens part of the "home office" the 
ir love to hate. On top of it wa a stack of marked-up scripts, note 
scribbl all over them in six differ colors. you never realiz 
movi are so complic till you see a breakdown sheet. camera angl 
and voice-ov and . . . 

next to the bed wa a violin case and three book about indian ragas. 
what wa that about? somebodi might wonder. some kind of indian music 
nut? I was, albeit a veri minim talent nut. 

the kitchen wa the new york effici kind paint a glossi tan, the 
color of aerosol oliv oil. the cabinet contain mostli packag of 
pasta, instant soup, and coffe filters. not even ani real food. I live 
on deli takeout these days. An inventori of my fridg at thi moment 
would clock two carton of "fresh squeezed" orang juice, a half quart 
of spoil milk, a bag of coffe beans, plastic contain of wilt 
veggi from the corner salad bar, and three bottl of new york 
seltzer. that wa it. 

god help me, I thought, my mind-stat turn even more 

morose. thi is my life. I had becom that retrograd woman of the 
nineties: work nineti hour a week, make nineti thou a year, weigh 
nineti pounds, and think (pardon my french) cook and fuck are 
provinc in northern china. well, the ninety-pound part of that 
obscen quip didn't fit--and it wasn't the nineti anymore, anyway. 

In ani case, wa my apart a place to rais a child? No earthli way. 
like carly, i'd have to spring for some decent space, prefer with a 
wash machine. . . . 

A park slot wa open right in front of my building, a minor miracl 
on thi day of uncertain events. As I wa pull in, I glanc over to 
see a man walk past, not catch the face but sens someth 
familiar in the walk. He wa in the process of unbutton a feder 
express uniform, peel away the top to reveal a dark suit. He 
certainli seem to be in a big hurry, carri an unmark shop 
bag. maybe, I thought, hi shift wa over and he wa meet hi wife, 
or a friend. 

I wonder if he'd left a packag for me, and told myself to check with 
the super. not the usual deliveri guy--did they come on sunday 
now?--and also . . . 

where wa the truck? they alway park right here by the building. 

I wa still so upset over sarah, I couldn't immedi process those 
illog observations, so I just grab my pink roses, drip from 
the bottom of their paper wrapping, and open the car door. It wa 
definit good to be home. I love my chelsea neighborhood, where you 
got to know the locals, run into them in the delis, the littl 
restaurants, the dri cleaners. just like a small town. If you work at 
home, the way I sometim did, you even got to know the mailman and the 
deliveri guy for up and fedex. . . . 

hey! that guy. I final place the walk, a kind of a strut. He wa the 
slimebal who'd been outsid paula marks' build last week, carri 
a gun and threaten me. what' he do here? 

My puls went off the charts. wa he one of nicki russo' wiseguy crew 
after all? had he come back, with hi pistol, to pay me a return 
engagement? 

My god. 

chill out, I told myself, take a deep breath. he' leaving. just tri 
and find out who he is. 

rose in one hand held up awkwardli around my face, I slowli ambl 
down the street after him. I didn't have to go far. within about a 
hundr feet, he unlock a long black lincoln towncar, step out of 
the fedex camouflage, toss it onto the seat along with the bag he wa 
carrying, pull the cap off hi bald head got in, and sped away. 

the licens plate look differ from the usual, but I got what I 
needed: DL and a string of numbers. 

uh-oh, I thought. wa he leav a packag bomb for me? 

I turn back and let myself into the outer lobby, glanc around as I 
did. there were no parcel anywhere, just blank, brown tile. 

My apart wa 3a. the name on the bell wa M. james. As I step 
through the inner lobby--stil no package--a rumpl face appear in 
the doorway just to my left. the sign on it, flaking, said super. 

"oh, hi." the voic wa patrick mooney, our superintendent, who did not 
normal emerg to greet those arriving. but there had been complaint 
from the building' manag agent that he could never be found for 
emergencies, so he probabl want to appear available, even on 
sundays. hi voic wa slur from some midday medicin irish whisky. 
"thought you were home. fedex guy wa here earlier look for you." 

oh, boy. "did he leav a package?" 

"he had someth with him, if that' what you mean. like a bag of some 
kind." 

"and you let him go up?" I couldn't believ what I wa hearing. I felt 
a rush of dismay. 

"said he had to. need a signature." patrick mooney then shrug and 
reach for the dooijamb to steadi himself, hi whiski breath waft 
across the hall. great security. 

I step into the elev as the door wa clank shut, and watch 
as he rub hi eye and eas hi own door closed. 

now I wa realli puzzled. If the fedex guy came "earlier," whi wa he 
just now leaving? A lot of scari theori went through my mind as I 
push the button for the third floor. 

I took a deep breath as the elev opened, but again I saw no 
packages. So far so good. get off, I set down my rose on the hall 
carpet and fumbl for my key. when I insert it, the lock felt a 
littl rough, caus me to think for an instant i'd use the wrong 
key, but then it responded. 

what had caus that? I wondered. had the guy been fiddl with my 
door, wire a bomb? use one hand I push it open, again hold my 
breath and stand aside, but it open okay. I exhaled, then reach 
back to drag in the flowers. 

but if he didn't leav a package, what wa he do here? case out 
where I lived? plant a bug in the elevator? and whi wa he here so 
long? 

the place wa dark when I step in, the drape drawn. I relock the 
door, then survey the gloom. No explosions, so I guess he didn't 
plan to kill me. yet. here I was, home, safe and sound. I just stood a 
minute, still uneasy. 

then I rememb the flowers, my drip bouquet, and head for the 
kitchen. deal with them, and then mayb get a bottl of white wine out 
of the fridg and sip some in the bath. 

after my unnerv sequenc with sarah, thought of go to the offic 
had zero appeal. time to lighten up, way up. 

preoccupied, not look around, I stuf the rose into a vase by the 
sink, and then I thought again about the white wine and open the 
refrigerator. i'd still not bother to turn on ani lights, but the 
kitchen and it ancient fridg were dimli illumin by the tini 
window just across. I wasn't sure where i'd put the bottle, sinc i'd 
had to rearrang thing to make room for the dup of carly' interview. 
(I wa also plan to take home a safeti dup of paula' interview 
sometim later in the week.) 

whi wa I do that? take home copies? It wa a sign of deep 
compulsion. you couldn't realli make a professional-qu second 
neg from a first positive--bi that time it would be 
third-generation--but i'd brought it anyway. now and then I just have a 
raw instinct that keep a safeti backup around is a good idea. but 
the canist had end up devour the entir lower shelf of the 
fridge. 

I open the white door and peer in. the light wa out, and for a 
moment I stare numbl at the dark, half-fil shelves. the onli thing 
that struck me as odd wa that I could see the pure white of the empti 
bottom shelf. 

for a second I could onli stand and stare, but then I back away, 
tri to figur out what wa wrong, and stumbl over something. I 
regain my balanc and flip on the overhead light. 

"what!" 

the floor around me wa litter with bottles, my old toaster, my tini 
microwave. It wa a total shambles. 

I recoil stumbl again, thi time over can strewn across the 
linoleum. My kitchen, it wa slowli sink in, had been complet 
trashed. 

I felt a viscer wave of nausea. it' the scariest thing in the world 
have your space invad like a form of psychic rape. I sag against 
the refriger as I gaze around. the cabinet had been empti out, 
a hasti and haphazard search. quick and extrem dirty, as glass 
contain of condiments, includ an old bottl of dill pickles, were 
shatter and their content smear into the floor. 

"I don't believ this." I march back into the live room and reach 
for the lights. thi room too had been turn upsid down. the tv, 
stereo, vcr, all had been swept onto the rug. but they were still 
there. that guy, that animal, who did thi wasn't a thief. he'd been 
look for something. 

My breath now come in pulses, I edg into the bedroom and switch 
on the light. the bed wa the way i'd left it, the cover thrown back 
and the pillow in a pile. the clock radio wa there, and so wa the 
old mac, still on the tabl in the far corner, my "workstation." again 
noth seem to be missing. 

I head back to the kitchen, where the refriger door wa still 
open. I gaze at the interior a moment, still puzzled, tri to figur 
out what wasn't right. . . . 

shit! shit! shit! that' what wa wrong. the field of white bottom 
shelf wa empty. total empty. the film canist of paula' interview 
wa gone. 

for a moment I just lean against the kitchen counter, bare push 
asid an impuls to throw up in the sink. think, I told myself, get a 
grip and think. . . . 

It wa the film he'd wanted. and he'd want it badli enough to pick 
the lock, then rip my home apart look for it. 

I pull at a tangl of hair, feel my mind in chaos, and tri to 
reason out the situation. why? whi would he steal a posit that 
couldn't be use for anything? 

final the real truth of what had happen hit me like a fist in the 
chest. My home sweet home had been violated. 

seething, I went into the live room and reach for the phone, the 
onli thing not on the floor. 

My first instinct wa to call david, but then I decid he'd just go 
into a tizzi of hysteria and be no support at all. So instead I call 
lou, pray I wouldn't wake sarah. In an unsteadi voice, I tri to 
tell him what had happened. 

He seem puzzl to hear from me again so soon, but then he quickli 
turn fbi, concern for my safety. 

"guy sound like a professional," he declared. "probabl got in with an 
electr picker, like the edge. ani asshol can buy one for a hundr 
and thirti bucks. it'll rake cylind at a hundr time a second. pro 
like that, you can be sure there'l be no prints." 

"but whi would . . . ?" My voic wa still a croak. "I mean, my god, 
all for a lousi reel of film?" 

"fucker want you to know he' in town. So how he did it' as import 
as what he did. it' a time-proven scare tactic." He paused. "morgan, I 
don't like thi one bit. there could be more befor thi is over." 

"think I should call the cops?" 

"damn right you should," he said, slowli and sadly, "but to tell you 
the truth, they ain't gonna do all that much. somebodi mess up your 
apart and lift a third-hand copi of a woman talking. they'll say 
it sound more like malici mischief than a crime. then they'll write 
it up and that'll be the last you'll hear from them." 

"well," I said, my anger well up, "mayb I don't feel quit so 
laissez-faire. tell me, you know anybodi who can run a plate for you on 
a sunday?" 

"you got the prick' licens number?" he exclaimed. "whi the hell 
didn't you say so?" 

"honestly, it sort of slip my mind. i'm have a littl troubl 
think straight right now." 

fortun my short-term memori is pretti good, even when i'm 
stressed, so I spew it out. 

"don't go anywhere," he declared. "i'll get back to you in five 
minutes." 

I hung up the phone and lay down, flat out on the carpet, tri a 
breath exercis to calm down. the problem was, it wasn't working. 
have had some experi with be robbed--i onc got complet 
clean out when I had a ground-floor apart down in the village--i 
know you go through certain kubler-ross-lik stage of anger, denial, 
depression, acceptance. you also go through a predict seri of 
recriminations: I should have had window bar and gates; I should have 
had a differ lock; I should have had two differ locks. In the 
instanc just recalled, i'm virtual certain an apart painter 
duplic a set of my key on hi lunch break and then pass them on 
to a second-stori artist. No way to prove that, mind you, but it had to 
be what happened. I also suspect he check my appoint calendar to 
see when I wa go to be out of town. 

but in thi case the lock wa definit picked. nobodi had a set of my 
key except the super, and steve. So the guy with the spanish accent 
knew how to slip through door and he had no financi interest in my 
old vcr. He onli had an interest in my film. what had he said there on 
the sidewalk outsid paula marks' apartment? someth about how 
make thi pictur wa a big mistake? 

I jump as the phone erupt by my ear. 

"the name colonel jose alvino ramo grijalva mean anyth to you?" lou 
asked. 

"how could it? i'm not sure I can even pronounc it." 

"well, colonel ramo declar himself to be a militari attaché at the 
guatemalan consul here. you'v got a big shot in the guatemalan armi 
rummag through your apartment. thi is even wors than I thought. 
those guy are killers." 

"jesus." I wa still come to grip with the horrifi fact he'd been 
in my apartment, in my onli refuge. "think I could bring charg 
against him?" 

"well, let' consid thi a minute. probabl no prints, no credibl 
witness. you'd have a damn hard time prove anything." He sighed. 
"truth is, I doubt you could even get a restrain order, given what 
littl you'v got to work with." 

"the bastard." I sat a moment, feel the logical, left side of my 
brain just shut down. My mind went back to it most primit level, 
run on adrenaline. "look, I need to check out something. i'll call 
you in the morning." 

"well, be careful," he said warily. "and for god' sake don't go 
run off anyplac alone. i'm tell you you'r not safe. alway be 
around people." 

"i'll keep it in mind." with that I gentli hung up the phone and 
exhaled. 

think. some colonel from guatemala just broke into my apart look 
for what I might know about children of light, where i'v been go to 
see about have a baby. So whi is he so interest in what i'm doing? 

I rememb alex goddard want me to go to a "clinic" he had 
somewher in central america. ten to one that clinic wa in guatemala. 
that wa what thi whole thing wa about. and now he'd just gone back 
there; at least that wa what he'd said. 

guatemala wa a long way off, but hi other oper wa right up the 
river. I hadn't seen all of it thi morning, but that wa about to 
change. A lot of thing were about to change. It wa time to start 
get the play field level again. 




chapter twelv 


I arrang with patrick mooney to have hi sister in queens, a 
full-figur woman name rosalyn, come in and finish the job of 
reconstruct my wreck home. she arriv an hour and a half later, 
and wa hard at work when I left. I also agon over the 
police-report issue, but final decid to forgo the bother. lou wa 
right: It would be a two-hour ordeal of futility. besides, I had better 
thing to do with my time. I wa go to return the favor of an 
information-gath expedition. 

alex goddard had said he'd be absent from quetzal manor--who know for 
how long--and thi time around I wa go to do the place right, the 
next step in my undercov research. the first, and main, thing I 
want to do wa explor the new high-tech clinic that sat nestl in 
the wood across from the old building. everyth about it wa the 
exact opposit of a "manor." not a shred of new age "spirituality," 
just a lot of digit equip and ultrasound and . . . what else? 
chief among my questions: what wa behind that big, white door? 

mayb I wa be impulsive, but I wa complet wire and the truth 
was, I wasn't go to sleep till I knew a lot more than I did. and if 
I went late tonight, sunday, I probabl wouldn't have to deal with 
ramala. 

I call roger drexel, my unshaven cameraman, and ask him to come up 
and meet me at applecore. It wa sunday and he wa watch the third 
quarter of a knick game and into hi second six-pack, but he agreed. 
after all, I wa hi current boss. 

all I realli want wa hi betacam and some metal tape, which would be 
broadcast quality. (i'd want to do it yesterday, but now the time had 
definit come.) We met at the office, and he unlock the room with 
the camera gear and load in a fresh tape. with ani luck, he made it 
home for the end of the game. 

I then had a sin cheeseburg and fri at a greek diner two block 
down the avenue. It wa my idea of a courage-bolst indulgence. 

My watch read six thirty-f and daylight wa wane when I rev my 
old toyota and start my northbound trek back to quetzal manor. when I 
wa pass the georg washington bridge, the first drift flake of 
a freak late-season snowstorm began pelt my windshield. good I 
thought, turn on my wipers, the less visibility, the better. At 
least I believ that till the road start get slipperi and I had 
to throttl back. It wa onli then I realiz i'd been push eighti 
on the speedometer, pass a lot of cars. lou' warn not to go 
anywher alon wa still file in the back of my mind but I kept tri 
not to think about it. sometim there are thing you'v just got to do. 

the highway grew more treacher the farther north I went, but the 
traffic wa thin out and by the time I reach the turnoff to 
quetzal manor, total dark had set in, in addit to which the 
pave wa cover with at least an inch of sparkling-new pristin snow. 

As I eas up the roadway, my headlight made the tree around me 
glisten with their light dust of white, like frost on the tip of 
a buzz cut. I switch off my light as I made the last turn in the 
road but not befor catch a glimps of quetzal manor, and I must 
confess to feel a shudder, of both anger and apprehension, run 
through me as I watch it magisteri turret disappear into the 
snowi dark. 

I park my car at the back of the lot and retriev the flashlight i'd 
brought, a yellow plastic two-batteri model. I hadn't realiz there'd 
be snow when I left home, so I wa just wear some old sneakers, but 
they'd do. I then sat there in the dark for a long minute, listen to 
the silenc and thinking. the first thing wa to find out if anybodi 
wa guard the place. the next wa to get some video of the new 
building. 

I grab the bag carri the betacam, test my flashlight against 
the floorboard, and then head up the snowi driveway. I march 
straight through the open arch that wa the front door, and I wa again 
in the drafti hallway where i'd met ramala saturday morning. It wa 
empti and dark now, no light anywhere, not even out in the courtyard 
beyond. the stoni quiet--no music, no chants--felt unnatural, but it 
also suggest that alex goddard' ador acolyt were safe tuck 
away. earli to bed . . . you know the rest. So mayb I realli had come 
at the right time. 

A chilli wind wa blow in from the far end of the hallway, and I 
felt like i'd just enter a dank tomb, but I tighten my coat and 
press on. when I got to the end and look out, the snowi courtyard 
wa like a pictur postcard. and complet empty. 

all right, I thought, move on to what you came for. 

but when I turn and head back down the hallway, toward the entri 
arch, I caught a glimps of a furtiv form, dark and shadowy, lurk 
just outside. shit! I froze in my tracks, but then the figur step 
inside, wear someth that made me think of littl red ride hood, 
like a tini ghost in a cowl. 

It wa tara, alex goddard' spacey waif, who wa move so oddly, I 
thought for a moment she might be sleepwalking. 

she wasn't, of course. she'd just been out stroll around the 
driveway in the snow. I soon realiz she live her life in someth 
resembl a trance, as though she were a perman denizen of the 
spirit world. for her it wa a natur condition. 

"it' so beauti like this," she mumbl dreamily, as though we'd 
been in the middl of a lifelong conversation. "I just love it." her 
voic wa bare abov a whisper, but in the silenc it seem to 
ricochet off the stone walls. "I want to take them out, show them god' 
paintbrush. will you help me?" 

"take who out?" I asked, immedi decid to go with the moment. 

final she look directli at me and realiz whom she'd been talk 
to. 

"you were here before. I tri to give you herb to help you, but then 
he came and . . ." her voic trail off as she walk back through the 
portico and out again into the drift snow. then she held up her 
hands, as though attempt to captur the flake as keepsakes. "I so 
want to show them. they'v never seen it before." she glanc back at 
me. "come on. let' do it." 

As I follow her out into the drift white and across the park 
lot, the accumul of snow wa grow denser, enough now to start 
cover the cars, but still, someth told me the flurri wa go to 
be short-lived. I took a long, misti breath of the moist air and 
click open the case hold the betacam, readi myself to take it 
out the minut we got inside. 

well, I thought, mayb i'v gotten lucky. she wa head for the new 
clinic, which wa exactli where I want to go. It wa nestl in the 
trees, up a wind pathway, and as I slog along I could feel the 
snow melt through my sneakers. 

when we got to the front door, larg and made of glass, she just push 
it open. 

"we never lock anything," she declared, glanc back. "it' one of our 
rules." 

the hallway wa dark, silent, and empti except for the two of us. 
still, I felt a ting of caution as we entered. At some level thi wa 
trespassing. 

"come on," she said, casual flip a switch on the right-hand wall 
and caus the overhead fluoresc to blink on. "he' away now, and 
everybody' in bed. but i'll bet they'r still awak in here. it' a 
perfect time." 

I didn't feel anyth wa perfect, but I did know I want to learn 
what wa behind the door i'd seen when I wa leaving. It wa at the end 
of the hallway, wide and steel and paint hospit white. and, sure 
enough, that wa exactli where tara wa heading. 

she just kept talk nonstop, in her dreamy, little-girl voice. "we'v 
got to tri and make them understand it' okay. that it'll be just for a 
minute." 

she shove open the door without knocking, and my ear were greet by 
the faint strain of beethoven' "moonlight sonata," one of my 
favorites. for an instant I wa caught up in the music, a poignant 
moment draw me in. 

the room itself wa spacious, with a row of white bassinet along one 
side and subdu light provid by small fluoresc bulb along the 
walls. It was, I immedi realized, a no-fril nursery. alongsid 
the bassinet were tabl with formula and box of pamper and 
handi-wipes. two short women of indefin nationality--they look 
vagu asian--wer in attendance, and at the moment one wa face 
away and bounc a babi on her shoulder. her infant look like a 
boy--or wa that just my imagination?--and I felt my heart go out. the 
light wa dim, but I could tell he wa a gorgeou sandy-hair kid 
plump and peachy, so sublim in hi tender vulner as he gaze 
around with eye full of trust. He wa stare directli back at me and 
befor I could stop myself, I gave him a littl wave and wrinkl my 
nose. He stare at me a second then respond with a tini smile. hey, I 
thought, i'v got the touch. 

"come on," tara said ignor the women, "let me show you. they'r all 
so beautiful." 

By then my eye were adjust to the subdu light, and as we walk 
down the middl of the long room, I confirm my assumpt that the 
bassinet next to the tabl all contain infants. i'm no expert on 
babies, but i'd guess they were all around six week old mayb a coupl 
of month at most. 

thi is the nest, I thought. ground zero. kevin and rachel were both 
probabl in thi room at one time too. . . . 

"aren't they wonderful?" tara wa saying, still in her squeaky, 
spaced-out voice. 

I wa open the betacam bag when the first woman, the one hold and 
lightli bounc her littl boy, absent put her hand under hi quilt, 
then spoke to the other in deepli accent english. 

"he' wet again." 

It wa the first word either of them had uttered. then she turn to 
me in exasperation, assuming, I suppose, that I wa one of alex 
goddard' flock. "and I just chang him." again the accent, but I 
still couldn't identifi it. she made a face, then carri him over to a 
plywood chang tabl in the center of the room. 

I felt a great baby-yearn as I move over besid her, but she wa 
behav like a typic hourli wage-earner, glumli go about her job, 
and I just stood there a moment, vainli want to hold him, then 
turn back to tara. 

"where do all these children come from?" 

"ramala say they'r orphan or abandon or something. from oversea 
or wherever." she sighed. "they'r so perfect." 

she wa complet zombied-out. It felt like talk to a marshmallow 
on downers. 

"but how, exactly, do--?" 

"peopl bring them here." she seem uninterest in the question, just 
plung on as she wander on down the line of bassinets. 

i'd final come to my sens enough to take out the betacam, though 
the light wasn't actual enough to realli work with, certainli not 
broadcast quality. 

she stop and pick up one of the infant out of it bassinet, then 
turn back to me, her eye turn soft as she hug it the way she 
might a small puppy. "isn't thi one cute? i'd so love to have him." 

wa she on some kind of drug that suppress curiosity? I found myself 
wonder as I pan the camera around the room. there must have been 
at least twenti bassinets, all just alike, wicker with a white lace 
hood. A coupl of the babi were sniffling, and the one tara had 
pick up now began cri outright, much to her annoyance. the room 
itself smell like babi powder. 

"and then what happens?" I ask finally, zoom in on one of the 
women. 

"what happen when?" now tara wa twirl in a circle, hum 
futil to the shriek child. "you mean, after they come here?" 

"right." god, get answer from her wa make me crazy. 

"the girl here take them to their new mothers." her eye had turn 
even more dreami as she lightli bounc the bawl bundl she wa 
hold one last time, after which she return it to it bassinet. 
then she gaze around the room. "it' so sad to see them leave." 

did paula and carli get their babi that way? I found myself 
wondering. probably, but it wa one more thing i'd neglect to ask. 

"come on," tara continued. "let' take some of them out. He make the 
nurs tri and speak english around the children, but they don't realli 
know much. mayb you could figur out a way to, like, explain--" 

"tara, I don't think take ani of these babi out into the snow is a 
veri hot idea. not tonight. mayb in the morning." stall her, I 
thought. she' complet out of it. then I look at the woman 
chang the baby. sure enough, I wa right. It wa a boy. 

"but I want to." tara turn crestfallen. "to show them how beautiful--" 

"well, I don't speak whatev languag they'r speaking," I said, 
cut cut her off. "i'm not even sure I could make it sound 
reason in english. So you'll have to do it without my help." 

then I turn to the woman who'd been chang the baby. 

"do you know where thi child came from?" whi not take a shot? 

she just stare at me, alarmed, then turn away. nothing. she clearli 
wasn't go to tell me anything, even if she could. she and the other 
were just cheap hire help, probabl illeg immigr without a green 
card and scare to death for their jobs. they weren't go to be do 
an in-depth tell-al to anybody. 

I thought about the situat for a moment, and decid i'd seen what I 
came to see. thi wa pay dirt. alex goddard wa run a full-scal 
adopt mill, just as lou had suspected. He wa collect beauti 
white babi from "oversea or wherever," and sell them here at 
sixti thousand a pop. 

which went a long way toward explain whi he didn't want children of 
light to be featur in my film. and the guatemalan colonel who'd just 
trash my home wa almost certainli in on the operation. alex goddard 
might be a new age miracl worker rediscov ancient nativ american 
herbal cures, but he also wa run a veri effici money machine. 

still, the big question kept come back: where did he get all the 
babies? To extract ani more inform about that from quetzal manor, 
i'd have to break into an offic somewhere, and I wasn't quit up to 
that yet. I didn't have the nerv of colonel jose alvino ramos. 

"tell you what, tara, I think i'm out of here." I wa return the 
betacam to it bag. noth i'd shot wa remot broadcast quality, 
but I did have proof of what wa go on. My "undercover" 
investig wa make some headway. 

"okay." she sigh her express increasingli glazed. 

I took one last look around the room, at the row of bassinets, then 
gave her a part pat and head for the exit. 

"look," I said turn back as I reach the door. "don't say anyth 
to anybodi about me be here tonight, okay? can we just let it be our 
secret?" 

"sure, whatever." she shrug absently. like, whi not. 

"and tara, do yourself a favor. get out of thi place." 

"but there' nowher els I can go," she said sad in her eyes. As I 
slowli close the door, the last thing I heard wa the sound of the 
beethoven sonata die away. 

what a day . . . and night. As I walk down the hallway carri the 
camera bag, I tri to process my new information. i'd just seen some 
of the most incred lovabl babi ever. that part of it wa a 
beauti experience, one that pull at my heartstr more strongli 
than i'd ever imagin someth like that could. the part that 
troubl me was, the babi were so alike, so fair, and . . . they all 
could have been perfect sibl for kevin and rachel. 

no, I told myself, sure that wa my imagination. though they did look 
amazingli related. . . . 

As I move across the park lot, I thought I saw a movement in the 
shadow just insid the entri archway, a quick chang in the pattern of 
dark. wa it ramala or one of the girls, I wondered, or wa it just my 
paranoia? 

keep walking, I told myself. lose yourself in the snow. the onli way 
they can stop you from expos thi racket now is to kill you. 

when I got back to my car, I gaze up at the impos turret of 
quetzal manor one last time, wish there wa enough light to film 
them, and collect my thoughts. wa the stori about the babi be 
orphan or abandon children or "whatever" realli true? I didn't 
believ it, not for a minute. 

but as carli grove said, alex goddard could "make it happen." the 
problem for me was, he wouldn't tell me where he got the children, and 
nobodi i'd talk to so far seem to want to know, not really. 

I want to know. 




chapter thirteen 


In moment I wa head down the snowi drive, south toward my home 
(which had been hope put back together). I push the pace, 
mesmer by the snow, and tri to decid what to do next. the thug 
ramo had stolen some second-gener interview footag from me, but 
now I had a tape of someth a lot more interesting. 

when I pull into my street, the time wa just past eleven and I wa 
think about call lou, or steve, or both. but then I saw someth 
odd. A woman wa walk down the step from the lobbi of my building, 
a woman I recogn from somewhere. 

her hair wa tangl and she wa wear black jean and a black 
sweater. It took a second befor I final process the fact it wa 
carli grove. and she seem frantic. I assum she'd come in a cab, but 
she had my home phone number, so whi would she come over if I didn't 
answer? new yorker don't just drop in. A social no-no. 

mayb the reason had someth to do with how she looked. I felt like I 
wa see a specter. 

"thank god you'r here," she blurt out, stride up. she wa actual 
shaking, and I could tell she'd been crying. noth like the gutsi 
woman i'd seen a few day earlier. "I kept get your machine, but I 
thought mayb you were hiding." 

I look at her, and forgot all about my own issues. It wa hard to 
rememb ever see a human be in such distress, except for sarah. 

"whi would I be hiding?" I wa take out the betacam bag and close 
my car door, hope to seem normal and professional. 

"they call me about six o'clock tonight. children of light." she 
could bare get the word out. "they'd seen my interview with you. how 
did they get it?" 

I look down at the snowy--mak that slushy--street and felt a chill 
go through me, follow immedi by anger. ramos, that bastard. 

"they . . . somebodi took a copi thi morning." state like that, it 
sound pretti lame. "i'm so sorry--" 

"he threaten kevin. He actual said if I sign a releas to let you 
use the film, my child would 'meet with an accident.' and then he said 
someth about you, that your own--" 

"who? who call you? did he tell you his--?" 

"he wouldn't give a name. just some man. He had a foreign accent." she 
threw her arm around me, and I hug her back as best I could. 

"where' kevin now?" I wa so concern about carli that i'd repress 
the inform that he'd also mention me. 

"marci wa there, so I told her to take him with her. To her mother' 
place in the bronx, where she lives." carli wa still trembl as she 
loosen her grip on me. "I call a car servic to drive them up." 

"well, come on in. let' talk." truthfully, I wasn't sure how much I 
want to tell her about what i'd just seen at quetzal manor. It would 
probabl just distress her more. where had kevin come from? did I 
realli want to de-legitim him in her eyes? 

As I led her through the lobby, hope to appear composed, patrick 
mooney greet us, announc that hi sister, rosalyn, had been gone 
for an hour and that she appreci my memor tip. 

the place look like noth had happened, and carli immedi 
collaps onto my "earth-tone" couch. I hadn't told her my apart 
had been toss along with the robberi and, thank to rosalyn, I didn't 
need to. In fact, it actual look cleaner than it had in months. 
maybe, I thought, I should repriorit my life and hire her more often. 

then I got a glass of water for carli and sat down next to her. 

"i'm realli sorry," I began, deepli mean it. "if i'd known all thi 
wa go to happen, i'd never--" 

"it' not your fault." she took a long drink. I hadn't bother with 
ice, and I immedi felt i'd been inhospitable. kind of a vagrant, 
minor concern, considering. then she went on. "I guess I knew down deep 
I shouldn't have given you that interview. but I want the world to 
know about kevin. now, though . . . should I call the polic or 
something?" 

the short answer to that wa yes, but my mind wa alreadi skip on 
to a differ topic. 

"carly, do you know where kevin came from? realli came from? did you 
ever actual tri to find out?" 

she sigh and took anoth sip. 

"I told you I don't care. when they brought him, all pink and helpless, 
I just--" 

"who brought him?" I interrupted. 

"well, i'd been up there the day before, sign all the papers. I wa 
suppos to go up that day, but then somebodi call and said one of 
the girl who wa stay in the clinic or whatev it is wa bring 
him to me. So don't come." 

"you'r say one of the girls--?" 

"yeah." she look wist for a moment, as though remembering. "then 
she just show up, look like some blond colleg dropout. I guess a 
littl more fanfar would'v been nice, but marci wa there to help me 
and that wa it. that' the last contact I ever had with children of 
light." she shudder involuntarily. "till now." 

well, I thought, the last thing i'm go to do is tell her about what 
I just saw. she' the ideal custom for alex goddard: she truli 
doesn't want to know details. 

"carly, there' not much I can do about what' alreadi happened, but I 
can tri to keep you from get into ani more trouble. whi don't you 
call them in the morn and tell them you'v yell at me and 
rescind your permiss for applecor to use the film? and say i'v 
promis I won't. you'v threaten to sue me or something. that should 
get you off the hook." 

"you realli think so?" her look brighten slightly. 

"yes, it' me they'r worri about, not you. I repres some threat 
to them, becaus of the film i'm making. just bail out and you'll be 
okay." 

"thanks. I did get the feel that' all they realli want." she took 
anoth drink of water. "but if they want to scare me, they'r do 
a hell of a good job." 

"well, then, whi not take kevin and go away for a coupl of weeks? On a 
vacat someplace? and while you'r do that, i'm go to have a 
one-on-on with alex goddard. i'v got a littl leverag now." 

she look at me. "what . . . what are you go to do?" 

I couldn't tell her about my videotap of hi babi cach without 
explain a lot more about children of light than I thought she want 
to hear. 

"don't you think the less you know the better?" I said, take her 
hand. "i'v caus you enough troubl already." 

"no, I caus myself trouble." she wa get up. "can I use your 
bathroom?" 

"sure." I point the way. 

while she wa gone, I went to the kitchen and survey it, check the 
cabinets. again, the place wa cleaner than it had been in ages. the 
look of it momentarili buck me up. 

when carli came back, she hug me and then announc she want to go 
check on kevin. 

"i'll do what you said about call them," she concluded, reach for 
her bag. "I think you'r right. that ought to get them off my case. At 
least for the moment. As for the long run--" 

"carly," I said, take her hand again, "we'll get through this. just 
trust me." 

We hug one more time and then she wa gone. I took the moment to 
double-lock the door, and then collaps on the couch. what should be 
my next move? I close my eye and tri to review all the insidi 
thing that had happen in the last twenty-four hours. the illeg 
drugs, the break-in and theft of my film, the suspici nurseri of 
children of light, the threat to carli . . . 

then it final came back that she'd mention ramo say someth 
about me. By now I wa get use to be threaten by the man, so 
one more time wa hardli news. but I wish i'd ask her the specifics. 

that wa when I rous myself and reach for the phone. the time wa 
push eleven, but I still want to check in on sarah, see how she 
wa doing. had she come back to realiti after I left? 

I wa listen to the phone ring, my mind drift to thought of how 
to gentli ask lou about her, when I realiz nobodi wa pick up. 

what' go on? I wondered, immedi come alert. mrs. reilli had 
probabl gone home for the day, but no way would lou be in bed befor 
midnight. He alway had troubl settl into sleep. 

maybe, I then hoped, i'd just dial the wrong number. but when I tri 
again, still no answer. 

I click off the phone and felt a wave of concern. If colonel jose 
alvino ramo could find out I wa make a movie, and then find out 
where I lived, he sure as hell could locat my extend family. wa 
that what he'd meant when he mention me to carly? 

I grab the set of lou' key I had store in my bedroom' desk 
drawer and flew out the door. 

the street were plaster with a grimi veneer of citi snow, melt 
fast, but I push the limit of safeti and ran a coupl of light 
sinc the traffic wa spotty. there wa a park space just across the 
street from lou' building, and as I pull in I look over at hi 
windows. 

through the curtain I could tell a dim light wa on, probabl come 
from sarah' bedroom. the front room, however, wa dark. 

My puls wa pound as I race up the step to the street door. I 
thought about push hi bell, but I didn't have the patience. instead 
I just fumbl with the key set till I found the biggest one and shove 
it into the lock. 

the build had no lobby, just a row of stair lead up to the next 
floor, with lou' own door set off to the left. I shove hi medeco key 
into the deadlock and push it open. the room wa pitch-dark. 

"who . . ." said a startl voice, and I knew it wa lou, somewher in 
the direct of the couch. 

I click on the light switch and saw him lie on the floor, lean 
against the couch, blood everywhere, hi eye in shock. 

"mi god! what happened?" 

"i'm afraid to move. the phone wa ring and I figur it wa you, 
but I didn't dare get up. know you, you'd come over if I didn't 
answer." He wa hold hi side as he look at me. "morgy, she' 
gone." 

At first what he said didn't sink in as I bent over him. the right side 
of hi shirt, just abov hi belt, wa soak in blood. take care, I 
unbutton it and saw an open cut that look as though he'd been 
stab with a knife. It also appear to be reason superficial, as 
though a thin blade had pierc through a coupl of layer of tread on 
hi ampl spare tire. but it wa bleed still, enough to make it look 
wors than it probabl was. however, if it'd happen to me, i'd 
doubtless be in shock too. 

I got up, went to the bathroom, and pull two towel off the rack, 
then dous water over one and came back. 

"don't move. i'm go to pull your shirt away and tri to clean you up, 
see how bad it is." 

He just groan and stare at the ceiling. 

As I wa swab hi side, what he'd said final registered. 

"did you say . . . _sarah_!" 

I drop the towel and ran into the bedroom. 

It wa empty, the bed rumpl and beig sheet on the floor. 

"no." I turn and feel a hit of nausea, hurri back to hi side. 
"what happened? did--?" 

"fat hispan guy. spic bastard. He had a coupl of young punk with 
him. mrs. reilli had just left and I went to the door, think it wa 
probabl you ring my bell. He flash a knife and they shove their 
way in. then one of hi thug went into the bedroom and carri her 
out. when I tri to stop them, the sob knife me. I guess I . . . 
swoon caus the next thing I rememb is wake up here on the floor." 

It sound garbl and probabl didn't occur as quickli 

as he thought. but I knew immedi what had happen ramos--of 
cours that' who it was--had come to take sarah. It wa hi one sure 
way to stop me from mention children of light in my film. she wa a 
hostage. My first instinct wa to kill him. 

"what els can you remember?" I wa alreadi dial 911. time to get an 
ambulance. and after that, the cops. 

after about ten ring I got somebodi and, follow an explan that 
wa longer than it need to be, a woman with a southern accent told me 
the medic would be there in fifteen minutes. I took anoth look at 
lou and order them to hurry, then hung up. I wa go to call the 
polic next, but first I need to hear exactli what had happen 
befor he got quarantin in some emerg room. 

hi eye were glaze over again, as shock and blood loss start to 
catch up with him. clearli he would pull through, but right now, 
sit there in a pool of blood, he could have been at death' door. 

"look . . . at that." He wa pointing, hi ration begin to 
fail. for a second I didn't realiz what he meant, but then I saw a fax 
lie besid the phone. I pick it up. the time on it wa 9:08 p.m. 
and it wa from somebodi name john williams. then I remembered. wasn't 
that the fbi comput whiz he'd talk about the other day at the 
hospital, after we'd deconstruct sarah' waterlog passport? 

there wa no message, just a sheet with a date--two year old--and a 
list of name accompani by number and a capit letter. then I 
notic the letterhead of aviateca, the guatemalan nation airline, 
and it dawn on me I wa look at a flight manifest. 

I scan down the page, and then I saw it. 

sarah crenshaw, 3b. 

william found her, I thought. and she wa travel first class. 

what caught my eye next wa the name of the person sit in 3a, the 
seat right next to hers. A. godford. probabl a comput misprint. Or 
mayb it wa the name he use when he traveled. So if it wa him, which 
it sure was, the bastard didn't even tri to hide it. 

I just stood there, thinking. mayb you get one big-tim coincid in 
life, and if so, thi must be mine. sarah and I had both found alex 
goddard. Or he'd found us. other women came and went through quetzal 
manor, but we were different. she'd escap from him, half dead but now 
he'd sent ramo to bring her back. It wa the one way he could be sure 
to keep me under hi control. but again, why? wa it just to stop my 
film, or wa there more to the story? 

"morgy," lou groan "that son of a bitch took her tonight. I just know 
it." 

that wa my conclus precisely, though I hadn't been plan to say 
it to him, at least not yet. 

"how can you be so sure?" 

"someth they said. I didn't quit catch it, but it sound like, 'he 
want you back.' then some word. It sound like 'babylon' or 
something." 

I stare at him a second tri to rememb where i'd heard that 
before. then it click in. that wa the last thing sarah had said 
she'd whisper that word when I wa put her to bed. what could she 
have been talk about? 

He wheez and I went back to him and press the towel against hi 
side. the bleed wa about stem but he wa definit due for a 
hospit stay. A siren wa sound down the street. probabl the 
ambulance. thank god I thought. now it' time to call the police. 

then I notic he wa crying. what wa that about? 

"morgy, they didn't actual kidnap her. you see, she--" 

"what?" I guess I wa tri to take it in. "what do you mean?" 

"know what she said? sarah?" He choke for a second, then continued. 
"she said, 'yes, I want to go back.' " 




chapter fourteen 


befor I could ask him what the hell he wa talk about, the medic 
were ring the doorbell. they strode in with a gurney, also roll a 
portabl plasma iv, young guy who look like they'd be more at home 
at a garden hockey game, follow immedi by two uniform 
policemen, actual policewomen, one short and heavy, with reddish 
hair, the other a wiri young hispanic. (I found out that ambul 
call out for stab or gunshot wound automat get a cop 
escort.) In less than three minutes, lou wa in the blue-and-whit 
ambul and on hi way to st. vincent' emerg room. 

I rode in the backseat of the squad car as we follow them and tri 
to explain what littl I knew of what had happened. It turn out to be 
an educ in the mindless stick point of the law. 

long stori short: the fact that I hadn't report the burglari of my 
apart that veri same day immedi cast doubt on my serious 
as a truth-seek citizen; I had no proof the unreport burglari of 
my apart (if, indeed, such had actual occurred) wa by some 
guatemalan militari attach name jose alvino ramos; sinc lou had 
never seen colonel ramo befor tonight, he couldn't possibl identifi 
him as that burglar either; accus diplomat of a crime without 
ironclad proof wa frown on downtown; and when I stupidli repeat 
what lou had said about sarah' last word (well, he wa go to tell 
them sooner or later, it would just come bubbl out at some point), 
the whole case that she wa kidnap went into revis mode. 

By the time we got to the hospital, I wa get question that seem 
to impli that mayb it wa all a domest affair--lik most of their 
calls: some spaced-out chick who'd run away onc and got brought back 
and then, still unstabl and crazy, decid to knife her own dad and 
disappear again. now he wa understand cover for her. happen 
more than you'd think. 

I kept stress that lou wa former fbi and not the sort to invent 
such a whopper, but thi wa listen to in skeptic silence. If it 
wa a kidnapping, they then wonder aloud what wa the motiv and 
where were the demand of the perpetrators? I wa readi to start 
yell at them by the time we park in the seventh avenu driveway of 
the emerg room at st. vincent's. 

they next made me cool my heel in the wait room while they went 
back to interrog lou. they were with him for almost an hour, then 
came back to where I wa and ask me to read and sign the report 
they'd written. 

A troubl girl, who had emerg from a coma and appar wa 
suffer bout of non-rationality, had disappear and her father had 
been stab but not seriously. He wa the onli wit to the incid 
and claim she'd been kidnapped. however, the girl had run away onc 
previously, and there wa no physic evid she'd been taken against 
her will; in fact, her father admit she had declar just the 
opposite. the whole incid would be investig further after he 
came downtown and made a complet statement. 

"i'm not go to sign this." I hand it back, fuming. 

"i there anyth here that' not factual correct?" the 

hispan cop wa look me straight in the eye, her express cold as 
alaska. 

the question made me seethe. sarah wa probabl alreadi on her way out 
of the country, and here I wa tri to reason with two women who 
practic thought she wa the criminal. but I knew a lost caus when 
I saw one. 

"forget about it. I want to see lou." 

An intern wa come out and I snag him, announc I wa next of kin 
to a patient, and demand to be taken through the offici door and 
into the back. At that moment, the stout cop' radio crackled. they 
were be summon to a christoph street gay bar where somebodi had 
just been knife in a back room. she look at me, as though to say, 
"thi sound like a real crime," and then they hurri out for their 
squad car. christ! 

the intern, a young black guy, led me past a row of gurney and into a 
privat room at the rear of the huge space. lou wa bandag all around 
hi chest and hook up to an IV and a monitor. He look better, but I 
wasn't sure he'd be readi for what I wa about to tell him. 

"hey, how'r you feeling?" I ask as I walk in, tri to seem 
upbeat. 

"fuck cops." He wa boiling, hi face actual red. "where do they 
get them these days? mcdonald' rejects?" 

"easy, don't get your blood pressur up." I reach over and touch 
hi brow. It felt like he had a mild temperature. "let' all just calm 
down and tri to think rationally." 

"yeah, i'm think rationally. you saw that fax I got from williams." 

"you think that wa alex goddard seat next to her, right?" 

"who else? when she wa in her moonbeam phase, she must have heard 
about him and gone up there and end up in hi clutches. but whi did 
she let him take her down to--?" 

"he told me he ha a clinic in central america. He call it 'a place 
of miracles.' and then colonel ramo show up, part of the guatemalan 
diplomat corps. put two and two together. that' got to be where 
they'r take her." 

"who knows, but i'm go to get the boy downtown to put out a 
missing-person apb nationwide. gerry'l do it for me if I ask. fuck 
new york' finest. they ain't gonna do crap anyway." 

I listen wonder how to impress my bright idea upon him. the 
chanc were ramo wa take sarah back to guatemala. probabl right 
thi minute. for some kind of unfinish business. Or just to hold her 
there as an insur polici that children of light would never be 
mention in my picture. 

"I serious doubt a missing-person alert is go to do ani good lou, 
becaus I serious doubt she' go to be walk the street of thi 
country. that bastard ramo is take her where he know he can hide 
her." 

"you mean . . . jesus." He stare at me as though the idea had never 
cross hi mind. I think he'd just repress it. "what are we go 
to--?" 

"the onli thing we can do. i'm go down there. i'm go to go 
straight down there and locat alex goddard." 

"that' an except lousi thought process." hi voic seem to be 
come from a great distance. 

"why? give me one good reason why. you think the polic down there are 
go to bring charg against a colonel?" I realli could have use 
some encouragement. "it' the onli way--" 

"morgan, you'v alway been high-strung." He sigh and then winced. 
"ever sinc you were a kid. I worri about you then and i'm worri 
about you now. I don't want you to go down there and get into trouble. 
becaus believ me, that' a serious wrong place to get crossway 
with the prick who make the rules. you don't know your way around that 
third world craphole. wouldn't be that hard to end up a statistic. We 
can alert the embassy. have them start look for her." 

"listen, there' a lot more go on between alex goddard and me than 
you know." thi wa definit not the time to tell him about the 
babies, or about carli and the threats. "trust me. i'm go down 
there. In the morning, if I can. who knows? sarah and ramo might even 
be on the same plane." 

As I wa finish that pronouncement, two nurs came in roll a 
gurney and announc that hi room wa ready. then they gave him a 
sedative. 

wa I be irrational? the thing was, though, what would you do? I wa 
absolut sure ramo had taken her. So it wa obviou that wa where 
he would go next. He wa a "diplomat," apparently, so he could easili 
fudg the passport formalities. 

As the nurs were help lou onto the gurney, I stood there hold 
hi hand and think about what lay ahead. steve wa in beliz and 
mayb not even reachable, but I decid to start by give him a call 
the minut I got home. 

then a middle-ag wasp, with dark hair, slightli balding, strode in 
the room. the photo ID on hi chest read "dr. M. summers." 

"so, how' the patient?" he enquir cheerily, ignor me as he 
immedi began check the chart at the foot of lou' bed. 

"felt better," lou said, not be taken in by hi pro forma cheer. 

"well, we'r go to make sure you get a good night' rest." dr. 
summer finish with the chart and start take hi pulse. "what' 
left of it." 

"how long am I go to be in here, doc?" lou asked, flinch as the 
nurs remov the IV stuck in hi arm. 

"A coupl of days. for observation. To make sure there'r no 
complications." He smile again. "you'r a lucki man, mr. . . . 
crenshaw. just a superfici cut. but we don't want you out play 
handbal for a few days." He turn and gave me a conspiratori wink, 
then glanc back. "okay, up we go." 

"can I come with him?" I asked, not optimist but hoping. 

the doctor look genuin contrite. "i'm realli sorry, but he' go 
to be fine and visit hour are long past. you can call in the 
morning. and you can come up anytim after two p.m. tomorrow. let' let 
him get some rest now." 

I walk around and took lou' hand, hot and fevered, feel so 
agitated. 

"don't think about anyth tonight, okay? worri won't help. just 
get some sleep. i'm go to find her, I promis you." 

"don't--" He mumbl some words, but I think the sed the nurs 
had given him wa serious start to kick 

"look, you can call down to 26 feder plaza tomorrow. see what they 
can do. In the meantime, let me follow my nose." 

He tri to answer, but he wa too far gone. I then watch wist 
as he disappear down the steril alley of beds. 

after I stop by the desk and help them fill out the insur 
forms, I caught a cab downtown to retriev my toyota. the time wa now 
two-fifteen in the morning, but I still had plenti to do. when I got 
home, the first thing I did after I walk in the door wa grab a phone 
book and call american airlines. they had a flight, in the morn at 
nine-thirty. I gave them my credit card specif and made a 
reservation. 

I no longer thought that alex goddard' children of light and it 
guatemalan accomplic were mere do someth shady. My hunch now 
wa that it wa complet illegal. they were get hundr of white 
babi in some way that couldn't bear the light of day, and they were 
prepar to do whatev it took to prevent me from highlight them in 
my film. and with the armi involved, and now sarah taken, their game 
wa begin to feel more and more like kidnapping. they certainli 
knew how. 

sarah had becom a pawn, and all becaus of me. I almost wonder if 
i'd been unconsci led to him by her, though that wa impossible. 
whatev had happened, the remors I now felt wa overpowering. It was, 
in fact, an intensifi version of the guilt that had dog me for the 
past fifteen years, the horribl feel i'd somehow let her down, not 
done enough for her. I could have flown back for her high school 
graduation, but I wa cram for grad school final and didn't take 
the time. thing like that, which, look back, seem terribl 
selfish. and now i'd brought thi on her. god. 

okay, I thought, glanc at the clock, time to start make it up to 
her. screw up your courag and wake steve. 

the problem was, lou had been right about one thing. it'd been year 
sinc i'd been to guatemala, and I wasn't sure I knew bean about how 
thing oper down there these days. I wa high on motiv and 
onli so-so in the area of modu operandi. I need steve' help in 
pli the tricki water of that part of the planet. He wa busy, but 
thi wa definit "u against the world" time, so mayb he could 
drive over to guatemala citi and help. 

I pick up the phone again and punch in the number of hi hotel in 
beliz city, which seem to be embed perman in my brain. that 
wonder accent at the desk mon, and then they were ring hi room. 
I had no reason on earth to assum he would be there, but . . . 

the click, the voice, it wa him. 

"sorri to call so late, love. you said you miss me, so i'v decid 
to find out if it' true. your come attract is about to arrive." 

I guess I wa tri to keep it flip. after our talk that morning, I 
wasn't entir sure where we stood anymore. 

"who . . . morgy, is that you? god it' two . . . are you okay?" then 
he start come around, process what I said. "you'r come . . . 
honey, that' great." 

As I note before, he alway knew how to give a good reading, sound 
sincere, no matter what the occasion. 

"actually, i'v just made a plane reservation, and i'm go to be in 
guatemala citi tomorrow, just after noon." I hesit then thought, 
whi beat around the bush? "care to meet me there?" 

"that' terrific," he declar come fulli awake. "but whi don't you 
just come to beliz city? can't you get flight? it' actual not 
nearli as wild here as the travel books--" 

"well, i'v . . . look, i'd rather not talk about thi on the phone. 
but do you think you could get free and drive over I realli could use 
your help. i'v got a situation." 

"well . . ." He paused. "I could be there by late tomorrow assum my 
rent jeep still oper after last week and the road haven't 
total disintegrated. where'r you go to be staying?" 

"I don't know. got ani suggestions? I want to keep out of the 
limelight." 

"then tri the camino real. it' like a holiday inn with plastic palm 
trees. definit low mainten and low profile. hang on, i'll get 
you the number." 

which he did, though I could hear him stumbl around the room in the 
dark. then he continued. 

"but listen, here' the bad news. i'v got to be back here day after 
tomorrow. I just got a special permit to do some night shoot in the 
jaguar preserv down by victoria peak--you rememb the rain forest I 
told you about?--but it' onli good for one night, and I hear rumor 
there' an off-season hurrican form in the caribbean, which mean 
i'v got to stick to schedule. after that, though, i'm free again." 

"we'll work it out." I wa thrill he would just drop everyth and 
come. mayb we were over the rough spot about the baby. 

He didn't bring that up and I didn't either. instead we kill a few 
minutes, and then I let him go back to sleep. I want to say I love 
you, but I didn't want to push my luck. 

after that I call the hotel he'd recommended. the exchang wa more 
spanish than english, but they had a room. appar lot of rooms. 

next I rang paula marks, even though it wa terribl late. she must 
have had the phone off, but I left a messag tell her to be 
careful, with a postscript that i'd explain everyth later. just 
stick close to home. 

final I call david' voic mail up at applecore. I told him I had a 
person crisi and wa go to guatemala city. i'd tri to be back by 
the end of the week, hell or high water, but no guarantees. and if he 
touch so much as a frame of my work print while I wa gone, i'd 
person strangl him. 

I don't rememb much of what happen next. I basic went on 
autopilot. it' as though I drop into a trance, total focused. I 
pack my passport, a good busi suit, the tailor blue one, and 
also a set of mix-and-match separates, easi to roll and cram in. 
final a coupl of pair of good (clean) jeans, a few toiletries, and 
then, think ahead, I also threw in my yellow plastic flashlight. I 
almost alway over pack, but not thi time. 

oh, and one other thing. for airplan read I grab a lone planet 
guid to central america that steve had left behind--i guess he figur 
he wa at the stage of life to start write them, not read 
them--that turn out to be veri helpful, particularli the map of 
guatemala citi and the northern peten rain forest. I then collaps 
and--imag of sarah' emaci face haunt my consciousness--caught 
a coupl of hours' sleep. 

the next thing I knew, it wa 9:20 a.m. and I wa settl into window 
seat 29f on american airlin flight 377--next to a two-hundred-pound 
execut busi rip articl out of the busi section of _el 
diario_--head for guatemala city. 




chapter fifteen 


for onc in my life, I took my time get off an airplane. but the 
instant I felt that first burst of humid tropic air against my face, 
like a gush from a sauna, I found myself wonder what sarah had felt 
the moment her feet first touch the ground of guatemala. In fact, i'd 
decid to tri to think like her, to better understand whi she might 
want to come back. truth I didn't have a clue. 

but first thing first. not know whether I wa be stalk by 
ramo or hi proxies, I decid the idea wa to see and not be 
seen--which actual wa easier than i'd expected, at least dure the 
initi pell-mel stages. turn out the self-centered of homo 
sapien blossom under those circumstances. ignor thi neighbor, goe 
the credo. I just buri myself in the crush. 

when I got to "inmigracion," I labor through the "formalities" (a 
all countri love to call the suspici look you get from their 
airport bureaucrats) along with all the other gringo passeng on AA 
flight 377, paranoid I might be arrest on the spot for some spuriou 
reason. the purpos of my visit, I declared, wa tourism. just a nod at 
my passport and a stamp, which look exactli like the one in sarah's. 
I stare at it and felt a renew sens of purpose. In fact, the photo 
in my passport look more than a littl like her. maybe, I thought, 
i'm get carri away with the ident issue, but there it was. 

As I emerg through the wide glass door of the arriv area, which 
front out onto the step lead down to the park lot and the 
humidity, I spot a black land rover with tint window right in 
front. uh-oh. that was, steve onc told me, a vehicl much favor by 
the notori guatemalan g-2 militari secret police, who had retir 
the cup for murder human-right abus over the past two decades. 

then two middle-ag men with latin mustach and nondescript brown 
shirt began get out through the door on the far side. they next 
walk around to the termin side of the car and glanc up the step 
in my direction, as though look for somebody. It wa a quick survey, 
after which they turn back and nod to the vehicl befor it sped 
away. 

what' that about? Am I imagin thing already? 

By the time I reach the bottom of the steps, I wa be besieg by 
clamor cabbies, so it wa difficult to keep an eye on the two men, 
who were now walk off to the side of the main commotion, toward a 
shadi grove of palm at the end of the arriv drive, light 
cigarettes. 

get out of here. whether you'r fantas or not, the thing to do is 
grab an unsuspect cab and get going. 

I stroll toward the other end of the long row of concret step till 
I reach an area where cab were parked, more driver lurk in wait. 
they all look the same way most cabbi in third world land look: 
shabbi clothes, with beat-up cars, an express in their eye 
somewher between aggress and desperation. 

just pick one whose car look like it might actual make it to 
downtown. 

I spot a dark blue chevi that seem clean and well maintained, it 
driver young and full of male hormon as he beckon me to hi 
vehicle, all the while undress me with hi eyes. yep, he wa 
definit my guy. 

I ambl by hi car, act as though I wa ignor the innuendo of 
hi pitch. then I bolt for the back door, open it myself sinc he 
wa too startl to help, threw in my carry-ons, pile in behind them, 
and yelled, "let' go. rapido." 

As we sped away, I realiz hi greatest surpris wa that I hadn't 
rais the subject of price. At that point, it wa the last thing on my 
mind. I look back to see the two guy from the black land rover, 
togeth with two others, head for a car that had been double-park 
right in front. 

had I been right after all? 

We made a high-spe turn onto the highway, and I immedi order 
the driver to take a servic road that led off toward a cluster of ga 
station and park lot with falling-down barbed-wir fences. I 
figur I had about half a minut of lead time, whatev wa go on. 

We dodg massiv pothol and the loos gravel flew, but then we 
reach a ramshackl ga station and I order him to pull in. then I 
watch the line of traffic speed by on the main highway for sever 
minutes. nobodi pull off. good. 

My driver final got around to ask where I want to go, and as 
calmli as I could, I told him. 

"the palacio nacional." 

"_si_." 

with that he gun hi engin and spun out. jesus! 

"_ma despacio, por favor_." 

"okay," he said, show off hi english as he don hi sunglasses. 
"I go more slow. No problem." 

the initi destin wa part of my new plan, hatch while I wa on 
the plane. when I wa read my guidebook and fill out my entri 
card i'd had a bright idea. I knew exactli how I want to begin. 

head into town, the time now the middl of the afternoon, I lean 
back in the seat and tri to absorb the view, to get a feel for 
where I was. We first travel through the suburban fringes, the 
heavili guard luxuri mansion of the landhold and militari 
elite, the one percent of guatemala who own ninety-nin percent of the 
country. iron fenc and wide expans of lawn, protect by uzi-tot 
security, guard whimsic architectur conceit top by silver 
satellit dishes. A twenty-foot wall shield their delic eye from 
the city' largest shanty-town, makeshift hovel of bamboo and rust 
tin, with no sign of water or drain or toilets. guatemala city: as 
steve had put it once, a million doom citizens, the rich and the 
poor, trap togeth side by side in the most "modern" capit in 
central america. 

whi on earth had sarah decid to come here? even if she did travel 
with the mesmer alex goddard it wa hard to imagin a place less 
spiritual. couldn't she feel that thi wa all wrong? one of us had to 
be miss someth major. 

fifteen minut later I wa pass through the fetid atmospher of 
downtown, which seem to be anoth world, guatemala city' twin soul. 
It wa an urban hodgepodg of burger king, mcdonald's, discount 
electron emporia, an eye-numb profus of plastic signs, filthi 
park lots, rattletrap buse and taxis, stall traffic. exhaust 
fume thicken the air, and everywher you look teenag "guards" in 
uniform loiter in front of store and bank with sawed-off shotguns, 
boy so green and scared-look you'd think twice about let one of 
them park your car. but there they were, weapon at the ready, 
nervous monitor passersby. who were they defend all the wealth 
from? the rag street children, with swollen belli and skin 
disease, vend singl cigarett from open packs? Or the hord of 
widow and orphans, beneficiari of the army' mayan "pacification" 
program, who now beg for centavo or plaintiv hawk half-rotten 
fruit from the safeti of the shadows? 

My bright-idea destin wa a govern offic in the palacio 
nacional, right in the center of town, where I hope I could find 
sarah' old land card, the record of when tourist arriv and 
departed. when i'd fill mine out on the plane, i'd realiz you were 
suppos to put down where you'd be stay in guatemala. I figur the 
best way to locat her thi time wa to find out where she went last 
time. . . . 

As my cab pull up in front, a black land rover wa park in a 
"prohibido estacionarse" zone by the front steps. To my eye it look 
like the same one i'd seen at the airport. shit. 

but nobodi wa around, so I decid mayb I wa just be paranoid 
again. 

the palacio turn out to be a mixtur of moorish and faux greek 
architecture, with a facad of light green imit stone that gave 
off the impress of a large, rococo wed cake. I took a long look, 
paid off the driver--who had turn out to be veri nice--and head in. 
It was, after all, a public building, open to tourist gringos. 

nobodi in the lobbi appear to take ani particular notic of me, so 
after go through their veri seriou security, uniform and gun 
everywhere, I check the directory. 

It turn out the president, cabinet ministers, and high militari 
offic all kept offic there, but it didn't take long to find the 
bureau I wa look for. go down the marble-floor hallway on the 
third floor, I pass by the sala de recepcion, a vast wood-panel 
room of enorm chandeliers, stained-glass windows, and a massiv coat 
of arms. quit a place, but not my destination. At the far end of the 
hallway, I found the door I wanted, went in, and tri out the spanish 
question i'd been practic in the cab. not necessary: english work 
fine. 

"_senora_, the record for that time were onli kept on paper," a ladino 
woman declar shrugging, her nail color a brash mauve, her hair a 
burst of red, "but you are welcom to look." she'd been on the phone, 
chat in rapid-fir spanish, but she quickli hung up and got out her 
glasses. 

"thanks." 

the welcom mat wa obvious a littl thin. the woman wa tri to be 
friendly, but veri quickli her nervous began to come through. 
"we'r alway glad to accommod american search for friend or 
relatives," she went on, attempt a smile. "some of your american 
press ha been print distortions, that the guatemalan armi conspir 
with the cia to cover up murders. it' a total lie." 

right. mayb you ought to see some of the photo steve ha of the 
"army-pacified" maya villag up in the mountains. 

the search took an hour and a half of leaf through dusti boxes, 
which chafe my hand raw, but then . . . voila. 

there it was. the crucial piec of inform lou had missed. A 
hastili scribbled-in land card for an american, with the name sarah 
crenshaw. I stare at it a moment, feel a glow of success. wa it an 
omen? 

It wa definit her. she'd even dot an "i" with a smiley face, one 
of her person trademarks. 

then I look down the form. what I want wa the address she'd put 
down as a destin in guatemala. 

the answer: "nino del mundo, peten department." 

My hope sank. great. that wa like say your address 

is children of the world, lost somewher in the state of montana. 

the home address wa equal vague. just "new york." So much for the 
high level of curios at "inmigracion." 

however, the carbon copi of the land card, which you'r suppos to 
surrend when you leave, wa not stapl to it, the way it wa on all 
the other in the box. naturally, sinc she'd left in a medevac plane, 
half dead. 

"what doe thi mean?" I got up and walk over to the woman' desk, 
carri the card. mainli I just want to get a rise out of her. "the 
carbon copi is missing. doe that mean she could still be here?" 

red alert. she glanc at the arriv date a moment and her eye froze. 
then, doubtless with vision of anoth cia scandal loom in her 
consciousness, she brusqu announc that the offic wa get 
readi to close for the day. 

"you'll have to pursu ani further inquiri through the american 
embassy, mrs. james, which handl all matter concern u.s. 
nationals." 

"well, thank for all your help." I wa final get the 
police-st runaround i'd expect all along. I guess I need her to 
care, and it wa obviou she didn't. 

okay . . . i'd plan to go to the embassi anyway. mayb they could 
tell me about thi place she'd put on her land card. could it be the 
local name for alex goddard' clinic? 

As I pick up my things, I thought again about the prospect of show 
my face on the street of guatemala city. would there be more loiter 
men in grungi brown shirt wait to watch my everi move? more black 
land rovers? As I march back out through the ornat lobby, I decid 
not to let my imagin get too active. It wa now late afternoon, 
but I wa make progress. I also wa think about steve, wonder 
if he'd gotten into town yet. probabl not for anoth coupl of hours, 
but just think about see him again, and have him for support, 
wa boost my energy. 

A short cab ride later I arriv at the embassi of the all-pow 
unit state of america, a two-block-long concret fortress on reforma 
avenu guard by yank marin with heavi automat weapons. when I 
explain myself to the PR peopl man the recept desk, includ 
my brush with guatemalan bureaucracy, they told me to check with the 
intern secur section. 

"in fact, if you'r look for an american national, thi is where you 
should have come in the first place," said a veri efficient-appear 
young woman, with a busi suit and dark, close-crop hair. "A 
phone call from here work wonder at the palacio nacional." 

I had no proof sarah wa in guatemala yet, and if she was, it would 
doubtless be under a differ name. what' more, tell them my 
suspicion that she'd been kidnap by a high offici and brought here 
would definit brand me as a conspiraci theorist. So for now, all I 
could realli hope to get from them wa an address for alex goddard' 
clinic, someplac to start. where and what wa "nino del mundo"? 
appar the woman hadn't fulli understood that. 

moment later a thirtyish male attach show up, look veri harried. 
He also could have been presid of the local young republicans, with 
a cute haircut and preppi tie, knot perfectly. 

"hi, i'm mel olberg. how can I . . .?" 

I told him I want to see someon who wa respons for the record 
of miss american tourists. I also sens he wa edgi and tri to 
get it over with fast; all the while he kept check hi watch, onli 
half listening. 

"gee, I realli wish you'd come earlier," he said. "monday 

afternoon are a littl nut around here, weekli report due and all, 
and it' get late." when he glanc at hi watch again, make sure 
I noticed, I found myself want to yell at the guy. "I mean it' been 
two year sinc thi woman you'r look for fill out a land 
card. We might have someth in the files, but. . . would it be 
possibl for you to come back tomorrow?" 

"no, it will not be possible," I lied. "i'v got a plane back to new 
york tomorrow." I felt my frustrat rising. I want to just grab him 
and shake him. 

My first thought wa to tell him I make documentari film and mayb 
he'd like to end up in one about how my country' guatemala citi 
embassi didn't care about it citizens. but then I decid to go in a 
different, probabl more productive, direction. 

"just for five minutes," I declared, reach for feign helplessness. 

"well, let me call upstairs," he muttered, realizing, I suppose, that 
the best way to get rid of me wa to kick me up the chain of command, 
"and see if mr. morton can take a moment to meet with you." 

It worked. the next thing I knew, I wa in the offic of a good-look 
diplomat name barri morton--gray temples, tailor suit, rug face 
of a sixty-year-old soap-opera heartthrob who play tenni and keep a 
mistress. chief inform officer. 

"actually, I do rememb her, vaguely," morton declared, flash me 
hi profession smile. "the crenshaw girl wa an unfortun case. To 
begin with, anybodi who overstay their visa that long get us in a lot 
of hot water with the locals. they alway tend to blame us, ms. . . ." 

"james. My name' morgan james." 

"ms. james." anoth of those smiles. "frankly, I don't know what to 
tell you, though." He shrugged, exud helplessness. "it' hard to 
keep track of everi american tourist who come and goe through thi 
country. some of the hippi type end up in a mountain villag 
somewhere, gone native. In thi instance, as I recall, we got her out 
on a medevac." 

"her land card gave her destin as someplac call 'nino del 
mundo,' up to the peten. that ring a bell? ani idea how I could find 
it?" 

"niiio del mundo?" He glanc up quickly. "that' a new one on me." 
he'd been fiddl with a stack of paper on hi desk, give me onli 
half hi attention, but he abruptli stopped. "you tri the phone book?" 

"like I said, it' in the peten." I wa get the definit sens he 
want to get rid of me as soon as possible. the whole scene wa 
feel tens and off. "mi understand is that' mostli rain forest. 
Do they even have phone up there?" 

"not many," he said, hi tone start to definit acquir an "I have 
better thing to do" edge. 

that wa when he focus in on me, hi look turn protective. 

"let me speak candidly, ms. james, strictli off the record. down here 
peopl have been known to 'disappear' just for ask too mani 
questions. curios kill the cat, and all that. between us, thi 
place is still a polic state in mani regards. you want my advice, let 
sleep dog lie. just forget about thi crenshaw girl. she' out of 
the countri now, so . . . let me put it like this: peopl who go poke 
around here are just ask for trouble." 

I felt a ring of sincer in hi voice. mayb a littl too much 
sincerity. whi wa he so worri for me? 

"that may be true, but i'm still go to see what I can find out. My 
heart is pure. whi should anybodi care?" 

"do what you think best," he said with a sigh, "but i'v told you 
everyth we know. which, i'm afraid, is actual veri little." 

"bi the way." tri one more thing on him, I thought, see what he'll say. 
"sinc you'r so concern about sarah, you'll be reliev to know 
she' regain conscious and start to talk." there seem no 
point in tell him ani more. the rest wa all still speculation. 

that stop him cold. "what . . . what ha she said?" hi eye 
appear startl in the glare light of the offic fluorescents. At 
long last I had hi undivid attention. 

"you'r busy." I smile at him. "I don't want to bore you with details. 
but it' just go to be a matter of time befor she rememb exactli 
what happen down here." 

"she hasn't talk about it yet?" He wa fiddl with an ornat letter 
opener, an onyx jaguar head on the handle. 

"she' get there." I stare back at him, tri to read hi mood. 
"we may soon find out who wa behind whatev happen to her." then I 
tri a long shot. "mayb officialdom here had someth to do with it." 

"let me tell you something." He sigh again, seem to regain hi 
composure. "the sovereign state of guatemala definit play by it 
own rules. whenev foreign down here meet with foul play, 
lower-level offici have develop a consensu over the year that 
sometim it' better not be too industrious. nobody' ever sure of 
what, or who, they might turn up." 

the meet wa definit ending, and onc again I had more question 
than answers. someth about barri morton felt wrong, but I couldn't 
quit get a grip on what it was. one thing I wa certain of: He knew 
more than he wa tell me. whi wa that? 

As I wa exit through hi outer office, head for the swarm 
street below, I wave good-by to hi secretary, a stout, fiftyish 
ladino matron with defiantli black-di hair, a hard look mitig 
somewhat by the zircon trim on her thick glass and a small silver 
pendant nestl on her ample, low-cut sweater. It wa the pendant that 
caught my eye, be the silver face of a cat, most like the local 
jaguar. look just like the one i'd seen you-know-where. I wa 
stare so hard I almost stumbl over a chair. yes. It wa definit 
like those I rememb from kevin and rachel. 

the onli differ was, when she bent over to reach for her stapler, 
the medallion twist around and the back, I could see, flash blank 
silver, no engrav of line and dots. 

So where did she get it? I start to ask her, but decid i'd just get 
more BS runaround. then I had anoth thought: mayb she handl a lot 
of thing that never made it to barri morton' desk, the "don't wast 
the boss' valuabl time" kind of secretary. mayb she s the one I 
realli should have been talk to, the kind of woman who take care of 
everyth while the high-paid senior supervisor is at long lunches. 

she look at me, and our eye met and held for a second. had she been 
listen in on my chat with morton? did she know someth I ought to 
know? 

By then, however, thought of steve were weigh in. I hadn't seen him 
in three and a half month and I wa realiz that wa about my limit. 
I want to recaptur the lost time. our be togeth wa go to 
make everyth turn out right. 

cling to that thought, I grab a cab and head for my hotel and a 
much-overdu hot bath. 




chapter sixteen 


"come here," he said. 

whoosh. there he was. He strode through the door, tan safari shirt, 
smell like a man who'd just driven hundr of mile through central 
america in an open jeep. I want to undress him with my teeth and lick 
off the sweat. brown eyes, skin tan as leather, he threw hi arm 
around me and I felt the weight of the world slip away. He wa here. I 
wa wear a robe, fresh from the tub, but it wa gone in a second. 
steve, I gotta say, knew a thing or two about the bedroom. 

As we wound ourselv togeth for the next two hours, I had a 
refresh cours in how much Id miss him, soul and body. hi taste, 
hi skin, hi touch. finally, we were both so exhaust we just lay 
there bath in sweat, spoon togeth on the sag bed. I hadn't 
felt so good in years. It wa like anoth world. 

"god i'v miss you," I said again, hold him closer. the 
air-condit wa begin to lose ground against the late sun, but 
I didn't care. after my solo nightmar of the last two days, I wa 
rememb what it wa like to be a coupl again. 

the camino real, by the way, turn out to be an american-styl 
hideaway with budget shag carpet and flake blue walls. In a way, 
though, the downtrodden decor actual made it more romantic, like we'd 
sneak off to a garish hot-sheet motel for a twilight rendezvous. 

I final drag myself up and got us a bottl of water. then, lean 
against the ricketi headboard, I recount an abbrevi version of 
what had happen yesterday after we'd first talked--th theft of my 
film, and then lou be assault and sarah taken, appar 
willingly, to be brought (I strongli suspected) back here. what I held 
out on were the detail about a certain colonel jose alvino ramos, my 
belief that he wa behind the crime and in leagu with alex goddard 
and stalk me. I wa afraid our room wa bugged. 

"morgy, we'll get through this," he said, reach over to stroke my 
hair. "if somebodi brought her back down here, we'll find her. and I 
apolog for be such a shit on the phone, about the baby. i'd just 
had a local lab lose three roll of high-spe kodachrom and I wa 
serious frost at the world. We can keep tri if you want to." 

"just hold me." I put down my glass and I reach around and ran my 
finger across hi chest. It wa so love to be thi close to somebodi 
you want so much. I love hi earnest brown eye and hi soft skin. I 
love him. just have him with me made such a difference. 

the unexpect part was, i'd ask him to come and help me, but now 
that he wa here, I wa start to feel uneasi about lure him into 
my person nightmare. wa that realli fair? 

also, I wa get hint he had problem of hi own. the photo book, I 
gathered, wa not come togeth the way he'd hoped. he'd mumbl 
someth about find himself torn between a heartstr essay about 
the children (hi specialty; you'v probabl seen hi work, whether you 
know it or not), a devast portray of the latest crop of sleazi 
politicos, or a natur valentin to the vanish rain forest. but 
whenev he agon about hi work, I knew enough to keep my mouth 
shut and just listen. He didn't want bright ideas; he just want me to 
clam up and be there for him. 

anyway, I knew he'd think hi way through the problem. He had a 
decept air of vulner that alway disappear in a crunch. He 
wa the master of ad hoc solutions. . . . 

At that moment, he reach for hi watch, studi it, and abruptli 
bolt straight up. "hey, I almost forgot my surprise. I hope you'r 
still up for it. did you know thi is our anniversary? It wa on thi 
veri day I first watch you dive into that grungi swim pool at the 
oloffson in port-au-prince." 

"mi god you'r right. i'm humiliated." I hug him contritely, feel 
like a self-cent twit. I guess I wa too focus on sarah. (I screw 
up a lot on birthday too, alway with an excuse.) "I don't even have a 
present for you. i'v been so--" 

"that' okay." He grin then stood up and head for the shower. "not 
the first time. but i'v got one for both of us. we'll make it a gift 
to each other. it'll help start you think like a _guatemalteco_ 
insider." 

"what? you sneak. what did you get?" 

"A trip back into the void of prehistor time," he yell over hi 
shoulder. "I am the possessor of a little-known secret about thi town. 
I call from beliz citi thi morn and made dinner reserv for 
us downtown. you'll see." 

god I love thi man. but the last thing on my mind at that moment wa 
food. 

"honey, I don't know if i'm really--" 

"hey, don't wimp out on me. If we'r go to do thi place, at least 
we can do it in style. besides, you can't live on smog alone. you gotta 
eat." 

He had a point. starv myself wasn't go to help find sarah ani 
sooner. and there were detail I want to tell him that I didn't want 
to broadcast in the room. what if colonel ramo had long ear to match 
hi long arm? 

"come on," he pressed. "just put on the slinkiest thing 

you'v got and get readi to go native. it'll help you put thi part of 
the world into perspective." 

alas, I had noth particularli "slinky," though fortun i'd 
pack a silk blous I could loosen and tie with a scarf around the 
waist. don't laugh, it worked. I even brush on some seriou eye 
shadow, which normal I don't bother with much. 

I tri not to let him know how concern I wa as we walk down the 
driveway of the hotel and hail a cab, while I furtiv search the 
shadows. see the street after dark made me sad all over again for 
sarah. I still want to see and feel guatemala the way she had, but 
when I got close to the realiti of the place, it made me uneasy. 

It turn out the marvel he'd discov wa call siriaco's, a 
wonder old place with a patio and garden in back--both roof by 
glitter tropic stars--which were down a stone pathway from the 
main dine room and bar. It appear to be where a lot of vips, the 
rule oligarchy, dined. It wa romant and perfect. 

when we arrived, hi special anniversari surpris wa alreadi be 
laid out on a low stone table, attend by mayan women all in 
tradit dress: the color _huipil _blous of their villages, red 
and blue skirts, immens jade earrings. 

"they'v reconstruct a kingli feast from old documents," he 
explained, beam at my amazement. "cuisin of the ancient rain 
forest. we'r go to have a banquet of authent _guatemalteco_ chow 
from eon ago." 

and the meal wa definit fit for royalty. soon we were work our 
way through a long-forgotten medley of piquant flavor that swept 
through my sens as though I were in anoth world. there wa 
pit-roast deer, steam fish, bake wild turkey. one calabash bowl 
set forth coriander-flavor kidney beans; anoth had half a dozen 
varieti of green legum all in a rich turtl broth; a third offer 
vanilla-season sweet potatoes; other had variou forest tuber 
steam with chiles. We even had a delici honey wine, like heavenli 
nectar, serv in red clay bowls, that made me want to have sex right 
on the table. there with steve, the unexpect juxtaposit of spice 
and flavor made everi bite, everi aroma, a new sensual experience. 
(let me say right here he' a cook fanatic, wherea i'v been known 
to burn water. I think it' the new divis of labor in post-feminist 
america.) final the mayan waitress brought out cup of a chocol 
dessert drink from ancient times, cocoa bean roasted, ground, and 
boil with sugarcane. the whole event wa pure heaven. 

except for the occasion unwant intrusions. variou dark-ey 
low-cut ladino divorcees, about half a dozen in all, hang out at the 
bar with heavi perfum and too much jewelry, kept come over 
purportedli to marvel over our privat feast (or wa it steve' big 
brown eyes). He return their attent with hi polit and perfect 
spanish, but I despis them. In ani case, they were shameless. not 
rememb quit enough espanol, however, the best I could do wa just 
to put my hand on hi and give them the evil eye. It seem to work, 
though what I realli want to do wa hold up a cross the way you do to 
ward off vampires. . . . 

"hey, check out orion," he said final lean back, an easy, 
delici finger aim at that sprawl constellation. I look up at 
the canopi of stars, and sure enough, the hunter and hi sword 
domin the starri sky abov like a stalwart centurion, guard us. 
"I alway know i'm in the tropic when it' right overhead." 

"honey, thi ha been wonderful," I declared. "thank you so much." I 
move around and kiss him. "it' exactli the attitud adjust I 
needed." 

"well"--h smile back--"now I guess we'v got some 

organ to do. So tell me everyth you left out back there at the 
hotel. I know you were hold off." 

I wa feel increasingli hyper, probabl from the high-octan 
chocolate, but I proceed to recount all my find about alex 
goddard and quetzal manor. then I move on to colonel ramo and how 
he'd threaten carli and me about my film. finally, I told him my deep 
belief that colonel ramo and a coupl of hi goon were obvious the 
one who'd rough up lou and taken sarah. 

"bad scene," he said when I final paus for breath. He wa toy 
with hi cup and run hi finger through hi sandi hair, in that 
"deep thought" mode of his. "way I see it, thi just sound like a 
classic case of sell kids. To me, that' right up there with murder 
and grand larceny." 

"well, I also firmli believ it' all tie in with alex goddard' 
clinic here, or whatev it is. the place sarah call nino del mundo 
on her land card. i'll bet you anyth that' where ramo ha taken 
her." 

"you know," he said, hi brow a perfect furrow, eye narrowed, "about 
the babi you saw, there'v been press stori over the last few year 
about american be attack in guatemala on suspicion of tri to 
kidnap maya children out in the villages, to put up for adoption. but 
i'v never seen ani proof of it. i'v alway thought it just might have 
been dumb gringo who don't know the culture. they go poke around out 
in the countrysid and stupidli say the wrong thing. mayb use 
schoolbook spanish nobodi out there realli understands. but now thi 
make me wonder if--" 

"love, those babi I saw up at quetzal manor are not kidnap indian 
children, trust me. they'r caucasian as vanilla snow cones. tri again." 

"I get your point," he said quickly. "but let me relat the fact of 
life down here. when you'v got some guatemalan colonel behind 
something, you'd better think twice about how mani rock you turn over." 

"funny, but that' exactli what some guy at the embassi name barri 
morton said to me." 

"and you'd better listen. thi is the countri that turn the word 
'disappear' into a new kind of verb. peopl get 'disappeared.' I 
actual knew some of them, back in the late eighties. one dark night 
an armi truck roll into a village, and when the tortur and . . . 
other thing are over with, a few maya are never heard from again." He 
look at me. "you saw my pictur of that villag in the huehuetenango 
department, tzalala, where the armi mutil and murder half the--" 

"I know all about that." It wa chill to recal hi gruesom photos. 
"but i'm go to track down alex goddard' clinic, no matter what. 
that' where they'v taken sarah, i'm sure of it. I just may need some 
help find it." 

He grimaced. "damn, i'v got to head back to beliz by noon tomorrow." 
then hi look brightened. "but, hey, I finish my shoot wednesday, so I 
can drive back here on thursday. then on friday mayb we could--" 

"come on, love, I can't just sit around till the end of the week. what 
am I go to do till then?" the veri thought made me itchy. "I need to 
find out if nino del mundo, the place sarah put on her origin 
land card is for real. her card said it' somewher in the peten, 
the rain forest. If I could find somebodi who--" 

"okay, look." He wa think aloud. "how about this? there' a guy 
here in town who owe me a favor. A big one. He screw me out of 
twenti grand in the u.s. We were go to start a travel magazine--i 
think I told you about that--but then he took my money and split the 
country. He end up down here and went to work for the cia--til they 
sack him. after that he leas a helicopt and start some kind of 
bullshit tourist hustle. He sure as hell know what' go on. name' 
alan dupre. the prick. mayb I could give him a call and we could get 
togeth for a late drink. he' got an easi number these days: 4-mayan." 

"how' he go to help?" 

"trust me. he' our guy." 

I lean back and close my eyes, my imagin drifting. In that 
brief moment, my mind float back to yesterday afternoon at lou' 
loft, and sarah. her hallucin still haunt me. what had happen 
to her in the rain forest? and whi would she say she want to go back? 

then I snap back. "all right. tri and ring him if you think he can 
help. right now I need all I can get." 

He got up and work hi way to the phone, past the crowd bar, while 
I tri to contempl the night sky. I look up again, hope to see 
orion, but now a dark cloud had move in, leav noth but deepen 
blackness. he'd said there wa a storm brewing, part of an 
out-of-season hurrican develop in the caribbean, so I guess thi 
wa the first harbinger. 

"tonight' out, but tomorrow' okay." He wa stride back. "crack of 
dawn. which for him is roughli about noon. we'll have a quick 
get-togeth and then i'v got to run. really. but if thi guy doesn't 
know what' go on down here, nobodi does. he' probabl laid half 
those hot tomatillo there at the bar. the man ha hi sources, if you 
get my meaning." 

"then let' go back to the gloriou camino real." I took hi hand. 
"we'll split the check. At the moment, even that seem romantic." 

"i'm still think about--" 

"don't. don't think." I touch hi lips, soft and moist, then kiss 
him. An impuls but deepli felt act. "we'v all had enough think 
for one day." 




chapter seventeen 


alan dupr didn't ring till almost ten-thirti the next morning, and I 
had the feel even that wa a stretch. He then offer to meet us in 
the parqu concordia, right downtown. As I watch him ambl toward 
our bench, my first impress was: why'd we bother? 

the man appear to be in hi earli forties, puffy-ey and 
pink-cheek with discount aviat shades, look like a glad-hand 
tourist just down to central america for a weekend of unchaperon 
bacchanals. the flower sport shirt, worn outsid the belt, gave him 
the aura of a tout insuffici attir without a can of coor in 
hand. 

how can thi be progress? i'm down here hope to find sarah, and I end 
up in a trash-fil park meet some expat operator. 

steve had explain that the main benefit of alan dupre' cia gig wa 
that he did learn how to fli a helicopter. with that skill he'd end 
up start a tourist agenc in guatemala citi use an old bell he 
leased: "mayan pyramid from the air." mainly, though, he wa a 
self-styl bon vivant who knew people. 

"steve the brave." On came dupre' mirthless smile as he approach a 
jaunti spring enter hi step. 

"alan, ani friend of your ha got to be brave." steve just stare at 
him. 

dupr had the kind of empti grin that look like it'd been rehears 
in hi high school bathroom mirror. It wa thin, kind of fork and 
dangerous, and thi morn it plaster qualiti undermin ani attempt 
at honesty. mayb deal with complain tourist everi day of your 
life did that to you. 

"you called, I came." He wa now shift from foot to foot. "guess it 
final had to happen. what' the phrase? you can run but you can't 
hide? surpris us both and pretend you'r happi to see me." 

steve look like he wa not entir prepar for thi moment. He use 
the awkward paus that follow to introduc me. dupr shook hand like 
he wa fear of germs, then turn back. 

"jesus, man, i'm still work on the money, honest to god. but do I 
get a last cigarett befor the fire squad?" 

"hey, alan, eas up." steve wa deadpan. "good to see you again. I mean 
it. love that waikiki shirt, by the way. never knew you had such 
progress taste." 

"thi is actual my incognito attire. for secret missions. it' my 
object today to look like some cruise-ship jerk." He glanc around 
nervously. "so how'm I doing?" 

"i'd say your year of train in undercov work have paid off." 

I listened, rememb steve had explain that alan dupre' career as 
a cia information-gather wa hamper by hi propens to drink too 
much tequila and then brag about hi occupation, hope to impress 
whatev woman he had in hi sight at the moment. 

"so bring me up to date." steve wa tri to hide hi total contempt. 
"why'd you get out of the spook business? langley couldn't find a 'new 
mission' for you after the evil empir dissolved?" 

dupre' face turn pensive. "man, you don't get it, do you? langley' 
still got plenti on it mind. noth ha changed. most peopl don't 
realiz the u.s. isn't run by the folk they vote for. there' a 
perman govern that doesn't appear on larri king, and I wa part 
of it. the central intellig agenc of the u.s. of A. will go on 
do exactli what it' alway done, guid event in third world 
toilet like thi through whatev mean are necessari to protect 
america' strateg concerns. keep the world safe for microsoft and 
ronald mcdonald." He paus and glanc at me, as though slightli 
embarrassed. then he continued. "what i'm say is, all those beltway 
turkey with the briar pipe and gigabyt computers, sit around 
wring their hands, worri the compani need a new mission, never 
realli grasp it old mission." 

"you'r right," steve said go along with the shtick, the applaus 
line dupr had doubtless use in a thousand bars. "i'm get slow. 
what langley need nowaday is a new cover story." 

"couldn't have phrase it better." dupr smile again too easily. 
"they're--" 

"actually," steve said cut him off impatiently, all the while 
gaze up at the gather dark cloud as though they were a hover 
adversary, "the truth of the matter is, we call you to discuss a 
favor. A small help hand." He seem to be search for a sale 
point. "for old times' sake." 

"for old times' sake?" dupr appear to be have troubl with the 
concept. 

"yeah. all we want is to hear a littl talk of the town." He gaze out 
over the square, uzi-tot polic still stroll by. "you know, local 
inform of the kind that doesn't make the papers." 

"right," I said. "for starters, how could a gringa sort of melt into 
the peten rain forest, disappear for month and months, and then end up 
in a coma?" i'd decid to feel him out befor go for the bigger 
questions. 

"peopl disappear down here all the time, and nobodi in their right 
mind goe around inquir why." dupr seem genuin astonish that 
anyon would find such a thing unusual. He also wa finger a 
cigarett pack in hi breast pocket, clearli nervou about the quick 
turn our convers had taken. "whatever' your problem in guatemala, 
just forget about it. drink some _cerveza_, take a few snapshot of the 
picturesqu natives, and then move on to a civil place. thi is a 
land of mystery, lady, and the peopl who matter like it that way. 
there are those here who take their privaci veri seriously." 

just like alex goddard' children of light, I thought. Or nino del 
mundo, or whatev it' called. It wa chill to hear alan dupr 
back away so quickli from my question. the guy seem truli scare 
under all the bluster. I also observ that hi eye were curious 
small, out of proport to hi face. I hadn't notic it at first. 

"well," I went on, determin to push him, "an old land card for the 
person i'm look for said her destin wa a place call nino 
del mundo, up in the peten. I assum that' somewher in the northern 
rain forest, right? So I guess what I want to know is, doe that name 
stir up ani connections?" 

He look around, then extract a gaulois from a blue pack and lit it 
with a wooden match, flick the tip with hi fingernail. He inhaled, 
take hi time. "well, mayb i'v heard a littl someth about a 
place some peopl call by that name." He drew again on the cigarette. 
"and the stori might includ a femal american _tourista_ or two--about 
one a year, actually--who'v sort of melt into the forest never to be 
seen more. i'm not exactli sure where it is, though. Or even if what 
you hear is true. but who cares? come on, guys, thi is guatemala, for 
chrissake. shit happens. get a life." 

"the embassy, or the cia, or anybodi ever carri out an inquiry?" I felt 
my energi rising. "A woman everi year or so? I went by reforma avenu 
yesterday and nobodi there seem to have ever heard of ani of this." 

"no kidding." He snorted. "whatev happen that place, our care 
embassy, ain't gonna do zip--don't faint at the news--and there' no 
way the company' go to pull their old-tim yanke number, roll in 
with the beig sunglasses, and yell, 'okay, you peons, we'r here to 
take name and kick butt. what happen to our national?' they'v 
recent acquir a habit of take local situat at face value. 
make for a lot better tabl at the toni supper club in town." 

thi guy like to talk, I realiz but he had no interest in go 
beyond glib one-liners. I glanc at steve, and I could tell he wa 
have the same thoughts. 

"tell you what," steve said finally, "how about this? tell us whatev 
you know about how to find thi place, and mayb we can adjust the 
term on the money you screw me out of. I might settl for someth 
less on the dollar and let bygon be bygones." 

"hey, man, you'll get your money. i'm good for it." dupr sigh and 
drew on hi gauloise. "it' just that thing are a littl tight right 
now, you know." He paused. "matter of fact, I wa hope you might be 
abl to spare a coupl of bill for a week or so. but I guess . . ." 
hi voic trail off. 

alan dupr knew someth I need to know, or might know it. steve had 
definit found the right guy in that regard. but he clearli wa 
cautiou to the point of paralysi as he kept furtiv glanc 
around. what wa he so fear of, and what could I do to convinc him 
to help me? 

I stood gaze at the dark sky for a long moment, and 

then I had an off-the-wal idea, a long shot, the all-or-noth take 
you go for when the sun is die and the union are look at overtime. 

"you do tourist flights, right?" I started, still work on the idea. 
"so how about pretend i'm an eco nut? A lover of the rain forest. 
you can tell whoever you'r so afraid of that you'r take me up into 
the wild to show me jaguar or something. A regular tour. just 
cruis around, take in the sights. total innocent. and then if we 
accident scout a little, mayb we could find the place." 

"jesus, you'r seriou about this, aren't you?" dupr nervous crush 
out hi cigarette, stare at me glassy-eyed. 

"never been more." 

He extract anoth gauloise. 

"okay, a counteroffer, miss . . ." 

"james. morgan james." 

"right, miss james. i'm begin to think you'v got no realist 
sens of proport about thi part of the world. you--" 

"fool rush in, right?" 

"mi point precisely. but if steve here mean what he says, well, mayb 
there' a littl room to negotiate. mayb I could take you on a quick 
sightse trip. and just for laugh I could kind of inadvert 
stray over the area I think you might find productive. assum we can 
locat it. but here'r my terms. I do it and steverino and me are 
square. consid it a twenty-thousand-dollar cruise." 

"fine with me." steve didn't even blink, and I love him all over 
again, right on the spot. though the truth was, I knew he'd never 
plan on see a penni of the money again anyway. 

"and you think thi place is nino del mundo?" I wa tri not to get 
my hope up too much, but still . . . 

dupr lit hi new cigarette. "you didn't hear thi from me, okay? you 
heard it from the embassi or some other damn place. but that' one 
name for it. anoth is 'jungl disneyland.' actually, I think the 
local name is _baalum_, the old maya word for jaguar. but everybodi 
act like it' a state secret, so all you get are rumors." 

"well, assum we find it, then how could I get in? I mean actual 
in." I wa squint at him, feel my bodi tense. what wa it lou had 
said about a word he'd heard when they were take sarah? It sound 
like "babylon"? I also thought that wa what she'd whisper to me. 
could it be the word wa actual baalum? the gloomi morn sky 
abruptli flood with the brilliant white light of hope. I glanc back 
at steve, and our eye lock for a long moment. 

"morgy, for chrissake, what are you saying?" steve took my hand. "don't 
you realiz thi is guatemala? don't even think about it." 

"we'r just talk now, okay?" I squeez hi hand then look back at 
dupre. "I wa just wondering. onc we'v found it, could I get a sneak 
look-see? assum I want to?" 

"well, i'll tell you one thing, miss morgan james." dupr wa finger 
hi new cigarette, oblivi to my reaction. "give no seriou thought 
to just drive up. the army'd be all over your butt in the time it 
take to cock an ak-47." He glanc up at the sky again, though now a 
dens bank of dark cloud had swallow what remain of the sun. A 
pre-rain gloom wa envelop the park, which wa start to empti 
out, the hawker and loiter head home to wait out the weather. 
"but if we do find it, then as long as we'r there, I might be abl to 
drop you off for a quick glanc somehow, say, if we did it around 
twilight time . . . that is, if that' what you want. but it' ten 
minut tops, and that' my final offer. frankly, I think you'd be 
ill-advis in the extrem to do it, but . . . in ani case, it' got to 
be a low-profil enterpris all the way. We screw thi up and we could 
easili swell the rank of the 'disappeared.' " 

"but you think you could actual locat it?" 

"what I hear, the place is on a tributari of the usumacinta river, a 
latrin they call the rio tigre. way up in the northwest. low-level 
armi types, you meet them in bar from time to time, like to BS about 
it. i'v got a rough idea where it might be, though you don't know 
whether to believ a bunch of kid recruit after half-a-dozen beers." 

then my mind clicked. the rio tigre? didn't that have someth to do 
with where lou said sarah wa found? that wa definit where I want 
to go. 

"morgy, have you lost your senses?" steve had place hi hand on my 
shoulder. "if the army' involv in someth down here, you don't 
want to know about it. don't lose sight of the fact those goon knock 
off two hundr thousand villag sinc the freedom-lov day of the 
gipper, for fear they might be commies, with the cia practic fli 
in the ammo. thi whole damn country' just one big mass grave. yet 
anoth unclaim corps or two won't make a hell of a lot of 
difference." 

"steve, i'll bet you anyth that' where she is." say it, I had a 
vision of all the thing that had happen to me, and to sarah, becaus 
of alex goddard. I couldn't wait to confront the bastard. "he' brought 
her back." 

steve just glare at me for a long moment, despairing. 

"christ, you make me nuts. okay, look, how about this? At least let me 
come with you. that way we'll face the unknown together." 

though I had a lump-in-the-throat moment, I didn't say anything, just 
stood there glori in the feel of be together. It wa so 
wonder to have him with me and so difficult to think about press 
on without him. 

there wa a long, awkward pause, and then he glanc at hi watch. 
"blast, i'v got to hit the road if i'm go to get back in time to 
set up for tonight' shoot. I just pray I can beat the rain." then he 
pull me around and circl me fulli in hi arms. "please, 
morgy, I realli don't like the sound of this. i'll move heaven and 
earth to get back here by friday night, and if you still want to check 
out thi '_baalum' _place, then we'll figur out a way to do it 
together." 

"just you stay safe." I hug him back. "noth I do is go to mean 
much if I don't have you. don't worry. i'll be okay." 

alan dupr had abruptli taken an even deeper interest in the darken 
sky. I got the feel he wa uncomfort be around two peopl 
capabl of caring. 

"it' onli for a coupl of days," steve went on. "we'll both be okay if 
we just stick together." 

"right," I said, and kiss him harder than I ever had. 

five minut later, my heart and my head still at war with each other, 
I wa alon in the virtual empti park with my brand-new best friend. 
watch steve' jeep blend into the smoggi haze of the avenu made me 
feel like half of me had just disappear into anoth dimension. 

"so that' that," I declar finally, turn back and take a deep 
breath. I had to find sarah befor someth els truli horribl 
happen to her. and the one thing I wa determin to do wa keep 
steve as safe distant from my search as I could, even though it meant 
I wa go to be terribl lone for the next few days. "when can we 
leave?" 

"hey, get real." dupr choked, whirl around. "we can't go today. 
case you hadn't noticed, there' a storm coming. If you realli want to 
go . . . and I mean realli want to, then mayb in a day or so. 
prefer when steve--" 

"I don't want to drag him into this," I said evenly. truthfully, I wa 
sound braver than I felt. but then I rememb onc go down into 
the four-hundred-year-old subterranean harem quarter of the red fort 
in agra, seemingli mile underground and pitch black, with noth but 
a flashlight, surround by scream bat and knee-deep in guano, for 
no better reason than I wa determin to see how the women there onc 
lived. So how much scarier could thi be? 

"well, I say no way," dupr told me. "not today. correction, make that 
no fuck way." He had remov hi aviat shade and wa clean 
them with a dirti hanky. "besides, I don't think you have ani busi 
go up there in the first place. If you'r not scare shitless, you 
ought to be." 

"alan, I think you 're the one who' afraid to go." 

He almost reach for anoth cigarette, but then stop himself. "I 
will definit plead guilti to a deep-seat disquiet about the peopl 
who rule thi placid paradise. but if it'll squar thing with steve, 
then i'll take you up to have a quick look, for my sins. but it' got 
to be after the weather clears." 

I final realiz he wa alreadi think about hi next loan. steve, 
beware. 

"tomorrow then?" I wasn't go to blink, becaus the peten wa where 
sarah had end up the first time and I wa sure that wa where ramo 
had taken her now. _baalum_. 

dupr stare at the sky a moment longer, then caved. "mayb we can 
shoot for tomorrow late. If I can convinc myself thi storm ha done 
it worst." He look back at me. "but I gotta tell you one thing, ms. 
morgan james. We blunder in up there and end up get ourselv 
'disappeared,' we won't even get our pictur in the papers. you'd 
better tell your immedi love one where you'r going, and it 
wouldn't be the worst time in the world to think about make a will." 

the way he said it, I wa sure for onc he meant everi word. 




chapter eighteen 


when I got back to the camino real, the time wa earli afternoon and 
the bed wa freshli made, with all sign and scent of my and steve' 
torrid reunion long gone. I tri to push asid thought of how much I 
wa alreadi miss him and focu on what I wa get myself into. I 
must admit I wa have seriou qualm about go up to the peten, the 
part of guatemala where sarah had been left for dead, with my brand-new 
tour director, the flaki alan dupre. i'd never been in a helicopt 
before, much less one fli over a stormi rain forest. On the other 
hand, if that wa where they'd taken sarah, the sooner I got there, the 
better. 

sit there in the room, I found myself feel right at home: 
everyth about it wa so familiar to an expert on budget travel like 
me. off-brand carpet the color of decay vegetation, the usual two 
doubl bed (one total unused, except as a suitcas shelf), the TV 
suspend over the dresser and bolt to the wall. funny, but it wa 
the first time i'd notic half the thing in the room. 

okay, I told myself, the thing to do first is call st. vincent' and 
check on lou. also, I want to tell him what wa happening. I just 
hope he wouldn't launch into a lectur about the reckless of what 
I wa planning. I need support, not male advice. 

I got the desk to give me the local at&t contact number, 

then rang right through to st. vincent's. the next thing I knew, they 
were call hi room. 

"hi. how' the patient?" 

"morgan, what the hell are you up to? i'v been tri to reach you. I 
final call david and he said you'd left a message; someth about 
central america. whi the hell--?" 

"I wa tri to explain that to you sunday night, but you were pretti 
far gone." 

"well, I ain't that far gone now, so i'm tell you to--" 

"bi the way," I interrupted, hope to chang the subject, "how'r you 
feeling?" 

"I guess i'll live. they let me get up and go to the bathroom now. 
they'r say I can probabl go home tomorrow." 

"that' encouraging." thank god he wa go to be okay. 

"I also had a talk with gerry, downtown. He believ sarah wa 
kidnapped, even if new york' finest don't, so that mean the fbi ha 
jurisdiction. we'r gonna get some action. they'r tri to get a 
photo of that colonel, so mayb I can ID the bastard. but the 
consulate' give us a lot of shit about it." 

"well, i'm track someth down here. between the two of us, I think 
we'll find her." 

"so, what the hell are you doing?" 

I told him about find the name of a destin on sarah' old 
land card, and about meet a guy who wa go to take me there as 
soon as the weather cleared. 

"and you think she could be there now?" He didn't sound hopeful. 

"there'r reason to check it out." I didn't want to elaborate. "mayb 
we'll get lucky." 

I wa attempt to say as littl as possible, fear the phone wa 
tapped. In that spirit, I decid to get off the line as quickli as 
possible. 

"lou, you get lot of rest, and i'll tri and call you tomorrow." 

with a final warn to watch out for myself, he took down my hotel 
number and hung up. truthfully, he wa sound pretti tire and weak, 
not nearli hi old self. 

well, he had a right to be. but at least there were no complications. 

My next call wa go to be to david roth, to check in on thing at 
applecore, but first I want to order up some_ huevo rancheros_, get 
some breakfast protein. I wa becom energ by the prospect of 
progress, and be that way alway make me ravenous. it' probabl a 
primal femal respons that ha a latin name. 

I check out the number for room service, and wa liter reach 
for the black phone when it rang of it own accord. startl I pick 
up the receiver, wonder who had my number. 

"hello." It wa a man' voic that sound vagu familiar. "thought 
i'd check in and see how thing are go with your search." 

"hi," I answer back after a pause, tri to place hi intonation. 

"oh, sorry. barri morton. rememb me? fortress america. you came by 
the offic yesterday." 

"how . . . ?" whi wa he call me? "how did you get this--?" 

"you must have accident put the wrong hotel on your land card as 
your address in guatemala city." He hesit a second then said "but I 
had my secretari call around and . . . well, it happen all the time." 

"I see." It did have the ring of logic. and I had put down a differ 
hotel. A safeti measure. "do you alway take thi much . . . interest 
in your fellow citizens?" 

"onli when they come to see me personally." He chuckled. "so how' it 
going?" 

"well, thank for calling," I said. "everything' move along." 

"good, good." there wa anoth pause, then, "incidentally, you have 
ani luck find that nino del mundo place you were look for?" 

I hesitated, wonder whi he would ask and also unsur what to say. 

"not yet," I volunteered. My god, it final dawn on me. the guy wa 
track me. He want to know what I knew. "you come up with anyth 
at your end?" 

"i'v been busy, a string of meetings, but I still think you might want 
to check out the phone book." It wa the second time he'd made the 
suggestion. He wa practic order me to do it. why? "you never 
know. i'm afraid that' about the best I can do." 

"mayb I will," I said. "i'v been a littl busi too." 

the phone call wa feel stranger and stranger. He wa send me to 
see something, probabl in hope it would make me go away. It wa 
actual more unnerv than if he'd done noth at all. 

"well, in ani case, I hope you have a good visit," he declar 
diplomatically. anoth pause. "plan to be here long?" 

"i'm not sure yet." whi did he want to know that? 

"I see. whatev happens, I hope you find what you'r look for. best 
of luck." 

He hung up, leav me with the feel he alreadi knew the answer to 
everi question he'd asked. the guy at the airport, and now the 
embassy--i wa the best-known tourist in the country. 

okay, mayb I should just play along and see what happens. In ani case, 
i'd just lost my appetit for fri egg with hot sauce, but I had a 
definit interest in the phone book. 

and there they were. nino del mundo. complet with an address, way out 
the boulevar R. aguilar batres. 

well, whi not see where it lead you? sarah' card said the place wa 
in the peten, but who knows? 

I got up off the bed and went into the bathroom for a shampoo and 
shower. despit the fact that barri morton want me to see thi nino 
del mundo place, whatev it was, I didn't want to show up look and 
smell like some bedraggl tourist. i'd wear my tailor blue suit, 
which, along with the dark blue heels, ought to make me look adequ 
businesslike. 

the shower wa wonderful, purg away the soot of the park, and I wa 
wrap my hair in a larg beig towel when the phone jangl again. I 
tuck in the edg to secur it and walk over. mayb it wa lou 
ring back. 

No such luck. the caller wa none other than my brand-new partner alan 
dupre. I wa not thrill to hear hi voice. wa he about to get cold 
feet and back out? 

"morgan, listen," he said, not wast time on niceties, "there' been 
a small chang of plans. i've--" 

"alan, don't do thi to me." you shit. "you agreed--" 

"no, whi i'm call is, we'v got to go ahead and go up today, storm 
or no, god help us. you happi now?" 

what? after that neurot song-and-d he'd just given me in the 
park? I should have been overjoyed, but someth about the whole thing 
immedi felt synthetic. I paus a long moment, tri to think the 
situat through. what wa go on? 

the answer to that wa clear as day. I wa be set up. somebodi 
want me out of town, and they'd just found a way. 

Or wa I be paranoid again? had the weather cleared? I reach over 
and push asid a curtain. nope, it look as threaten as ever. 

No question. thi wa definit a setup. 

On the other hand whi not use whoever had put him up to this? thi told 
me for sure I wa on the trail of sarah, and the sooner I got going, 
the better. asid from call new york and then check out the local 
nino del mundo that barri morton want me to see so badly, I had no 
other press plans. . . . 

"alan, I thought you declar no 'effing' way were you go to go 
today," I said test him. "whi the sudden revis in scheduling?" 

"yeah, well, someth heavy' come up for tomorrow. i'm afraid it' 
gotta be now or forget it for at least a week." 

unrefin bullshit. but somebodi knew how badli I want to go. 

"look, there' someth I need to check out first. I just learn 
about a place here in town I want to at least see. it' also call 
nino del mundo." 

"no shit." He paused. "okay, we'll talk about it. get the address and 
mayb we can cruis by if there' time. thing is, we don't have all 
that much leeway here." 

"one last question." I thought i'd give him a final shot at the truth. 
"just tell me honestli whi it ha to be today. the real story." 

"like I said everything' changed." He wasn't budging. "so if we'r 
do this, i'v got to pick you up now and get us on our merri way." 

He wa too cheer by half, which definit told me he wa lying. 

"all right, but I realli need to make at least one phone call first." I 
want steve to know where I was. "and if I walk out of here with a 
bag, i'v got to let the desk know i'm not skip on the bill." 

"forget the phone call. No time. Do it after we get back. just be out 
front in exactli nineteen minutes. thi is not a dri run. the train is 
leaving. i'm outta here now." 

there wa a click and he wa gone. 

I sat there a moment stare at the floor. what wa I get into? 

well, there' one way to find out. play their game and beat them. 
there' no better way to get insid what' go on. 

the first thing I did wa call steve' hotel in beliz city. Of cours 
he wasn't there, but I left a long messag to the effect that I wa 
take a "sightseeing" trip up to the peten with alan dupr today 
becaus of unforeseen new circumstances. the reason were complicated, 
but i'd watch out for myself and therefor he shouldn't worry. 

that out of the way, I look around the room. It wa a disaster, but I 
quickli began cram thing into the small fold backpack I alway 
took on trips. then I rang the kitchen and told them to make up a 
quadrupl egg sandwich (_quatro huevos, por favor_) to go, along with a 
larg bottl of distil water. 

By the time I got to the recept desk and explain I wasn't actual 
check out for good, alan dupr wa alreadi wait outsid in hi 
batter green jeep, clean hi scratchi shade and lean on the 
horn. 

let him wait. I wrote out a long note to steve, on the chanc he might 
come look for me. then with deliber slowness, I wander out to 
where alan' jeep wa park and toss my backpack behind the seat. 

"first thing first." I climb in and hand him the address of nino 
del mundo i'd copi onto some hotel stationery. "thi is where we'v 
got to go." 

He stare at it a moment, puzzling, and then seem to figur out where 
it was. 

"upscal part of thi beauti oasis." He shift into gear. "but it' 
more or less on the way." He glanc up nervous at the sky. "we just 
don't have all day." 

off we head toward the suburbs, through a ganglia of downtown street 
lace with pizza joint and frying-meat vendors, till we eventu 
end up on a tree-lin avenu that look as genteel as oyster bay. 
when we got to the address, I told him to park across the way, and just 
sat a moment staring. 

the build itself wa a windowless compound surround by tree and a 
high wall of white stucco, with a guardhous and wide iron gate (not 
unusu for guatemala) protect a long walkway. the whole thing 
look like a fortress, except the view through the gate wa a pastor 
vista of neat flower bed and a pristin lawn. the guardhous itself 
had a doze teenager, undoubtedli with an uzi rest across hi lap. 

"okay, alan," I said "time to get with the program. how' your spanish?" 

"depend on who i'm tri to bs." He shrug and began clean hi 
sunglass again. 

"well, whi don't you see if you can talk us past that guard." 

He stare at the entranc a moment. "be a wast of our preciou time. 
tell you right now, kid like that onli answer to one boss, the _jefe_, 
the big guy, whoever he is. that' how they retain their employment. A 
joint lock down thi tight don't give sunday tours." 

"well, I think he' asleep. So i'm go to be creativ and see if 
there' a back entranc of some kind. mayb a servic area that'll give 
me some idea of what' go on here." 

"do what you want, but make it fast," he said, lean back in the 
seat. "and tri not to get shot." 

I care got out and walk down the empti street a way, then 
follow the stucco wall/fence--th build cover an entir citi 
block--until I came across an alley entrance, with anoth larg iron 
gate, padlock shut. 

I peer up the driveway, shroud in overhang trees, but there wa 
noth in the park lot except a coupl of armi jeeps. and a black 
land rover. 

well, barri morton realli want me to see this. but why? Is there a 
connect to the place in the peten? and what are the armi vehicl 
all about? 

I sigh and made my way back to the street. when I reach the jeep, 
alan wa gone, but then I realiz he wa over talk to the young 
guard, offer him a cigarette. A few moment later he wave good-by 
and casual ambl back. 

"okay." He settl in and hit the ignition. "here' the offici deal. 
thi place is some kind of hospic for unw mothers. they also take in 
orphans, or so he thinks. accord to him, no american women have ever 
had anyth to do with the place, which is probabl whi i'd never 
heard of it." He glanc at me as we sped off. "you happi now? 
debrief young armi dude is a specialti of mine, so I think that' 
probabl the straight scoop." 

"did you ask if it' connect with someth in the peten?" I wa 
still hoping. In ani case, whatev it was, I wa collect more 
piec of the puzzle. 

"hey, give me a break." He shift up, gain speed. "I know when to 
push, and thi wasn't the precis moment. the kid wa itchi enough as 
it was. like, who the fuck are you, gringo, and what are you do 
here? I got all I could get without a cold _cerveza_." He glanc over. 
"you ask me, a littl gratitud wouldn't be entir out of place." 

"okay. _mucha gracias, amigo_. happi now?" 

"ecstatic." 

the jeep wa open and I check out the sky, which wa grow darker 
and more threaten by the minute. the promis foul weather still 
seem to be just that, promis but it wa definit on the way. alan 
dupr must realli be scared. final I lean back in the torn plastic 
seat and close my eyes. 

wa thi nino del mundo the latin branch of children of light? the 
place where alex goddard' babi came from? consid the interest 
colonel ramo had in my movie, the armi jeep could be a tip-off. also, 
there seem to be an even chanc that barri morton wa involv 
somehow. but it wa all still guesswork. and anyway, thi wasn't the 
place sarah had put on her land card. _that _nino del mundo wa 
somewher up north, hidden in the rain forest. 

readi or not, sar, hang on. 




chapter nineteen 


"what did he say?" I asked, not quit catch the burst of rapid-fir 
spanish from the cockpit. the explos of explet had includ the 
word _navegacion_. someth about malfunction. 

god help us. 

alan dupre' helicopt remind me of the disintegr taxi on 
guatemala city' pothol streets. the vibrat in the passeng 
compart wa so violent it made my teeth chatter. My stomach felt 
like it wa in a cocktail shaker, and the deafen roar could have 
been the voic of hell. 

I wa stare out the smudgi plastic window, where less than three 
hundr meter below I could just make out the top of the peten rain 
forest of northwest guatemala sweep by beneath us. So thi wa what 
it look like. dens and impenetrable, it wa a yawning, decidu 
carpet envelop the earth as far as the eye could see--if someth 
ten stori high could be call carpet. i'd been in the forest of 
india' kerala and seen some of the denser growth in southern mexico, 
but thi wa like anoth planet. 

the main problem was, a violent downpour, the lead edg of the 
hurricane, wa now sweep across the yucatan, stir up the 
treetop of the jungl below. the rain, which had begun in earnest 
about ten minut after we got airborne, had been steadili increas 
to the point it wa now almost blinding. 

thi wa the risk i'd chosen to take, but let me admit right here: the 
weather had me serious scared, my fingernail dig into the 
armrest and my puls erratic. and now wa there someth else? we'd 
onli been in the air for thirty-f minutes, and alreadi we had some 
kind of mechan issu looming? what wa left to go wrong? 

"some of the light went out or something." dupr tri a shrug. "i'm 
not sure. No big deal, though. thi old bird alway get the job done." 
hi pilot, lieuten villatoro, formerli of the guatemalan army, had 
just shout the new develop back to the cabin. "probabl nothing. 
don't worri about it." 

don't worri about it! hi "tourist" helicopt wa a guatemalan 
candid for the air & space museum, an old bell uh-1d patch 
togeth with chicl and corn masa. sure the storm wa push it far 
beyond it stress limits. 

"right, but what exactly--?" 

"sound like the nav station." He click open hi seat belt. 
"someth . . . who knows? If you'd be happier, i'll go up and look." 

I felt my palm go cold. "doesn't seem too much to ask, considering." 

the world down below us wa a hostil mélang of tower trees, all 
strain for the sky, while the ground itself wa a dark tangl of 
ferns, lianas, strangler vines, creepers--among which lurk olymp 
scorpion and some of the earth' most poison snakes. If we had to 
set down here--i didn't even want to think about it. To lower a 
helicopt into the wave of flicker green below us would be to 
confront the hereafter. 

"it' just the lights, like he said." dupr yell back from the 
cockpit' door, let a tone of "I told you to chill out" seep 
through. He wa peer past the opening, at the long line of 
instruments. He follow hi announc with a sigh as he move back 
into the main cabin. "relax." 

I wasn't relax and from the way hi eye were shift and hi 
gaulois cigarett were be chain-smok he wa on the verg of a 
nervou breakdown. In hi case it wasn't just the weather. He wa 
fidget like a trap animal, give me the distinct sens he wa 
do someone' invis bid and wa terrifi he might fail. 

"well, whi don't you tri and fix it?" wa he tri to act calm just to 
impress me? "can't you bang on the panel or something?" 

"okay, okay, let me see what I can do. jesus!" He edg back into the 
cockpit, next to villatoro. the wind wa shake us so badli that, even 
bent over, he wa have troubl keep hi balance. then he 
halfheartedli slam the dark instrument readout with the heel of hi 
open hand. when the effort produc no immedi electron miracle, he 
settl into the copilot' seat. 

"_que pasa_? " he yell at villatoro, hi voic bare audibl over 
the roar of the engin and the plaster of rain on the fuselage. then 
he look out the windscreen, at the torrent slam against it, and 
rub at hi chin. 

"_no se, mi comandante_," the guatemalan shout back. I sens he wa 
hope to sound effici and unperturbed. dupr claim hi pilot had 
person check out the bell and prep it. now, though . . . 
"_mira_. like I said the lights. On the nav station. mayb the 
electrical--" 

"how about the backup battery?" dupr wa just bare keep hi cool. 

villatoro scratch hi chin. "i'll tell you the truth. the backup is 
_muerto_. I test it befor we left, but I couldn't find ani 
replac in provisiones. I figure, no problem, but now, amigo . . ." 

I felt anoth wave of dismay, right into my churn stomach. 

"well, keep your head north." dupre' voic wa come from a place 
of extrem pain. "and if you sight the rio tigre, then _baalum_ or 
whatev should be more or less due west, accord to what i'm 
assuming. just keep your eye open." He paused. "problem is, with all 
thi rain, the river' go to be tough to make out." 

I redoubl my effort to peer out the window, searching, my breath 
come in bursts. still nothing. dear god, what now? 

final dupr head back, brace himself against the firewal as he 
crouch and pass through the door into the main cabin. when he 
settl into the seat across from me, he wa glare at me as though 
everyth wa my fault. "you know." He wa yell again. "i'm 
begin to think mayb we ought to tri to find a clear and just 
sit out thi crap till morning." He lean over and peer down through 
the bell' spatter side window at the dens tangl of growth below. 
after a moment he got up and onc more move the toward the cockpit, 
still with the same troubl look. thi time, however, he wa beam 
as he shout back. 

"there may be a god after all. I think we just intersect the rio 
tigre. We can bear due west now, along the river. We could be get 
close, if it' where I think it is." 

I turn and stare down again, bare make out the thread of the 
stream through the rain. yes! mayb there' hope. still, below us the 
windblown treetop were a solid mass of pastel sparkles, a danc sea 
of hungri green . . . but then I thought I saw something. hey! It might 
even be a clearing. I quickli unbuckl and made my way up to the 
cockpit, hang on to anyth I could grasp. 

"alan, look," I yelled, and point off to the side, out 

through the rain-obscur windscreen. "I think we just pass over 
something. back there. see?" 

"where?" He squinted. 

"you can still just make it out." I twist and kept pointing. I wa 
bite my lip, tri to hold together. "there . . . it look like some 
kind of clearing. mayb . . . I don't know, but what if we just set 
down there and let thi storm blow over?" 

He order villatoro to bank and go back for a look. A few moment 
later it wa obviou there wa an open in the trees. 

"yeah, let' check it out." He then said someth to villatoro and we 
start eas toward it, definit a wide opening. the billow 
ocean of tree below us seem to be part like the red sea as we 
settl in. there had to be solid ground down there somewhere. had to 
be. 

"what' . . ." I wa pointing. "there, over to the side, it' a kind of 
hill or something. it's--" 

"where?" dupr squint again, hi voic start to crack. then he 
focus in. "yeah, mayb there' someth there. hard to tell what it 
is, though. but I guess we'r about to find out." 

He gestur to the lieutenant, bark an order in quick spanish. while 
the bell kept move lower through the opening, dupr flick on the 
land lights, and appear to be mutter a prayer of thanks. 

I wa stare out, grow ever more puzzled. A "hill" wa there, all 
right. the problem was, it wa definit man-made, top by a stone 
building. I could just make it out in the glare of the lights. 

"what do you think that is?" 

"what do I think?" dupr studi the scene for a moment longer, and 
then hi face melt into the first smile i'd seen sinc we left. "I 
think we are lucki beyond belief. god help us, we may have found it. 
that could be the damn pyramid or whatever' suppos to be up here." 
He lean back. "yeah, congratulations. look at that damn thing. 
either thi is the place, or we'r about to becom the archaeologist 
of the year. cover of _time_. the nobel frig prize." 

At that moment I almost want to hug alan dupre, but not quite. 
instead I move farther into the cockpit, tri to get a look out the 
windscreen. By then we had lower well through the open in the 
trees, the helicopter' control fight against the blow rain, and 
it felt as though we'd begun descend into the ocean' depth in a 
dive bell, surround by thrashing, wind-whip branches. 

now, though, I wa stare at the ghostli rise of the pyramid emerg 
out of the rain. 

"it look brand new." 

"yeah, the whole place is 'jungl disneyland' remember? except thi 
deal ain't about mickey mouse, believ me. there' plenti of armi 
hang out around here." 

lieuten villatoro took us ever lower, gentli guid the chopper' 
descent, and now we were onli a few feet abov the ground. there 
certainli wa no mistak what wa around us, even with the blow 
rain. the pyramid loom over one side of a larg plaza, a big pave 
area that wa mostli obscur from the sky sinc the sway tree 
arch over and cover it from aerial view. 

"okay, we'r about to touch down." dupr wa claw at hi pocket, 
yearn for a cigarette. "so if you still want to get out, move over 
by the door. i'll disengag the main rotor onc we'r on the ground." 

As we settl in, the rotor began to caus surfac effect, throw a 
spray off the pave stones, which now glisten under the cold beam of 
the land lights. and loom abov us, off to the right, wa a 
step pyramid in the classic mayan style. We all laps into silenc 
as the bell' skid thump onto the stones. the ex-armi pilot, 
villatoro, kept glanc over at the pyramid as though he didn't want 
to admit even see it. did he know someth alan and I didn't? 

thi wa the moment i'd been brace for. I wa increasingli convinc 
somebodi want me to see thi place, whatev it was, but now what 
should I do? 

well, the first thing wa to dip my toe in the water, do a quick 
reconnoit on the ground. If thi realli wa _baalum_, dupre' maya 
disneyland, could it also be part of alex goddard' clinic of 
"miracles," the locat sarah call nino del mundo? If I knew that 
for sure, then I could start figur how to find out if she wa 
here--a I suspected--and get her out of hi clutches. mayb the 
see-no-evil embassi might even be prod into help an american 
citizen for a change. 

"i'm get out, to look around a little, but not till you turn off 
the engine. I want to be abl to use my ears." 

"all right, but don't take all day. thi kind of weather, I want to 
keep it warm." He turn to villatoro and shout the order. In the 
sheet of pound rain, I figur that no one could have heard us come 
in. that, at least, wa positive. 

when the rpm' of the engin had die away, I click open the bell' 
wide door, slid it back, and look around. In the glare of the land 
light I realiz at onc that the stone were old, weathered, and 
worn, but the grout that seal them wa white and brand new. the plaza 
wa free of moss, clean as the day it wa done--which did not appear to 
be all that long ago. abov me, the pyramid, continu recess tier 
of glisten stones, tower into the dim skylin of trees. 

I step out onto the pavement, hold my breath. the plaza wa 
almost football-field in size, remind me of an italian piazza. 
around me the rain wa lessen slightly, and as my eye adjust . . 
. my god. there wasn't just a pyramid here; through the sparkl of 
raindrop at the edg of the helicopter' light I could see what 
look like a wide cobbleston walkway lead into the dens growth 
just off the edg of the square, probabl toward the south, away from 
the river, connect the plaza with distant group of small, 
thatch-roof houses, set in clusters. . . . 

could alex goddard' "miracle" clinic be in some collect of 
primit huts? It made no sense. 

but I decid to tri to get a closer look. i'd walk about thirti feet 
away from the helicopter, across the slipperi paving, when I saw a 
flash of lightn in the southeast, follow by a boom of thunder that 
echo over the square. 

At least I thought it wa thunder. Or mayb the armi wa hold heavi 
artilleri practic somewher nearby. abruptli the rain turn into a 
renew torrent, and the next thing I heard wa the helicopter' engin 
start up again. then I sens the main rotor engage, a sudden "whoom, 
whoom, whoom" quickli spiral upward in frequency. 

hey! I told him not to--! 

when I look back at the bell' open door, dupr wa stand there, 
frantic search the dark as he heav out my tan backback and 
what look like a rolled-up sleep bag, both splash down onto the 
rain-soak paving. 

what! for a moment I thought the thunder, or whatev it was, must have 
complet freak him. then what wa actual happen hit me with a 
horrifi impact. 

"alan, wait!" 

I start dash back, but now the main rotor wa creat a power 
downdraft, throw the rain into me like a monsoon. By the time I 
manag to fight my way through the spray, the rotor wa on full power 
and alan dupr and hi bell were alreadi lift off. I reach up, and 
just manag to brush one greasi skid as he churn away straight 
upward into the raini night. 

"you shit!" I yell up, but my final farewel wa lost in the whine of 
the engine. My god, I thought, watch him disappear, i'v just been 
abandon hundr of mile deep in a central american rain forest. 

then it all sank in. whoever had gotten to him wa play a rough 
game. they didn't want me just to see _baalum_, they want me 
deliv here. probabl to secur me in the same place sarah was. 
colonel ramos, or whoever had frighten dupr into bring me, had 
want us both. So what now? were we both go to be "disappeared"? 
stare around at the pyramid and the empti square, I could feel my 
heart pounding. 

then I trip over the roll sleep bag and sank to my knee there 
in the middl of the rain-swept plaza, soak to the skin and so angri 
I wa actual trembling. Up abov me, alan dupre, king of two-timers, 
had switch off hi land lights, and a few moment later the hum of 
the bell wa swallow by the night sound of the forest--th 
high-pitch din of crickets, the pierc call of night birds, the 
basso groan of frog celebr the storm. 

and someth else, an eeri sens of the unnatural. I can't explain 
it. even the night song of the bird felt ominous, the primev forest 
reassert it will. It wa haunting, like nature' mockeri of my 
desolation. I pound the sleep bag and felt . . . shit, how did I 
let thi happen? 

get a grip. I final stood up and look around. mayb when god want 
to do you up right, she give you what you want. you use alan dupr 
just like you intended: He got you here. but there' more to the plan 
of whoever' hold hi puppet strings. So the thing now is, don't let 
yourself be manipul ani more. get off your soggi butt and start 
take control of the situation. . . . 

that wa when I sight a white form at the south, forest edg of the 
plaza. what! I duck down, sure it wa somebodi lurk there, wait 
to tri to beat me to death as they had sarah. did ramo intend to just 
murder me immediately? 

but there wa no get away. If I could see them, they sure could 
see me. and where would I escap to anyway? 

I dug my yellow plastic flashlight out of my backpack and my hand 
shaking, flick it on. the beam, however, wa just swallow up in the 
rain. all right. I strap on the pack and take a deep breath, threw 
the roll sleep bag over my shoulder and head across the slipperi 
pave toward the white, which now glisten in the period sheet of 
distant lightning. 

meet them straight on. tri and bluff. 

when I got closer, though, I realiz what I wa see wa actual 
just the skin of a jaguar, bleach white, the head still on, fearsom 
teeth bare which had been hung besid the pave pathway. thank god. 

but then, play my light over it, I thought, bad sign. My first 
encount at _baalum_ is with a spooky, dead cat. It felt like a 
chill omen of . . . I wasn't sure what. 

I studi it a moment longer with my flashlight, shivering, then turn 
and head quickli across the plaza toward the pyramid now bare 
visibl in the rain. If there were jaguars, or god know what else, 
around I figur i'd be safer up at the top. 

when I reach the base and shine my light up the steps, I saw they 
were steeper than i'd thought, but they also look to be part of some 
meticul restor and brand-new, probabl safe to climb. and there 
at the top wa a stone hut, complet with what appear to be a roof. 
good. If there hadn't been anyth taller than it around I think I 
might have just climb a tree. 

On the way up I began tri to digest what the place realli was. the 
pyramid wa "fake". . . or wa it? A hundr year ago the eccentr 
brit archaeologist sir arthur evan whimsic "reconstructed" the 
palac of mino on crete with hi own money, and it' still a tourist 
highlight. So whi couldn't somebodi do the same with a reclaim mayan 
pyramid in central america? still, thi wa different, had the feel of 
be somebody' craze obsession. 

As I top the steps, I realiz the build that crown the pyramid 
wa also a "restoration" like everyth else, includ a decor 
wooden lintel abov the door that look to be newli lacquered. bizarre. 

I move through the door and unload my gear, then extract my water 
bottle, now half-empty, for a pull. final I unrol alan dupre' 
sleep bag on the (dry) stone floor, remov and spread out my wet 
clothes, peed off the edge, then took a new pair of underpants, jeans, 
and shirt out of my backpack, don them, and uneasili crawl in. I 
wa shivering--wheth from the soak rain or from fright, I didn't 
know--and my teeth were tri to chatter. wa I hidden away enough to 
be safe? I didn't know. all I did know was, I wa in someth deeper 
than i'd ever been in my life, and I had no idea how I wa go to get 
out. and I wa both scare to death and angri as hell. 

sarah wa here, though, I wa certain. like a sixth sense, I could feel 
her presence, out there somewher in the rain. for a moment I wa 
tempt to just plung into the storm look for her, but a split 
second' reflect told me that wa the stupidest thing I could do. 
instead, I should tri and get some rest, till the storm cleared, and 
keep period watch on the plaza in case somebodi show up. then, the 
minut there wa light, i'd hit the ground and go find her. 

I suppos noth ever happen the way you plan. My mind wa race and 
my nerv were in the red, but I wa so exhaust from the 
teeth-rattl trip in the bell I couldn't realli stay alert veri long. 
In spite of myself, I eventu drift off into a dreamless doze, a 
victim of the narcot song of wind in the giant cebia tree and the 
insist drum of forest rain on the roof. 




chapter twenti 


I awok as a sliver of sun flash through the stone doorway of the 
room and forest bird erupt around me in celebration. As I pull 
myself up and move over to the opening, a quick tropic glare burn 
into my face. My god, the dawn wa electric; it wa the purest blue i'd 
ever seen, a swath of artist' cobalt. An azur radianc from the sky 
glisten off the rain forest leav around me. had I dream the 
stormy, haunt world of the night before? 

when I look down, everywher below me wa a bank of dense, pastel 
mist. wa the plaza realli there or had I imagin it? I felt like the 
top of the pyramid wa float on a cloud. 

"babylon." that wa what sarah had call thi place. ancient and 
mysterious. I took a breath of the morn air and wonder what would 
draw her back here. wa _baalum _the ultim escap from her other 
life? even so . . . whi would she want to return after somebodi had 
tri to murder her? what wa wait down there in the fog? 

turn back, I notic that the room' insid wall were emboss with 
row and row of classic mayan glyphs, like littl cartoon faces, all 
mold in newli set plaster. To my groggi sight they seem playful, 
harmless littl caricatures, though next to them were rais 
bas-relief of warrior in battl dress. It wa both sublim auster 
and eerie, even creepy. 

I knelt down and roll my sleep bag, tri to clear my head. then 
I stuf my still-moist cloth into my backpack and thought about the 
river, the rio tigre, down somewher at the back of the pyramid. and I 
felt my puls rate edg up. the first thing I want to do wa see it 
in the light of day. It had been sarah' way out, the onli thing I knew 
for sure she'd touched. 

get go and do it. 

I head through the rear door and down the back steps. when I reach 
the ground, the dens forest close in around me, but I wa certain the 
river lay dead ahead, through the tangl of trees. As I move down a 
path that grew ever steeper, the canopi up abov thickened, arch 
over me till it blot out the pure blue of the sky. and the air wa 
fill with natur sounds--birdcalls, trills, songs, and clacks, all 
mingl with the hum and buzz of insects. then suddenly, from somewher 
up in the canopy, a pack of screech spider monkey began fling 
rotten mango down in my direction. I also thought I heard the 
asthmatic, territori roar of a giant howler monkey, the lord of the 
upper jungle. and what about snakes? I kept an eye on the vine and 
tendril alongsid the path, expect ani moment to stumbl across a 
deadli fer-de-lance, a littl red-and-black oper whose poison head 
straight for your nervou system. 

On the other hand, the birds, the forest birds, were everywhere, 
scarlet macaw and keel-bil toucan and dart flock of amazon 
parrots, brilliant and iridescent, their sweep tail a psychedel 
rainbow of green, yellow, red. then the next thing I knew, the path I 
wa on abruptli open onto a mossi expans of pea-soup green, sure 
the rio tigre, and . . . 

My god, those dark-brown bump scatter everywher . . . they'r the 
eye and snout of . . . yes, crocodiles, lurk there in wait, hope 
i'm dumb enough to wade in. forget what alan dupr said. thi is 
definit not "disneyland." 

then I glanc upstream and caught sight of a string of mahogani dugout 
cano tie along the shore. they were huge, about fifteen feet long 
and three feet wide, and clearli design to be crocodile-resistant. 
they . . . 

wait a minute. lou said sarah wa found in a dugout cano that had 
drift all the way down the rio tigr to where it join the 
usumacinta. one more clue she might have been here. mayb I wa close 
in. _yes!_ 

I glare back at the crocodiles' unblink reptil eye and tri to 
get my mind around the fact sarah could have stood right where I wa 
standing, or been set adrift from here in a coma, to float downstream. 
see that vision, I felt unbidden tear trail down my cheeks. and 
the question I had kept pile up. wa thi the locat of alex 
goddard' "miracle" clinic? whi wa _baalum _such a high-secur 
secret? what wa the connect between thi place and sarah' ravag 
mind and body? I want to know all of it, and by god I would. 

thi wa the farthest i'd ever been from "civilization," though I wa 
tri not to let that fact sink in too deeply. the water wa green and 
full of small aquat creations, but I manag to find a reason 
unmossi spot and--stil keep an eye on the leer 
crocodiles--splash my face. It felt good, even if it wa filthy. . . . 

okay, i'd seen enough of the river. I rais up and stretched. time to 
go. 

My hope at war with my nerves, I turn my back on the scummy, fetid 
rio tigr and head back up the jungl trail toward the plaza. 

when I got there, I wa struck all over again by the vision of the 
pyramid. someth like it might have been here originally, but in ani 
case it had been complet redone, with newli cut yellowish stone and 
white lime plaster, an exot castl nestl in the green lap of the 
rain forest, rise abov the squar like a haunt presence. It must 
have been well over a hundr feet high, a stone wed cake with a 
dozen steep tier between the ground and the platform at the top, which 
also wa squar and roughli fifteen feet on the side. 

stand there gaze at it, I think i'd never felt more disoriented. 
sarah, sarah, how could we both end up here, at the last outpost of the 
known world? but see is believing. I took a deep breath, then turn 
down the pathway toward the thatch-roof huts. 

through the mist it wa gradual becom clear that _baalum_ actual 
wa a village, and a sizabl one. the walkway led past a string of 
clearings, each with cluster of one-room hut built in the ancient, 
classic style, with wall of mud over row of vertic saplings, 
their roof and porch peak with yellow-green thatch weather to 
brown and grays. the structures, outlin starkli against the tower 
green arbor of the forest above, were group around pave patios. It 
all wa neat and meticulous, like a jungl brigadoon. although the 
effect of the storm were everywhere--blown thatch and bamboo--i still 
felt as if i'd fallen into a time warp where clock had gone backward. 
what . . . ? 

then I began to catch the outlin of people, as though they had 
materi out of the pale fog. all pure maya, short and brown, shini 
black hair, they appear to be just go about their daili lives. I 
wa approach a workshop area where, under a wide thatch shade, men 
with chipped-flint adz were carv bowls, plows, variou implement 
from mahogani and other rain forest woods. next to them, potter were 
fashion brown clay jugs. they all were wear white loincloth and 
a larg squar cotton cloth knot around their shoulders, their hair 
tie back in dens ponytails. It must have been how the maya look a 
thousand year ago. 

their earnest remind me of the villag I onc film in the 
yucatan for the discoveri channel--with one big difference: there I wa 
the big-shot gringo; here I felt like a powerless time traveler. the 
sens of be lost in anoth age wa as compel as the "colonial" 
mock-up at williamsburg, but thi wa real and it wa decidedli spooky. 

final one of the men look up and notic me. our eye lock for an 
instant--it seem like forever--and then he reach over and, in a way 
that seem breathless, shook the man next to him, gestur toward me. 
togeth they gaze back as though view a phantom, their brown face 
intent, and then they turn and call out to the others, alert 
them. 

what are they go to do with me? I wonder with a sudden chill. A 
stranger here in their hideaway midst. would they just turn on me? 

find some women. get off the street. 

I turn and head as fast as I could down the cobbleston central 
path, till I saw a cluster of femal on a whitewash stone porch, 
long hair fall over their shoulder as they bent to their task 
beneath the thatch overhangs. some were stir rug clay pot of 
corn soak in lime; other were grind the soften maiz to 
tortilla thin on wide granit platters. behind them wa anoth 
group that appear to be part of a sew commune, young wive busi at 
their back-strap looms, layer thread after thread of dy cotton. 
none of them wa wear a _huipil_--th tradit multicolor 
blous i'd rememb from the waitress in the restaurant. instead, 
they all had on a kind of handloom-woven white shift i'd never seen 
before. 

talk to them. let them know you'r no threat to anybody. 

As I move down the hard clay pathway toward them, two look up and 
took notice. their first reaction seem to be alarm, as they tens 
and stared. but then I tri a smile and it seem to work. their look 
turn to puzzlement, then embarrass grins, as though they want to 
be friendli but weren't sure how to acknowledg my presence. 

when I reach the porch, sever reach out to touch me. one older 
woman, short and wizen and extrem brown, even tri to stroke my 
hair. 

what wa go on? I wa taken aback, but I also wa determin to get 
through to them. whi not just ask them point-blank if sarah' here? Is 
there ani chanc they understand spanish? 

"_bueno dias_." I smile and nodded. "_dispenseme. quiero descubrir . 
. . esta una gringa de lo estado unido aqui? _" 

they all return uncomprehend looks, then glanc quickli at each 
other in confusion. Or at least that wa how I read their faces. 

"sarah," I said, pronounc the name slowly. "sarah crenshaw." 

"sara," one voiced, then others. they back away and immedi began 
a heat dispute, which eventu involv all the women. well, one 
thing wa for sure: they damn well knew who I wa ask about. but 
whi were they so upset? next, sever of them grew testy, point at 
me as they continu to argue. 

final the two i'd first approach turn and began urg me to 
leave, gestur at me with their hand as though sweep me out of 
the compound. yes, there wa no mistaking. I wa be dismissed. and I 
detect an odd nervous as they glanc around, seemingli worri 
somebodi might catch me there with them. I got the feel they'd 
final decid they didn't want me anywher near them, sinc they kept 
point down the thoroughfar in the direct of the pyramid. 

i'v blown it, I thought. they must have figur out i'm here to get 
her and decid they no longer want to have anyth to do with me. 
what did that mean? 

and now what do I do? As I retreat back out to the main walkway, I 
felt a grow sens of defeat. then, look down it, I realiz i'd 
liter been go in a circle. It wa actual a larg oval that 
curv back to the main squar and the pyramid, where i'd start from. 

god, what a nightmare. I obvious had to rethink my game plan, find a 
way to communicate. and on top of that, I wa die of thirst. 

I fish out the almost-empti plastic contain from my backpack, then 
walk across the squar and settl myself on the first step lead 
up the steep front. As I drew on the bottle, my mind still swirling, I 
happen to notic an upright stone slab off to the side, like a tall, 
thin tombstone, with a bas-relief of a maya warrior on it, next to some 
kind of two-head serpent god--prob kukulkan, one of the few maya 
deiti I knew. and then, down the side, were row of line and dots. I 
studi them a minut befor realiz it wa the classic mayan 
number system, tell precis when thing happen to the ruler 
shown there: born on such and such a date, assum the kingship, won 
great battles, etc., all care date as career high-points. I knew 
that dot repres singl years, horizont line the number five. 
the maya love number and numerology, so . . . 

that wa when I glanc up to see a group of women approach slowli 
across the square, with a bunch of the men watch from the forest 
arbor beyond, and they were huddl around someth they were 
carrying. whatev it was, they seem to be deliv it to me. then 
I realiz they were the same one who'd just kick me out of their 
compound. what next? are they come to drive me from the plaza too? 
should I tri and forcibl search all the huts? 

but then they set down their load--it turn out to be a crude 
bamboo-and-thatch palanquin--and step asid as they beckon me 
forward. 

for a moment I just stared, disbelieving. I felt like I wa see 
someon I didn't want to recognize, perhap becaus that someon look 
so much like me. 

"morgy, they told me a new one wa here, and I hope it wa you." sarah 
wa swing her skinni leg off the side, her voic bright. her face 
wa drawn, but her hair wa neat and her eye were radiant. "isn't 
_baalum_ the most wonder place you'v ever seen?" 

she wa wear a white shift that remind me of the blue hospit 
smock she'd had on the last time I saw her, except here it seem more 
like someth that had a special significance, like the robe of an 
acolyte. her shoe were soft brown slipper that look brand-new, and 
around her waist wa a braid leather band. As I stare at her, I 
wonder if she wa realli as transform as she looked. she wa 
undeni stronger than two day ago, in spite of what that bastard 
alex goddard and hi guatemalan armi croni had done to her to get her 
here. but still, she had to be half dead. thank god lou couldn't see 
her now. 

"sar, oh, sar." I rush over and threw my arm around her. she'd been 
freshli bath and perfumed--a fragranc like chocolate--but she felt 
like a bag of bones. "are you okay?" 

"I wa afraid _baalum_ wa all just a dream." she hug me back, then 
start rise to her feet. god, could she walk? "but now I rememb 
everything." 

"sar, i'v come to take you home." I grasp her hand, warm and soft, 
to help her stand--though it wasn't necessary. "you'r not safe--" 

"no, it' wonder now" then she turn and said someth to one of 
the women. It took me a moment to realiz she wa speak their 
language; I guess it wa kekchi maya. 

I wa stunned. how did she learn it? final she look back at me and 
switch to english again. "I didn't understand before. I wa . . . 
sick so much." 

"sar, come on." I slip my arm around her. "we'r go to get you 
out of here." 

i'd never felt so helpless. alan dupr had said there wa a road, but 
it wa control by the army. right now, I didn't even know where it 
was. mayb I could find a phone, or radio. call the embassy. there must 
be something. alex goddard ha to be here somewhere, but he' not go 
to stop me. i'll strangl him if he tries. 

I hug her again, the feel of her skin-and-bon frame make my soul 
ache. but most hurt of all, I wasn't sure she would want to leave. 

"sar, can you understand me?" I tri to catch her deep blue eyes. "i'm 
take you home. your father' veri worri about you." 

mention of lou seem to final get through to her. she turn and 
examin me with a quizzic look, and then her eye hardened. 

"morgy, he wa never there for me." her voic wa fill with 
certainty, and pain. "but when I went to see dr. goddard he let me come 
here for the ceremony. it' so spiritual. after--" 

"sar, come on." what did she mean by "ceremony"? whatev it was, I had 
to get her out of thi place. immediately. "we've--" 

"are you here for the ceremony?" her face flood with renew joy. 
"it' two day from now. mayb he'll let you--" 

"she should be resting." It wa a harsh voice, directli behind us. 

I recoiled, then whirl around. three men were stand there, two of 
them young privat in uniform of the guatemalan armi and carri 
ak-47 assault rifles, the one with the long, omin curv clip steve 
call _cuerno de cabrio_, the "horn of the goat." 

the third wa in a black sweatshirt and black jeans, hi long 
salt-and-pepp hair tie back in a ponytail. 

"they should have known better than to bring her out here," alex 
goddard said. "not in her condition." 

the bastard. It wa all come togeth in my mind. he'd tri to kill 
her onc before, and now he wa go to finish the job. but he'd have 
to kill me first. 

"i'm here to take her home." I march up to him. "you'r not about to 
get away with kidnapping. i'm go to get the embassi to--" 

"she' here for import medic reasons." He met my eyes. "I hope 
you'll allow me the opportun to help her." 

"what do you mean, 'help'?" 

"i'll explain if you'll give me a chance." He revolv and deliv 
some brusqu order in kekchi maya to the women, who nod 
apologet and began help sarah back onto the palanquin. after 
he admonish her in the same language, he then said someth in quick 
spanish to the two young armi privates, who gave him a firm salute, 
turned, and walk over to pick the palanquin up, to carri it for the 
women. the sens of author he exud remind me of that first 
morn we met at quetzal manor. hi eye flash from benign to 
demand to benign in an instant. 

"no, damn it, _alto_!" I strode over, shove the soldier aside, and 
took her hand. "sar, honey, don't you understand what' go on? 
someth terribl happen to you when you were here before. i'm so 
worried--" 

"but he say I need to stay, morgy." she drew back. "it' best. he' 
help me." 

As I watch the two privat carri her away, down the cobbleston 
pathway, ak-47' swung over their shoulders, I felt my helpless 
becom complete. the armi here wa under hi control, just like 
everyth else. 

how wa I go to tell lou about this, that sarah had been 
brainwashed? whatev alex goddard had done to her had turn her into 
some kind of "moonie," readi to denounc her own father. So now did I 
have two battl to wage: one with alex goddard and one with her? 

then he walk over to me. 

"i'm not go to ask how you got here, though I assum it wasn't 
easy." He smiled, like a kindli priest, and put hi hand on my 
shoulder. "but howev you did it, i'm glad you decid to come. it' 
import for you to be here. she need you now." 




chapter twenty-on 


"cut the crap." I pull away, still in shock from see sarah so 
addled. I want more than anyth els in the world just to slug him. 
"whi did you bring her here? think about your answer. kidnap is a 
seriou crime in the states." 

"i'v been veri concern about her." He look up at the grove of 
cebia tree around the square, a quiet glance, as though to inhal the 
misti morn air. My legal threat had gone right past him--prob 
becaus here he wa the onli law. "but now she' receiv the 
treatment she needs. I expect she'll be fine befor long." 

"treatment?" I wa caught off guard. okay, let' start get thing 
straight. "when she wa here before, somebodi tri to beat her to 
death. how--?" 

"what happen then wa beyond my control." He motion me to join him 
as he settl onto the first step of the pyramid sad in hi eyes. 
We were alon in the squar now, and I felt like i'd becom hi 
person prisoner, trapped. "sarah wa . . . is veri dear to me. I care 
for her deeply." 

"you care so much for her she end up in a coma, over on the mexican 
border." I didn't sit. instead I just bore in, hope to stare him 
down, but hi eye had grown distant, that littl trick he had of 
altern between intimaci and remoteness. again it remind me of 
that first morn we'd met, look out over the bluff of the hudson. 

"if you'll let me, i'd like to tri and tell you someth of the 
circumst surround that tragedy." He wa gaze off in the 
direct the women had gone. "you see, when sarah first appear at 
quetzal manor in new york, she wa a veri troubl young woman. she 
declar she wa a person of pure spirit and she want to have a babi 
without so much as touch a man, some procedur that would produc a 
divin child creat of cosmic energy." 

cosmic energy. I had a flashback, hear the words, to the time when 
she'd just turn six and we'd been sent by my mother to the hayloft to 
track down nest secret there by rogu chicken hens. when we came 
across a cach of eggs, she ask if babi chick came out of them. I 
assur her they did, and then she ask if human babi came from egg 
too. My biolog wa pretti thin, but I told her I suppos they did, 
sort of, but then the egg were probabl hatched, or something, befor 
babi were born. she thought about that a moment, scrunch up her 
face, then declar "no!" and bitterli began smash the eggs. babi 
and all live thing came from anoth world, she declared, a special 
place we could not see. they came directli from god. . . . 

that wa whi she would seek out someon like alex goddard. for her, he 
must have seem a messeng of the unseen. who better to creat a 
child for her? the iron part was, i'd found him for almost the same 
reason, seek a miracl when all els had failed. were sarah and I 
even more alik than i'd realized? 

"so I began tri to work with her." He wa turn back to me. "but 
then I discov she'd been born with an abnorm of the uterus. It 
ha a medic name, but suffic to say it' veri rare, and afflict 
onli about one woman in twenti thousand. even after my diagnosis, 
though, she refus to give up. she wa a person of enorm tenacity." 

god, I thought. whi didn't she come home to us, to lou 

and me? We love her. I felt my guilt go out to her all over again. 

"she next declar she want to come here to _baalum_, to the place of 
miracles. I told her that, yes, miracl can sometim transpir here, 
but onli at a great price. We would need to have an agreement and she 
would have to keep it no matter what." 

"what do you mean, an agree--?" 

"truthfully, though," he went on, ignor me, "I immedi regret 
the offer, sinc I realiz she wa far too unstabl for thi . . . 
environment. final I forbad her to come, but just befor my next 
schedul trip she found out and book herself on the same flight. 
there wa liter noth I could do to stop her." 

"she put nino del mundo on her land card." I wa grow sick to my 
stomach at the rehears way he wa recount her story. "that' thi 
place, right? _baalum_." 

"mi clinic here is known by that name. the villag itself is call 
baalum." He wa easili meet my eye, hold hi own in our battl of 
wills. "sarah was, I have to say, a veri impression young person. 
onc here, she forgot all about her purpos for coming. she should have 
stay up the hill there"--h wa point off to the south--"wher I 
could care for her, but instead she move down here, into the 
compounds. then she discov a hallucinogen substanc they have 
here, began use it heavily, and I think it tip her into a form of 
dementia." 

so, she wa do drugs, someth i'd alway secretli feared. well, 
mayb she wa still have flashback of some kind; mayb that 
explain whi she wa off in anoth world when she came out of her 
coma. 

"what . . . kind of 'hallucinogen substance'?" 

He sigh then shrug and answered. "here in the rain forest there' 
an ugli three-pound toad the _bufo marinus_--you'l see them around, 
near sunset--that ha gland down it back that excret a milki white 
poison." 

I knew about them. they were migrat north now, even into florida. 
they were huge and look like jabba the hutt in star wars. I hate 
toad of all varieties, but the thought of those monster made me 
shudder. 

"mi god, isn't their toxin lethal?" wa sarah tri to destroy 
herself? wa that whi her mind wa so blitzed? "i'v heard--" 

"yes, it can kill you, but it can also--if process correctly, with 
ferment honey--g you truli supernatur visions. the classic 
maya use it for ceremoni purposes. i'd manag to reconstruct how 
they prepar it, and--someth I now deepli regret--i show the 
shaman here how to replic the procedure. At the time it wa just a 
minor part of my research into tradit pharmacology, but she heard 
about it and persuad them to give her a vial. then more and more." 

that did sound like sarah. alway out on the edge, test new 
realities. but then I thought a moment about what he'd actual said. 
some of the peopl here in hi "place of miracles" were do heavi 
drugs, and she'd got caught up in it. 

"but whi didn't you stop her?" you unfeel bastard. 

"I tried, believ me. but i'm afraid she wa far past listen to me. 
By then she wa learn the kekchi maya dialect, becom total 
immers in their world. she began have episod of complet 
non-rationality, and then one day she told the women in her compound 
she wa go over to palenque, the maya ruin in mexico. it' where 
the classic maya held their last kingship ceremony. befor anyon 
realiz she wa serious, she stole one of their _cayucos_, their 
mahogani dugout canoes, and head down the rio tigre." hi eye had 
turn complet dark, the way he use to blank them out. "she just 
went missing. everyon here wa devastated. We all love her." 

I stood there weigh hi story. It didn't ring true. I suppos she 
wa capabl of someth that crazy, but would she have actual done 
it? I didn't think so. 

then I rememb someth els he'd said. 

"you said you propos an 'agreement.' what wa that about?" 

He stare at me. "it' noth that need concern us. suffic to say I 
kept my part. anyway, it' over and past now." 

whi wouldn't he tell me? did she make some bargain with the devil? 

"but regard sarah," he went on, "I onli just learn she'd been 
found and brought to new york in a coma. want to do what I could, I 
immedi call the hospit and, out of profession courtesy, they 
told me she'd shown earli stage of come out of it, but she appear 
to be hallucinating. It wa exactli what i'd feared. . . ." hi voic 
trail off. "I hope I did the right thing, but when I learn she'd 
been released, I arrang for her to be brought back here, where 
perhap I can do someth for her." 

"what?" 

"in rare cases, the hallucinogen she took perman alter critic 
synaps in the brain. i'm fear she may have abus it to the extent 
someth like that could have occurred. No one in the u.s. would have 
the slightest idea what to do, but I think I may know of an herbal 
antidot they turn to in ancient time that can repair at least part 
of the damage. I also knew that get her back here through normal 
channel would be impossible." 

"so you had colonel ramo and a bunch of hi guatemalan thug just 
break in and take her?" I didn't know which part of the stori 
horrified, and angered, me the most. 

"I have the misfortun to know him reason well, and 

I explain it wa veri import to me, and he agre to assist. I 
honestli didn't know where els to turn. I understand there may have 
been some violence, for which I apologize, but these peopl have their 
own way of do things." He rose and came over and put hi hand on my 
shoulder. "I hope you'll understand." 

the son of a bitch wa come on oili and contrite, when he'd just 
subcontract an outright kidnapping. I want to kill him. 

final I walk away, tri to get a grip on my anger. 

"you know, that bastard also broke into my apart and stole a reel 
of a pictur i'm shooting." I turn back. "i'v also got a strong 
feel he' the one who just threaten one of the women I filmed." 

"well, if that happened, then let me say welcom to the paranoid 
harass of the guatemalan high command." He sigh against the 
morn sound of bird chirp all around us. "unfortunately, I gather 
they'v assum you'r document the oper of children of light 
in some way, do a movie." hi eye drift off into space, as though 
seek a refuge. "you see, my project up here in the peten is to carri 
out pharmaceut research with as few distract as possible. but 
in guatemala city, I have what is, in effect, a hospic for girl in 
trouble--which is also call niiio del mundo, by the way--that' 
connect with my u.s. adopt service, children of light. however, 
ani time niiio del mundo take in an orphan or abandon infant and 
tri to provid it with a love home through adopt in the states, 
the govern here alway threaten to hold up the paperwork if I 
don't give a bribe, what they call an 'expedit fee.' So if you were 
to probe too deepli . . . let me just say it' not someth they'd 
care to see lead off 60 minutes." 

It sound like more bs, but I couldn't prove that. yet. 

"well, whi don't you just clear that up, and then i'll take sarah and--" 

"but i'v onli now initi her treatment. sure you want to give it 
a chance." 

I look out at the rain forest. thi wa the place she'd come to once, 
and--though i'd never admit it to alex goddard--it wa the place she'd 
announc she want to return to. but someth devast had 
happen to her mind here. what should I do? 

the fact was, I didn't trust alex goddard ani farther than I could 
throw him. I had to get sarah and get us both out of here as soon as 
possible, though that meant i'd have to neutral him and the army, 
and then use my limit american dollar to tri to buy our way back to 
guatemala city. 

"but come." He turn hi gaze toward the south. "let me show you the 
thing i'm proudest of here. it' just up there." He wa point toward 
a dens section of the rain forest, in the opposit direct from the 
river and up a steep incline. 

I couldn't see anyth but trees, but then I still had the feel i'd 
step through the look glass and found sarah trap there. the 
next thing I knew, we were on an uphil forest trail, head due south. 

"I think it' time you told me what' go on back there in the 
village," I said. what wa it about thi place that had seiz such a 
claim on sarah' mind? 

"_baalum_ is difficult to explain to someon encount it for the 
first time." He paused. "much of it is so--" 

"I think I can handl it." 

"you have everi right to know, but I don't realli know where to start." 

"how about the beginning?" whi wa he be so ambiguous? 

"veri well." He wa take out a pair of gray sunglasses, 

as though to gain time. "it actual goe back about ten year ago, 
when I wa prospect for rainforest plant up here in the peten and 
accident stumbl across thi isol village, which clearli had 
been here sinc classic times. I immedi notic a huge mound of 
dirt everybodi said wa haunt by 'the old ones,' and I knew right 
away it had to be a buri pyramid. they'r more common down here than 
you'd think. So I struck a bargain with the villag elder and acquir 
the site. but after I unearth it and began the restoration, I becam 
inspir with a vision. one day I found myself offer to restor 
anyth els they could find--which eventu included, by the way, a 
magnific old steam bath--in exchang for which they would help me by 
undertak a grand experiment, a return to their tradit way of 
life." 

"so you deliber close them off to the modern world?" It told me 
alex goddard could control a mayan villag just as he control 
everyth els he touched. It also confirm he had a weak for the 
grandios gesture. would a time come when I could exploit that? 

"I told them that togeth we would tri to recreat the time of their 
glory, and perhap in so do we could also rediscov it long-lost 
spirit, and wisdom. On the practic side, they would help me by 
bring me the rare plant I need to tri and rediscov the lost 
nativ american pharmacologies, and in return I would build them a 
clinic where famili can come for modern pediatr and public-health 
services. So _baalum _becam a project we share together. I call it a 
miracle." 

that still didn't begin to explain whi it felt so eerie. someth els 
wa go on just under the surface. what wa he realli do here? 

then the path uphil abruptli open onto a clear in which sat a 
larg two-stori building, it color a dazzl white, most like 
plaster over cinder block, with a thatch roof and a wide, ornat 
mahogani door at the front. the build wa nestl in a grove of 
tree whose vine and tendril had embrac it so thoroughly, there wa 
no tell how far it extend back into the forest. there also wa a 
park lot, pave and fed by a well-maintain gravel road lead 
south. 

see it, I felt an immedi wave of relief. even better, the lot 
itself contain half-a-dozen well-worn pickup trucks, while sunburn 
maya men were loung in the shade of a nearbi tree and smoke 
cigarettes. they were not from baalum. they wore machine-mad cloth 
and they were speak spanish, unlik the men in loincloth down in 
the village. 

yes! that' how I can get us out of here. A few dollar . . . 

park there also wa a tan humvee, the ultim all-road vehicle, 
which I assum belong to alex goddard. mayb I should just tri to 
steal it. 

As we pass through the door and into the vestibul of the building, I 
glimps a cluster of maya women and children crowd into a 
brilliantli lit recept area. goddard smile and wave at them, and 
sever nod back, timor and with enorm reverence. they were 
be attend by a dark-eyed, attract maya woman in a blue 
uniform--th name letter on her blous wa marcelina--who wa hold 
a tray of vial and hypoderm needles. she wa pure _indigena_, all of 
five feet tall, with broad cheekbon and deep-set penetr eyes. 
unlik the other women in the room, however, there wa no air of 
resign about her. she wa full of authority, a palpabl inner fire. 

"one of my most success program here"--h nod a greet to 
her--"i to provid free vaccin and gener health resourc for 
the villag in thi part of the peten department." 

"I thought usaid alreadi had public-health project in guatemala." the 
sight deepli depress me. they all look so poignant, the women with 
their shabbi _huipils_ and line faces, the children even more 
disheartening, sad waif with runni nose and wateri eyes. 

which confirm again that they'd come in the pickup park outside, 
driven here by the men. 

I had six hundr cash in dollars. I could just buy one of those 
worn-out junker for that. 

alex goddard glanc around, as though reluct to respond in the 
presenc of all the maya. 

"you saw those 'secur guards' down there just now. they'r noth 
but boy with guns, 'recruits' kidnap by the govern on market 
day and press into the army. they'r all around here. the power that 
be in guatemala citi are veri threaten by what i'm achieving, so 
they'v got these armi kid hang around, keep an eye on me. they 
also hate the fact I can provid health servic better than they can. 
but to answer your question, most of the aid money get soak up by 
the bureaucraci in guatemala city, so the peopl up here have learn 
to reli on me. the army, however, despis me and everyth i'm doing." 

what a load of bs. you just admit you had an insid track with 
colonel alvino ramos. anybodi can see children of light or nino del 
mundo, or whatev the hell other alias you use, is thick as thiev 
with the guatemalan arm forces. don't insult my intelligence. It just 
make me furious. 

I turn to marcelina. she'd begun pass out hard-sugar candi to 
the mesmer children, show them how to remov the cellophan 
befor put them into their mouths. though she wa pure maya, she 
look educated. I instinct like her. mayb she could tell me 
what wa realli go on here. 

"do you speak english?" 

"yes." she wa gaze at me with a blend of curios and concern. 
"if--" 

"i'v got a procedur schedul shortly," goddard interjected, urg 
me on down the tile hallway. "but I need to take a moment and 
recharge. come with me and we can talk some more." 

near the end of the hall, we enter a spacious, country-styl kitchen. 
He walk over and open the refrigerator. 

"care for a littl someth to eat?" He look back, speckl white 
hair swing across hi shoulder as hi ponytail came loose. "I had 
marcelina whip up some gazpacho last night and I see there' some left. 
it' my own secret recipe, special herb from around here. it' good 
and good for you." 

"i'm not hungry." It wasn't true. I wa grow ravenous. but I wa 
repress the feel becaus of everyth els that wa go on. 
hi "village" wa hold back it secrets, and now hi clinic of 
"miracles" also felt suspici wrong. i'd seen plenti of rural 
public-health oper in develop countries, and thi setup wa 
far too big and fancy. the whole thing didn't begin to compute. 

"a you like." He gave an absent shrug. 

I look around and notic that just off the kitchen wa anoth 
space, which was, I realized, hi privat dine room. there wa a 
rustic tabl in the center that look like it had been carv from the 
trunk of a larg cebia tree. I walk in, and moment later he follow 
carri a tray with two calabash bowl of gazpacho and some crusti 
bread. 

"in case you chang your mind and decid to join me." He place a bowl 
opposit where he wa plan to sit. "like I said, there'r unusu 
herb around here with flavor you'v never dream of." 

He began eating, while behind him I glimps marcelina move down the 
hall, carri more tray of vaccin and head out toward the 
vestibul again. I had to find a way to talk to her. 

As I settl into the ricketi chair that face my plate, I glanc down 
and saw a red lumpi mixtur with a spray of indefin green speck 
across the top like a scatter of jungl stars. No way. 

when I look up again, he wa swab hi lip with a white napkin, 
hi penetr eye bore in. 

"now," he said, "it' time we start concentr on you. got you 
go with your program." 




chapter twenty-two 


"mi program?" I stare back at him, feel a jolt. with my thought 
complet focus on sarah, the last thing on my mind wa my own baby. 

"now that you'r here"--h smiled--"there' no reason we shouldn't 
proceed. thi is, after all, a place of miracles." 

right. you let sarah destroy her mind and now you want me to . . . 

don't even think about it. 

"I have to tell you, i'm not overli impress thu far with your 
'program,' " I said. "first I pass out in your clinic, and then my 
doctor in new york told me those drug ramala gave me are highli 
illegal, and for good reason." 

"what is 'legal' is more often than not the judgment of medic 
reactionaries." He dismiss the issu with a wave of hi hand. "mi 
work ha move far beyond anyth the fda ha ever dream of." then 
hi look turn grave. "I hope you'll give me a chanc to tri to help 
you. i'v been give your case a lot of thought sinc our first 
examination, about what we should do. but first let me ask you . . . do 
you have a partner who could come here soon?" 

okay, mayb the thing to do wa appear to play along for a while, move 
under hi radar, and then get sarah and split. 

"it' a possibility." 

He smile again. "excellent. If thi person can come here 

to the clinic for a . . . deposit, then we could put you on a 
fast-track schedule." 

"one thing at a time. first i'd like to know exactli what it is you 
have in mind." would hi "program" includ string me out on the toad 
drug, the way he'd done with sarah? 

"of course." He lean forward in hi chair. "I believ that, given 
your history, an in-vitro procedur would have the highest chanc of 
success. you undoubtedli know how it works. We remov a number of egg 
by aspir and grade them for matur and viability, after which we 
fertil them to begin embryo growing. then we pick the most 
promis for implantation." 

"in vitro is invas and danger and there' a lot that can go 
wrong." I genuin hate the idea. 

"to some extent." He examin hi watch for a moment, then look up. 
"but let me just say this. sinc ani reproduct therapy, particularli 
in vitro, is strongli depend on the factor of timing, i'v develop 
experiment compound down here that can regul egg matur veri 
precisely. It minim a lot of uncertainties, which is whi we'r so 
lucki you'r . . ." He paused. "look, the first thing we need to do is 
put you on a strict regimen of diet and spiritu discipline, use my 
system for regul your chi, your energi flows. then, if you respond 
we can start think about the procedure. and should you eventu 
decid you want to go ahead and you can have your partner come here, we 
could possibl have everyth done in just a few days." 

"well, you can forget about me take ani 'experiment compounds.' " 
how long could I stall him? 

"morgan, there' more to this." hi look grew pained. "it' awkward to 
bring it up, but your presenc here creat no small difficulti for me. 
I told you certain peopl in the militari high command have concern 
about the film you'r making. and then the next thing they know, you 
show up here. it' just go to heighten their paranoia. but if I can 
convinc them you'r here for fertil treatment . . . In ani case, 
it' import that noth you, or I, do is at odd with that 
presumption. I hope it' true, but even if you chose to forgo it, I 
still need to put you on my normal regimen. you understand." 

that' baloney. somebodi had me brought to _baalum_. whoever did it 
know full well whi i'm here. the problem is, I still don't know what 
they realli want. 

"well, you can say i'v come to take sarah home," I told him. "that 
seem reason enough." 

"the other stori is simpler to explain." He took a last bite of 
gazpacho, then rest hi pewter spoon on the table. "take my word for 
it." 

"and what if I don't choos to go along with thi charade?" 

"we would both be in jeopardy. they'r entir capabl of . . . thing 
i'd rather not have to elabor on." 

I sat there, feel a chill envelop the room. how wa I go to get 
out of thi place? 

"bi the way, a while ago sarah mention someth about a 'ceremony.' 
what' that--?" 

"it' a special time here." hi gaze shift to the ceiling. "in fact, 
it' suppos to take place in three days, but the armi ha inform me 
it ha to be two day from now. that' the day they rotat the troop 
here, so there'l be doubl strength." 

"but whi do they need--" 

"thing can get a bit frenzied." He smiled, though he seem to be 
embarrassed. "however, the peopl will love the fact you'r here to 
share it with them." 

did he say "frenzied"? My mind immedi flash on the aztec ritual 
of rip out beat hearts. but the maya didn't go to that extreme, 
at least so far as I knew. onc again, though, I had the feel I wa 
onli hear what he want me to know, not the whole truth. It felt 
like a chess game where I didn't know the locat of all the piec or 
how they could move. 

"tell you what." He wa get up, turn toward the hall. "whi don't 
you let me show you around the clinic? In fact, i'm schedul to 
perform an in vitro thi morn for a childless coupl here. you'r 
free to see it. perhap that could help you make your own decision." 

"well . . . do you have a phone? I need to make some calls." would he 
let me call out? that would be a first test of what hi intent 
were. It wa all get so insidious. I had sarah to worri about, and 
the army, and now some kind of "ceremony" that he'd manag to stay 
cannili vagu about. I onli knew I want the whole world to know where 
I was. 

"of course," he said. "you'r welcom to use my office." He wa 
point down the hall. "it' right thi way." 

yes! mayb i'm not complet hi prison yet. I still have 
privileges. but i'd damn well better use them while I can. 

I walk out and felt a breeze, and then I studi the far end of the 
hallway, at the opposit end from the entrance, and notic huge 
slat windows. As we walk in their direction, I realiz there wa 
a stairway on one side, at the end of the hall, lead up to the 
second stori of the building. 

"what' up there?" 

"hygen nurseri rooms." He glanc at the stairs. "unlik u.s. 
practice, new mother here aren't sent home after a day or two. women 
and their newborn are encourag to stay here at the clinic for at 
least a week. it' actual veri much a part of their tradition, a 
period of bonding. you'r welcom to visit with them later if you like." 

I intend to. In fact, I found myself look around and tri to 
memor everyth about the place. A two-stori building, a marbl 
stair, a nurseri upstairs, downstair room along either side of the 
hallway (what wa in them?), and an offic I wa about to see. could 
the clinic be lock down? what were the escap routes? how close wa 
the armi watching? the time would come, I wa sure, when i'd need everi 
scrap of intellig I could collect. 

when we reach the end of the hall, the fresh cool wind still blow 
against my face, he stop in front of a large, ornat wooden door 
with a brass knob in the veri center. there wa no sign of a lock, just 
a sens of great graviti about it purpose. 

"the phone' in here." He push the door and it slowli swung inward on 
hing that must have requir ball bearings. 

It wa inde an office, dimli light by the move screen-sav of 
two computers, each on a separ desk. He flick on the overhead 
light and I notic that one comput wa hook to a fax machine, the 
other to a separ printer. An impress assembl of data-manag 
technolog for out here in the rain forest. 

then I focus on the central desk, on which sat an open, 
briefcase-look box contain a mini-consol label magellan world 
phone. A small satellit dish wa bolt down next to it. 

"it uplink to the inmarsat seri 3 geostationari satellites." He 
indic the dish. "but it work like a regular phone. the 
intern code all apply." then he turn to leave. "I should be 
readi for the procedur in a few minutes." 

I pick up the handset and flick it on. three green diod flashed, 
then two yellow ones, after which a white light came on and I heard a 
continu hum, a dial tone. 

hooray. but wa hi satellit phone tapped? whi would he let me just 
call out? wa thi a feint in our game of cat-and-mouse, just to lull 
me into believ everyth here wa safe and benign? rememb 
sarah' drug experience, I alreadi knew that couldn't be true. for now, 
though, I had to get an so out while I had the chance. 

i'd long sinc memor the number of steve' hotel in beliz city, 
and if I could reach him, he could go the embassi in guatemala citi and 
. . . I wasn't sure what. I still hope to get out of here on my own, 
but if that fail . . . mayb some of those sturdi marin . . . 

when I dial the beliz number, however, the phone just rang and rang. 

come on. somebodi pleas pick up. 

then they did. thank goodness. but when I ask for steve-- 

"so sorry, mon," came the proud caribbean voice, "but mr. abram check 
out monday. earli in the morning." 

"right, I know that. but he came back last night, didn't he?" 

"no, mon. He say he be come back, to hold hi room, but--" 

"he didn't come back?" I felt my palm go icy. who wa go to know 
where sarah and I were? "what do you mean?" 

"he not come back here, mon." the man paus and mumbl someth to 
anoth clerk, then came back on. "nobodi seen him since. you want 
leav a message, that' okay. but I don't know when--" 

"no." I didn't know what to say. the implic wa onli gradual 
sink in. "no message. thank anyway. i'll tri back later." 

"ani time, mon. No problem." 

I hung up, tri to stay calm. steve, where are you? 

okay, I told myself, you don't actual know something' wrong. It 
could be anything. still, it wa veri worrying. steve, my one and onli 
. . . 

I wa stare at the phone, wonder what my next move should be. 
whatev else, i'v got to tri to reach lou, tell him i'v found sarah. 
but then what? He certainli wasn't go to be ani help in get us 
out. If he blunder hi way down here, there wa a real chanc he'd 
misread the delicaci of the situat and end up get us all 
"disappeared" by the army. but still, I had to tell him about her. 

I pick up the handset again, key in the u.s. countri code, and 
tri the number for hi place in soho. he'd said he wa go to be 
releas from st. vincent' today, so mayb he wa home by now. 

the familiar ring jangl half a dozen time and then . . . 

"crenshaw residence." It wa the irish tone of mrs. reilly, sarah' 
day nurse. hallelujah. I guess she wa there now take care of lou. 

"uh, thi is morgan james. mr. crenshaw' niece. remember? I came by. 
Is he home yet? I need to talk to him." 

"he' resting, dear. I wa just about to go out and get some things, 
milk and soup and the like." 

"so . . . dare I ask? how is he?" 

"he' weak, but I think he' go to be fine. If peopl will just let 
him be." 

"look, I hate to bother him, but it' realli an emergency. i'm call 
from guatemala." 

"oh. I truli don't know if he' awake, dear. He wa nap a while 
ago." 

"could you . . . could you go and see? please. and take the phone?" 

"just a minute." she sound reluctant, but I could hear her movement 
as she shuffl across the loft. I listened, wonder how long alex 
goddard wa go to be away, and then a moment later . . . 

"yeah." there wa a rustl as lou got a grip on hi cordless. "morgan, 
is that you? where the hell are you now?" 

It took me a second to even find my voice, I wa so thrill to hear 
him. He sound just like always. 

"hey, how' it going, champ?" I said. come on, lou. get well. fight. 

"I start have these migraines, but they gave me some medicine--" 

"listen." I cut him off, and immedi felt guilti i'd been so 
impatient. "i'm up in northern guatemala and i'v found sarah." 

"oh, my god." that wa follow by a long silence, probabl an 
emot meltdown. "i she all right?" 

what wa I go to say? that she'd been brainwash or wors by alex 
goddard? that we were both in hi clutches, cut off from the world, and 
in deep, deep trouble? 

"she' abl to stand," I said. 

I don't rememb what white lie I eventu manag to tell him. I 
think it wa someth like, "she' be treat for a post-coma 
syndrom by a medic specialist. i'v found out that when she wa in 
guatemala before, she wa given some veri bad drugs, and someon here 
who know about them is tri to revers some of the damage." 

"alex goddard, right?" there wa no bs-ing lou for veri long. "that 
bastard." 

"lou, i'm go to get her out of here and back home as soon as 
possible. everything' go to be all right. don't worry. it' realli 
too complic to tri and explain over the phone." 

"yeah, well, i'm coming. soon as i'm up. i'm gonna take that son of a 
bitch by the--" 

"don't. don't you go anywhere. i'm handl it, okay?" 

I heard him grunt, whether from pain or frustrat I couldn't be sure. 
"lou, listen, i'm go to tri and phone you everi day. If I miss a 
day, then you should call the embassi down here. tell them you'r fbi. 
that might get their attention. the place where I am, where sarah is, 
is name baalum. it' a . . . kind of village. In the northern peten 
department. I don't know if the u.s. ha ani clout up here, but that' 
where they should come looking." 

I got him to write it down, and then eas him off the line as gentli 
as I could and hung up. I would have love for him to be here, but I 
want to tri to get sarah out by stealth if I could. and stealth wa 
scarc lou' style. 

My call were one for two, and there still wasn't anybodi to help me. 
the time had come to tri david. I wa have the glimmer of a new 
strategy. 

It wa lunchtim in new york, but on wednesday he usual just had a 
sandwich at hi desk. mayb I could catch him. 

"hello," declar the british femal voic he'd put on hi machine, 
hope it would sound like he had a classi secretary. "you'v reach 
the offic of david roth, presid of applecor productions. we'r 
sorri mr. roth is not avail at thi time to--" 

"david," I bark into the phone. "if you'r there, pick up. thi is 
morgan. i'v got to talk to you." 

while the announc kept running, nois erupt outsid in the 
hall, voic and a click sound, as though someth wa be roll 
along the tile floor. shit. wa alex goddard about to walk in? My mouth 
went dry. come on, david, I know you'r there, hiding--varieti with a 
tuna salad on rye, extra pickle. dr. brown' cel-ray soda. 

"david damnit, pick up." I said it quieter thi time, but I could feel 
my heart pounding. "thi is an emergency." 

"morgy, don't!" He yell as I heard the receiv be 

lifted. "jesus, I just walk in from the deli. listen, thank god it' 
you. drop whatev the hell you'r not do and get your butt in here. 
jerri reiner called, you know, the orion distribut deal--and he 
want a rough cut of _babi love_ yesterday so he can pitch it to the 
suit on the fifth floor. We could be stare at financi success 
here. I hope you can handl the vulgar of that." 

"david, you'r not go to believ where I am," I began, work out 
my game plan as I went along, tri to sound cool and control my 
race pulse. "i'm in northern guatemala, at a place that would make a 
terrif feature. it' like a maya theme park, deep in the rain forest. 
but it' real. I want you to contact the embassi and get them to greas 
the way for my crew to come here. thi is too good to pass up." I 
thought about the cost and then added, "at least one camera and sound." 

one sure way to get sarah out wa to blow the place open to the world. 

"what' . . . where are you again?" 

I gave him a glow trailer of the williamsburg-lik qualiti of 
baalum--a beautiful, excit recreat of time gone by that 
out-disney disney. the cabl channel would be bid for the 
footage. 

"hey, look, all thing in time." He wasn't buying. "i'm talk an 
actual deal here. you know, money? fuck the jungl wonderland. you'v 
got exactli one more day down there on the tarzan set, or wherev the 
hell it is, and then i'm gonna start finish final cut on thi damn 
pictur myself. don't make me have to do that, morgy. thi is not a 
drill. nicki russo came by again yesterday. he' fulli prepar to call 
our note and impound your origin negative. it' here, under lock and 
key, but we'v got to get thi project in the can and sold." 

"you touch a frame of my movi and I won't be respons for my 
actions." god, he wa miss my sos. "david do one thing for me, 
please. I can't tell you how import it is. I haven't explain 
everything. thi situat is . . . it' veri threatening. I need you 
to at least call the embassi down here and see if they'll send 
somebody. the army' all over the place and--" 

A loud nois interven follow by complete, absolut silence. the 
diod on the panel all began flash yellow. 

"shit!" had alex goddard been listen in and decid to cut me off 
befor I could get word to the embassy? 

I slam the box and went for the usual maneuver: I cut the connect 
and tri again, but nothing. again, and still nothing. 

My hand were trembling. i'd just lost contact with the outsid world. 
I wa complet isol in the middl of nowhere. 

how convenient. alex goddard let me tell a coupl of peopl I wa 
physic okay, and then he block the line. 

I exhal settl into the pad chair next to the computers, and 
tri to think. david, david whi wouldn't you listen? He wa so excit 
he'd complet ignor my distress signal. nobodi wa go to come 
and help me get out of here. 

I gaze around the room, wonder what to do next. wa there anoth 
phone, a radio, a box of flares, for godsake? 

that wa when I spot the outlin of anoth door--whi hadn't I 
notic it sooner?--thi one steel, there on the left. alex goddard 
might walk in ani second now, but I had to tri to learn everyth I 
could as fast as I could. what wa go on besid what wa go on? 

alert for ani new sound from outside, I quickli went over and tri 
the knob. 

It wa lock tight. 

figured. now I realli want to know what wa in there. 

when I glanc around the office, I notic a ring of key on the desk. 
could he have forgotten them? 

more important, would I blow everyth if he caught me snooping? In 
spite of hi attempt at a cool veneer, he might go ballistic. 

I made a snap decision. take the chanc and give them a try. 

My hand were so moist I had troubl hold the slipperi keys, but 
final I manag to shove in the first one. It went in, but noth 
would turn. 

come on. I manag to wiggl the next one in, my hand trembl now, 
but again the knob wouldn't budge. footstep outsid march up to the 
door and I stop breathing, but then they move on. 

hurry. I wa rapidli lose hope when the fifth one slip in and the 
knob turned. yes! 

take a deep breath and work on a stori in case alex goddard walk 
in, I click the lock and eas the door inward just enough to look 
inside. 

hello, what' this? the space wa a fulli equip medic research 
lab. the light were off, but like the office, it wa illumin by 
the glow of sever crt screen station abov a long lab bench. there 
also wa a larg machine, probabl a ga chromatograph, with it own 
screen, flank by row of test tubes. finally, there wa a larg 
electron microscop complet with video screen. 

one non-med thing stood out, though: there in the middl of the 
workbench wa a two-foot-high bronz danc shiva presid over 
whatev wa go on. It wa breath-takingli beautiful. 

So . . . what wa the lord of the danc give hi bless to? time to 
tri and find out. 

now clank nois were filter in from out in the hall, along with 
the pound of heavi boots, and my puls jump again. wa the armi 
come to drag me away? 

just go in. Do it. 

the crt screen were attach to black metal containers, their door 
closed, that all were connect to a power supply, doubtless to 
maintain some temperature. It look like goddard wa incub 
someth in a care control environment. the whole arrang 
wa veri care organ and laid out. 

final I notic a row of larg steel jugs, six in all, near the back 
and cover with a sheet of black plastic, thin like a wrap. what could 
they be? some kind of special ga for use in the lab? 

voic in spanish drift in from the hallway. A woman and a man were 
argu about something. 

okay, get out of here. come back and check thi out when nobody' 
around. 

I step back into the office, click off the thumb latch on the door 
so it wouldn't lock, and close it. I realiz I wa pour sweat. 

what next? well, see if the phone' work again and tri call the 
camino real and see if steve' come back there for some reason, mayb a 
chang in plans. It would be a long shot, but still . . . 

My hand wa shake as I open up the phone case. thank god, the 
diod were all quiet. mayb . . . 

the steel door i'd close onli moment befor swung open and alex 
goddard walk through. did he realiz i'd left it unlocked? how did he 
get in there? wa there anoth door? 

he'd chang cloth and wa wear a pale blue surgic gown. I shut 
the phone case, as though just finish with it. could he tell i'd 
turn myself into a nervou wreck? I tri to smile and look normal, 
but my shirt wa soaking. 

"ah, I see you'r finished," he said, not seem to notice. 

"good. As I said, i'v got an in-vitro procedur schedul now for one 
of the coupl here in the village. you'r welcom to observe. It might 
help you decid what you want to do in your own case." He wa move 
across the room. "you can watch on the close circuit." 

He reach up and snap on a monitor bolt to the wall in the corner. 

"oh, just one small word of forewarning." He wa turn back. "down 
here i'v made certain . . . cosmet chang in the procedur to keep 
patients' anxieti level as low as possible. It wouldn't be appropri 
in your case, but . . . well, you'll see." 

befor I had time to wonder what he meant, he disappear back through 
the steel door with a reassur smile. 




chapter twenty-thre 


the monitor' pictur wa in color, but the predomin hue wa brown. 
where wa this? the OR had to be somewher in the clinic, but still . . 
. 

the space look flawlessli sterile, obvious an oper theater, 
but it wa certainli like none other on earth. the wall were not white 
or pale blue; they had the shade of stone and were decor with maya 
pictur write and bas-reliefs. It wa as though a sacr chapel had 
been convert into a surgery. I guess thi wa what he meant by 
"cosmet changes." A door wa visibl on the right side of the screen, 
and moment later alex goddard strode through, come in from the 
hallway. 

so, it must be right next door. god, the place look ancient and 
haunted. 

I watch as he walk over to a basin and scrub hi hands, then 
don a white surgic mask. next he flip variou switch on the 
walls. final he put on a second mask that glisten like some green 
crystallin material. 

what wa that for? then it hit me. A "jade" mask . . . 

that wa someth sarah had mention in her ramblings. So she must 
have seen thi too. which meant. . . not everyth she describ wa 
just some drug-induc hallucination. the mask part wa veri real. . . . 

now marcelina wa roll a steel oper table, bear a 
dark-hair maya woman, through the doorway. the patient look like 
all the other down in baalum, except that she had a strang express 
on her face. she appear to be tens and veri afraid, as her eye kept 
dart around the room, then to the "jade" mask alex goddard wa 
wearing--most like papier-mach cover with shini green granules. 

when she wa in position, he walk to the corner and flip anoth 
switch, whereupon there start the deep drone of a chant, probabl 
from speaker in the walls, that sound like kekchi maya. 

He bent over her and said someth in the same language, after which 
marcelina place a rubber mask over her nose and mouth. her eye still 
frightened, the patient utter a few words, perhap a final prayer, 
then inhal deeply. As her eyelid fluttered, he turn and open 
what appear to be some kind of stone tableau, cover by it own 
bas-relief. It was, I final realized, mere paint fiberglass--that 
wa what the whole room was--and insid were crt monitor design to 
display variou vital life functions. As marcelina help him, he began 
attach sensor to the patient' body. 

when the woman' eye had fulli closed, he remov hi green mask and 
toss it into a box. 

it' all fake. the room, everything. just like _baalum_. but now he' 
got sarah' mind caught in hi thrall. i'v got to make her understand 
noth here is real. 

marcelina wa care watch the screens, her apprehens obviou 
as she fiddl uncertainli with the knobs. 

"oxygen steady." her voic wa small and uneasy. "ekg stable." 

He immedi strip away the sheet that had been cover the 
patient. beneath it wa an open-sid gown color in brilliant stripe 
of red and blue. He pull it back with absent precision, then turn 
to marcelina. 

"shave her and scrub her." 

with the woman now under sedation, marcelina put on her own surgic 
garb: she pull a blue plastic cap over her hair, then secur a white 
OR mask over her face. while she wa finish the preparations, he 
turn and walk to the far side of the room, where he abruptli seem 
to disappear through the wall. 

what . . . there must be a panel there, a camouflag door. 

He wa gone for a moment, then reappear carri a long metal tube 
that look to be emit white vapor. He next open yet anoth 
ersatz stone cabinet to reveal a microscop with a crt screen abov it. 
He took out three glass ampul from the tube--frozen embryos, 
undoubtedly--and place them in a container. when he switch on the 
microscope, it crt screen show him whatev he need to know. 
interesting. In surgery, he wa coldli efficient, no "human touch." 
here he wa the "scientist" alex goddard. 

next, marcelina activ an ultrasound scanner and began run the 
wand over the woman' stomach. the screen abov the tabl show her 
uteru and her fallopian tube with flicker clarity. 

he'd been readi the embryos, and now he walk over and care 
insert a needl into the woman' abdomen--ouch--hi eye on the 
ultrasound scan, which indic the precis locat of the needle' 
tip. 

I watch as the screen show the needl on it way to it 
destination, a thin, hard line amidst the puls gray mass of her 
uterus. second later all three embryo had been implant with such 
flawless precis it wa scary. 

did I want to undergo thi deepli invas procedur at the hand of 
alex goddard? the veri thought left a dull ach in my stomach. 

while marcelina bandag her and began prepar her for return to 
wherev she'd been, he turn off the systems, then close their 
"stone" cabinets. 

I thought back to some of the "hallucinations" sarah had pour out. 
she'd mention the green mask, and she'd also reliv some sinist 
event that seem to her like disappear down a long white tunnel. 
wa that her own anesthesia? did he perform an in vitro on her too? 

I jump as I heard the "bump, thump, bump" sound of the oper 
tabl be roll out of the OR and back down the hall. for some 
reason I thought of the sound of fate knock on the door, like death 
come to take don giovanni. did alex goddard have plan to take me, 
onli with drug and medic sleight of hand? It wasn't go to happen. 

I switch off the monitor and turn to stare at the computers. whi 
were they here in thi "place of miracles"? what did they hold? mayb 
that wa where I should be. . . . 

that wa the moment when the heavi offic door swung open and marcelina 
appeared. 

"your room is readi now." her english wa heavili accent but sure. 
"he sent me to show you. and I can wash ani of your thing if you like." 

My room? whoa! sinc when had I check in? 

"marcelina, we need to talk. what happen to sarah the last time she 
wa here? wa she oper on like that woman just now?" 

I also plan to ask her about all the bizarr trap surround 
the procedure. whi wa the woman so suck in by hi phoni mardi gra 
mysticism? had sarah fallen for it too? 

"sara wa one of the special ones. you are sure bless too. you 
resembl her a lot." she look at me, affect in her dark eyes, then 
turn and head out the door. "but come, let me take you up." 

Of cours I resembl her; she wa my cousin. but so what? I didn't 
like the odd way she'd said it. and what about my question? 

watch her walk away, clearli nervous, I realiz thi wa the moment 
i'd been dreading--when I had to make a decis about how far to play 
along with alex goddard. steve couldn't be reached, yet, but I still 
might be abl to handl the situat on my own. the first thing to do 
wa to get down to sarah and talk some sens into her. then I had to 
arrang for a way to get us both out. 

So . . . probabl the best way to accomplish that wa to go along with 
my own medic charad for a few more hours, to give me time to scout 
the scene and come up with a plan. A room would be a base to oper 
from. 

still, I wa feel plenti of trepid as we ascend the marbl 
step to the second floor, which had a long, carpet hallway with 
door along each side. then, when we start down the hall, I caught 
the sound of a babi crying. 

"what' thi floor for?" I rememb alex goddard had claim it wa 
to provid a postpartum bond period, but I want to confirm that 
with my own eyes. 

"thi is the recoveri ward and nursery. here, let me show you." she 
paus and push open the door nearest us. I look in to see a mayan 
woman rest on a high hospit bed and wear a white shift, with an 
ornat wicker cradle, wide and deep, next to her. 

marcelina smile and said someth to her that sound like an apolog 
for the intrusion. the room wa lit onli by candles, but I did make out 
how oddli the woman stare at me, as though she wa see a spirit. 
whi wa that? becaus I wa a _gringa _here in the middl of the 
forest? but it seem someth more. 

"the birth of a child is a sacr thing for us." marcelina wa 
discreetli close the door again. "when a woman carri a child she 
will take walk to the _milpas_, to the river, to the orchards, just so 
her littl one can be in it world. then, after her babi is born, our 
tradit hold that she should be alon with it for a week and a day. 
So their life' breath can becom one." 

I could sens her heart wa deepli entwin with the peopl here at 
baalum. 

"marcelina, how long have--?" 

"well, what do you think?" said a voice. I look around to see alex 
goddard come up the stair behind us. and my anger well up again. 
everyth about him wa just too . . . manipulating. 

he'd chang back to hi black sweatshirt and jean and wa carri a 
tray. the costum event wa over. In an instant marcelina slip 
quietli around him and head back down the stairs, almost like a 
rabbit startl by a fox. He smile and move past me. 

"all those trap just now, the fake green mask." I decid to 
challeng him head-on. start forc him to show hi hand. "what's--?" 

"mere a littl harmless theater." He look back. "the forest maya 
like to think they'r be minist to by a shaman." then he 
indic I should follow him. "bi the way, in case you do get hungry, 
I brought you someth you can have in your room if you like. then you 
can make yourself at home and rest a bit." 

hold on. I wa be given the illus of freedom, but in realiti I 
wa noth more than hi prisoner. 

"that room next to your office. the steel door. what' in--?" 

"that' the heart of _baalum_." pride in hi voice. "the real reason 
i'm here." 

"you mean drug research?" 

He nodded. "did you know the central american rain forest easili 
contain a hundr thousand plant species? over half of all 
pharmaceut drug are deriv from plants, yet less than one percent 
of those here have been test for pharmacolog potential. still, 
the old shaman and midwiv all know of herb they claim can cure 
everyth from menstrual cramp to cancer." He smiled. "they also know 
which one have power contracept properties, which is 
particularli help in my primari study, fertil and fetal 
viability. I take the specimen they bring and perform a rough 
screen in the lab to determin if they'r actual pharmacolog 
active. If they do test positive, I then examin their effect on the 
blastocyst, the earli form of embryon cell form just after 
fertilization, to see whether they affect cell divis and viabil 
and . . . the miscarriag rate here is veri low, so some of these 
plant . . ." hi voic trail off as he push open the door of a 
suit at the end of the hall. It had a stone floor, a simpl bed, and 
through the slat window the light of midday filter through, along 
with the birdcal of the rain forest. ani other time and place, i'd 
have felt like I wa stay at a rustic natur retreat. 

but thi wasn't some other time and place. and what about steve? where 
wa he? mayb he wa somewher worse. think about him, I wa 
startl to hear myself say . . . 

"incidentally, I found out the man i'v been tri to have a babi with 
didn't show up at hi hotel in beliz last night. He wa drive there 
from guatemala city. i'm veri worried. I keep hear about how peopl 
get 'disappeared' in thi country. he's--" 

"could hi name be steve abrams?" goddard turn back, still hold 
the tray. 

It wa a moment that stop my heart. for a second I wasn't even abl 
to speak. 

"how . . . did you know?" I final manag to say. "I never 
mentioned--" 

"that' the name they gave me. I receiv a call thi morn from 
guatemala city. from colonel ramos' office, in fact. As you might 
suppose, he' well awar you'r here, and he said you were seen dine 
night befor last at a downtown restaur with a man by that name. 
they think he' in the countri becaus of you, and they'r tri to 
locat him." 

I felt the life go entir out of me. My god what wa go on? steve 
wa now the subject of a manhunt in a polic state. did he even know? 

"I told them you were here for pure medic reasons." He sigh with 
frustration. "and that they were be irrat paranoid but . . ." 

"so they don't actual know where he is, right?" I wa still tri to 
breathe. 

"a of thi morning. If they did they wouldn't have call up here." He 
walk over and set the tray down on a rustic tabl next to the bed. "I 
wouldn't worri too much about it. he' commit no crime. they just 
want to make sure you realiz your presenc ha not gone unnoticed." 

dear god. what had I drag steve into? If they found him, what would 
they do? I could onli pray he wa deft enough to elud them. If anybodi 
could . . . 

then I look at the tray. An empti syring wa there. also, there wa 
a larg bowl contain some kind of soup. I wa final grow 
ravenous, but still . . . 

"what' thi for?" I indic the syringe. 

"I just need to take a littl blood for some tests. don't worry, it 
won't hurt a bit." 

hold on. how far do I have to play along to stay in hi chess game? 

then I glanc down again at the tray. "and what' in that bowl?" 

"right now diet is crucial, so i'v had marcelina prepar you a healthi 
broth of soy extract and buckwheat and rainforest herb that--" 

"what kind of rainforest herb exactly?" I wa starving, but no way in 
hell-- 

"medicin ones. part of your program of wholeness." He turned, with 
that faraway look of his, and open the window slats. beyond them I 
could see foliage, now aliv with flock of multicolor birds. the 
forest wa in full cry. "you know, so mani drug are wait to be 
discov up here." He wa gaze out. "beyond thi window is a giant 
pharmacy, but if it goe like the rest of the peten, it'll soon be 
bulldoz to make way for more cattl ranches." 

He came back and pick up the syringe. that wa when I notic it 
didn't seem to be entir empty. It appear to contain trace of a 
yellow substance, though mayb I wa imagining. . . . 

"look, about the blood test. I don't think--" 

"consid it a free medic screening." He firmli grip my arm as he 
plung the needl into a vein. second later he wa cap off the 
syringe, red with my blood. "i'm run a batch of test thi 
afternoon, so one more sampl won't make ani difference." 

while he swab my arm with alcohol, I look down again at the bowl 
of broth he'd brought. forget about it. i'd find someth in the 
kitchen later. 

"I want to go down and see sarah." get start immediately. push and 
mayb I could catch him off guard. "i'm veri worri about her." 

"of course." He nodded. "whenev you wish." 

"I wa thinking, as soon as possible." 

"then i'll send marcelina to take you, the minut she' finish 
downstairs. but I assum you might want to at least unpack first." 

with that he disappear as quietli as he'd come. 

I walk over and stare out at the bird flit past the slat 
window, feel my hope go up. the color and the 

freedom. I want to be one of them, to take sarah and just fli away. . 
. . 

then, feel vagu drowsy, I settl myself down on the edg of the 
bed. the next thing I knew, though, the chaotic music of the bird had 
begun to sound amplifi as though they were swirl down a long, 
echo hallway. In spite of myself, I felt my conscious begin to 
drift. 

shit, that needl he just slam into my arm. It wasn't to take blood 
you idiot. you suspect that, but he wa too fast. shit. shit. shit. 
don't let him do it. stay awake. 

but now the tunnel wa growing. I pull myself up and stagger in 
slow motion to the door and tri it, but it seem to be locked. I 
couldn't realli tell, though, becaus the tunnel wa swallow me. 

no! I bang my head against the door, hope the pain would bring me 
back, but the room just swirl even more. 

the tunnel. now it wa all around me, shadowi and dim. I thought I 
glimps sarah at the end of it, wear a white shift, beckon me, 
but when I reach out for her, to take us away, all I could touch wa 
empti mist. 




chapter twenty-four 


i'm on a bed, in a dreamscap room envelop in pastel fog, watch a 
melania butterfli the size of a man pump hi massiv orang and black 
wing abov me. hi voic is mellifluous, hypnotic, and I feel the soft 
wind of hi wing against my face, cooling, scented, enveloping. It is 
the soft of etern peace. 

"your bodi is a realm of fertility," he is saying, hi tone echo in 
the shadowi haze around me, sonor and caring. "you are special." 
then, iridesc blue and purpl shimmer off hi wings, hi face 
evolv into the orang and black mask of a jaguar. "you are one of the 
special ones. togeth we will creat life." 

did he say "special"? marcelina said I wa . . . like sarah . . . 

now hi eye are bore in and i'm think of the chines . . . Am I 
human, dream i'm a butterfly, or am I a butterfli dream i'm human? 

As he move over me, the rest of hi butterfli form disappear and he' 
becom a lith jaguar whose lip are touch mine. the sheet over me 
melt into my skin as the soft spot fur of hi underbelli press 
onto me. and hi face ha turn even more felin and sensuous, with 
dark eye that look directli through me. I can feel hi whisker 
against me as he sniff down my body, then explor my groin with hi 
probe tongue. 

befor I realiz what' happening, hi thigh press against mine and he 
knowingli insinu himself into me. It all happen so natur and 
effortlessli I scarc . . . I see onli an intens twitch of hi 
anim ears, erect and direct toward me, as he enfold me completely, 
hi hot male breath urgent. As he grind hi thigh against mine, he 
emit growls, low in hi throat, then nip lightli and lovingli at my 
cheek, hi pale fang benign and delicious. 

I cling to him, bath in sweat, fall into him, want him, but now 
. . . 

he' changing. . . . My god. no! he' . . . 

hi face is becom a jade mask with eye that burn a fieri red, a 
spirit of evil. he' plung someth deep into me, metal, cold and 
cutting. far inside, reaching, while my mind fight through the wave 
of pain that cours down my lower body. I struggl back, but my arm 
just pass through empti air. stop. the eyes, the hard metal . . . time 
turn fluid, minut are hours, lost, and I don't know . . . 

finally---it could be year later--h growl one last time and the room 
begin fade to darkness. then a bless numb wash over me. he' 
gone. . . . 

and I dream I am dead. 

sometime, probabl hour later, I sens my conscious gradual 
returning. around me the room wa still dark and, rememb the 
"dream," I came fulli awak with a start, my heart pounding. what had . 
. . it done to me? I wa shivering, with a piercing, point ach in my 
groin. I need air. 

I rose up unsteadili and reach out, and realiz I wa in a hospit 
bed with metal bar along one side. 

what! how did I come to be in this? then I began remembering. I wa at 
_baalum_, in alex goddard' nino del mundo clinic. and i'd been tri 
to get sarah and take her home. 

instead, i'd pass out and then . . . an attack, some unspeak evil 
. . . 

get out of here. now. 

I settl my feet onto the floor with a surg of determination, and 
that wa when I sens I wa in a differ place from where i'd . . . 
where--! 

I gaze around in the dark, then reach out and felt someth on a 
tabl besid the bed. It wa a clay bowl full of wax. what . . . a 
candle. and next to it I touch a plain book of matches. My hand wa 
trembl from the pain in my groin, but I manag to light the candle, 
a flicker glow. 

My wristwatch wa lie nearbi on the table. someon must have taken it 
off and place it there. I pick it up and held it by the candle, and 
for a moment I wa confus by the second tick off. then I realiz 
the time wa . . . how could that be! It read 4:57 a.m. had I been out 
for hours? 

I gasped, then rais the candl and gaze around. the wall were brown 
stone--or mayb they just look like stone. yes, now I recogn it. 
I wa in the fiberglass-wal oper room i'd seen on alex 
goddard' closed-circuit monitor. 

what wa I do in here? 

My arm brush against the tabl and I felt an odd sensation. glanc 
down, I realiz there wa a band-aid on the insid of my left wrist. 
what wa that about? earlier he'd taken blood from my right arm, but 
then he'd just swab it, so whi thi bandage? and what in hell wa I 
do in an oper room? I hadn't agre to ani procedures. did he 
come back for a second--? 

Or . . . that wa what he'd done. he'd inject me with an IV drug. the 
bizarr vision i'd had wa hi cover for some pervers invas of my 
body. My god, i'd been unconsci sinc yesterday afternoon. dure 
all that time, what could he have done to me? 

I wa fist-clench furious. look around the "oper room," I 
want to rip the place apart. 

when I tri to stand, I realiz my groin wa tender and sore as hell, 
all across my panty-line, onli somewher deep, deep inside, in my 
reproduct . . . It wa like after he'd given me those shot up at 
quetzal manor. I check and saw no red needle-punctur thi time, but 
the pain wa much worse. that sick butterfly-jaguar dream wa no dream. 
i'd been rape by . . . the bastard. 

I push asid the pain, edg across to the door, and test it. 
unlocked. good. Go find the sob right now. tear hi head off. 

I pull back the door, took a deep breath, and check out the hallway. 

whoa! how did they get here? In the dim light I made out two uniform 
armi privat down at the end near the slat windows, doze in 
fold metal chairs, their ak-47' prop against the plaster wall. 

whi were they here? just a cool, breezi place to hang out? Or were they 
in place to guard me? 

the breez wa caus the candle' flame to cast flicker shadow 
across the hall, so I quickli re-clos the door. 

now what? I wa trembl as I return the candl bowl to the tabl 
and sat down on the bed. soldier with gun were outsid my room at 
five in the morning. In the farthest end of guatemala. what wa I go 
to do? 

I gaze around at the "stone" wall and tri to think. My mind still 
felt cloud from whatev drug he'd given me, but it wa begin to 
. . . 

wait. I saw alex goddard come into thi veri room with embryo from the 
lab, which is connect by the steel door to hi office. . . . 

where there wa a phone. 

time to call the embassy, get some help to get the hell out of here. 

I sat there thinking. all right. i'd need to wait an hour or so--now 
i'd get some low-level flunki stuck with the graveyard shift--but 
there wa someth I wa damn well go to do immediately. with the 
lab right next door, I could tri to find out whi goddard had just 
perform medic rape on me. there had to be some connection. 
accord to him, the lab wa for "plant research." but if that wa all 
he wa doing, whi wa the armi here? right outsid my door? I felt a 
pump of adrenalin that made me forget all about my pain. befor I got 
the hell out of _baalum_, I wa go to know what he wa realli up to 
here. 

god, I feel miserable. I realli hurt. all the more reason . . . 

I took the candle, stood up, and move to the opposit wall to begin 
look for an open in the fiberglass "stone." It appear to have 
been made from impress from the room atop the pyramid, row and 
row of those littl cartoon-fac glyphs, mix in with bas-reliefs, 
but there had to be a door somewhere. i'd seen him walk right through 
it. As I ran my hand along the surface, I wa struck by how their 
hard felt like stone. but it couldn't be. 

what wa I look for? there certainli were no doorknobs. I came 
across a hard crack, next to the bas-relief of a feather-festoon 
warrior, but as I slid my hand down, it end and again there wa more 
rough "stone." solid. 

damn. I stood back and studi the wall with my candle. he'd come in 
from the left, which would be about . . . 

I move over and start again. thi time my fingernail caught in a 
crevic that ran directli down to the floor. then I discov another, 
about two and a half feet farther along. It had to be the door. 

I felt along the side, wonder how to open it, till I notic that 
one of the littl "stone" glyph gave way when I press it. when I put 
my hand against it harder and rotat it, the panel click backward, 
then swung inward. yes! 

and there it was: the lab, crt screen abov the incubators, ga 
chromatograph in the corner. this, accord to him, wa where he 
test the rainforest plant the shaman and midwiv brought in. but 
what about what he'd just done to _me_? 

I wa still worri about the armi guy outside, but I walk in, 
tri to be as quiet as I could. the first thing I did wa head for 
the row of black box abov the bench. those, I assumed, were be 
use to maintain a micro-environ for incub plant specimens. 
and sure enough, the dimli lit window reveal row and row of petri 
dishes. they were clear, with circular indent in the center. . . . 

but wait a minute. those weren't just ani old lab dishes. and no plant 
extract were in them either, just clear liquid. that wa odd, veri 
fishy. 

I stood there puzzling, and then I rememb see pictur of lab 
dish like these be use for artifici fertil embryos. At 
the beginning, freshli extract human ova are place in an incub 
for sever hours, afloat in a medium that replic the insid of a 
femal fallopian tube, to matur them in prepar for fertilization. 
goddard had said someth about test on the blastocyst, the first 
cellular materi creat after fertilization. So wa he use actual 
fetuses? My god. I felt like I wa start to know, or guess, a lot 
more than he want me to. 

My thought were churn as I look up and studi the video screen 
abov the boxes. It took a moment, but then I figur out the petri 
dish and their chemic had been place in the incub between 
4:00 p.m. and 7:30 p.m. last evening. what--? 

I start counting. they were in racks, stacked, in set of 

four by four. let' see. five in thi incubator, five in the next, five 
in the . . . there were over two hundr dish in all! 

impossible. I look down at them again, feel a chill. noth 
seem to be in them yet, at least as far as I could tell, but then 
human egg are microscopic. So if ova were . . . 

when he supposedli wa do that _in vitro _on the mayan woman, wa he 
actual extract eggs? 

get serious. that wa not where they came from. 

By then I wa well along the kubler-ross scale, past denial and close 
in on anger, but still . . . so many! how could they all-- 

I turn and examin the row of plastic-cov jug at the back of 
the lab, line up, six in all. now I had to know what wa in them. 

I wa still shaky, but I steadi myself, walk over, pull back the 
plastic, and touch one. It wa deathli cold, sweat in the moist 
air. when I flip open it frisbee-s top, I saw a faint wisp of 
vapor emerg into the twilight of the room . . . 

then it dawn on me. Of course. they were cryo-storag containers. 
he'd need them to preserv fertil eggs, embryos. 

I lift off the insid cover and place it care onto the bench, 
where it immedi turn white, steam with mist. then I notic a 
tini metal rod hook over the side of the opening. when I pull it 
up, it turn out to be attach to a porou metal cylind contain 
row of glass tubes. 

what' . . .? 

feel like I wa deep in a medic fourth dimension, I took out one 
of the freez tubes. It wa notch and mark with a code label 
along the side: "bl -1 la," "bl -1 lb," "bl-1 lc," and so it went, all 
the way to "g." but noth wa there. 

I began check the other tubes. they all were empti too. So whi wa 
he freez empti containers? 

Go with the simpl answer. he' get them readi for new embryos. 

I slid the rod back into the cryo-tank, then walk over and hoist 
myself onto the lab bench next to the danc shiva, creator and 
destroyer. and when I did, I again felt a stab of pain in my groin. the 
bastard. I wa shaking, in the earli stage of shock. more than 
anything, I just want to find him and kill him. . . . 

I thought I heard a scrape nois somewher outside, in the hall, and 
I froze. wa he about to come in and check on hi "experiments"? then I 
realiz it wa just the building, hi hous of horrors, creak from 
the wind. 

I took one final look at the incubators, and all the pain came back. 
the whole thing wa too much for my bodi to take in. I sat there tri 
to muster my strength. 

don't stop now. keep going. 

I got back onto my feet. the phone. use the telephone. find steve, 
alert the embassy, then get sarah. Do it now, while you still can. 

I wa hold my breath as I walk over and push open the door to 
the offic and look in. It wa empti and dark. good. I head 
straight for the black case of the magellan world phone. 

when I pick up the handset and switch it on, the diod went 
through their techno-d of green and yellow and then stabil 
give me a dial tone. thank you, merci god. 

I decid to start off by call the hotel in beliz again, on the 
long shot that steve had manag to get the hell out of guatemala. 
baby, pleas be there. My watch said the time wa five-twenti in the 
morning, but he onc told me they man the desk around the clock. No 
problem get through, though the connect had a lot of static. but 
then came the news i'd been dreading: no steve abrams. 

"he still not come back, mon." 

where wa he? I want to scream, but I wa determin to keep a grip. 

all right, tri the camino real and hope you can get somebodi awak who 
speak english. mayb he went back. please, god. 

I had the number memorized, so I plug it in, and I recogn the 
voic of the guy who pick up, the owner' son, who wa tri hi 
best to learn english. 

"hi, thi is morgan james. rememb me? i'm just call to see if 
there' a steve abram stay there now?" 

"hey, _que pasa_, senora james. veri early, yes? _momento_." there wa 
a paus as he checked. come on, steve, be there. please, pleas be 
somewhere. 

then the voic came back: "no, nobodi by that name stay here." 

"okay . . . _gracias_." shit. It wa like a pit had open somewher 
deep in my stomach. 

I replac the handset, feel grate that at least the phone still 
worked, my last link to sanity. My next call wa go to be to the 
embassy, but I couldn't risk use up my open shot with the 
graveyard shift. mayb by 6 a.m. somebodi with author to do 
someth would be there. just a few more minutes. 

now what? I felt the ach sore in my groin again, along with a 
wave of nausea. I had to do something, anything, just to keep going, to 
beat back an anxieti attack. 

that wa when I turn and stare at the computers, the littl duck 
drift across the screens. 

all right, you know what he' doing; now it' time to tri and find out 
why. the real why. there must be record of what he' up to store 
there. what els would he have them for? 

"clang, clang, clang." A nois erupt from somewher outsid the 
window. In spite of myself, I jumped. 

then I realiz it wa just the odd call of some forest bird. god, I 
wasn't cut out for this. now my head wa hurting, stab of pain, but I 
rub at my templ and sat down at the first terminal. 

i'm a mac fan, hate windows, so I had to start out by experimenting. In 
the movi peopl alway know how to do this, but I had to go with 
trial and error, error compound error. 

after endless fals start that elicit util screen I couldn't get 
rid of, I final brought up an index of files, which includ a long 
list of names. 



alkaloid 

cardiac glycosid 

phenol 

saponin 

terpenoid 



biolog 103--which I hated--wa come back. plant-extract categories. 
look like he actual is do research on the flora here. but . . . 
still, what doe he need my ova for? 

I scroll on. scientif term that meant nothing. then, toward the 
end of the alphabet list, I came to the word quetzal. 

what wa that? I click on it and--lo and behold--up came a short list 
of names. six in all, organ by date about a year apart, and each a 
woman. 

My god. first I assum they were patient from quetzal manor who'd 
come here for fertil treatment, though each wa indic 
"terminated" at the end, whatev that meant. but as I scan down, I 
didn't want to see what I wa seeing. the name next to the last wa S. 
crenshaw. she'd been "terminated" too. 

the bottom wa M. james. but I hadn't been "terminated." not yet. 

I slump back in the chair, tri to breathe. how much more of thi 
horror could I handle? final I lean forward again and with a 
trembl hand click on S. crenshaw. 

A lot of data pop up, includ three import dates. the first wa 
exactli three week after the one in her passport, the guatemalan entri 
visa. the second wa ten month ago, the third eight month ago. after 
each wa a number: 268, follow by 153, and final 31. 

the count of her extract ova. kill him. just kill him. 

A lot of medic terminolog I couldn't interpret follow each number, 
but the note at the end requir no degree. 

"blastocyst materi from embryo after third extract show 84% 
decreas in cellular viability. No longer usable." 

My god, had he made her perman sterile? 

while that obscen wa sink in, I went back and click on my own 
name. the date wa today, the number wa 233. he'd just taken 233 of my 
ova. I stare at the screen and felt faint. 

No medic analysi had yet been entered, but it didn't matter. I 
stare at the screen, feel numb, for a full minut befor click 
back to sarah' page. yes, I wa right. the last date wa just six 
week befor she wa found in a coma, down the river from here. . . . 

No more mystery. he'd been use her egg to creat embryos, and they'd 
final stop working. not "special" anymore. So her "program" had 
been "terminated." In the river. 

My stomach wa churning, bile in my throat, and I thought 

I wa go to throw up. I took a deep breath, slowly, and stop 
myself. befor I got sarah and we got the hell out of _baalum_, I wa 
go to smash everyth in thi lab. 

It all had just come together. those shot of "muscl relaxant" he gave 
me up at quetzal manor, they had to be a cocktail of hi "proprietary" 
ovul drugs. then, with my ovari ripening, he'd lure me here 
use sarah. He knew i'd come after her. next he'd "arranged" with alan 
dupr to fli me here. finally, a sedative, and he'd harvest 233 of my 
ova, which he now had out there in those incubators. . . . 

but what about proof? To show the world. morn sound were build 
up outside, so I wa less worri whether the two soldier in the 
hallway were still asleep or not. truthfully, I wa so wire I no 
longer cared. I click on a printer and began zip off the file of 
each woman he'd violated, all six. 

disgust flow through me like a torrent. heart of darkness. "the 
horror, the horror." alex goddard had use sarah in the most 
unspeak way possible, then tri to have her murdered. probabl 
he'd just turn her over to colonel ramos. 

the same thing must have happen to those other women. all 
"disappeared" somewher in guatemala. but who would know? 

one thing I knew. I wa next. . . . 

the printer wa old and loud, but thank it wa fast. four minut 
later I had what i'd need to nail the criminal. when I got out of here, 
somebodi would have to believ me. 

while I wa stack the printouts, I resolv to call the embassi 
right then, the hour be damned. I wa sweat like a gazel when the 
lion is close in. alex goddard had just perform primal, surgic 
rape on me, and now the armi wa right outside. I had to get the 
embassy. 

and that wa when I realiz I didn't have the number. but it had to be 
in a phone book somewhere. 

A quick look around the offic didn't turn up one. I consid ring 
the camino real again, to ask them to look up the number, but then I 
had an inspir thought. steve had said alan dupre' number wa easi to 
rememb becaus it promot hi business. what wa it? I couldn't 
remember. 

then it came back: 4-mayan, the six-digit number they use in guatemala 
city. call the sleazebag and ask him who can get me out of here. he' 
suppos to know everybody. 

dawn wa bring more and more forest-morn song through the thin 
slat of the windows. I walk over and push them open, run my 
finger out into the air. It felt cool, the touch of freedom, and I 
thought for a moment about burst through to escape. just get sarah 
now. 

instead, I walk back to the phone, clench my fists, and dial 
alan dupre' number, pray and hope it wa where he lived. steve 
had call him late in the evening, so it probabl was. i'd thought I 
never want to speak to him again, but now . . . god, let him be there. 

the phone, however, just rang and rang and rang. 

come on. damn. 

It rang and rang some more. then finally-- 

"who the fuck is this? We don't open till nine." 

the first sound of hi voic brought a wave of relief, but then hi 
cocki attitud made me livid all over again. 

"it' morgan james, you shit. whi did you leav me strand up here? 
you have no idea what--" 

"oh, you . . ." He paus for a cigarett cough. "you made me walk all 
the way downstair just to bust my chops. what the--?" 

"talk to me, you prick." I still intend to strangl him. "I need your 
help. you owe me. you have no idea what--" 

"hey, lady, you didn't possibl believ take off in that fuck 
hurrican wa my . . . let' just say I wa act under duress. I all 
but didn't get back." 

"well, you can start make up for that right now by spring me the 
hell out of here." so, somebodi had put him up to it, just like i'd 
thought all along. but who? "I want you to look up the number for the 
american embassy. and tell me the name of somebodi there who--" 

"jesus, you truli don't get the picture, do you?" He paus for anoth 
early-morn reefer hack. 

"I 'get' that you--" 

"missy, it wa a high offici at that veri establish 'suggested' I 
fli you up there. whi the hell els would I do it, for chrissake? you 
know i'm not a citizen of thi fun house. said parti note that if I 
didn't, he could make a few phone call about my resid status, my 
pilot' licens . . . let' just say it wa an offer I didn't see fit 
to take issu with." 

"oh, my god." I felt like a knife had just plung into my back. "wa 
hi name barri morton? pleas tell me." 

"take the fifth on that one," he said cough again. "but you'v got 
primal instincts." 

I heard a nois outsid and sank lower in the chair. what wa I go 
to do now? 

"listen, do you have ani idea where steve is? they'r looking--" 

"no shit, madam sherlock. I had a long, deepli uninspir 
interrog by a coupl of upscal asshol who show up here in an 
armi jeep. they want to know where the fuck he was, when i'd sup 
with him last. let me inform you, love, you got my old heartstr 
buddi in some decid doo-doo." 

"I feel guilti enough about that as is, so stop." In spite of all alex 
goddard had done, I felt horribl about steve, like a self-involv 
witch. "but do you know where he is now?" 

"haven't the foggiest fuck idea, never heard of the jerk. shit, hang 
on." the line went silent, and I could feel my puls pounding. 

outsid the offic door, I heard footstep approach down the hall. 
please, god, please. but then they pass by, termin where the two 
soldier had been dozing. next I heard the tone of a solid 
dressing-down in profan spanish. 

"_tu here un pedaso de mierda!"_ 

then came a familiar voic from the receiver. I couldn't believ it. 

"morgy, whi in hell did you let alan take you up there by yourself?" 
hi tone had a sadness, and a deserv pique, that cut me to the core. 

I think I stop breathing. 

"oh, baby, thank god you'r . . ." I wa expect the door to burst 
open ani moment. men with ak-47's. "do you know the army' look 
for--?" 

"you'r complet nuts. I got halfway to beliz and call the motel 
to see how you were doing, and they told me you'd taken off with thi 
asshole. So I turn around and drove back here. It wa after midnight 
and the armi thug had just left. morgy, i'm come to get you. soon as 
the ga station open. I know a back road to mexico. we'v got to get 
out of thi fuck countri immediately." 

"don't tri to drive up. it' too dangerous. can you get alan to fli 
you? sarah' here and she' been turn into a space cadet. I don't 
know how i'm go to pri her away." I stop to tri to assembl my 
thoughts. "he' got soldier watch me. i'v got to smuggl her out 
somehow." 

I couldn't bring myself to tell him what wa realli go on. 

"let me talk to dupr a second. the fucker. I can't believ he did thi 
to you. but mayb we can come up with something. otherwise, I may just 
kill him with my bare hands." 

I heard a cough, which told me alan had been listen in on an 
extension. It teed me off, but then--h did have to be in on this. 
shit. the idea of reli on alan dupr for anyth . . . 

"well, do it fast. I broke into alex goddard' offic to use thi phone 
and . . . just hurry." 

"you got it." 

now the sound of firm, officer-lik boot step storm past the door, 
head out thi time, after which the two young soldier began berat 
each other in high-pitch spanish. 

"_hace falta tener cojones!_" 

"_hijo de tu chingada madre!_" 

more and more light wa creep through the slat windows. A glanc 
at my watch show the time to be six sharp, but the embassi wa no 
longer an option. 

"listen," steve said come back on, "there' some rain due for 
tonight, but he say he think we can try. He claim there' a clear 
about a quarter of a mile down a gravel road that goe south. with the 
rain as cover, mayb we can put down just after dark. think you can 
find a way to get sarah and meet us?" 

"i'm not even sure she can walk, at least not far, but we'll be there." 
I wa flash on her back in the square, proclaim her happiness. 
would I have to drag her out, carri her on my back? well, I would. 
"there' some kind of 'ceremony' on for tomorrow morning. the army' 
go to be here in doubl strength becaus of it, but mayb it'll make 
for some confus that'll help. still, she's--" 

"damn, thi is go to be big-tim dicey." 

"honey, let me tell you as much as I can about the layout of thi 
place. just in case." 

which I did. the main problem was, I didn't know exactli where sarah 
was. 

"i there anybodi there who could help you?" he ask when i'd finished. 

"i'm not hopeful." I paused. "listen, can you get your hand on a gun 
or guns?" 

"what are you . . . don't even think about it! that' the best way to 
guarante we all get killed. i'm not take on the guatemalan arm 
forces. and you'r not either. we'v got to keep thi veri low-tech. 
the dark and the rain, that' what we use. they don't shoot back." 

At that moment I want noth more than to shoot alex goddard. i'd 
have done it if i'd had the chance. happily. but I knew steve wa right. 

"okay, look, what time?" 

"we'll tri to set down about, say--" 

there wa a crackl as the yellow diod on the phone erupt in a 
high-pitch whistle, cut the connection. 

no! My god, had somebodi been listen in? 

So when exactli wa he coming? around dark? that would probabl be 
about eight o'clock. Or mayb nine . . . 

I wa close the phone case when I heard a sound from outside, as 
though someon had pass the door, then come back to listen. 

all right. get going. 

I gather the printouts, then head back through the laboratory, 
where I took a long, last look at the petri dish be incubated. 
should I just dump them now? but then he'd know for sure that I knew. 

the time would come, and soon. 

As I eas myself back into the fake-ston OR and close the door, the 
dawn outsid wa steep in forest sounds, clack and whistl and 
chirps. that wa good, becaus I need some stray nois to mask what I 
wa go to do next. take control. 




chapter twenty-f 


I began by feel along the fake-ston wall to find where the 
crevic were, the door that enclos the medic instruments. 
somewhere, I wa sure, there wa a cabinet that held a complet set of 
surgic equipment. 

when I found the first crevice, I gave the wall on either side a push 
and, sure enough, the panel wa spring-loaded. good. the side on the 
right of the crevic pop open to reveal the microscop goddard had 
used. but noth els wa there. 

I move on down the wall test for cabinets, tri to rememb what 
marcelina had done when alex goddard told her to prep the mayan woman. 
one after anoth the panel snap open till . . . yes, thi wa the 
one I wanted. hallelujah. 

the third drawer held the scalpels. I took out the largest I could 
find, heavi and steel, then wedg it into the metal slide mechan 
and snap off the tip. perfect. 

I felt like I wa hold the key to my escap as I care reclos 
all the panels. sinc there were no window in the OR room, I slip 
back through the lab--it had now becom a haunt place of monstrou 
obscen to me--and check out the office. 

It wa still deserted, but now the hazi light of earli day wa mingl 
with the sound of natur seep through the slat window. As I 
walk over to it, the cool, moist morn air onc again felt like 
freedom. how long did I have befor the clinic start stirring? 

i'd origin plan to tri to unscrew some of the slats, but that 
turn out to be unnecessary. the strip of wood were held in with 
crude, rusti clamps, and one by one I began pri them out with the 
blunt scalpel. I figur five slat should give me enough space to 
squeez through, and i'd alreadi remov three when I heard a 
frustrat voic in spanish just down the hail. uh-oh. 

"_tengo que mear que mi dient flotan!_" It wa follow by the sound 
of boot head toward the office. 

I duck down behind a desk, hold my breath, but then the footstep 
march past, head for the front door of the clinic. that wa when I 
final process what he'd said: "i'v got to piss so bad my teeth are 
floating." 

So where wa he headed? 

moment later I knew. I heard the nois of someon kick their way 
through the underbrush till they were right next to the window, 
follow by the sound of a zipper. 

My god, I thought, he' right here. will he spot the miss slats? 

I bit my lip as I listen to a member of the guatemalan arm forc 
vigor urin upon the north wall of alex goddard' clinic. well, 
I told myself, that' probabl what they think of him. i'd like to do 
the same. 

then came a confirm re-zip, after which the sound of slash boot 
fade back into the distance. If he'd notic the window i'd just 
burgled, it hadn't alert hi curiosity. moment later I heard hi 
heavi footstep return up the hall. 

jesus, two minut more and i'd have been out there. 

I wa trembling, but I manag to finish pri out the last two slats. 
I then push all five out onto the ground, hope the clatter would be 
lost in forest music, and climb through after them, tri to be as 
quiet as I could. I end up go out headfirst and collaps onto 
the ground in an unceremoni crumple. thirti second later, though, 
the slat were wedg roughli back into place, and i'd discard the 
broken scalpel in the jungl underbrush. yes! 

now the cool air of freedom wa all around me. My first small step. 

how long befor alex goddard discov i'm missing? will I have time to 
find sarah, bring her to her senses, and hide her from him? A lot would 
depend on what kind of physic and mental shape she wa in. 

As I pass around the park lot, gray cloud were thicken 
overhead and I notic that half a dozen new olive-green jeep were 
park there. the armi wa arriv in force, get readi for god 
know what. I took one look at them and felt my breath start come in 
bursts. steve, we'r go to need our own kind of miracle. how are we 
go to get out of here? 

I skirt the edg of the lot and reach the trail lead down into 
the village. and I wa tri to quell my pulse. what wa down there? 
with the dens rain forest arch over me, I felt as though I wa 
enter a domain of maya dreamtim where the past live again, onli 
with a sinist twist. 

the air in the dark grove wa thick with the buzz of insects, 
harbing of the come rainstorm, but befor long I caught a glimmer 
of daylight ahead. soon I emerg into a wide arbor that, after anoth 
hundr feet, open onto the central plaza and the pyramid. now . . . 

It wa daylight, but it also wa . . . the sight took my breath away. 
what wa go on? 

A mill hord of men wa gather in the square, and resin torch 
were flame on each of the pyramid' tier of steps. A lot of drink 
from clay jug wa get under way, and the men were in the process 
of paint their faces, stripe of black and white, with dark circl 
around their eyes. some also were appli row of 
red-and-green-color seed to their cheek with white glue. the 
bizarr of the scene rippl through me like the shard of a 
dysfunct dream. jesus! 

alex goddard had said the ceremoni got "frenzied," and now I wa 
begin to realize. . . . what were they get readi to do? had I 
been wrong in think the classic maya never got around to rip 
out hearts? did that explain the half-dozen young armi privat 
loiter there at the far side, rifl slung over their shoulders? 

I melt back into the tree and studi the geometri of the plaza, 
reconsid my situation. I need to find some way to get around it 
and onto the cobbleston pathway at the far side, which led into the 
village. final I decid I could skirt the peripheri if I wa care 
not to advertis my presence. dawn had come and gone and the quick 
light of tropic day wa arriving, but everybodi appear to be 
pre-occupi with their nightmarish preparations. 

thank god it worked. I weav in and among the tree and in five 
minut i'd reach the central pathway, now deserted. still bare 
let myself breathe, I turn back and gaze up at the pyramid. I 
had no idea what wa next, but I decid it would be my signpost, to 
help me keep my bear as I move through the confusing, 
tree-shroud hut of _baalum_. except for the men in the square, the 
villag now seem deserted, though a pack of brown dogs, curiou and 
annoying, had spot me and now circl around to sniff. don't bark, 
damn it. 

that wa when I saw marcelina, in her white shift, stride through the 
crowd of drink men like an alpha lioness part a postur pride. 
My god. My heart stop for a moment. doe alex goddard alreadi know 
i'v fled and ha he sent her to lure me back? 

No way. I clench my fist and kick at the surly, long-tail mutts, 
still circl and nuzzling. 

As she came closer, I saw she wa smile and carri a brown wicker 
basket. what. . . 

"i'v brought you something," she announc as she walk up, her dark 
eye oddli kind. "you must be starv by now." 

"how did you know I wa down here?" look at her earnest mayan face, 
I suddenli wonder if she could have ani idea what alex goddard had 
done to sarah, and to me? 

"you were gone from your room," she declared, settl the basket onto 
the walkway and begin to open it. "where els would you be?" when I 
looked, I saw it had a seal contain of yogurt, a banana, and two 
eggs, presum hard-boiled--tradit "safe" food for gringo in 
third world places. "i'd been plan to bring you down today," she 
went on. "they all want to meet you." 

wa she come to look after me? the more I examin her, the more I 
began to suspect someth els wa go on. would she help me get 
sarah out and away from alex goddard? 

"I want to find sarah," I said. whi not start out with the truth? "doe 
he . . . dr. goddard know i'm here?" 

"he' not here now," she said, her eye shift down. "he left for 
guatemala citi earli thi morning. I think to meet with the army. On 
business. . . ." 

yes. hi big humve hadn't been in the clinic' park lot when I went 
by. whi hadn't I notic that? for the first time I felt the odd were 
tipping. now wa go to be the perfect time to get sarah. yes. yes. 
yes. 

"if you want to see her, I can take you," marcelina offered, replac 
the lid on the basket. 

yes, perfect. I want to hug her. 

"then let' go right now" and while I wa at it, I wa determin to 
get through to thi woman somehow, to enlist her help. 

As we head down the central walkway of the village, we pass the 
row of compound where i'd seen the women that first morning. none wa 
in evid now, and the garden were empty, as though the entir 
settlement had been evacuated. It felt veri strange. 

and what about those bizarr proceed now under way in the square? 
wa that go to interfer with get sarah out? 

"marcelina." I point back toward the mill plaza. "what' that all 
about? the drink and the--?" 

"it' begun," she answered, both simpl and vague. "they'r get 
ready." 

I didn't like the way she said it. her tone seem to impli I wa 
involv somehow. 

"readi for--?" 

"the ceremony. they like to drink a tree-bark liquor we call _balche_. 
it' veri strong and rancid." she smile and touch me. "take my 
advic and avoid it." 

"I plan to." whi did she think i'd even be offer it? 

As we hurri along, two women abruptli appear on a porch, bowed, and 
greet us. marcelina wave back, then went over and spoke earnestli 
with them for a moment. final she turn and motion for me. 

"they'v invit you in." 

someth about the easi way it all just "happened" felt as though 
they'd been expect me. had marcelina' trip down to the villag been 
part of a setup, wittingli or unwittingly? 

"I told them we could onli stay for a minute," she went on. I sens 
she wa reluctant, but felt we had no choice. 

the last thing I want to do wa this. 

"marcelina, can't you tell them we'll come back later?" 

"it' . . . it' important." she wa beckon for me. "please." 

well, I thought, thi could give me the time I need, the person 
moment, to get through to her. even after I locat sarah, spirit her 
out isn't go to be simple. i'v got to make marcelina understand 
what' realli go on, then get her to help us. 

As we head through the yard, the women smiled, then polit led us 
under the thatch overhang and into the hut. they both were short and 
maya-sturdy, with white shift and broad faces, and they exud a 
confid intens in their bearing, a power sens of 
self-knowledge. I tri a phrase in spanish, but they just stare at me 
as though they'd never heard the language. then I rememb my first 
attempt to ask about sarah. the women hadn't understood me then either. 
Or had they? 

the room they usher us into had no windows, but there wa cool, 
shadowi morn light filter through the upright wooden slat of the 
walls, lay dim stripe across the earthen floor. A cook fire 
smolder in a central hearth, and from the smoke-blacken roof beam 
dangl dri gourds, bundl of tobacco, net bag of onion and 
squash, and sever leaf-wrap block of salt. the room smell of 
ancient smoke, sweet and pungent. 

they immedi produc a calabash bowl with a gray liquid inside, 
pronounc the word _atol _a they urg it on me, smile 
expectantly. 

"it' our special drink," marcelina explained. she seem to be wary, 
watch me close as they hand it over. "it' how we welcom an 
honor guest." 

I wasn't sure how polit I ought to be. third world food . . . 

"marcelina," I said, take the bowl and tri to smile. "i'm not 
really--" 

"you must have a little," she whisper back. "it would be veri rude. . 
. ." 

well, I thought, just a taste. I tri it and realiz it wa a dens 
gruel of cornmeal and honey-water, like a lukewarm gluey porridge, 
though with a bitter after-jolt. but I choke it down and tri to look 
pleased. marcelina urg me to have more--i took anoth small sip--and 
then they produc corn dumpl wrap in larg leaves, togeth 
with a pile of fieri chile and a bowl of squash, corn, and beans, all 
mix together. 

after one bite, though, marcelina reach out and--her eye 
downcast--whisk the bowl away, pass them back to the women. she 
said someth to them, then turn to me. 

"eat too much would be as rude as not eat at all." 

that wa a cultur norm I didn't remember, and I suspect she'd just 
chang her mind about the wisdom of my eat local food. 

I smile at the women and use some of my so-so spanish to offer them 
thanks. 

"_mucha gracias_." I nod toward the bowls. "_esta es muy 
delicioso_." 

they beam as though they understood me. who could say? but they'd 
been intens interest in watch me eat, even more than marcelina. 

work on her. now. 

"marcelina." I turn to her, onli vagu notic she hadn't had a 
bite. "do you understand whi dr. goddard move me down to the oper 
room yesterday? there in the clinic? what did he tell you?" 

"he said it wa for special tests." her voic wa gentl through the 
gloom. "you were veri . . . sleepy. you must have been very, veri 
tired. but he told me someth in your blood work wa unusual, so he 
had me bring you down for a pelvic exam. I gave you a sedative"--sh 
wa point at the band-aid still on my arm--"th way we alway do. 
but then he said you were fine." 

"do you realiz he did thing to my bodi I didn't agre to?" I studi 
her trust mayan face and tri to get a sens of how much she knew 
about what wa go on. that wa when I first becam sure of an 
increas disquiet in her eyes, as she kept glanc away. whi wa she 
so uncomfort talk about alex goddard? "and I think he did some 
of those same thing to sarah." 

"dr. goddard tri to help her in mani way when she wa here before." 
marcelina' tone had becom odd and distant. "now he want to help you 
too." 

yes, there wa definit someth uneasi in her eyes. 

"befor he came here," she went on, tri to look at me, "_baalum _wa 
just a poor, simpl village. mani children die of diseases. So I left 
and went to guatemala citi to study. To becom a public-health nurse. 
then after he came here, I move back to help him with hi clinic, the 
children." 

she wa tri to make a case for him, and I notic she'd avoid the 
actual question. 

"now _baalum _ha becom a special place," she said finally. "A place 
of miracles. and if a woman from outsid comes, she can be part of 
that. when sara wa here before, I start teach her to speak our 
language, and the other did too. she truli want to be part of hi 
miracles. sometim we don't understand how they happen, but he ha 
great medic powers." 

one thing' for sure, I thought. he' got plenti of power over the 
peopl here, includ you. the whole place ha been brainwashed. I 
look her over and realiz she'd just gone on mental autopilot. she 
want to be loyal to him, and she can't let herself believ there' 
someth rotten in the "special" paradis of _baalum_. 

"listen," I said, get up, "I need to go see sarah right now. her 
father' been in the hospital, and he' not well. I spoke with him 
yesterday, and he' veri worri about her. I know dr. goddard is 
treat her, but it' better if I just take her home immediately." 

more and more I wa begin to suspect thi detour for the two women 
had been a diversion, an attempt to stall. marcelina had set it up. 
mayb she want to tell me something, and she didn't have the nerv to 
do it point-blank. 

"famili are veri important," she said, sound sincere. "we'll go 
now." she spoke to the women briefly, an anim benedict that 
seem to leav her even more disturbed. As we head out and on down 
the path, I again wonder what wa realli happening. 

when we reach the end of the long "street," the arch arbor still 
abov us, she stop in front of an odd stone build unlik ani of 
the other and pointed. 

"thi is where she like to be," she said quietly. "except for the 
pyramid, it' the most sacr place in baalum." 

the doorway wa a stone arch about five feet high and point at the 
top like a tini gothic cathedral. 

"what . . . is this?" I felt as though I wa about to enter someth 
from the templ of doom. 

"it wa onc the royal bath," she explained. "in ancient time heat 
rock were brought in, with spring water from a sacr _cenote_." 

We walk through the portal and enter a room whose roof wa a stone 
latticework that let the gray daylight just filter through. the space 
wa vast, with carv and color glyph all around the walls, while 
the air wa fill with cloud of incens from pot along the floor. It 
felt like a smoki pagan church. 

At the far end wa a larg stone platform, and in the dappled, hazi 
light I could see it wa emboss along it side with carv and 
paint classic scene and glyphs, glisten littl red and green 
and blue pictur of face and figures. 

My eye final start adjust to the shadows, and I realiz the 
platform had been fit with a cover across the top, a jaguar skin 
over bundl straw, and a tini form wa lie on it, wear a white 
shift. . . . 

dear god. 

"morgy, i'v been so hope you'd come," sarah said, rise up and 
hold out her hands. then she slid her feet around onto the rough 
stone floor and manag to steadi herself. her shift wa wrinkl now, 
but she still wa wear the brown slipper and the braid leather 
waist-cinch. she appear sleepy, though her eye were sparkl and 
she seem to have more strength than she'd had when I first saw her 
out in the square. I look at her and weigh the chanc she could 
walk. possibly. but i'd carri her if I had to. 

"sar, honey, we'r go home now," I said, final find my voice. 

she didn't respond at first, just turn to caress the decor side 
of the platform. "i'v been want to show you this, morgy. It tell 
my story." her voic sound as if it were come from a long way off, 
as though through a dens haze. 

"please, we don't have time for stories." wa she hear me at all? 
"let' just--" 

"see," she went on, ignor me as she point down, "that' the cosmic 
monster, that one there with maiz sprout out of hi forehead. and 
that man next to him with a flint knife is my father, let blood 
from hi penis. he' the king. and that one there is me, ladi jaguar. 
He gave my name to thi place." she paus to rever touch the 
carv stone. "look, i'v just stuck a stingray spine through my tongu 
and put my blood in the _copal_ censer there." 

"sar, please--" 

"here, see it?" she wa point to a section at the veri end. "that' 
the two-head vision serpent up abov me. he' the god kukulkan . . . 
or something. i'v made him come to me by give him my blood. i'm--" 

"sar, what in heaven' name is go on with you?" I grab her and in 
spite of myself, shook her. jesus! the whole scene left me in shock. 
she wa sink back deeper into her fantasi world. wa she take the 
drug again, I wonder and fantas she wa some dead mayan 
princess? please, god no. 

that wa when I saw marcelina walk over to a shelf along the wall and 
lift down anoth clay-pot incens burner, along with a small white 
brick. what--? 

"oh, yes!" sarah exclaim move quickli over to her. "let' do it for 
morgy." 

marcelina nod warili and hand her the white brick, then turn to 
me. "she like to do incense. It alway calm her. thi is _copal_, 
what the shaman use." 

I watch while sarah shakili began crumbl piec of the sticki 
substanc into the pot. My god I thought, she' truly, truli lost it. 
next she insert dri tinder and began tri to knock spark into it 
with a piec of hard black jade and a flint. but she wa too weak, and 
final marcelina had to take the flint and do it for her. then, as the 
gray smoke start billow out, marcelina began a long chant, shrill 
and strang melodic. I felt a chill creep down my back. when she 
finish she turn her dark eye on me sadly, waiting. 

"what were you saying?" I ask finally, sens she want me to. 

"I wa sing from the popol vuh." then she translated. 



_holi earth, giver of life, 

help us in our struggl against 

the god of the hous of darkness. 

_ 

wait a minute. what' she saying? 

"who' the god of the hous of darkness?" could she be talk about 
alex goddard? 

"I didn't want to do it," she blurt out, reach out to me, her eye 
even sadder. "but he said you'r the new special one. We had to." 

what the hell wa she talk about? had to what? did it have someth 
to do with my "visit" to the women in the hut? 

"pleas stay here with us," she plead as she took my hand. "don't go." 

stay? don't even think about it. I had sarah halfway to freedom. while 
the armi wa still get it act together, we could lose ourselv 
someplac in the forest where nobodi would find us, and when steve got 
here tonight . . . 

"sar, come on, it' time." I pull away from marcelina and slip my 
arm around her. "noth here is what you think it is." 

"are we leaving?" she asked, her eye blank. 

"yes, honey, we'r leaving. thi veri minute." 

the dens forest wa all about us, and i'd just carri her into it if I 
had to. In the come storm, nobodi wa go to find . . . 

that' when I notic I wa begin to have gastric rumblings. damn. 
never, ever eat "native" food, no matter what the social pressure. that 
damn "visit" . . . 

when I turn to ask marcelina if she would help me get sarah outside, 
I notic she'd been join by the two women, both still in their white 
shifts, who'd just fed me the sickli 

sweet _atole_. and more women were behind them, all stare at me, 
expectant, as though wonder what I would do. 

mayb it wa my imagination, or the dizzi that wa abruptli grow 
around me, but it also seem they'd paint their face with streak 
of white, design like the men in the squar were put on. 

"she' go to be all right," marcelina wa saying. "but we have to 
get you back now. you'll need your strength." 

I need it then. My stomach had realli begun to gyrate, and my vision 
had start grow colored. I notic I wa sweating, even though the 
day wa cool down. actually, I felt as though I wa about to pass 
out. what had those women fed me? 

It wa final dawn on me that marcelina' fear back in the 
hut had noth to do with betray alex goddard. It wa becaus she 
knew she wa betray me. 

well, damn her, i'm not go to let alex goddard win, no matter what. 

"marcelina, pleas help me. i'v got to get sarah out of here. now. I 
don't know what poison drug he' give her, but he' drive her 
insane." 

"we'll take care of her," she said. but I could bare make out the 
words. they echo bounc around in my head. 

"i'm realli get dizzy." I glanc over again at the women stand 
by the door. "pleas tell me what they--?" 

"the elixir," she said. "for tomorrow at sunup. that' when you'll see 
hi real power." 

i'd begun experienc white spot befor my eyes--and for some reason 
I had a vision of the armi jeep park up the hill. I didn't know how 
the two were connect but in my jumbl thought they seem to be. 

just get sarah and get out into the air. walk, don't think, and you can 
do it. . . . 

I pull her next to me and struggl toward the door, the women 
studi us, unmoving. 

"morgy, i'v miss you so much," sarah wa saying, slip her arm 
around my neck to help herself walk. "i'm . . . i'm readi to go home." 

"i'v miss you too." I think my heart wa burst as I urg her on 
through the stone portico. At last. had someth click that freed 
her from alex goddard? mayb her mind wa final becom her own. 

when we got outside, the sky were grow ever more foreboding, storm 
cloud looming. steve had been right about the come rain, but now it 
seem the perfect cover for us to just get out. I took a deep breath 
of the misti air and forc myself to start help sarah up the 
cobbleston path. 

"sar, you can walk, I know you can. Be strong. for both of us. i'm . . 
." 

I felt myself sink slowli to the cold stone of the walkway, the 
hard abras against my knees, sarah tumbl forward as I pull her 
down on top of me, marcelina' arm around me tri to hold me up. It 
wa the last real sensat I would remember. 




chapter twenty-six 


sarah wa hover around me, a sylphlik presence, as I watch myself 
drift up the step of the pyramid there in the square, my sens wax 
and wane like the wave on a distant ocean shore. there seem to be 
rain, or fog, or smoke, but it had a luminous, purpl cast one moment, 
a day-glo orang the next. In fact, all the color were swirl and 
changing, shimmer from hue to hue. A pack of howler monkey wa 
cavort up and down the step on my left, like circu harlequin in 
electr red-and-blu suits, do pratfal and huf as they flew 
through the air and tumbl one over another. 

sarah wa float silent besid me, but where wa steve? had he 
come? were we escaping? 

no. I sens hi face drift across my sight like a cartoon cloud 
befor dissolv into nothingness. He wasn't here. I wa have the 
eeriest dream i'd ever had. 

when I reach the stone-pav platform at the pinnacle, I felt alex 
goddard clasp my arm and turn me around to face the plaza below. 

"they are waiting," he said, point toward the hazi square. 

I look down, and at first I couldn't see anyth except rain and 
smoke, but then slowli a crowd materialized. the scatter of men i'd 
seen earlier had becom an undul sea of upturn face paint 
with stripe and swirl circl of blue and white and red, a 
torch-lit garden of brilliant blossoms. they all were look up at us, 
at sarah and me. 

next he held out a mirror whose reflect surfac wa a polish 
silver metal. 

"behold yourself, morgan. As befit a royal one, a special one, your 
nose ha been built up with clay and pierc with lustrou blue 
feather and a giant topaz. your front teeth have been file to a point 
and inlaid with jewels, your royal skull ha been shape back and 
flattened." 

I gaze into the mirror and gasped. I wa monstrous, a halloween harpy. 

then he move over to a waist-high censer station there on the edg 
of the platform and began ad ball of sticki white _copal_ resin, 
togeth with bark and grasses, which he ignit by the quick friction 
of a fire stick spun by a bow. 

final he turn to me and held out hi hands. "now we will make a 
miracle, the miracl of _baalum_." 

heavi smoke from the censer wa pour out into the raini sky as we 
start a stiff _pa de deux_, the strain of a clay flute drift 
around us. wa it the "ceremony"? wa I dream it? 

As the incens billowed, our maya dreamtim danc becam ever more 
intense, and then a faint form began to writh up out of the haze 
between us, an undul serpent the deep color of jade. As alex 
goddard wrap hi arm around it, it began to form into two dark 
heads, then pirouett abov us. finally, as the two-head specter 
open it mouth and gaze down on the platform, sarah step toward 
it and held out her arms. 

"sar, no!" 

I scream to her to get back, but as I did, the . . . thing reach 
down and swallow her in flames. It wa the vision-serp come to 
receiv her. 

"sarah . . ." 

"can you get up now?" said a voice, cut through the haze that 
envelop my consciousness. At first I thought it wa more of the 
dream, but then someon wa touch me and I open my eye to see 
marcelina stand besid the bed I wa in, dress in white and 
hold a candle. for a moment I thought I wa still atop the raini 
pyramid but then I felt the moist of the sheet and realiz the 
storm Id been dream of wa be blown in through the slat of the 
windows. I wa shivering. 

"marcelina, where' sarah?" the nightmar had seem so real, and now I 
wa hallucinating, have flash of color I didn't want to see. "I 
just had the most horribl dream. I wa on the pyramid and there wa 
smoke, rain and some kind of ghastly--" 

"it' the elixir. from the toad. It make you dream dream of the old 
ones." she took my hand. "she' rest now. He gave her someth to 
calm her." 

more drugs, I thought angrily. 

then I caught the "he." alex goddard must be back. everyth had gone 
wrong. 

"i'v got to get her and--" 

"not now," marcelina went on, help me up. "come. I want to show you 
the true miracl of _baalum_. now is the time you should know." 

the upstair hallway wa dimli illumin by row of light along the 
floor as she led me forward. there also wa total silence, except for 
the occasion whimper of a babi in one of the rooms. where wa she 
take me? 

when she stop in front of the third door from the end of the hall, I 
tri to get my mental bearings. I wa still hallucinating; in control 
of onli half my mind to the point where I wasn't sure I could find my 
hand in front of my face. but then she tap on the door and when she 
heard a voic inside, someth in the kekchi dialect, she gentli 
push it open. 

when we move inside, the room wa dark and there wa no sound, except 
a gasp from the bed when the woman realiz I wa a gringo. the dim 
slant of illumin from the doorway reveal a small night lamp just 
abov the head of her bed, and marcelina reach for it. 

As the light came on, a pale glow fill the room, I notic the woman 
wa stare at me, her eye wide and frightened. 

"she' afraid you'v come for her child," marcelina whispered, point 
toward the bassinet. "she know we have to give him back." 

the woman wa pure maya, a power visag straight off that upright 
stele in the square. I walk over and took her hand, hope to calm 
her fears. then I lift her hand to my cheek and realiz my face wa 
moist with tears. I held it there for a long moment, till the alarm in 
her eye diminished. 

her newborn infant wa sleep quietli in a crib right next to her, on 
the opposit side from the table. when I look close at him, I 
final understood everything. 

I laid her hand back onto the bed and walk around. while the woman 
watched, I pull away the strip red and green coverlet and lift 
out her groggi littl boy, tender and vulnerable. 

He made a baby' protest as I cradl him, then began sleepili probe 
my left breast, make me feel sad I had no milk. 

"it' okay," I whispered, first to him and then to hi mother. "_esta 
bien_." 

"_tz'ac tzotz_," the woman said, point at him. I could feel her 
deep, matern love. 

"hi name?" I ask in english, befor I thought. 

when marcelina translated, the woman smile and nodded. 

then the blond-hair tz'ac tzotz start to sniffle, so I kiss him 
gently, turned, and took the woman' hand again. there wa noth els 
I could do. 

tz'ac tzotz wa sarah incarnate. thi wa no hallucination. He had her 
special blue eye and her steep cheeks, her high brow. I wa hold 
her child. 

"they are sent from kukulkan," marcelina wa saying, "the white god of 
the plume serpent. then there' the ceremoni on the pyramid and they 
go back." 

the woman wa stare at me, seemingli awestruck. then she point at 
tz'ac tzotz and at me, say someth to marcelina. final the woman 
bow her head to me with great reverence. 

"she say he look so much like you," marcelina explained. "you are 
sure the special one. the new bride." 

I wa still speechless, but then I notic the babi had a littl silver 
jaguar amulet tie around hi wrist with a silken string, and on the 
back--a on kevin' and rachel's--wer row of line and dots. 

It final dawn on me. they were digits, written in the archaic maya 
script. what could they be, mayb hi birthday? no, I realized, that 
wa far too simplistic. thi wa the origin bar code; it wa hi 
_baalum _"serial number." 

for a long moment it felt as if time had stopped. sarah, and now 
me--we'd been lure here to provid the life forc for mayan surrog 
mothers. thi whole elabor recreat wasn't about rainforest drug 
and research into fertility; it wa just a cover to use the bodi of 
these intens believ nativ americans. alex goddard had 
perpetr the greatest systemat exploit of anoth race sinc 
slavery. the differ was, he'd found a way to get them to give 
themselv willingly. 

_baalum_ wa definit a place of miracles. there could scarc be 
anoth isol spot on earth where he could find thi mani sincere, 
trust peopl with power belief he could prostitute. and all of 
it hidden deep in an ancient rainforest. 

but I had to be sure. I turn around, leav marcelina to watch in 
confusion, and march out into the hall and into the next room. the 
maya mother there cri out in shock as I unceremoni strode over 
to her crib and checked. 

her babi wa the same. sarah stamp all over him. My god. 

when I went back, marcelina wa still tri to calm tz'ac tzotz' 
mother with her bedsid manner. 

As I stood look at them, the extent of what wa go on final 
settl in. all those new babi at quetzal manor, even kevin and 
rachel--they all look alik becaus they all were from the same 
woman. the one who wa here befor sarah. and now her were ready. 

I wa go to be next. the new "bride." those fresh petri dish down 
in the lab . . . My god, whi didn't I destroy them when I had the 
chance? 

So whose sperm would he use? Of course. It would be from the man alan 
dupr wa go to deliv to him. 

"marcelina, don't you realiz what' happening?" I want to pound some 
sens into her. they didn't have to let him do thi to them. 

"I know that with miracl must come sadness," she said, reach to 
touch tz'ac tzotz' tini brow. "we all understand that." 

"it' not a miracle. it' science, don't you realize? _ciencia_. he' 
use you." 

"we know he doe mani thing that are magic. He make power 
medicin from the plant we bring him, and when women want to bear a 
child--" 

"no, marcelina." I felt my heart go out to her, and to all the others. 
"it' black magic. it' all a lie." 

the first thing to do wa go down to the laboratori and dump everi last 
one of my petri dish into the sink, ova and all. destroy the nest, 
then call steve and warn him. . . . 

I glanc at my watch. no! the time wa 4:58 a.m. He wa come at nine 
o'clock last night. . . . 

I wa stand there in horror, unnatur color flit across my 
vision, when I heard . . . 

"it' almost morning." 

I jump as alex goddard walk into the room, dress in white, hair 
fall around hi shoulders. He took tz'ac tzotz from hi crib, 
check the number on hi amulet, and then absent put him back. next 
he examin me, hi eye brim with concern. 

"how'r you feeling?" He place hi hand on my brow. when I look 
around for marcelina, I realiz she'd vanished. 

"where' steve?" I felt the bottom drop out of my world, my whole 
bodi trembling. "if you'v harm so much as a hair on hi head, i'll--" 

"he' here," he said quietly. 

"I want to see him." dear god, what had I done? I want to die. 

"he' been given someth to help him rest. are you sure you want to 
disturb him?" 

"I told you I want to see him." I could bare get out the words. "now." 

"if you insist. he' just downstairs." 

We slowli walk down the marbl steps, my mind flood with more and 
more hallucinations. when we reach the first floor, he open the 
door of a room adjac to hi office. I realiz the window slat were 
open, send a rush of moist air across my face. then he motion me 
forward and click on the bedsid light. 

steve wa there on the bed, comatose. I walk over and lift hi 
upper torso, then cradl hi head in my arms. baby, I love you. pleas 
forgiv me. please. 

hi eye were firmli shut and he didn't stir in the slightest. He wa 
in a deathlik stupor, and there were larg bruis on hi face and a 
bandag across hi nose. then hi bed shift fell open and I notic 
anoth bandag on hi groin. 

"you'v alreadi done it!" I whirl back, readi to kill the bastard. 

"a I said, he wa inject with a mild sedative." He had walk over 
and start take steve' pulse. "given the . . . condit he wa in, 
I decid to go with the simplest procedur possible. after he wa 
brought in, I made a small incis in the _va deferen _and extract 
a substanti quantiti of motil sperm." He wa turn down the 
lights. "don't worry. i'v perform the procedur before. the last wa 
a swedish tourist who wa in a car accid up by lake atitlan and then 
lay in a coma in guatemala citi for week on end." 

I listen to him, my mind racing. i'd thought kevin and rachel look 
nordic, big and blond. that swede must have been their father. 

"those ova of mine you took, the way you stole sarah's, and all the 
other women you'v brought here--y don't use them for research." 

"I have ampl leftov embryon materi here for that." He start 
help me onto the bed next to steve. now hi face wa undul 
through my vision, as though I were see it in a wavi mirror. "pleas 
understand, it' veri expens to run a laboratori up here. but the 
good i'm doing--" 

"you'r a criminal." I rememb the frighten eye of the women 
upstair and felt myself seeth with anger. 

"no! I am, in my special way, give them back a small part of what 
they had taken away by peopl exactli like us. i'm provid them 
proof, live proof, their truth are still powerful." 

He stroll over to the window and look out. "the women come to me 
for my bless whenev they hope to bear a child. they know that if 
they wish, I can caus their first child to be a descend of their 
white deiti kukulkan. for them it is a sacr event." 

"they believ that?" It wa sickening. I felt a knot grow in my 
stomach, even as my hallucin flash ever bolder, bright rainbow 
that flit about the room, then wound themselv around me. 

"A great philosoph onc said, all religion are true.' who are we to 
judge?" He paused. "let me tri and explain something. those pattern 
you see the women weav on the fabric down in baalum, those pattern 
are actual just like the design on that thousand-year-old pyramid. 
but though that pyramid had been buri and lost to them for so mani 
years, they still made the design all those years, becaus those 
symbol are a road map of their unseen world. not the forest here where 
we are now, but their real world, where the god dwell who rule the 
lightn bolts, the germin of corn." He wa at the door, 
prepar to leave, but he paused. "they also understand the . . . 
special infant who come are miracl that must be returned. they 
receiv but they also must give. now they wish you to be part of that." 

with that he close the door with a swing of hi long hair, a slam 
follow by a hard click. 




chapter twenty-seven 


As I watch him depart, hallucin swirl through my brain like 
furiou fireworks, I had a bizarr thought. In an ancient rainforest 
all thing are still possible. the old fairi tale we grew up with 
mostli took place in a deep wood where evil could lurk unfettered. 
today, though, the earth' forest no longer symbol the unknow 
dark within us. nowadays, the ogr of our nightmar descend from 
outer space or even from our inner selves, place we can't physic 
know or subdue. here, though, at thi veri moment, steve and sarah and 
I were maroon in a thousand-year-old forest where horror still lived. 

I got off the bed and steadi myself, breath deeply, forc my 
brain to clear. steve wa wear a shift, but hi cloth were hang 
from a hook on the door. for a long moment I just stare at the bruis 
on hi face. 

"god, baby, what did he do to you?" 

No answer. 

"come on, love. pleas wake up." 

He didn't move, but hi breath wa normal, not labored. I 
immedi decid i'd slap him around if I had to, anyth to get 
him go and abl to walk. 

"honey, wake up. please." I pull hi feet out of the bed and slid 
them around and onto the linoleum floor. I didn't know what kind of 
sed he'd been inject with, but if I had to shake him out of it, 
fine. thi wa no time for half measures. "come _on_." 

I pull him to hi feet and drag him across the floor to the 
slat window at the rear of the room, where the predawn sound of the 
forest beyond fill the air, mingl with the rain. what I need wa 
a gallon of black coffee, but the wet breez would have to do. 

It took ten minut of work on him, with me bare abl to hold a 
grasp on my own reality, but then hi eyelid began to flutter. I kept 
talk to him, plead and badgering, and when he final start 
come around, I began to walk him back and forth in front of the 
window. 

steve, I thought, i'm so sorry, so terribl sorri I drag you into 
this. 

"can I pleas lie down?" hi timor voic startl me, but it gave me 
a burst of hope. come _on_. 

"baby, just walk a littl more. tri to get the blood flow and flush 
the damn chemic out of your brain." 

"morgy, are you okay?" hi eye had final start to focus. and the 
first thing he ask about wa _me_. I impuls hug him. 

"i'm go to be." I pull back and examin him. "you know where you 
are?" 

He grin with onli half hi face, and I could tell even that hurt. 
then he stare around the room. 

"tell you one thing," he said, "thi ain't kansa anymore. last thing I 
rememb is, alan and I were set down. then out of nowhere, your 
colonel ramo and about twenti kid soldier with ak-47' were all over 
us." He groaned. "they took me and then he told dupr to get back in 
the chopper and disappear. I think that son of a bitch tip ramo off 
we were coming. then ramo work me over and gave me an injection. 
about five minut later I pass out. it' the last thing I remember." 

ramos. wa he go to kill us both, now that alex goddard had gotten 
everyth he wanted? I thought about it and decid thi wa not the 
moment to share that possibl with steve. instead I turn him 
around and lift up hi head. 

"are you realli awake?" I love thi poor, beat-up man. more than 
anything, I just want to hold him. 

"i'm not . . . but i'd damn well better be." He tri unsteadily, to 
straighten up. "morgy, befor he put me away, that ramo bastard wa 
talk about me, and you, in the past tense. like we'd alreadi been 
'disappeared.' He didn't know I speak spanish. what the hell' go 
on?" 

I wasn't sure how to tell him. but I wa get that super energi god 
give you when you realiz life is no longer a game. We had to get 
focused. 

"baby, where' your passport?" I asked. 

He look around then point to hi batter camera bag in the corner. 

"it' in there. Or was. central america. never leav home without it." 
He grimac then lightli push me away and stood by himself. "jesus, 
do you know what they'r doing? you were right all along. they'r 
sell kid in the states. that ramo prick is run the operation, 
not to mention alex goddard' slice of the action. and somebodi at the 
american embassi here is handl all the paperwork, so they can greas 
everyth through the ins. but I still don't understand how it is 
we're--" 

"honey, I know exactli what' happening." i'd long sinc figur out 
that alex goddard and colonel ramo were work hand in glove. but I 
still couldn't bring myself to tell him how he and I were go to be 
used. It wa just too sick. "listen, not long from now I think i'm 
suppos to be taken down there to the villag for some kind of rite, 
as part of thi whole disgust operation, and then after that he' 
go to use . . . you don't want to hear. we've--" 

"you know, ramo and a bunch of g-2 thug are here to take away a batch 
of littl kids," he rambl on, not seem to hear anyth I wa 
saying. He wa off in hi own world, tri to sort out thing in hi 
head. "but what I can't figur is, how can they just take children from 
here and nobodi tri to stop them? are these _indigena_ so 
terrified--?" 

"listen, please." now my hallucin were return in spite of all 
I could do, trail of light that glimmer off all the object in the 
room, and I didn't know how much longer i'd be coherent. i'd have to 
talk fast. "we'v got to get sarah befor daylight. she' down in the 
village. I tri to get her out of there yesterday, but--" 

"i she okay?" He stare at me and hi eye clear for a moment. "I 
mean, is she abl to--?" 

"no, she' not okay. she' hallucin wors than ever. i'm sure he' 
give her more drugs. realli heavi stuff." 

"so how--?" 

"hopefully, we'r go right thi minute. there' a river. but if that 
doesn't work out, there' someth I can do to buy us a month' time. 
alex goddard' got a laboratori here, just down the hall, in back of 
hi office. it' the evil center of thi place. So if I can get in 
there and dump all hi petri dishes, hi in-vitro cultur medium . . . 
baby, it' all so disgusting. but i'm go to take care of it." 

I wa start to have real troubl just string word togeth into 
sentences. My hallucin were still growing, the loud whisper of 
light, but I did manag to tell him how I thought we could get sarah 
and elud the army, if we did it befor sunup, though my plan probabl 
came out pretti jumbled. yet I felt that if we did it together, we 
could take care of each other. . . . 

then, with my remain strength, I launch into action. 

"let me check the hall. I just want to shut down hi lab. call it . . . 
call it insurance. five minutes, and then we'll be out of here." 

It also would be a kind of justice, to even the score for what he'd 
done to sarah and to me. 

I lean steve back against the wall, then walk slowli across the 
tile floor to the door and test it. surprise, surprise, it wa 
locked. I again tri the knob, an old one, then again, but it wouldn't 
budge, just wiggl slightly. he'd lock us in. 

now what? 

then I rememb the time steve and I were in a similar situation. 
when we got lock in my room at the oloffson in port-au-prince, he'd 
just taken hi swiss armi knife and unscrew the knob, then click it 
open. he'd made it look like a piec of cake, but he had a way of do 
that. 

He wa bare conscious, so thi time i'd have to do it myself. I 
glanc around at hi bag. 

"i your swiss still in there?" 

"I think . . ." hi mind seem to be wandering. then he gave a weak 
thumbs-up. 

I went over and zip it open. Be there, I prayed. We realli could use 
a break. 

I rummag through telephoto lens and film canist and underwear. 
then I found it, zip insid a water-repel baggi and stuck in a 
side pouch. 

I snap it open and went to work, him watch me, hi head nod 
as he struggl to stay conscious. 

the main differ between thi time and haiti was, here I didn't know 
what wa on the other side and I wa have hallucin of 
multicolor snakes. 

"you'r do great," he said finally, seem to come a bit more alive. 

and I was. out with the screws, off with the knob, in with the small 
blade, and click. mayb we just think men' mechan skill are 
genet hard-wired. mayb it' all a secret plot to elicit awe. 

I close the knife and shove it back into hi bag, then turn to him. 

"honey, i'm just go to be a second. while i'm gone, practic 
walking." 

"be careful, please." He gave a cautionari wave. "they don't want us 
leav here alive." 

"just get ready." I quietli pull back the door and peer out into 
the dark hallway. It wa empty, abandoned, no snakes, with onli a light 
breez flow through. 

when I step out, the fresh air hit my face and I had a moment of 
intens that made me realiz what I realli want to do, first and 
foremost, wa see tz'ac tzotz one last time. A last farewel to one of 
sarah' children. stupid, yes, a privat folli of the heart, but I had 
to do it. 

I wa halfway down the hall, experienc flash of color befor my 
eyes, when I heard a voice. 

"they'r all pray for you. it' almost time." 

I turn back, startled, bare abl to see. final I made out 
marcelina, in her white shift. We were stand a few feet from the 
stairs, where I want to go, and I wa tripping, my realiti almost 
gone. I think she knew that, becaus she reach out to help me stand. 

"marcelina, where' sarah?" I grasp her hand, which help me to keep 
my balance. "i she still down there in that . . . place?" 

"she' been so look forward to the ceremony. she want them to bring 
her--" 

"you don't know where she is?" I realiz noth wa go to go the 
way i'd hope it would. 

"they all love her. they'r take good care of her." 

"well, I love her too. and I have to get her. now." I wa whisper to 
her, tri to save my strength. "marcelina, promis me you'll stop all 
this. it' so horrible. So sad." 

"it' our life," she whisper back, then turn her face away. 

I didn't know what els to say, and I wa terrifi alex goddard might 
materialize, so without anoth word, I pull away and start up the 
steps. 

when I reach the top of the stairs, the hallway wa light by the 
string of bulb along the floor, and I made my way as fast as I could 
to my room at the end. I pull my passport out of my bag, along with a 
charg card, slip them both into my pant pocket, and head back 
down the hall. 

when I got to the door of the room where tz'ac tzotz and hi mother 
were, I gave it a gentl push and peer in, but the glow from the lamp 
abov the bed show it and the crib were both empty. . . . 

no! they must have alreadi taken the children. next they'd be come 
for me. I realiz i'd been a fool not to head straight for the lab. I 
should have just gone-- 

the room went complet dark, togeth with the hallway, a pitch-black 
that felt like a liquid wash over me. the main power, somewhere, had 
abruptli died, or been deliber shut off. 

then I heard a thunder of footstep pound up the steps, hard boot 
on the marble. 

I made a dash, hope to slip past them in the dark hall. 

i'd reach the top of the stair when I felt a hand brush against my 
face, then a grip circl around my biceps. somebodi had been too quick. 

I brought my elbow around hope to catch him in the face, bring him 
down, but instead it slam against someth metal, which clatter 
onto the floor. 

"_chingado_!" came a muffl voice. 

I drew back and swung, and thi time my arm scrape hard against the 
flesh of a face and the bastard stagger backward hi grip loosening. 

I twist away and drop to the floor to begin search for what had 
fallen. sure it wa a pistol. 

the marbl wa cold against my bare arm as I swept my hand across the 
floor. then I ran my finger down the edg of the stair. 

and there it was, on the first step. My left hand close around the 
cold barrel of an automatic. I shift it to my right, grasp the 
plastic grip, not entir sure what I should do with it. but at least 
I had a gun. i'd never actual held a real one before, but it wa 
heavi and I assum it wa readi to fire. 

I wa halfway down the first set of stairs, on my way to the landing, 
when I felt an arm slip around my neck. I duck and twist away, 
stumbl down the last three or four steps, and land on my feet, 
stagger back against the wall to regain my balance. all I knew was, 
the next step loom somewher to my right. just a few more feet . . . 

but he wa there again, move between me and the final stairs. get 
around him, I told myself, but at that moment he grab me at the 
waist. 

danc in the dark, but the swirl had no music and no swing, just a 
quick, dizzi pirouette. I aim the pistol as close as I could to 
hi face and pull the hard metal trigger. 

"_mierda!_" 

blind light, a face lost in the burst of flame, star fill my 
head. the fieri explos tongu out past hi ear like a brilliant 
sword of red and yellows, send a round off into space. the nois 
left a ring in my ear and multicolor hue stutter across my 
eyes. 

It hit me who i'd just seen. It wa ramos. with a gun! shit. 

the flash of my pistol had given me the advantag for a second, sinc I 
knew it wa coming, and with that edg I swung an elbow across hi 
chin, then kneed him in the groin. It should have been enough to bring 
him down, but instead he mere sank to one knee and redoubl hi grip. 

hey, I thought, mayb I know someth he doesn't. how to take a fall. 
i'd seen enough movi stunt to know what you'r suppos to do. it'd 
be risky, but I knew I wasn't go to win a wrestl match. 

I open up with the automatic, fire everywher again and again and 
again, get off five round in a crescendo of light and sound, like 
a huge firecrack in my hand, enough to illumin the stairwel like 
a strobe and catch him off guard. In that fleet moment I slip a 
foot behind hi ankl and shoved. 

I think I yell as I felt myself be pull forward. then I realiz 
he wa wear a heavi bracelet that had tangl in my hair. i'd been 
plan to roll down the remain stairs, protect my head, and let 
him bounce, but the pull of hi bracelet ruin it. I felt myself be 
swept into empti space, my gun fli away. 

then someth glanc off my face, the wooden banist of the stair, 
which had mysteri come up to meet me. I turn and felt hi bodi 
beneath mine, arm flailing, a soft landing, till we roll and I wa 
beneath him again. 

I struck out, a right fist, and he fell away, hi bracelet 
disentangl as he tumbl farther down the stairs. then I rose and 
tri to take a step, but it wasn't there. In the pitch dark the angl 
wa wrong, off by just inches, and as I toppl forward into empti 
space I reach out, take a hand of dark air. 

final I felt someth clench my wrist, and the next 

thing I knew I wa be swung around. I twist sideway one last 
time, but then my head hit the wall. the hard marbl caught me just 
abov the ear, and I saw the dark of the space grow brilliantli 
light, then transmut to vibrant colors. 

Or mayb the hall light had come back on. I onli know I felt a set of 
arm encircl me. 

"come," alex goddard wa say as he lift me up. "they'r ready." 




chapter twenty-eight 


when we reach the park lot, sever more armi thug were waiting, 
grown-up now, khaki shirt and dens mustaches, the regul g-2 
sunglass even though it wa still dark, with 9mm automat in 
holster at their belt. I took one look at them and I think I black 
out. steve and I were about to "disappear," and possibl sarah too. 
probabl in anoth hour or two. My tatter mind final just slip 
away. 

soon afterward, I sens myself be transport in a larg vehicle, 
and after that I wa be carried, up, up, as though I were float 
into the come dawn. when I regain consciousness, I realiz I wa 
stand in a rainstorm near a small stone building. A dozen armi men 
were huddl inside, shield their cigarett from the blow rain 
while they guard a row of olive-green bassinets. around me, censer 
were spew _copal_ smoke into the soggi air. 

I becam awar of the cool sensat of the fresh rain across my 
face, and wonder if it might clear some of the toad venom (sure 
that wa what it was) from my brain. mayb it wa working. instead of 
see vivid color everywhere, I wa abruptli experienc a hyper 
acut clariti of everi sensation. the stone beneath my bare feet were 
becom so articulated, I felt as though I could number everi granule, 
everi crystal, everi atom. the paint and carv on the lintel 
abov the door to the stone room--i recogn it as where i'd spent 
the first night--sparkled, leapt out at me. 

"stand there on the edg of the platform," alex goddard commanded, 
urg me forward. It wa onli then I realiz we'd come up the back 
step of the pyramid, where the g-2 men had park their black land 
rovers, unnot and ready. 

look down at the crowd of peopl gather in the square, I realiz 
they couldn't realli see much of what wa go on atop the pyramid. To 
them it wa just a cloud of _copal_ smoke and foggi rain. although the 
sun wa start to brighten the east, the onli real light still came 
from the torch station around the plaza. 

then like a ghost materi out of the mist, marcelina move up the 
steep front steps, lead a line of maya mother from the clinic--i 
count twelve--each carri her newborn, the "special" babi she would 
give back to kukulkan, perhap the way abraham of the old testament 
offer up hi son isaac in sacrific to jehovah. It wa a sight I 
shall never forget, the sad but also the unmistak rever in 
their eyes. I want to yell at them to run, to take sarah' votiv 
babi and disappear into the forest, but I didn't have the words. 

next the women array themselv in a line across the front of the 
pyramid, face not the crowd below, but toward alex goddard and me. 
then, hold out a jade-handl obsidian knife, he walk down the 
line, allow each woman to touch her forehead against it flint 
blade. I assum each one believ it wa the instrument that would 
take her child' life, ceremoni send it back to the maya 
otherworld whenc it came. had he drug them too, I fleetingli 
wondered, hypnot them or given them some potion to prevent them 
from comprehend what wa realli go on? 

I kept rememb . . . a hundr other insan episod of immort 
yearn lead to a mass "transport" to some other "plane." this, I 
thought, must be what it wa like in the jungl of jonestown that 
death-fil morning. and alex goddard wa their "jim jones," the 
spiritu leader of the moral travesti he'd impos upon the lost 
villag of baalum. 

I wa go to stop it, somehow. By god, I was. I stare at the women 
and felt so sad at the sight of the hand-woven blanket they held their 
babi in, primari green and red and blue lovingli woven into 
shimmer pattern that mirror the symbol across the side of the 
stone room. their faces, especi their eyes, were transcend in a 
kind of chiaroscuro of darkest black and purest whites, as though all 
their human had been caught by their blanket and shawls, sure 
creat for thi ultim moment. and the mother of tz'ac tzotz wa 
there, carri him, the babi i'd so want to hold one last time. 

next alex goddard emerg from the stone room bear a basket fill 
with sheet of white bark-paper. He approach tz'ac tzotz' mother, 
then took a wide section of the paper and secur it around her face 
with a silk cord, cover her vision. down the line, one after 
another, he care blindfold the women, while they stood 
passively, some crying--from joy or sorrow, I could not tell. finally, 
at the last, he also cover marcelina' face. 

So she' not suppos to know what' realli happening. nobody' 
suppos to know except him, and me. and, of course, ramo and the g-2 
secret polic and whoever els is in on thi crime. but, secretly, she 
doe know. the god of the hous of darkness. 

when he finished, he put down the basket, then turn to me. "stand at 
the front edg of the platform and lift your hand in benediction. they 
all want to see you, the new bride." 

I took a coupl of steps, then look back to see him ad more 
_copal_ to the main censer, send a fresh cloud of smoke billow 
out into the rain. As the incens pour around us, the armi thug 
who'd been loiter at the back of the stone room began come 
forward, each carri one of the bassinets. they set them down on the 
stones, readi to start take the children. My outrag mind flash on 
ghirlandajo' "massacr of the innocents." here, though, sarah' 
children weren't be stab to death; they were being--kidnap and 
stolen. 

revuls pierc through me as though i'd been hit by a jag shaft 
of lightning, but instead of be knock down, I wa energized. Or 
mayb the final effect of the toad venom were give me a spurt of 
adrenaline. let hi crimin charad continu one second longer 
becam unbearable. what would happen to me, I didn't know, but I 
couldn't let it go on. 

"no," I yelled, startl myself by the sound of my own voice. "in 
god' name, stop." 

the rain wa grow more intense, and I wa soak and bleary-eyed, 
but befor I could think I found myself stalk over to tz'ac tzotz' 
mother, shout at her. the next thing I knew I wa rip the paper 
from her frighten eyes. I hug her as best I could, then yell 
back at marcelina. 

"tell them all to take off their blindfolds. thi is obscene." 

then I went on autopilot, shut out everyth around me--th rain, 
the peril side of the pyramid, the pistol-carri g-2 thugs, even 
alex goddard. the way I rememb it now, it all took place in slow 
motion, like some underwat dream sequence, but sure it wa just the 
opposite. 

anyway, I do know I snapped. I start shout again, and with the g-2 
hood momentarili frozen, I start fling the still-empti bassinet 
down the steep side of the pyramid, where they just bounc away into 
the rain. As I watch them disappearing, one after another, I felt 
marvel emboldened. I would throw one and watch it go flying, and 
then I would throw another. yes, damn it, yes! 

I want to show anybodi with two eye that it wa all a sham. onc 
they realiz what wa realli happening, sure they would rise up and 
drive alex goddard from their home. 

for a moment it seem to be working. A stun silenc wa slowli 
spread over the square, while everybodi around me wa paralyzed, 
like waxworks. mayb it' the same way you'r temporarili caught off 
guard when a stranger on the street goe berserk. 

By the time i'd flung away the last bassinet, the women had all remov 
their blindfold and were stare at me, dumbfounded. finally, tz'ac 
tzotz' mother whisper someth to marcelina, and she turn to me. 

"she want to know whi you'r angry. you'r the bride. they onli want 
to pleas you." 

angry? I wa terrified, but also fight mad. 

"marcelina, thi is all a ghastli lie." i'd finish throw and I wa 
move to the next stage. get control. could he risk kill me in 
front of all these people? "tell them to take their babi and hide in 
the forest." 

that wa when I heard a cri that pierc through the rain and across 
the squar beyond, and I turn back to see alex goddard shove toward 
me. he' come to murder me, sinc i'v expos him. but I wouldn't 
let it happen without a fight. I clench my fists, waiting, feel my 
adrenalin surge. 

instead, though, he just brush past me, head toward the edg of the 
platform. At first I didn't know why, but he wa intent on someth 
off in the mist, hi open hand thrust up at the raini skies. 

that wa when I heard the guatemalan armi hood yell curses. 

"_vete ala chingada!_" 

they also were stare off to the south, in the same direction. 

hadn't they notic i'd just dismantl their sick pageant? I want a 
reaction that would drive home the truth to marcelina, to the mothers, 
to everyone. 

"damn it, look at me," I yelled, first at him and then at the g-2 
thugs. "_mira!_" but their focu still wa on someth beyond the 
square. 

final I turned, follow their gaze, and for a second I too forgot 
all about everyth else. An intens red glow wa illumin the 
morn sky from the direct of the clinic, a vibrant electr rose 
weav it hue in the mist. then I saw spew spike of flame, 
orang and yellow, danc over the top of the clinic. there wa a 
final about it that momentarili took my breath away. 

then it hit me. steve' in there. It wa a horror that, in my initi 
shock, I couldn't actual process, the thought just hover in the 
recess of my brain defi me to accept it. 

then alex goddard turn back, shout at the armi men in rapid 
spanish--i recogn the word for fire--that galvan them to 
action. they snap out of their mental paralysi and head down the 
pyramid, toward two land rover park at the back. 

next he turn around and fix hi gaze on me. At last he knew / knew 
he wa capabl of unspeak evil, and I knew he knew I would do 
everyth in my power to stop him. 

"all my records." hi voic sound as though it wa come from 
anoth world, and it held a sad that touch even me. "you have no 
idea what' been lost." 

He wa distraught, but also obsessed. with hi wild mane of hair, he 
did, finally, look like shiva the destroyer. He stalk over and seiz 
the obsidian knife, then turn toward me. 

I look for someth to defend myself with. the bassinets, which I 
might have use as a shield were gone. I onli had my bare hands. 

I had to get away from him, get down the pyramid and find sarah and 
steve. but as I start toward the front steps, the women were all 
cluster there, block my way. 

then, for no reason I could understand the mother of tz'ac tzotz 
step out of the group and hand me her baby, say someth in 
kekchi maya and reach to touch my cheek. 

I wa so startl I took the bundl that wa sarah' child. but then I 
thought, no! alex goddard will just kill him too. 

"she said he must not harm you," marcelina whisper move besid me. 
"you are the special one. she want you to give her child back to 
kukulkan." 

she still believes, I realized. they all do. 

hold tz'ac tzotz, my eye fix on alex goddard, i'd entir fail 
to notic a new presenc on the pyramid a ghostlik waif in a white 
shift who now stood silent in the doorway of the stone room. sarah! 

marcelina had said she'd want to come for the ceremony. she wa be 
help to stand by the two maya women who'd fed me the _atole_. 
somehow, she'd gotten them to bring her. 

"morgy, are you there?" sarah ask gaze up at the raini skies, the 
downpour soak her blond hair, her eye unblinking. At that moment, I 
felt we'd join becom one person--m the dog ration half who'd 
just gone over the line, her the spiritu part that need to float, 
to fli free. "I want to be with--" 

"sar, get back," I yell and start to go to her, but there wasn't 
time. now alex goddard wa move toward me hold the knife, as 
though track a prey, oblivi to sarah, to everything. he'd 
concentr all hi hatr on me and me alone, and I hate him back as 
much. death hover between us, wait to see whom to take. 

but then the woman who had born tz'ac tzotz said someth in kekchi 
maya, point back at me and her child, and lung at him. they 
collid togeth in the rain and next she slid down, first seiz hi 
leg, then lose her grip and slip onto the stones, her long black 
hair askew in the hover smoke. 

she' tri to save me, I realized. why--? 

then I saw sarah pull away from the women support her and slowli 
move across the platform. 

"morgi . . ." 

she wa walk in the direct of alex goddard, but then she stumbl 
over the fallen woman' leg and her hand went down as she sprawl 
across her. she must have touch something, becaus she recoil 
backward, and onli then did I notic the flare of a torch glint off 
the obsidian knife now protrud from the woman' chest. 

sarah rose up, her eye full of anger, and awkwardli flung her arms, 
searching. I could feel the passion that had been pent up all those 
month she lay in the coma, feed her madness. she manag to catch 
hold of alex goddard' arm, and they began an awkward minuet, neither 
realiz how close they were to the stone platform' edge. I stood 
mesmer a moment, then dash toward them, but onli in time to watch 
them vanish into the rain and haze. It wa as though there had been 
some sleight of hand. one second they were there and the next they 
weren't. At first I thought my eye were play trick on me, but then 
I realiz it wa real. they were gone. 

"_sarah!_" 

I reach the side in time to see them land on the first tier of stone 
below. she'd fallen near the edge, but she wa solid and safe. alex 
goddard, however, hit with one foot on and one foot off, and the result 
wa he slid away, then vanish into the dark rain. 

it' her final act of self-destruction. she' join me in my rage, but 
we'v both been spared. that' the miracl of _baalum_. 

"sar, don't move." I final found my voice. I wa still hold tz'ac 
tzotz, who'd begun to shriek, hi blue eye flood with fear. 

now sever villag men from the squar were running, shouting, up the 
slipperi steps. their face look like they'd been paint at one 
time, but now the rain had wash most of it away. 

while I yell down to sarah, again beg her not to move, marcelina 
wa ask them something, and their answer were tumbl out. 

final I turn to look at her, the scream tz'ac tzotz still in my 
arms. 

"no one know where he is," she wa say as she look down over the 
side. "he' gone into the forest." 

"good." I pull tz'ac tzotz to me and kiss him, tri to tell him 
to calm down. It wasn't working. 

"marcelina, here, pleas hold him. i'v got to get down to sarah." 

she took him. then I walk over to where hi mother lay bleed on 
the stones. the woman wasn't moving, the obsidian knife still 
protrud from her chest. she'd save me, but now death had taken her. 
there wa noth anyon could do. 

I wa trembling, but I turn and began eas myself over the side of 
the stone platform and onto the first tier of the pyramid. 

"sar, don't move." I inch my way across to her. "just 

stay still." the rain wa pour again, but the electr bloom of 
spark and flame from the direct of the clinic wa unabated. It 
would be complet gutted. wa steve awak enough to get out? he'd 
seem alert when I left him. 

"morgy, is that you?" she wa hold out her fingers. "I can't see 
you. where are--?" 

"i'm here, sar. right here." I reach down and took her hand, which 
wa deathli cold. "come on. let me help you get up." 

carefully, lean against the wet stone of the side of the pyramid, I 
gradual pull her to her feet and away from the treacher edge. 
then it hit me what she'd said. 

"sar, what do you mean, you can't see me?" 

"i'm okay. it' just . . ." she wa grip my hand now, and then she 
brush against the stone side of the pyramid and put out her other 
hand to cling to it. "morgy, I took it again. To go to their sacr 
place. but sometim you can onli see vision and then after a while 
everyth goe blank." 

that bastard. alex goddard had given her the drug again. now she wa 
lost in a world of color lights, a place i'd just travel through 
myself. she probabl had no idea she'd just push him off the pyramid 
and into the dark. 

"your hand feel so soft," she wa saying. "you'r like warm honey." 

"sar, tri to walk. we'r go to turn a corner and then we'll be at 
the back of the pyramid. next we'll come to some steps, and then we'r 
go down." 

As I inch our way along, scarc abl to keep our foot becaus of 
the rain, I wonder again about steve. please, god, let him be all 
right. 

when we final got to the steps, marcelina wa there, stand 
expectantly, hold tz'ac tzotz. He wa still crying, intermitt 
sobs. 

"he belong to you now," she said, hold him out for me. "it' what 
she wished. 

"what--?" I took him befor I realiz what I wa doing. 

As I cradl him, gaze down at hi tender littl face, I realiz he 
truli wa sarah all over again. and I wa so glad she couldn't see him. 
never, I thought, she must never, ever know. 

I final forc myself to place him back into marcelina' arms. 

"you'v got no idea how much I want him, but I can't. let one of these 
women give him her milk, have a twin for her own child." 

for that wrench moment i'd held the veri babi my heart long for. 
but he wa the last one on earth I could have. just go, take sarah and 
find steve and go as far from _baalum_ as you can, befor you lose your 
compass and do someth terribl selfish. 

"marcelina," I said, reach to hug her, "tell them these 'sacred' 
children are all from hi _medico_. look up 'in vitro' in your 
dictionary. that' all it is." 

she hug me back, though I wasn't sure whether she understood. then I 
ask her to take sarah' hand for a moment while I went back up the 
step to the platform. I felt a primal anger as I took one last look at 
the women alex goddard had wronged, now cluster around the bodi of 
tz'ac tzotz' mother. then I bade them a silent farewell, turned, and 
walked, hold my tears, back through the stone room. 

the rear of the pyramid wa deserted, the step slipperi and dangerous, 
but it wa our way out. I began lead sarah down, step by treacher 
step. everyth had happen so fast i'd bare had time to think 
about steve. those flames, my god. It wa final sink in, truli 
hit me. had he gotten out in time? 

then the slimi rio tigre, now swell from the rain, came into view. I 
stare at it a second befor I notic the three young armi recruit 
lean against the trunk of a giant cebia tree next to the trail, 
their rifl cover in plastic against the rain. when they saw us, 
they stiffened, shift their weapons, and glanc up at the top of the 
pyramid, as though seek orders. neither group had ani idea whi the 
other wa there. sarah and I were an unforeseen conting they hadn't 
been brief on. 

what are they go to do? they have no idea what just happened. 

"morgy," sarah said, gaze blankli at the sky, "the color are so 
beautiful. can we--?" 

"shhh, we'll talk in a minute." 

I smile and nod and began walk past the young privates, hold 
my breath. then a spectral form emerg out of the rain just behind 
them. 

It took me a moment to recogn who it was. I wa hope it might be 
steve, but instead it wa a man dress in white, now cover with mud, 
and hold a knife, not obsidian thi time but long and steel. hi 
eye were glazed, and I wasn't sure if he even knew exactli where he 
was. whi had he come down to the river? had he known i'd come here, too? 

for a moment we just stood stare at each other, while the armi 
privat began edg up the hill, as though not want to wit 
what sure wa come next. 

"whi don't you put an end to all the evil?" I yell at him finally, 
tri to project through the rain. "just stop it right now." 

"_baalum_ wa my life' work," he said. then he look down at the 
knife a moment, as though unsur what it was. final he turn and 
flung it in the direct of the river. 

"it could have been beautiful," I said back. thank god the knife wa 
gone. but what would he do next? "but now--" 

"no," he said stare directli at me, hi eye seem to plead. "it 
is. It will be again. To make a place like _baalum _i to coin the 
rich of god. I want you to stay. To be part of it. together, we . . 
." but whatev els he said wa lost in the cloudburst that abruptli 
swept over the embankment. In an instant it wa a torrent, the last 
outpour of the storm, power and unrelenting. natur had unleash 
it worst, as though kukulkan wa render hi final judgment. 

"morgy, i'm falling," sarah screamed. the ground she and I had been 
stand on began turn to liquid as though it were a custard melt 
in the tropic heat. As we began slip down the embank toward 
him, I grip her arm with my left hand and reach up to seiz a 
low-li branch of the cebia with my right. 

then, under the weight of the water, all the soil beneath us gave way, 
ton of wet riverbank that abruptli buckl outward. 

alex goddard made no sound as the mass of earth lift him backward 
toward the river. hi sulli garb of white blend into the gray 
sludg of mud and rain, then fade to dark as the embank 
dissolv into the swirl rio tigre. 

"sar, hold on. pleas hold on." I felt my grasp of the tree slipping, 
but now the mud slide had begun to stabilize. 

I manag to cling to the limb for a few second more, the bark cut 
into my fingers, and then my hold slip away, send us both 
spiral downward till we were temporarili snag by the cebia' 
newli expos undergrowth. I still had her hand though just barely, but 
the torrent of rain and mud wa subsiding, and final we collaps 
togeth into the gnarl network of roots. 

after a moment' rest, I manag to crawl out and pull her up. 

"come on, sar. tri and walk." 

togeth we stumbl and slid down the last inclin befor the river' 
edge, then turn upstream along the bank. after about fifti yards, 
sure enough, the nativ _cayucos_, the hollowed-out mahogani cano i'd 
told steve about, were still there just as i'd seen them that first 
morning, bob and strain at their moorings. In the rain I 
couldn't tell how usabl they were, but I figur go downriv wa 
the onli way we'd ever be abl to get out. we'd have to flee the way 
sarah had that first time. 

for a moment I thought they all were empty--dear god, no--but then I 
realiz there wa a drench figur in the last one in the row. when I 
recogn who it was, I think I complet lost it; all the horror of 
the last two day swallow me up. I grab sarah and hug her for 
dear life, feel the tear cours down my cheeks. I liter 
couldn't help myself. 

"they were tie up here just like you said." steve wipe the rain from 
hi eyes, then reach to take my hand. hi bandag nose wa bleed 
again, and he look like he'd just been half killed. "I told those 
littl armi _chicos_ I wa a big amigo of _el doctor _and they salut 
and show me where these were tie up." 

"thank god you'r okay. what happened? did--?" 

"ramos, the son of a bitch. He came in and ... I guess it wa time to 
finish me off. but I wasn't as drug out as he thought." He wa 
stare at sarah, clearli reliev but ask no questions. "I brought 
along hi nine-millimeter"--h indic the silver automat in hi 
belt--"in case we run into problems." 

I want to kiss him, but I wa still too shaken up. instead I focus 
on help sarah in without capsiz everything. 

after i'd settl her, I pull myself over the side and reach for a 
paddle. 

"if we go with the current," I said, "we'll get to the usumacinta. 
hope the flood will help push us downstream." 

"honestly, I didn't think the fire would get away from me like it did." 
He shove off amidst the swirl debris. "jesus. I heard them take 
you away, and I assum you didn't get to mess up hi lab. So I figur 
there wa one way . . . I just threw around some ether and pitch a 
match. the place wa empty, so . . ." 

I look around at the roil waters, snake and crocodil lurking, 
and felt a lifetim of determination. wa alex goddard still alive? I 
no longer cared. . . . 

sunris wa break through the last of the rain, lay danc 
shadow on the water as we row for midstream. someday, I knew, what 
wa real about _baalum _and what i'd dream here might well merg 
together, the way they had for sarah. but for now, true daylight never 
look better. 




chapter twenty-nin 


We got pick up by a rag crew of mexican fishermen just befor 
dark. asid from be sunburn to medium rare, we were physic 
okay. the fresh air and sunshin did a lot to bring sarah back, though 
she did have laps of non-rationality, and onc tri to dive over the 
side of their fish cutter. they drop us off at the tourist site 
of yaxchitan, a mayan ruin on the western bank of the mighti 
usumacinta, where we join an american day-tour on it way back to san 
cristob de la casas. there we caught a prop flight to cancun, and 
then american airlin to new york. We had no luggage, but I flew us 
first-class, and I still have the mastercard slip to prove it. 

As thing turn out, though, return sarah to normalcy--or me, for 
that matter--wa anoth struggl entirely. for me, time, after that 
raini morn in the peten, becam an essenc that flow around me as 
though I were aswim in the ether of interstellar space, ponder the 
conjunct of good and evil. I suffer flashbacks, late-night 
reveri of forest and children that must have been like those sarah 
struggl to bury. for week after that, I had a lot of troubl 
rememb meetings, return phone calls, give david an honest 
day' editing. 

for her own part, sarah just seem to drift at first, to the point I 
sometim wonder if she realiz she wa back at lou' loft. then 
abruptly, one day she snap into her old self and start send for 
re-registr materi from columbia. I realli need to talk with 
her about our mutual nightmare, but she seem to have eras all 
memori of _baalum_, except for occasion mumbl in kekchi maya. 
perhap that wa best, I consol myself. mayb it wa wise for us all 
just to let the ghost of that faraway place lie sleeping. 

As for lou, I told him as littl as I could about what happen to her 
there. He hadn't return to work, had mainli stay at hi soho place 
to be near her, as though he wa fear she might be snatch away 
from him onc more. frankly, I think all hi enforc close wa 
start to grate on her nerves, though I dare not hint such a thing 
to him. 

In the meantime, steve return to beliz to wrap up hi photo essay, 
and david submit a (very) rough cut of _babi love _to the select 
committe at sundanc (our hoped-for distribut deal with orion was, 
alas, in temporari turnaround pend yet anoth manag shuffle). 
We did, however, squeez an advanc from lifetim that lower the heat 
with nicki russo. 

nevertheless, the stori of how alex goddard touch all our live still 
wasn't over. It wa two month after we got back to the citi that my 
dark danc with the man who thought he wa shiva, creator and 
destroyer, had it final pirouette, as though hi ghost had return 
from hi rain-forest redoubt for one last sorcerer' turn. 

truthfully, it all transpir so fast I could scarc take it in, but 
here' the rough outlin of what happened. I wa work late that 
thursday even in the edit room at applecore, around seven 
o'clock. and I wa feel particularli out of sorts, includ a 
headach and stomach pain from the leftov pizza i'd microwav to 
keep me going. I wa re-cut some new real-lif interview i'd 
film to replac those of carli and paula. (children of light had gone 
defunct, by the way, the phone at quetzal manor disconnected, but I 
didn't need ani more excit in my life of the colonel ramo 
variety. the replac interview weren't nearli as bubbl and full 
of exuberance, but they were actual much truer to the realiti of 
adoption.) 

anyway, I listen to my stomach, and decid it wa high time to toss 
in the towel. I got my things, lock up, and then I ran into david on 
the elevator, come down from the floor above. 

"how' it going?" he asked, ostentati check hi watch, an 
approv gleam in hi eyes. I wa glad he want to let me know he'd 
notic I wa log long hours. then he look at me again. "hey, you 
feel okay?" 

"i'v been better," I said, think how nice it wa that he cared. 
"could be a coupl of aspirin and a good night' sleep are call for." 

"so now you'r a doctor?" he said, follow me into the lobby, 
"provid self-diagnosis--?" 

"david, give me a break. I just happen to feel a littl off today, 
okay? It doesn't mean i'm at death' door." 

"yeah, well, the way you look you coulda fool me." He head down the 
street, toward the avenue. then he call back over hi shoulder. "I 
don't want to see you in tomorrow unless you look like you might live 
through the day. I pay for your health insurance. use it, for god' 
sake." 

after I found a cab, I began to think he might be right. thi wa no 
typic down day. So I decid i'd stop at the duan read on my corner 
and talk to the pharmacist. 

the second-shift man wa on, a gray-hair portli old guy who knew more 
about drug than most doctors. the tag on hi jacket said "bernd" and 
that' all anybodi ever knew of hi name. I sometim call him "dr. 
bernd" by way of banter, but noth I could do would ever make him 
smile. 

the place wa nearli empti and the pharmaci at the rear, with it 
spectral fluoresc lighting, look like an out-tak from a 
low-budget we craven movie. bernd, who wa in back puttering, came out 
and look me over. 

I know it sound naive, but I trust him more than I trust half the 
young, overwork intern you get at an emerg room these days. I 
pour out my symptoms, includ the stori about how i'd been given 
fertil drug and toad venom. wa it all come back to haunt me, the 
dark hand of alex goddard? 

He began by ask me some veri percept questions, about thing that 
had been puzzl me but i'd sort of manag to dismiss. finally, he 
walk around the counter and lift a small, shrink-wrap box off a 
rack. 

"tri this," he said hand it over, "and then come back tomorrow. 
mayb it' not such a big deal." 

you'r kidding, I thought, look at the box. 

I got home, collaps onto the couch, and open it. believ it or not, 
I actual had to read the instructions. I did what they said, check 
the time, and then decid to run a hot bath. 

I fill the tub, dump in some bubble-bath, put the cordless on the 
toilet seat, and splash in. It felt so good I want to dissolve. 
then I reach for the phone. 

the clock abov the sink read eight-thirty, and I figur rightly, that 
steve would be back at hi hotel in beliz city. sure enough I got him 
on the first try. 

"honey, you sit down?" I said. 

"i'm lie down. you wouldn't believ my day." 

"you 're not go to believ what I just heard from the pharmacist at 
the corner. rememb I told you i'v been feel strange, and some 
thing were a littl behind schedule? well, guess what. we'r about to 
find out something. We can't be together, but we can share it over a 
satellite." 

"you mean . . ." 

"i'm do the test right now. you know, you take the stick out of the 
glass holder and if it' turn pink. . . ." 

He wa speechless for a long moment. final he just said, "wow." 

I check the clock again, then reach for the test tube. this, I 
realized, is the most incred moment in ani woman' life. Is your 
world go to go on be the same, or is it never, ever go to be 
the same again? 

when I pull out the stick, it wa a bright, beauti pink. 

"steve. I love you. it's--" 

"max." He didn't realiz it, but hi voic had just gone up an octave. 

"what?" 

"that' my dad' middl name. I want to name him max. it' an old 
famili tradition." 

"and what if it' a girl? don't say maxin or i'll divorc you befor 
you even make an honest woman of me." 

"nope. If it' a girl, then you get to pick." 

I couldn't believ I wa final have thi conversation. It wa 
someth i'd dream of for years. 

It then got too maudlin to repeat. He wa come home in eleven days, 
and we plan the celebration. dinner at Le cirqu and then an even 
at cafe carlyle. for a coupl of would-b new york sophisticates, that 
wa about as fancy-schm as thi town gets. 

I wa cri tear of triumph by the time we hung up. By then it wa 
late enough I figur arlen would be home from her exercis class, so 
I decid to call her and break the happi news onc more. who I realli 
want to call wa betsy, on the coast, but I knew she'd still be 
drive home from her temp job. arlen would have to do. tell her 
would be the equival of send an urgent e-mail to the entir 
office, but I want everybodi to know. two bird with one stone. 

I look down at my body, all the curv and soft skin, and tri to 
think about the miracl of a babi final grow insid it, life 
recreat itself. god! 

arlen wa go to break my mood, but for some reason I had to call 
her. If onli to bring me back to reality. 

I reach over and click open the cordless again. I wa punch in 
her number when someth made me pause. It wa a nag thought that 
i'd manag to repress for a while. finally, though, it wouldn't stay 
down ani more. there wa someth I had to check out. 

I slowli put down the handset, climb out of the tub, dri off, then 
plod into the bedroom to dig out my privat calendar, which had long 
sinc becom a record of everyth relev to my and steve' babi 
project. 

It wa buri at the bottom of the desk' second drawer, in amongst old 
bank statements. It wa also, figuratively, cover by two month of 
dust, sinc that wa how long it'd been sinc i'd bother with it. I 
guess my attitud had been, what' the point? 

I place it on the desk, tri not to get it wet. then I wrap the 
towel more firmli around me, switch on the desk lamp, and sat down. I 
think I wa also hold my breath. 

I count all the day twice, but there wa no mistaking. the night 
steve and I had spent so glorious togeth in the camino real wasn't 
a fertil time. not even close. I suppos that by then i'd becom so 
despair of ever get pregnant, I hadn't even given it ani 
thought. It wa enough just to see him and hold him. 

I just sat there for a long time stare at the white page, unabl to 
move, random thought come too fast to contain insid my tangl 
brain. finally, though, I manag to get up 

and numbl put the calendar away. order, I need order. I then work 
my way into the kitchen to fix myself something. I had a glass of 
water, then pull down a bottl of red label and pour myself half a 
tumbler. okay, somewher down deep I knew it wa the worst possibl 
thing I could do, but I wasn't thinking, just go on autopilot and 
dismay. 

I drank off a shot of the foul-tast scotch, then realiz how 
thoughtless that wa and dump the rest into the sink. next, I move 
into the live room and put on a raga, "malkauns," concert volume, the 
one where the first note goe straight to your heart. final I 
collaps onto the couch, the room now glorious aliv with all the 
spiritu and sensual of the raga, note pile on exquisit 
notes. for a while I just lay there numbly, envelop in it lush 
eroticism. . . . 

eventu I start to think. alex goddard had plan to take from 
me, but had he also given? had hi "proprietary" ovul drug . . . 
caus all those hundr of egg to matur simultan . . . 
inadvert let me get pregnant? 

then I had a dismay counter-thought. could he have done an _in 
vitro_ while I wa under sedation, when he harvest my ova? the 
ultim link to _baalum_. wa my babi sarah' too? one of those last 
frozen embryo in hi . . .? 

then I lean back and close my eyes. 

no, sure not. thi babi wa steve' and mine. ours. had to be. hi 
unintended, beautiful, iron gift. 

sure . . . 

uh-uh. Go for a second take. embrac life. Be molli bloom and shout it. 

yes! 

_yes_! 



* * * 




book BY thoma hoover 



nonfict 

zen cultur 

the zen experi 



fiction 

the moghul 

caribbe 

wall street _samurai_ 

(the _samurai_ strategy) 

project daedalu 

project cyclop 

life blood 

syndrom 



all free as e-book at 

www.thomashoover.info 










end of the project gutenberg ebook of life blood, by thoma hoover 

*** end OF thi project gutenberg ebook life blood *** 

***** thi file should be name 34318-8.txt or 34318-8.zip ***** 
thi and all associ file of variou format will be found in: 
http://www.gutenberg.org/3/4/3/1/34318/ 

produc by Al hain 

updat edit will replac the previou one--th old edit will be 
renamed. 

creat the work from public domain print edit mean that no one 
own a unit state copyright in these works, so the foundat (and 
you!) can copi and distribut it in the unit state without permiss 
and without pay copyright royalties. special rules, set forth in the 
gener term of use part of thi license, appli to copi and 
distribut project gutenberg-tm electron work to protect the 
project gutenberg-tm concept and trademark. project gutenberg is a 
regist trademark, and may not be use if you charg for the ebooks, 
unless you receiv specif permission. If you do not charg anyth 
for copi of thi ebook, compli with the rule is veri easy. you may 
use thi ebook for nearli ani purpos such as creation of deriv 
works, reports, perform and research. they may be modifi and 
print and given away--y may do practic anyth with public 
domain ebooks. redistribut is subject to the trademark license, 
especi commerci redistribution. 



*** start: full licens *** 

the full project gutenberg licens 
pleas read thi befor you distribut OR use thi work 

To protect the project gutenberg-tm mission of promot the free 
distribut of electron works, by use or distribut thi work 
(or ani other work associ in ani way with the phrase "project 
gutenberg"), you agre to compli with all the term of the full project 
gutenberg-tm licens (avail with thi file or onlin at 
http://www.gutenberg.org/license). 


section 1. gener term of use and redistribut project gutenberg-tm 
electron work 

1.a. By read or use ani part of thi project gutenberg-tm 
electron work, you indic that you have read, understand, agre to 
and accept all the term of thi licens and intellectu properti 
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agre to abid by all 
the term of thi agreement, you must ceas use and return or destroy 
all copi of project gutenberg-tm electron work in your possession. 
If you paid a fee for obtain a copi of or access to a project 
gutenberg-tm electron work and you do not agre to be bound by the 
term of thi agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or 
entiti to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.e.8. 

1.b. "project gutenberg" is a regist trademark. It may onli be 
use on or associ in ani way with an electron work by peopl who 
agre to be bound by the term of thi agreement. there are a few 
thing that you can do with most project gutenberg-tm electron work 
even without compli with the full term of thi agreement. see 
paragraph 1.c below. there are a lot of thing you can do with project 
gutenberg-tm electron work if you follow the term of thi agreement 
and help preserv free futur access to project gutenberg-tm electron 
works. see paragraph 1.e below. 

1.c. the project gutenberg literari archiv foundat ("the foundation" 
or pglaf), own a compil copyright in the collect of project 
gutenberg-tm electron works. nearli all the individu work in the 
collect are in the public domain in the unit states. If an 
individu work is in the public domain in the unit state and you are 
locat in the unit states, we do not claim a right to prevent you from 
copying, distributing, performing, display or creat deriv 
work base on the work as long as all refer to project gutenberg 
are removed. Of course, we hope that you will support the project 
gutenberg-tm mission of promot free access to electron work by 
freeli share project gutenberg-tm work in complianc with the term of 
thi agreement for keep the project gutenberg-tm name associ with 
the work. you can easili compli with the term of thi agreement by 
keep thi work in the same format with it attach full project 
gutenberg-tm licens when you share it without charg with others. 
thi particular work is one of the few copyright individu work 
includ with the permiss of the copyright holder. inform on 
the copyright owner for thi particular work and the term of use 
impos by the copyright holder on thi work are set forth at the 
begin of thi work. 

1.d. the copyright law of the place where you are locat also govern 
what you can do with thi work. copyright law in most countri are in 
a constant state of change. If you are outsid the unit states, check 
the law of your countri in addit to the term of thi agreement 
befor downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distribut or 
creat deriv work base on thi work or ani other project 
gutenberg-tm work. the foundat make no represent concern 
the copyright statu of ani work in ani countri outsid the unit 
states. 

1.e. unless you have remov all refer to project gutenberg: 

1.e.1. the follow sentence, with activ link to, or other immedi 
access to, the full project gutenberg-tm licens must appear promin 
whenev ani copi of a project gutenberg-tm work (ani work on which the 
phrase "project gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "project 
gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed, 
copi or distributed: 

thi ebook is for the use of anyon anywher at no cost and with 
almost no restrict whatsoever. you may copi it, give it away or 
re-us it under the term of the project gutenberg licens includ 
with thi ebook or onlin at www.gutenberg.org 

1.e.2. If an individu project gutenberg-tm electron work is deriv 
from the public domain (doe not contain a notic indic that it is 
post with permiss of the copyright holder), the work can be copi 
and distribut to anyon in the unit state without pay ani fee 
or charges. If you are redistribut or provid access to a work 
with the phrase "project gutenberg" associ with or appear on the 
work, you must compli either with the requir of paragraph 1.e.1 
through 1.e.7 or obtain permiss for the use of the work and the 
project gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraph 1.e.8 or 
1.e.9. 

1.e.3. If an individu project gutenberg-tm electron work is post 
with the permiss of the copyright holder, your use and distribut 
must compli with both paragraph 1.e.1 through 1.e.7 and ani addit 
term impos by the copyright holder. addit term will be link 
to the project gutenberg-tm licens for all work post with the 
permiss of the copyright holder found at the begin of thi work. 

1.e.4. Do not unlink or detach or remov the full project gutenberg-tm 
licens term from thi work, or ani file contain a part of thi 
work or ani other work associ with project gutenberg-tm. 

1.e.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribut or redistribut thi 
electron work, or ani part of thi electron work, without 
promin display the sentenc set forth in paragraph 1.e.1 with 
activ link or immedi access to the full term of the project 
gutenberg-tm license. 

1.e.6. you may convert to and distribut thi work in ani binary, 
compressed, mark up, nonproprietari or proprietari form, includ ani 
word process or hypertext form. however, if you provid access to or 
distribut copi of a project gutenberg-tm work in a format other than 
"plain vanilla ascii" or other format use in the offici version 
post on the offici project gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org), 
you must, at no addit cost, fee or expens to the user, provid a 
copy, a mean of export a copy, or a mean of obtain a copi upon 
request, of the work in it origin "plain vanilla ascii" or other 
form. ani altern format must includ the full project gutenberg-tm 
licens as specifi in paragraph 1.e.1. 

1.e.7. Do not charg a fee for access to, viewing, displaying, 
performing, copi or distribut ani project gutenberg-tm work 
unless you compli with paragraph 1.e.8 or 1.e.9. 

1.e.8. you may charg a reason fee for copi of or provid 
access to or distribut project gutenberg-tm electron work provid 
that 

- you pay a royalti fee of 20% of the gross profit you deriv from 
the use of project gutenberg-tm work calcul use the method 
you alreadi use to calcul your applic taxes. the fee is 
owe to the owner of the project gutenberg-tm trademark, but he 
ha agre to donat royalti under thi paragraph to the 
project gutenberg literari archiv foundation. royalti payment 
must be paid within 60 day follow each date on which you 
prepar (or are legal requir to prepare) your period tax 
returns. royalti payment should be clearli mark as such and 
sent to the project gutenberg literari archiv foundat at the 
address specifi in section 4, "inform about donat to 
the project gutenberg literari archiv foundation." 

- you provid a full refund of ani money paid by a user who notifi 
you in write (or by e-mail) within 30 day of receipt that s/he 
doe not agre to the term of the full project gutenberg-tm 
license. you must requir such a user to return or 
destroy all copi of the work possess in a physic medium 
and discontinu all use of and all access to other copi of 
project gutenberg-tm works. 

- you provide, in accord with paragraph 1.f.3, a full refund of ani 
money paid for a work or a replac copy, if a defect in the 
electron work is discov and report to you within 90 day 
of receipt of the work. 

- you compli with all other term of thi agreement for free 
distribut of project gutenberg-tm works. 

1.e.9. If you wish to charg a fee or distribut a project gutenberg-tm 
electron work or group of work on differ term than are set 
forth in thi agreement, you must obtain permiss in write from 
both the project gutenberg literari archiv foundat and michael 
hart, the owner of the project gutenberg-tm trademark. contact the 
foundat as set forth in section 3 below. 

1.f. 

1.f.1. project gutenberg volunt and employe expend consider 
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcrib and proofread 
public domain work in creat the project gutenberg-tm 
collection. despit these efforts, project gutenberg-tm electron 
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain 
"defects," such as, but not limit to, incomplete, inaccur or 
corrupt data, transcript errors, a copyright or other intellectu 
properti infringement, a defect or damag disk or other medium, a 
comput virus, or comput code that damag or cannot be read by 
your equipment. 

1.f.2. limit warranty, disclaim OF damag - except for the "right 
of replac or refund" describ in paragraph 1.f.3, the project 
gutenberg literari archiv foundation, the owner of the project 
gutenberg-tm trademark, and ani other parti distribut a project 
gutenberg-tm electron work under thi agreement, disclaim all 
liabil to you for damages, cost and expenses, includ legal 
fees. you agre that you have NO remedi for negligence, strict 
liability, breach OF warranti OR breach OF contract except those 
provid IN paragraph 1.f.3. you agre that the foundation, the 
trademark owner, and ani distributor under thi agreement will not BE 
liabl TO you for actual, direct, indirect, consequential, punit OR 
incident damag even IF you give notic OF the possibl OF such 
damage. 

1.f.3. limit right OF replac OR refund - If you discov a 
defect in thi electron work within 90 day of receiv it, you can 
receiv a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by send a 
written explan to the person you receiv the work from. If you 
receiv the work on a physic medium, you must return the medium with 
your written explanation. the person or entiti that provid you with 
the defect work may elect to provid a replac copi in lieu of a 
refund. If you receiv the work electronically, the person or entiti 
provid it to you may choos to give you a second opportun to 
receiv the work electron in lieu of a refund. If the second copi 
is also defective, you may demand a refund in write without further 
opportun to fix the problem. 

1.f.4. except for the limit right of replac or refund set forth 
in paragraph 1.f.3, thi work is provid to you 'as-is,' with NO other 
warranti OF ani kind, express OR implied, includ but not limit TO 
warranti OF merchant OR fit for ani purpose. 

1.f.5. some state do not allow disclaim of certain impli 
warranti or the exclus or limit of certain type of damages. 
If ani disclaim or limit set forth in thi agreement violat the 
law of the state applic to thi agreement, the agreement shall be 
interpret to make the maximum disclaim or limit permit by 
the applic state law. the invalid or unenforc of ani 
provis of thi agreement shall not void the remain provisions. 

1.f.6. indemn - you agre to indemnifi and hold the foundation, the 
trademark owner, ani agent or employe of the foundation, anyon 
provid copi of project gutenberg-tm electron work in accord 
with thi agreement, and ani volunt associ with the production, 
promot and distribut of project gutenberg-tm electron works, 
harmless from all liability, cost and expenses, includ legal fees, 
that aris directli or indirectli from ani of the follow which you do 
or caus to occur: (a) distribut of thi or ani project gutenberg-tm 
work, (b) alteration, modification, or addit or delet to ani 
project gutenberg-tm work, and (c) ani defect you cause. 


section 2. inform about the mission of project gutenberg-tm 

project gutenberg-tm is synonym with the free distribut of 
electron work in format readabl by the widest varieti of comput 
includ obsolete, old, middle-ag and new computers. It exist 
becaus of the effort of hundr of volunt and donat from 
peopl in all walk of life. 

volunt and financi support to provid volunt with the 
assist they need are critic to reach project gutenberg-tm' 
goal and ensur that the project gutenberg-tm collect will 
remain freeli avail for gener to come. In 2001, the project 
gutenberg literari archiv foundat wa creat to provid a secur 
and perman futur for project gutenberg-tm and futur generations. 
To learn more about the project gutenberg literari archiv foundat 
and how your effort and donat can help, see section 3 and 4 
and the foundat web page at http://www.pglaf.org. 


section 3. inform about the project gutenberg literari archiv 
foundat 

the project gutenberg literari archiv foundat is a non profit 
501(c)(3) educ corpor organ under the law of the 
state of mississippi and grant tax exempt statu by the intern 
revenu service. the foundation' ein or feder tax identif 
number is 64-6221541. it 501(c)(3) letter is post at 
http://pglaf.org/fundraising. contribut to the project gutenberg 
literari archiv foundat are tax deduct to the full extent 
permit by u.s. feder law and your state' laws. 

the foundation' princip offic is locat at 4557 melan dr. S. 
fairbanks, ak, 99712., but it volunt and employe are scatter 
throughout numer locations. it busi offic is locat at 
809 north 1500 west, salt lake city, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email 
business@pglaf.org. email contact link and up to date contact 
inform can be found at the foundation' web site and offici 
page at http://pglaf.org 

for addit contact information: 
dr. gregori B. newbi 
chief execut and director 
gbnewby@pglaf.org 

section 4. inform about donat to the project gutenberg 
literari archiv foundat 

project gutenberg-tm depend upon and cannot surviv without wide 
spread public support and donat to carri out it mission of 
increas the number of public domain and licens work that can be 
freeli distribut in machin readabl form access by the widest 
array of equip includ outdat equipment. mani small donat 
($1 to $5,000) are particularli import to maintain tax exempt 
statu with the irs. 

the foundat is commit to compli with the law regul 
chariti and charit donat in all 50 state of the unit 
states. complianc requir are not uniform and it take a 
consider effort, much paperwork and mani fee to meet and keep up 
with these requirements. We do not solicit donat in locat 
where we have not receiv written confirm of compliance. To 
send donat or determin the statu of complianc for ani 
particular state visit http://pglaf.org 

while we cannot and do not solicit contribut from state where we 
have not met the solicit requirements, we know of no prohibit 
against accept unsolicit donat from donor in such state who 
approach us with offer to donate. 

intern donat are grate accepted, but we cannot make 
ani statement concern tax treatment of donat receiv from 
outsid the unit states. u.s. law alon swamp our small staff. 

pleas check the project gutenberg web page for current donat 
method and addresses. donat are accept in a number of other 
way includ checks, onlin payment and credit card donations. 
To donate, pleas visit: http://pglaf.org/don 


section 5. gener inform about project gutenberg-tm electron 
works. 

professor michael S. hart is the origin of the project gutenberg-tm 
concept of a librari of electron work that could be freeli share 
with anyone. for thirti years, he produc and distribut project 
gutenberg-tm ebook with onli a loos network of volunt support. 

project gutenberg-tm ebook are often creat from sever print 
editions, all of which are confirm as public domain in the u.s. 
unless a copyright notic is included. thus, we do not necessarili 
keep ebook in complianc with ani particular paper edition. 

each ebook is in a subdirectori of the same number as the ebook' 
ebook number, often in sever format includ plain vanilla ascii, 
compress (zipped), html and others. 

correct edit of our ebook replac the old file and take over 
the old filenam and etext number. the replac older file is renamed. 
version base on separ sourc are treat as new ebook receiv 
new filenam and etext numbers. 

most peopl start at our web site which ha the main PG search facility: 

http://www.gutenberg.org 

thi web site includ inform about project gutenberg-tm, 
includ how to make donat to the project gutenberg literari 
archiv foundation, how to help produc our new ebooks, and how to 
subscrib to our email newslett to hear about new ebooks. 

ebook post prior to novemb 2003, with ebook number below #10000, 
are file in directori base on their releas date. If you want to 
download ani of these ebook directly, rather than use the regular 
search system you may util the follow address and just 
download by the etext year. 

http://www.ibiblio.org/gutenberg/etext06 

(or /etext 05, 04, 03, 02, 01, 00, 99, 
98, 97, 96, 95, 94, 93, 92, 92, 91 or 90) 

ebook post sinc novemb 2003, with etext number over #10000, are 
file in a differ way. the year of a releas date is no longer part 
of the directori path. the path is base on the etext number (which is 
ident to the filename). the path to the file is made up of singl 
digit correspond to all but the last digit in the filename. for 
exampl an ebook of filenam 10234 would be found at: 

http://www.gutenberg.org/1/0/2/3/10234 

or filenam 24689 would be found at: 
http://www.gutenberg.org/2/4/6/8/24689 

An altern method of locat ebooks: 
http://www.gutenberg.org/gutindex.al 

*** end: full licens *** 
