the project gutenberg ebook of edgar huntley, by charl brockden brown 

thi ebook is for the use of anyon anywher in the unit state and most 
other part of the world at no cost and with almost no restrict 
whatsoever. you may copi it, give it away or re-us it under the term of 
the project gutenberg licens includ with thi ebook or onlin at 
www.gutenberg.org. If you are not locat in the unit states, you'll have 
to check the law of the countri where you are locat befor use thi ebook. 

title: edgar huntley 

author: charl brockden brown 

post date: februari 11, 2015 [ebook #8223] 
releas date: june, 2005 
first posted: juli 3, 2003 

language: english 


*** start OF thi project gutenberg ebook edgar huntley *** 




produc by onlin distribut proofread team 









edgar huntli 

or, memoir OF A sleep-walk 

by 

charl brockden brown 







To the public: 

the flatter recept that ha been given, by the public, to arthur 
mervyn, ha prompt the writer to solicit a continu of the same 
favour, and to offer to the world a new performance. 

america ha open new view to the naturalist and politician, but ha 
seldom furnish theme to the moral painter. that new spring of action 
and new motiv to curios should operate,--that the field of 
investigation, open to us by our own country, should differ 
essenti from those which exist in europe,--may be readili conceived. 
the sourc of amus to the fanci and instruct to the heart, that 
are peculiar to ourselves, are equal numer and inexhaustible. It is 
the purpos of thi work to profit by some of these sources; to exhibit 
a seri of adventures, grow out of the condit of our country, and 
connect with one of the most common and most wonder diseas or 
affect of the human frame. 

one merit the writer may at least claim:--that of call forth the 
passion and engag the sympathi of the reader by mean hitherto 
unemploy by preced authors. pueril superstit and explod 
manners, gothic castl and chimeras, are the materi usual employ 
for thi end. the incid of indian hostility, and the peril of the 
western wilderness, are far more suitable; and for a nativ of america 
to overlook these would admit of no apology. these, therefore, are, in 
part, the ingredi of thi tale, and these he ha been ambiti of 
depict in vivid and faith colours. the success of hi effort must 
be estim by the liber and candid reader. 

C. B. B. 





chapter I. 


I sit down, my friend, to compli with thi request. At length doe the 
impetuos of my fears, the transport of my wonder, permit me to 
recollect my promis and perform it. At length am I somewhat deliv 
from suspens and from tremors. At length the drama is brought to an 
imperfect close, and the seri of event that absorb my faculties, 
that hurri away my attention, ha termin in repose. 

till now, to hold a steadfast pen wa impossible; to disengag my sens 
from the scene that wa pass or approaching; to forbear to grasp at 
futurity; to suffer so much thought to wander from the purpos which 
engross my fear and my hopes, could not be. 

yet am I sure that even now my perturb are suffici still 
for an employ like this? that the incid I am go to relat can 
be recal and arrang without indistinct and confusion? that 
emot will not be reawaken by my narrative, incompat with order 
and coherence? yet when I shall be better qualifi for thi task I know 
not. time may take away these headlong energies, and give me back my 
ancient sobriety; but thi chang will onli be effect by weaken my 
remembr of these events. In proport as I gain power over words, 
shall I lose dominion over sentiments. In proport as my tale is 
deliber and slow, the incid and motiv which it is design to 
exhibit will be imperfectli reviv and obscur portrayed. 

oh, whi art thou away at a time like this. wert thou present, the offic 
to which my pen is so inadequ would easili be execut by my tongue. 
accent can scarc be too rapid; or that which word should fail to 
convey, my look and gestur would suffic to communicate. but I know 
thi come is impossible. To leav thi spot is equal beyond my power. 
To keep thee in ignor of what ha happen would justli offend thee. 
there is no method of inform thee except by letter, and thi method 
must I, therefore, adopt. 

how short is the period that ha elaps sinc thou and I parted, and 
yet how full of tumult and dismay ha been my soul dure that period! 
what light ha burst upon my ignor of myself and of mankind! how 
sudden and enorm the transit from uncertainti to knowledge! 

but let me recal my thoughts; let me struggl for so much composur as 
will permit my pen to trace intellig characters. let me place in 
order the incid that are to compos my tale. I need not call on thee 
to listen. the fate of waldegrav wa as fertil of torment to thee as 
to me. hi bloodi and mysteri catastroph equal awaken thi grief, 
thi revenge, and thi curiosity. thou wilt catch from my stori everi 
horror and everi sympathi which it paints. thou wilt shudder with my 
forebod and dissolv with my tears. As the sister of my friend, and 
as one who honour me with her affection, thou wilt share in all my 
task and all my dangers. 

you need not be remind with what reluct I left you. To reach thi 
place by even wa impossible, unless I had set out earli in the 
morning; but your societi wa too preciou not to be enjoy to the last 
moment. It wa indispens to be here on tuesday, but my duti requir 
no more than that I should arriv by sunris on that day. To travel 
dure the night wa product of no formid inconvenience. the air 
wa like to be frosti and sharp, but these would not incommod one who 
walk with speed. A nocturn journey in district so romant and wild 
as these, through which lay my road, wa more congeni to my temper 
than a noonday ramble. 

By nightfal I wa within ten mile of my uncle' house. As the dark 
increased, and I advanc on my way, my sensat sunk into melancholy. 
the scene and the time remind me of the friend whom I had lost. I 
recal hi features, and accents, and gestures, and muse with 
unutter feel on the circumst of hi death. 

My recollect onc more plung me into anguish and perplexity. onc 
more I asked, who wa hi assassin? By what motiv could he be impel 
to a deed like this? waldegrav wa pure from all offence. hi pieti wa 
rapturous. hi benevol wa a stranger to remiss or torpor. all 
who came within the sphere of hi influenc experienc and acknowledg 
hi benign activity. hi friend were few, becaus hi habit were timid 
and reserved; but the exist of an enemi wa impossible. 

I recal the incid of our last interview, my importun that he 
should postpon hi ill-omen journey till the morning, hi 
inexplic obstinacy, hi resolut to set out on foot dure a dark 
and tempestu night, and the horribl disast that befel him. 

the first intim I receiv of thi misfortune, the insan of 
vengeanc and grief into which I wa hurried, my fruitless search for 
the author of thi guilt, my midnight wander and reveri beneath 
the shade of that fatal elm, were reviv and reacted. I heard the 
discharg of the pistol, I wit the alarm of inglefield, I heard 
hi call to hi servants, and saw them issu forth with light and 
hasten to the spot whenc the sound had seem to proceed. I beheld my 
friend, stretch upon the earth, ghastli with a mortal wound, alone, 
with no trace of the slayer visible, no token by which hi place of 
refug might be sought, the motiv of hi enmiti or hi instrument of 
mischief might be detected. 

I hung over the die youth, whose insens forbad him to 
recognis hi friend, or unfold the caus of hi destruction. I 
accompani hi remain to the grave; I tend the sacr spot where he 
lay; I onc more exercis my penetr and my zeal in pursuit of hi 
assassin. onc more my medit and exert were doom to be 
disappointed. 

I need not remind thee of what is past. time and reason seem to have 
dissolv the spell which made me deaf to the dictat of duti and 
discretion. remembr had ceas to agonize, to urg me to headlong 
act and foster sanguinari purposes. the gloom wa half dispersed, and a 
radianc had succeed sweeter than my former joys. 

now, by some unseen concurr of reflections, my thought revert 
into some degre of bitterness. methought that to ascertain the hand who 
kill my friend wa not impossible, and to punish the crime wa just. 
that to forbear inquiri or withhold punish wa to violat my duti to 
my god and to mankind. the impuls wa gradual awaken that bade me 
onc more to seek the elm; onc more to explor the ground; to 
scrutin it trunk. what could I expect to find? had it not been a 
hundr time examined? had I not extend my search to the neighbour 
grove and precipices? had I not pore upon the brooks, and pri into 
the pit and hollows, that were adjac to the scene of blood? 

late I had view thi conduct with shame and regret; but in the 
present state of my mind it assum the appear of conform with 
prudence, and I felt myself irresist prompt to repeat my search. 
some time had elaps sinc my departur from thi district,--tim 
enough for moment chang to occur. expedi that formerli were 
useless might now lead instantan to the end which I sought. the 
tree which had formerli been shun by the crimin might, in the 
absenc of the aveng of blood, be incauti approached. thoughtless 
or fearless of my return, it wa possibl that he might, at thi moment, 
be detect hover near the scene of hi offences. 

noth can be plead in extenu of thi relaps into folly. My 
return, after an absenc of some duration, into the scene of these 
transact and sufferings, the time of night, the glimmer of the 
stars, the obscur in which extern object were wrapped, and which, 
consequently, did not draw my attent from the imag of fancy, may in 
some degre account for the reviv of those sentiment and resolut 
which immedi succeed the death of waldegrave, and which, dure 
my visit to you, had been suspended. 

you know the situat of the elm, in the midst of a privat road, on 
the verg of norwalk, near the habit of inglefield, but three mile 
from my uncle' house. It wa now my intent to visit it. the road in 
which I wa travel led a differ way. It wa requisit to leav 
it, therefore, and make a circuit through meadow and over steeps. My 
journey would, by these means, be consider prolonged; but on that 
head I wa indifferent, or rather, consid how far the night had 
alreadi advanced, it wa desir not to reach home till the dawn. 

I proceed in thi new direct with speed. time, however, wa allow 
for my impetuos to subside, and for sober thought to take place. 
still I persist in thi path. To linger a few moment in thi shade, 
to ponder on object connect with event so moment to my happiness, 
promis me a mourn satisfaction. I wa familiar with the way, though 
trackless and intricate, and I climb the steeps, crept through the 
brambles, leap the rivulet and fenc with undevi aim, till at 
length I reach the craggi and obscur path which led to inglefield' 
house. 

In a short time, I descri through the dusk the widespread branch of 
the elm. thi tree, howev faintli seen, cannot be mistaken for 
another. the remark bulk and shape of it trunk, it posit in the 
midst of the way, it branch spread into an ampl circumference, 
made it conspicu from afar. My puls throb as I approach it. 

My eye were eagerli bent to discov the trunk and the area beneath the 
shade. these, as I approached, gradual becam visible. the trunk wa 
not the onli thing which appear in view. somewhat else, which made 
itself distinguish by it motions, wa likewis noted. I falter 
and stopped. 

To a casual observ thi appear would have been unnoticed. To me, 
it could not but possess a power significance. all my surmis and 
suspicion instantli returned. thi apparit wa human, it wa 
connect with the fate of waldegrave, it led to a disclosur of the 
author of that fate. what wa I to do? To approach unwarili would alarm 
the person. instant flight would set him beyond discoveri and reach. 

I walk softli to the roadside. the ground wa cover with rocki 
masses, scatter among shrub-oak and dwarf-cedars, emblem of it 
steril and uncultiv state. among these it wa possibl to elud 
observ and yet approach near enough to gain an accur view of 
thi being. 

At thi time, the atmospher wa somewhat illumin by the moon, 
which, though it had alreadi set, wa yet so near the horizon as to 
benefit me by it light. the shape of a man, tall and robust, wa now 
distinguished. repeat and closer scrutini enabl me to perceiv that 
he wa employ in dig the earth. someth like flannel wa wrap 
round hi waist and cover hi lower limbs. the rest of hi frame wa 
naked. I did not recognis in him ani one whom I knew. 

A figure, robust and strange, and half naked, to be thu employed, at 
thi hour and place, wa calcul to rous up my whole soul. hi 
occup wa mysteri and obscure. wa it a grave that he wa 
digging? wa hi purpos to explor or to hide? wa it proper to watch 
him at a distance, unobserv and in silence, or to rush upon him and 
extort from him, by violenc or menaces, an explan of the scene? 

befor my resolut wa formed, he ceas to dig. He cast asid hi 
spade and sat down in the pit that he had dug. He seem wrap in 
meditation; but the paus wa short, and succeed by sobs, at first low 
and at wide intervals, but present louder and more vehement. sore 
charg wa inde that heart whenc flow these token of sorrow. 
never did I wit a scene of such mighti anguish, such heart-burst 
grief. 

what should I think? I wa suspend in astonishment. everi sentiment, 
at length, yield to my sympathy. everi new accent of the mourner 
struck upon my heart with addit force, and tear found their way 
spontan to my eyes. I left the spot where I stood, and advanc 
within the verg of the shade. My caution had forsaken me, and, instead 
of one whom it wa duti to persecute, I beheld, in thi man, noth but 
an object of compassion. 

My pace wa check by hi suddenli ceas to lament. He snatch the 
spade, and, rise on hi feet, began to cover up the pit with the 
utmost diligence. He seem awar of my presence, and desir of hide 
someth from my inspection. I wa prompt to advanc nearer and hold 
hi hand, but my uncertainti as to hi charact and views, the 
abrupt with which I had been usher into thi scene, made me still 
hesitate; but, though I hesit to advance, there wa noth to 
hinder me from calling. 

"what, ho!" said I. "who is there? what are you doing?" 

He stopped: the spade fell from hi hand; he look up and bent forward 
hi face toward the spot where I stood. An interview and explan 
were now, methought, unavoidable. I muster up my courag to confront 
and interrog thi being. 

He continu for a minut in hi gaze and listen attitude. where I 
stood I could not fail of be seen, and yet he act as if he saw 
nothing. again he betook himself to hi spade, and proceed with new 
dilig to fill up the pit. thi demeanour confound and bewild 
me. I had no power but to stand and silent gaze upon hi motions. 

the pit be filled, he onc more sat upon the ground, and resign 
himself to weep and sigh with more vehem than before. In a short 
time the fit seem to have passed. He rose, seiz the spade, and 
advanc to the spot where I stood. 

again I made prepar as for an interview which could not but take 
place. He pass me, however, without appear to notic my existence. 
He came so near as almost to brush my arm, yet turn not hi head to 
either side. My nearer view of him made hi brawni arm and lofti 
statur more conspicuous; but hi imperfect dress, the dim of the 
light, and the confus of my own thoughts, hinder me from discern 
hi features. He proceed with a few quick step along the road, but 
present dart to one side and disappear among the rock and bushes. 

My eye follow him as long as he wa visible, but my feet were root 
to the spot. My muse wa rapid and incongruous. It could not fail to 
termin in one conjecture, that thi person wa _asleep_. such 
instanc were not unknown to me, through the medium of convers and 
books. never, indeed, had it fallen under my own observ till now, 
and now it wa conspicuous, and environ with all that could give edg 
to suspicion and vigour to inquiry. To stand here wa no longer of use, 
and I turn my step toward my uncle' habitation. 




chapter ii. 


I had food enough for the longest contemplation. My step partook, as 
usual, of the vehem of my thoughts, and I reach my uncle' gate 
befor I believ myself to have lost sight of the elm. I look up and 
discov the well-known habitation. I could not endur that my 
reflect should so speedili be interrupted. I therefor pass the 
gate, and stop not till I had reach a neighbour summit, crown 
with chestnut-oak and poplars. 

here I more deliber review the incid that had just occurred. 
the infer wa just, that the man, half cloth and digging, wa a 
sleeper; but what wa the caus of thi morbid activity? what wa the 
mourn vision that dissolv him in tears, and extort from him 
token of inconsol distress? what did he seek, or what endeavour to 
conceal, in thi fatal spot? the incapac of sound sleep denot a 
mind sore wounded. It is thu that atroci crimin denot the 
possess of some dread secret. the thoughts, which consider 
of safeti enabl them to suppress or disguis dure wakefulness, 
oper without impediment, and exhibit their genuin effects, when the 
notic of sens are partli exclud and they are shut out from a 
knowledg of their entir condition. 

thi is the perpetr of some nefari deed. what but the murder of 
waldegrav could direct hi step hither? hi employ wa part of 
some fantast drama in which hi mind wa busy. To comprehend it 
demand penetr into the recess of hi soul. but one thing is 
sure: an incoher concept of hi concern in that transact 
bewitch him hither. thi it is that delug hi heart with bitter 
and suppli him with ever-flow tears. 

but whenc come he? He doe not start from the bosom of the earth, or 
hide himself in airi distance. He must have a name and a terrestri 
habitation. It cannot be at an immeasur distanc from the haunt 
elm. inglefield' hous is the nearest. thi may be one of it 
inhabitants. I did not recognis hi features, but thi wa owe to the 
duski atmospher and to the singular of hi garb. inglefield ha two 
servants, one of whom wa a nativ of thi district, simple, guileless, 
and incap of ani act of violence. He was, moreover, devoutli 
attach to hi sect. He could not be the criminal. 

the other wa a person of a veri differ cast. He wa an emigr from 
ireland, and had been six month in the famili of my friend. He wa a 
pattern of sobrieti and gentleness. hi mind wa superior to hi 
situation. hi natur endow were strong, and had enjoy all the 
advantag of cultivation. hi demeanour wa grave, and thoughtful, and 
compassionate. He appear not untinctur with religion; but hi 
devotion, though unostentatious, wa of a melancholi tenor. 

there wa noth in the first view of hi charact calcul to 
engend suspicion. the neighbourhood wa populous. but, as I con 
over the catalogue, I perceiv that the onli foreign among us wa 
clithero. our scheme was, for the most part, a patriarch one. each 
farmer wa surround by hi son and kinsmen. thi wa an except to 
the rule. clithero wa a stranger, whose adventur and character, 
previous to hi come hither, were unknown to us. the elm wa 
surround by hi master' domains. An actor there must be, and no one 
wa equal questionable. 

the more I revolv the pensiv and reserv deport of thi man, the 
ignor in which we were place respect hi former situation, hi 
possibl motiv for abandon hi countri and choos a station so 
much below the standard of hi intellectu attainments, the stronger my 
suspicion became. formerly, when occupi with conjectur rel to 
the same topic, the imag of thi man did not fail to occur; but the 
seem harmless of hi ordinari conduct had rais him to a level 
with others, and place him equal beyond the reach of suspicion. I did 
not, till now, advert to the recent of hi appear among us, and 
to the obscur that hung over hi origin and past life. but now these 
consider appear so highli moment as almost to decid the 
question of hi guilt. 

but how were these doubt to be chang into absolut certainty? 
henceforth thi man wa to becom the subject of my scrutiny. I wa to 
gain all the knowledge, respect him, which those with whom he lived, 
and were the perpetu wit of hi actions, could impart. for thi 
end I wa to make minut inquiries, and to put season 
interrogatories. from thi conduct I promis myself an ultim 
solut of my doubts. 

I acquiesc in thi view of thing with consider satisfaction. It 
seem as if the maze wa no longer inscrutable. It would be quickli 
discov who were the agent and instig of the murder of my 
friend. 

but it suddenli occur to me, for what purpos shall I prosecut thi 
search? what benefit am I to reap from thi discovery? how shall I 
demean myself when the crimin is detected? I wa not insensible, at 
that moment, of the impuls of vengeance, but they were transient. I 
detest the sanguinari resolut that I had onc formed. yet I wa 
fear of the effect of my hasti rage, and dread an encount in 
consequ of which I might rush into evil which no time could repair, 
nor penit expiate. 

"but why," said I, "should it be imposs to arm myself with firmness? 
If forbear be the dictat of wisdom, cannot it be so deepli engraven 
on my mind as to defi all temptation, and be proof against the most 
abrupt surprise? My late experi ha been of use to me. It ha shown 
me my weak and my strength. have found my ancient fortif 
insuffici to withstand the enemy, what should I learn from thenc but 
that it becom me to strengthen and enlarg them? 

"no caution, indeed, can hinder the experi from be hazardous. Is 
it wise to undertak experi by which noth can be gained, and 
much may be lost? curios is vicious, if undisciplin by reason, and 
inconduc to benefit." 

I wa not, however, to be divert from my purpose. curiosity, like 
virtue, is it own reward. knowledg is of valu for it own sake, and 
pleasur is annex to the acquisition, without regard to ani thing 
beyond. It is preciou even when disconnect with moral induc and 
heartfelt sympathies; but the knowledg which I sought by it union with 
these wa calcul to excit the most complex and fieri sentiment in 
my bosom. 

hour were employ in revolv these thoughts. At length I began to be 
sensibl of fatigue, and, return home, explor the way to my chamber 
without molest the repos of the family. you know that our door are 
alway unfastened, and are access at all hour of the night. 

My slumber were imperfect, and I rejoic when the morn light 
permit me to resum my meditations. the day glide away, I scarc 
know how, and, as I had rejoic at the return of morning, I now hailed, 
with pleasure, the approach of night. 

My uncl and sister have retired, I betook myself, instead of 
follow their example, to the _chestnut-hill_. conceal among 
it rocks, or gaze at the prospect which stretch so far and so wide 
around it, my fanci ha alway been accustom to deriv it highest 
enjoy from thi spot. I found myself again at leisur to recal the 
scene which I had wit dure the last night, to imagin it 
connect with the fate of waldegrave, and to plan the mean of 
discov the secret that wa hidden under these appearances. 

shortly, I began to feel insupport disquiet at the thought of 
postpon thi discovery. wile and stratagem were practicable, but 
they were tedious, and of dubiou success. whi should I proceed like a 
plotter? Do I intend the injuri of thi person? A gener purpos will 
sure excus me from descend to artifices. there are two mode of 
draw forth the secret of another,--bi open and direct mean and by 
circuit and indirect. whi scrupl to adopt the former mode? whi not 
demand a conference, and state my doubts, and demand a solut of them, 
in a manner worthi of a benefic purpose? whi not hasten to the spot? 
He may be, at thi moment, mysteri occupi under thi shade. I may 
note hi behaviour; I may ascertain hi person, if not by the featur 
that belong to him, yet by trace hi footstep when he departs, and 
pursu him to hi retreats. 

I embrac thi scheme, which wa thu suggested, with eagerness. I 
threw myself with headlong speed down the hill and pursu my way to the 
elm. As I approach the tree, my palpit increased, though my pace 
slackened. I look forward with an anxiou glance. the trunk of the 
tree wa hidden in the deepest shade. I advanc close up to it. No one 
wa visible, but I wa not discouraged. the hour of hi come was, 
perhaps, not arrived. I took my station at a small distance, besid a 
fence, on the right hand. 

An hour elaps befor my eye light on the object of which they were 
in search. My previou observ had been rove from one quarter to 
another. At last, it dwelt upon the tree. the person whom I befor 
describ wa seat on the ground. I had not perceiv him before, and 
the mean by which he place himself in thi situat had escap my 
notice. He seem like one whom an effort of will, without the exercis 
of locomotion, had transport hither, or made visible. hi state of 
disarray, and the dark that shroud him, prevent me, as before, 
from distinguish ani peculiar in hi figur or countenance. 

I continu watch and mute. the appear alreadi describ took 
place on thi occasion, except the circumst of dig in the earth. 
He sat muse for a while, then burst into sigh and lamentations. 

these be exhausted, he rose to depart. He stalk away with a solemn 
and deliber pace. I resolv to tread, as close as possible, in hi 
footsteps, and not to lose sight of him till the termin of hi 
career. 

contrari to my expectation, he went in a direct opposit to that 
which led to inglefield's. presently, he stop at bars, which he 
cautious removed, and, when he had pass through them, as 
deliber replaced. He then proceed along an obscur path, which 
led across stubble-fields, to a wood. the path continu through the 
wood, but he quickli struck out of it, and made hi way, seemingli at 
random, through a most perplex undergrowth of bush and briers. 

I was, at first, fear that the nois which I made behind him, in 
trampl down the thicket, would alarm him; but he regard it not. the 
way that he had select wa alway difficult: sometim consider 
forc wa requisit to beat down obstacles; sometim it led into a deep 
glen, the side of which were so steep as scarc to afford a footing; 
sometim into fens, from which some exert were necessari to 
extric the feet, and sometim through rivulets, of which the water 
rose to the middle. 

for some time I felt no abat of my speed or my resolution. I 
thought I might proceed, without fear, through brake and dell which my 
guid wa abl to penetrate. He wa perpetu chang hi direction. 
I could form no just opinion as to my situat or distanc from the 
place at which we had set out. 

I began at length to be weary. A suspicion, likewise, suggest itself 
to my mind, whether my guid did not perceiv that he wa followed, and 
thu prolong hi journey in order to fatigu or elud hi pursuer. I 
wa determined, however, to baffl hi design. though the air wa 
frosty, my limb were bedew with sweat and my joint were relax with 
toil, but I wa obstin bent upon proceeding. 

At length a new idea occur to me. On find me indefatig in 
pursuit, thi person might resort to more atroci method of 
concealment. but what had I to fear? It wa suffici to be upon my 
guard. man to man, I need not to dread hi encounter. 

We at last arriv at the verg of a consider precipice. He kept 
along the edge. from thi height, a dreari vale wa discoverable, 
embarrass with the leafless stock of bushes, and encumb with 
rug and point rocks. thi scene remind me of my situation. the 
desert tract call norwalk, which I have often mention to you, my 
curios had formerli induc me to travers in variou directions. It 
wa in the highest degre rugged, picturesque, and wild. thi vale, 
though I had never befor view it by the glimps of the moon, 
suggest the belief that I had visit it before. such a one I knew 
belong to thi uncultiv region. If thi opinion were true, we were 
at no inconsider distanc from inglefield' habitation. "where," 
said I, "i thi singular career to terminate?" 

though occupi with these reflections, I did not slacken my pursuit. 
the stranger kept along the verg of the cliff, which gradual declin 
till it termin in the valley. He then plung into it deepest 
thickets. In a quarter of an hour he stop under a projectur of the 
rock which form the opposit side of the vale. He then proceed to 
remov the stalks, which, as I immedi perceived, conceal the 
mouth of a cavern. He plung into the darkness, and in a few moment 
hi step were heard no more. 

hitherto my courag had support me, but here it failed. wa thi 
person an assassin, who wa acquaint with the wind of the grotto, 
and who would take advantag of the dark to execut hi vengeanc upon 
me, who had dare to pursu him to these forlorn retreats? or wa he 
maniac, or walker in hi sleep? whichev supposit were true, it 
would be rash in me to follow him. besides, he could not long remain in 
these darksom recesses, unless some fatal accid should overtak him. 

I seat myself at the mouth of the cave, determin patient to wait 
till he should think proper to emerge. thi opportun of rest wa 
exceedingli accept after so toilsom a pilgrimage. My puls began to 
beat more slowly, and the moistur that incommod me ceas to flow. 
the coolness, which for a littl time wa delicious, present increas 
to shivering, and I found it necessari to chang my posture, in order to 
preserv my blood from congealing. 

after I had form a path befor the cavern' mouth, by the remov of 
obstructions, I employ myself in walk to and fro. In thi situat 
I saw the moon gradual declin to the horizon, and, at length, 
disappear. I mark the deepen of the shade, and the mutat which 
everi object success underwent. the vale wa narrow, and hem in 
on all side by lofti and precipit cliffs. the gloom deepen as the 
moon declined, and the faint of starlight wa all that preserv my 
sens from be useless to my own guidance. 

I drew nearer the cleft at which thi mysteri personag had entered. 
I stretch my hand befor it, determin that he should not emerg 
from hi den without my notice. hi step would, necessarily, 
commun the tide of hi approach. He could not move without a 
nois which would be echo to, on all sides, by the abrupt by which 
thi valley wa surrounded. here, then, I continu till the day began 
to dawn, in momentari expect of the stranger' reappearance. 

My attent wa at length excit by a sound that seem to issu from 
the cave. I imagin that the sleeper wa returning, and prepar 
therefor to seiz him. I blame myself for neglect the opportun 
that had alreadi been afforded, and wa determin that anoth should 
not escape. My eye were fix upon the entrance. the rustl 
increased, and present an anim leap forth, of what kind I wa 
unabl to discover. heart-struck by thi disappointment, but not 
discouraged, I continu to watch, but in vain. the day wa advanc 
apace. At length the sun arose, and it beam glisten on the edg of 
the cliff above, whose sapless stalk and rug mass were cover 
with hoarfrost. I began to despair of success, but wa unwil to 
depart until it wa no longer possibl to hope for the return of thi 
extraordinari personage. whether he had been swallow up by some of the 
abyss of thi grotto, or lurk near the entrance, wait my 
departure, or had made hi exit at anoth and distant aperture, wa 
unknown to me. 

exhaust and discouraged, I prepared, at length, to return. It wa easi 
to find my way out of thi wilder by go forward in one direction, 
regardless of impedi and cross-paths. My absenc I believ to have 
occas no alarm to my family, sinc they knew not of my intent to 
spend the night abroad. thu unsatisfactorili termin thi night' 
adventures. 




chapter iii. 


the ensu day wa spent partli in sleep, and partli in languor and 
disquietude. I incessantli rumin on the incid of the last night. 
the scheme that I had form wa defeated. wa it like that thi 
unknown person would repeat hi midnight visit to the elm? If he did, 
and could again be discovered, should I resolv to undertak a new 
pursuit, which might termin abortively, or in some signal disaster? 
but what proof had I that the same rout would be taken, and that he 
would again inter himself aliv in the same spot? or, if he did, sinc 
hi reappear would suffici prove that the cavern wa not 
dangerous, and that he who should adventur in might hope to come out 
again in safety, whi not enter it after him? what could be the 
induc of thi person to betak himself to subterranean retreats? 
the basi of all thi region is _limestone_; a substanc that 
emin abound in rift and cavities. these, by the gradual decay of 
their cement parts, frequent make their appear in spot where 
they might have been least expected. My attent ha often been excit 
by the hollow sound which wa produc by my casual footsteps, and which 
show me that I trod upon the roof of caverns. A mountain-cav and the 
rumbl of an unseen torrent are appendag of thi scene, dear to my 
youth imagination. mani of romant structur were found within the 
precinct of norwalk. 

these I had industri sought out; but thi had hitherto escap my 
observation, and I form the resolut of some time explor it. At 
present I determin to revisit the elm, and dig in the spot where thi 
person had been employ in a similar way. It might be that someth 
wa here deposit which might exhibit thi transact in a new light. 
At the suitabl hour, on the ensu night, I took my former stand. the 
person again appeared. My intent to dig wa to be carri into effect 
on condit of hi absence, and was, consequently, frustrated. 

instead of rush on him, and break at onc the spell by which hi 
sens were bound, I concluded, contrari to my first design, to wait hi 
departure, and allow myself to be conduct whithersoev he pleased. 
the track into which he now led me wa differ from the former one. It 
wa a maze, oblique, circuitous, upward and downward, in a degre which 
onli could take place in a region so remark irregular in surface, so 
abound with hillock and steep and pit and brooks, as 
_solesbury_. It seem to be the sole end of hi labour to 
bewild or fatigu hi pursuer, to pierc into the deepest thickets, to 
plung into the darkest cavities, to ascend the most difficult heights, 
and approach the slipperi and tremul verg of the dizziest 
precipices. 

I disdain to be outstrip in thi career. all danger were 
overlooked, and all difficulti defied. I plung into obscurities, and 
clamber over obstacles, from which, in a differ state of mind, and 
with a differ object of pursuit, I should have recoil with 
invinc timidity. when the scene had passed, I could not review the 
peril I had undergon without shuddering. 

At length my conductor struck into a path which, compar with the 
rugged of that which we had late trodden, wa easi and smooth. 
thi track led us to the skirt of the wilderness, and at no long time we 
reach an open field, when a dwell appeared, at a small distance, 
which I speedili recognis to be that belong to inglefield. I now 
anticip the fulfil of my predictions. My conductor direct hi 
step toward the barn, into which he enter by a small door. 

how were my doubt removed! thi wa no other than clithero edny. there 
wa noth in hi appear incompat with thi conclusion. He and 
hi fellow-serv occupi an apart in the barn as a lodging-room. 
thi arduou purpos wa accomplished, and I retir to the shelter of a 
neighbour shed, not so much to repos myself after the fatigu of my 
extraordinari journey, as to devis further expedients. 

noth now remain but to take clithero to task; to repeat to him the 
observ of the two last nights; to unfold to him my conjectur and 
suspicions; to convinc him of the rectitud of my intentions; and to 
extort from him a disclosur of all the circumst connect with the 
death of waldegrav which it wa in hi power to communicate. 

In order to obtain a conference, I resolv to invit him to my uncle' 
to perform a certain piec of work for me under my own eyes. He would, 
of course, spend the night with us, and in the even I would take an 
opportun of enter into convers with him. 

A period of the deepest deliber wa necessari to qualifi myself for 
perform suitabl my part in thi project interview. I attend to 
the feel that were suggest in thi new state of my knowledge. I 
found reason to confid in my newly-acquir equanimity. "remorse," said 
I, "i an ampl and proper expiat for all offences. what doe 
vengeanc desir but to inflict misery? If miseri come, it desir are 
accomplished. It is onli the obdur and exult crimin that is 
worthi of our indignation. It is common for piti to succeed the 
bitterest suggest of resentment. If the veng mind be delight 
with the spectacl of woe of it own contriving, at least it canin 
hunger is appeased, and thenceforth it hand are inactive." 

On the even of the next day, I paid a visit to inglefield. I wish 
to impart to him the discoveri that I had made, and to listen to hi 
reflect on the subject. I likewis desir to obtain all possibl 
inform from the famili respect the conduct of clithero. 

My friend receiv me with hi usual kindness. thou art no stranger to 
hi character; thou knowest with what patern affect I have ever 
been regard by thi old man; with what solicitud the wander of my 
reason and my freak of passion have been note and correct by him. 
thou knowest hi activ to save the life of thi brother, and the hour 
that have been spent by him in aid my conjectur as to the caus of 
hi death, and inculc the lesson of penit and duty. 

the topic which could not but occur at such a meet were quickli 
discussed, and I hastili proceed to that subject which wa nearest my 
heart. I relat the adventur of the two preced nights, and 
mention the infer to which they irresist led. 

He said that thi infer coincid with suspicion he had formed, 
sinc our last interview, in consequ of certain commun from 
hi housekeeper. It seem the charact of clithero had, from the first, 
exercis the inquisit of thi old lady. she had care mark 
hi muse and melancholi deportment. she had tri innumer 
expedi for obtain a knowledg of hi past life, and particularli 
of hi motiv for come to america. these expedients, howev profound 
and addressful, had failed. He took no pain to elud them. He content 
himself with turn a deaf ear to all indirect allus and hints, 
and, when more explicitli questioned, with simpli declar that he had 
noth to commun worthi of her notice. 

dure the day he wa a sober and dilig workman. hi even he 
spent in incommun silence. On sundays, he alway rambl away, no 
one knew whither, and without a companion. I have alreadi observ that 
he and hi fellow-serv occupi the same apart in the barn. thi 
circumst wa not unattend to by miss inglefield. the name of 
clithero' companion wa ambrose. thi man wa copious interrog by 
hi mistress, and she found him by no mean so refractori as the other. 

ambrose, in hi tediou and confus way, relat that, soon after 
clithero and he had becom bedfellows, the former wa consider 
disturb by restless and talk in hi sleep. hi discours wa 
incoherent. It wa gener in the tone of expostulation, and appear 
to be entreat to be save from some great injury. such phrase as 
these,--"hav pity;" "have mercy," were frequent intermingl with 
groans, and accompani with weeping. sometim he seem to be hold 
confer with some one who wa make him consider offer on 
condit of hi perform some danger service. what he said in hi 
own person, and in answer to hi imaginari tempter, testifi the utmost 
reluctance. 

ambros had no curios on the subject. As thi interrupt prevent 
him at first from sleeping, it wa hi custom to put an end to the 
dialogue, by awaken hi companion, who betray token of great alarm 
and deject on discov how he had been employed. He would 
solicit inquir what were the word that he had uttered; but 
ambrose' report wa seldom satisfactory, becaus he had attend to 
them but little, and becaus he grudg everi moment in which he wa 
depriv of hi accustom repose. 

whether clithero had ceas from thi practice, or habit had reconcil 
hi companion to the sounds, they no longer occas ani interrupt 
to hi slumber. 

No one appear more shock than he at the death of waldegrave. after 
thi event hi deject suddenli increased. thi symptom wa observ 
by the family, but none but the housekeep took the troubl to notic 
it to him, or build conjectur on the incident. dure nights, however, 
ambros experienc a renew of hi ancient disturbances. He remark 
that clithero, one night, had disappear from hi side. ambrose' rang 
of reflect wa extrem narrow. quickli fall asleep, and find 
hi companion besid him when he awoke, he dismiss it from hi mind. 

On sever ensu night he awaken in like manner, and alway found 
hi companion' place empty. the repetit of so strang an incid at 
length incit him to mention it to clithero. the latter wa confound 
at thi intelligence. He question ambros with great anxieti as to the 
particular of thi event, but he could gain no satisfact from the 
stupid inattent of the other. from thi time there wa a visibl 
augment of hi sadness. hi fit of taciturn becam more 
obstinate, and a deeper gloom sat upon hi brow. 

there wa one other circumstance, of particular importance, mention by 
the housekeeper. one even some one on horseback stop at thi gate. 
He rattl at the gate, with an air of authority, in token of hi desir 
that some one would come from the house. miss inglefield wa employ in 
the kitchen, from a window of which she perceiv who it wa that made 
the signal. clithero happened, at the same moment, to be employ near 
her. she, therefore, desir him to go and see whom the stranger wanted. 
He laid asid hi work and went. the confer last abov five 
minutes. the length of it excit in her a faint degre of surprise, 
induc her to leav her employ and pay an unintermit attent 
to the scene. there wa nothing, however, but it durat that render 
it remarkable. 

clithero at length entered, and the travel proceeded. the counten 
of the former betray a degre of perturb which she had never 
wit before. the muscl of hi face were distort and tremulous. 
He immedi sat down to hi work, but he seemed, for some time, to 
have lost all power over hi limbs. He struggl to avoid the sight of 
the lady, and hi gestures, irresolut or misdirected, betoken the 
deepest dismay. after some time, he recovered, in some degree, hi 
self-possession; but, while the object wa view through a new medium, 
and the chang exist onli in the imagin of the observer, a chang 
wa certainli discovered. 

these circumst were relat to me by inglefield and corrobor by 
hi housekeeper. one consequ inevit flow from them. the 
sleep-walker, he who had led me through so deviou a tract, wa no other 
than clithero. there was, likewise, a strong relat between thi person 
and him who stop at the gate. what wa the subject of discours between 
them? In answer to miss inglefield' interrogatories, he mere said 
that the travel inquir whither the road led which, at a small 
distanc forward, struck out of the princip one. consid the 
length of the interview, it wa not like that thi wa the onli topic. 

My determin to confer with him in privat acquir new forc from 
these reflections. inglefield assent to my proposal. hi own affair 
would permit the absenc of hi servant for one day. I saw no necess 
for delay, and immedi made my request to clithero. I wa fashion 
an implement, I told him, with respect to which I could not wholli 
depend upon my own skill. I wa acquaint with the dexter of hi 
contrivances, and the neat of hi workmanship. He readili consent 
to assist me on thi occasion. next day he came. contrari to my 
expectation, he prepar to return home in the evening. I urg him to 
spend the night with us: but no; it wa equal convenient, and more 
agreeabl to him, to return. 

I wa not awar of thi resolution. I might, indeed, have foreseen that, 
be consciou of hi infirmity, he would desir to avoid the scrutini 
of strangers. I wa pain disconcerted; but it occur to me, that 
the best that could be done wa to bear him company, and seiz some 
opportunity, dure thi interval, of effect my purpose. I told him, 
that, sinc he would not remain, I care not if, for the sake of 
recreation, and of a much more moment purpose, I went along with him. 
He tacitly, and without appar reluctance, consent to my scheme, 
and, accordingly, we set off together. thi wa an aw crisis. the 
time had now come that wa to dissip my uncertainty. By what mean 
should I introduc a topic so moment and singular? I had been 
qualifi by no experi for rightli conduct myself on so critic 
an emergency. My companion preserv a mourn and inviol silence. 
He afford me no open by which I might reach the point in view. hi 
demeanour wa sedate, while I wa almost disabled, by the confus of 
my thoughts, to utter a word. 

It wa a dread charg that I wa about to insinuate. I wa to accus 
my companion of noth less than murder. I wa to call upon him for an 
avow of hi guilt. I wa to state the ground of my suspicions, and 
desir him to confut or confirm them. In do this, I wa princip 
stimul by an ungovern curiosity; yet, if I intend not the 
confer of a benefit, I did not, at least, purpos the inflict of 
evil. I persuad myself that I wa abl to exclud from my bosom all 
sanguinari or veng impulses; and that, whatev should be the issu 
of thi conversation, my equanim would be unsubdued. 

I revolv variou mode of introduc the topic by which my mind wa 
engaged. I pass rapidli from one to another. none of them were 
suffici free from object to allow me to adopt it. My perplex 
became, everi moment, more painful, and my abil to extric myself, 
less. 

In thi state of uncertainty, so much time elapsed, that the elm at 
length appear in sight. thi object had somewhat of a mechan 
influenc upon me. I stop short, and seiz the arm of my companion. 
till thi moment, he appear to have been engross by hi own 
reflections, and not to have heed those emot which must have been 
suffici conspicu in my looks. 

thi action recal him from hi reverie. the first idea that occur 
to him, when he had notic my behaviour, was, that I wa assail by 
some sudden indisposition. 

"what is the matter?" said he, in a tone of anxiety: "are you not well?" 

"yes," repli i,--"perfectli well. but stop a moment; I have someth 
to say to you." 

"to me?" answer he, with surprise. 

"yes," said I. "let us turn down thi path," (pointing, at the same 
time, to that along which I had follow him the preced night.) 

He now partook, in some degree, of my embarrassment. 

"i there ani thing particular?" said he, in a doubt accent. there he 
stopped. 

"something," I answered, "of the highest moment. Go with me down thi 
path. We shall be in less danger of interruption." 

He wa irresolut and silent, but, see me remov the bar and pass 
through them, he follow me. noth more wa said till we enter the 
wood. I trust to the suggest of the moment. I had now gone too far 
to recede, and the necess that press upon me suppli me with 
words. I continued:-- 

"thi is a remark spot. you may wonder whi I have led you to it. I 
ought not to keep you in suspense. there is a tale connect with it, 
which I am desir of tell you. for thi purpos I have brought you 
hither. listen to me." 

I then recapitul the adventur of the two preced nights. I ad 
nothing, nor retrench ani thing. He listen in the deepest silence. 
from everi incident, he gather new caus of alarm. repeatedli he wipe 
hi face with hi handkerchief, and sigh deeply. I took no verbal 
notic of these symptoms. I deem it incumb on me to repress 
nothing. when I came to the conclud circumstance, by which hi person 
wa identified, he heard me without ani new surprise. To thi narr 
I subjoin the inquiri that I had made at inglefield's, and the 
result of those inquiries. I then continu in these words:-- 

"you may ask whi I subject myself to all thi trouble. the 
mysteri of these transact would have natur suggest 
curios in ani one. A transient passeng would probabl have act as 
I have done. but I had motiv peculiar to myself. need I remind you of 
a late disaster? that it happen beneath the shade of thi tree? Am I 
not justifi in draw certain infer from your behaviour? what 
they are, I leav you to judge. Be it your task to confut or confirm 
them. for thi end I have conduct you hither. 

"mi suspicion are vehement. how can they be otherwise? I call upon you 
to say whether they be just." 

the spot where we stood wa illumin by the moon, that had now risen, 
though all around wa dark. henc hi featur and person were easili 
distinguished. hi hand hung at hi side. hi eye were downcast, and 
he wa motionless as a statue. My last word seem scarc to have 
made ani impress on hi sense. I had no need to provid against the 
possibl suggest of revenge. I felt noth but the tender of 
compassion. I continued, for some time, to observ him in silence, and 
could discov no token of a chang of mood. I could not forbear, at 
last, to express my uneasi at the fixed of hi featur and 
attitude. 

"recollect yourself. I mean not to urg you too closely. thi topic is 
solemn, but it need not divest you of the fortitud becom a man." 

the sound of my voic startl him. He broke from me, look up, and 
fix hi eye upon me with an express of affright. He shudder and 
recoil as from a spectre. I began to repent of my experiment. I could 
say noth suitabl to thi occasion. I wa oblig to stand a silent 
and powerless spectator, and to suffer thi paroxysm to subsid of 
itself. when it violenc appear to be somewhat abated, I resumed:-- 

"I can feel for you. I act not thu in complianc with a temper that 
delight in the miseri of others. the explan that I have solicit 
is no less necessari for your sake than for mine. you are no stranger to 
the light in which I view thi man. you have wit the grief which 
hi fate occasioned, and the effort that I made to discov and drag to 
punish hi murderer. you heard the execr that I heap upon 
him, and my vow of etern revenge. you expect that, have detect 
the offender, I will hunt him to infami and death. you are mistaken. I 
consid the deed as suffici expiated. 

"I am no stranger to your gnaw cares; to the deep and incur 
despair that haunt you, to which your wake thought are a prey, and 
from which sleep cannot secur you. I know the enorm of your crime, 
but I know not your inducements. whatev they were, I see the 
consequ with regard to yourself. I see proof of that remors which 
must ever be attend on guilt. 

"thi is enough. whi should the effect of our misde be 
inexhaustible? whi should we be debar from a comforter? An 
opportun of repair our error may, at least, be demand from the 
ruler of our destiny. 

"I onc imagin that he who kill waldegrav inflict the greatest 
possibl injuri on me. that wa an error, which reflect ha cured. 
were futur laid open to my view, and events, with their consequences, 
unfolded, I might see reason to embrac the assassin as my best friend. 
Be comforted." 

He wa still incap of speaking; but tear came to hi relief. 
without attend to my remonstrances, he betray a disposit to 
return. I had, hitherto, hope for some disclosure, but now fear that 
it wa design to be withheld. He stop not till we reach 
inglefield' piazza. He then spoke, for the first time, but in a hollow 
and tremul voice:-- 

"you demand of me a confess of crimes. you shall have it. some time 
you shall have it. when it will be, I cannot tell. someth must be 
done, and shortly." 

He hurri from me into the house, and, after a pause, I turn my 
step home wards. My reflections, as I proceeded, perpetu revolv 
round a singl point. these were scarc more than a repetition, with 
slight variations, of a singl idea. 

when I awok in the morning, I hied, in fancy, to the wilderness. I saw 
noth but the figur of the wander befor me. I trace hi footstep 
anew, retold my narrative, and ponder on hi gestur and words. My 
condit wa not destitut of enjoyment. My stormi passion had 
subsid into a calm, portent and awful. My soul wa big with 
expectation. I seem as if I were on the eve of be usher into a 
world whose scene were tremend but sublime. the suggest of 
sorrow and malic had, for a time, taken their flight, and yield place 
to a gener sympathy, which fill my eye with tears, but had more in 
it of pleasur than of pain. that clithero wa instrument to the death 
of waldegrave, that he could furnish the clue explanatori of everi 
bloodi and mysteri event that had hitherto occurred, there wa no 
longer the possibl of doubting. "he, indeed," said I, "i the 
murder of excellence; and yet it shall be my provinc to emul a 
father' clemency, and restor thi unhappi man to puriti and to peace." 

day after day passed, without hear ani thing of clithero. I began to 
grow uneasi and impatient. I had gain so much, and by mean so 
unexpected, that I could more easili endur uncertainti with respect to 
what remain to be known. but my patienc had it limits. I should, 
doubtless, have made use of new mean to acceler thi discovery, had 
not hi time appear made them superfluous. 

sunday be at length arrived, I resolv to go to inglefield's, seek 
an interview with hi servant, and urg him, by new importunities, to 
confid to me the secret. On my way thither, clithero appear in sight. 
hi visag wa pale and wan, and hi form emaci and shrunk. I wa 
astonish at the alter which the laps of a week had made in hi 
appearance. At a small distanc I mistook him for a stranger. As soon as 
I perceiv who it was, I greet him with the utmost friendliness. My 
civil made littl impress on him, and he hasten to inform me, 
that he wa come to my uncle's, for the purpos of meet and talk 
with me. If I thought proper, we would go into the wood together, and 
find some spot where we might discours at our leisur and be exempt 
from interruption. 

you will easili conceiv with what alacr I accept hi invitation. 
We return from the road into the first path, and proceed in silence, 
till the wild of the surround sceneri inform us that we were in 
the heart of norwalk. We light on a recess, to which my companion 
appear to be familiar, and which had all the advantag of solitude, 
and wa suitabl to rest. here we stopped. hitherto my companion had 
display a certain degre of composure. now hi counten betoken a 
violent intern struggle. It wa a consider time befor he could 
command hi speech. when he had so far effect the conquest of hi 
feelings, he began. 




chapter iv. 


you call upon me for a confess of my offences. what a strang fortun 
is mine! that a human being, in the present circumstances, should make 
thi demand, and that I should be driven, by an irresist necessity, 
to compli with it! that here should termin my calamit series! that 
my destini should call upon me to lie down and die, in a region so 
remot from the scene of my crime; at a distanc so great from all that 
wit and endur their consequences! 

you believ me to be an assassin. you requir me to explain the motiv 
that induc me to murder the innocent. while thi is your belief, and 
thi the scope of your expectations, you may be sure of my compliance. I 
could resist everi demand but this. 

for what purpos have I come hither? Is it to relat my story? shall I 
calmli sit here, and rehears the incid of my life? will my strength 
be adequ to thi rehearsal? let me recollect the motiv that 
govern me, when I form thi design. perhap a strenuous may be 
impart by them which, otherwise, I cannot hope to obtain. for the sake 
of those, I consent to conjur up the ghost of the past, and to begin a 
tale that, with a fortitud like mine, I am not sure that I shall live 
to finish. 

you are unacquaint with the man befor you. the infer which you 
have drawn, with regard to my design and my conduct, are a tissu of 
destruct errors. you, like others, are blind to the most moment 
consequ of your own actions. you talk of impart consolation. you 
boast the benefic of your intentions. you set yourself to do me a 
benefit. what are the effect of your misguid zeal and random efforts? 
they have brought my life to a miser close. they have shroud the 
last scene of it in blood. they have put the seal to my perdition. 

My miseri ha been greater than ha fallen to the lot of mortals. yet it 
is but beginning. My present path, full as it is of asperities, is 
better than that into which I must enter when thi is abandoned. 
perhaps, if my pilgrimag had been longer, I might, at some futur day, 
have light upon hope. In consequ of your interference, I am 
forev debar from it. My exist is henceforward to be invariable. 
the woe that are reserv for me are incap alik of allevi or 
intermission. 

but I came not hither to recriminate. I came not hither to accus 
others, but myself. I know the retribut that is appoint for guilt 
like mine. It is just. I may shudder at the foresight of my punish 
and shrink in the endur of it; but I shall be indebt for part of 
my torment to the vigour of my understanding, which teach me that my 
punish is just. whi should I procrastin my doom and strive to 
render my burden more light? It is but just that it should crush me. it 
procrastin is impossible. the stroke is alreadi felt. even now I 
drink of the cup of retribution. A chang of be cannot aggrav my 
woe. till conscious itself be extinct, the worm that gnaw me will 
never perish. 

fain would I be reliev from thi task. gladli would I buri in oblivion 
the transact of my life. but no! My fate is uniform. the demon that 
control me at first is still in the fruition of power. I am entangl 
in hi fold, and everi effort that I make to escap onli involv me in 
deeper ruin. I need not conceal, for all the consequ of disclosur 
are alreadi experienced. I cannot endur a groundless imputation, though 
to free me from it I must creat and justifi imput still more 
atrocious. My stori may at least be brief. If the agoni of remembr 
must be awaken afresh, let me do all that in me lie to shorten them. 

I wa born in the counti of armagh. My parent were of the better sort 
of peasants, and were abl to provid me with the rudiment of 
knowledge. I should doubtless have trodden in their footsteps, and have 
spent my life in the cultiv of their scanti fields, if an event had 
not happened, which, for a long time, I regard as the most fortun 
of my life, but which I now regard as the scheme of some infern agent, 
and as the primari sourc of all my calamities. 

My father' farm wa a portion of the demesn of one who resid wholli 
in the metropoli and consign the manag of hi estat to hi 
steward and retainers. thi person marri a ladi who brought him great 
access of fortune. her wealth wa her onli recommend in the eye 
of her husband, (whose understand wa deprav by the prejudic of 
luxuri and rank,) but wa the least of her attract in the estim 
of reason beings. 

they pass some year together. If their union were not a sourc of 
miseri to the lady, she wa indebt for her tranquil to the forc 
of her mind. she was, indeed, governed, in everi action of her life, by 
the precept of duty, while her husband listen to no call but those 
of pernici dissipation. He wa immers in all the vice that grow 
out of opul and a mistaken education. 

happili for hi wife, hi career wa short. He wa enrag at the 
infidel of hi mistress, to purchas whose attach he had lavish 
two-third of hi fortune. He call the paramour, by whom he had been 
supplanted, to the field. the contest wa obstinate, and termin in 
the death of the challenger. 

thi event freed the ladi from mani distress and humili 
obligations. she determin to profit by her newly-acquir 
independence, to live thenceforward conform to her notion of right, 
to preserv and improve, by scheme of economy, the remain of her 
fortune, and to employ it in the diffus of good. her plan made it 
necessari to visit her estat in the distant provinces. 

dure her abod in the manor of which my father wa a vassal, she 
visit hi cottage. I wa at that time a child. she wa pleas with my 
vivac and promptitude, and determin to take me under her own 
protection. My parent joy acced to her proposal, and I return 
with her to the capital. 

she had an onli son of my own age. her design, in relat to me, wa 
that I should be educ with her child, and that an affection, in thi 
way, might be excit in me toward my young master, which might render 
me, when we should attain to manhood, one of hi most faith and 
intellig dependants. I enjoyed, equal with him, all the essenti 
benefit of education. there were certain accomplishments, from which I 
wa excluded, from the belief that they were unsuit to my rank and 
station. I wa permit to acquir others, which, had she been actuat 
by true discernment, she would, perhaps, have discov to be far more 
incompat with a servil station. In proport as my view were 
refin and enlarg by histori and science, I wa like to contract a 
thirst of independence, and an impati of subject and poverty. 

when the period of childhood and youth wa past, it wa thought proper 
to send her son to improv hi knowledg and manner by a resid on 
the continent. thi young man wa endow with splendid abilities. hi 
error were the growth of hi condition. all the expedi that 
matern solicitud and wisdom could suggest were employ to render him 
a use citizen. perhap thi wisdom wa attest by the larg share of 
excel which he realli possessed; and that hi charact wa not 
unblemish prove onli that no exert could preserv him from the 
vice that are inher in wealth and rank, and which flow from the 
spectacl of univers depravity. 

As to me, it would be folli to deni that I had benefit by my 
opportun of improvement. I fulfil the expect of my 
mistress, in one respect. I wa deepli imbu with affect for her 
son, and rever for herself. perhap the forc of educ wa 
evinc in those particulars, without reflect ani credit on the 
director of it. those might merit the name of defects, which were 
regard by them as accomplishments. My unfavour qualities, like 
those of my master, were imput to my condition, though, perhaps, the 
differ wa advantag to me, sinc the vice of servitud are less 
hate than those of tyranny. 

It wa resolv that I should accompani my master in hi travels, in 
qualiti of favourit domestic. My principles, whatev might be their 
rectitude, were harmoni and flexible. I had devot my life to the 
servic of my patron. I had form concept of what wa realli 
conduc to hi interest, and wa not to be misl by speciou 
appearances. If my affect had not stimul my diligence, I should 
have found suffici motiv in the behaviour of hi mother. she 
condescend to express her relianc on my integr and judgment. she 
wa not asham to manifest, at parting, the tender of a mother, and 
to acknowledg that all her tear were not shed on her son' account. I 
had my part in the regret that call them forth. 

dure our absence, I wa my master' constant attendant. I correspond 
with hi mother, and made the conduct of her son the princip theme of 
my letters. I deem it my privilege, as well as duty, to sit in 
judgment on hi actions, to form my opinion without regard to selfish 
considerations, and to avow them whenev the avow tend to benefit. 
everi letter which I wrote, particularli those in which hi behaviour 
wa freeli criticized, I allow him to peruse. I would, on no account, 
conniv at or particip in the slightest irregularity. I knew the duti 
of my station, and assum no other control than that which result 
from the avoid of deceit, and the open express of my sentiments. 
the youth wa of a nobl spirit, but hi firm wa wavering. He 
yield to temptat which a censor less rigor than I would have 
regard as venial, or, perhaps, laudable. My duti requir me to set 
befor him the consequ of hi actions, and to give imparti and 
time inform to hi mother. 

He could not brook a monitor. the more he need reproof the less 
support it became. My compani becam everi day less agreeable, till 
at length there appear a necess of parting. A separ took 
place, but not as enemies. I never lost hi respect. In hi 
represent to hi mother, he wa just to my charact and services. 
My dismiss wa not allow to injur my fortune, and hi mother 
consid thi event mere as a new proof of the inflex 
consist of my principles. 

On thi chang in my situation, she propos to me to becom a member of 
her own family. No propos could be more acceptable. I wa fulli 
acquaint with the charact of thi lady, and had noth to fear from 
injustic and caprice. I did not regard her with filial familiarity, but 
my attach and rever would have done honour to that relation. I 
perform for her the function of a steward. her estat in the citi 
were put under my direction. she place boundless confid in my 
discret and integrity, and consign to me the payment, and, in some 
degree, the select and government, of her servants. My station wa a 
servil one, yet most of the evil of servitud were unknown to me. My 
person eas and independ were less infring than that of those 
who are account the freest member of society. I deriv a sort of 
author and digniti from the receipt and disburs of money. the 
tenant and debtor of the ladi were, in some respects, mine. It was, 
for the most part, on my justic and leniti that they depend for their 
treatment. My lady' household-establish wa larg and opulent. her 
servant were my inferior and menials. My leisur wa considerable, and 
my emolu larg enough to suppli me with everi valuabl instrument 
of improv or pleasure. 

these were reason whi I should be content with my lot. these 
circumst alon would have render it more elig than ani other, 
but it had addit and far more power recommendations, aris 
from the charact of mrs. lorimer, and from the relat in which she 
allow me to stand to her. 

how shall I enter upon thi theme? how shall I expati upon 
excel which it wa my fate to view in their genuin colours, to 
ador with an immeasur and inextinguish ardour, and which, 
nevertheless, it wa my hate task to blast and destroy? yet I will 
not be spared. I shall find, in the rehearsal, new incit to 
sorrow. I deserv to be suprem in misery, and will not be deni the 
full measur of a bitter retribution. 

No one wa better qualifi to judg of her excellencies. A casual 
spectat might admir her beauty, and the digniti of her demeanour. 
from the contempl of those, he might gather motiv for love or 
rever her. age wa far from have wither her complexion, or 
destroy the even of her skin; but no time could rob her of the 
sweet and intellig which anim her features. her habitu 
benefic wa bespoken in everi look. alway in search of occas 
for do good, alway medit scene of happiness, of which she wa 
the author, or of distress, for which she wa prepar relief, the most 
torpid insens was, for a time, subdued, and the most deprav 
smitten by charm of which, in anoth person, they would not perhap 
have been sensible. 

A casual visit might enjoy her conversation, might applaud the 
rectitud of her sentiments, the rich of her elocution, and her 
skill in all the offic of politeness. but it wa onli for him who 
dwelt constantli under the same roof, to mark the inviol consist 
of her action and opinions, the ceaseless flow of her candour, her 
cheerfulness, and her benevolence. It wa onli for one who wit her 
behaviour at all hours, in sick and in health, her manag of 
that great instrument of evil and good, money, her treatment of her son, 
her menials, and her kindred, rightli to estim her merits. 

the intercours between us wa frequent, but of a peculiar kind. My 
offic in her famili requir me often to see her, to submit scheme to 
her consideration, and receiv her directions. At these time she 
treat me in a manner in some degre adapt to the differ of rank 
and the inferior of my station, and yet wide dissimilar from that 
which a differ person would have adopt in the same circumstances. 
the treatment wa not that of an equal and a friend, but still more 
remot wa it from that of a mistress. It wa mere character by 
affabl and condescension, but as such it had no limits. 

she made no scrupl to ask my counsel in everi pecuniari affair, to 
listen to my arguments, and decid conform to what, after suffici 
canvass and discussions, should appear to be right. when the direct 
occas of our interview were dismissed, I did not of cours withdraw. 
To detain or dismiss me wa inde at her option; but, if no engag 
interfered, she would enter into gener conversation. there wa none 
who could with more safeti to herself have made the world her confessor; 
but the state of societi in which she live impos certain limit 
on her candour. In her intercours with me there were fewer restraint 
than on ani other occasion. My situat had made me more intim 
acquaint with domest transactions, with her view respect her 
son, and with the term on which she thought proper to stand with those 
whom old acquaint or kindr gave some titl to her good offices. In 
addit to all those motiv to a candid treatment of me, there were 
other which owe their efficaci to her matern regard for me, and to 
the artless and unsuspect generos of her character. 

her hour were distribut with the utmost regularity, and appropri 
to the best purposes. she select her societi without regard to ani 
qualiti but probiti and talents. her associ were numerous, and her 
even convers embellish with all that could charm the sens 
or instruct the understanding. thi wa a chosen field for the display 
of her magnificence; but her grandeur wa unostentatious, and her 
graviti unmingl with haughtiness. from these my station exclud me; 
but I wa compens by the freedom of her commun in the 
intervals. she found pleasur in detail to me the incid that 
pass on those occasions, in rehears convers and depict 
characters. there wa an uncommon portion of dramat merit in her 
recitals, besid valuabl and curiou information. one uniform effect 
wa produc in me by thi behaviour. each day I thought it imposs 
for my attach to receiv ani new accessions, yet the morrow wa sure 
to produc some new emot of respect or of gratitude, and to set the 
unrival accomplish of thi ladi in a new and more favour 
point of view. I contempl no chang in my condition. the necess 
of change, whatev were the alternative, would have been a subject of 
pierc regret. I deem my life a cheap sacrific in her cause. No 
time would suffic to discharg the debt of gratitud that wa due to 
her. yet it wa continu accumulating. If an anxiou thought ever 
invad my bosom, it aros from thi source. 

It wa no difficult task faith to execut the function assign to 
me. No merit could accru to me from thi source. I wa expos to no 
temptation. I had pass the feverish period of youth. No contagi 
exampl had contamin my principles. I had resisted, the allur 
of sensual and dissip incid to my age. My dwell wa in 
pomp and splendour. I had amass suffici to secur me, in case of 
unforeseen accidents, in the enjoy of competence. My mental 
resourc were not despicable, and the extern mean of intellectu 
gratif were boundless. I enjoy an unsulli reputation. My 
charact wa well known in that sphere which my ladi occupied, not onli 
by mean of her favour report, but in numberless way in which it 
wa my fortun to perform person servic to others. 




chapter V. 


mrs. lorim had a twin-brother. natur had impress the same imag 
upon them, and had model them after the same pattern. the resembl 
between them wa exact to a degre almost incredible. In infanc and 
childhood they were perpetu liabl to be mistaken for each other. As 
they grew up, nothing, to a superfici examination, appear to 
distinguish them, but the sexual characteristics. A sagaci observ 
would, doubtless, have note the most essenti differences. In all 
those modif of the featur which are produc by habit and 
sentiments, no two person were less alike. natur seem to have 
intend them as exampl of the futil of those theori which 
ascrib everi thing to conform and instinct and noth to extern 
circumstances; in what differ mode the same materi may be 
fashioned, and to what differ purpos the same materi may be 
applied. perhap the rudiment of their intellectu character, as well 
as of their form, were the same; but the power that in one case were 
exert in the caus of virtu were, in the other, misappli to sordid 
and flagiti purposes. 

arthur wiatt (that wa hi name) had ever been the object of hi 
sister' affection. As long as he existed, she never ceas to labour in 
the promot of hi happiness. all her kind wa repaid by a stern 
and inexor hatred. thi man wa an except to all the rule which 
govern us in our judgment of human nature. He exceed in deprav all 
that ha been imput to the arch-fo of mankind. hi wicked wa 
without ani of those remors intermiss from which it ha been 
suppos that the deepest guilt is not entir exempt. He seem to 
relish no food but pure unadulter evil. He rejoic in proport to 
the depth of that distress of which he wa the author. 

hi sister, by be place most within the reach of hi enmity, 
experienc it worst effects. she wa the subject on which, by be 
acquaint with the mean of influenc her happiness, he could tri hi 
malign experi with most hope of success. her parent be high 
in rank and wealth, the marriag of their daughter was, of course, an 
object of anxiou attention. there is no event on which our felic and 
use more materi depends, and with regard to which, therefore, 
the freedom of choic and the exercis of our own understand ought to 
be less infringed; but thi maxim is commonli disregard in proport 
to the elev of our rank and extent of our property. 

the ladi made her own election; but she wra one of those who act on a 
comprehens plan, and would not admit her privat inclin to 
dictat her decision. the happi of others, though found on 
mistaken views, she did not consid as unworthi of her regard. the 
choic wa such as wa not like to obtain the parent sanction, to 
whom the moral qualiti of their son-in-law, though not absolut 
weightless in the balance, were greatli inferior to the consider 
of wealth and dignity. 

the brother set no valu on ani thing but the mean of luxuri and power. 
He wa astonish at that pervers which entertain a differ 
concept of happi from himself. love and friendship he consid 
as groundless and chimerical, and believ that those delus would, 
in peopl of sense, be rectifi by experience; but he knew the 
obstinaci of hi sister' attach to these phantoms, and that to 
bereav her of the good they promis wa the most effectu mean of 
render her miserable. for thi end he set himself to thwart her 
wishes. In the imbecil and fals indulg of hi parent he found 
the most power auxiliaries. He prevail upon them to forbid that 
union which want noth but their concurrence, and their consent to 
endow her with a small portion of their patrimony, to render complet 
eligible. the caus wa that of her happi and the happi of him 
on whom she had bestow her heart. It behoov her, therefore, to call 
forth all her energi in defenc of it, to weaken her brother' 
influenc on the mind of her parents, or to win him to be her advocate. 
when I reflect upon her mental powers, and the advantag which should 
seem to flow from the circumst of plead in the charact of 
daughter arid sister, I can scarc believ that her attempt 
miscarried. I should have imagin that all obstacl would yield befor 
her, and particularli in a case like this, in which she must have 
summon all her forces, and never have believ that she had struggl 
sufficiently. 

certain it is that her lot wa fixed. she wa not onli deni the 
husband of her choice, but anoth wa impos upon her, whose 
recommend were irresist in everi one' apprehens but her 
own. the discard lover wa treat with everi sort of contumely. 
deceit and violenc were employ by her brother to bring hi honour, 
hi liberty, and even hi life, into hazard. all these iniqu 
produc no inconsider effect on the mind of the lady. the 
machin to which her love wa expos would have exasper him 
into madness, had not her most strenuou exert been direct to 
appeas him. 

she prevail on him at length to abandon hi country, though she 
therebi mere turn her brother' deprav into a new channel. her 
parent die without conscious of the evil they inflicted, but they 
experienc a bitter retribut in the conduct of their son. He wa the 
darl and stay of an ancient and illustri house, but hi action 
reflect noth but disgrac upon hi ancestry, and threaten to 
bring the honour of their line to a period in hi person. At their 
death the bulk of their patrimoni devolv upon him. thi he speedili 
consum in game and riot. from splendid he descend to meaner vices. 
the effort of hi sister to recal him to virtu were unintermit and 
fruitless. her affect for him he convert into a mean of prolong 
hi selfish gratifications. she decid for the best. It wa no argument 
of weak that she wa so frequent deceived. If she had judg truli 
of her brother, she would have judg not onli without example, but in 
opposit to the gener experi of mankind. but she wa not to be 
forev deceived. her tender wa subservi to justice. and when 
hi vice had led him from the gaming-t to the highway, when seiz 
at length by the minist of law, when convict and sentenc to 
transportation, her intercess wa solicited, when all the world knew 
that pardon would readili be grant to a suppliant of her rank, 
fortune, and character, when the crimin himself, hi kindred, hi 
friends, and even indiffer persons, implor her interference, her 
justic wa inflexible. she knew full well the incur of hi 
depravity; that banish wa the mildest destini that would befal 
him; that estrang from ancient haunt and associ wa the 
condit from which hi true friend had least to fear. find 
entreati unavailing, the wretch deliv himself to the suggest 
of hi malice, and he vow to be bloodili reveng on her 
inflexibility. the sentenc wa executed. that charact must inde be 
monstrou from which the execut of such threat wa to be dreaded. 
the event suffici show that our fear on thi head were well 
grounded. thi event, however, wa at a great distance. It wa report 
that the felons, of whom he wa one, mutini on board the ship in which 
they had been embarked. In the affray that succeeded, it wa said that 
he wa killed. 

among the nefari deed which he perpetr wa to be number the 
seduct of a young lady, whose heart wa broken by the detect of 
hi perfidy. the fruit of thi unhappi union wa a daughter. her mother 
die shortli after her birth. her father wa careless of her destiny. 
she wa consign to the care of a hireling, who, happili for the 
innoc victim, perform the matern offic for her own sake, and 
did not allow the want of a stipul recompens to render hor cruel or 
neglectful. 

thi orphan wa sought out by the benevol of mrs. lorim and place 
under her own protection. she receiv from her the treatment of a 
mother. the tie of kindred, corrobor by habit, wa not the onli 
thing that unit them. that resembl to herself which had been so 
deplor defect in her brother wa complet realiz in hi 
offspring. natur seem to have preclud everi differ between them 
but that of age. thi darl object excit in her bosom more than 
matern sympathies. her soul clung to the happi of her 
_clarice_ with more ardour than to that of her own son. the latter 
wa not onli less worthi of affection, but their separ necessarili 
diminish their mutual confidence. 

It wa natur for her to look forward to the futur destini of 
_clarice_. On these occas she could not help contempl the 
possibl of a union between her son and niece. consider 
advantag belong to thi scheme, yet it wa the subject of hope 
rather than the scope of a project. the conting were numer and 
delic on which the ultim desir of thi union depended. she 
wa far from certain that her son would be worthi of thi benefit, or 
that, if he were worthy, hi propens would not select for 
themselv a differ object. It wa equal dubiou whether the young 
ladi would not think proper otherwis to dispos of her affections. 
these uncertainti could be dissip onli by time. meanwhil she wa 
chiefli solicit to render them virtuou and wise. 

As they advanc in years, the hope that she had form were 
annihilated. the youth wa not exempt from egregi errors. In addit 
to this, it wa manifest that the young peopl were dispos to regard 
each other in no other light than that of brother and sister. I wa not 
unappr of her views. I saw that their union wa impossible. I wa 
near enough to judg of the charact of clarice. My youth and 
intellectu constitut made me peculiarli suscept to femal 
charms. I wa her playfellow in childhood, and her associ in studi 
and amus at a matur age. thi situat might have been 
suspect of a danger tendency. thi tendency, however, wa obviat 
by motiv of which I was, for a long time, scarc conscious. 

I wa habitu to consid the distinct of rank as indelible. the 
obstruct that existed, to ani wish that I might form, were like 
those of time and space, and, in their own nature, as insuperable. 

such wa the state of thing previou to our set out upon our 
travels. claric wa indirectli includ in our correspondence. My 
letter were open to her inspection, and I wa sometim honour with a 
few complimentari line under her own hand. On return to my ancient 
abode, I wa onc more expos to those sinist influenc which 
absenc had at least suspended. variou suitor had, meanwhile, been 
rejected. their character, for the most part, had been such as to 
account for her refusal, without resort to the supposit of a 
lurk or unavow attachment. 

On our meet she greet me in a respect but dignifi manner. 
observ could discov in it noth not correspond to that 
differ of fortun which subsist between us. If her joy, on that 
occasion, had in it some portion of tenderness, the soft of her 
temper, and the peculiar circumst in which we had been placed, 
be considered, the most rigid censor could find no occas for blame 
or suspicion. 

A year pass away, but not without my attent be solicit by 
someth new and inexplic in my own sensations. At first I wa not 
awar of their true cause; but the gradual progress of my feel left 
me not long in doubt as to their origin. I wa alarm at the discovery, 
but my courag did not suddenli desert me. My hope seem to be 
extinguish the moment that I distinctli perceiv the point to which 
they led. My mind had undergon a change. the idea with which it wa 
fraught wrere varied. the sight or recollect of claric wa sure to 
occas my mind to advert to the recent discovery, and to revolv the 
consider natur connect with it. some latent glow and secret 
trepid were likewis experienced, when, by some accident, our 
meet were abrupt or our interview unwitnessed; yet my usual 
tranquil wa not as yet sensibl diminished. I could bear to think 
of her marriag with anoth without pain emotions, and wa anxiou 
onli that her choic should be judici and fortunate. 

My thought could not long continu in thi state. they gradual becam 
more ardent and museful. the imag of claric occur with unseason 
frequency. it charm were enhanc by some nameless and indefin 
additions. when it met me in the way I wa irresist dispos to stop 
and survey it with particular attention. the pathet cast of her 
features, the deep glow of her cheek, and some catch of melt music 
she had late breathed, stole incessantli upon my fancy. On recov 
from my thought moods, I sometim found my cheek wet with tear 
that had fallen unperceived, and my bosom heav with involuntari sighs. 
these imag did not content themselv with invad my wake hours, 
but, likewise, encroach upon my sleep. I could no longer resign myself 
to slumber with the same eas as before. when I slept, my vision were 
of the same impass tenor. 

there wa no difficulti in judg rightli of my situation. I knew what 
it wa that duti exact from me. To remain in my present situat wa 
a chimer project. that time and reflect would suffic to restor 
me to myself wa a notion equal fallacious. yet I felt an 
insupport reluct to chang it. thi reluct wa owing, not 
wholli or chiefli to my grow passion, but to the attach which 
bound me to the servic of my lady. all my contempl had hitherto 
been model on the belief of my remain in my present situat 
dure my life. My mildest anticip had never fashion an event 
like this. ani misfortun wa light in comparison with that which tore 
me from her presenc and service. but, should I ultim resolv to 
separate, how should I commun my purpose? the pain of part would 
scarc be less on her side than on mine. could I consent to be the 
author of disquietud to her? I had consecr all my faculti to her 
service. thi wa the recompens which it wa in my power to make for 
the benefit that I had received. would not thi procedur bear the 
appear of the basest ingratitude? the shadow of an imput like 
thi wa more excruci than the rack. 

what motiv could I assign for my conduct? the truth must not be told. 
thi would be equival to supplic for a new benefit. It would 
more becom me to lessen than increas my obligations. among all my 
imagin on thi subject, the possibl of a mutual passion never 
occur to me. I could not be blind to the essenti distinct that 
subsist among men. I could expatiate, like others, on the futil of 
ribbon and titles, and on the digniti that wa annex to skill and 
virtue; but these, for the most part, were the incoher of 
speculation, and in no degre influenc the stream of my action and 
practic sentiments. the barrier that exist in the present case I 
deem insurmountable. thi wa not even the subject of doubt. In 
disclos the truth, I should be conceiv to be solicit my lady' 
merci and intercession; but thi would be the mad of presumption. 
let me impress her with ani other opinion than that I go in search of 
the happi that I have lost under her roof. let me save her gener 
heart from the pang which thi persuas would infal produce. 

I could form no stabl resolutions. I seem unalter convinc of 
the necess of separation, and yet could not execut my design. when I 
had wrought up my mind to the intent of explain myself on the next 
interview, when the next interview took place my tongu wa powerless. I 
admit ani excus for postpon my design, and gladli admit ani 
topic, howev foreign to my purpose. 

It must not be imagin that my health sustain no injuri from thi 
conflict of my passions. My patro perceiv thi alteration. she 
inquir with the most affection solicitud into the cause. It could 
not be explained. I could safe make light of it, and repres it as 
someth which would probabl disappear of itself, as it origin 
without ani adequ cause. she wa oblig to acquiesc in my imperfect 
account. 

day after day pass in thi state of fluctuation. I wa consciou of 
the danger of delay, and that procrastination, without render the 
task less necessary, augment it difficulties. At length, summon my 
resolution, I demand an audience. she receiv me with her usual 
affability. common topic were started; but she saw the confus and 
trepid of my thoughts, and quickli relinquish them. she then 
notic to me what she had observed, and mention the anxieti which 
these appear had given her she remind me of the matern regard 
which she had alway manifest toward me, and appeal to my own heart 
whether ani thing could be said in vindic of that reserv with 
which I had late treat her, and urg me, as I valu her good 
opinion, to explain the caus of a deject _that wa too 
visible_. 

To all thi I could make but one answer:--"think me not, madam, pervers 
or ungrateful. I came just now to appriz you of a resolut that I had 
formed. I cannot explain the motiv that induc me. In thi case, to 
lie to you would be unpardonable, and, sinc I cannot assign my true 
motives, I will not mislead you by fals representations. I came to 
inform you of my intent to leav your service, and to retire, with 
the fruit of your bounty, to my nativ village, where I shall spend my 
life, I hope, in peace." 

her surpris at thi declar wa beyond measure. she could not 
believ her ears. she had not heard me rightly. she compel me to 
repeat it. still I wa jesting. I could not possibl mean what my word 
imported. 

I assur her, in term still more explicit, that my resolut wa 
taken and wa unalterable, and again entreat her to spare me the task 
of assign my motives. 

thi wa a strang determination. what could be the ground of thi new 
scheme? what could be the necess of hide them from her? thi 
mysteri wa not to be endured. she could by no mean away with it. she 
thought it hard that I should abandon her at thi time, when she stood 
in particular need of my assist and advice. she would refus noth 
to make my situat eligible. I had onli to point out where she wa 
defici in her treatment of me, and she would endeavour to suppli it. 
she wa will to augment my emolu in ani degre that I desired. 
she could not think of part with me; but, at ani rate, she must be 
inform of my motives. 

"it is a hard task," answer I, "that I have impos upon myself. I 
foresaw it difficulties, and thi foresight ha hitherto prevent me 
from undertak it; but the necess by which I am impel will no 
longer be withstood. I am determin to go; but to say whi is 
impossible. I hope I shall not bring upon myself the imput of 
ingratitude; but thi imputation, more intoler than ani other, must 
be borne, if it cannot be avoid but by thi disclosure. 

"keep your motiv to yourself," said she. "I have too good an opinion 
of you to suppos that you would practis conceal without good 
reason. I mere desir you to remain where you are. sinc you will not 
tell me whi you take up thi new scheme, I can onli say that it is 
imposs there should be ani advantag in thi scheme. I will not hear 
of it, I tell you. therefore, submit to my decre with a good grace." 

notwithstand thi prohibition, I persist in declar that my 
determin wa fixed, and that the motiv that govern me would 
allow of no alternative. 

"so, you will go, will you, whether I will or no? I have no power to 
detain you? you will regard noth that I can say?" 

"believ me, madam, no resolut ever wa form after a more vehement 
struggle. If my motiv were known, you would not onli ceas to oppose, 
but would hasten, my departure. honour me so far with your good opinion 
as to believ that, in say this, I say noth but the truth, and 
render my duti less burdensom by cheer acquiesc in it 
dictates." 

"I would," repli the lady, "I could find somebodi that ha more power 
over you than I have. whom shall I call in to aid me in thi arduou 
task?" 

"nay, dear madam, if I can resist your entreaties, sure no other can 
hope to succeed." 

"I am not sure of that," said my friend, archly; "there is one person in 
the world whose supplications, I greatli suspect, you would not 
withstand." 

"whom do you mean?" said I, in some trepidation. 

"you will know presently. unless I can prevail upon you, I shall be 
oblig to call for assistance." 

"spare me the pain of repeat that no power on earth can chang my 
resolution." 

"that' a fib," she rejoined, with increas archness. "you know it is. 
If a certain person entreat you to stay, you will easili comply. I see I 
cannot hope to prevail by my own strength. that is a mortifi 
consideration: but we must not part; that is a point settled. If noth 
els will do, I must go and fetch my advocate. stay here a moment." 

I had scarc time to breathe, befor she returned, lead in clarice. 
I did not yet comprehend the mean of thi ceremony. the ladi wa 
overwhelm with sweet confusion. avert eye and reluct step might 
have explain to me the purpos of thi meeting, if I had believ that 
purpos to be possible. I felt the necess of new fortitude, and 
struggl to recollect the motiv that had hitherto sustain me. 

"there!" said my patroness; "I have been endeavour to persuad thi 
young man to live with us a littl longer. He is determined, it seems, 
to chang hi abode. He will not tell why, and I do not care to know, 
unless I could show hi reason to be groundless. I have mere 
remonstr with him on the folli of hi scheme, but he ha prove 
refractori to all I can say. perhap your effort may meet with better 
success." 

claric said not a word. My own embarrass equal disabl me from 
speaking. regard us both, for some time, with a benign aspect, mrs. 
lorim resumed, take a hand of each and join them together:-- 

"I veri well know what it wa that suggest thi scheme. It is strang 
that you should suppos me so careless an observ as not to note, or 
not to understand, your situation. I am as well acquaint with what is 
pass in your heart as you yourself are: but whi are you so anxiou to 
conceal it? you know less of the adventur of love than I should 
have suspected. but I will not trifl with your feelings. 

"you, clithero, know the wish that I onc cherished. I had hope that 
my son would have found, in thi darl child, an object worthi of hi 
choice, and that my girl would have prefer him to all others. but I 
have long sinc discov that thi could not be. they are nowis 
suit to each other. there is one thing in the next place desirable, 
and now my wish are accomplished. I see that you love each other; and 
never, in my opinion, wa a passion more ration and just. I should 
think myself the worst of be if I did not contribut all in my power 
to your happiness. there is not the shadow of object to your union. I 
know your scruples, clithero, and am sorri to see that you harbour them 
for a moment. noth is more unworthi of your good sense. 

"I found out thi girl long ago. take my word for it, young man, she 
doe not fall short of you in the puriti and tender of her 
attachment. what need is there of tediou preliminaries? I will leav 
you together, and hope you will not be long in come to a mutual 
understanding. your union cannot be complet too soon for my wishes. 
claric is my onli and darl daughter. As to you, clithero, expect 
henceforth that treatment from me, not onli to which your own merit 
entitl you, but which is due to the husband of my daughter."--with 
these word she retired, and left us together. 

great god! deliv me from the torment of thi remembrance. that a 
be by whom I wa snatch from penuri and brutal ignorance, exalt 
to some rank in the intellig creation, rear to affluenc and 
honour, and thus, at last, spontan endow with all that remain 
to complet the sum of my felicity, that a be like this-but such 
thought must not yet be: I must shut them out, or I shall never arriv 
at the end of my tale. My effort have been thu far successful. I have 
hitherto been abl to deliv a coher narrative. let the last word 
that I shall speak afford some glimmer of my better days. let me 
execut without falter the onli task that remain for me. 




chapter vi. 


how propitious, how incredible, wa thi event! I could scarc confid 
in the testimoni of my senses. wa it true that claric wa befor me, 
that she wa prepar to counten my presumption, that she had 
slight obstacl which I had deem insurmountable, that I wa fondli 
belov by her, and should shortli be admit to the possess of so 
inestim a good? I will not repeat the term in which I pour forth, 
at her feet, the raptur of my gratitude. My impetuos soon extort 
from claric a confirm of her mother' declaration. An unrestrain 
intercours wa thenceforth establish between us. deject and 
languor gave place, in my bosom, to the irradi of joy and hope. My 
flow fortun seem to have attain their utmost and immut 
height. 

alas! they were destin to ebb with unspeakably-great rapidity, and 
to leav me, in a moment, strand and wrecked. 

our nuptial would have been solemn without delay, had not a 
melancholi duti interfered. claric had a friend in a distant part of 
the kingdom. her health had long been the prey of a consumption. she wa 
now evid tend to dissolution. In thi extrem she entreat 
her friend to afford her the consol of her presence. the onli wish 
that remain wa to die in her arms. 

thi request could not but be willingli compli with. It becam me 
patient to endur the delay that would thenc aris to the complet 
of my wishes. consid the urgenc and mourn of the occasion, 
it wa imposs for me to murmur, and the affection claric would 
suffer noth to interfer with the duti which she owe to her die 
friend. I accompani her on thi journey, remain with her a few days, 
and then part from her to return to the metropolis. It wa not 
imagin that it would be necessari to prolong her absenc beyond a 
month. when I bade her farewell, and inform her on what day I propos 
to return for her, I felt no decay of my satisfaction. My thought were 
bright and full of exultation. whi wa not some intim afford me 
of the snare that lay in my path? In the train laid for my destruction, 
the agent had so skil contriv that my secur wa not molest 
by the faintest omen. 

I hasten to the crisi of my tale. I am almost dubiou of my strength. 
the nearer I approach to it, the stronger is my aversion. My courage, 
instead of gather forc as I proceed, decays. I am will to dwell 
still longer on preliminari circumstances. there are other incid 
without which my stori would be lame. I retail them becaus they afford 
me a kind of respit from horror at the thought of which everi joint in 
my frame trembles. they must be endured, but that infirm may be 
forgiven which make me inclin to procrastin my suffering. 

I mention the lover whom my patro wa compelled, by the 
machin of her brother, to discard. more than twenti year had 
pass sinc their separation. hi birth wa mean and he wa without 
fortune. hi profess wa that of a surgeon. My ladi not onli 
prevail upon him to abandon hi country, but enabl him to do thi by 
suppli hi necess from her own purse. hi excel 
understand was, for a time, obscur by passion; but it wa not 
difficult for my ladi ultim to obtain hi concurr to all her 
schemes. He saw and ador the rectitud of her motives, did not disdain 
to accept her gifts, and project mean for maintain an epistolari 
intercours dure their separation. 

her interest procur him a post in the servic of the east india 
company. she was, from time to time, inform of hi motions. A war 
broke out between the compani and some of the nativ powers. He wa 
present at a great battl in which the english were defeated. she could 
trace him by hi letter and by other circumst thu far, but here 
the thread wa discontinued, and no mean which she employ could 
procur ani tide of him. whether he wa captive, or dead, continued, 
for sever years, to be mere matter of conjecture. 

On my return to dublin, I found my patro engag in convers 
with a stranger. she introduc us to each other in a manner that 
indic the respect which she entertain for us both. I survey and 
listen to him with consider attention. hi aspect wa nobl and 
ingenuous, but hi sunburnt and rug featur bespok a variou and 
boister pilgrimage. the furrow of hi brow were the product of 
vicissitud and hardship, rather than of age. hi accent were fieri and 
energetic, and the impass bold of hi address, as well as the 
tenor of hi discourse, full of allus to the past, and regret that 
the cours of event had not been different, made me suspect someth 
extraordinari in hi character. 

As soon as he left us, my ladi explain who he was. He wa no other 
than the object of her youth attachment, who had, a few day before, 
drop among us as from the skies. He had a long and variou stori to 
tell. He had account for hi silenc by enumer the incid of 
hi life. He had escap from the prison of hyder, had wander on 
foot, and under variou disguises, through the northern district of 
hindostan. He wa sometim a scholar of benares, and sometim a 
discipl of the mosque. accord to the exig of the times, he wa 
a pilgrim to mecca or to juggernaut. By a long, circuitous, and peril 
route, he at length arriv at the turkish capital. here he resid for 
sever years, deriv a precari subsist from the profess of 
a surgeon. He wa oblig to desert thi post, in consequ of a duel 
between two scotsmen. one of them had embrac the greek religion, and 
wa betroth to the daughter of a wealthi trader of that nation. He 
perish in the conflict, and the famili of the ladi not onli procur 
the execut of hi antagonist, but threaten to involv all those who 
were known to be connect with him in the same ruin. 

hi life be thu endangered, it becam necessari for him to seek a 
new residence. He fled from constantinopl with such precipit as 
reduc him to the lowest poverty. He had travers the indian conquest 
of alexander, as a mendicant. In the same character, he now wander 
over the nativ countri of philip and philopoemen. He pass safe 
through multipli perils, and finally, embark at salonica, he 
reach venice. He descend through the pass of the apennin into 
tuscany. In thi journey he suffer a long detent from banditti, by 
whom he wa waylaid. In consequ of hi harmless deportment, and a 
season display of hi chirurg skill, they grant him hi life, 
though they, for a time, restrain him of hi liberty, and compel 
him to endur their society. the time wa not misemploy which he spent 
immur in cavern and carous with robbers. hi detail were 
emin singular and curious, and evinc the acut of hi 
penetration, as well as the steadfast of hi courage. 

after emerg from these wilds, he found hi way along the bank of the 
arno to leghorn. thenc he procur a passag to america, whenc he had 
just returned, with mani addit to hi experience, but none to hi 
fortune. 

thi wa a remark event. It did not at first appear how far it 
consequ would extend. the ladi was, at present, disengag and 
independent. though the passion which cloud her earli prosper wa 
extinct, time had not diminish the worth of her friend, and they were 
far from have reach that age when love becom chimer and 
marriag folly. A confidenti intercours wa immedi establish 
between them. the bounti of mrs. lorim soon divest her friend of all 
fear of poverty. "at ani rate," said she, "he shall wander no farther, 
but shall be comfort situat for the rest of hi life." all hi 
scrupl were vanquish by the reason of her remonstr and 
the vehem of her solicitations. 

A cordial intimaci grew between me and the newly-arrived. our interview 
were frequent, and our commun without reserve. He detail to me 
the result of hi experience, and expati without end on the histori 
of hi action and opinions. He relat the adventur of hi youth, and 
dwelt upon all the circumst of hi attach to my patroness. On 
thi subject I had heard onli gener details. I continu found 
cause, in the cours of hi narrative, to rever the illustri 
qualiti of my lady, and to weep at the calam to which the 
infern malic of her brother had subject her. 

the tale of that man' misdeeds, amplifi and dramat by the 
indign eloqu of thi historian, oppress me with astonishment. 
If a poet had drawn such a portrait, I should have been prone to suspect 
the sound of hi judgment. till now I had imagin that no charact 
wa uniform and unmixed, and my theori of the passion did not enabl me 
to account for a propens gratifi mere by evil, and delight in 
shriek and agoni for their own sake. 

It wa natur to suggest to my friend, when expati on thi theme, 
an inquiri as to how far subsequ event had obliter the 
impress that were then made, and as to the plausibl of reviving, 
at thi more auspici period, hi claim on the heart of hi friend. 
when he thought proper to notic these hints, he gave me to understand 
that time had made no essenti alter in hi sentiment in thi 
respect; that he still foster a hope, to which everi day ad new 
vigour; that, whatev wa the ultim event, he trust in hi 
fortitud to sustain it, if adverse, and in hi wisdom to extract from 
it the most valuabl consequences, if it should prove prosperous. 

the progress of thing wa not unfavour to hi hopes. she treat 
hi insinu and profess with levity; but her argument seem 
to be urg with no other view than to afford an opportun of 
confutation; and, sinc there wa no abat of familiar and 
kindness, there wa room to hope that the affair would termin 
agreeabl to hi wishes. 




chapter vii. 


clarice, meanwhile, wa absent. her friend seemed, at the end of a 
month, to be littl less distant from the grave than at first. My 
impati would not allow me to wait till her death. I visit her, but 
wa onc more oblig to return alone. I arriv late in the city, and, 
be greatli fatigued, I retir almost immedi to my chamber. 

On hear of my arrival, sarsefield hasten to see me. He came to my 
bedside, and such, in hi opinion, wa the import of the tide 
which he had to communicate, that he did not scrupl to rous me from a 
deep sleep---- 


At thi period of hi narrative, clithero stopped. hi complexion vari 
from one degre of pale to another. hi brain appear to suffer 
some sever constriction. He desir to be excused, for a few minutes, 
from proceeding. In a short time he wa reliev from thi paroxysm, and 
resum hi tale with an accent tremul at first, but acquir 
stabil and forc as he went on:-- 


On waking, as I have said, I found my friend seat at my bedside. hi 
counten exhibit variou token of alarm. As soon as I perceiv 
who it was, I started, exclaiming, "what is the matter?" 

He sighed. "pardon," said he, "thi unseason intrusion. A light 
matter would not have occas it. I have waited, for two day past, 
in an agoni of impatience, for your return. happili you are, at last, 
come. I stand in the utmost need of your counsel and aid." 

"heaven defend!" cri I. "thi is a terribl prelude. you may, of 
course, reli upon my assist and advice. what is it that you have to 
propose?" 

"tuesday evening," he answered, "I spent here. It wa late befor I 
return to my lodgings. I wa in the act of lift my hand to the 
bell, when my eye wa caught by a person stand close to the wall, at 
the distanc of ten paces. hi attitud wa that of one employ in 
watch my motions. hi face wa turn toward me, and happened, at 
that moment, to be fulli illumin by the ray of a globe-lamp that 
hung over the door. I instantli recognis hi features. I wa 
petrified. I had no power to execut my design, or even to move, but 
stood, for some seconds, gaze upon him. He was, in no degree, 
disconcert by the eager of my scrutiny. He seem perfectli 
indiffer to the consequ of be known. At length he slowli 
turn hi eye to anoth quarter, but without chang hi posture, or 
the stern of hi looks. I cannot describ to you the shock which 
thi encount produc in me. At last I went into the house, and have 
ever sinc been excess uneasy." 

"I do not see ani ground for uneasiness." 

"you do not then suspect who thi person is?" 

"no." 

"it is arthur wiatte." 

"good heaven! It is impossible. what! my lady' brother?" 

"the same." 

"it cannot be. were we not assur of hi death? that he perish in a 
mutini on board the vessel in which he wa embark for transportation?" 

"such wa rumour, which is easili mistaken. My eye cannot be deceiv 
in thi case. I should as easili fail to recognis hi sister, when I 
first met her, as him. thi is the man; whether onc dead or not, he is 
at present alive, and in thi city." 

"but ha ani thing sinc happen to confirm you in thi opinion?" 

"yes, there has. As soon as I had recov from my first surprise, I 
began to reflect upon the measur proper to be taken. thi wa the 
ident arthur wiatte. you know hi character. No time wa like to 
chang the principl of such a man, but hi appear suffici 
betray the incur of hi habits. the same sullen and atroci 
passion were written in hi visage. you recollect the vengeanc which 
wiatt denounc against hi sister. there is everi thing to dread from 
hi malignity. how to obviat the danger, I know not. I thought, 
however, of one expedient. It might serv a present purpose, and 
someth better might suggest itself on your return. 

"I came hither earli the next day. old gowan, the porter, is well 
acquaint with wiatte' story. I mention to him that I had reason to 
think that he had returned. I charg him to have a watch eye upon 
everi one that knock at the gate, and that, if thi person should 
come, by no mean to admit him. the old man promis faith to abid 
by my directions. hi terrors, indeed, were greater than mine, and he 
knew the import of exclud wiatt from these walls." 

"did you not inform my ladi of this?" 

"no. In what way could I tell it to her? what end could it answer? whi 
should I make her miserable? but I have not done. yesterday morn 
gowan took me aside, and inform me that wiatt had made hi 
appearance, the day before, at the gate. He knew him, he said, in a 
moment. He demand to see the lady, but the old man told him she wa 
engaged, and could not be seen. He assum peremptori and haughti airs, 
and assert that hi busi wa of such import as not to endur a 
moment' delay. gowan persist in hi first refusal. He retir with 
great reluctance, but said he should return to-morrow, when he should 
insist upon admiss to the presenc of the lady. I have inquired, and 
find that he ha not repeat hi visit. what is to be done?" 

I wa equal at a loss with my friend. thi incid wa so 
unlooked-for. what might not be dread from the monstrou deprav of 
wiatte? hi menac of vengeanc against hi sister still rung in my ears. 
some mean of elud them were indispensable. could law be resort to? 
against an evil like this, no legal provis had been made. nine year 
had elaps sinc hi transportation. seven year wa the period of hi 
exile. In returning, therefore, he had commit no crime. hi person 
could not be law molested. We were justifi mere in repel an 
attack. but suppos we should appeal to law: could thi be done without 
the knowledg and concurr of the lady? she would never permit it. 
her heart wa incap of fear from thi quarter. she would spurn at 
the mention of precaut against the hatr of her brother. her 
inquietud would mere be awaken on hi own account. 

I wa overwhelm with perplexity. perhap if he were sought out, and 
some judgment form of the kind of danger to be dread from him, by a 
knowledg of hi situat and views, some expedi might be thenc 
suggested. 

but how should hi haunt be discovered? thi wa easy. He had intim 
the design of appli again for admiss to hi sister. let a person 
be station near at hand, who, be furnish with an adequ 
descript of hi person and dress, shall mark him when he comes, and 
follow him when he retires, and shall forthwith impart to us the 
inform on that head which he shall be abl to collect. 

My friend concur in thi scheme. No better could, for the present, be 
suggested. here end our conference. 

I wa thu suppli with a new subject of reflection. It wa calcul 
to fill my mind with dreari forebodings. the futur wa no longer a 
scene of secur and pleasure. It would be hard for those to partak of 
our fear who did not partak of our experience. the exist of wiatt 
wa the canker that had blast the felic of my patroness. In hi 
reappear on the stage there wa someth portentous. It seem to 
includ in it consequ of the utmost moment, without my be abl 
to discov what these consequ were. 

that sarsefield should be so quickli follow by hi arch-foe; that they 
start anew into existence, without ani previou intimation, in a 
manner wholli unexpected, and at the same period,--it seem as if there 
lurked, under those appearances, a tremend significance, which human 
sagac could not uncover. My heart sunk within me when I reflect 
that thi wa the father of my clarice. He by whose cruelti her mother 
wa torn from the enjoy of untarnish honour, and consign to 
infami and an untim grave. He by whom herself wa abandon in the 
helpless of infancy, and left to be the prey of obdur avarice, 
and the victim of wretch who traffic in virgin innocence. who had done 
all that in him lay to devot her youth to guilt and misery. what were 
the limit of hi power? how may he exert the parent prerogatives? 

To sleep, while these imag were haunt me, wa impossible. I pass 
the night in continu motion. I strode, without ceasing, across the 
floor of my apartment. My mind wa wrought to a higher pitch than I had 
ever befor experienced. the occasion, accur considered, wa far 
from justifi the omin inquietud which I then felt. how, then, 
should I account for them? 

sarsefield probabl enjoy hi usual slumber. hi repos might not be 
perfectli serene, but when he rumin on impend or possibl 
calam hi tongu did not cleav to hi mouth, hi throat wa not 
parch with unquench thirst, he wa not incessantli stimul to 
employ hi superflu fertil of thought in motion. If I trembl for 
the safeti of her whom I loved, and whose safeti wa endang by be 
the daughter of thi miscreant, had he not equal reason to fear for her 
whom he also loved, and who, as the sister of thi ruffian, wa 
encompass by the most alarm perils? yet he probabl wa calm while 
I wa harass by anxieties. 

alas! the differ wa easili explained. such wa the begin of a 
seri ordain to hurri me to swift destruction. such were the primari 
token of the presenc of that power by whose accurs machin I 
wa destin to fall. you are startl at thi declaration. It is one to 
which you have been littl accustomed. perhap you regard it mere as 
an effus of frenzy. I know what I am saying. I do not build upon 
conjectur and surmises. I care not, indeed, for your doubts. your 
conclus may be fashion at your pleasure. would to heaven that my 
belief were groundless, and that I had no reason to believ my 
intellect to have been pervert by diabol instigations! 

I could procur no sleep that night. after sarsefield' departur I did 
not even lie down. It seem to me that I could not obtain the benefit 
of repos otherwis than by place my ladi beyond the possibl of 
danger. 

I met sarsefield the next day. In pursuanc of the scheme which had been 
adopt by us on the preced evening, a person wa select and 
commiss to watch the appear of wiatte. the day pass as usual 
with respect to the lady. In the even she wa surround by a few 
friends. into thi number I wa now admitted. sarsefield and myself made 
a part of thi company. variou topic were discuss with eas and 
sprightliness. her societi were compos of both sexes, and seem to 
have monopol all the ingenu and wit that exist in the 
metropolis. 

after a slight repast the compani dispersed. thi separ took place 
earlier than usual, on account of a slight indisposit in mrs. 
_lorimer_. sarsefield and I went out together. We took that 
opportun of examin our agent, and, receiv no satisfact from 
him, we dismiss him for that night, enjoin him to hold himself in 
readi for repeat the experi to-morrow. My friend direct hi 
step homeward, and I proceed to execut a commiss with which I had 
charg myself. 

A few day before, a larg sum had been deposit in the hand of a 
banker, for the use of my lady. It wa the amount of a debt which had 
late been recovered. It wa lodg here for the purpos of be paid 
on demand of her or her agents. It wa my present busi to receiv 
thi money. I had defer the perform of thi engag to thi 
late hour, on account of certain preliminari which were necessari to 
be adjusted. 

have receiv thi money, I prepar to return home. the inquietud 
which had been occas by sarsefield' intellig had not 
incapacit me from perform my usual daili occupations. It wa a 
theme to which, at everi interv of leisur from busi or discourse, 
I did not fail to return. At those time I employ myself in examin 
the subject on all sides; in suppos particular emergencies, and 
delin the conduct that wa proper to be observ on each. My daili 
thought were, by no means, so fear-inspir as the medit of the 
night had been. 

As soon as I left the banker' door, my medit fell into thi 
channel. I again review the recent occurrences, and imagin the 
consequ like to flow from them. My deduct were not, on thi 
occasion, peculiarli distressful. the return of dark had ad 
noth to my apprehensions. I regard wiatt mere as one against 
whose malic it wa wise to employ the most vigil precautions. In 
revolv these precaut noth occur that wa new. the danger 
appear without unusu aggravations, and the expedi that offer 
themselv to my choic were view with a temper not more sanguin or 
despond than before. 

In thi state of mind I began and continu my walk. the distanc wa 
consider between my own habit and that which I had left. My way 
lay chiefli through popul and well-frequ streets. In one part of 
the way, however, it wa at the option of the passeng either to keep 
along the larg streets, or consider to shorten the journey by 
turn into a dark, crooked, and narrow lane. be familiar with everi 
part of thi metropolis, and deem it advis to take the shortest 
and obscurest road, I turn into the alley. I proceed without 
interrupt to the next turning. one night-officer, distinguish by 
hi usual ensigns, wa the onli person who pass me. I had gone three 
step beyond when I perceiv a man by my side. I had scarc time to 
notic thi circumstance, when a hoars voic exclaimed, "damn ye, 
villain, ye'r a dead man!" 

At the same moment a pistol flash at my ear, and a report followed. 
this, however, produc no other effect than, for a short space, to 
overpow my senses. I stagger back, but did not fall. 

the ball, as I afterward discovered, had graze my forehead, but 
without make ani danger impression. the assassin, perceiv that 
hi pistol had been ineffectual, muttered, in an enrag tone, "thi 
shall do your business!" At the same time, he drew a knife forth from 
hi bosom. 

I wa abl to distinguish thi action by the ray of a distant lamp, 
which glisten on the blade. all thi pass in an instant. the attack 
wa so abrupt that my thought could not be suddenli recal from the 
confus into which they were thrown. My exert were mechanical. My 
will might be said to be passive, and it wa onli by retrospect and a 
contempl of consequ that I becam fulli inform of the natur 
of the scene. 

If my assail had disappear as soon as he had discharg the pistol, 
my state of extrem surpris might have slowli given place to resolut 
and activity. As it was, my sens wa no sooner struck by the reflect 
from the blade, than my hand, as if by spontan energy, wa thrust 
into my pocket. I drew forth a pistol. 

He lift up hi weapon to strike, but it drop from hi powerless 
fingers. He fell, and hi groan inform me that I had manag my arm 
with more skill than my adversary. the nois of thi encount soon 
attract spectators. light were brought, and my antagonist discov 
bleed at my feet. I explained, as briefli as I wa able, the scene 
which they witnessed. the prostrat person wa rais by two men, and 
carri into a public hous nigh at hand. 

I had not lost my presenc of mind. I at onc perceiv the proprieti of 
administ assist to the wound man. I despatched, therefore, 
one of the bystand for a surgeon of consider eminence, who live 
at a small distance, and to whom I wa well known. the man wa carri 
into an inner apart and laid upon the floor. It wa not till now 
that I had a suitabl opportun of ascertain who it wa with whom I 
had been engaged. I now look upon hi face. the pale of death 
could not conceal hi well-known features. It wa wiatt himself who wa 
breath hi last groan at my feet! 

the surgeon, whom I had summoned, attended; but immedi perceiv 
the condit of hi patient to be hopeless. In a quarter of an hour he 
expired. dure thi interval, he wa insens to all around him. I 
wa known to the surgeon, the landlord, and some of the witnesses. the 
case need littl explanation. the accid reflect no guilt upon me. 
the landlord wa charg with the care of the corps till the morning, 
and I wa allow to return home, without further impediment. 




chapter viii. 


till now my mind had been sway by the urgenc of thi occasion. 
these reflect were excluded, which rush tumultu upon me the 
moment I wa at leisur to receiv them. without foresight of a previou 
moment, an entir chang had been wrought in my condition. 

I had been oppress with a sens of the danger that flow from the 
exist of thi man. By what mean the peril could be annihilated, and 
we be place in secur from hi attempts, no effort of mind could 
suggest. To devis these means, and employ them with success, demanded, 
as I conceived, the most power sagac and the firmest courage. now 
the danger wa no more. the intellig in which plan of mischief 
might be gener wa extinguish or flown. lifeless were the hand 
readi to execut the dictat of that intelligence. the contriv of 
enorm evil was, in one moment, bereft of the power and the will to 
injure. our past tranquil had been owe to the belief of hi death. 
fear and dismay had resum their dominion when the mistak wa 
discovered. but now we might regain possess of our wont confidence. 
I had beheld with my own eye the lifeless corps of our implac 
adversary. thus, in a moment, had termin hi long and flagiti 
career. hi restless indignation, hi malign projects, that had so 
long occupi the stage and been so fertil of calamity, were now at an 
end! 

In the cours of my meditations, the idea of the death of thi man had 
occurred, and it bore the appear of a desir event. yet it wa 
littl qualifi to tranquil my fears. In the long catalogu of 
contingencies, this, indeed, wa to be found; but it wa as littl 
like to happen as ani other. It could not happen without a seri of 
anterior event pave the way for it. If hi death came from us, it 
must be the theme of design. It must spring from labori circumvent 
and deep-laid stratagems. 

no. He wa dead. I had kill him. what had I done? I had medit 
nothing. I wa impel by an unconsci necessity. had the assail 
been my father, the consequ would have been the same. My 
understand had been neutral. could it be? In a space so short, wa it 
possibl that so tremend a deed had been executed? wa I not deceiv 
by some portent vision? I had wit the convuls and last 
agoni of wiatte. He wa no more, and I wa hi destroyer! 

such wa the state of my mind for some time after thi dread event. 
previous to it I wa calm, considerate, and self-collected. I mark 
the way that I wa going. pass object were observed. If I advert 
to the seri of my own reflections, my attent wa not seiz and 
fasten by them. I could disengag myself at pleasure, and could pass, 
without difficulty, from attent to the world within, to the 
contempl of that without. 

now my liberty, in thi respect, wa at an end. I wa fettered, 
confounded, smitten with excess of thought, and laid prostrat with 
wonder! I no longer attend to my steps. when I emerg from my stupor, 
I found that I had trodden back the way which I had late come, and had 
arriv within sight of the banker' door. I check myself, and onc 
more turn my step homeward. 

thi seem to be a hint for enter into new reflections. "the deed," 
said I, "i irretrievable. I have kill the brother of my patroness, 
the father of my love." 

thi suggest wa new. It instantli involv me in terror and 
perplexity. how shall I commun the tidings? what effect will they 
produce? My lady' sagac is obscur by the benevol of her 
temper. her brother wa sordidli wicked,--a hoari ruffian, to whom the 
languag of piti wa as unintellig as the gabbl of monkeys. hi 
heart wa fortifi against compunction, by the atroci habit of 
forti years; he live onli to interrupt her peace, to confut the 
promis of virtue, and convert to rancour and reproach the fair dame of 
fidelity. 

He wa her brother still. As a human being, hi deprav wa never 
beyond the health-restor power of repentance. hi heart, so long as 
it beat, wa access to remorse. the singular of hi birth had 
made her regard thi be as more intim her brother, than would 
have happen in differ circumstances. It wa her obstin 
persuas that their fate were blended. the rumour of hi death she 
had never credited. It wa a topic of congratul to her friends, but 
of mourn and distress to her. that he would one day reappear upon the 
stage, and assum the digniti of virtue, wa a sourc of consol 
with which she would never consent to part. 

her charact wa now known. when the doom of exil wa pronounc upon 
him, she deem it incumb on her to vindic herself from aspers 
found on misconcept of her motiv in refus her interference. 
the manuscript, though unpublished, wa wide circulated. none could 
resist her simpl and touch eloquence, nor rise from the perus 
without resign hi heart to the most impetu impuls of 
admiration, and enlist himself among the eulogist of her justic and 
her fortitude. thi wa the onli monument, in a written form, of her 
genius. As such it wa engraven on my memory. the pictur that it 
describ wa the perpetu companion of my thoughts. 

alas! It had, perhaps, been well for me if it had been buri in etern 
oblivion. I read in it the condemn of my deed, the agoni she wa 
prepar to suffer, and the indign that would overflow upon the 
author of so signal a calamity. 

I had rescu my life by the sacrific of his. wherea I should have 
died. wretch and precipit coward! what had becom of my boast 
gratitude? such wa the zeal that I had vow to her. such the servic 
which it wa the busi of my life to perform. I had snatch her 
brother from existence. I had torn from her the hope which she so 
ardent and indefatig cherished. from a contempt and dastardli 
regard to my own safeti I had fail in the moment of trial and when 
call upon by heaven to evinc the sincer of my professions. 

she had treat my profess lightly. My vow of etern devot she 
had reject with lofti disinterestedness. she had arraign my 
impati of oblig as criminal, and condemn everi scheme I had 
project for free myself from the burden which her benefic had 
laid upon me. the impass and vehement anxieti with which, in former 
days, she had deprec the vengeanc of her lover against wiatte, rung 
in my ears. My sens were shock anew by the dread sounds, "touch 
not my brother. wherev you meet with him, of whatev outrag he be 
guilty, suffer him to pass in safety. despis me; abandon me; kill me. 
all thi I can bear even from you; but spare, I implor you, my unhappi 
brother. the stroke that depriv him of life will not onli have the 
same effect upon me, but will set my portion in everlast misery." 

To these supplic I had been deaf. It is true I had not rush upon 
him unarmed, intend no injuri nor expect any. Of that degre of 
wicked I was, perhaps, incapable. alas! I have immers myself 
suffici deep in crimes. I have trampl under foot everi motiv 
dear to the heart of honour. I have shown myself unworthi the societi of 
men. 

such were the turbul suggest of that moment. My pace slackened. I 
stopped, and wa oblig to support myself against a wall. the sick 
that had seiz my heart penetr everi part of my frame. there wa 
but one thing want to complet my distraction.--"mi lady," said I, 
"believ her fate to be blend with that of wiatte. who shall affirm 
that the persuas is a groundless one? she had live and prospered, 
notwithstand the gener belief that her brother wa dead. she would 
not hearken to the rumour. why? becaus noth less than indubit 
evid would suffic to convinc her? becaus the counter-intim 
flow from an infal source? how can the latter supposit be 
confuted? ha she not predict the event? 

"the period of terribl fulfil ha arrived. the same blow that 
bereav _him_ of life ha likewis ratifi her doom. 

"she ha been deceived. It is noth more, perhaps, than a fond 
imagination. It matter not. who know not the cogenc of faith? that 
the puls of life are at the command of the will? the bearer of these 
tide will be the messeng of death. A fatal sympathi will seiz her. 
she will shrink, and swoon, and perish, at the news! 

"fond and short-sight wretch! thi is the price thou hast given for 
security. In the rash of thi thought, thou saidst, 'noth is 
want but hi death to restor us to confid and safety.' lo! the 
purchas is made. havoc and despair, that were restrain dure hi 
life, were let loos by hi last sigh. now onli is destruct made 
sure. thi lady, thi clarice, thi friend, and thyself, are, by thi act, 
involv in irretriev and common ruin!" 

I start from my attitude. I wa scarc consciou of ani transition. 
the interv wa fraught with stupor, and amazement. It seem as if my 
sens had been hush in sleep, while the power of locomot were 
unconsci exert to bear me to my chamber. By whatev mean the 
chang wa effected, there I was. 

I have been abl to proceed thu far. I can scarc believ the 
testimoni of my memori that assur me of this. My task is almost 
executed; but whenc shall I obtain strength enough to finish it? what I 
have told is light as gossamer, compar with the insupport and 
crush horror of that which is to come. heaven, in token of it 
vengeance, will enabl me to proceed. It is fit that my scene should 
thu close. 

My fanci began to be infect with the error of my understanding. the 
mood into which my mind wa plung wa incap of ani propiti 
intermission. all within me wa tempestu and dark. My ear were 
access to no sound but those of shriek and lamentations. It wa 
deepest midnight, and all the nois of a great metropoli were hushed. 
yet I listen as if to catch some strain of the dirg that wa begun. 
sabl robes, sobs, and a dreari solemn encompass me on all sides, I 
wa haunt to despair by imag of death, imaginari clamours, and the 
train of funer pageantry. I seem to have pass forward to a distant 
era of my life. the effect which were come were alreadi realized. the 
foresight of miseri creat it, and set me in the midst of that hell 
which I feared. 

from a paroxysm like thi the worst might reason be dreaded, yet the 
next step to destruct wa not suddenli taken. I paus on the brink 
of the precipice, as if to survey the depth of that frenzi that invad 
me; wa abl to ponder on the scene, and deliberate, in a state that 
partook of calm, on the circumst of my situation. My mind wa 
harass by the repetit of one idea. conjectur deepen into 
certainty. I could place the object in no light which did not 
corrobor the persuas that, in the act committed, I had insur the 
destruct of my lady. At length my mind, somewhat reliev from the 
tempest of my fears, began to trace and analyz the consequ which I 
dreaded. 

the fate of wiatt would inevit draw along with it that of hi 
sister. In what way would thi effect be produced? were they link 
togeth by a sympathi whose influenc wa independ of sensibl 
communication? could she arriv at a knowledg of hi miser and by 
other than verbal means? I had heard of such extraordinari 
copartnership in be and mode of instantan intercours among 
be local distant. wa thi a new instanc of the subtleti of mind? 
had she alreadi endur hi agonies, and like him alreadi ceas to 
breathe? 

everi hair bristl at thi horribl suggestion. but the forc of 
sympathi might be chimerical. buri in sleep, or engag in careless 
meditation, the instrument by which her destini might be accomplish 
wa the steel of an assassin. A seri of events, equal beyond the 
reach of foresight with those which had just happened, might introduce, 
with equal abruptness, a similar disaster. what, at that moment, wa her 
condition? repos in safeti in her chamber, as her famili imagined. 
but were they not deceived? wa she not a mangl corpse? whatev were 
her situation, it could not be ascertained, except by extraordinari 
means, till the morning. wa it wise to defer the scrutini till then? 
whi not instantli investig the truth? 

these idea pass rapidli through my mind. A consider portion of 
time and amplif of phrase are necessari to exhibit, verbally, 
idea contempl in a space of incalcul brevity. with the same 
rapid I conceiv the resolut of determin the truth of my 
suspicions. all the family, but myself, were at rest. wind passag 
would conduct me, without danger of disturb them, to the hall, from 
which doubl staircas ascended. one of these led to a saloon above, on 
the east side of which wa a door that commun with a suit of 
room occupi by the ladi of the mansion. the first wa an antechamber, 
in which a femal servant usual lay. the second wa the lady' own 
bedchamber. thi wa a sacr recess, with whose situation, rel to 
the other apart of the building, I wa well acquainted, but of 
which I knew noth from my own examination, have never been admit 
into it. 

thither I wa now resolv to repair. I wa not deter by the sanctiti 
of the place and hour. I wa insens to all consequ but the 
remov of my doubts. not that my hope were balanc by my fears. that 
the same tragedi had been perform in her chamber and in the street, 
noth hinder me from believ with as much cogenc as if my own 
eye had wit it, but the reluct with which we admit a 
detest truth. 

To termin a state of intoler suspense, I resolv to proceed 
forthwith to her chamber. I took the light and paced, with no 
interruption, along the galleries. I use no precaution. If I had met a 
servant or robber, I am not sure that I should have notic him. My 
attent wa too perfectli engross to allow me to spare ani to a 
casual object. I cannot affirm that no one observ me. this, however, 
wa probabl from the distribut of the dwelling. It consist of a 
central edific and two wings, one of which wa appropri to 
domest and the other, at the extrem of which my apart wa 
placed, comprehend a library, and room for formal and social and 
literari conferences. these, therefore, were desert at night, and my 
way lay along these. henc it wa not like that my step would be 
observed. 

I proceed to the hall. the princip parlour wa beneath her chamber. 
In the confus of my thoughts, I mistook one for the other. I 
rectified, as soon as I detected, my mistake. I ascended, with a beat 
heart, the staircase. the door of the antechamb wa unfastened. I 
entered, total regardless of disturb the girl who slept within. the 
bed which she occupi wa conceal by curtains. whether she were 
there, I did not stop to examine. I cannot recollect that ani token 
were given of wake or alarm. It wa not till I reach the door 
of her own apart that my heart began to falter. 

It wa now that the moment of the question I wa about to decid 
rush with it genuin forc upon my apprehension. appal and aghast, 
I had scarc power to move the bolt. If the imagin of her death 
wa not to be supported, how should I bear the spectacl of wound and 
blood? yet thi wa reserv for me. A few pace would set me in the 
midst of a scene of which I wa the abhor contriver. wa it right to 
proceed? there were still the remnant of doubt. My forebod might 
possibl be groundless. all within might be safeti and serenity. A 
respit might be gain from the execut of an irrevoc sentence. 
what could I do? wa not ani thing easi to endur in comparison with the 
agoni of suspense? If I could not obviat the evil I must bear it, but 
the torment of suspens were suscept of remedy. 

I drew back the bolt, and enter with the reluct of fear, rather 
than the cautious of guilt. I could not lift my eye from the 
ground. I advanc to the middl of the room. not a sound like that of 
the die salut my-ear. At length, shake off the fetter of 
hopelessness, I look up. 

I saw noth calcul to confirm my fears. everywher there reign 
quiet and order. My heart leap with exultation. "can it be," said I, 
"that I have been betray with shadows?--but thi is not sufficient." 

within an alcov wa the bed that belong to her. If her safeti were 
inviolate, it wa here that she reposed. what remain to convert 
torment doubt into ravish certainty? I wa insens to the 
peril of my present situation. If she, indeed, were there, would not my 
intrus awaken her? she would start and perceiv me, at thi hour, 
stand at her bedside. how should I account for an intrus so 
unexampl and audacious? I could not commun my fears. I could not 
tell her that the blood with which my hand were stain had flow from 
the wound of her brother. 

My mind wa inaccess to such considerations. they did not even 
modifi my predomin idea. obstacl like these, had they existed, 
would have been trampl under foot. 

leav the lamp, that I bore, on the table, I approach the bed. I 
slowli drew asid the curtain, and beheld her tranquilli slumbering. I 
listened, but so profound wa her sleep, that not even her breath 
could be overheard. I drop the curtain and retired. 

how bliss and mild were the illumin of my bosom at thi 
discovery! A joy that surpass all utter succeed the fierc 
of desperation. I stood, for some moments, wrap in delight 
contemplation. alas! it wa a lumin but transient interval. the 
mad to whose black suggest it bore so strong a contrast began 
now to make sensibl approach on my understanding. 

"true," said I, "she lives. her slumber is seren and happy. she is 
blind to her approach destiny. some hour will at least be rescu 
from anguish and death. when she wakes, the phantom that sooth her 
will vanish. the tide cannot be withheld from her. the murder of 
thi brother cannot hope to enjoy thi smiles. those ravish accents, 
with which thou hast use to greet me, will be changed. scowl and 
reproaches, the invect of thi anger and the maledict of thi 
justice, will rest upon my head, 

"what is the bless which I made the theme of my boast arrogance? 
thi interv of be and repos is momentary. she will awake, but onli 
to perish at the spectacl of my ingratitude. she will awak onli to the 
conscious of instantly-impend death. when she again sleep she 
will wake no more. I, her son,--i, whom the law of my birth doom to 
poverti and hardship, but whom her unsolicit benefic snatch from 
those evils, and endow with the highest good known to intellig 
beings, the consol of scienc and the blandish of 
affluence,--to whom the darl of her life, the offspr in whom are 
faith preserv the lineament of it angel mother, she ha not 
denied! what is the recompens that I have made? how have I discharg 
the measureless debt of gratitud to which she is entitled? thus!-- 

"cannot my guilt be extenuated? Is there not a good that I can do thee? 
must I perpetr unmingl evil? Is the provinc assign me that of an 
infern emissary, whose effort are concentr in a singl purpose, and 
that purpos a malign one? I am the author of thi calamities. 
whatev miseri is reserv for thee, I am the sourc whenc it flows. 
can I not set bound to the stream? cannot I prevent thee from return 
to a conscious which, till it ceas to exist, will not ceas to be 
rent and mangled? 

"yes. It is in my power to screen thee from the come storm; to 
acceler thi journey to rest. I will do it." 

the impuls wa not to be resisted. I move with the sudden of 
lightning. arm with a point implement that lay----it wa a dagger. 
As I set down the lamp, I struck the edge. yet I saw it not, or notic 
it not till I need it assistance. By what accid it came hither, to 
what deed of dark it had alreadi been subservient, I had no power to 
inquire. I step to the tabl and seiz it. 

the time which thi action requir wa insuffici to save me. My doom 
wa ratifi by power which no human energi can counterwork.--ne I 
go further? did you entertain ani imagin of so fright a 
catastrophe? I am overwhelm by turn with dismay and with wonder. I am 
prompt by turn to tear my heart from my breast and deni faith to the 
verdict of my senses. 

wa it I that hurri to the deed? no. It wa the demon that possess 
me. My limb were guid to the bloodi offic by a power foreign and 
superior to mine. I had been defrauded, for a moment, of the empir of 
my muscles. A littl moment for that sufficed. If my destruct had 
not been decreed, whi wa the imag of claric so long excluded? yet whi 
do I say long? the fatal resolut wa conceived, and I hasten to the 
execution, in a period too brief for more than itself to be view by 
the intellect. 

what then? were my hand imbru in thi preciou blood? wa it to thi 
extrem of horror that my evil geniu wa determin to urg me? too 
sure thi wa hi purpose; too sure I wa qualifi to be it 
minister. 

I lift the weapon. it point wa aim at the bosom of the sleeper. 
the impuls wa given. 

At the instant a pierc shriek wa utter behind me, and a 
stretched-out hand, grasp the blade, made it swerv wide from it 
aim. It descended, but without inflict a wound. it forc wa spent 
upon the bed. 

Oh for word to paint that stormi transition! I loos my hold of the 
dagger. I start back, and fix eye of frantic curios on the 
author of my rescue. He that interpos to arrest my deed, that start 
into be and activ at a moment so pregnant with fate, without 
token of hi purpos or hi come be previous imparted, could 
not, methought, be less than divinity. 

the first glanc that I dart on thi be corrobor my conjecture. 
It wa the figur and lineament of mrs. lorimer. neglig habit in 
flow and brilliant white, with featur burst with terror and 
wonder, the like of that be who wa stretch upon the bed now 
stood befor me. 

all that I am abl to conceiv of angel wa compris in the moral 
constitut of thi woman. that her geniu had overleap all bounds, 
and interpos to save her, wa no audaci imagination. In the state 
in which my mind then was, no other belief than thi could occupi the 
first place. 

My tongu wa tied. I gaze by turn upon her who stood befor me, and 
her who lay upon the bed, and who, awaken by the shriek that had been 
uttered, now open her eyes. she start from her pillow, and, by 
assum a new and more distinct attitude, permit me to recognis 
_claric herself_! 

three day before, I had left her, besid the bed of a die friend, at 
a solitari mansion in the mountain of donegal. here it had been her 
resolut to remain till her friend should breath her last. fraught 
with thi persuasion, know thi to be the place and hour of repos of 
my lady, hurri forward by the impetuos of my own conceptions, 
deceiv by the faint gleam which penetr through the curtain and 
imperfectly-irradi featur which bore, at all times, a power 
resembl to those of mrs. lorimer, I had rush to the brink of thi 
terribl precipice! 

whi did I linger on the verge? why, thu peril situated, did I not 
throw myself headlong? the steel wa yet in my hand. A singl blow would 
have pierc my heart, and shut out from my remembr and foresight 
the past and the future. 

the moment of insan had gone by, and I wa onc more myself. instead 
of regard the act which I had medit as the dictat of compass 
or of justice, it onli ad to the sum of my ingratitude, and gave 
wing to the whirlwind that wa sent to bear me to perdition. 

perhap I wa influenc by a sentiment which I had not leisur to 
distribut into parts. My understand was, no doubt, bewild in the 
maze of consequ which would spring from my act. how should I 
explain my come hither in thi murder guise, my arm lift to 
destroy the idol of my soul and the darl child of my patroness? In 
what word should I unfold the tale of wiatte, and enumer the motiv 
that termin in the present scene? what penalti had not my 
infatu and cruelti deserved? what could I less than turn the 
dagger' point against my own bosom? 

A second time, the blow wa thwart and diverted. onc more thi 
benefic interpos held my arm from the perpetr of a new 
iniquity. onc more frustrat the instig of that demon, of whose 
malic a mysteri destini had consign me to be the sport and the 
prey. 

everi new moment ad to the sum of my inexpi guilt. murder wa 
succeeded, in an instant, by the more detest enorm of suicide. 
she to whom my ingratitud wa flagrant in proport to the benefit of 
which she wa the author, had now ad to her former act that of 
rescu me from the last of mischiefs. 

I threw the weapon on the floor. the zeal which prompt her to seiz my 
arm, thi action occas to subside, and to yield place to those 
emot which thi spectacl wa calcul to excite. she watch me 
in silence, and with an air of ineff solicitude. clarice, govern 
by the instinct of modesty, wrap her bosom and face in the 
bedclothes, and testifi her horror by vehement but scarcely-articul 
exclamations. 

I move forward, but my step were random and tottering. My thought 
were fetter by reverie, and my gesticul destitut of meaning. My 
tongu falter without speaking, and I felt as if life and death were 
struggl within me for the mastery. 

My will, indeed, wa far from be neutral in thi contest. To such as 
I, annihil is the suprem good. To shake off the ill that fasten 
on us by shake off existence, is a lot which the system of natur ha 
deni to man. By escap from life, I should be deliv from thi 
scene, but should onli rush into a world of retribution, and be immers 
in new agonies. 

I wa yet to live. No instrument of my deliver wa within reach. I 
wa powerless. To rush from the presenc of these women to hide me 
forev from their scrutini and their upbraiding, to snatch from their 
mind all trace of the exist of clithero, wa the scope of 
unutter longings. 

urg to flight by everi motiv of which my natur wa susceptible, I 
wa yet root to the spot. had the paus been onli to be interrupt by 
me, it would have last forever. 

At length, the lady, clasp her hand and lift them, exclaimed, in 
a tone melt into piti and grief,-- 

"clithero! what is this? how came you hither, and why?" 

I struggl for utterance:--"i came to murder you. your brother ha 
perish by my hands. fresh from the commiss of thi deed, I have 
hasten hither to perpetr the same crime upon you." 

"mi brother!" repli the lady, with new vehemence. "oh, say not so! I 
have just heard of hi return, from sarsefield, and that he lives." 

"he is dead," repeat I, with fierceness; "I know it. It wa I that 
kill him." 

"dead!" she faintli articulated. "and by thee, clithero? oh! curs 
chanc that hinder thee from kill me also! dead! then is the omen 
fulfilled! then am I undone! lost forever!" 

her eye now wander from me, and her counten sunk into a wild and 
rueful expression. hope wa utterli extinguish in her heart, and life 
forsook her at the same moment. she sunk upon the floor pallid and 
breathless. 

how she came into possess of thi knowledg I know not. It is 
possibl that sarsefield had repent of concealment, and, in the 
interv that pass between our separ and my encount with 
wiatte, had returned, and inform her of the reappear of thi 
miscreant. 

thus, then, wa my fate consummated. I wa rescu from destroy her 
by a dagger, onli to behold her perish by the tide which I brought. 
thu wa everi omen of mischief and miseri fulfilled. thu wa the 
enmiti of wiatt render efficacious, and the instrument of hi 
destruct chang into the execution of hi revenge. 

such is the tale of my crimes. It is not for me to hope that the curtain 
of oblivion will ever shut out the dismal spectacle. It will haunt me 
forever. the torment that grow out of it can termin onli with the 
thread of my existence, but that, I know full well, will never end. 
death is but a shift of the scene; and the endless progress of 
eternity, which to the good is mere the perfect of felicity, is to 
the wick an accumul of woe. the self-destroy is hi own enemy: 
thi ha ever been my opinion. hitherto it ha influenc my actions. 
now, though the belief continues, it influenc on my conduct is 
annihilated. I am no stranger to the depth of that abyss into which I 
shall plunge. No matter. chang is preciou for it own sake. 

well, I wa still to live. My abod must be somewher fixed. My conduct 
wa henceforth the result of a pervers and rebelli principle. I 
banish myself forev from my nativ soil. I vow never more to 
behold the face of my clarice, to abandon my friends, my books, all my 
wont labour and accustom recreations. 

I wa neither asham nor afraid. I consid not in what way the 
justic of the countri would affect me. It mere made no part of my 
contemplations. I wa not embarrass by the choic of expedi for 
trammel up the visibl consequ and for elud suspicion. the 
idea of abjur my countri and fli forev from the hate scene 
partook, to my apprehension, of the vast, the boundless, and strange; of 
plung from the height of fortun to obscur and indigence, 
correspond with my present state of mind. It wa of a piec with the 
tremend and wonder event that had just happened. 

these were the imag that haunt me, while I stood speechlessli gaze 
at the ruin befor me. I heard a nois from without, or imagin that I 
heard it. My reveri wa broken, and my muscular power restored. I 
descend into the street, through door of which I possess one set of 
keys, and hurri by the shortest way beyond the precinct of the city. 
I had laid no plan. My concept with regard to the futur were 
shapeless and confused. success incid suppli me with a clue, 
and suggested, as they rose, the next step to be taken. I threw off the 
garb of affluence, and assum a beggar' attire. that I had money about 
me for the accomplish of my purpos wa wholli accidental. I 
travel along the coast, and, when I arriv at one town, knew not whi 
I should go farther; but my restless wa unabated, and chang wa 
some relief. I it length arriv at belfast. A vessel wa prepar for 
america. I embrac eagerli the opportun of pass into a new world. 
I arriv at philadelphia. As soon as I land I wander hither, and 
wa content to wear out my few remain day in the servic of 
inglefield. 

I have no friends. whi should I trust my stori to mother? I have no 
solicitud about concealment; but who is there who will deriv pleasur 
or benefit from my rehearsal? and whi should I expati on so hate a 
scheme? yet now have I consent to this. I have confid in you the 
histori of my disasters. I am not fear of the use that you may be 
dispos to make of it. I shall quickli set myself beyond the reach of 
human tribunals. I shall reliev the minist of law from the troubl 
of punishing. the recent event which induc you to summon me to thi 
confer have likewis determin me to make thi disclosure. 

I wa not aware, for some time, of my perturb sleep. No wonder that 
sleep cannot sooth miseri like mine; that I am alik infest by 
memori in wake and slumber. yet I wa anew distress by the 
discoveri that my thought found their way to my lips, without my be 
consciou of it, and that my step wander forth unknowingli and 
without the guidanc of my will. 

the stori you have told is not incredible. the disast to which you 
allud did not fail to excit my regret. I can still weep over the 
untim fall of youth and worth. I can no otherwis account for my 
frequent hi shade than by the distant resembl which the death of 
thi man bore to that of which I wa the perpetrator. thi resembl 
occur to me at first. If he were abl to weaken the impress which 
wa produc by my crime, thi similitud wa adapt to reviv and 
enforc them. 

the wilderness, and the cave to which you follow me, were familiar to 
my sunday rambles. often have I indulg in audibl grief on the cliff 
of that valley. often have I brood over my sorrow in the recess of 
that cavern. thi scene is adapt to my temper. it mountain 
asper suppli me with imag of desol and seclusion, and it 
headlong stream lull me into temporari forget of mankind. 

I comprehend you. you suspect me of concern in the death of waldegrave. 
you could not do otherwise. the conduct that you have wit wa that 
of a murderer. I will not upbraid you for your suspicions, though I have 
bought exempt from them at a high price. 




chapter ix. 


there end hi narrative. He start from the spot where he stood, and, 
without afford me ani opportun of repli or commenting, 
disappear amidst the thickest of the wood. I had no time to exert 
myself for hi detention. I could have use no argument for thi end, 
to which it is probabl he would have listened. the stori I had heard 
wa too extraordinary, too complet the revers of all my 
expectations, to allow me to attend to the intim of self-murd 
which he dropped. 

the secret which I imagin wa about to be disclos wa as inscrut 
as ever. not a circumstance, from the moment when clithero' charact 
becam the subject of my meditations, till the conclus of hi talk, 
but serv to confirm my suspicion. wa thi error to be imput to 
credulity. would not ani one, from similar appearances, have drawn 
similar conclusions? Or is there a criterion by which truth can alway 
be distinguished? wa it owe to my imperfect educ that the 
inquietud of thi man were not trace to a deed perform at the 
distanc of a thousand leagues, to the murder of hi patro and 
friend? 

I had heard a tale which appar relat to scene and person far 
distant: but, though my suspicion have appear to have been misplaced, 
what should hinder but that the death of my friend was, in like manner, 
an act of momentari insan and origin in a like spirit of mistaken 
benevolence? 

but I did not consid thi tale mere in relat to myself. My life 
had been limit and uniform. I had commun with romanc and 
historians, but the impress made upon me by thi incid wa 
unexampl in my experience. My read had furnish me with no 
instanc in ani degre parallel to this, and I found that to be a 
distant and second-hand spectat of event wa wide differ from 
wit them myself and partak in their consequences. My judgment 
was, for a time, sunk into imbecil and confusion. My mind wa full of 
the imag unavoid suggest by thi tale, but they exist in a 
kind of chaos, and not otherwis than gradual wa I abl to reduc 
them to distinct particulars, and subject them to a deliber and 
method inspection. 

how wa I to consid thi act of clithero? what a deplor 
infatuation! yet it wa the necessari result of a seri of idea 
mutual link and connected. hi conduct wa dictat by a motiv 
alli to virtue. It wa the fruit of an ardent and grate spirit. 

the death of wiatt could not be censured. the life of clithero wa 
unspeak more valuabl than that of hi antagonist. It wa the 
instinct of self-preserv that sway him. He knew not hi adversari 
in time enough to govern himself by that knowledge. had the assail 
been an unknown ruffian, hi death would have been follow by no 
remorse. the spectacl of hi die agoni would have dwelt upon the 
memori of hi assassin like ani other mourn sight, in the product 
of which he bore no part. 

It must at least be said that hi will wa not concern in thi 
transaction. He act in obedi to an impuls which he could not 
control nor resist. shall we imput guilt where there is no design? 
shall a man extract food for self-reproach from an action to which it is 
not enough to say that he wa actuat by no culpabl intention, but 
that he wa sway by no intent whatever? If consequ aris that 
cannot be foreseen, shall we find no refug in the persuas of our 
rectitud and of human frailty? shall we deem ourselv crimin becaus 
we do not enjoy the attribut of deity? becaus our power and our 
knowledg are confin by impass boundaries? 

but whenc aros the subsequ intention? It wa the fruit of a 
dread mistake. hi intent were nobl and compassionate. but thi is 
of no avail to free him from the imput of guilt. No remembr of 
past benefic can compens for thi crime. the scale load with 
the recrimin of hi conscience, is immov by ani 
counter-weight. 

but what are the conclus to be drawn by dispassion observers? Is 
it possibl to regard thi person with disdain or with enmity? the crime 
origin in those limit which natur ha impos upon human 
faculties. proof of a just intent are all that are requisit to 
exempt us from blame; he is thus, in consequ of a doubl mistake. 
the light in which he view thi event is erroneous. He judg wrong, 
and is therefor miserable. 

how imperfect are the ground of all our decis wa it of no use to 
superintend hi childhood, to select hi instructor and examples, to 
mark the oper of hi principles, to see him emerg into youth, 
to follow him through variou scene and tri vicissitudes, and mark 
the uniform of hi integrity? who would have predict hi futur 
conduct? who would not have affirm the imposs of an action like 
this? 

how mysteri wa the connect between the fate of wiatt and hi 
sister! By such circuit and yet infal mean were the predict 
of the ladi and the vengeanc of the brother accomplished! In how mani 
case may it be said, as in this, that the predict wa the caus of 
it own fulfilment! that the veri act which consider observers, and 
even himself, for a time, imagin to have utterli preclud the 
execut of wiatte' menaces, should be that inevit lead to it! 
that the execut should be assign to him who, abound in 
abhorrence, and in the act of self-defence, wa the slayer of the 
menacer! 

As the obstruct of hi designs, wiatt waylaid and assault clithero. 
He perish in the attempt. were hi design frustrated? no. It wa thu 
that he secur the gratif of hi vengeance. hi sister wa cut 
off in the bloom of life and prosperity. By a refin of good 
fortune, the voluntari minist of hi malic had entail upon himself 
exil without repriev and miseri without end. 

but what chiefli excit my wonder wa the connect of thi tale with 
the destini of sarsefield. thi wa he whom I have frequent mention 
to you as my preceptor. about four year previou to thi era, he 
appear in thi district without fortun or friend. He desired, one 
evening, to be accommod at my uncle' house. the convers 
turn on the object of hi journey and hi present situation, he 
profess himself in search of lucr employment. My uncl propos 
to him to becom a teacher, there be a suffici number of young 
peopl in thi neighbourhood to afford him occup and subsistence. 
He found it hi interest to embrac thi proposal. 

I, of course, becam hi pupil, and demean myself in such a manner as 
speedili to grow into a favourite. He commun to us no part of hi 
earli history, but inform us suffici of hi adventur in asia 
and itali to make it plain that thi wa the same person allud to by 
clithero. dure hi abod among us hi conduct wa irreproachable. when 
he left us, he manifest the most poignant regret, but thi origin 
chiefli in hi regard to me. He promis to maintain with me an 
epistolari intercourse. sinc hi departure, however, I had heard 
noth respect him. It wa with unspeak regret that I now heard 
of the disappoint of hi hopes, and wa inquisit respect the 
measur which he would adopt in hi new situation. perhap he would' 
onc more return to america, and I should again be admit to the 
enjoy of hi society. thi event I anticip with the highest 
satisfaction. 

At present, the fate of the unhappi clithero wa the subject of abund 
anxiety. On hi suddenli leav me, at the conclus of hi tale, I 
suppos that he had gone upon one of hi usual rambles, and that it 
would termin onli with the day. next morn a messag wa receiv 
from inglefield, inquir if ani one knew what had becom of hi 
servant. I could not listen to thi messag with tranquillity, I 
recollect the hint that he had given of some design upon hi life, 
and admit the most dreari forebodings. I speed to inglefield's. 
clithero had not returned, they told me, the preced evening. He had 
not appriz them of ani intent to chang hi abode. hi boxes, and 
all that compos hi slender property, were found in their ordinari 
state. He had express no dissatisfact with hi present condition. 

sever day passed, and no tide could be procur of him. hi 
absenc wa a topic of gener speculation, but wa a sourc of 
particular anxieti to no one but myself. My apprehens were sure 
built upon suffici grounds. from the moment that we parted, no one 
had seen or heard of him. what mode of suicid he had selected, he had 
disabl us from discovering, by the impenetr secreci in which he 
had involv it. 

In the midst of my reflect upon thi subject, the idea of the 
wilder occurred. could he have execut hi design in the deepest of 
it recesses? these were unvisit by human footsteps, and hi bone 
might lie for age in thi solitud without attract observation. To 
seek them where they lay, to gather them togeth and provid for them a 
grave, wa a duti which appear incumb on me, and of which the 
perform wa connect with a thousand habitu sentiment and mix 
pleasures. 

thou knowest my devot to the spirit that breath it inspir in 
the gloom of forest and on the verg of streams. I love to immers 
myself in shade and dells, and hold convers with the solemn and 
secreci of natur in the rude retreat of norwalk. the disappear 
of clithero had furnish new incit to ascend it cliff and 
pervad it thickets, as I cherish the hope of meet in my rambl 
with some trace of thi man. but might he not still live? hi word had 
impart the belief that he intend to destroy himself. thi 
catastrophe, however, wa far from certain. wa it not in my power to 
avert it? could I not restor a mind thu vigorous, to tranquil and 
wholesom existence? could I not subdu hi pervers disdain and 
immeasur abhorr of himself? hi upbraid and hi scorn were 
unmerit and misplaced. perhap they argu frenzi rather than 
prejudice; but frenzy, like prejudice, wa curable. reason wa no less 
an antidot to the illus of insan like his, than to the illus 
of error. 

I did not immedi recollect that to subsist in thi desert wa 
impossible. nut were the onli fruit it produced, and these were 
inadequ to sustain human life. If it were haunt by clithero, he 
must occasion pass it limit and beg or purloin victuals. thi 
deport wa too humili and flagiti to be imput to him. 
there wa reason to suppos him smitten with the charm of solitude, of 
a lone abod in the midst of mountain and rug nature; but thi 
could not be uninterruptedli enjoyed. life could be support onli by 
occasion visit the haunt of men, in the guis of a thief or a 
mendicant. hence, sinc clithero wa not known to have reappear at ani 
farm-hous in the neighbourhood, I wa compel to conclud either that 
he had retir far from thi district, or that he wa dead. 

though I design that my leisur should chiefli be consum in the 
bosom of norwalk, I almost dismiss the hope of meet with the 
fugitive. there were inde two sourc of my hopeless on thi 
occasion. not onli it wa probabl that clithero had fled far away, but, 
should he have conceal himself in some nook or cavern within these 
precincts, hi conceal wa not to be traced. thi aros from the 
natur of that steril region. 

It would not be easi to describ the face of thi district, in a few 
words. half of solesbury, thou knowest, admit neither of plough nor 
spade. the cultiv space lie along the river, and the desert, lie 
on the north, ha gained, by some means, the appel of norwalk. 
canst thou imagin a space, somewhat circular, about six mile in 
diameter, and exhibit a perpetu and intric varieti of craggi 
emin and deep dells? 

the hollow are single, and wall around by cliffs, ever vari in 
shape and height, and have seldom ani percept commun with 
each other. these hollow are of all dimensions, from the narrow and 
depth of a well, to the amplitud of one hundr yards. winter' snow is 
frequent found in these caviti at midsummer. the stream that burst 
forth from everi crevic are thrown, by the irregular of the 
surface, into numberless cascades, often disappear in mist or in 
chasms, and emerg from subterranean channels, and, finally, either 
subsid into lakes, or quietli meander through the lower and more level 
grounds. 

wherev natur left a flat it is made rug and scarc passabl by 
enorm and fallen trunks, accumul by the storm of ages, and 
forming, by their slow decay, a moss-cov soil, the haunt of rabbit 
and lizards. these spot are obscur by the melancholi umbrag of 
pines, whose etern murmur are in unison with vacanc and solitude, 
with the reverber of the torrent and the whistl of the blasts. 
hickori and poplar, which abound in the lowlands, find here no foster 
elements. 

A sort of continu vale, wind and abrupt, lead into the midst of 
thi region and through it. thi vale serv the purpos of a road. It 
is a tediou maze and perpetu declivity, and requires, from the 
passenger, a cautiou and sure foot. open and ascent occasion 
present themselv on each side, which seem to promis you access to the 
interior region, but alway terminate, sooner or later, in insuper 
difficulties, at the verg of a precipic or the bottom of a steep. 

perhap no one wa more acquaint with thi wilder than I, but my 
knowledg wa extrem imperfect. I had travers part of it, at an 
earli age, in pursuit of berri and nuts, or led by a roam 
disposition. afterward the sphere of my rambl wa enlarg and their 
purpos changed. when sarsefield came among us, I becam hi favourit 
scholar and the companion of all hi pedestrian excursions. He wa fond 
of penetr into these recesses, partli from the love of picturesqu 
scenes, partli to investig it botan and miner productions, and 
partli to carri on more effectu that speci of instruct which he 
had adopt with regard to me, and which chiefli consist in moral 
narr or synthet reasonings. these excurs had familiar 
me with it outlin and most access parts; but there wa much 
which, perhaps, could never be reach without wings, and much the onli 
path to which I might forev overlook. 

everi new excursion, indeed, ad somewhat to my knowledge. new track 
were pursued, new prospect detected, and new summit were gained. My 
rambl were product of incess novelty, though they alway 
termin in the prospect of limit that could not be overleaped. but 
none of these had led me wider from my customari path than that which 
had taken place when in pursuit of clithero. I had a faint remembr 
of the valley into which I had descend after him; but till then I had 
view it at a distance, and suppos it imposs to reach the bottom 
but by leap from a precipic some hundr feet in height. the 
opposit steep seem no less inaccessible, and the cavern at the bottom 
wa impervi to ani view which my former posit had enabl me to 
take of it. 

My intent to re-examin thi cave and ascertain whither it led had, 
for a time, been suspend by differ considerations. It wa now 
reviv with more energi than ever. I reflect that thi had formerli 
been haunt by clithero, and might possibl have been the scene of the 
desper act which he had meditated. It might at least conceal some 
token of hi past existence. It might lead into space hitherto 
unvisited, and to summit from which wider landscap might be seen. 

one morn I set out to explor thi scene. the road which clithero had 
taken wa labori circuitous. On my return from the first pursuit of 
him, I ascend the cliff in my former footsteps, but soon light on 
the beaten track which I have alreadi described. thi enabl me to shun 
a thousand obstacl which had late risen befor me, and open an 
easi passag to the cavern. 

I onc more travers thi way. the brow of the hill wa gained. the 
ledg of which it consist afford suffici footing, when the 
attempt wa made, though view at a distanc they seem to be too 
narrow for that purpose. As I descend the rug stair, I could not 
but wonder at the temer and precipit with which thi descent had 
formerli been made. It seem as if the noonday light and the tardiest 
circumspect would scarc enabl me to accomplish it; yet then it 
had been done with headlong speed, and with no guidanc but the moon' 
uncertain rays. 

I reach the mouth of the cave. till now I had forgotten that a lamp or 
a torch might be necessari to direct my subterranean footsteps. I wa 
unwil to defer the attempt. light might possibl be requisite, if 
the cave had no other outlet. somewhat might present itself within to 
the eyes, which might forev elud the hands, but I wa more inclin 
to consid it mere as an avenu termin in an open on the 
summit of the steep, or on the opposit side of the ridge. caution might 
suppli the place of light, or, have explor the cave as far as 
possibl at present, I might hereaft return, better furnish for the 
scrutiny. 




chapter X. 


with these determinations, I proceeded. the entranc wa low, and 
compel me to resort to hand as well as feet. At a few yard from the 
mouth the light disappeared, and I found myself immers in the dunnest 
obscurity. had I not been persuad that anoth had gone befor me, I 
should have relinquish the attempt. I proceed with the utmost 
caution, alway ascertaining, by outstretch arms, the height and 
breadth of the caviti befor me. In a short time the dimens expand 
on all sides, and permit me to resum my feet. 

I walk upon a smooth and gentl declivity. present the wall on one 
side, and the ceiling, reced beyond my reach. I began to fear that I 
should be involv in a maze, and should be disabl from returning. To 
obviat thi danger it wa requisit to adher to the nearest wall, and 
conform to the direct which it should take, without stray through 
the palpabl obscurity. whether the ceil wa lofti or low, whether 
the opposit wall of the passag wa distant or near, thi I deem no 
proper opportun to investigate. 

In a short time, my progress wa stop by an abrupt descent. I set 
down the advanc foot with caution, be awar that I might at the 
next step encount a bottomless pit. To the brink of such a one I 
seem now to have arrived. I stooped, and stretch my hand forward and 
downward, but all wa vacuity. 

here it wa need to pause. I had reach the brink of a caviti whose 
depth it ava imposs to ascertain. It might be a few inch beyond 
my reach, or hundr of feet. By leap down I might incur no injury, 
or might plung into a lake or dash myself to piec on the point of 
rocks. 

I now saw with new forc the proprieti of be furnish with a light. 
the first suggest wa to return upon my footsteps, and resum my 
undertak on the morrow. yet, have advanc thu far, I felt 
reluct to reced without accomplish my purposes. I reflect 
likewis that clithero had boldli enter thi recess, and had certainli 
come forth at a differ avenu from that at which he entered. 

At length it occur to me that, though I could not go forward, yet I 
might proceed along the edg of thi cavity. thi edg would be as safe 
a guidance, and would serv as well for a clue by which I might return, 
as the wall which it wa now necessari to forsake. 

intens dark is alway the parent of fears. impend injuri cannot in 
thi state be descried, nor shunned, nor repelled. I began to feel some 
falter of my courage, and seat myself, for a few minutes, on a 
stoni mass which aros befor me. My situat wa new. the cavern I 
had hitherto met with in thi desert were chiefli form of low-brow 
rocks. they were chambers, more or less spacious, into which twilight 
wa at least admitted; but here it seem as if I were surround by 
barrier that would forev cut off my return to air and to light. 

present I resum my courag and proceeded. My road appear now to 
ascend. On one side I seem still upon the verg of a precipice, and on 
the other all wa empti and waste. I had gone no inconsider 
distance, and persuad myself that my career would speedili terminate. 
In a short time, the space on the left hand wa again occupied, and I 
cautious proceed between the edg of the gulf and a rug wall. As 
the space between them widen I adher to the wall. 

I wa not insens that my path becam more intric and more 
difficult to retread in proport as I advanced. I endeavour to 
preserv a vivid concept of the way which I had alreadi passed, and 
to keep the imag of the left and right-hand wall, and the gulf, in due 
success in my memory. 

the path, which had hitherto been consider smooth, now becam rug 
and steep. chill damps, the secret trepid which attend me, the 
length and difficulti of my way, enhanc by the ceaseless caution and 
the numer expedi which the utter dark oblig me to employ, 
began to overpow my strength. I wa frequent compel to stop and 
recruit myself by rest. these respit from toil were of use, but they 
could not enabl me to prosecut an endless journey, and to return wa 
scarc a less arduou task than to proceed. 

I look anxious forward, in the hope of be comfort by some dim 
ray, which might assur me that my labour were approach an end. At 
last thi propiti token appeared, and I issu forth into a kind of 
chamber, one side of which wa open to the air and allow me to catch a 
portion of the checker sky. thi spectacl never befor excit such 
exquisit sensat in my bosom. the air, likewise, breath into the 
cavern, wa unspeak delicious. 

I now found myself on the projectur of a rock. abov and below, the 
hill-sid wa nearli perpendicular. opposite, and at the distanc of 
fifteen or twenti yards, wa a similar ascent. At the bottom wa a glen, 
cold, narrow, and obscure. thi projecture, which serv as a kind of 
vestibul to the cave, wa connect with a ledge, by which, though not 
without peril and toil, I wa conduct to the summit. 

thi summit wa higher than ani of those which were interpos between 
itself and the river. A larg part of thi chao of rock and precipic 
wa subjected, at one view, to the eye. the fertil lawn and vale 
which lay beyond this, the wind cours of the river, and the slope 
which rose on it farther side, were part of thi extens scene. 
these object were at ani time fit to inspir rapture. now my delight 
wa enhanc by the contrast which thi lightsom and seren element 
bore to the gloom from which I had late emerged. My station, also, 
wa higher, and the limit of my view, consequently, more ampl than ani 
which I had hitherto enjoyed. 

I advanc to the outer verg of the hill, which I found to overlook a 
steep no less inaccessible, and a glen equal profound. I chang 
frequent my station in order to diversifi the scenery. At length it 
becam necessari to inquir by what mean I should return. I travers 
the edg of the hill, but on everi side it wa equal steep and alway 
too lofti to permit me to leap from it. As I kept along the verge, I 
perceiv that it tend in a circular direction, and brought me back, 
at last, to the spot from which I had set out. from thi inspection, it 
seem as if return wa imposs by ani other way than that through 
the cavern. 

I now turn my attent to the interior space. If you imagin a 
cylindr mass, with a caviti dug in the centre, whose edg conform 
to the exterior edge; and if you place in thi caviti anoth cylinder, 
higher than that which surround it, but so small as to leav between 
it side and those of the caviti a hollow space, you will gain as 
distinct an imag of thi hill as word can convey. the summit of the 
inner rock wa rug and cover with tree of unequ growth. To reach 
thi summit would not render my return easier; but it greater elev 
would extend my view, and perhap furnish a spot from which the whole 
horizon wa conspicuous. 

As I had travers the outer, I now explor the inner, edg of thi 
hill. At length I reach a spot where the chasm, separ the two 
rocks, wa narrow than at ani other part. At first view, it seem as 
if it were possibl to leap over it, but a nearer examin show me 
that the passag wa impracticable. So far as my eye could estim it, 
the breadth wa thirti or forti feet. I could scarc ventur to look 
beneath. the height wa dizzy, and the walls, which approach each 
other at top, reced at the bottom, so as to form the resembl of an 
immens hall, light from a rift which some convuls of natur had 
made in the roof. where I stood there ascend a perpetu mist, 
occas by a torrent that dash along the rug pavement below. 

from these object I willingli turn my eye upon those befor and abov 
me, on the opposit ascent. A stream, rush from above, fell into a 
cavity, which it own forc seem gradual to have made. the nois and 
the motion equal attract my attention. there wa a desol and 
solitari grandeur in the scene, enhanc by the circumst in which 
it wa beheld, and by the peril through which I had recent passed, 
that had never befor been wit by me. 

A sort of sanctiti and awe environ it, owe to the conscious of 
absolut and utter loneliness. It wa probabl that human feet had never 
befor gain thi recess, that human eye had never been fix upon 
these gush waters. the aborigin inhabit had no motiv to lead 
them into cave like thi and ponder on the verg of such a precipice. 
their successor were still less like to have wander hither. sinc 
the birth of thi continent, I wa probabl the first who had deviat 
thu remot from the customari path of men. 

while muse upon these ideas, my eye wa fix upon the foam 
current. At length I look upon the rock which confin and 
embarrass it course. I admir their fantast shape and endless 
irregularities. pass from one to the other of these, my attent 
lighted, at length, as if by some magic transition, on--a human 
countenance! 

My surpris wa so abrupt, and my sensat so tumultuous, that I 
forgot for a moment the peril natur of my situation. I loosen my 
hold of a pine-branch, which had been hitherto one of my supports, and 
almost start from my seat. had my station been in a slight degre 
nearer the brink than it was, I should have fallen headlong into the 
abyss. 

To meet a human creature, even on that side of the chasm which I 
occupied, would have been wholli advers to my expectation. My station 
wa access by no other road than that through which I had passed, 
and no motiv were imagin by which other could be prompt to 
explor thi road. but he whom I now beheld wa seat where it seem 
imposs for human effort to have place him. 

but thi affect me but littl in comparison with other incidents. not 
onli the counten wa human, but, in spite of shaggi and tangl 
locks, and an air of melancholi wildness, I speedili recognis the 
featur of the fugit clithero! 

one glanc wa not suffici to make me acquaint with thi scene. I 
had come hither partli in pursuit of thi man, but some casual appendag 
of hi person, someth which should indic hi past rather than hi 
present existence, wa all that I hope to find. that he should be found 
aliv in thi desert, that he should have gain thi summit, access to 
which wa appar impossible, were scarc within the boundari of 
belief. 

hi scanti and coars garb had been nearli rent away by brambl and 
thorns; hi arms, bosom, and cheek were overgrown and half conceal by 
hair. there wa somewhat in hi attitud and look denot more than 
anarchi of thought and passions. hi rueful, ghastly, and immov 
eye testifi not onli that hi mind wa ravag by despair, but that 
he wa pinch with famine. 

these proof of hi miseri thrill to my inmost heart. horror and 
shudder invad me as I stood gaze upon him, and, for a time, I wa 
without the power of deliber on the measur which it wa my duti 
to adopt for hi relief. the first suggest was, by calling, to inform 
him of my presence. I knew not what counsel or comfort to offer. By what 
word to bespeak hi attention, or by what topic to mollifi hi dire 
passions, I knew not. though so near, the gulf by which we were 
separ wa impassable. all that I could do wa to speak. 

My surpris and my horror were still strong enough to give a shrill and 
pierc tone to my voice. the chasm and the rock louden and 
reverber my accent while I exclaimed,--"_man! clithero!_" 

My summon wa effectual. He shook off hi tranc in a moment. He had 
been stretch upon hi back, with hi eye fix upon a craggi 
projectur above, as if he were in momentari expect of it fall and 
crush him to atoms. now he start on hi feet. He wa consciou of 
the voice, but not of the quarter whenc it came. He wa look 
anxious around when I again spoke:--"look hither. It is I who called." 

He looked. astonish wa now mingl with everi other dread 
mean in hi visage. He clasp hi hand togeth and bent forward, 
as if to satisfi himself that hi summon wa real. At the next moment 
he drew back, place hi hand upon hi breast, and fix hi eye on 
the ground. 

thi paus wa not like to be broken but by me. I wa prepar again 
to speak. To be more distinctli heard, I advanc closer to the brink. 
dure thi action, my eye wa necessarili withdrawn from him. have 
gain a somewhat nearer station, I look again, but--h wa gone! 

the seat which he so late occupi wa empty. I wa not forewarn of 
hi disappear or direct to the cours of hi flight by ani 
rustl among leaves. these, indeed, would have been overpow by the 
nois of the cataract. the place where he sat wa the bottom of a 
cavity, one side of which termin in the verg of the abyss, but the 
other side were perpendicular or overhanging. sure he had not leap 
into thi gulf; and yet that he had so speedili scale the steep wa 
impossible. 

I look into the gulf, but the depth and the gloom allow me to see 
noth with distinctness. hi cri or groan could not be overheard 
amidst the uproar of the waters. hi fall must have instantli destroy 
him, and that he had fallen wa the onli conclus I could draw. 

My sensat on thi incid cannot be easili described. the imag of 
thi man' despair, and of the sudden catastroph to which my 
inauspici interfer had led, fill me with compunct and 
terror. some of my fear were reliev by the new conjecture, that, 
behind the rock on which he had lain, there might be some apertur or 
pit into which he had descended, or in which he might be concealed. 

I deriv consol from thi conjecture. not onli the evil which I 
dread might not have happened, but some allevi of hi miseri wa 
possible. could I arrest hi footstep and win hi attention, I might be 
abl to insinu the lesson of fortitude; but if word were impotent, 
and argument were nugatory, yet to sit by him in silence, to moisten 
hi hand with tears, to sigh in unison, to offer him the spectacl of 
sympathy, the solac of believ that hi demerit were not estim 
by so rigid a standard by other as by himself, that one at least among 
hi fellow-men regard him with love and pity, could not fail to be of 
benign influence. 

these thought inspir me with new zeal. To effect my purpos it wa 
requisit to reach the opposit steep. I wa now convinc that thi wa 
not an impractic undertaking, sinc clithero had alreadi perform 
it. I onc more made the circuit of the hill. everi side wa steep and 
of enorm height, and the gulf wa nowher so narrow as at thi spot. 
I therefor return hither, and onc more ponder on the mean of 
pass thi tremend chasm in safety. 

cast my eye upward, I note the tree at the root of which I wa 
standing. I compar the breadth of the gulf with the length of the 
trunk of thi tree, and it appear veri suitabl for a bridge. happili 
it grew obliquely, and, if fell by an axe, would probabl fall of 
itself, in such a manner as to be suspend across the chasm. the stock 
wa thick enough to afford me footing, and would enabl me to reach the 
opposit decliv without danger or delay. 

A more care examin of the spot, the site of the tree, it 
dimensions, and the direct of it growth, convinc me fulli of the 
practic of thi expedient, and I determin to carri it into 
immedi execution. for thi end I must hasten home, procur an axe, 
and return with all expedit hither. I took my former way, onc more 
enter the subterranean avenue, and slowli re-emerg into day. befor 
I reach home, the even wa at hand, and my tire limb and jade 
spirit oblig me to defer my undertak till the morrow. 

though my limb were at rest, my thought were activ through the night. 
I care review the situat of thi hill, and wa unabl to 
conjectur by what mean clithero could place himself upon it. unless he 
occasion return to the habit grounds, it wa imposs for 
him to escap perish by famine. He might intend to destroy himself by 
thi means, and my first effort were to be employ to overcom thi 
fatal resolution. To persuad him to leav hi desol haunt might be 
a labori and tediou task; meanwhile, all my benevol intent 
would be frustrat by hi want of sustenance. It wa proper, therefore, 
to carri bread with me, and to place it befor him. the sight of food, 
the urgenc of hunger, and my vehement entreaties, might prevail on 
him to eat, though no expostul might suffic to make him seek food 
at a distance. 




chapter xi. 


next morn I store a small bag with meat and bread, and, throw an 
axe on my shoulder, set out, without inform ani one of my intentions, 
for the hill. My passag wa render more difficult by these 
encumbrances, but my persever surmount everi impediment, and I 
gained, in a few hours, the foot of the tree whose trunk wa to serv me 
for a bridge. In thi journey I saw no trace of the fugitive. 

A new survey of the tree confirm my former conclusions, and I began my 
work with diligence. My stroke were repeat by a thousand echoes, and 
I paus at first, somewhat startl by reverber which made it 
appear as if not one but a score of axe were employ at the same time 
on both side of the gulf. 

quickli the tree fell, and exactli in the manner which I expect arid 
desired. the wide-spread limb occupi and choke up the channel of the 
torrent, and compel it to seek a new outlet and multipli it 
murmurs. I dare not trust myself to cross it in an upright posture, but 
clung, with hand and feet, to it rug bark. have reach the 
opposit cliff, I proceed to examin the spot where clithero had 
disappeared. My fondest hope were realized, for a consider caviti 
appeared, which, on a former day, had been conceal from my distant 
view by the rock. 

It wa obviou to conclud that thi wa hi present habitation, or that 
an avenue, conduct hither and termin in the unexplor side of 
thi pit, wa that by which he had come hither, and by which he had 
retired. I could not hesit long to slide into the pit. I found an 
entranc through which I fearlessli penetrated. I wa prepar to 
encount obstacl and peril similar to those which I have alreadi 
described, but wa rescu from them by ascending, in a few minutes, 
into a kind of passage, open above, but wall by a continu rock on 
both sides. the side of thi passag conform with the utmost 
exact to each other. nature, at some former period, had occas 
the solid mass to dispart at thi place, and had thu afford access to 
the summit of the hill. loos stone and rag point form the 
floor of thi passage, which rapidli and circuit ascended. 

I wa now within a few yard of the surfac of the rock. the passag 
open into a kind of chamber or pit, the side of which were not 
difficult to climb. I rejoic at the prospect of thi termin of my 
journey. here I paused, and, throw my weari limb on the ground, 
began to examin the object around me, and to medit on the step 
that were next to be taken. 

My first glanc light on the veri be of whom I wa in search. 
stretch upon a bed of moss, at the distanc of a few feet from my 
station, I beheld clithero. He had not been rous by my approach, 
though my footstep were perpetu stumbl and sliding. thi 
reflect gave birth to the fear that he wa dead. A nearer inspect 
dispel my apprehensions, and show me that he wa mere buri in 
profound slumber. those vigil must inde have been long which were at 
last succeed by a sleep so oblivious. 

thi meet was, in the highest degree, propitious. It not onli assur 
me of hi existence, but prove that hi miseri were capabl of be 
suspended. hi slumber enabl me to pause, to rumin on the manner by 
which hi understand might be most success addressed; to collect 
and arrang the topic fit to rectifi hi gloomi and disastr 
perceptions. 

thou knowest that I am qualifi for such task neither by my educ 
nor my genius. the headlong and feroci energi of thi man could not 
be repel or divert into better path by effort so undisciplin as 
mine. A despair so stormi and impetu would drown my feebl accents. 
how should I attempt to reason with him? how should I outroot 
prepossess so inveterate,--th fruit of hi earliest education, 
foster and matur by the observ and experi of hi whole 
life? how should I convinc him that, sinc the death of wiatt wa not 
intended, the deed wa without crime? that, if it had been deliber 
concerted, it wa still a virtue, sinc hi own life could by no other 
mean be preserved? that when he point a dagger at the bosom of hi 
mistress he wa actuated, not by avarice, or ambition, or revenge, or 
malice? He desir to confer on her the highest and the onli benefit of 
which he believ her capable. He sought to rescu her from torment 
regret and linger agonies. 

these posit were suffici just to my own view, but I wa not 
call upon to reduc them to practice. I had not to struggl with the 
conscious of have been rescued, by some miracul contingency, 
from imbru my hand in the blood of her whom I adored; of have 
drawn upon myself suspicion of ingratitud and murder too deep to be 
ever effaced; of have bereft myself of love, and honour, and friends, 
and spotless reputation; of have doom myself to infami and 
detestation, to hopeless exile, penury, and servil toil. these were the 
evil which hi malign destini had made the unalter portion of 
clithero, and how should my imperfect eloqu annihil these evils? 
everi man, not himself the victim of irretriev disasters, perceiv 
the folli of rumin on the past, and of foster a grief which 
cannot revers or recal the decre of an immut necessity; but 
everi man who suffer is unavoid shackl by the error which he 
censur in hi neighbour, and hi effort to reliev himself are as 
fruitless as those with which he attempt the relief of others. 

No topic, therefore, could be properli employ by me on the present 
occasion. all that I could do wa to offer him food, and, by pathet 
supplications, to prevail on him to eat. famine, howev obstinate, 
would scarc refrain when bread wa place within sight and reach. 
when made to swerv from hi resolut in one instance, it would be 
less difficult to conquer it a second time. the magic of sympathy, the 
persever of benevolence, though silent, might work a gradual and 
secret revolution, and better thought might insens displac those 
desper suggest which now govern him. 

have revolv these ideas, I place the food which I had brought at 
hi right hand, and, seat myself at hi feet, attent survey 
hi countenance. the emot which were visibl dure wake had 
vanish dure thi cessat of remembr and remorse, or were 
faintli discernible. they serv to dignifi and solemn hi features, 
and to embellish those immut line which betoken the spirit of hi 
better days. lineament were now observ which could never coexist with 
folli or associ with obdur guilt. 

I had no inclin to awaken him. thi respit wa too sweet to be 
needlessli abridged. I determin to await the oper of nature, and 
to prolong, by silenc and by keep interrupt at a distance, thi 
salutari period of forgetfulness. thi interv permit new idea to 
succeed in my mind. 

clithero believ hi solitud to be unapproachable. what new expedi 
to escap inquiri and intrus might not my presenc suggest! might he 
not vanish, as he had done on the former day, and afford me no time to 
assail hi constanc and tempt hi hunger? if, however, I withdrew 
dure hi sleep, he would awak without disturbance, and be 
unconscious, for a time, that hi secreci had been violated. He would 
quickli perceiv the victuals, and would need no foreign induc to 
eat. A provis so unexpect and extraordinari might suggest new 
thoughts, and be constru into a kind of heavenli condemn of hi 
purpose. He would not readili suspect the motiv or person of hi 
visitant, would take no precaut against the repetit of my visit, 
and, at the same time, our interview would not be attend with so much 
surprise. the more I revolv these reflections, the greater forc they 
acquired. At length, I determin to withdraw, and, leav the food 
where it could scarc fail of attract hi notice, I return by the 
way that I had come. I had scarc reach home, when a messeng from 
inglefield arrived, request me to spend the succeed night at hi 
house, as some engag had occur to draw him to the city. 

I readili compli with thi request. It wa not necessary, however, to 
be earli in my visit. I defer go till the even wa far 
advanced. My way led under the branch of the elm which recent event 
had render so memorable. henc my reflect revert to the 
circumst which had late occur in connect with thi tree. 

I paused, for some time, under it shade. I mark the spot where 
clithero had been discov digging. It show mark of be 
unsettled; but the sod which had formerli cover it, and which had 
late been removed, wa now care replaced. thi had not been done 
by him on that occas in which I wa a wit of hi behaviour. the 
earth wa then hastili removed, and as hastili thrown again into the 
hole from which it had been taken. 

some curios wa natur excit by thi appearance. either some 
other person, or clithero, on a subsequ occasion, had been here. I 
wa now likewis led to reflect on the possibl motiv that prompt 
the maniac to turn up thi earth. there is alway some signific in 
the action of a sleeper. somewhat was, perhaps, buri in thi spot, 
connect with the histori of mrs. lorim or of clarice. wa it not 
possibl to ascertain the truth in thi respect? 

there wa but one method. By care uncov thi hole, and dig 
as deep as clithero had alreadi dug, it would quickli appear whether ani 
thing wa hidden. To do thi publicli by daylight wa evid 
indiscreet. besides, a moment' delay wa superfluous. the night had now 
fallen, and befor it wa past thi new undertak might be finished. 
An interview was, if possible, to be gain with clithero on the morrow, 
and for thi interview the discoveri made on thi spot might emin 
qualifi me. influenc by these considerations, I resolv to dig. I wa 
first, however, to convers an hour with the housekeeper, and then to 
withdraw to my chamber. when the famili were all retired, and there wa 
no fear of observ or interruption, I propos to rise and hasten, 
with a proper implement, hither. 

one chamber in inglefield' hous wa usual reserv for visitants. In 
thi chamber thi unfortun brother died, and here it wa that I wa to 
sleep. the imag of it last inhabit could not fail of be call 
up, and of banish repose; but the scheme which I had medit wa an 
addit incit to watchfulness. hither I repair at the due 
season, have previous furnish myself with candles, sinc I knew 
not what might occur to make a light necessary. 

I did not go to bed, but either sat muse by a tabl or walk across 
the room. the bed befor me wa that on which my friend breath hi 
last. To rest my head upon the same pillow, to lie on that pallet which 
sustain hi cold and motionless limbs, were provoc to 
remembr and grief that I desir to shun. I endeavour to fill my 
mind with more recent incidents, with the disast of clithero, my 
subterranean adventures, and the probabl issu of the scheme which I 
now contemplated. 

I recal the convers which had just end with the housekeeper. 
clithero had been our theme, but she had dealt chiefli in repetit of 
what had formerli been relat by her or by inglefield. I inquir what 
thi man had left behind, and found that it consist of a squar box, 
put togeth by himself with uncommon strength, but of rug 
workmanship. she proceed to mention that she had advis her brother, 
mr. inglefield, to break open thi box and ascertain it contents; but 
thi he did not think himself justifi in doing. clithero wa guilti of 
no known crime, wa respons to no one for hi actions, and might 
some time return to claim hi property. thi box contain noth with 
which other had a right to meddle. somewhat might be found in it, 
throw light upon hi past or present situation; but curios wa not 
to be gratifi by these means. what clithero thought proper to conceal, 
it wa crimin for us to extort from him. 

the housekeep wa by no mean convinc by these arguments, and at 
length obtain her brother' permiss to tri whether ani of her own 
key would unlock thi chest. the key were produced, but no lock nor 
keyhol were discoverable. the lid wa fast, but by what mean it wa 
fasten the most accur inspect could not detect. henc she wa 
compel to lay asid her project. thi chest had alway stood in the 
chamber which I now occupied. 

these incid were now remembered, and I felt dispos to profit by 
thi opportun of examin thi box. It stood in a corner, and wa 
easili distinguish by it form. I lift it and found it weight by no 
mean extraordinary. it structur wa remarkable. It consist of six 
sides, squar and of similar dimensions. these were joined, not by 
mortis and tennon, not by nails, not by hinges, but the junction wa 
accurate. the mean by which they were made to coher were invisible. 

appear on everi side were uniform, nor were there ani mark by 
which the lid wa distinguish from it other surfaces. 

dure hi resid with inglefield, mani specimen of mechan 
ingenu were given by hi servant. thi wa the workmanship of hi own 
hands. I look at it for some time, till the desir insens aros of 
open it and examin it contents. 

I had no more right to do thi than the inglefields; perhaps, indeed, 
thi curios wa more absurd, and the gratif more culpable, in 
me than in them. I wa acquaint with the histori of clithero' past 
life, and with hi present condition. respect these, I had no new 
intellig to gain, and no doubt to solve. what excus could I make 
to the proprietor, should he ever reappear to claim hi own, or to 
inglefield for break open a receptacl which all the maxim of 
societi combin to render sacred? 

but could not my end be gain without violence? the mean of open 
might present themselv on a patient scrutiny. the lid might be rais 
and shut down again without ani token of my act; it content might be 
examined, and all thing restor to their former condition, in a few 
minutes. 

I intend not a theft. I intend to benefit myself without inflict 
injuri on others. nay, might not the discoveri I should make throw 
light upon the conduct of thi extraordinari man which hi own narr 
had withheld? wa there reason to confid implicitli on the tale which I 
had heard? 

In spite of the testimoni of my own feelings, the miseri of clithero 
appear in some degre fantast and groundless. A thousand conceiv 
motiv might induc him to pervert or conceal the truth. If he were 
thoroughli known, hi charact might assum a new appearance; and what 
is now so difficult to reconcil to common maxim might prove perfectli 
consist with them. I desir to restor him to peace; but a thorough 
knowledg of hi action is necessary, both to show that he is worthi of 
compassion, and to suggest the best mean of extirp hi errors. It 
wa possibl that thi box contain the mean of thi knowledge. 

there were likewis other motives, which, as they possess some 
influence, howev small, deserv to be mentioned. thou knowest that I 
also am a mechanist. I had construct a writing-desk and cabinet, in 
which I had endeavour to combin the properti of secrecy, security, 
and strength, in the highest possibl degree. I look upon this, 
therefore, with the eye of an artist, and wa solicit to know the 
principl on which it wa formed. I determin to examine, and, if 
possible, to open it. 




chapter xii. 


I survey it with the utmost attention. all it part appear equal 
solid and smooth. It could not be doubt that one of it side serv 
the purpos of a lid, and wa possibl to be raised. mere strength could 
not be appli to rais it, becaus there wa no projectur which might 
be firmli held by the hand, and by which forc could be exerted. some 
spring, therefore, secretli existed, which might forev elud the 
senses, but on which the hand, by be move over it in all directions, 
might accident light. 

thi process wa effectual. A touch, casual appli at an angle, drove 
back a bolt, and a spring, at the same time, wa set in action, by which 
the lid wa rais abov half an inch. No event could be suppos more 
fortuit than this. A hundr hand might have sought in vain for thi 
spring. the spot in which a certain degre of pressur wa suffici to 
produc thi effect was, of all, the least like to attract notic or 
awaken suspicion. 

I open the trunk with eagerness. the space within wa divid into 
numer compartments, none of which contain ani thing of moment. 
tool of differ and curiou constructions, and remnant of minut 
machinery, were all that offer themselv to my notice. 

My expect be thu frustrated, I proceed to restor thing to 
their former state. I attempt to close the lid; but the spring which 
had rais it refus to bend. No measur that I could adopt enabl me 
to place the lid in the same situat in which I had found it. In my 
effort to press down the lid, which were augment in proport to the 
resist that I met with, the spring wa broken. thi obstacl be 
removed, the lid resum it proper place; but no means, within the 
reach of my ingenu to discover, enabl me to push forward the bolt, 
and thu to restor the fastening. 

I now perceiv that clithero had provid not onli against the open 
of hi cabinet, but likewis against the possibl of conceal that 
it had been opened. thi discoveri threw me into some confusion. I had 
been tempt thu far by the belief that my action wa without 
witnesses, and might be forev concealed. thi opinion wa now 
confuted. If clithero should ever reclaim hi property, he would not 
fail to detect the violenc of which I had been guilty. inglefield would 
disapprov in anoth what he had not permit to himself, and the 
unauthor and clandestin manner in which I had behav would 
aggravate, in hi eyes, the heinous of my offence. 

but now there wa no remedy. all that remain wa to hinder suspicion 
from light on the innocent, and to confess, to my friend, the offenc 
which I had committed. meanwhil my first project wa resumed, and, the 
famili be now wrap in profound sleep, I left my chamber, and 
proceed to the elm. the moon wa extrem brilliant, but I hope that 
thi unfrequ road and unseason hour would hinder me from be 
observed. My chamber wa abov the kitchen, with which it commun 
by a small staircase, and the build to which it belong wa 
connect with the dwell by a gallery. I extinguish the light, and 
left it in the kitchen, intend to relight it, by the ember that 
still glow on the hearth, on my return. 

I began to remov the sod and cast out the earth, with littl confid 
in the success of my project. the issu of my examin of the box 
humbl and dishearten me. for some time I found noth that tend 
to invigor my hopes. I determined, however, to descend, as long as 
the unsettl condit of the earth show me that some one had 
preced me. small mass of stone were occasion met with, which 
serv onli to perplex me with groundless expectations. At length my 
spade struck upon someth which emit a veri differ sound. I 
quickli drew it forth, and found it to be wood. it regular form, and 
the crevic which were faintli discernible, persuad me that it wa 
human workmanship, and that there wa a caviti within. the place in 
which it wa found easili suggest some connect between thi and the 
destini of clithero. cover up the hole with speed, I hasten with my 
prize to the house. the door by which the kitchen wa enter wa not to 
be seen from the road. It open on a field, the farther limit of which 
wa a ledg of rocks, which formed, on thi side, the boundari of 
inglefield' estat and the westernmost barrier of norwalk. 

As I turn the angl of the house, and came in view of thi door, 
methought I saw a figur issu from it. I wa startl at thi incident, 
and, stopping, crouch close to the wall, that I might not be 
discovered. As soon as the figur pass beyond the verg of the shade, 
it wa easili distinguish to be that of clithero! He cross the field 
with a rapid pace, and quickli pass beyond the reach of my eye. 

thi appear wa mysterious. for what end he should visit thi 
habit could not be guessed. wa the conting to be lament in 
consequ of which an interview had been avoided? would it have 
compel me to explain the broken condit of hi trunk? I knew not 
whether to rejoic at have avoid thi interview, or to deplor it. 

these thought did not divert me from examin the natur of the prize 
which I had gained. I relight my candl and hie onc more to the 
chamber. the first object which, on enter it, attract my attention, 
wa the cabinet broken into twenti fragments, on the hearth. I had left 
it on a low table, at a distant corner of the room. 

No conclus could be form but that clithero had been here, had 
discov the violenc which had been commit on hi property, and, 
in the first transport of hi indignation, had shatter it to pieces. I 
shudder on reflect how near I had been to be detect by him in 
the veri act, and by how small an interv I had escap that resent 
which, in that case, would have probabl been wreak upon me. 

My attent wa withdrawn, at length, from thi object, and fix upon 
the content of the box which I had dug up. thi wa equal 
inaccess with the other. I had not the same motiv for caution and 
forbearance. I wa somewhat desperate, as the consequ of my 
indiscret could not be aggravated, and my curios wa more 
impetu with regard to the smaller than to the larger cabinet. I 
place it on the ground and crush it to piec with my heel. 

someth wa within. I brought it to the light, and, after loos 
numer folds, at length drew forth a volume. No object in the circl 
of natur wa more adapt than thi to rous up all my faculties. My 
feel were anew excit on observ that it wa a manuscript. I 
bolt the door, and, draw near the light, open and began to read. 

A few page were suffici to explain the natur of the work. clithero 
had mention that hi ladi had compos a vindic of her conduct 
toward her brother when her intercess in hi favour wa solicit 
and refused. thi perform had never been published, but had been 
read by many, and wa preserv by her friend as a preciou monument of 
her geniu and her virtue. thi manuscript wa now befor me. 

that clithero should preserv thi manuscript, amidst the wreck of hi 
hope and fortunes, wa appar conform to hi temper. that, 
have form the resolut to die, he should seek to hide thi volum 
from the profan curios of survivors, wa a natur proceeding. To 
buri it rather than to burn, or dispers it into fragments, would be 
suggest by the wish to conceal, without commit what hi heat 
fanci would regard as sacrilege. To buri it beneath the elm wa dictat 
by no fortuit or inexplic caprice. thi event could scarc fail 
of exercis some influenc on the perturb of hi sleep, and 
thus, in addit to other causes, might hi hover near thi trunk, 
and throw up thi earth, in the interv of slumber, be account 
for. clithero, indeed, had not mention thi proceed in the cours 
of hi narrative; but that would have contraven the end for which he 
had provid a grave for thi book. 

I read thi copiou tale with unspeak eagerness. It essenti 
agre with that which had been told by clithero. By draw forth 
event into all their circumstances, more distinct impress were 
produc on the mind, and proof of fortitud and equanim were here 
given to which I had hitherto known no parallel. No wonder that a soul 
like clithero's, pervad by these proof of inimit excellence, and 
thrillingli aliv to the passion of virtuou fame, and the valu of that 
exist which he had destroyed, should be overborn by horror at the 
view of the past. 

the instabl of life and happi wa forcibl illustrated, as well 
as the pernici of error. exempt as thi ladi wa from almost 
everi defect, she wa indebt for her ruin to absurd opinion of the 
sacred of consanguinity, to her anxieti for the preserv of a 
ruffian becaus that ruffian wa her brother. the spirit of clithero wa 
enlighten and erect, but he weakli suffer the dictat of etern 
justic to be swallow up by gratitude. the dread of unjust upbraid 
hurri him to murder and to suicide, and the imput of imaginari 
guilt impel him to the perpetr of genuin and enorm crimes. 

the perus of thi volum end not but with the night. contrari to my 
hopes, the next day wa stormi and wet. thi did not deter me from 
visit the mountain. slipperi path and muddi torrent were no 
obstacl to the purpos which I had adopted. I wrap myself, and a 
bag of provisions, in a cloak of paint canvas, and speed to the 
dwell of clithero. 

I pass through the cave and reach the bridg which my own ingenu 
had formed. At that moment, torrent of rain pour from above, and 
stronger blast thunder amidst these desol recess and profound 
chasms. instead of lament the preval of thi tempest, I now began 
to regard it with pleasure. It confer new form of sublim and 
grandeur on thi scene. 

As I crept with hand and feet along my imperfect bridge, a sudden gust 
had nearli whirl me into the fright abyss below. To preserv 
myself, I wa oblig to loos my hold of my burden, and it fell into 
the gulf. thi incid disconcert and distress me. As soon as I had 
effect my danger passage, I screen myself behind a cliff and gave 
myself up to reflection. 

the purpos of thi arduou journey wa defeat by the loss of the 
provis I had brought. I despair of win the attent of the 
fugit to supplications, or argument tend to smother remors or 
reviv hi fortitude. the scope of my effort wa to consist in 
vanquish hi avers to food; but these effort would now be 
useless, sinc I had no power to suppli hi cravings. 

thi deficiency, however, wa easili supplied. I had onli to return home 
and suppli myself anew. No time wa to be lost in do this; but I wa 
will to remain under thi shelter till the furi of the tempest had 
subsided. besides, I wa not certain that clithero had again retreat 
hither. It wa requisit to explor the summit of thi hill, and 
ascertain whether it had ani inhabitant. I might likewis discov what 
had been the success of my former experiment, and whether the food, 
which had been left here on the former day, wa consum or neglected. 

while occupi with these reflections, my eye were fix upon the 
opposit steeps. the top of the trees, wave to and fro in the wildest 
commotion, and their trunks, occasion bend to the blast, which, 
in these lofti regions, blew with a violenc unknown in the tract 
below, exhibit an aw spectacle. At length, my attent wa 
attract by the trunk which lay across the gulf, and which I had 
convert into a bridge. I perceiv that it had alreadi somewhat 
swerv from it origin position, that everi blast broke or loosen 
some of the fibr by which it root were connect with the opposit 
bank, and that, if the storm did not speedili abate, there wa immin 
danger of it be torn from the rock and precipit into the chasm. 
thu my retreat would be cut off, and the evil from which I wa 
endeavour to rescu anoth would be experienc by myself. 

I did not just then reflect that clithero had found access to thi hill 
by other means, and that the avenu by which he came would be equal 
commodi to me. I believ my destini to hang upon the expedit with 
which I should recross thi gulf. the moment that were spent in these 
deliber were critical, and I shudder to observ that the trunk 
wa held in it place by one or two fibr which were alreadi stretch 
almost to breaking. 

To pass along the trunk, render slipperi by the wet and unsteadfast by 
the wind, wa immin dangerous. To maintain my hold, in passing, in 
defianc of the whirlwind, requir the most vigor exertions. for 
thi end it wa necessari to discommod myself of my cloak, and of the 
volum which I carri in the pocket of my cloak. I believ there wa 
no reason to dread their be destroy or purloined, if left, for a 
few hour or a day, in thi recess. If laid besid a stone, under 
shelter of thi cliff, they would, no doubt, remain unmolest till the 
disappear of the storm should permit me to revisit thi spot in the 
afternoon or on the morrow. 

just as I had dispos of these encumbr and had risen from my seat, 
my attent wa again call to the opposit steep, by the most 
unwelcom object that, at thi time, could possibl occur. someth wa 
perceiv move among the bush and rocks, which, for a time, I hope 
wa no more than a raccoon or opossum, but which present appear to 
be a panther. hi gray coat, extend claws, fieri eyes, and a cri which 
he at that moment uttered, and which, by it resembl to the human 
voice, is peculiarli terrific, denot him to be the most feroci and 
untam of that detest race. 

[footnote: the gray cougar. thi anim ha all the essenti 
characterist of a tiger. though somewhat inferior in size and 
strength, these are such as to make him equal formid to man.] 

the industri of our hunter ha nearli banish anim of prey from 
these precincts. the fast of norwalk, however, could not but 
afford refug to some of them. Of late I had met them so rarely, that my 
fear were seldom alive, and I trod, without caution, the ruggedest and 
most solitari haunts. still, however, I had seldom been unfurnish in 
my rambl with the mean of defence. 

My temper never delight in carnag and blood. I found no pleasur in 
plung into bogs, wade through rivulets, and penetr thickets, 
for the sake of dispatch woodcock and squirrels. To watch their 
gambol and flittings, and invit them to my hand, wa my darl 
amus when loiter among the wood and the rocks. It wa much 
otherwise, however, with regard to rattlesnak and panthers. these I 
thought it no breach of duti to extermin wherev they could be 
found. these judici and sanguinari spoiler were equal the enemi 
of man and of the harmless race that sport in the trees, and mani of 
their skin are still preserv by me as trophi of my juvenil 
prowess. 

As hunt wa never my trade or my sport, I never load myself with 
fowling-piec or rifle. assidu exercis had made me master of a 
weapon of much easier carriage, and, within a moder distance, more 
destruct and unerring. thi wa the tomahawk. with thi I have often 
sever an oak-branch, and cut the sinew of a catamount, at the 
distanc of sixti feet. 

the unfrequ with which I had late encount thi foe, and the 
encumbr of provision, made me neglect, on thi occasion, to bring 
with me my usual arms. the beast that wa now befor me, when stimul 
by hunger, wa accustom to assail whatev could provid him with a 
banquet of blood. He would set upon the man and the deer with equal and 
irresist ferocity. hi sagac wa equal to hi strength, and he 
seem abl to discov when hi antagonist wa arm and prepar for 
defence. 

My past experi enabl me to estim the full extent of my danger. 
He sat on the brow of the steep, eye the bridge, and appar 
deliber whether he should cross it. It wa probabl that he had 
scent my footstep thu far, and, should he pass over, hi vigil 
could scarc fail of detect my asylum. the pit into which clithero 
had sunk from my view wa at some distance. To reach it wa the first 
impuls of my fear, but thi could not be done without excit the 
observ and pursuit of thi enemy. I deepli regret the untoward 
chanc that had led me, when I first came over, to a differ shelter. 

should he retain hi present station, my danger wa scarc lessened. 
To pass over in the face of a famish tiger wa onli to rush upon my 
fate. the fall of the trunk, which had late been so anxious 
deprecated, wa now, with no less solicitude, desired. everi new gust, I 
hoped, would tear asund it remain bands, and, by cut off all 
commun between the opposit steeps, place me in security. 

My hopes, however, were destin to be frustrated. the fibr of the 
prostrat tree were obstin tenaci of their hold, and present 
the anim scrambl down the rock and proceed to cross it. 

Of all kind of death, that which now menac me wa the most abhorred. 
To die by disease, or by the hand of a fellow-creature, wa propiti 
and lenient in comparison with be rent to piec by the fang of thi 
savage. To perish in thi obscur retreat, by mean so impervi to the 
anxiou curios of my friends, to lose my portion of exist by so 
untoward and ignobl a destiny, wa insupportable. I bitterli deplor 
my rash in come hither unprovid for an encount like this. 

the evil of my present circumst consist chiefli in suspense. My 
death wa unavoidable, but my imagin had leisur to torment itself 
by anticipations. one foot of the savag wa slowli and cautious move 
after the other. He struck hi claw so deepli into the bark that they 
were with difficulti withdrawn. At length he leap upon the ground. We 
were now separ by an interv of scarc eight feet. To leav the 
spot where I crouch wa impossible. behind and besid me, the cliff 
rose perpendicularly, and befor me wa thi grim and terrif visage. I 
shrunk still closer to the ground and close my eyes. 

from thi paus of horror I wa arous by the nois occas by a 
second spring of the animal. He leap into the pit, in which I had so 
deepli regret that I had not taken refuge, and disappeared. My rescu 
wa so sudden, and so much beyond my belief or my hope, that I doubted, 
for a moment, whether my sens did not deceiv me. thi opportun of 
escap wa not to be neglected. I left my place, and scrambl over the 
trunk with a precipit which had like to have prove fatal. the 
tree groan and shook under me, the wind blew with unexampl violence, 
and I had scarc reach the opposit steep when the root were 
sever from the rock and the whole fell thunder to the bottom of the 
chasm. 

My trepid were not speedili quieted. I look back with wonder on 
my hairbreadth escape, and on that singular concurr of event which 
had place me, in so short a period, in absolut security. had the trunk 
fallen a moment earlier, I should have been imprison on the hill or 
thrown headlong. had it fall been delay anoth moment, I should have 
been pursued; for the beast now issu from hi den, and testifi hi 
surpris and disappoint by token the sight of which made my blood 
run cold. 

He saw me, and hasten to the verg of the chasm. He squat on hi 
hind-leg and assum the attitud of one prepar to leap. My 
constern wa excit afresh by these appearances. It seem at 
first as if the rift wa too wide for ani power of muscl to carri him 
in safeti over; but I knew the unparallel agil of thi animal, and 
that hi experi had made him a better judg of the practic of 
thi exploit than I was. still there wa hope that he would relinquish 
thi design as desperate. thi hope wa quickli at an end. He sprung, 
and hi fore-leg touch the verg of the rock on which I stood. In 
spite of vehement exertions, however, the surfac wa too smooth and too 
hard to allow him to make good hi hold. He fell, and a pierc cry, 
utter below, show that noth had obstruct hi descent to the 
bottom. 

thu wa I again rescu from death. noth but the pressur of famin 
could have prompt thi savag to so audaci and hazard an effort; 
but, by yield to thi impulse, he had made my futur visit to thi 
spot exempt from peril. clithero was, likewise, reliev from a danger 
that wa immin and unforeseen. prowl over these grounds, the 
panther could scarc have fail to meet with thi solitari fugitive. 

had the anim lived, my first duti would have been to have sought him 
out and assail him with my tomahawk; but no undertak would have 
been more hazardous. lurk in the grass, or in the branch of a tree, 
hi eye might have descri my approach, he might leap upon me 
unperceived, and my weapon would be useless. 

with a heart beat with unwont rapidity, I onc more descend the 
cliff, enter the cavern, and arriv at huntli farm, drench with 
rain, and exhaust by fatigue. 

By night the storm wa dispelled; but my exhaust strength would not 
allow me to return to the mountain. At the customari hour I retir to 
my chamber. I incessantli rumin on the adventur of the last day, 
and inquir into the conduct which I wa next to pursue. 

the bridg be destroyed, my customari access wa cut off. there wa 
no possibl of restor thi bridge. My strength would not suffic 
to drag a fallen tree from a distance, and there wa none whose posit 
would abridg or supersed that labour. some other expedi must, 
therefore, be discov to pass thi chasm. 

I review the circumst of my subterranean journey. the cavern wa 
imperfectli explored. it branch might be numerous. that which I had 
hitherto pursu termin in an open at a consider distanc 
from the bottom. other branch might exist, some of which might lead to 
the foot of the precipice, and thenc a commun might be found 
with the summit of the interior hill. 

the danger of wander into dark and untri paths, and the 
commodi of that road which had at first been taken, were 
suffici reason for have hitherto suspend my examin of the 
differ branch of thi labyrinth. now my customari road wa no 
longer practicable, and anoth wa to be care explored. for thi 
end, on my next journey to the mountain, I determin to take with me a 
lamp, and unravel thi darksom maze: thi project I resolv to execut 
the next day. 

I now recollect what, if it had more season occurred, would have 
taught me caution. some month befor thi a farmer, live in the 
skirt of norwalk, discov two maraud in hi field, whom he 
imagin to be a male and femal panther. they had destroy some sheep, 
and had been hunt by the farmer with long and fruitless diligence. 
sheep had likewis been destroy in differ quarters; but the owner 
had fix the imput of the crime upon dogs, mani of whom had aton 
for their suppos offenc by their death. He who had mention hi 
discoveri of panther receiv littl credit from hi neighbours; 
becaus a long time had elaps sinc these anim were suppos to 
have been exil from thi district, and becaus no other person had 
seen them. the truth of thi seem now to be confirm by the testimoni 
of my own senses; but, if the rumour were true, there still exist 
anoth of these animals, who might harbour in the obscur of thi 
desert, and against whom it wa necessari to employ some precaution. 
henceforth I resolv never to travers the wilder unfurnish with 
my tomahawk. 

these images, mingl with those which the contempl of futur 
suggested, floated, for a time, in my brain, but at length gave place to 
sleep. 




chapter xiii. 


sinc my return home, my mind had been fulli occupi by scheme and 
reflect rel to clithero. the project suggest by thee, and to 
which I had determin to devot my leisure, wa forgotten, or 
rememb for a moment and at wide intervals. what, however, wa nearli 
banish from my wake thoughts, occur in an incongru and 
half-seen form, to my dreams. dure my sleep, the imag of waldegrav 
flit befor me. methought the sentiment that impel him to visit me 
wa not affect or complacency, but inquietud and anger. some servic 
or duti remain to be perform by me, which I had culpabl neglected: 
to inspirit my zeal, to awaken my remembrance, and incit me to the 
perform of thi duty, did thi glimmer messenger, thi 
half-indign apparition, come. 

I commonli awak soon enough to mark the youngest dawn of the morning. 
now, in consequ perhap of my perturb sleep, I open my eye 
befor the star had lost ani of their lustre. thi circumst 
produc some surprise, until the imag that late hover in my fanci 
were recalled, and furnish somewhat like a solut of the problem. 
connect with the imag of my dead friend wa that of hi sister. the 
discours that took place at our last interview; the scheme of 
transcribing, for thi use, all the letter which, dure hi short but 
busi life, I receiv from him; the natur of thi correspondence, and 
the opportun which thi employ would afford me of contempl 
these ampl and preciou monument of the intellectu exist and 
moral pre-emin of my friend, occur to my thoughts. 

the resolut to prosecut the task wa revived. the oblig of 
benevolence, with regard to clithero, wa not discharged. this, neither 
duti nor curios would permit to be overlook or delayed; but whi 
should my whole attent and activ be devot to thi man? the hour 
which were spent at home and in my chamber could not be more use 
employ than in make my intend copy. 

In a few hour after sunris I purpos to resum my way to the 
mountain. could thi interv be appropri to a better purpos than 
in count over my friend' letters, set them apart from my own, 
and prepar them for that transcript from which I expect so high 
and yet so mourn a gratification? 

thi purpose, by no violent union, wa blend with the recollect of 
my dream. thi recollect infus some degre of waver and 
deject into my mind. In transcrib these letter I should violat 
pathet and solemn injunct frequent repeat by the writer. wa 
there some connect between thi purpos and the incid of my 
vision? wa the latter sent to enforc the interdict which had been 
formerli imposed? 

thou art not fulli acquaint with the intellectu histori of thi 
brother. some inform on that head will be necessari to explain the 
natur of that reluct which I now feel to compli with thi request, 
and which had formerli so much excit thi surprise. 

waldegrave, like other men earli devot to medit and books, had 
adopted, at differ periods, differ system of opinion on topic 
connect with religion and morals. hi earliest creed tend to effac 
the impress of hi education; to deifi necess and univers 
matter; to destroy the popular distinct between soul and body, and 
to dissolv the suppos connect between the moral condit of man 
anterior and subsequ to death. 

thi creed he adopt with all the ful of conviction, and propag 
with the utmost zeal. soon after our friendship commenced, fortun 
place us at a distanc from each other, and no intercours wa allow 
but by the pen. our letters, however, were punctual and copious. those 
of waldegrav were too frequent devot to the defenc of hi 
favourit tenets. 

thou art acquaint with the revolut that afterward took place in 
hi mind. place within the sphere of religi influence, and listen 
daili to the reason and exhort of mr. s----, whose benign 
temper and blameless deport wa a visibl and constant lesson, he 
insens resum the faith which he had relinquished, and becam the 
vehement oppon of all that he had formerli defended. the chief object 
of hi labours, in thi new state of hi mind, wa to counteract the 
effect of hi former reason on my opinions. 

At thi time, other chang took place in hi situation, in consequ 
of which we were onc more permit to resid under the same roof. the 
intercours now ceas to be by letter, and the subtl and labori 
argument which he had formerli produc against religion, and 
which were contain in a perman form, were combat in transient 
conversation. He wa not onli eager to subvert those opinion which he 
had contribut to instil into me, but wa anxiou that the letter and 
manuscript which had been employ in their support should be 
destroyed. He did not fear wholli or chiefli on my own account. He 
believ that the influenc of former reason on my faith would be 
suffici erad by the new; but he dread lest these 
manuscript might fall into other hands, and thu produc mischief 
which it would not be in hi power to repair. with regard to me, the 
poison had been follow by it antidote; but with respect to others, 
these letter would commun the poison when the antidot could not 
be administered. 

I would not consent to thi sacrifice. I did not entir abjur the 
creed which had, with great copious and eloquence, been defend in 
these letters. besides, mix up with abstract reason were 
numberless passag which elucid the charact and histori of my 
friend. these were too preciou to be consign to oblivion; and to take 
them out of their present connect and arrang would be to 
mutil and deform them. 

hi entreati and remonstr were earnest and frequent, but alway 
ineffectual. He had too much puriti of motiv to be angri at my 
stubbornness; but hi sens of the mischiev tendenc of these letter 
wa so great, that my intract cost him mani a pang. 

He wa now gone, and I had not onli determin to preserv these 
monuments, but had consent to copi them for the use of another; for 
the use of one whose present and etern welfar had been the chief 
object of hi care and efforts. thou, like other of thi sex, art 
unaccustom to metaphys refinements. thi religion is the growth of 
sensibl and not of argument. thou art not fortifi and prepossess 
against the subtleti with which the be and attribut of the deiti 
have been assailed. would it be just to expos thee to pollut and 
deprav from thi source? To make thi brother the instrument of thi 
apostasy, the author of thi fall? that brother whose latter day were so 
ardent devot to cherish the spirit of devot in thi heart? 

these idea now occur with more forc than formerly. I had promised, 
not without reluctance, to give thee the entir copi of hi letters; but 
I now reced from thi promise. I resolv mere to select for thi 
perus such as were narr or descriptive. thi could not be done 
with too much expedition. It wa still dark, but my sleep wa at an end, 
and, by a common apparatus, that lay besid my bed, I could instantli 
produc a light. 

the light wa produced, and I proceed to the cabinet where all my 
paper and book are deposited. thi wa my own contriv and 
workmanship, undertaken by the advic of sarsefield, who took infinit 
pain to foster that mechan geniu which display itself so earli 
and so forcibl in thi friend. the key belong to thi was, like the 
cabinet itself, of singular structure. for greater safety, it wa 
constantli place in a closet, which wa likewis locked. 

the key wa found as usual, and the cabinet opened. the letter were 
bound togeth in a compact form, lodg in a parchment case, and place 
in a secret drawer. thi drawer would not have been detect by common 
eyes, and it open by the motion of a spring, of whose exist none 
but the maker wa conscious. thi drawer I had open befor I went to 
sleep, and the letter were then safe. 

thou canst not imagin my confus and astonishment, when, on open 
the drawer, I perceiv that the packet wa gone. I look with more 
attention, and put my hand within it; but the space wa empty. whither 
had it gone, and by whom wa it purloined? I wa not consciou of have 
taken it away, yet no hand but mine could have done it. On the last 
even I had doubtless remov it to some other corner, but had 
forgotten it. I task my understand and my memory. I could not 
conceiv the possibl of ani motiv induc me to alter my 
arrang in thi respect, and wa unabl to recollect that I had 
made thi change. 

what remained? thi invalu relic had disappeared. everi thought and 
everi effort must be devot to the singl purpos of regain it. As 
yet I did not despair. until I had open and ransack everi part of 
the cabinet in vain, I did not admit the belief that I had lost it. even 
then thi persuas wa tumultu and fluctuating. It had vanish to 
my senses, but these sens were abus and depraved. To have passed, of 
it own accord, through the pore of thi wood, wa impossible; but, if 
it were gone, thu did it escape. 

I wa lost in horror and amazement. I explor everi nook a second and a 
third time, but still it elud my eye and my touch. I open my closet 
and cases. I pri everywhere, unfold everi articl of clothing, 
turn and scrutin everi instrument and tool, but noth availed. 

My thought were not speedili collect or calmed. I threw myself on the 
bed and resign myself to musing. that my loss wa irretriev wa a 
supposit not to be endured. yet omin terror haunt me,--a 
whisper intim that a relic which I valu more than life wa 
torn forev away by some malign and inscrut destiny. the same 
power that had taken it from thi receptacl wa abl to waft it over 
the ocean or the mountains, and condemn me to a fruitless and etern 
search. 

but what wa he that commit the theft? thou only, of the be who 
live, wast acquaint with the exist of these manuscripts. thou art 
mani mile distant, and art utterli a stranger to the mode or place of 
their concealment. not onli access to the cabinet, but access to the 
room, without my knowledg and permission, wa impossible. both were 
lock dure thi night. not five hour had elaps sinc the cabinet 
and drawer had been opened, and sinc the letter had been seen and 
touched, be in their ordinari position. dure thi interval, the 
thief had entered, and despoil me of my treasure. 

thi event, so inexplic and so dreadful, threw my soul into a kind 
of stupor or distraction, from which I wa suddenli rous by a footstep 
softli move in the entri near my door. I start from my bed, as if I 
had gain a glimps of the robber. befor I could run to the door, some 
one knocked. I did not think upon the proprieti of answer the signal, 
but hasten with tremul finger and throb heart to open the 
door. My uncle, in hi night-dress, and appar just risen from hi 
bed, stood befor me! 

He mark the eager and perturb of my looks, and inquir into 
the cause. I did not answer hi inquiries. hi appear in my chamber 
and in thi guis ad to my surprise. My mind wa full of the late 
discovery, and instantli conceiv some connect between thi 
unseason visit and my lost manuscript. I interrog him in my turn 
as to the caus of hi coming. 

"why," said he, "I came to ascertain whether it wa you or not who 
amus himself so strang at thi time of night. what is the matter 
with you? whi are you up so early?" 

I told him that I had been rous by my dreams, and, find no 
inclin to court my slumber back again, I had risen, though earlier 
by some hour than the usual period of my rising. 

"but whi did you go up-stairs? you might easili imagin that the sound 
of your step would alarm those below, who would be puzzl to guess who 
it wa that had thought proper to amus himself in thi manner." 

"up-stairs? I have not left my room thi night. It is not ten minut 
sinc I awoke, and my door ha not sinc been opened." 

"indeed! that is strange. nay, it is impossible! It wa your feet sure 
that I heard pace so solemnli and indefatig across the _long 
room_ for near an hour. I could not for my life conjecture, for a 
time, who it was, but final conclud that it wa you. there wa 
still, however, some doubt, and I came hither to satisfi myself." 

these tide were adapt to rais all my emot to a still higher 
pitch. I question him with eager as to the circumst he had 
noticed. He said he had been rous by a sound, whose power of 
disturb him arose, not from it loudness, but from it uncommonness. 
He distinctli heard some one pace to and fro with bare feet, in the 
long room: thi sound continued, with littl intermission, for an hour. 
He then notic a cessat of the walking, and a sound as if some one 
were lift the lid of the larg cedar chest that stood in the corner 
of thi room. the walk wa not resumed, and all wa silent. He 
listen for a quarter of an hour, and busi himself in conjectur 
the caus of thi disturbance. the most probabl conclus was, that 
the walker wa hi nephew, and hi curios had led him to my chamber 
to ascertain the truth. 

thi dwell ha three stories. the two lower stori are divid into 
numer apartments. the upper stori constitut a singl room whose 
side are the four wall of the house, and whose ceil is the roof. 
thi room is unoccupied, except by lumber, and imperfectli light by a 
small casement at one end. In thi room were footstep heard by my 
uncle. 

the staircas lead to it termin in a passag near my door. I 
snatch the candle, and, desir him to follow me, ad that I would 
ascertain the truth in a moment. He followed, but observ that the 
walk had ceas long enough for the person to escape. 

I ascend to the room, and look behind and among the tables, and 
chairs, and casks, which were confusedli scatter through it, but found 
noth in the shape of man. the cedar chest, spoken of by mr. huntly, 
contain old books, and remnant of map and charts, whose 
worthless unfit them for accomod elsewhere. the lid wa 
without hing or lock. I examin thi repository, but there wa 
noth which attract my attention. 

the way between the kitchen-door and the door of the long room had no 
impediments. both were usual unfastened; but the motiv by which ani 
stranger to the dwelling, or inde ani one within it, could be prompt 
to choos thi place and hour for an employ of thi kind, were 
wholli incomprehensible. 

when the famili rose, inquiri were made; but no satisfact wa 
obtained. the famili consist onli of four persons,--mi uncle, my two 
sisters, and myself. I mention to them the loss I had sustained, but 
their conjectur were no less unsatisfactori on thi than on the former 
incident. 

there wa no end to my restless meditations. waldegrav wa the onli 
being, besid myself, acquaint with the secret of my cabinet. dure 
hi life these manuscript had been the object of perpetu solicitude; 
to gain possession, to destroy or secret them, wa the strongest of hi 
wishes. had he retain hi sensibl on the approach of death, no 
doubt he would have renewed, with irresist solemnity, hi 
injunct to destroy them. 

now, however, they had vanished. there were no materi of conjecture; 
no probabl to be weighed, or suspicion to revolve. human artific 
or power wa unequ to thi exploit. mean less than preternatur 
would not furnish a convey for thi treasure. 

It wa otherwis with regard to thi unseason walker. hi 
induc inde were beyond my power to conceive; but to enter these 
door and ascend these stair demand not the faculti of ani be 
more than human. 

thi intrusion, and the pillag of my cabinet, were contemporari events. 
wa there no more connect between them than that which result from 
time? wa not the purloin of my treasur and the wander the same 
person? I could not reconcil the former incid with the attribut of 
man; and yet a secret faith, not to be outroot or suspended, sway 
me, and compel me to imagin that the detect of thi visit 
would unveil the thief. 

these thought were pregnant with deject and reverie. clithero, 
dure the day, wa forgotten. On the succeed night, my intentions, 
with regard to thi man, returned. I deriv some slender consol 
from reflecting, that time, in it long laps and ceaseless revolutions, 
might dissip the gloom that environ me. meanwhile, I struggl to 
dismiss the imag connect with my loss and to think onli of clithero. 

My impati wa as strong as ever to obtain anoth interview with 
thi man. I long with vehem for the return of day. I believ that 
everi moment ad to hi sufferings, intellectu and physical, and 
confid in the efficaci of my presenc to allevi or suspend them. 
the provis I had left would be speedili consumed, and the abstin 
of three day wa suffici to undermin the vital energies. I 
sometim hesit whether I ought not instantli to depart. It wa 
night indeed, but the late storm had purifi the air, and the radianc 
of a full moon wa univers and dazzling. 

from thi attempt I wa deter by reflect that my own frame need 
the repair of sleep. toil and watchfulness, if prolong anoth day, 
would deepli injur a constitut by no mean distinguish for it 
force. I must, therefore, compel, if it were possible, some hour of 
repose. I prepar to retir to bed, when a new incid occur to 
divert my attent for a time from these designs. 




chapter xiv. 


while sit alon by the parlour-fire, mark the effect of 
moonlight, I note one on horseback come toward the gate. At first 
sight, methought hi shape and guis were not wholli new to me; but all 
that I could discern wa mere a resembl to some one whom I had 
befor seen. present he stopped, and, look toward the house, made 
inquiri of a passeng who chanc to be near. be appar 
satisfi with the answer he received, he rode with a quick pace into 
the court and alight at the door. I start from my seat, and, go 
forth, wait with some impati to hear hi purpos explained. 

He accost me with the formal of a stranger, and ask if a young 
man, by name edgar huntly, resid here. be answer in the 
affirmative, and be request to come in, he entered, and seat 
himself, without hesitation, by the fire. some doubt and anxieti were 
visibl in hi looks. He seem desir of inform upon some topic, 
and yet betray terror lest the answer he might receiv should subvert 
some hope or confirm some foreboding. 

meanwhil I scrutin hi featur with much solicitude. A nearer and 
more deliber view convinc me that the first impress wa just; 
but still I wa unabl to call up hi name or the circumst of our 
former meeting. the paus wa at length end by hi saying, in a 
falter voice,-- 

"mi name is weymouth. I came hither to obtain inform on a subject 
in which my happi is deepli concerned." 

At the mention of hi name, I started. It wa a name too close 
connect with the imag of thi brother, not to call up affect and 
vivid recollections. weymouth, thou knowest, wa thi brother' friend. 
It is three year sinc thi man left america, dure which time no 
tide had been heard of him,--at least, by thi brother. He had now 
returned, and wa probabl unacquaint with the fate of hi friend. 

after an anxiou pause, he continued:--"sinc my arriv I have heard of 
an event which has, on mani accounts, given me the deepest sorrow. I 
love waldegrave, and know not ani person in the world whose life wa 
dearer to me than his. there were considerations, however, which made it 
more preciou to me than the life of one whose merit might be greater. 
with hi life, my own exist and properti were, I have reason to 
think, insepar united. 

"on my return to my country, after a long absence, I made immedi 
inquiri after him. I wa inform of hi untim death. I had 
questions, of infinit moment to my happiness, to decid with regard to 
the state and disposit of hi property. I sought out those of hi 
friend who had maintain with him the most frequent and confidenti 
intercourse, but they could not afford me ani satisfaction. At length, I 
wa inform that a young man of your name, and live in thi district, 
had enjoy more of hi affect and societi than ani other, had 
regul the properti which he left behind, and wa best qualifi to 
afford the intellig which I sought. you, it seems, are thi person, 
and of you I must make inquiri to which I conjur you to return 
sincer and explicit answers." 

"that," said I, "I shall find no difficulti in doing. whatev question 
you shall think proper to ask, I will answer with readi and truth." 

"what kind of property, and to what amount, wa your friend possess of 
at hi death?" 

"it wa money, and consist of deposit at the bank of north america. 
the amount wa littl short of eight thousand dollars." 

"on whom ha thi properti devolved?" 

"hi sister wa hi onli kindred, and she is now in possess of it." 

"did he leav ani will by which he direct the disposit of hi 
property?" while thu speaking, weymouth fix hi eye upon my 
countenance, and seem anxiou to pierc into my inmost soul. I wa 
somewhat surpris at hi questions, but much more at the manner in 
which they were put. I answer him, however, without delay:--"h left 
no will, nor wa ani paper discov by which we could guess at hi 
intentions. No doubt, indeed, had he made a will, hi sister would have 
been place precis in the same condit in which she now is. He wa 
not onli bound to her by the strongest tie of kindred, but by affect 
and gratitude." 

weymouth now withdrew hi eye from my face, and sunk into a mourn 
reverie. He sigh often and deeply. thi deport and the strain of 
hi inquiri excit much surprise. hi interest in the fate of 
waldegrav ought to have made the inform he had receiv a sourc 
of satisfact rather than of regret. the properti which waldegrav 
left wa much greater than hi mode of life and hi own profess had 
given us reason to expect, but it wa no more than suffici to insur 
to thee an adequ subsistence. It ascertain the happi of those 
who were dearest to waldegrave, and place them forev beyond the reach 
of that poverti which had hitherto beset them. I made no attempt to 
interrupt the silence, but prepar to answer ani new interrogatory. At 
length, weymouth resumed:-- 

"waldegrav wa a fortun man to amass so consider a sum in so 
short a time. I remember, when we parted, he wa poor. He use to lament 
that hi scrupul integr preclud him from all the common road to 
wealth. He did not contemn riches, but he set the highest valu upon 
competence, and imagin that he wa doom forev to poverty. hi 
religi duti compel him to seek hi livelihood by teach a school 
of blacks. the labour wa disproport to hi feebl constitution, 
and the profit wa greatli disproport to the labour. It scarc 
suppli the necess of nature, and wa reduc sometim even below 
that standard by hi frequent indisposition. I rejoic to find that hi 
scrupl had somewhat relax their force, and that he had betaken 
himself to some more profit occupation. pray, what wa hi new way 
of business?" 

"nay," said I, "hi scrupl continu as rigid, in thi respect, as 
ever. He wa teacher of the negro freeschool when he died." 

"indeed! how, then, came he to amass so much money? could he blend ani 
more lucr pursuit with hi duti as a schoolmaster?" 

"so it seems." 

"what wa hi pursuit?" 

"that question, I believe, none of hi friend are qualifi to answer. 
I thought myself acquaint with the most secret transact of hi 
life, but thi had been care conceal from me. I wa not onli 
unappr of ani other employ of hi time, but had not the 
slightest suspicion of hi possess ani properti besid hi cloth 
and books. ransack hi papers, with a differ view, I light on 
hi bank-book, in which wa a regular receipt for seven thousand five 
hundr dollars. By what mean he acquir thi money, and even the 
acquisit of it, till hi death put us in possess of hi papers, 
wa wholli unknown to us." 

"possibl he might have held it in trust for another. In thi case some 
memorandum or letter would be found explain thi affair." 

"true. thi supposit could not fail to occur, in consequ of which 
the most dilig search wa made among hi papers, but no shred or 
scrap wa to be found which countenanc our conjecture." 

"you may reason be surprised, and perhap offended," said weymouth, 
"at these inquiries; but it is time to explain my motiv for make 
them. three year ago I was, like waldegrave, indigent, and earn my 
bread by daili labour. dure seven years' servic in a public office, I 
saved, from the expens of subsistence, a few hundr dollars. I 
determin to strike into a new path, and, with thi sum, to lay the 
foundat of better fortune. I turn it into a bulki commodity, 
freight and load a small vessel, and went with it to barcelona in 
spain. I wa not unsuccess in my projects, and, chang my abod to 
england, france, and germany, accord as my interest required, I 
becam final possess of suffici for the suppli of all my wants. I 
then resolv to return to my nativ country, and, lay out my money 
in land, to spend the rest of my day in the luxuri and quiet of an 
opul farmer. for thi end I invest the greatest part of my properti 
in a cargo of wine from madeira. the remaind I turn into a bill of 
exchang for seven thousand five hundr dollars. I had maintain a 
friendli correspond with waldegrav dure my absence. there wa no 
one with whom I had live on term of so much intimacy, and had 
boundless confid in hi integrity. To him therefor I determin to 
transmit thi bill, request him to take the money into safe-keep 
until my return. In thi manner I endeavour to provid against the 
accid that might befal my person or my cargo in cross the ocean. 

"it wa my fate to encount the worst of these disasters. We were 
overtaken by a storm, my vessel wa driven ashor on the coast of 
portugal, my cargo wa utterli lost, and the greater part of the crew 
and passeng were drowned. I wa rescu from the same fate by some 
fishermen. In consequ of the hardship to which I had been exposed, 
have labour for sever day at the pumps, and spent the greater 
part of a winter night hang from the rig of the ship and 
perpetu beaten by the waves, I contract a sever disease, which 
bereav me of the use of my limbs. the fishermen who rescu me carri 
me to their huts, and there I remain three week helpless and 
miserable. 

"that part of the coast on which I wa thrown was, in the highest 
degree, steril and rude. it few inhabit subsist precari on 
the produc of the ocean. their dwell were of mud,--low, filthy, 
dark, and comfortless. their fuel wa the stalk of shrub sparingli 
scatter over a sandi desert. their poverti scarc allow them salt 
and black bread with their fish, which wa obtain in unequ and 
sometim insuffici quantities, and which they ate with all it 
impurities, and half cooked. 

"mi former habits, as well as my present indisposition, requir veri 
differ treatment from what the ignor and penuri of these peopl 
oblig them to bestow. I lay upon the moist earth, imperfectli 
shelter from the sky, and with neither raiment nor fire to keep me 
warm. My host had littl attent or compass to spare to the want 
of others. they could not remov me to a more hospit district; and 
here, without doubt, I should have perished, had not a monk chanc to 
visit their hovels. He belong to a convent of st. jago, some leagu 
farther from the shore, which use to send one of it member annual 
to inspect the religi concern of those outcasts. happily, thi wa 
the period of their visitations. 

"mi abod in spain had made me somewhat convers with it language. 
the dialect of thi monk did not so much differ from castilian but that, 
with the assist of latin, we were abl to converse. the jargon of 
the fishermen wa unintelligible, and they had vainli endeavour to 
keep up my spirit by inform me of thi expect visit. 

"thi monk wa touch with compass at my calamity, and speedili 
provid the mean of my remov to hi convent. here I wa charit 
entertained, and the aid of a physician wa procur for me. He wa but 
poorli skill in hi profession, and rather confirm than allevi 
my disease. the portugues of hi trade, especi in remot 
districts, are littl more than dealer in talisman and nostrums. for a 
long time I wa unabl to leav my pallet, and had no prospect befor me 
but that of consum my day in the gloom of thi cloister. 

"all the member of thi convent but he who had been my first 
benefactor, and whose name wa chaledro, were bigot and sordid. their 
chief motiv for treat me with kind wa the hope of obtain a 
convert from heresy. they spare no pain to subdu my errors, and were 
will to prolong my imprisonment, in the hope of final gain their 
end. had my fate been govern by those, I should have been immur in 
thi convent, and compel either to adopt their fanat creed or to 
put an end to my own life, in order to escap their well-meant 
persecutions. chaledro, however, though no less sincer in hi faith and 
urgent in hi entreaties, yet find me invincible, exert hi 
influenc to obtain my liberty. 

"after mani delays, and strenuou exert of my friend, they consent 
to remov me to oporto. the journey wa to be perform in an open cart, 
over a mountain country, in the heat of summer. the monk 
endeavour to dissuad me from the enterprise, for my own sake, it 
be scarc possibl that one in my feebl state should surviv a 
journey like this; but I despair of improv my condit by other 
means. I prefer death to the imprison of a portugues monastery, 
and knew that I could hope for no allevi of my diseas but from the 
skill of scottish or french physicians, whom I expect to meet with in 
that city. I adher to my purpos with so much vehem and obstinacy, 
that they final yield to my wishes. 

"mi road lay through the wildest and most rug districts. It did not 
exceed nineti miles, but seven day were consum on the way. the motion 
of the vehicl rack me with the keenest pangs, and my attend 
conclud that everi stage would be my last. they had been select 
without due regard to their characters. they were knavish and inhuman, 
and omit noth but actual violenc to hasten my death. they 
purpos retard the journey, and protract to seven what might have 
been readili perform in four days. they neglect to execut the 
order which they had receiv respect my lodg and provisions; and 
from them, as well as from the peasants, who were sure to be inform 
that I wa a heretic, I suffer everi speci of insult and injury. My 
constitution, as well as my frame, possess a fund of strength of which 
I had no previou conception. In spite of hardship, and exposure, and 
abstinence, I at last arriv at oporto. 

"instead of be carried, agreeabl to chaledro' direction, to a 
convent of st. jago, I wa left, late in the evening, in the porch of a 
common hospital. My attendants, have laid me on the pavement and 
load me with imprecations, left me to obtain admiss by my own 
efforts. I pass the livelong night in thi spot, and in the morn 
wa receiv into the hous in a state which left it uncertain whether I 
wa aliv or dead. 

"after recov my sensibility, I made variou effort to procur a 
visit from some english merchant. thi wa no easi undertak for one 
in my deplor condition. I wa too weak to articul my word 
distinctly, and these word were rendered, by my foreign accent, 
scarc intelligible. the likelihood of my speedi death made the peopl 
about me more indiffer to my want and petitions. 

"I will not dwell upon my repeat disappointments, but content myself 
with mention that I gain the attent of a french gentleman whose 
curios brought him to view the hospital. through him I obtain a 
visit from an english merchant, and final gain the notic of a 
person who formerli resid in america, and of whom I had imperfect 
knowledge. By their kind I wa remov from the hospit to a 
privat house. A scottish surgeon wa summon to my assistance, and in 
seven month I wa restor to my present state of health. 

"at oporto, I embarked, in an american ship, for new york. I wa 
destitut of all property, and relied, for the payment of the debt 
which I wa oblig to contract, as well as for my futur subsistence, 
on my remitt to waldegrave. I hasten to philadelphia, and wa soon 
inform that my friend wa dead. hi death had taken place a long time 
sinc my remitt to him: henc thi disast wa a subject of regret 
chiefli on hi own account. I entertain no doubt but that my properti 
had been secured, and that either some testamentari direct or some 
paper had been left behind respect thi affair. 

"I sought out those who were formerli our mutual acquaintance. I found 
that they were wholli stranger to hi affairs. they could mere relat 
some particular of hi singular death, and point out the lodg which 
he formerli occupied. hither I forthwith repaired, and discov that 
he live in thi hous with hi sister, disconnect with it other 
inhabitants. they describ hi mode of life in term that show them 
to be veri imperfectli acquaint with it. It wa easi inde to infer, 
from their aspect and manners, that littl sympathi or union could have 
subsist between them and their co-tenants; and thi infer wa 
confirm by their insinuations, the growth of prejudic and envy. they 
told me that waldegrave' sister had gone to live in the country, but 
whither, or for how long, she had not condescend to inform them, and 
they did not care to ask. she wa a top dame, whose notion were 
much too high for her station; who wa more nice than wise, and yet wa 
one who could stoop when it most becam her to stand upright. It wa no 
busi of theirs; but they could not but mention their suspicion that 
she had good reason for leav the citi and for conceal the place 
of her retreat. some thing were hard to be disguised. they spoke for 
themselves, and the onli way to hinder disagre discoveri wa to 
keep out of sight. 

"I wa wholli a stranger to waldegrave' sister. I knew mere that he 
had such a relation. there wa nothing, therefore, to outbal thi 
unfavour report, but the appar malign and gross of those 
who gave it. It wa not, however, her charact about which I wa 
solicitous, but mere the place where she might be found and the 
suitabl inquiri respect her deceas brother be answered. On thi 
head, these peopl profess utter ignorance, and were either unabl or 
unwil to direct me to ani person in the citi who knew more than 
themselves. after much discourse, they, at length, let fall an 
intim that, if ani one knew her place of retreat, it wa probabl a 
country-lad, by name huntly, who live near the _forks_ of 
delaware. after waldegrave' death thi lad had paid hi sister a visit, 
and seem to be admit on a veri confidenti footing. she left the 
house, for the last time, in hi company, and he, therefore, wa most 
like to know what had becom of her. 

"the name of huntli wa not total unknown to me. I myself wa born and 
brought up in the neighbour township of chetasco. I had some 
knowledg of your family, and your name use often to be mention by 
waldegrav as that of one who, at a matur age, would prove himself 
use to hi country. I determined, therefore, to appli to you for what 
inform you could give. I design to visit my father, who live in 
chetasco, and reliev him from that disquiet which hi ignor of my 
fate could not fail to have inspired, and both these end could be thus, 
at the same time, accomplished. 

"befor I left the city, I thought it proper to appli to the merchant on 
whom my bill had been drawn. If thi bill had been present and paid, 
he had doubtless preserv some record of it, and henc a clue might be 
afforded, though everi other expedi should fail. My usual ill fortun 
pursu me upon thi occasion; for the merchant had late becom 
insolvent, and, to avoid the rage of hi creditors, had fled, without 
leav ani vestig of thi or similar transact behind him. He had, 
some year since, been an adventur from holland, and wa suspect to 
have return thither." 




chapter xv. 


"I came hither with a heart despond of success. advers had 
weaken my faith in the promis of the future, and I wa prepar to 
receiv just such tide as you have communicated. unacquaint with 
the secret motiv of waldegrav and hi sister, it is imposs for me 
to weigh the probabl of their rectitude. I have onli my own 
assert to produc in support of my claim. all other evidence, all 
voucher and papers, which might attest my verac or sanction my claim 
in a court of law, are buri in the ocean. the bill wa transmit 
just befor my departur from madeira, and the letter by which it wa 
accompani inform waldegrav of my design to follow it immediately. 
henc he did not, it is probable, acknowledg the receipt of my letters. 
the vessel in which they were sent arriv in due season. I wa assur 
that all letter were duli deposit in the post-office, where, at 
present, mine are not to be found. 

"you assur me that noth ha been found among hi papers, hint at 
ani pecuniari transact between him and me. some correspond pass 
between us previou to that event. have no letters, with my signature, 
been found? are you qualified, by your knowledg of hi papers, to 
answer me explicitly? Is it not possibl for some letter to have been 
mislaid?" 

"I am qualified," said I, "to answer your inquiri beyond ani other 
person in the world. waldegrav maintain onli gener intercours with 
the rest of mankind. with me hi correspond wa copious, and hi 
confidence, as I imagined, without bounds. hi book and paper were 
contain in a singl chest at hi lodgings, the key of which he had 
about him when he died. these key I carri to hi sister, and wa 
author by her to open and examin the content of thi chest. thi 
wa done with the utmost care. these paper are now in my possession. 
among them no paper, of the tenor you mention, wa found, and no letter 
with your signature. neither mari waldegrav nor I are capabl of 
disguis the truth or commit an injustice. the moment she receiv 
convict of your right, she will restor thi money to you. the moment 
I imbib thi conviction, I will exert all my influenc (and it is not 
small) to induc her to restor it. permit me, however, to question you 
in your turn. who wa the merchant on whom your bill wa drawn, what wa 
the date of it, and when did the bill and it counterpart arrive?" 

"I do not exactli rememb the date of the bills. they were made out, 
however, six day befor I myself embarked, which happen on the 10th 
of august, 1784. they were sent by three vessels, one of which wa bound 
to charleston and the other to new york. the last arriv within two 
day of each other, and about the middl of novemb in the same year. 
the name of the payer wa monteith." 

after a paus of recollection, I answered, "I will not hesit to 
appriz you of everi thing which may throw light upon thi transaction, 
and whether favour or otherwis to your claim. I have told you, 
among my friend' paper your name is not to be found. I must likewis 
repeat that the possess of thi money by waldegrav wa wholli 
unknown to us till hi death. We are likewis unacquaint with ani 
mean by which he could get possess of so larg a sum in hi own 
right. He spent no more than hi scanti stipend as a teacher, though 
thi stipend wa insuffici to suppli hi wants. thi bank-receipt is 
date in december, 1784, a fortnight, perhaps, after the date that you 
have mentioned. you will perceiv how much thi coincidence, which could 
scarc have taken place by chance, is favour to your claim. 

"mari waldegrav resides, at present, at abingdon. she will rejoice, as 
I do, to see one who, as her brother' friend, is entitl to her 
affection. doubt not but that she will listen with imparti and 
candour to all that you can urg in defenc of your titl to thi money. 
her decis will not be precipitate, but it will be gener and just, 
and found on such reason that, even if it be advers to your wishes, 
you will be compel to approv it?" 

"I can entertain no doubt," he answered, "a to the equiti of my claim. 
the coincid you mention are suffici to convinc me that thi sum 
wa receiv upon my bill; but thi convict must necessarili be 
confin to myself. No one but I can be consciou to the truth of my own 
story. the evid on which I build my faith, in thi case, is that of 
my own memori and senses; but thi evid cannot make itself 
conspicu to you. you have noth but my bare assertion, in addit 
to some probabl flow from the conduct of waldegrave. what fact 
may exist to corrobor my claim, which you have forgotten, or which 
you may think proper to conceal, I cannot judge. I know not what is 
pass in the secret of your hearts; I am unacquaint with the 
charact of thi ladi and with yours. I have noth on which to build 
surmis and suspicion of your integrity, and noth to gener 
unusu confidence. the frailti of your virtu and the strength of your 
temptat I know not. howev she decid in thi case, and whatev 
opinion I shall form as to the reason of her decision, it will 
not becom me either to upbraid her, or to nourish discontent and 
repinings. 

"I know that my claim ha no legal support; that, if thi money be 
resign to me, it will be the impuls of spontan justice, and not 
the coercion of law, to which I am indebt for it. since, therefore, 
the justic of my claim is to be measur not by law, but by simpl 
equity, I will candidli acknowledg that, as yet, it is uncertain 
whether I ought to receive, even should miss waldegrav be will to 
give it. I know my own necess and schemes, and in what degre thi 
money would be subservi to these; but I know not the view and want 
of others, and cannot estim the use of thi money to them. 
howev I decid upon your conduct in withhold or retain it, I 
shall make suitabl allow for my imperfect knowledg of your motiv 
and wants, as well as for your unavoid ignor of mine. 

"I have relat my suffer from shipwreck and poverty, not to bia 
your judgment or engag your pity, but mere becaus the impuls to 
relat them chanc to awake; becaus my heart is soften by the 
remembr of waldegrave, who ha been my onli friend, and by the sight 
of one whom he loved. 

"I told you that my father live in chetasco. He is now aged, and I am 
hi onli child. I should have rejoic in be abl to reliev hi gray 
hair from labour to which hi fail strength cannot be equal. thi 
wa one of my induc in come to america. anoth was, to prepar 
the way for a woman whom I marri in europ and who is now await 
intellig from me in london. her poverti is not less than my own, and 
by marri against the wish of her kindr she ha bereav herself 
of all support but that of her husband. whether I shall be abl to 
rescu her from indigence, whether I shall allevi the poverti of my 
father, or increas it by burden hi scanti friend by my own 
mainten as well as his, the futur alon can determine. 

"I confess that my stock of patienc and hope ha never been large, and 
that my misfortun have nearli exhaust it. the flower of my year ha 
been consum in struggl with adversity, and my constitut ha 
receiv a shock, from sick and mistreat in portugal, which I 
cannot expect long to survive. but I make you sad," he continued. "I 
have said all that I meant to say in thi interview. I am impati to 
see my father, and night ha alreadi come. I have some mile yet to ride 
to hi cottage, and over a rough road. I will shortli visit you again, 
and talk to you at greater leisur on these and other topics. At present 
I leav you." 

I wa unwil to part so abruptli with thi guest, and entreat him 
to prolong hi visit; but he would not be prevail upon. repeat hi 
promis of shortli see me again, he mount hi hors and 
disappeared. I look after him with affect and complex emotions. I 
review the incid of thi unexpect and extraordinari interview, 
as if it had exist in a dream. An hour had passed, and thi stranger 
had alight among us as from the clouds, to draw the veil from those 
obscur which had bewild us so long, to make visibl a new train 
of disastr consequ flow from the untim death of thi 
brother, and to blast that scheme of happi on which thou and I had 
so fondli meditated. 

but what wilt thou think of thi new-born claim? the story, hadst thou 
observ the featur and guis of the relater, would have won thi 
implicit credit. hi counten exhibit deep trace of the 
afflict he had endured, and the fortitud which he had exercised. He 
wa sallow and emaciated, but hi counten wa full of serious 
and dignity. A sort of rugged of brow, the token of great mental 
exert and vari experience, argu a prematur old age. 

what a mourn tale! Is such the lot of those who wander from their 
rustic home in search of fortune? our countrymen are prone to 
enterprise, and are scatter over everi sea and everi land in pursuit 
of that wealth which will not screen them from diseas and infirmity, 
which is miss much often than found, and which, when gained, by no 
mean compens them for the hardship and vicissitud endur in the 
pursuit. 

but what if the truth of these pretens be admitted? the money must 
be restor to it right owner. I know that, whatev inconveni may 
follow the deed, thou wilt not hesit to act justly. affluenc and 
dignity, howev valuable, may be purchas too dear. honesti will not 
take away it keen from the winter blast, it ignomini and 
unwholesom from servil labour, or strip of it charm the life of 
eleg and leisure; but these, unaccompani with self-reproach, are 
less deplor than wealth and honour the possess of which is mar 
by our own disapprobation. 

I know the bitter of thi sacrifice. I know the impati with 
which your poverti ha formerli been borne; how much your earli 
educ is at war with that degrad and obscur to which your 
youth ha been condemned; how earnestli your wish pant after a state 
which might exempt you from depend upon daili labour and on the 
capric of others, and might secur to you leisur to cultiv and 
indulg your love of knowledg and your social and benefic 
affections. 

your motiv for desir a chang of fortun ha been greatli enforc 
sinc we have becom known to each other. thou hast honour me with thi 
affection; but that union, on which we reli for happiness, could not 
take place while both of us were poor. My habits, indeed, have made 
labour and rustic obscur less pain than they would prove to my 
friend, but my present condit is wholli inconsist with marriage. 
As long as my exert are insuffici to maintain us both, it would 
be unjustifi to burden you with new care and duties. Of thi you 
are more thoroughli convinc than I am. the love of independ and 
ease, and impati of drudgery, are woven into your constitution. 
perhap they are carri to an erron extreme, and derog from that 
uncommon excel by which your charact is, in other respects, 
distinguished; but they cannot be removed. 

thi obstacl wa unexpectedli remov by the death of your brother. 
howev justli to be deplor wa thi catastrophe, yet, like everi 
other event, some of it consequ were good. By give you 
possess of the mean of independ and leisure, by enabl us to 
complet a contract which poverti alon had thu long delayed, thi 
event ha been, at the same time, the most disastr and propiti 
which could have happened. 

whi thi brother should have conceal from us the possess of thi 
money,--why, with such copiou mean of indulg and leisure, he 
should still pursu hi irksom trade, and live in so penuri a 
manner,--ha been a topic of endless and unsatisfactori conjectur 
between us. It wa not difficult to suppos that thi money wa held in 
trust for another; but in that case it wa unavoid that some 
document or memorandum, or at least some claimant, would appear. much 
time ha sinc elapsed, and you have thought yourself at length 
justifi in appropri thi money to your own use. 

our flatter prospect are now shut in. you must return to your 
origin poverty, and onc more depend for precari subsist on 
your needle. you cannot restor the whole, for unavoid expens and 
the chang of your mode of live have consum some part of it. for so 
much you must consid yourself as weymouth' debtor. 

repin not, my friend, at thi unlooked-for reverse. think upon the 
merit and misfortun of your brother' friend; think upon hi age 
father, whom we shall enabl him to rescu from poverty; think upon hi 
desol wife, whose merit are, probably, at least equal to your own, 
and whose helpless is like to be greater. I am not insens to 
the evil which have return upon us with augment force, after 
having, for a moment, taken their flight. I know the precari of 
my condit and that of my sisters; that our subsist hang upon the 
life of an old man. My uncle' death will transfer thi properti to hi 
son, who is a stranger and an enemi to us, and the first act of whose 
author will unquestion be to turn us forth from these doors. 
marriag with thee wa anticip with joyou emotions, not mere on 
my own account or on thine, but likewis for the sake of those belov 
girl to whom that event would enabl me to furnish an asylum. 

but wedlock is now more distant than ever. Mv heart bleed to think of 
the suffer which my belov mari is again fate to endure; but 
regret are onli aggrav of calamity. they are pernicious, and it 
is our duti to shake them off. 

I can entertain no doubt as to the equiti of weymouth' claim. So mani 
coincid could not have happen by chance. the non-appear of 
ani letter or paper connect with it is inde a mysteri 
circumstance; but whi should waldegrav be studiou of preserv these? 
they were useless paper, and might, without impropriety, be cast away or 
made to serv ani temporari purpose. perhaps, indeed, they still lurk in 
some unsuspect corner. To wish that time may explain thi mysteri in a 
differ manner, and so as to permit our retent of thi money, is, 
perhaps, the dictat of selfishness. the transfer to weymouth will not 
be product of less benefit to him and to hi family, than we should 
deriv from the use of it. 

these considerations, however, will be weigh when we meet. meanwhil I 
will return to my narrative. 




chapter xvi. 


here, my friend, thou must permit me to pause. the follow incid 
are of a kind to which the most ardent invent ha never conceiv a 
parallel. fortune, in her most wayward mood, could scarc be suspect 
of an influenc like this. the scene wa pregnant with astonish and 
horror. I cannot, even now, recal it without reviv the dismay and 
confus which I then experienced. 

possibly, the period will arriv when I shall look back without agoni on 
the peril I have undergone. that period is still distant. solitud and 
sleep are now no more than the signal to summon up a tribe of ugli 
phantoms. famine, and blindness, and death, and savag enemies, never 
fail to be conjur up by the silenc and dark of the night. I 
cannot dissip them by ani effort of reason. sli cowardic requir 
the perpetu consol of light. My heart droop when I mark the 
declin of the sun, and I never sleep but with a candl burn at my 
pillow. if, by ani chance, I should awak and find myself immers in 
darkness, I know not what act of desper I might be suddenli 
impel to commit. 

I have delay thi narr longer than my duti to my friend enjoined. 
now that I am abl to hold a pen, I will hasten to termin that 
uncertainti with regard to my fate in which my silenc ha involv 
thee. I will recal that seri of unheard-of and disastr 
vicissitud which ha constitut the latest portion of my life. 

I am not certain, however, that I shall relat them in an intellig 
manner. one imag run into another; sensat succeed in so rapid a 
train, that I fear I shall be unabl to distribut and express them with 
suffici perspicuity. As I look back, my heart is sore, and ach 
within my bosom. I am consciou to a kind of complex sentiment of 
distress and forlorn that cannot be perfectli portray by words; 
but I must do as well as I can. In the utmost vigour of my faculties, no 
eloqu that I possess would do justic to the tale. now, in my 
languish and feebl state, I shall furnish thee with littl more than 
a glimps of the truth. with these glimpses, transient and faint as they 
are, thou must be satisfied. 

I have said that I slept. My memori assur me of this; it inform me of 
the previou circumst of my lay asid my clothes, of place the 
light upon a chair within reach of my pillow, of throw myself upon 
the bed, and of gaze on the ray of the moon reflect on the wall and 
almost obscur by those of the candle. I rememb my occasion 
relaps into fit of incoher fancies, the harbing of sleep. I 
remember, as it were, the instant when my thought ceas to flow and my 
sens were arrest by the leaden wand of forgetfulness. 

My return to sensat and to conscious took place in no such 
tranquil scene. I emerg from oblivion by degre so slow and so faint, 
that their success cannot be marked. when enabl at length to attend 
to the inform which my sens afforded, I wa consciou for a time 
of noth but existence. It wa unaccompani with lassitud or pain, 
but I felt disinclin to stretch my limb or rais my eyelids. My 
thought were wilder and mazy, and, though conscious wa present, 
it wa disconnect with the locomot or voluntari power. 

from thi state a transit wa speedili effected. I perceiv that my 
postur wa supine, and that I lay upon my back. I attempt to open my 
eyes. the weight that oppress them wa too great for a slight exert 
to remove. the exert which I made cost me a pang more acut than ani 
which I ever experienced. My eyes, however, were opened; but the 
dark that environ me wa as intens as before. 

I attempt to rise, but my limb were cold, and my joint had almost 
lost their flexibility. My effort were repeated, and at length I 
attain a sit posture. I wa now sensibl of pain in my shoulder 
and back. I wa univers in that state to which the frame is reduc 
by blow of a club, mercilessli and endlessli repeated; my templ 
throbbed, and my face wa cover with clammi and cold drops: but that 
which threw me into deepest constern wa my inabl to see. I 
turn my head to differ quarters; I stretch my eyelids, and 
exert everi visual energy, but in vain. I wa wrap in the murkiest 
and most impenetr gloom. 

the first effort of reflect wa to suggest the belief that I wa 
blind: that diseas is known to assail us in a moment and without 
previou warning. this, surely, wa the misfortun that had now befallen 
me. some ray, howev fleet and uncertain, could not fail to be 
discerned, if the power of vision were not utterli extinguished. In what 
circumst could I possibl be placed, from which everi particl of 
light should, by other means, be excluded? 

thi led my thought into a new train. I endeavour to recal the past; 
but the past wa too much in contradict to the present, and my 
intellect wa too much shatter by extern violence, to allow me 
accur to review it. 

sinc my sight avail noth to the knowledg of my condition, I 
betook myself to other instruments. the element which I breath wa 
stagnant and cold. the spot where I lay wa rug and hard. I wa 
neither nake nor clothed: a shirt and trouser compos my dress, and 
the shoe and stockings, which alway accompani these, were now 
wanting. what could I infer from thi scanti garb, thi chill 
atmosphere, thi stoni bed? 

I had awaken as from sleep. what wa my condit when I fell asleep? 
sure it wa differ from the present. then I inhabit a lightsom 
chamber and wa stretch upon a down bed; now I wa supin upon a 
rug surfac and immers in palpabl obscurity. then I wa in perfect 
health; now my frame wa cover with bruis and everi joint wa rack 
with pain. what dungeon or den had receiv me, and by whose command wa 
I transport hither? 

after variou effort I stood upon my feet. At first I totter and 
staggered. I stretch out my hand on all sides, but met onli with 
vacuity. I advanc forward. At the third step my foot move someth 
which lay upon the ground: I stoop and took it up, and found, on 
examination, that it wa an indian tomahawk. thi incid afford me 
no hint from which I might conjectur my state. 

proceed irresolut and slowli forward, my hand at length touch a 
wall. this, like the flooring, wa of stone, and wa rug and 
impenetrable. I follow thi wall. An advanc angl occur at a 
short distance, which wa follow by similar angles. I continu to 
explor thi clue, till the suspicion occur that I wa mere go 
round the wall of a vast and irregular apartment. 

the utter dark disabl me from compar direct and distances. 
thi discovery, therefore, wa not made on a sudden, and wa still 
entangl with some doubt. My blood recov some warmth, and my 
muscl some elasticity; but in proport as my sensibl returned, 
my pain augmented. overpow by my fear and my agonies, I desist 
from my fruitless search, and sat down, support my back against the 
wall. 

My excruci sensat for a time occupi my attention. these, in 
combin with other causes, gradual produc a speci of delirium. 
I existed, as it were, in a wake dream. with noth to correct my 
erron perceptions, the imag of the past occur in caprici 
combin and vivid hues. methought I wa the victim of some tyrant 
who had thrust me into a dungeon of hi fortress, and left me no power 
to determin whether he intend I should perish with famine, or linger 
out a long life in hopeless imprisonment. whether the day wa shut out 
by insuper walls, or the dark that surround me wa owe to 
the night and to the small of those cranni through which daylight 
wa to be admitted, I conjectur in vain. 

sometim I imagin myself buri alive. methought I had fallen into 
seem death, and my friend had consign me to the tomb, from which a 
resurrect wa impossible. that, in such a case, my limb would have 
been confin to a coffin, and my coffin to a grave, and that I should 
instantli have been suffocated, did not occur to destroy my supposition. 
neither did thi supposit overwhelm me with terror or prompt my 
effort at deliverance. My state wa full of tumult and confusion, and 
my attent wa incessantli divid between my pain sensat and 
my feverish dreams. 

there is no standard by which time can be measur but the success of 
our thought and the chang that take place in the extern world. from 
the latter I wa total excluded. the former made the laps of some 
hour appear like the tedious of week and months. At length, a new 
sensat recal my rambl meditations, and gave substanc to my 
fears. I now felt the crave of hunger, and perceiv that, unless my 
deliver were speedili effected, I must suffer a tediou and 
linger death. 

I onc more task my understand and my sens to discov the natur 
of my present situat and the mean of escape. I listen to catch 
some sound. I heard an unequ and vari echo, sometim near and 
sometim distant, sometim die away and sometim swell into 
loudness. It wa unlik ani thing I had befor heard, but it wa evid 
that it aros from wind sweep through spaciou hall and wind 
passages. these token were incompat with the result of the 
examin I had made. If my hand were true, I wa immur between 
wall through which there wa no avenue. 

I now exert my voice, and cri as loud as my wast strength would 
admit. it echo were sent back to me in broken and confus sound and 
from above. thi effort wa casual, but some part of that uncertainti in 
which I wa involv wa instantli dispel by it. In pass through 
the cavern on the former day, I have mention the verg of the pit at 
which I arrived. To acquaint me as far as wa possibl with the 
dimens of the place, I had halloo with all my force, know that 
sound is reflect accord to the distanc and rel posit of 
the substanc from which it is repelled. 

the effect produc by my voic on thi occas resembled, with 
remark exactness, the effect which wa then produced. wa I, then, 
shut up in the same cavern? had I reach the brink of the same 
precipic and been thrown headlong into that vacuity? whenc els could 
aris the bruis which I had received, but from my fall? yet all 
remembr of my journey hither wa lost. I had determin to explor 
thi cave on the ensu day, but my memori inform me not that thi 
intent had been carri into effect. still, it wa onli possibl to 
conclud that I had come hither on my intend expedition, and had been 
thrown by another, or had, by some ill chance, fallen, into the pit. 

thi opinion wa conform to what I had alreadi observed. the 
pavement and wall were rug like those of the foot and side of 
the cave through which I had formerli passed. 

but if thi were true, what wa the abhor catastroph to which I wa 
now reserved? the side of thi pit were inaccessible; human footstep 
would never wander into these recesses. My friend were unappr of my 
forlorn state. here I should continu till wast by famine. In thi 
grave should I linger out a few day in unspeak agonies, and then 
perish forever. 

the inroad of hunger were alreadi experienced; and thi knowledg of 
the desper of my calam urg me to frenzy. I had none but 
caprici and unseen fate to condemn. the author of my distress, and 
the mean he had taken to decoy me hither, were incomprehensible. sure 
my sens were fetter or deprav by some spell. I wa still asleep, 
and thi wa mere a torment vision; or mad had seiz me, and 
the dark that environ and the hunger that afflict me exist 
onli in my own distemp imagination. 

the consol of these doubt could not last long. everi hour ad to 
the proof that my percept were real. My hunger speedili becam 
ferocious. I tore the linen of my shirt between my teeth and swallow 
the fragments. I felt a strong propens to bite the flesh from my arm. 
My heart overflow with cruelty, and I ponder on the delight I should 
experi in rend some live anim to pieces, and drink it 
blood and grind it quiver fibr between my teeth. 

thi agoni had alreadi pass beyond the limit of endurance. I saw that 
time, instead of bring respit or relief, would onli aggrav my 
wants, and that my onli remain hope wa to die befor I should be 
assault by the last extrem of famine. I now recollect that a 
tomahawk wa at hand, and rejoic in the possess of an instrument by 
which I could so effectu termin my sufferings. 

I took it in my hand, move it edg over my fingers, and reflect on 
the forc that wa requir to make it reach my heart. I investig 
the spot where it should enter, and strove to fortifi myself with 
resolut to repeat the stroke a second or third time, if the first 
should prove insufficient. I wa sensibl that I might fail to inflict a 
mortal wound, but delight to consid that the blood which would be 
made to flow would final releas me, and that meanwhil my pain would 
be allevi by swallow thi blood. 

you will not wonder that I felt some reluct to employ so fatal 
though indispens a remedy. I onc more rumin on the possibl 
of rescu myself by other means. I now reflect that the upper 
termin of the wall could not be at an immeasur distanc from 
the pavement. I had fallen from a height; but if that height had been 
considerable, instead of be mere bruised, should I not have been 
dash into pieces? 

gleam of hope burst anew upon my soul. wa it not possible, I asked, to 
reach the top of thi pit? the side were rug and uneven. would not 
their projectur and abrupt serv me as step by which I might 
ascend in safety? thi expedi wa to be tri without delay. shortli 
my strength would fail, and my doom would be irrevoc sealed. 

I will not enumer my labori efforts, my altern of 
despond and confidence, the eager and unweari scrutini with which 
I examin the surface, the attempt which I made, and the failur 
which, for a time, succeed each other. A hundr times, when I had 
ascend some feet from the bottom, I wa compel to relinquish my 
undertak by the _untenable_ smooth of the space which 
remain to be gone over. A hundr time I threw myself, exhaust by 
fatigu and my pains, on the ground. the conscious wa gradual 
restor that, till I had attempt everi part of the wall, it wa 
absurd to despair, and I again drew my totter limb and ach joint 
to that part of the wall which had not been surveyed. 

At length, as I stretch my hand upward, I found somewhat that seem 
like a recess in the wall. It wa possibl that thi wa the top of 
the cavity, and thi might be the avenu to liberty. My heart leap 
with joy, and I proceed to climb the wall. No undertak could be 
conceiv more arduou than this. the space between thi verg and the 
floor wa nearli smooth. the verg wa higher from the bottom than my 
head. the onli mean of ascend that were offer me were by my hands, 
with which I could draw myself upward so as, at length, to maintain my 
hold with my feet. 

My effort were indefatigable, and at length I place myself on the 
verge. when thi wa accomplished, my strength wa nearli gone. had I 
not found space enough beyond thi brink to stretch myself at length, I 
should unavoid have fallen backward into the pit, and all my pain 
had serv no other end than to deepen my despair and hasten my 
destruction. 

what impedi and peril remain to be encount I could not 
judge. I wa now inclin to forebod the worst. the interv of repos 
which wa necessari to be taken, in order to recruit my strength, would 
acceler the ravag of famine, and leav me without the power to 
proceed. 

In thi state, I onc more consol myself that an instrument of death 
wa at hand. I had drawn up with me the tomahawk, be sensibl that, 
should thi impedi be overcome, other might remain that would prove 
insuperable. befor I employ it, however, I cast my eye wildli and 
languidli around. the dark wa no less intens than in the pit 
below, and yet two object were distinctli seen. 

they resembl a fix and obscur flame. they were motionless. though 
lustrou themselves, they creat no illumin around them. thi 
circumstance, ad to others, which remind me of similar object 
note on former occasions, immedi explain the natur of what I 
beheld. these were the eye of a panther. 

thu had I struggl to obtain a post where a savag wa lurk and 
wait onli till my effort should place me within reach of hi fangs. 
the first impuls wa to arm myself against thi enemy. the 
desper of my condit was, for a moment, forgotten. the weapon 
which wa so late lift against my own bosom wa now rais to defend 
my life against the assault of another. 

there wa no time for deliber and delay. In a moment he might 
spring from hi station and tear me to pieces. My utmost speed might not 
enabl me to reach him where he sat, but mere to encount hi 
assault. I did not reflect how far my strength wa adequ to save me. 
all the forc that remain wa muster up and exert in a throw. 

No one know the power that are latent in hi constitution. call 
forth by immin dangers, our effort frequent exceed our most 
sanguin belief. though totter on the verg of dissolution, and 
appar unabl to crawl from thi spot, a forc wa exert in thi 
throw, probabl greater than I had ever befor exerted. It wa 
resistless and unerring. I aim at the middl space between those 
glow orbs. It penetr the skull, and the anim fell, struggl 
and shrieking, on the ground. 

My ear quickli inform me when hi pang were at an end. hi cri and 
hi convuls last for a moment and then ceased. the effect of hi 
voice, in these subterranean abodes, wa unspeak rueful. 

the abrupt of thi incident, and the preternatur exert of my 
strength, left me in a state of languor and sinking, from which slowli 
and with difficulti I recovered. the first suggest that occur wa 
to feed upon the carcass of thi animal. My hunger had arriv at that 
pitch where all fastidi and scrupl are at an end. I crept to 
the spot. I will not shock you by relat the extrem to which dire 
necess had driven me. I review thi scene with loath and horror. 
now that it is past I look back upon it as on some hideou dream. the 
whole appear to be some freak of insanity. No altern wa offered, 
and hunger wa capabl of be appeas even by a banquet so 
detestable. 

If thi appetit ha sometim subdu the sentiment of nature, and 
compel the mother to feed upon the flesh of her offspring, it will 
not excit amaz that I did not turn from the yet warm blood and 
reek fibr of a brute. 

one evil wa now removed, onli to give place to another. the first 
sensat of full had scarc been felt when my stomach wa seiz 
by pangs, whose acut exceed all that I ever befor experienced. I 
bitterli lament my inordin avidity. the excruci of famin 
were better than the agoni which thi abhor meal had produced. 

death wa now impend with no less proxim and certainty, though in 
a differ form. death wa a sweet relief for my present miseries, and 
I vehement long for it arrival. I stretch myself on the ground. I 
threw myself into everi postur that promis some allevi of thi 
evil. I roll along the pavement of the cavern, wholli inattent to 
the danger that environ me. that I did not fall into the pit whenc I 
had just emerg must be ascrib to some miracul chance. 

how long my miseri endured, it is not possibl to tell. I cannot even 
form a plausibl conjecture. judg by the linger train of my 
sensations, I should conjectur that some day elaps in thi 
deplor condition; but natur could riot have so long sustain a 
conflict like this. 

gradual my pain subsided, and I fell into a deep sleep. I wa visit 
by dream of a thousand hues. they led me to flow stream and 
plenteou banquets, which, though place within my view, some power 
forbad me to approach. from thi sleep I recov to the fruition of 
solitud and darkness, but my frame wa in a state less feebl than 
befor that which I had eaten had produc temporari distress, but on 
the whole had been of use. If thi food had not been provid for me I 
should scarc have avoid death. I had reason, therefore, to 
congratul myself on the danger that had late occurred. 

I had act without foresight, and yet no wisdom could have prescrib 
more salutari measures. the panther wa slain, not from a view to the 
relief of my hunger, but from the self-preserv and involuntari 
impulse. had I foreknown the pang to which my raven and bloodi meal 
would give birth, I should have care abstained; and yet these pang 
were a use effort of natur to subdu and convert to nourish the 
matter I had swallowed. 

I wa now assail by the torment of thirst. My invent and my 
courag were anew bent to obviat thi press evil. I reflect that 
there wa some recess from thi cavern, even from the spot where I now 
stood. before, I wa doubt whether in thi direct from thi pit 
ani avenu could be found; but, sinc the panther had come hither, there 
wa reason to suppos the exist of some such avenue. 

I now likewis attend to a sound, which, from it invari tenor, 
denot somewhat differ from the whistl of a gale. It seem like 
the murmur of a run stream. I now prepar to go forward and 
endeavour to move along in that direct in which thi sound appar 
came. 

On either side, and abov my head, there wa noth but vacuity. My 
step were to be guid by the pavement, which, though unequ and 
rugged, appeared, on the whole, to ascend. My safeti requir that I 
should employ both hand and feet in explor my way. 

I went on thu for a consider period. the murmur, instead of 
becom more distinct, gradual die away. My progress wa arrest by 
fatigue, and I began onc more to despond. My exert produc a 
perspiration, which, while it augment my thirst, happili suppli me 
with imperfect mean of appeas it. 

thi expedi would, perhaps, have been accident suggested; but my 
ingenu wa assist by rememb the histori of certain english 
prison in bengal, whom their merciless enemi imprison in a small 
room, and some of whom preserv themselv aliv mere by swallow 
the moistur that flow from their bodies. thi experi I now 
perform with no less success. 

thi wa slender arid transitori consolation. I knew that, wander at 
random, I might never reach the outlet of thi cavern, or might be 
disabled, by hunger and fatigue, from go farther than the outlet. the 
crave which had late been satiat would speedili return, and my 
neglig had cut me off from the resourc which had recent been 
furnished. I thought not till now that a second meal might be 
indispensable. 

To return upon my footstep to the spot where the dead anim lay wa a 
heartless project. I might thu be place myself at a hopeless distanc 
from liberty. besides, my track could not be retraced. I had frequent 
deviat from a straight direct for the sake of avoid impediments. 
all of which I wa sensibl was, that I wa travel up an irregular 
acclivity. I hope some time to reach the summit, but had no reason for 
adher to one line of ascent in prefer to another. 

To remain where I wa wa manifestli absurd. whether I mount or 
descended, a chang of place wa most like to benefit me. I resolv 
to vari my direction, and, instead of ascending, keep along the side of 
what I account a hill. I had gone some hundr feet when the murmur, 
befor described, onc more salut my ear. 

thi sound, be imagin to proceed from a run stream, could not 
but light up joy in the heart of one nearli perish with thirst. I 
proceed with new courage. the sound approach no nearer, nor becam 
more distinct; but, as long as it die not away, I wa satisfi to 
listen and to hope. 

I wa eagerli observ if ani the least glimmer of light should 
visit thi recess. At length, on the right hand, a gleam, infinit 
faint, caught my attention. It wa waver and unequal. I direct my 
step toward it. It becam more vivid and permanent. It wa of that 
kind, however, which proceed from a fire, kindl with dri sticks, and 
not from the sun. I now heard the crackl of flames. 

thi sound made me pause, or, at least, to proceed with circumspection. 
At length the scene opened, and I found myself at the entranc of a 
cave. I quickli reach a station, when I saw a fire burning. At first 
no other object wa noted, but it wa easi to infer that the fire wa 
kindl by men, and that they who kindl it could be at no great 
distance. 




chapter xvii. 


thu wa I deliv from my prison, and restor to the enjoy of 
the air and the light. perhap the chanc wa almost miracul that led 
me to thi opening. In ani other direction, I might have involv myself 
in an inextric maze and render my destruct sure; but what now 
remain to place me in absolut security? beyond the fire I could see 
nothing; but, sinc the smoke roll rapidli away, it wa plain that on 
the opposit side the cavern wa open to the air. 

I went forward, but my eye were fix upon the fire: presently, in 
consequ of chang my station, I perceiv sever feet, and the 
skirt of blankets. I wa somewhat startl at these appearances. the 
leg were naked, and score into uncouth figures. the _moccasins_ 
which lay besid them, and which were adorn in a grotesqu manner, in 
addit to other incidents, immedi suggest the suspicion that 
they were indians. No spectacl wa more adapt than thi to excit 
wonder and alarm. had some mysteri power snatch me from the earth, 
and cast me, in a moment, into the heart of the wilderness? wa I still 
in the vicin of my parent habitation, or wa I thousand of mile 
distant? 

were these the perman inhabit of thi region, or were they 
wander and robbers? while in the heart of the mountain, I had 
entertain a vagu belief that I wa still within the precinct of 
norwalk. thi opinion wa shaken for a moment by the object which I now 
beheld, but it insens returned: yet how wa thi opinion to be 
reconcil to appear so strang and uncouth, and what measur did a 
due regard to my safeti enjoin me to take? 

I now gain a view of four brawni and terrif figures, stretch upon 
the ground. they lay parallel to each other, on their left sides; in 
consequ of which their face were turn from me. between each wa 
an interv where lay a musket. their right hand seem place upon the 
stock of their guns, as if to seiz them on the first moment of alarm. 

the apertur through which these object were seen wa at the back of 
the cave, and some feet from the ground. It wa mere larg enough to 
suffer a human bodi to pass. It wa involv in profound darkness, and 
there wa no danger of be suspect or discov as long as I 
maintain silenc and kept out of view. 

It wa easili imagin that these guest would make but a short sojourn 
in thi spot. there wa reason to suppos that it wa now night, and 
that, after a short repose, they would start up and resum their 
journey. It wa my first design to remain shroud in thi covert till 
their departure, and I prepar to endur imprison and thirst 
somewhat longer. 

meanwhil my thought were busi in account for thi spectacle. I need 
not tell thee that norwalk is the termin of a steril and narrow 
tract which begin in the indian country. It form a sort of rug and 
rocki vein, and continu upward of fifti miles. It is cross in a few 
place by narrow and intric paths, by which a commun is 
maintain between the farm and settlement on the opposit side of 
the ridge. 

dure former indian wars, thi rude surfac wa sometim travers by 
the red men, and they made, by mean of it, frequent and destruct 
inroad into the heart of the english settlements. dure the last war, 
notwithstand the progress of population, and the multipli peril of 
such an expedition, a band of them had onc penetr into norwalk, and 
linger long enough to pillag and murder some of the neighbour 
inhabitants. 

I have reason to rememb that event. My father' hous wa place on 
the verg of thi solitude. eight of these assassin assail it at the 
dead of night. My parent and an infant child were murder in their 
beds; the hous wa pillaged, and then burnt to the ground. happily, 
myself and my two sister were abroad upon a visit. the preced day 
had been fix for our return to our father' house; but a storm 
occurred, which made it danger to cross the river, and, by oblig 
us to defer our journey, rescu us from captiv or death. 

most men are haunt by some speci of terror or antipathy, which they 
are, for the most part, abl to trace to some incid which befel them 
in their earli years. you will not be surpris that the fate of my 
parents, and the sight of the bodi of one of thi savag band, who, in 
the pursuit that wa made after them, wa overtaken and killed, should 
produc last and terrif imag in my fancy. I never look upon or 
call up the imag of a savag without shuddering. 

I knew that, at thi time, some hostil had been commit on the 
frontier; that a long cours of injuri and encroach had late 
exasper the indian tribes; that an implac and extermin war 
wa gener expected. We imagin ourselv at an inaccess 
distanc from the danger; but I could not but rememb that thi 
persuas wa formerli as strong as at present, and that an expedit 
which had onc succeed might possibl be attempt again. here wa 
everi token of enmiti and bloodshed. each prostrat figur wa furnish 
with a rifl musket, and a leathern bag tie round hi waist, which 
was, probably, store with powder and ball. 

from these reflections, the sens of my own danger wa reviv and 
enforced; but I likewis rumin on the evil which might impend over 
others. I should, no doubt, be safe by remain in thi nook; but might 
not some mean be pursu to warn other of their danger? should they 
leav thi spot without notic of their approach be given to the 
fearless and pacif tenant of the neighbour district, they might 
commit, in a few hours, the most horrid and irrepar devastation. 

the alarm could onli be diffus in one way. could I not escape, 
unperceived, and without alarm the sleepers, from thi cavern? the 
slumber of an indian is broken by the slightest noise; but, if all nois 
be precluded, it is commonli profound. It wa possible, I conceived, to 
leav my present post, to descend into the cave, and issu forth without 
the smallest signal. their supin postur assur me that they were 
asleep. sleep usual come at their bidding, and if, perchance, they 
should be wake at an unseason moment, they alway sit upon their 
haunches, and, lean their elbow on their knees, consum the tediou 
hour in smoking. My peril would be great. accid which I could not 
foresee, and over which I had no command, might occur to awaken some one 
at the moment I wa pass the fire. should I pass in safety, I might 
issu forth into a wilderness, of which I had no knowledge, where I 
might wander till I perish with famine, or where my footstep might be 
note and pursu and overtaken by these implac foes. these peril 
were enorm and imminent; but I likewis consid that I might be at 
no great distanc from the habit of men, and that my escap might 
rescu them from the most dread calamities. I determin to make thi 
danger experi without delay. 

I came nearer to the aperture, and had, consequently, a larger view of 
thi recess. To my unspeak dismay, I now caught a glimps of one 
seat at the fire. hi back wa turn toward me, so that I could 
distinctli survey hi gigant form and fantast ornaments. 

My project wa frustrated. thi one wa probabl commiss to watch 
and to awaken hi companion when a due portion of sleep had been taken. 
that he would not be unfaith or remiss in the perform of the part 
assign to him wa easili predicted. To pass him without excit hi 
notic (and the entranc could not otherwis be reached) wa impossible. 
onc more I shrunk back, and revolv with hopeless and anguish the 
necess to which I wa reduced. 

thi interv of dreari forebod did not last long. some motion in him 
that wa seat by the fire attract my notice. I looked, and beheld 
him rise from hi place and go forth from the cavern. thi unexpect 
incid led my thought into a new channel. could not some advantag be 
taken of hi absence? could not thi opportun be seiz for make my 
escape? He had left hi gun and hatchet on the ground. It wa likely, 
therefore, that he had not gone far, and would speedili return. might 
not these weapon be seized, and some provis be thu made against the 
danger of meet him without, or of be pursued? 

befor a resolut could be formed, a new sound salut my ear. It wa 
a deep groan, succeed by sob that seem struggl for utter but 
were vehement counteract by the sufferer. thi low and bitter 
lament appar proceed from some one within the cave. It could 
not be from one of thi swarthi band. It must, then, proceed from a 
captive, whom they had reserv for torment or servitude, and who had 
seiz the opportun afford by the absenc of him that watch to 
give vent to hi despair. 

I again thrust my head forward, and beheld, lie on the ground, apart 
from the rest, and bound hand and foot, a young girl. her dress wa the 
coars russet garb of the country, and bespok her to be some farmer' 
daughter. her featur denot the last degre of fear and anguish, and 
she move her limb in such a manner as show that the ligatur by 
which she wa confin produced, by their tightness, the utmost degre 
of pain. 

My wish were now bent not onli to preserv myself and to frustrat the 
futur attempt of these savages, but likewis to reliev thi miser 
victim. thi could onli be done by escap from the cavern and 
return with season aid. the sob of the girl were like to rous 
the sleepers. My appear befor her would prompt her to testifi her 
surpris by some exclam or shriek. what could henc be predict 
but that the band would start on their feet and level their uner 
piec at my head? 

I know not whi I wa insens to these dangers. My thirst wa render 
by these delay intolerable. It took from me, in some degree, the power 
of deliberation. the murmur which had drawn me hither continu still 
to be heard. some torrent or cascad could not be far distant from the 
entranc of the cavern, and it seem as if one draught of clear water 
wa a luxuri cheapli purchas by death itself. this, in addit to 
consider more disinterested, and which I have alreadi mentioned, 
impel me forward. 

the girl' cheek rest on the hard rock, and her eye were dim with 
tears. As they were turn toward me, however, I hope that my 
movement would be notic by her gradual and without abruptness. thi 
expect wa fulfilled. I had not advanc mani step befor she 
discov me. thi moment wa critic beyond all other in the cours 
of my existence. My life wa suspended, as it were, by a spider' 
thread. all rest on the effect which thi discoveri should make upon 
thi feebl victim. 

I wa watch of the first movement of her eye which should indic a 
conscious of my presence. I laboured, by gestur and looks, to 
deter her from betray her emotion. My attent was, at the same 
time, fix upon the sleepers, and an anxiou glanc wa cast toward 
the quarter whenc the watch savag might appear. 

I stoop and seiz the musket and hatchet. the space beyond the fire 
was, as I expected, open to the air. I issu forth with trembl 
steps. the sensat inspir by the danger which environ me, ad 
to my recent horrors, and the influenc of the moon, which had now 
gain the zenith, and whose lustr dazzl my long-benight senses, 
cannot be adequ described. 

for a minute, I wa unabl to distinguish objects. thi confus wa 
speedili corrected, and I found myself on the verg of a steep. craggi 
emin aros on all sides. On the left hand wa a space that offer 
some footing, and hither I turned. A torrent wa below me, and thi path 
appear to lead to it. It quickli appear in sight, and all foreign 
care were, for a time, suspended. 

thi water fell from the upper region of the hill, upon a flat 
projectur which wa continu on either side, and on part of which I 
wa now standing. the path wa bound on the left by an inaccess 
wall, and on the right terminated, at the distanc of two or three feet 
from the wall, in a precipice. the water wa eight or ten pace distant, 
and no impedi seem like to rise between us. I rush forward 
with speed. 

My progress wa quickli checked. close to the fall water, seat on 
the edge, hi back support by the rock, and hi leg hang over the 
precipice, I now beheld the savag who left the cave befor me. the 
nois of the cascad and the improb of interruption, at least 
from thi quarter, had made him inattent to my motions. 

I paused. along thi verg lay the onli road by which I could reach the 
water, and by which I could escape. the passag wa complet occupi 
by thi antagonist. To advanc toward him, or to remain where I was, 
would produc the same effect. I should, in either case, be detected. He 
wa unarmed; but hi outcri would instantli summon hi companion to 
hi aid. I could not hope to overpow him, and pass him in defianc of 
hi opposition. but, if thi were effected, pursuit would be instantli 
commenced. I wa unacquaint with the way. the way wa unquestion 
difficult. My strength wa nearli annihilated; I should be overtaken in 
a moment, or their defici in speed would be suppli by the accuraci 
of their aim. their bullets, at least, would reach me. 

there wa one method of remov thi impediment. the piec which I held 
in my hand wa cocked. there could be no doubt that it wa loaded. A 
precaut of thi kind would never be omit by a warrior of thi hue. 
At a greater distanc than this, I should not fear to reach the mark. 
should I not discharg it, and, at the same moment, rush forward to 
secur the road which my adversary' death would open to me? 

perhap you will conceiv a purpos like thi to have argu a 
sanguinari and murder disposition. let it be remembered, however, 
that I entertain no doubt about the hostil design of these men. 
thi wa suffici indic by their arms, their guise, and the 
captiv who attend them. let the fate of my parent be, likewise, 
remembered. I wa not certain but that these veri men were the assassin 
of my family, and were those who had reduc me and my sister to the 
condit of orphan and dependants. No word can describ the torment 
of my thirst. relief to these torments, and safeti to my life, were 
within view. how could I hesitate? 

yet I did hesitate. My avers to bloodsh wa not to be subdu but 
by the direst necessity. I knew, indeed, that the discharg of a musket 
would onli alarm the enemi who remain behind; but I had anoth and 
a better weapon in my grasp. I could rive the head of my adversary, and 
cast him headlong, without ani nois which should be heard, into the 
cavern. 

still I wa will to withdraw, to re-ent the cave, and take shelter 
in the darksom recess from which I had emerged. here I might remain, 
unsuspected, till these detest guest should depart. the hazard 
attend my re-entr were to be boldli encountered, and the torment 
of unsatisfi thirst were to be patient endured, rather than imbru 
my hand in the blood of my fellowmen. but thi expedi would be 
ineffectu if my retreat should be observ by thi savage. Of that I 
wa bound to be incontest assured. I retreated, therefore, but kept 
my eye fix at the same time upon the enemy. 

some ill fate decre that I should not retreat unobserved. scarc had 
I withdrawn three pace when he start from hi seat, and, turn 
toward me, walk with a quick pace. the shadow of the rock, and the 
improb of meet an enemi here, conceal me for a moment from 
hi observation. I stood still. the slightest motion would have 
attract hi notice. At present, the narrow space engag all hi 
vigilance. cautiou footsteps, and attent to the path, were 
indispens to hi safety. the respit wa momentary, and I employ 
it in my own defence. 

how otherwis could I act? the danger that impend aim at noth 
less than my life. To take the life of anoth wa the onli method of 
avert it. the mean were in my hand, and they were used. In an 
extrem like this, my muscl would have act almost in defianc of 
my will. 

the stroke wa quick as lightning, and the wound mortal and deep. He had 
not time to descri the author of hi fate, but, sink on the path, 
expir without a groan. the hatchet buri itself in hi breast, and 
roll with him to the bottom of the precipice. 

never befor had I taken the life of a human creature. On thi head I 
had, indeed, entertain somewhat of religi scruples. these scrupl 
did not forbid me to defend myself, but they made me cautiou and 
reluct to decide. though they could not withhold my hand when urg 
by a necess like this, they were suffici to make me look back upon 
the deed with remors and dismay. 

I did not escap all compunct in the present instance, but the tumult 
of my feel wa quickli allayed. To quench my thirst wa a 
consider by which all other were supplanted. I approach the 
torrent, and not onli drank copiously, but lave my head, neck, and 
arms, in thi delici element. 




chapter xviii. 


never wa ani delight worthi of comparison with the raptur which I 
then experienced. life, that wa rapidli ebbing, appear to return upon 
me with redoubl violence. My languors, my excruci heat, vanish 
in a moment, and I felt prepar to undergo the labour of hercules. 
have fulli suppli the demand of natur in thi respect, I return 
to reflect on the circumst of my situation. the path wind 
round the hill wa now free from all impediments. what remain but to 
precipit my flight? I might speedili place myself beyond all danger. 
I might gain some hospit shelter, where my fatigu might be 
repair by repose, and my wound be cured. I might likewis impart to 
my protector season inform of the enemi who medit their 
destruction. 

I thought upon the condit of the hapless girl whom I had left in the 
power of the savages. wa it imposs to rescu her? might I not 
reliev her from her bonds, and make her the companion of my flight? the 
exploit wa perilous, but not impracticable. there wa someth 
dastardli and ignomini in withdraw from the danger, and leav a 
helpless be expos to it. A singl minut might suffic to snatch 
her from death or captivity. the parent might deserv that I should 
hazard or even sacrific my life in the caus of their child. 

after some fluctuation, I determin to return to the cavern and attempt 
the rescu of the girl. the success of thi project depend on the 
continu of their sleep. It wa proper to approach with wariness, and 
to heed the smallest token which might bespeak their condition. I crept 
along the path, bend my ear forward to catch ani sound that might 
arise. I heard noth but the half-stifl sob of the girl. 

I enter with the slowest and most anxiou circumspection. everi thing 
wa found in it pristin state. the girl notic my entranc with a 
mixtur of terror and joy. My gestur and look enjoin upon her 
silence. I stoop down, and, take anoth hatchet, cut asund the 
deer-skin thong by which her wrist and ankl were tied. I then made 
sign for her to rise and follow me. she willingli compli with my 
directions; but her benumb joint and lacer sinew refus to 
support her. there wa no time to be lost; I therefor lift her in my 
arms, and, feebl and totter as I was, proceed with thi burden 
along the peril steep and over a most rugged-path. 

I hope that some exert would enabl her to retriev the use of her 
limbs. I set her, therefore, on her feet, exhort her to walk as well 
as she wa able, and promis her my occasion assistance. the poor 
girl wa not defici in zeal, and present move along with light and 
quick steps. We speedili reach the bottom of the hill. 

No fanci can conceiv a scene more wild and desol than that which now 
present itself. the soil wa nearli cover with sharp fragment of 
stone. between these, sprung brambl and creep vines, whose twigs, 
cross and intertwin with each other, ad to the rough below, 
made the passag infinit toilsome. scatter over thi space were 
singl cedar with their rag spine and wreath of moss, and cops 
of dwarf oaks, which were onli new emblem of sterility. 

I wa wholli unacquaint with the scene befor me. No mark of 
habit or culture, no trace of the footstep of men, were 
discernible. I scarc knew in what region of the globe I wa placed. I 
had come hither by mean so inexplic as to leav it equal in doubt 
whether I wa separ from my patern abod by a river or an ocean. 

I made inquiri of my companion, but she wa unabl to talk coherently. 
she answer my question with weeping, and sobs, and entreati to fli 
from the scene of her distress. I collect from her, at length, that 
her father' hous had been attack on the preced evening, and all 
the famili but herself destroyed. sinc thi disast she had walk 
veri fast and a great way, but knew not how far or in what direction. 

In a wilder like this, my onli hope wa to light upon obscur paths, 
made by cattle. meanwhil I endeavour to adher to one line, and to 
burst through the vexati obstacl which encumb our way. the 
ground wa conceal by the bushes, and we were perplex and fatigu 
by a continu success of hollow and prominences. At one moment we 
were nearli thrown headlong into a pit. At anoth we struck our feet 
against the angl of stones. the branch of the oak rebound in our 
face or entangl our legs, and the unseen thorn inflict on us a 
thousand wounds. 

I wa obliged, in these arduou circumstances, to support not onli 
myself, but my companion. her strength wa overpow by her even 
journey, and the terror of be overtaken incessantli harass her. 

sometim we light upon track which afford us an easier foot and 
inspir us with courag to proceed. these, for a time, termin at a 
brook or in a bog, and we were onc more compel to go forward at 
random. one of these track insens becam more beaten, and, at 
length, exhibit the trace of wheels. To thi I adhered, confid 
that it would final conduct us to a dwelling. 

On either side, the undergrowth of shrub and brambl continu as 
before. sometim small space were observed, which had late been 
clear by fire. At length a vacant space, of larger dimens than had 
hitherto occurred, present itself to my view. It wa a field of some 
acres, that had, apparently, been upturn by the hoe. At the corner of 
thi field wa a small house. 

My heart leap with joy at thi sight. I hasten toward it, in the 
hope that my uncertainties, and toils, and dangers, were now draw to 
a close. thi dwell wa suit to the poverti and desol which 
surround it. It consist of a few unhewn log laid upon each other, 
to the height of eight or ten feet, includ a quadrangular space of 
similar dimensions, and cover by a thatch. there wa no window, light 
be suffici admit into the crevic between the logs. these 
had formerli been loos plaster with clay; but air and rain had 
crumbl and wash the greater part of thi rude cement away. somewhat 
like a chimney, built of half-burnt bricks, wa perceiv at one corner. 
the door wa fasten by a leathern thong, tie to a peg. 

all within wa silenc and darkness. I knock at the door and called, 
but no one move or answered. the tenant, whoever he was, wa absent. 
hi leav could not be obtained, and I, therefore, enter without it. 
the autumn had made some progress, and the air wa frosti and sharp. My 
mind and muscl had been of late so strenuous occupied, that the cold 
had not been felt. the cessat of exercise, however, quickli restor 
my sensibl in thi respect, but the unhappi girl complain of be 
half frozen. 

fire, therefore, wa the first object of my search. happily, some ember 
were found upon the hearth, togeth with potato-stalk and dri chips. 
Of these, with much difficulty, I kindl a fire, by which some warmth 
wa impart to our shiver limbs. the light enabl me, as I sat upon 
the ground, to survey the interior of thi mansion. three saplings, 
strip of their branch and bound togeth at their end by twigs, 
form a kind of bedstead, which wa rais from the ground by four 
stones. rope stretch across these, and cover by a blanket, 
constitut the bed. A board, of which one end rest on the bedstead 
and the other wa thrust between the log that compos the wall, 
sustain the stale fragment of a rye-loaf, and a cedar bucket kept 
entir by with instead of hoops. In the bucket wa a littl water, 
full of drop from the roof, drown insects, and sand. A basket or 
two neatli made, and a hoe, with a stake thrust into it by way of 
handle, made up all the furnitur that wa visible. 

next to cold, hunger wa the most urgent necess by which we were now 
pressed. thi wa no time to give ear to scruples. we, therefore, 
unceremoni divid the bread and water between us. I had now 
leisur to bestow some regard upon the future. 

these remnant of fire and food convinc me that thi dwell wa 
usual inhabited, and that it had late been deserted. some engag 
had probabl carri the tenant abroad. hi absenc might be termin 
in a few minutes, or might endur through the night. On hi return, I 
question not my power to appeas ani indign he might feel at the 
liberti which I had taken. I wa will to suppos him one who would 
readili afford us all the inform and succour that we needed. 

If he should not return till sunrise, I meant to resum my journey. By 
the comfort meal we had made, and the repos of a few hours, we 
should be consider invigor and refreshed, and the road would 
lead us to some more hospit tenement. 

My thought were too tumultuous, and my situat too precarious, to 
allow me to sleep. the girl, on the contrary, soon sank into a sweet 
oblivion of all her cares. she laid herself, by my advice, upon the bed, 
and left me to rumin without interruption. 

I wa not wholli free from the apprehens of danger. what influenc 
thi boister and solitari life might have upon the temper of the 
be who inhabit thi hut, I could not predict. how soon the indian 
might awake, and what path they would pursue, I wa equal unabl to 
guess. It wa by no mean imposs that they might tread upon my 
footsteps, and knock, in a few minutes, at the door of thi cottage. It 
behoov me to make all the prepar in my power against untoward 
incidents. 

I had not part with the gun which I had first seiz in the cavern, 
nor with the hatchet which I had afterward use to cut the band of the 
girl. these were at onc my trophi and my mean of defence, which it 
had been rash and absurd to have relinquished. My present relianc wa 
place upon these. 

I now, for the first time, examin the prize that I had made. other 
consider had prevent me, till now, from examin the structur 
of the piece; but I could not but observ that it had two barrels, and 
wa lighter and smaller than an ordinari musket. the light of the fire 
now enabl me to inspect it with more accuracy. 

scarc had I fix my eye upon the stock, when I perceiv mark that 
were familiar to my apprehension. shape, ornaments, and ciphers, were 
evid the same with those of a piec which I had frequent handled. 
the mark were of a kind which could not be mistaken. thi piec wa 
mine; and, when I left my uncle' house, it wa deposited, as I 
believed, in the closet of my chamber. 

thou wilt easili conceiv the infer which thi circumst 
suggested. My hair rose and my teeth chatter with horror. My whole 
frame wa petrified, and I pace to and fro, hurri from the chimney to 
the door, and from the door to the chimney, with the misguid furi of a 
maniac. 

I need no proof of my calam more incontest than this. My uncl 
and my sister had been murdered; the dwell had been pillaged, and 
thi had been a part of the plunder. defenceless and asleep, they were 
assail by these inexor enemies, and I, who ought to have been 
their protector and champion, wa remov to an immeasur distance, 
and wa disabled, by some accurs chance, from afford them the 
succour which they needed. 

for a time, I doubt whether I had not wit and share thi 
catastrophe. I had no memori of the circumst that preced my 
awak in the pit. had not the caus of my be cast into thi abyss 
some connect with the ruin of my family? had I not been drag 
hither by these savag and reduced, by their malice, to that breathless 
and insens condition? wa I born to a malign destini never tire 
of persecuting? thu had my parent and their infant offspr perished, 
and thu complet wa the fate of all those to whom my affect 
cleaved, and whom the first disast had spared. 

hitherto the death of the savage, whom I had dispatch with my hatchet, 
had not been rememb without some remorse. now my emot were 
total changed. I wa somewhat comfort in think that thu much of 
necessari vengeanc had been executed. new and more vehement regret 
were excit by reflect on the forbear I had practis when so 
much wa in my power. all the miscreant had been at my mercy, and a 
bloodi retribut might, with safeti and ease, have been inflict on 
their prostrat bodies. 

It wa now too late. what of consol or of hope remain to me? To 
return to my ancient dwelling, now pollut with blood, or, perhaps, 
noth but a smoke ruin, wa abhorred. life, connect with the 
remembr of my misfortunes, wa detestable. I wa no longer anxiou 
for flight. No chang of the scene but that which termin all 
conscious could I endur to think of. 

amidst these gloomi medit the idea wa suddenli suggest of 
returning, with the utmost expedition, to the cavern. It wa possibl 
that the assassin were still asleep. He who wa appoint to watch, and 
to make, in due season, the signal for resum their march, wa forev 
silent. without thi signal it wa not unlik that they would sleep 
till dawn of day. but, if they should be roused, they might be overtaken 
or met, and, by choos a proper station, two victim might at least 
fall. the ultim event to myself would sure be fatal; but my own 
death wa an object of desir rather than of dread. To die thu 
speedily, and after some aton wa made for those who had alreadi 
been slain, wa sweet. 

the way to the mountain wa difficult and tedious, but the ridg wa 
distinctli seen from the door of the cottage, and I trust that 
auspici chanc would lead me to that part of it where my prey wa to 
be found. I snatch up the gun and tomahawk in a transport of 
eagerness. On examin the former, I found that both barrel were 
deepli loaded. 

thi piec wa of extraordinari workmanship. It wa the legaci of an 
english officer, who die in bengal, to sarsefield. It wa construct 
for the purpos not of sport but of war. the artist had made it a 
congeri of tube and springs, by which everi purpos of protect and 
offenc wa effectu served. A dagger' blade wa attach to it, 
capabl of be fix at the end, and of answer the destruct 
purpos of a bayonet. On hi departur from solesbury, my friend left 
it, as a pledg of hi affection, in my possession. hitherto I had 
chiefli employ it in shoot at a mark, in order to improv my sight; 
now wa I to profit by the gift in a differ way. 

thu armed, I prepar to salli forth on my adventur expedition. 
sober view might have speedili succeed to the present tempest of my 
passions. I might have gradual discov the romant and crimin 
temer of my project, the folli of revenge, and the duti of preserv 
my life for the benefit of mankind. I might have suspect the proprieti 
of my conclusion, and have admit some doubt as to the catastroph 
which I imagin to have befallen my uncl and sisters. I might, at 
least, have consent to ascertain their condit with my own eyes, and 
for thi end have return to the cottage, and have patient wait 
till the morn light should permit me to resum my journey. 

thi conduct wa preclud by a new incident. befor I open the door I 
look through a crevic of the wall, and perceiv three human figur 
at the farther end of the field. they approach the house. though 
indistinctli seen, someth in their port persuad me that these were 
the indian from whom I had late parted. I wa startl but not 
dismayed. My thirst of vengeanc wa still powerful, and I believ that 
the moment of it gratif wa hastening. In a short time they 
would arriv and enter the house. In what manner should they be 
received? 

I studi not my own security. It wa the scope of my wish to kill the 
whole number of my foes; but, that be done, I wa indiffer to the 
consequences. I desir not to live to relat or to exult in the deed. 

To go forth wa peril and useless. all that remain wa to sit upon 
the ground opposit the door, and fire at each as he entered. In the 
hasti survey I had taken of thi apartment, one object had been 
overlooked, or imperfectli noticed. close to the chimney wa an 
aperture, form by a caviti partli in the wall and in the ground. It 
wa the entranc of an oven, which resembled, on the outside, a mound of 
earth, and which wa fill with dri stalk of potato and other 
rubbish. 

into thi it wa possibl to thrust my body. A sort of screen might be 
form of the brushwood, and more deliber and effectu execut be 
done upon the enemy. I weigh not the disadvantag of thi scheme, but 
precipit threw myself into thi cavity. I discovered, in an 
instant, that it wa total unfit for my purpose; but it wa too late 
to repair my miscarriage. 

thi wall of the hovel wa place near the verg of a sand-bank. the 
oven wa erect on the veri brink. thi bank, be of a loos and 
mutabl soil, could not sustain my weight. It sunk, and I sunk along 
with it. the height of the bank wa three or four feet, so that, though 
disconcert and embarrassed, I receiv no injury. I still grasp my 
gun, and resum my feet in a moment. 

what wa now to be done? the bank screen me from the view of the 
savages. the thicket wa hard by, and, if I were eager to escape, the 
way wa obviou and sure. but, though single, though enfeebl by toil, 
by abstinence, and by disease, and though so much exceed in number and 
strength by my foes, I wa determin to await and provok the contest. 

In addit to the desper impuls of passion, I wa sway by 
thought of the danger which beset the sleep girl, and from which my 
flight would leav her without protection. how strang is the destini 
that govern mankind! the consequ of shroud myself in thi caviti 
had not been foreseen. It wa an expedi which courag and not 
cowardic suggested; and yet it wa the onli expedi by which flight 
had been render practicable. To have issu from the door would onli 
have been to confront, and not to elude, the danger. 

the first impuls prompt me to re-ent the cottag by thi avenue, 
but thi could not be done with certainti and expedition. what then 
remained? while I deliberated, the men approached, and, after a moment' 
hesitation, enter the house, the door be partli open. 

the fire on the hearth enabl them to survey the room. one of them 
utter a sudden exclam of surprise. thi wa easili interpreted. 
they had notic the girl who had late been their captiv lie asleep 
on the blanket. their astonish at find her here, and in thi 
condition, may be easili conceived. 

I now reflect that I might place myself, without be observed, near 
the entrance, at an angl of the building, and shoot at each as he 
success came forth. I perceiv that the bank conform to two 
side of the house, and that I might gain a view of the front and of the 
entrance, without expos myself to observation. 

I lost no time in gain thi station. the bank wa as high as my 
breast. It wa easy, therefore, to crouch beneath it, to bring my eye 
close to the verge, and, lay my gun upon the top of it among the 
grass, with it muzzl point to the door, patient to wait their 
forthcoming. 

My eye and my ear were equal attent to what wa passing. A low and 
mutter convers wa maintain in the house. present I heard a 
heavi stroke descend. I shuddered, and my blood ran cold at the sound. I 
entertain no doubt but that it wa the stroke of a hatchet on the head 
or breast of the helpless sleeper. 

It wa follow by a loud shriek. the continu of these shriek 
prove that the stroke had not been instantli fatal. I wait to hear it 
repeated, but the sound that now aros were like those produc by 
drag somewhat along the ground. the shrieks, meanwhile, were 
incess and piteous. My heart faltered, and I saw that mighti effort 
must be made to preserv my joint and my nerv steadfast. all depend 
on the strenuou exert and the fortun dexter of a moment. 

one now approach the door, and came forth, drag the girl, whom he 
held by the hair, after him. what hinder me from shoot at hi first 
appearance, I know not. thi had been my previou resolution. My hand 
touch the trigger, and, as he moved, the piec wa level at hi 
right ear. perhap the moment consequ of my failur made me wait 
till hi ceas to move might render my aim more sure. 

have drag the girl, still piteous shrieking, to the distanc of 
ten feet from the house, he threw her from him with violence. she fell 
upon the ground, and, observ him level hi piec at her breast, 
renew her supplic in a still more pierc tone. littl did the 
forlorn wretch think that her deliver wa certain and near. I 
rebuk myself for have thu long delayed. I fired, and my enemi sunk 
upon the ground without a struggle. 

thu far had success attend me in thi unequ contest. the next shot 
would leav me nearli powerless. If that, however, prove as uner as 
the first, the chanc of defeat were lessened. the savag within, 
know the intent of their associ with regard to the captiv 
girl, would probabl mistak the report which they heard for that of hi 
piece. their mistake, however, would speedili give place to doubts, and 
they would rush forth to ascertain the truth. It behoov me to provid 
a similar recept for him that next appeared. 

It wa as I expected. scarc wa my eye again fix upon the entrance, 
when a tawni and terrif visag wa stretch fear forth. It wa 
the signal of hi fate. hi glances, cast wildli and swiftli round, 
light upon me, and on the fatal instrument which wa point at hi 
forehead. hi muscl were at onc exert to withdraw hi head, and to 
vocifer a warn to hi fellow; but hi movement wa too slow. the 
ball enter abov hi ear. He tumbl headlong to the ground, bereav 
of sensat though not of life, and had power onli to struggl and 
mutter. 




chapter xix. 


think not that I relat these thing with exult or tranquillity. 
all my educ and the habit of my life tend to unfit me for a 
contest and a scene like this. but I wa not govern by the soul which 
usual regul my conduct. I had imbibed, from the unparallel 
event which had late happened, a spirit vengeful, unrelenting, and 
ferocious. 

there wa now an interv for flight. throw my weapon away, I might 
gain the thicket in a moment. I had no ammunition, nor would time be 
afford me to reload my piece. My antagonist would render my poniard 
and my speed of no use to me. should he miss me as I fled, the girl 
would remain to expiate, by her agoni and death, the fate of hi 
companions. 

these thought pass through my mind in a shorter time than is demand 
to express them. they yield to an expedi suggest by the sight of 
the gun that had been rais to destroy the girl, and which now lay upon 
the ground. I am not larg of bone, but am not defici in agil and 
strength. all that remain to me of these qualiti wa now exerted; 
and, drop my own piece, I leap upon the bank, and flew to seiz my 
prize. 

It wa not till I snatch it from the ground, that the proprieti of 
regain my former post rush upon my apprehension. He that wa still 
post in the hovel would mark me through the seam of the wall, and 
render my destruct sure. I onc more ran toward the bank, with the 
intent to throw myself below it. all thi wa perform in an 
instant; but my vigil foe wa awar of hi advantage, and fire 
through an open between the logs. the bullet graze my cheek, and 
produc a benumb sensat that made me instantli fall to the earth. 
though bereav of strength, and fraught with the belief that I had 
receiv a mortal wound, my caution wa not remitted. I loosen not my 
grasp of the gun, and the postur into which I accident fell enabl 
me to keep an eye upon the hous and a hand upon the trigger. perceiv 
my condition, the savag rush from hi covert in order to complet hi 
work; but at three step from the threshold he receiv my bullet in hi 
breast. the uplift tomahawk fell from hi hand, and, utter a loud 
shriek, he fell upon the bodi of hi companion. hi cri struck upon my 
heart, and I wish that hi better fortun had cast thi evil from him 
upon me. 

thu I have told thee a bloodi and disastr tale. when thou reflectest 
on the mild of my habits, my antipathi to scene of violenc and 
bloodshed, my unacquaint with the use of fire-arm and the motiv 
of a soldier, thou wilt scarc allow credit to my story. that one 
rush into these dangers, unfurnish with stratagem or weapons, 
dishearten and enfeebl by hardship and pain, should subdu four 
antagonist train from their infanc to the artific and exert of 
indian warfare, will seem the vision of fancy, rather than the lesson of 
truth. 

I lift my head from the ground and ponder upon thi scene. the 
magnitud of thi exploit made me question it reality. By attend to 
my own sensations, I discov that I had receiv no wound, or, at 
least, none of which there wa reason to complain. the blood flow 
plenti from my cheek, but the injuri wa superficial. It wa 
otherwis with my antagonists. the last that had fallen now ceas to 
groan. their huge limbs, inur to combat and _war-worn_, were useless 
to their own defence, and to the injuri of others. 

the destruct that I wit wa vast. three beings, full of energi 
and heroism, endow with mind strenuou and lofty, pour out their 
live befor me. I wa the instrument of their destruction. thi scene 
of carnag and blood wa laid by me. To thi havoc and horror wa I led 
by such rapid footsteps! 

My anguish wa mingl with astonishment. In spite of the forc and 
uniform with which my sens were impress by extern objects, the 
transit I had undergon wa so wild and inexplicable; all that I had 
performed, all that I had wit sinc my egress from the pit, were 
so contradictori to preced events, that I still clung to the belief 
that my thought were confus by delirium. from these reveri I wa at 
length recal by the groan of the girl, who lay near me on the 
ground. 

I went to her and endeavour to consol her. I found that, while lie 
in the bed, she had receiv a blow upon the side, which wa still 
product of acut pain. she wa unabl to rise or to walk, and it wa 
plain that one or more of her rib had been fractur by the blow. 

I knew not what mean to devis for our mutual relief. It wa possibl 
that the nearest dwell wa mani leagu distant. I knew not in what 
direct to go in order to find it, and my strength would not suffic 
to carri my wound companion thither in my arms. there wa no expedi 
but to remain in thi field of blood till the morning. 

I had scarc form thi resolut befor the report of a musket wa 
heard at a small distance. At the same moment, I distinctli heard the 
whistl of a bullet near me. I now rememb that, of the five 
indian whom I saw in the cavern, I wa acquaint with the destini onli 
of four. the fifth might be still alive, and fortun might reserv for 
him the task of aveng hi companions. hi step might now be tend 
hither in search of them. 

the musket belong to him who wa shot upon the threshold wa still 
charged. It wa discreet to make all the provis in my power against 
danger. I possess myself of thi gun, and, seat myself on the 
ground, look care on all sides, to descri the approach of the 
enemy. I listen with breathless eagerness. 

present voic were heard. they ascend from that part of the thicket 
from which my view wa intercept by the cottage. these voic had 
someth in them that bespok them to belong to friend and countrymen. 
As yet I wa unabl to distinguish words. 

present my eye wa attract to one quarter, by a sound as of feet 
trampl down bushes. sever head were seen move in succession, and 
at length the whole person wa conspicuous. one after anoth leap 
over a kind of mound which border the field, and made toward the spot 
where I sat. thi band wa compos of ten or twelv persons, with each 
a gun upon hi shoulder. their guise, the moment it wa perceived, 
dissip all my apprehensions. 

they came within the distanc of a few pace befor they discov me. 
one stopped, and, bespeak the attent of hi followers, call to 
know who wa there. I answer that I wa a friend, who entreat their 
assistance. I shall not paint their astonish when, on come nearer, 
they beheld me surround by the arm and dead bodi of my enemies. 

I sat upon the ground, support my head with my left hand, and rest 
on my knee the stock of a heavi musket. My counten wa wan and 
haggard, my neck and bosom were dy in blood, and my limbs, almost 
strip by the brambl of their slender covering, were lacer by a 
thousand wounds. three savages, two of whom were steep in gore, lay at 
a small distance, with the trace of recent life on their visages. hard 
by wa the girl, vent her anguish in the deepest groans, and 
entreat relief from the new-comers. 

one of the company, on approach the girl, betray the utmost 
perturbation. "good god!" he cried, "i thi a dream? can it be you? 
speak!" 

"ah, my father! my father!" answer she, "it is I indeed." 

the company, attract by thi dialogue, crowd round the girl, whom 
her father, clasp in hi arms, lift from the ground, and pressed, 
in a transport of joy, to hi breast. thi delight wa succeed by 
solicitud respect her condition. she could onli answer hi inquiri 
by complain that her side wa bruis to pieces. "how came you 
here?"--"who hurt you?"--"wher did the indian carri you?"--wer 
question to which she could make no repli but by sob and plaints. 

My own calam were forgotten in contempl the fond and 
compass of the man for hi child. I deriv new joy from reflect 
that I had not abandon her, and that she owe her preserv to my 
efforts. the inquiri which the girl wa unabl to answer were now put 
to me. everi one interrog me who I was, whenc I had come, and what 
had given rise to thi bloodi contest. 

I wa not will to expati on my story. the spirit which had 
hitherto sustain me began now to subside. My strength eb away with 
my blood. tremors, lassitude, and deadli cold, invad me, and I faint 
on the ground. 

such is the caprici constitut of the human mind. while danger 
were at hand, while my life wa to be preserv onli by zeal, and 
vigilance, and courage, I wa not want to myself. had my peril 
continued, or even multiplied, no doubt my energi would have kept 
equal pace with them; but the moment that I wa encompass by 
protectors, and place in security, I grew powerless and faint. My 
weak wa proport to the durat and intens of my previou 
efforts, and the swoon into which I now sunk was, no doubt, mistaken by 
the spectat for death. 

On recov from thi swoon, my sensat were not unlik those which 
I had experienc on awak in the pit. for a moment a misti 
involv everi object, and I wa abl to distinguish nothing. My sight, 
by rapid degrees, wa restored, my pain dizzi wa banished, and I 
survey the scene befor me with anxieti and wonder. 

I found myself stretch upon the ground. I perceiv the cottag and 
the neighbour thicket, illumin by a declin moon. My head 
rest upon something, which, on turn to examine, I found to be one 
of the slain indians. the other two remain upon the earth, at a small 
distance, and in the attitud in which they had fallen. their arms, the 
wound girl, and the troop who were near me when I fainted, were gone. 

My head had repos upon the breast of him whom I had shot in thi part 
of hi body. the blood had ceas to ooz from the wound, but my 
dishevel lock were mat and steep in that gore which had 
overflow and choke up the orifice. I start from thi detest 
pillow, and regain my feet. 

I did not suddenli recal what had late passed, or comprehend the 
natur of my situation. At length, however, late event were 
recollected. 

that I should be abandon in thi forlorn state by these men seem to 
argu a degre of cowardic or cruelti of which I should have thought 
them incapable. presently, however, I reflect that appear might 
have easili misl them into a belief of my death. On thi supposition, 
to have carri me away, or to have stay besid me, would be useless. 
other enemi might be abroad; or their families, now that their fear 
were somewhat tranquillized, might requir their presenc and 
protection. 

I went into the cottage. the fire still burned, and afford me a genial 
warmth. I sat befor it, and began to rumin on the state to which I 
wa reduced, and on the measur I should next pursue. daylight could 
not be veri distant. should I remain in thi hovel till the morning, or 
immedi resum my journey? I wa feeble, indeed; but, by remain 
here, should I not increas my feebleness? the sooner I should gain some 
human habit the better; wherea watch and hunger would 
render me, at each minute, less abl to proceed than on the former. 

thi spot might be visit on the next day; but thi wa involv in 
uncertainty. the visitants, should ani come, would come mere to 
examin and buri the dead, and bring with them neither the cloth nor 
the food which my necess demanded. the road wa suffici 
discernible, and would, unavoidably, conduct me to some dwelling. I 
determined, therefore, to set out without delay. even in thi state I 
wa not unmind that my safeti might requir the precaut of be 
armed. besides, the fusil which had been given me by sarsefield, and 
which I had so unexpectedli recovered, had lost none of it valu in my 
eyes. I hope that it had escap the search of the troop who had been 
here, and still lay below the bank in the spot where I had drop it. 

In thi hope I wa not deceived. It wa found. I possess myself of the 
powder and shot belong to one of the savages, and load it. thu 
equip for defence, I regain the road, and proceeded, with alacrity, 
on my way. for the wound in my cheek, natur had provid a styptic, but 
the sore wa extreme, and I thought of no remedi but water, with 
which I might wash away the blood. My thirst likewis incommod me, and 
I look with eager for the trace of a spring. In a soil like that 
of the wilder around me, noth wa less to be expect than to 
light upon water. In thi respect, however, my destini wa propitious. I 
quickli perceiv water in the ruts. It trickl hither from the thicket 
on one side, and, pursu it among the bushes, I reach the bubbl 
source. though scanti and brackish, it afford me unspeak 
refreshment. 

thou wilt think, perhaps, that my peril were now at an end; that the 
blood I had alreadi shed wa suffici for my safety. I fervent hope 
that no new exig would occur compel me to use the arm that I 
bore in my own defence. I form a sort of resolut to shun the 
contest with a new enemy, almost at the expens of my own life. I wa 
satiat and gorg with slaughter, and thought upon a new act of 
destruct with abhorr and loathing. 

but, though I dread to encount a new enemy, I wa sensibl that an 
enemi might possibl be at hand. I had move forward with caution, and 
my sight and hear were attent to the slightest tokens. other 
troops, besid that which I encountered, might be hover near, and of 
that troop I rememb that one at least had survived. 

the gratif which the spring had afford me wa so great, that I 
wa in no hast to depart. I lay upon a rock, which chanc to be shade 
by a tree behind me. from thi post I could overlook the road to some 
distance, and, at the same time, be shade from the observ of 
others. 

My eye wa now caught by movement which appear like those of a beast. 
In differ circumstances, I should have instantli suppos it to be a 
wolf, or panther, or bear. now my suspicion were aliv on a differ 
account, and my startl fanci figur to itself noth but a human 
adversary. 

A thicket wa on either side of the road. that opposit to my station 
wa discontinu at a small distanc by the cultiv field. the road 
continu along thi field, bound by the thicket on the one side and 
the open space on the other. To thi space the be who wa now 
describ wa cautious approaching. 

He move upon all fours, and present came near enough to be 
distinguished. hi disfigur limbs, pendant from hi ear and nose, 
and hi shorn locks, were indubit indic of a savage, 
occasion he rear himself abov the bushes, and scanned, with 
suspici vigilance, the cottag and the space surround it. then he 
stooped, and crept along as before. 

I wa at no loss to interpret these appearances. thi wa my surviv 
enemy. He wa unacquaint with the fate of hi associates, and wa now 
approach the theatr of carnag to ascertain their fate. 

onc more wa the advantag afford me. from thi spot might uner 
aim be taken, and the last of thi hostil troop be made to share the 
fate of the rest. should I fire, or suffer him to pass in safety? 

My abhorr of bloodsh wa not abated. but I had not foreseen thi 
occurrence. My success hitherto had seem to depend upon a combin 
of fortun incidents, which could not be expect again to take place; 
but now wa I invest with the same power. the mark wa near; noth 
obstruct or delayed; I incur no danger, and the event wa certain. 

whi should he be suffer to live? He came hither to murder and despoil 
my friends; thi work he has, no doubt, performed. nay, ha he not born 
hi part in the destruct of my uncl and my sisters? He will live 
onli to pursu the same sanguinari trade; to drink the blood and exult 
in the lament of hi unhappi foe and of my own brethren. fate ha 
reserv him for a bloodi and violent death. for how long a time soever 
it may be deferred, it is thu that hi career will inevit 
terminate. 

should he be spared, he will still roam in the wilderness, and I may 
again be fate to encount him. then our mutual situat may be wide 
different, and the advantag I now possess may be his. 

while hastili revolv these thoughts, I wa thoroughli awar that one 
event might take place which would render all deliber useless. 
should he spi me where I lay, my fluctuat must end. My safeti would 
indispens requir me to shoot. thi persuas made me keep a 
steadfast eye upon hi motions, and be prepar to anticip hi 
assault. 

It now most season occur to me that one essenti duti remain 
to be performed. one operation, without which fire-arm are useless, had 
been unaccount omitted. My piec wa uncocked. I did not reflect 
that in move the spring a sound would necessarili be produc 
suffici to alarm him. but I knew that the chanc of escap hi 
notice, should I be perfectli mute and still, were extrem slender, 
and that, in such a case, hi movement would be quicker than the light: 
it behoov me, therefore, to repair my omission. 

the sound struck him with alarm. He turn and dart at me an inquir 
glance. I saw that forbear wa no longer in my power; but my heart 
sunk while I compli with what may sure be deem an indispens 
necessity. thi faltering, perhaps, it wa that made me swerv somewhat 
from the fatal line. He wa disabl by the wound, but not killed. 

He lost all power of resistance, and was, therefore, no longer to be 
dreaded. He roll upon the ground, utter dole shrieks, and 
throw hi limb into those contort which bespeak the keenest 
agoni to which ill-fat man is subject. horror, and compassion, and 
remorse, were mingl into one sentiment, and took possess of my 
heart. To shut out thi spectacle, I withdrew from the spot, but I 
stop befor I had move beyond hear of hi cries. 

the impuls that drove me from the scene wa pusillanim and cowardly. 
the past, howev deplorable, could not be recalled; but could not I 
afford some relief to thi wretch? could not I at least bring hi pang 
to a speedi close? thu he might continue, writh and call upon 
death, for hours. whi should hi miseri be uselessli prolonged? 

there wa but one way to end them. To kill him outright wa the dictat 
of compass and of duty. I hastili returned, and onc more level my 
piec at hi head. It wa a loathsom obligation, and wa perform with 
unconquer reluctance. thu to assault and to mangl the bodi of an 
enemy, alreadi prostrat and powerless, wa an act worthi of abhorrence; 
yet it was, in thi case, prescrib by pity. 

My falter hand render thi second bullet ineffectual. one 
expedient, still more detestable, remained. have gone thu far, it 
would have been inhuman to stop short. hi heart might easili be pierc 
by the bayonet, and hi struggl would cease. 

thi task of cruel leniti wa at length finished. I drop the weapon 
and threw myself on the ground, overpow by the horror of thi 
scene. such are the deed which pervers natur compel thousand of 
ration be to perform and to witness! such is the spectacle, 
endlessli prolong and diversified, which is exhibit in everi field 
of battle; of which habit and example, the temptat of gain, and the 
illus of honour, will make us, not reluct or indifferent, but 
zealou and delight actor and beholders! 

thus, by a seri of event imposs to be comput or foreseen, wa 
the destruct of a band, select from their fellow for an arduou 
enterprise, distinguish by prowess and skill, and equal arm 
against surpris and force, complet by the hand of a boy, uninur to 
hostility, unprovid with arms, precipit and timorous! I have note 
men who seem born for no end but by their achiev to beli 
experience, and baffl foresight, and outstrip belief. would to god that 
I had not deserv to be number among these! but what power wa it 
that call me from the sleep of death just in time to escap the 
merciless knife of thi enemy? had my swoon continu till he had 
reach the spot, he would have effectu my death by new wound and 
torn away the skin from my brows. such are the subtl thread on which 
hang the fate of man and of the universe! 

while engag in these reflections, I perceiv that the moonlight had 
begun to fade befor that of the sun. A duski and reddish hue spread 
itself over the east. cheer by thi appearance, I onc more resum my 
feet and the road. I left the savag where he lay, but made prize of 
hi tomahawk. I had left my own in the cavern; and thi weapon ad 
littl to my burden. prompt by some freak of fancy, I stuck hi musket 
in the ground, and left it stand upright in the middl of the road. 




chapter xx. 


I move forward with as quick a pace as my feebl limb would permit. I 
did not allow myself to meditate. the great object of my wish wa a 
dwell where food and repos might be procured. I look earnestli 
forward, and on each side, in search of some token of human residence; 
but the spot of cultivation, the _well-pole_, the _worm fence_, 
and the hayrick, were nowher to be seen. I did not even meet with a 
wild hog or a bewild cow. the path wa narrow, and on either side 
wa a trackless wilderness. On the right and left were the wave 
line of mountain ridges, which had no peculiar enabl me to 
ascertain whether I had ever befor seen them. 

At length I notic that the track of wheel had disappear from the 
path that I wa treading; that it becam more narrow, and exhibit 
fewer mark of be frequented. these appear were discouraging. I 
now suspect that I had taken a wrong direction, and, instead of 
approaching, wa reced from, the habit of men. 

It wa wisest, however, to proceed. the road could not but have some 
origin as well as end. some hour pass away in thi uncertainty. the 
sun rose, and by noonday I seem to be farther than ever from the end 
of my toils. the path wa more obscure, and the wilder more rugged. 
thirst more incommod me than hunger, but relief wa season 
afford by the brook that flow across the path. 

come to one of these, and have slake my thirst, I sat down upon the 
bank, to reflect on my situation. the circuiti of the path had 
frequent been noticed, and I began to suspect that, though I had 
travel long, I had not move far from the spot where I had commenc 
my pilgrimage. 

turn my eye on all sides, I notic a sort of pool, form by the 
rivulet, at a few pace distant from the road. In approach and 
inspect it, I observ the footstep of cattle, who had retir by a 
path that seem much beaten: I likewis notic a cedar bucket, broken 
and old, lie on the margin. these token reviv my droop spirits, 
arid I betook myself to thi new track. It wa intricate, but, at 
length, led up a steep, the summit of which wa of better soil than that 
of which the flat consisted. A clover-field, and sever 
apple-trees,--sur attend of man,--wer now discovered. from thi 
space I enter a corn-field, and at length, to my inexpress joy, 
caught a glimps of a house. 

thi dwell wa far differ from that I had late left. It wa as 
small and as low, but it wall consist of boards. A window of four 
pane admit the light, and a chimney of brick, well burnt and neatli 
arranged, peep over the roof. As I approached, I heard the voic of 
children and the hum of a spinning-wheel. 

I cannot make thee conceiv the delight which wa afford me by all 
these tokens. I now found myself, indeed, among be like myself, and 
from whom hospit entertain might be confid expected. I 
compass the house, and made my appear at the door. 

A good woman, busi at her wheel, with two children play on the ground 
befor her, were the object that now present themselves. the 
uncouth of my garb, my wild and weatherworn appearance, my fusil and 
tomahawk, could not but startl them. the woman stop her wheel, and 
gaze as if a spectr had start into view. 

I wa somewhat awar of these consequences, and endeavour to elud 
them by assum an air of supplic and humility. I told her that I 
wa a traveller, who had unfortun lost hi way and had rambl in 
thi wild till nearli famish for want. I entreat her to give me some 
food; ani thing, howev scanti or coarse, would be acceptable. 

after some paus she desir me, though not without some mark of fear, 
to walk in. she place befor me some brown bread and milk. she eye me 
while I eagerli devour thi morsel. It was, indeed, more delici 
than ani I had ever tasted. At length she broke silence, and express 
her astonish and commiser at my seemingly-forlorn state, ad 
that perhap I wa the man whom the men were look after who had been 
there some hour before. 

My curios wa rous by thi intimation. In answer to my 
interrogations, she said that three person had late stopped, to 
inquir if her husband had not met, within the last three days, a person 
of whom their descript seem pretti much to suit my person and 
dress. He wa tall, slender, wore noth but shirt and trousers, and 
wa wound on the cheek. 

"what," I asked, "did they state the rank or condit of the person to 
be?" 

He live in solesbury. He wa suppos to have rambl in the mountains, 
and to have lost hi way, or to have met with some mischance. It wa 
three day sinc he had disappeared, but had been seen by some one, the 
last night, at deb' hut. 

what and where wa deb' hut? 

It wa a hut in the wilderness, occupi by an old indian woman, known 
among her neighbour by the name of old deb. some peopl call her 
queen mab. her dwell wa eight _long_ mile from thi house. 

A thousand question were preclud and a thousand doubt solv by thi 
information. _queen mab_ were sound familiar to my ears; for they 
origin with myself. 

thi woman origin belong to the tribe of delawares, or 
lenni-lennapee. all these district were onc compris within the 
dominion of that nation. about thirti year ago, in consequ of 
perpetu encroach of the english colonists, they abandon their 
ancient seat and retir to the bank of the wabash and muskingum. 

thi emigr wa concert in a gener council of the tribe, and 
obtain the concurr of all but one female. her birth, talents, and 
age, gave her much consider and author among her countrymen; and 
all her zeal and eloqu were exert to induc them to lay asid 
their scheme. In this, however, she could not succeed. find them 
refractory, she declar her resolut to remain behind and maintain 
possess of the land which her countrymen should impious abandon. 

the villag inhabit by thi clan wa built upon ground which now 
constitut my uncle' barnyard and orchard. On the departur of her 
countrymen, thi femal burnt the empti wigwam and retir into the 
fast of norwalk. she select a spot suitabl for an indian 
dwell and a small plantat of maize, and in which she wa seldom 
liabl to interrupt and intrusion. 

her onli companion were three dogs, of the indian or wolf species. 
these anim differ in noth from their kinsmen of the forest but 
in their attach and obedi to their mistress. she govern them 
with absolut sway. they were her servant and protectors, and attend 
her person or guard her threshold, agreeabl to her directions. she 
fed them with corn, and they suppli her and themselv with meat, by 
hunt squirrels, raccoons, and rabbits. 

To the rest of mankind they were alien or enemies. they never left the 
desert but in compani with their mistress, and, when she enter a 
farm-house, wait her return at a distance. they would suffer none to 
approach them, but attack no one who did not imprud crave their 
acquaintance, or who kept at a respect distanc from their wigwam. 
that sacr asylum they would not suffer to be violated, and no stranger 
could enter it but at the immin hazard of hi life, unless 
accompani and protect by their dame. 

the chief employ of thi woman, when at home, besid pluck the 
weed from among her corn, bruis the grain between two stones, and 
set her snare for rabbit and opossums, wa to talk. though in 
solitude, her tongu wa never at rest but when she wa asleep; but her 
convers wa mere address to her dogs. her voic wa sharp and 
shrill, and her gesticul were vehement and grotesque. A hearer 
would natur imagin that she wa scolding; but, in truth, she wa 
mere give them directions. have no other object of contempl 
or subject of discourse, she alway found, in their postur and looks, 
occas for praise, or blame, or command. the readi with which they 
understood, and the docil with which they obeyed, her movement and 
words, were truli wonderful. 

If a stranger chanc to wander near her hut and overhear her jargon, 
incess as it was, and shrill, he might specul in vain on the 
reason of these sounds. If he wait in expect of hear some 
reply, he wait in vain. the strain, alway volubl and sharp, wa 
never intermit for a moment, and would continu for hour at a time. 

she seldom left the hut but to visit the neighbour inhabit and 
demand from them food and clothing, or whatev her necess 
required. these were exact as her due; to have her want suppli wa 
her prerogative, and to withhold what she claim wa rebellion. she 
conceiv that by remain behind her countrymen she succeed to the 
govern and retain the possess of all thi region. the english 
were alien and sojourners, who occupi the land mere by her 
conniv and permission, and whom she allow to remain on no term 
but those of suppli her wants. 

be a woman age and harmless, her demand be limit to that of 
which she realli stood in need, and which her own industri could not 
procure, her pretens were a subject of mirth and good-humour, and 
her injunct obey with seem defer and gravity. To me she 
earli becam an object of curios and speculation. I delight to 
observ her habit and humour her prejudices. she frequent came to my 
uncle' house, and I sometim visit her: insens she seem to 
contract an affect for me, and regard me with more complac and 
condescens than ani other received. 

she alway disdain to speak english, and custom had render her 
intellig to most in her nativ language, with regard to a few simpl 
questions. I had taken some pain to studi her jargon, and could make 
out to discours with her on the few idea which she possessed. thi 
circumstance, likewise, wonder prepossess her in my favour. 

the name by which she wa formerli known wa deb; but her pretens to 
royalty, the wild of her aspect and garb, her shrivel and 
diminut form, a constitut that seem to defi the ravag of time 
and the influenc of the elements, her age, (which some did not scrupl 
to affirm exceed a hundr years,) her romant solitud and 
mountain haunts, suggest to my fanci the appel of _queen 
mab_. there appear to me some rude analog between thi personag 
and her whom the poet of old time have delight to celebrate: thou 
perhap wilt discov noth but incongru between them; but, be 
that as it may, old deb and queen mab soon came into indiscrimin and 
gener use. 

she dwelt in norwalk upward of twenti years. she wa not forgotten by 
her countrymen, and gener receiv from her brother and son an 
autumn visit; but no solicit or entreati could prevail on her 
to return with them. two year ago, some suspicion or disgust induc 
her to forsak her ancient habit and to seek a hew one. happili she 
found a more conveni habit twenti mile to the westward, and in 
a spot abundantli steril and rude. 

thi dwell wa of logs, and had been erect by a scottish emigrant, 
who, not be rich enough to purchas land, and entertain a passion 
for solitud and independence, clear a field in the unappropri 
wilder and subsist on it produce. after some time he disappeared. 
variou conjectur were form as to the caus of hi absence. none of 
them were satisfactory; but that, which obtain most credit was, that 
he had been murder by the indians, who, about the same period, paid 
their annual visit to the _queen_. thi conjectur acquir some 
forc by observ that the old woman shortli after took possess of 
hi hut, hi implement of tillage, and hi corn-field. 

she wa not molest in her new abode, and her life pass in the same 
quiet tenor as before. her period rambles, her regal claims, her 
guardian wolves, and her uncouth volubility, were equal remarkable; 
but her circuit were new. her distanc made her visit to soleburi more 
rare, and had prevent me from ever extend my pedestrian excurs 
to her present abode. 

these recollect were now suddenli call up by the inform of my 
hostess. the hut where I had sought shelter and relief was, it seems, 
the resid of queen mab. some fortun occurr had call her 
away dure my visit. had she and her dog been at home, I should have 
been set upon by these feroci sentinels, and, befor their dame could 
have interfered, have been, togeth with my helpless companion, mangl 
or killed. these anim never barked: I should have enter unawar of 
my danger, and my fate could scarc have been avert by my fusil. 

her absenc at thi unseason hour wa mysterious. It wa now the 
time of year when her countrymen were accustom to renew their visit. 
wa there a leagu between her and the plunder whom I had 
encountered? 

but who were they by whom my footstep were so industri traced? 
those whom I had seen at deb' hut were stranger to me, but the wound 
upon my face wa known onli to them. To thi circumst wa now ad 
my place of resid and name. I suppos them impress with the 
belief that I wa dead; but thi mistak must have speedili been 
rectified. revisit the spot, find me gone, and obtain some 
intellig of my former condition, they had institut a search after 
me. 

but what tide were these? I wa suppos to have been bewild in 
the mountains, and three day were said to have pass sinc my 
disappearance. twelv hour had scarc elaps sinc I emerg from 
the cavern. had two day and a half been consum in my subterranean 
prison? 

these reflect were quickli supplant by others. I now gain a 
suffici acquaint with the region that wa spread around me. I wa 
in the midst of a vale includ between ridg that gradual approach 
each other, and, when joined, were broken up into hollow and steeps, 
and, spread themselv over a circular space, assum the appel 
of norwalk. thi vale gradual widen as it tend to the westward, 
and was, in thi place, ten or twelv mile in breadth. My deviou 
footstep had brought me to the foot of the southern barrier. the outer 
basi of thi wa lave by the river; but, as it tend eastward, the 
mountain and river reced from each other, and one of the cultiv 
district lie between them wa solesbury, my natal _township_. 
hither it wa now my duti to return with the utmost expedition. 

there were two way befor me. one lay along the interior base of the 
hill, over a steril and trackless space, and expos to the encount 
of savages, some of whom might possibl be lurk here. the other wa 
the well-frequ road on the outsid and along the river, and which 
wa to be gain by pass over thi hill. the practic of the 
passag wa to be ascertain by inquiri made to my hostess. she 
point out a path that led to the rocki summit and down to the river' 
brink. the path wa not easi to be kept in view or to be trodden, but it 
wa undoubtedli to be prefer to ani other. 

A rout somewhat circuit would termin in the river-road. 
thenceforward the way to solesburi wa level and direct; but the whole 
space which I had to travers wa not less than thirti miles. In six 
hour it would be night, and to perform the journey in that time would 
demand the agil bound of a leopard and the indefatig sinew of 
an elk. 

My frame wa in a miser plight. My strength had been assail by 
anguish, and fear, and watchfulness, by toil, and abstinence, and 
wounds. still, however, some remnant wa left; would it not enabl me to 
reach my home by nightfall? I had delighted, from my childhood, in feat 
of agil and perseverance. In rove through the maze of thicket and 
precipices, I had put my energies, both moral and physical, frequent 
to the test. greater achiev than thi had been performed, and I 
disdain to be outdon in perspicac by the lynx, in hi sure-foot 
instinct by the roe, or in patienc under hardship, and content with 
fatigue, by the mohawk. I have ever aspir to transcend the rest of 
anim in all that is common to the ration and brute, as well as in 
all by which they are distinguish from each other. 




chapter xxi. 


I likewis burn with impati to know the condit of my family, to 
dissip at onc their torment doubt and my own with regard to our 
mutual safety. the evil that I fear had befallen them wa too enorm 
to allow me to repos in suspense, and my restless and omin 
forebod would be more intoler than ani hardship or toil to 
which I could possibl be subject dure thi journey. 

I wa much refresh and invigor by the food that I had taken, and 
by the rest of an hour. with thi stock of recruit forc I determin 
to scale the hill. after receiv minut directions, and, return 
mani thank for my hospit entertainment, I set out. 

the path wa inde intricate, and deliber attent wa oblig to 
be exert in order to preserv it. henc my progress wa slower than I 
wished. the first impuls wa to fix my eye upon the summit, and to leap 
from crag to crag till I reach it; but thi my experi had taught 
me wa impracticable. It wa onli by wind through gullies, and 
coast precipic and bestrid chasms, that I could hope final to 
gain the top; and I wa assur that by one way onli wa it possibl to 
accomplish even this. 

An hour wa spent in struggl with impediments, and I seem to have 
gain no way. henc a doubt wa suggest whether I had not miss the 
true road. In thi doubt I wa confirm by the difficulti which now 
grew up befor me. the brooks, the angles, and the hollows, which my 
hostess had described, were not to be seen. instead of these, deeper 
dells, more headlong torrents, and wider-gap rifts, were incessantli 
encountered. 

To return wa as hopeless as to proceed. I consol myself with think 
that the survey which my inform had made of the hill-sid might prove 
inaccurate, and that, in spite of her predictions, the height might be 
reach by other mean than by those point out by her. I will not 
enumer my toilsom expedients, my frequent disappointments, and my 
desper exertions. suffic it to say that I gain the upper space not 
till the sun had dip beneath the horizon. 

My satisfact at accomplish thu much wa not small, and I hied, 
with renov spirits, to the opposit brow. thi prove to be a steep 
that could not be descended. the river flow at it foot. the opposit 
bank wa five hundr yard distant, and wa equal tower and steep 
as that on which I stood. appear were adapt to persuad you that 
these rock had formerli joined, but by some mighti effort of natur had 
been severed, that the stream might find way through the chasm. the 
channel, however, wa encumb with asperities, over which the river 
fret and foam with thunder impetuosity. 

I ponder for a while on these stupend scenes. they ravish my 
attent from consider that relat to myself; but thi interv 
wa snort, and I began to measur the descent, in order to ascertain the 
practic of tread it. My survey termin in bitter 
disappointment. I turn my eye success eastward and westward. 
solesburi lay in the former direction, and thither I desir to go. I 
kept along the verg in thi direct till I reach an impass 
rift. beyond thi I saw that the steep grew lower; but it wa imposs 
to proceed farther. higher up the descent might be practicable, and, 
though more distant from solesbury, it wa better to reach the road even 
at that distanc than never to reach it. 

chang my course, therefore, I explor the space above. the night 
wa rapidli advancing; the gray cloud gather in the southeast, and a 
chill blast, the usual attend of a night in october, began to 
whistl among the pigmi cedar that scantili grew upon these heights. My 
progress would quickli be arrest by darkness, and it behoov me to 
provid some place of shelter and repose. No recess better than a hollow 
in the rock present itself to my anxiou scrutiny. 

meanwhile, I would not dismiss the hope of reach the road, which I 
saw some hundr feet below, wind along the edg of the river, befor 
daylight should utterli fail. speedili these hope deriv new vigour 
from meet a ledg that irregularli declin from the brow of the 
hill. It wa wide enough to allow of cautiou footing. On a similar 
stratum, or ledge, project still farther from the bodi of the hill, 
and close to the surfac of the river, wa the road. thi stratum 
ascend from the level of the stream, while that on which I trod 
rapidli descended. I hope that they would speedili be blended, or, at 
least, approach so near as to allow me to leap from one to the other 
without enorm hazard. 

thi fond expect wa frustrated. present I perceiv that the 
ledg below began to descend, while that abov began to tend upward and 
wa quickli termin by the uppermost surfac of the cliff. here it 
wa need to pause. I look over the brink, and consid whether I 
might not leap from my present station without endang my limbs. the 
road into which I should fall wa a rocki pavement far from be 
smooth. the descent could not be less than forti or fifti feet. such an 
attempt was, to the last degree, hazardous; but wa it not better to 
risk my life by leap from thi emin than to remain and perish on 
the top of thi inhospit mountain? the toil which I had endur in 
reach thi height appeared, to my panic-struck fancy, less easi to be 
born again than death. 

I know not but that I should have final resolv to leap, had not 
differ view been suggest by observ that the outer edg of the 
road was, in like manner, the brow of a steep which termin in the 
river. the surfac of the road wa twelv or fifteen feet abov the 
level of the stream, which, in thi spot, wa still and smooth. henc I 
infer that the water wa not of inconsider depth. To fall upon 
rocki point was, indeed, dangerous, but to plung into water of 
suffici depth, even from a height greater than that at which I now 
stood, especi to one to whom habit had render water almost as 
congeni an element as air, wa scarc attend with inconvenience. 
thi expedi wa easi and safe. twenti yard from thi spot, the 
channel wa shallow, and to gain the road from the stream wa no 
difficult exploit. 

some disadvantages, however, attend thi scheme. the water wa smooth; 
but thi might aris from some other caus than it depth. My gun, 
likewise, must be left behind me; and that wa a loss to which I felt 
invinc repugnance. To let it fall upon the road would put it in my 
power to retriev the possession, but it wa like to be irrepar 
injur by the fall. 

while muse upon thi expedient, and weigh injuri with benefits, 
the night close upon me. I now consid that, should I emerg in 
safeti from the stream, I should have mani mile to travel befor I 
could reach a house. My cloth meanwhil would be load with wet. I 
should be heart-pierc by the ici blast that now blew, and my wound 
and bruis would be chafe into insupport pain. 

I reason likewis on the folli of impati and the necess of 
repose. By thu long continu in one posture, my sinew began to 
stiffen, and my reluct to make new exert to increase. My brow 
were heavy, and I felt an irresist propens to sleep. I conclud 
to seek some shelter, and resign myself, my pain recollections, and 
my mourn presages, to sweet forgetfulness. for thi end, I onc more 
ascend to the surfac of the cliff. I drag my weari feet forward, 
till I found somewhat that promis me the shelter that I sought. 

A cluster of cedar appeared, whose branch overarch a space that 
might be call a bower. It wa a slight cavity, whose floor wa 
compos of loos stone and a few fade leav blown from a distanc 
and find a temporari lodgment here. On one side wa a rock, form a 
wall rug and project above. At the bottom of the rock wa a rift, 
somewhat resembl a coffin in shape, and not much larger in 
dimensions. thi rift terminated, on the opposit side of the rock, in 
an open that wa too small for the bodi of a man to pass. the 
distanc between each entranc wa twice the length of a man. 

thi bower wa open to the southeast, whenc the gale now blew. It 
therefor imperfectli afford the shelter of which I stood in need; 
but it wa the best that the place and the time afforded. To stop the 
smaller entranc of the caviti with a stone, and to heap befor the 
other branch lop from the tree with my hatchet, might somewhat 
contribut to my comfort. 

thi wa done, and, thrust myself into thi recess as far as I wa 
able, I prepar for repose. It might have been reason suspect to 
be the den of rattlesnak or panthers; but my late content with 
superior danger and more formid enemi made me reckless of these. 
but anoth inconveni remained. In spite of my precautions, my 
motionless postur and slender cover expos me so much to the cold 
that I could not sleep. 

the air appear to have suddenli assum the temperatur of midwinter. 
In a short time, my extrem were benumbed, and my limb shiver and 
ach as if I had been seiz by an ague. My bed likewis wa dank and 
uneven, and the postur I wa oblig to assume, unnatur and painful. 
It wa evid that my purpos could not be answer by remain here. 

I therefor crept forth, and began to reflect upon the possibl of 
continu my journey. motion wa the onli thing that could keep me from 
freezing, and my frame wa in that state which allow me to take no 
repos in the absenc of warmth, sinc warmth wa indispensable. It now 
occur to me to ask whether it were not possibl to kindl a fire. 

stick and leav were at hand. My hatchet and a pebbl would enabl me 
to extract a spark. from this, by suitabl care and perseverance, I 
might final procur suffici fire to give me comfort and ease, and 
even enabl me to sleep. thi boon wa delicious, and I felt as if I 
were unabl to support a longer depriv of it. 

I proceed to execut thi scheme. I took the driest leaves, and 
endeavour to use them as tinder; but the driest leav were moisten 
by the dews. they were onli to be found in the hollows, in some of which 
were pool of water and other were dank. I wa not speedili 
discouraged; but my repeat attempt failed, and I wa final 
compel to relinquish thi expedient. 

all that now remain wa to wander forth and keep myself in motion till 
the morning. the night wa like to prove tempestu and long. the 
gale seem freight with ice, and act upon my bodi like the point 
of a thousand needles. there wa no remedy, and I muster my patienc 
to endur it. 

I return again to the brow of the hill. I rang along it till I 
reach a place where the descent wa perpendicular, and, in consequ 
of afford no susten to tree or bushes, wa nearli smooth and 
bare. there wa no road to be seen; and thi circumstance, ad to the 
sound which the rippl current produced, afford me some knowledg 
of my situation. 

the ledg along which the road wa conduct disappear near thi spot. 
the opposit side of the chasm through which flow the river 
approach nearer to each other, in the form of jut promontories. I 
now stood upon the verg of that on the northern side. the water 
flow at the foot, but, for the space of ten or twelv feet from the 
rock, wa so shallow as to permit the travel and hi hors to wade 
through it, and thu to regain the road which the reced precipic had 
allow to be continu on the farther side. 

I knew the natur and dimens of thi ford. I knew that, at a few 
yard from the rock, the channel wa of great depth. To leap into it, in 
thi place, wa a less danger exploit than at the spot where I had 
formerli been tempt to leap. there I wa unacquaint with the depth, 
but here I knew it to be considerable. still, there wa some ground of 
hesit and fear. My present station wa loftier, and how deepli I 
might sink into thi gulf, how far the fall and the concuss would 
bereav me of my presenc of mind, I could not determine. thi 
hesit vanished, and, place my tomahawk and fusil upon the ground, 
I prepar to leap. 

thi purpos wa suspended, in the moment of it execution, by a faint 
sound, heard from the quarter whenc I had come. It wa the warn of 
men, but had noth in common with those which I had been accustom to 
hear. It wa not the howl of a wolf or the yell of a panther. 
these had often been overheard by night dure my last year' excurs 
to the lakes. My fear whisper that thi wa the vocifer of a 
savage. 

I wa unacquaint with the number of the enemi who had adventur 
into thi district. whether those whom I had encount at _deb' 
hut_ were of that band whom I had met with in the cavern, wa mere 
a topic of conjecture. there might be a half-scor of troops, equal 
numerous, spread over the wilderness, and the signal I had just heard 
might betoken the approach of one of these. yet by what mean they 
should gain thi nook, and what prey they expect to discover, were not 
easili conceived. 

the sounds, somewhat diversified, nearer and rise from differ 
quarters, were again heard. My doubt and apprehens were increased. 
what expedi to adopt for my own safeti wa a subject of rapid 
meditation:--wheth to remain stretch upon the ground or to rise and 
go forward. wa it like the enemi would coast along the edg of the 
steep? would they rambl hither to look upon the ampl scene which 
spread on all side around the base of thi rocki pinnacle? In that 
case, how should I conduct myself? My arm were readi for use. could I 
not elud the necess of shed more blood? could I not anticip 
their assault by cast myself without delay into the stream? 

the sens of danger demand more attent to be paid to extern 
object than to the motiv by which my futur conduct should be 
influenced. My post wa on a circular prefecture, in some degre 
detach from the bodi of the hill, the brow of which continu in a 
straight line, uninterrupt by thi projecture, which wa somewhat 
higher than the continu summit of the ridge. thi line ran at the 
distanc of a few pace from my post. object move along thi line 
could mere be perceiv to move, in the present obscurity. 

My scrutini wa entir direct to thi quarter. present the 
tread of mani feet wa heard, and sever figur were discovered, 
follow each other in that straight and regular success which is 
peculiar to the indians. they kept along the brow of the hill join 
the promontory. I distinctli mark seven figur in succession. 

My resolut wa formed. should ani one cast hi eye hither, suspect or 
discov an enemy, and rush toward me, I determin to start upon my 
feet, fire on my foe as he advanced, throw my piec on the ground, and 
then leap into the river. 

happily, they pass unobserv and in silence. I remain in the same 
postur for sever minutes. At length, just as my alarm began to 
subside, the halloos, befor heard, arose, and from the same quarter as 
before. thi convinc me that my peril were not at an end. thi now 
appear to be mere the vanguard, and would speedili be follow by 
others, against whom the same caution wa necessari to be taken. 

My eye, anxious bent the onli way by which ani one could approach, now 
discern a figure, which wa indubit that of a man armed. none 
other appear in company; but doubtless other were near. He 
approached, stood still, and appear to gaze steadfastli at the spot 
where I lay. 

the optic of a _lenni-lennapee_ I knew to be far keener than my 
own. A log or a couch fawn would never be mistaken for a man, nor a 
man for a couch fawn or a log. not onli a human be would be 
instantli detected, but a decis be unerringli made whether it wrere 
friend or foe. that my prostrat bodi wa the object on which the 
attent of thi vigil and steadfast gazer wa fix could not be 
doubted. yet, sinc he continu an inact gazer, there wa ground for 
a possibl to stand upon that I wa not recognised. My fate therefor 
wa still in suspense. 

thi interv wa momentary. I mark a movement, which my fear 
instantli interpret to be that of level a gun at my head. thi 
action wa suffici conform to my prognostics. suppos me to 
be detected, there wa no need for him to chang hi post. aim might be 
too fatal taken, and hi prey be secured, from the distanc at which 
he now stood. 

these imag glanc upon my thought, and put an end to my suspense. A 
singl effort place me on my feet. I fire with a precipit that 
preclud the certainti of hit my mark, drop my piec upon the 
ground, and leap from thi tremend height into the river. I reach 
the surface, and sunk in a moment to the bottom. 

plung endlong into the water, the impetu creat by my fall from 
such a height would be slowli resist by thi denser element. had the 
depth been less, it resist would not perhap have hinder me from 
be mortal injur against the rocki bottom. had the depth been 
greater, time enough would not have been allow me to regain the 
surface. had I fallen on my side, I should have been bereft of life or 
sensibl by the shock which my frame would have received. As it was, 
my fate wa suspend on a thread. To have lost my presenc of mind, to 
have forborn to counteract my sinking, for an instant, after I had 
reach the water, would have made all exert to regain the air 
fruitless. To so fortun a concurr of event wa thi friend 
indebt for hi safety! 

yet I onli emerg from the gulf to encount new perils. scarc had I 
rais my head abov the surface, and inhal the vital breath, when 
twenti shot were aim at me from the precipic above. A shower of 
bullet fell upon the water. some of them did not fall farther than two 
inch from my head. I had not been awar of thi new danger, and, now 
that it assail me, continu gasp the air and flounder at 
random. the mean of elud it did not readili occur. My case seem 
desperate, and all caution wa dismissed. 

thi state of discomfit surpris quickli disappeared. I made myself 
acquainted, at a glance, with the posit of surround objects. I 
conceiv that the opposit bank of the river would afford me most 
security, and thither I tend with all the expedit in my power. 

meanwhile, my safeti depend on elud the bullet that continu 
incessantli to strike the water at an arm's-length from my body. for 
thi end I plung beneath the surface, and onli rose to inhal fresh 
air. present the fire ceased, the flash that late illumin 
the bank disappeared, and a certain bustl and murmur of confus voic 
gave place to solitud and silence. 




chapter xxii. 


I reach without difficulti the opposit bank, but the steep wa 
inaccessible. I swam along the edg in hope of meet with some 
project or recess where I might, at least, rest my weari limbs, and, 
if it were necessari to recross the river, to lay in a stock of 
recruit spirit and strength for that purpose. I trust that the 
water would speedili becom shoal, or that the steep would afford rest 
to my feet. In both these hope I wa disappointed. 

there is no one to whom I would yield the superior in swimming; but 
my strength, like that of other human beings, had it limits. My 
previou fatigu had been enormous, and my clothes, heavi with 
moisture, greatli encumb and retard my movements. I had propos 
to free myself from thi imprisonment; but I foresaw the inconveni 
of wander over thi scene in absolut nakedness, and wa will 
therefore, at whatev hazard, to retain them. I continu to struggl 
with the current and to search for the mean of scale the steeps. My 
search wa fruitless, and I began to medit the recross of the 
river. 

sure my fate ha never been paralleled! where wa thi seri of 
hardship and peril to end? No sooner wa one calam eluded, than I 
wa beset by another. I had emerg from abhor dark in the heart 
of the earth, onli to endur the extrem of famin and encount the 
fang of a wild beast. from these I wa deliv onli to be thrown into 
the midst of savages, to wage an endless and hopeless war with adept in 
killing, with appetit that long to feast upon my bowel and to quaff 
my heart' blood. from these likewis wa I rescued, but mere to 
perish in the gulf of the river, to welter on unvisit shores, or to 
be wash far away from curios or pity. 

formerli water wa not onli my field of sport but my sofa and my bed. I 
could float for hour on it surface, enjoy it delici cool, 
almost without the expens of the slightest motion. It wa an element as 
fit for repos as for exercise; but now the buoyant spirit seem to 
have flown. My muscl were shrunk, the air and water were equal 
congealed, and my most vehement exert were requisit to sustain me 
on the surface. 

At first I had move along with my wont celer and ease, but quickli 
my forc were exhausted. My pant and effort were augmented, and I 
saw that to cross the river again wa impracticable. I must continue, 
therefore, to search out some access spot in the bank along which I 
wa swimming. 

each moment diminish my stock of strength, and it behoov me to make 
good my foot befor anoth minut should escape. I continu to 
swim, to survey the bank, and to make ineffectu attempt to grasp the 
rock. the shrub which grew upon it would not uphold me, and the 
fragment which, for a moment, inspir me with hope, crumbl away as 
soon as they were touched. 

At length I notic a pine which wa root in a crevic near the water. 
the trunk, or ani part of the root, wa beyond my reach; but I trust 
that I could catch hold of the branch which hung lowest, and that, when 
caught, it would assist me in gain the trunk, and thu deliv me 
from the death which could not be otherwis averted. 

the attempt wa arduous. had it been made when I first reach the bank, 
no difficulti had attend it; but now to throw myself some feet abov 
the surfac could scarc be expect from one whose utmost effort 
seem to be demand to keep him from sinking. yet thi exploit, 
arduou as it was, wa attempt and accomplished. happili the twig 
were strong enough to sustain my weight till I caught at other branch 
and final place myself upon the trunk. 

thi danger wa now past; but I admit the convict that others, no 
less formidable, remain to be encountered, and that my ultim 
destini wa death. I look upward. new effort might enabl me to gain 
the summit of thi steep, but perhap I should thu be place mere in 
the situat from which I had just been delivered. It wa of littl 
moment whether the scene of my imprison wa a dungeon not to be 
broken, or a summit from which descent wa impossible. 

the river, indeed, sever me from a road which wa level and safe, but 
my recent danger were rememb onli to make me shudder at the thought 
of incur them a second time by attempt to cross it. I blush at 
the recollect of thi cowardice. It wa littl akin to the spirit 
which I had recent displayed. It was, indeed, an alien to my bosom, 
and wa quickli supplant by intrepid and perseverance. 

I proceed to mount the hill. from root to root, and from branch to 
branch, lay my journey. It wa finished, and I sat down upon the highest 
brow to medit on futur trials. No road lay along thi side of the 
river. It wa rug and sterile, and farm were sparingli dispers 
over it. To reach one of these wa now the object of my wishes. I had 
not lost the desir of reach solesburi befor morning, but my wet 
cloth and the cold of the night seem to have bereav me of the 
power. 

I travers thi summit, keep the river on my right hand. happily, 
it declin and ascent were by no mean difficult, and I wa 
cheered, in the midst of my vexations, by observ that everi mile 
brought me nearer to my uncle' dwelling. meanwhil I anxious look 
for some token of a habitation. these at length present themselves. A 
wild heath, whistl over by octob blasts, meagr adorn with the 
dri stalk of scent shrub and the bald head of the sapless mullein, 
wa succeed by a fenc field and a corn-stack. the dwell to which 
these belong wa eagerli sought. 

I wa not surpris that all voic were still and all light 
extinguished, for thi wa the hour of repose. have reach a piazza 
befor the house, I paused. whether, at thi drowsi time, to knock for 
admission, to alarm the peac tenant and take from them the rest 
which their daili toil and their rural innoc had made so sweet, or 
to retir to what shelter a haystack or barn could afford, wa the theme 
of my deliberations. 

meanwhile, I look up at the house. It wa the model of cleanli and 
comfort. It wa built of wood; but the materi had undergon the 
plane, as well as the axe and the saw. It wa paint white, and the 
window not onli had sashes, but these sash were supplied, contrari to 
custom, with glass. In most case the apertur where glass should be is 
stuf with an old hat or a petticoat. the door had not onli all it 
part entire, but wa embellish with mould and a pediment. I 
gather from these token that thi wa the abod not onli of rural 
compet and innocence, but of some be rais by educ and 
fortun abov the intellectu mediocr of clowns. 

methought I could claim consangu with such beings. not to share their 
chariti and kind would be inflict as well as receiv injury. 
the troubl of afford shelter, and warmth, and wholesom diet, to a 
wretch destitut as I was, would be eagerli sought by them. 

still, I wa unwil to disturb them. I bethought myself that their 
kitchen might be entered, and all that my necess requir be 
obtain without interrupt their slumber. I need noth but the 
warmth which their kitchen-hearth would afford. stretch upon the 
bricks, I might dri my clothes, and perhap enjoy some unmolest sleep, 
in spite of presag of ill and the horrid remembr of what I had 
perform and endured. I believ that natur would afford a short 
respit to my cares. 

I went to the door of what appear to be a kitchen. the door wa wide 
open. thi circumst portend evil. though it be not customari to 
lock or to bolt, it is still less usual to have entranc unclosed. I 
enter with suspici steps, and saw enough to confirm my 
apprehensions. sever piec of wood, half burned, lay in the midst of 
the floor. they appear to have been remov hither from the chimney, 
doubtless with a view to set fire to the whole building. 

the fire had made some progress on the floor, but had been season 
extinguish by pail of water thrown upon it. the floor wa still 
delug with wet: the pail, not empti of all it contents, stood upon 
the hearth. the earthen vessel and plates, whose proper place wa the 
dresser, were scatter in fragment in all part of the room. I look 
around me for some one to explain thi scene, but no one appeared. 

the last spark of fire wa put out, so that, had my curios been idle, 
my purpos could not be accomplished. To retir from thi scene, neither 
curios nor benevol would permit. that some mortal injuri had been 
intend wa apparent. what greater mischief had befallen, or whether 
greater might not, by my interposition, be averted, could onli be 
ascertain by penetr farther into the house. I open a door on 
one side which led to the main bodi of the build and enter to a 
bed-chamber. I stood at the entranc and knocked, but no one answer my 
signals. 

the sky wa not total clouded, so that some light pervad the room. I 
saw that a bed stood in the corner, but whether occupi or not it 
curtain hinder me from judging. I stood in suspens a few minutes, 
when a motion in the bed show me that some one wa there. I knock 
again, but withdrew to the outsid of the door. thi rous the sleeper, 
who, half groaning, and puf the air through hi nostrils, grumbl 
out, in the hoarsest voic that I ever heard, and in a tone of surli 
impatience, "who is there?" 

I hesit for an answer; but the voic instantli continued, in the 
manner of one half asleep and enrag at be disturbed, "is't you, 
peg? damn ye, stay away, now! I tell ye, stay away, or, by god, I will 
cut your throat!--i will!" He continu to mutter and swear, but without 
coher or distinctness. 

these were the accent of drunkenness, and denot a wild and ruffian 
life. they were littl in unison with the extern appear of the 
mansion, and blast all the hope I had form of meet under thi 
roof with gentl and hospitality. To talk with thi being, to 
attempt to reason him into human and soberness, wa useless. I wa at 
a loss in what manner to address him, or whether it wa proper to 
maintain ani parley. meanwhile, my silenc wa suppli by the 
suggest of hi own distemp fancy. "ay," said he; "ye will, will 
ye? well, come on; let' see who' the better at the oak stick. If I 
part with ye befor I have bare your bones!--i'l teach ye to be alway 
dip in my dish, ye devil' dam ye." 

So saying, he tumbl out of bed. At the first step, he struck hi head 
against the bedpost, but, set himself upright, he stagger toward 
the spot where I stood. some new obstacl occurred. He stumbl and fell 
at hi length upon the floor. 

To encount or expostul with a man in thi state wa plainli absurd. 
I turn and issu forth, with an ach heart, into the court befor 
the house. the miseri which a debauch husband or father inflict 
upon all whom their evil destini alli to him were pictur by my 
fancy, and wrung from me tear of anguish, these images, however, 
quickli yield to reflect on my own state. No expedi now 
remain but to seek the barn and find a cover and a bed of straw. 

I had scarc set foot within the barnyard when I heard a sound as of 
the cri of an infant. It appear to issu from the barn. I 
approach softli and listen at the door. the cri of the babe 
continued, but were accompani by the entreati of a nurs or a mother 
to be quiet. these entreati were mingl with heart-break sobs, and 
exclam of, "ah, me, my babe! canst thou not sleep and afford thi 
unhappi mother some peace? thou art cold, and I have not suffici 
warmth to cherish thee! what will becom of us? thi delud father care 
not if we both perish." 

A glimps of the true natur of the scene seem to be impart by these 
words. I now likewis recollect incid that afford addit 
light. somewher on thi bank of the river there formerli resid one by 
name selby. He wa an age person, who unit scienc and tast to the 
simpl and labori habit of a husbandman. He had a son who resid 
sever year in europe, but on the death of hi father return home, 
accompani by a wife. He had succeed to the occup of the farm, 
but rumour had whisper mani tale to the disadvantag of hi morals. 
hi wife wa affirm to be of delic and polish manners, and much 
unlik her companion. 

It now occur to me that thi wa the dwell of the selbys, and I 
seem to have gain some insight into the discord and domest 
miseri by which the unhappi ladi suffered. thi wa no time to wast 
my sympathi on others. I could benefit her nothing. selbi had probabl 
return from a carousal, with all hi malign passion rais into 
frenzi by intoxication. He had driven hi desol wife from her bed and 
house, and, to shun outrag and violence, she had fled, with her 
helpless infant, to the barn. To appeas hi fury, to consol her, to 
suggest a remedi for thi distress, wa not in my power. To have sought 
an interview would be mere to excit her terror and alarm her 
delicacy, without contribut to allevi her calamity. here, then, 
wa no asylum for me. A place of rest must be sought at some 
neighbour habitation. It wa probabl that one would be found at no 
great distance: the path that led from the spot where I stood, through a 
gate, into a meadow, might conduct me to the nearest dwelling; and thi 
path I immedi resolv to explore. 

I wa anxiou to open the gate without noise, but I could not succeed. 
some creak of it hing wa unavoid produced, which I fear 
would be overheard by the ladi and multipli her apprehens and 
perplexities. thi inconveni wa irremediable. I therefor close 
the gate and pursu the footway befor me with the utmost expedition. I 
had not gain the farther end of the meadow when I light on someth 
which lay across the path, and which, on be close inspected, 
appear to be a human body. It wa the corps of a girl, mangl by a 
hatchet. her head, gori and depriv of it locks, easili explain the 
kind of enemi by whom she had been assailed. here wa proof that thi 
quiet and remot habit had been visited, in their destruct 
progress, by the indians. the girl had been slain by them, and her 
scalp, accord to their savag custom, had been torn away to be 
preserv as a trophy. 

the fire which had been kindl on the kitchen-floor tva now 
remembered, and corrobor the infer which were drawn from thi 
spectacle. and yet that the mischief had been thu limited, that the 
besot wretch who lay helpless on hi bed and careless of impend 
danger, and that the mother and her infant, should escape, excit some 
degre of surprise. could the savag have been interrupt in their 
work, and oblig to leav their vengeanc unfinished? 

their visit had been recent. mani hour had not elaps sinc they 
prowl about these grounds. had they wholli disappeared, and meant they 
not to return? To what new danger might I be expos in remain thu 
guideless and destitut of all defence? 

In consequ of these reflections, I proceed with more caution. I 
look with suspici glanc befor and on either side of me. I now 
approach the fenc which, on thi side, bound the meadow. someth 
wa discerned, or imagined, stretch close to the fence, on the ground, 
and fill up the pathway. My apprehens of a lurk enemi had been 
previous awakened, and my fanci instantli figur to itself an arm 
man lie on the ground and wait to assail the unsuspect 
passenger. 

At first I wa prompt to fly, but a second thought show me that I 
had alreadi approach near enough to be endangered. notwithstand my 
pause, the form wa motionless. the possibl of be misl in my 
conjectur wa easili supposed. what I saw might be a log, or it might 
be anoth victim to savag ferocity. thi track wa that which my 
safeti requir me to pursue. To turn asid or go back would be mere 
to bewild myself anew. 

urg by these motives, I went nearer, and at last wa close enough to 
perceiv that the figur wa human. He lay upon hi face. near hi right 
hand wa a musket, unclenched. thi circumstance, hi deathlik 
attitude, and the garb and ornament of an indian, made me readili 
suspect the natur and caus of thi catastrophe. here the invad had 
been encount and repulsed, and one at least of their number had been 
left upon the field. 

I wa weari of contempl these rueful objects. custom, likewise, 
even in so short a period, had inur me to spectacl of horror. I wa 
grown callou and immovable. I stay not to ponder on the scene, but, 
snatch the musket, which wa now without an owner, and which might be 
indispens to my defence, I hasten into the wood. On thi side the 
meadow wa skirt by a forest; but a beaten road led into it, and might 
therefor be attempt without danger. 




chapter xxiii. 


the road wa intric and long. It seem design to pervad the 
forest in everi possibl direction. I frequent notic cut wood pile 
in heap upon either side, and rejoic in these token that the 
resid of man wa near. At length I reach a second fence, which 
prove to be the boundari of a road still more frequented. I pursu 
this, and present beheld befor me the river and it opposit 
barriers. 

thi object afford me some knowledg of my situation. there wa a ford 
over which travel use to pass, and in which the road that I wa now 
pursu terminated. the stream wa rapid and tumultuous, but in thi 
place did not rise higher than the shoulders. On the opposit side wa a 
highway, passabl by hors and men, though not by carriages, and which 
led into the midst of solesbury. should I not rush into the stream, and 
still aim at reach my uncle' hous befor morning? whi should I 
delay? 

thirti hour of incess watch and toil, of enorm effort and 
perils, preced and accompani by abstin and wounds, were enough 
to annihil the strength and courag of ordinari men. In the cours of 
them, I had frequent believ myself to have reach the verg beyond 
which my forc would not carri me; but experi as frequent 
demonstr my error. though mani mile were yet to be traversed, 
though my cloth were onc more to be drench and load with 
moisture, though everi hour seem to add somewhat to the keen of 
the blast, yet how should I know, but by trial, whether my stock of 
energi wa not suffici for thi last exploit? 

My resolut to proceed wa nearli formed, when the figur of a man 
move slowli across the road at some distanc befor me wa observed. 
hard by thi ford live a man by name bisset, of whom I had slight 
knowledge. He tend hi two hundr acr with a plod and 
money-dot spirit, while hi son overlook a grist-mil on the river. 
He wa a creatur of gain, coars and harmless. the man whom I saw befor 
me might be he, or some one belong to hi family. be arm for 
defence, I less scrupl at meet with ani thing in the shape of man. 
I therefor called. the figur stop and answer me without surli 
or anger. the voic wa unlik that of bisset, but thi person' 
inform I believ would be of some service. 

come up to him, he prove to be a clown belong to bisset' 
habitation. hi panic and surpris on see me made him aghast. In my 
present garb I should not have easili been recognis by my nearest 
kinsman, and much less easili by one who had seldom met me. 

It may be easili conceiv that my thoughts, when allow to wander from 
the object befor me, were torment with forebod and inquietud 
on account of the ill which I had so much reason to believ had 
befallen my family. I had no doubt that some evil had happened, but the 
full extent of it wa still uncertain. I desir and dread to discov 
the truth, and wa unabl to interrog thi person in a direct manner. 
I could deal onli in circuiti and hints. I shudder while I wait 
for an answer to my inquiries. 

had not indians, I asked, been late seen in thi neighbourhood? were 
they not suspect of hostil designs? had they not alreadi commit 
some mischief? some passenger, perhaps, had been attacked, or fire had 
been set to some house? On which side of the river had their step been 
observ or ani devast been committed? abov the ford or below it? 
At what distanc from the river? 

when hi attent could be withdrawn from my person and bestow upon 
my questions, he answer that some alarm had inde been spread about 
indians, and that parti from solesburi and chetasco were out in 
pursuit of them, that mani person had been kill by them, and that one 
hous in solesburi had been rifl and burnt on the night befor the 
last. 

these tide were a dread confirm of my fears. there scarc 
remain a doubt; but still my expir hope prompt me to inquire, "to 
whom did the hous belong?" 

He answer that he had not heard the name of the owner. He wa a 
stranger to the peopl on the other side of the river. 

were ani of the inhabit murdered? 

yes; all that were at home, except a girl whom they carri off. some 
said that the girl had been retaken. 

what wa the name? wa it huntly? 

huntly? yes. no. He did not know. He had forgotten. 

I fix my eye upon the ground. An interv of gloomi medit 
succeeded. all wa lost! all for whose sake I had desir to live had 
perish by the hand of these assassins! that dear home, the scene of 
my sportiv childhood, of my studies, labours, and recreations, wa 
ravag by fire and the sword,--wa reduc to a fright ruin! 

not onli all that embellish and endear exist wa destroyed, but 
the mean of subsist itself. thou knowest that my sister and I were 
depend on the bounti of our uncle. hi death would make way for the 
success of hi son, a man fraught with envi and malignity, who alway 
testifi a mortal hatr to us, mere becaus we enjoy the 
protect of hi father. the ground which furnish me with bread wa 
now becom the properti of one who, if he could have done it with 
security, would gladli have mingl poison with my food. 

all that my imagin or my heart regard as of valu had likewis 
perished. whatev my chamber, my closets, my cabinet contained, my 
furniture, my books, the record of my own skill, the monument of their 
exist whom I loved, my veri clothing, were involv in 
indiscrimin and irretriev destruction. whi should I surviv thi 
calamity? 

but did not he say that one had escaped? the onli femal in the famili 
were my sisters. one of these had been reserv for a fate wors than 
death; to gratifi the innat and insati cruelti of savages, by 
suffer all the torment their invent can suggest, or to linger out 
year of weari bondag and unintermit hardship in the bosom of the 
wilderness. To restor her to liberty, to cherish thi last survivor of 
my unfortun race, wa a suffici motiv to life and to activity. 

but soft! had not rumour whisper that the captiv wa retaken? oh! who 
wa her angel of deliverance? where did she now abide? weep over the 
untim fall of her protector and her friend? lament and upbraid 
the absenc of her brother? whi should I not hast to find her?--to 
mingl my tear with hers, to assur her of my safety, and expati the 
involuntari crime of my desert by devot all futur to the task 
of her consol and improvement? 

the path wa open and direct. My new motiv would have trampl upon 
everi impedi and made me reckless of all danger and all toils. I 
broke from my reverie, and, without take leav or express gratitud 
to my informant, I ran with frantic expedit toward the river, and, 
plung into it, gain the opposit side in a moment. 

I wa suffici acquaint with the road. some twelv or fifteen 
mile remain to be traversed. I did not fear that my strength would 
fail in the perform of my journey. It wa not my uncle' habit 
to which I direct my steps. inglefield wa my friend. If my sister had 
existence, or wa snatch from captivity, it wa here that an asylum 
had been afford to her, and here wa I to seek the knowledg of my 
destiny. for thi reason, have reach a spot where the road divid 
into two branches, one of which led to inglefield' and the other to 
huntly's, I struck into the former. 

scarc had I pass the angl when I notic a build on the right 
hand, at some distanc from the road. In the present state of my 
thoughts, it would not have attract my attention, had not a light 
gleam from an upper window and told me that all within were not at 
rest. 

I wa acquaint with the owner of thi mansion. He merit esteem and 
confidence, and could not fail to be acquaint with recent events. from 
him I should obtain all the inform that I needed, and I should be 
deliv from some part of the agoni of my suspense. I should reach 
hi door in a few minutes, and the window-light wa a proof that my 
entranc at thi hour would not disturb the family, some of whom were 
stirring. 

through a gate I enter an avenu of tall oaks, that led to the house. 
I could not but reflect on the effect which my appear would produc 
upon the family. the sleek locks, neat apparel, pacif guise, sobrieti 
and gentl of aspect by which I wa customarili distinguished, would 
in vain be sought in the apparit which would now present itself 
befor them. My legs, neck, and bosom were bare, and their nativ hue 
wa exchang for the livid mark of bruis and scarifications. A 
horrid scar upon my cheek, and my uncomb locks; hollow eyes, made 
ghastli by abstin and cold, and the ruthless passion of which my 
mind had been the theatre, ad to the musket which I carri in my 
hand, would prepossess them with the notion of a maniac or ruffian. 

some inconveni might henc arise, which, however, could not be 
avoided. I must trust to the speed with which my voic and my word 
should disclos my true charact and rectifi their mistake. 

I now reach the princip door of the house. It wa open, and I 
unceremoni entered. In the midst of the room stood a german stove, 
well heated. To thaw my half-frozen limb wa my first care. meanwhil I 
gaze around me, and mark the appear of things. 

two light candl stood upon the table. besid them were cider-bottl 
and pipe of tobacco. the furnitur and room wa in that state which 
denot it to have been late fill with drinker and smokers; yet 
neither voice, nor visage, nor motion, were anywher observable. I 
listened; but neither abov nor below, within nor without, could ani 
token of a human be be perceived. 

thi vacanc and silenc must have been late preced by noise, and 
concourse, and bustle. the contrast wa mysteri and ambiguous. No 
adequ caus of so quick and absolut a transit occur to me. 
have gain some warmth and linger some ten or twenti minut in 
thi uncertainty, I determin to explor the other apart of the 
building. I knew not what might betid in my absence, or what I might 
encount in my search to justifi precaution, and, therefore, kept the 
gun in my hand. I snatch a candl from the tabl and proceed into 
two other apart on the first floor and the kitchen. neither wa 
inhabited, though chair and tabl were arrang in their usual order, 
and no trace of violenc or hurri were apparent. 

have gain the foot of the staircase, I knocked, but my knock wa 
wholli disregarded. A light had appear in an upper chamber. It wa 
not, indeed, in one of those apart which the famili perman 
occupied, but in that which, accord to rural custom, wa reserv for 
guests; but it indubit betoken the presenc of some be by whom 
my doubt might be solved. these doubt were too torment to allow of 
scrupl and delay. I mount the stairs. 

At each chamber-door I knocked, but I knock in vain. I tri to open, 
but found them to be locked. I at length reach the entranc of that in 
which a light had been discovered. here it wa certain that some one 
would be found; but here, as well as elsewhere, my knock wa 
unnoticed. 

To enter thi chamber wa audacious, but no other expedi wa afford 
me to determin whether the hous had ani inhabitants. I therefor 
entered, though with caution and reluctance. No one wa within, but 
there were suffici trace of some person who had late been here. On 
the tabl stood a travelling-escritoire, open, with pen and inkstand. A 
chair wa place befor it, and a candl on the right hand. thi 
apparatu wa rare seen in thi country. some traveller, it seemed, 
occupi thi room, though the rest of the mansion wa deserted. the 
pilgrim, as these appear testified, wa of no vulgar order, and 
belong not to the class of period and every-day guests. 

It now occur to me that the occup of thi apart could not be 
far off, and that some danger and embarrass could not fail to accru 
from be found, thu accoutr and garbed, in a place sacr to the 
studi and repos of another. It wa proper, therefore, to withdraw, and 
either to resum my journey, or wait for the stranger' return, whom 
perhap some temporari engag had call away, in the lower and 
public room. the former now appear to be the best expedient, as the 
return of thi unknown person wa uncertain, as well as hi power to 
commun the inform which I wanted. 

had paper, as well as the implement of writing, lain upon the desk, 
perhap my lawless curios would not have scrupl to have pri into 
it. On the first glanc noth of that kind appeared; but now, as I 
turn toward the door, somewhat, lie besid the desk, on the side 
opposit the candle, caught my attention. the impuls wa instantan 
and mechan that made me leap to the spot and lay my hand upon it. 
till I felt it between my fingers, till I brought it near my eye and 
read frequent the inscript that appear upon it, I wa doubt 
whether my sens had deceiv me. 

few, perhaps, among mankind, have undergon vicissitud of peril and 
wonder equal to mine. the miracl of poetry, the transit of 
enchantment, are beggarli and mean compar with those which I had 
experienced. passag into new forms, overleap the bar of time and 
space, revers of the law of inanim and intellig existence, had 
been mine to perform and to witness. 

No event had been more fertil of sorrow and perplex than the loss of 
thi brother' letters. they went by mean invisible, and disappear at 
a moment when foresight would have least predict their disappearance. 
they now place themselv befor me, in a manner equal abrupt, in a 
place and by mean no less contrari to expectation. the paper which I 
now seiz were those letters. the parchment cover, the string that tie 
and the wax that seal them, appear not to have been open or 
violated. 

the power that remov them, from my cabinet, and drop them in thi 
house,--a hous which I rare visited, which I had not enter dure 
the last year, with whose inhabit I maintain no cordial 
intercourse, and to whom my occup and amusements, my joy and my 
sorrows, were unknown,--wa no object even of conjecture. but they were 
not possess by ani of the family. some stranger wa here, by whom they 
had been stolen, or into whose possess they had, by some 
incomprehens chance, fallen. 

that stranger wa near. He had left thi apart for a moment. He 
would speedili return. To go henc might possibl occas me to miss 
him. here, then, I would wait, till he should grant me an interview. the 
paper were mine, and were recovered. I would never part with them. but 
to know by whose forc or by whose stratagem I had been bereav of 
them thu long, wa now the suprem passion of my soul. I seat myself 
near a tabl and anxious wait for an interview, on which I wa 
irresist persuad to believ that much of my happi depended. 

meanwhile, I could not but connect thi incid with the destruct of 
my family. the loss of these paper had excit transport of grief; and 
yet to have lost them thu wa perhap the sole expedi by which their 
final preserv could be render possible. had they, remain in my 
cabinet, they could not have escap the destini which overtook the 
hous and it furniture. savag are not accustom to leav their 
extermin work unfinished. the hous which they have plunder they 
are care to level with the ground. thi not onli their revenge, but 
their caution, prescribes. fire may origin by accid as well as by 
design, and the trace of pillag and murder are total obliter by 
the flames. 

these thought were interrupt by the shut of a door below, and by 
footstep ascend the stairs. My heart throb at the sound. My seat 
becam uneasi and I start on my feet. I even advanc half-way to the 
entranc of the room. My eye were intens fix upon the door. My 
impati would have made me guess at the person of thi visit by 
measur hi shadow, if hi shadow were first seen; but thi wa 
preclud by the posit of the light. It wa onli when the figur 
entered, and the whole person wa seen, that my curios wa gratified. 
He who stood befor me wa the parent and foster of my mind, the 
companion and instructor of my youth, from whom I had been part for 
years, from whom I believ myself to be forev separated,--sarsefield 
himself! 




chapter xxiv. 


My deportment, at an interview so much desir and so wholli unforeseen, 
wa that of a maniac. the petrifi influenc of surpris yield to 
the impetuos of passion. I held him in my arms; I wept upon hi 
bosom; I sob with emot which, had it not found passag at my eyes, 
would have burst my heart-strings. thu I, who had escap the death 
that had previous assail me in so mani forms, should have been 
reserv to solemn a scene like thi by--_di for joy_! 

the sterner passion and habitu auster of my companion exempt 
him from pour out thi testimoni of hi feelings. hi feel were, 
indeed, more alli to astonish and incredul than mine had been. 
My person wa not instantli recognised. He shrunk from my embrac as if 
I were an apparit or impostor. He quickli disengag himself from my 
arms, and, withdraw a few paces, gaze upon me as on one whom he had 
never befor seen. 

these repuls were ascrib to the loss of hi affection. I wa not 
mind of the hideou guis in which I stood befor him, and by which 
he might justli be misl to imagin me a ruffian or a lunatic. My tear 
flow now on a new account, and I articulated, in a broken and faint 
voice, "mi master! my friend! have you forgotten, have you ceas to 
love me?" 

the sound of my voic made him start and exclaim, "am I alive? am I 
awake? speak again, I beseech you, and convinc me that I am not 
dream or delirious." 

"can you need ani proof," I answered, "that it is edgar huntly, your 
pupil, your child, that speak to you?" 

He now withdrew hi eye from me and fix them on the floor. after a 
paus he resumed, in emphat accents:--"well, I have live to thi age 
in unbelief. To credit or trust in miracul agenc wa foreign to my 
nature, but now I am no longer skeptical. call me to ani bar, and exact 
from me an oath that you have twice been dead and twice recal to 
life; that you move about invisibly, and chang your place by the force, 
not of muscles, but of thought, and I will give it. 

"how came you hither? did you penetr the wall? did you rise through 
the floor? 

"yet sure 'ti an error. you could not be he whom twenti wit 
affirm to have beheld a lifeless and mangl corps upon the ground, 
whom my own eye saw in that condition. 

"in seek the spot onc more to provid you a grave, you had vanished. 
again I met you. you plung into a rapid stream, from a height from 
which it wa imposs to fall and to live; yet, as if to set the 
limit of natur at defiance, to sport with human penetration, you rose 
upon the surface; you floated; you swam; thirti bullet were aim at 
your head, by marksmen celebr for the exact of their sight. I 
myself wa of the number, and I never miss what I desir to hit. 

"mi predict were confirm by the event. you ceas to struggle; you 
sunk to rise no more; and yet, after these accumul deaths, you light 
upon thi floor, so far distant from the scene of your catastrophe, over 
space onli to be passed, in so short a time as ha sinc elapsed, by 
those who have wings. 

"mi eyes, my ears, bear testimoni to your exist now, as they 
formerli convinc me of your death. what am I to think? what proof am 
I to credit?" there he stopped. 

everi accent of thi speech ad to the confus of my thoughts. the 
allus that my friend had made were not unintelligible. I gain a 
glimps of the complic error by which we had been mutual 
deceived. I had faint on the area befor deb' hut. I wa found by 
sarsefield in thi condition, and imagin to be dead. 

the man whom I had seen upon the promontori wa not an indian. He 
belong to a numer band of pursuers, whom my hostil and precipit 
deport caus to suspect me for an enemy. they that fire from the 
steep were friends. the interposit that screen me from so mani 
bullet wa inde miraculous. No wonder that my voluntari sinking, in 
order to elud their shots, wa mistaken for death, and that, have 
accomplish the destruct of thi foe, they resum their pursuit of 
others. but how wa sarsefield appriz that it wa I who plung into 
the river? No subsequ event wa possibl to impart to him the 
incred truth. 

A paus of mutual silenc ensued. At length sarsefield renew hi 
express of amaz at thi interview, and besought me to explain 
whi I had disappear by night from my uncle' house, and by what seri 
of unheard-of event thi interview wa brought about. wa it inde 
huntli whom he examin and mourn over at the threshold of deb' hut. 
whom he had sought in everi thicket and cave in the ampl circuit of 
norwalk and chetasco? whom he had seen perish in the current of the 
delaware? 

instead of notic hi questions, my soul wa harrow with anxieti 
respect the fate of my uncl and sisters. sarsefield could 
commun the tide which would decid on my futur lot and set my 
portion in happi or misery. yet I had not breath to speak my 
inquiries. hope tottered, and I felt as if a singl word would be 
suffici for it utter subversion. At length I articul the name of 
my uncle. 

the singl word suffici impart my fears, and these fear need 
no verbal confirmation. At that dear name my companion' featur were 
overspread by sorrow. 

"your uncle," said he, "i dead." 

"dead? merci heaven! and my sister too! both?" 

"your sister are aliv and well." 

"nay," resum I, in falter accents, "jest not with my feelings. Be 
not cruel in your pity. tell me the truth." 

"I have said the truth. they are well, at mr. inglefield's." 

My wish were eager to assent to the truth of these tidings. the better 
part of me was, then, safe: but how did they escap the fate that 
overtook my uncle? how did they evad the destroy hatchet and the 
midnight conflagration? these doubt were impart in a tumultu and 
obscur manner to my friend. He no sooner fulli comprehend them, than 
he look at me with some inquietud and surprise. 

"huntly," said he, "are you mad? what ha fill you with these hideou 
prepossessions? much havoc ha inde been commit in chetasco and the 
wilderness, and a log hut ha been burnt, by design or by accident, in 
solesbury; but that is all. your hous ha not been assail by either 
firebrand or tomahawk. everi thing is safe and in it ancient order. the 
master inde is gone, but the old man fell a victim to hi own temer 
and hardihood. It is thirti year sinc he retir with three wound 
from the field of braddock; but time in no degre abat hi adventur 
and militari spirit. On the first alarm, he summon hi neighbours, and 
led them in pursuit of the invaders. alas! he wa the first to attack 
them, and the onli one who fell in the contest." 

these word were utter in a manner that left me no room to doubt of 
their truth. My uncl had alreadi been lamented, and the discoveri of 
the natur of hi death, so contrari to my forebodings, and of the 
safeti of my girls, made the state of my mind partak more of exult 
and joy than of grief or regret. 

but how wa I deceived? had not my fusil been found in the hand of an 
enemy? whenc could he have plunder it but from my own chamber? It 
hung against the wall of a closet, from which no stranger could have 
taken it except by violence. My perplex and doubt were not at an 
end, but those which constitut my chief torment were removed. I 
listen to my friend' entreati to tell him the caus of my 
elopement, and the incid that termin in the present interview. 

I began with relat my return to conscious in the bottom of the 
pit; my effort to free myself from thi abhor prison; the act of 
horror to which I wa impel by famine, and their excruci 
consequences; my gain the outlet of the cavern, the desper 
expedi by which I remov the impedi to my escape, and the 
deliver of the captiv girl; the contest I maintain befor deb' 
hut; my subsequ wanderings; the banquet which hospit afford 
me; my journey to the river-bank; my medit on the mean of 
reach the road; my motiv for hazard my life by plung into the 
stream; and my subsequ peril and fear till I reach the threshold 
of thi habitation. 

"thus," continu I, "I have compli with your request. I have told all 
that I myself know. what were the incid between my sink to rest 
at my uncle' and my awak in the chamber of the hill; by what mean 
and by whose contrivance, preternatur or human, thi transit wa 
effected, I am unabl to explain; I cannot even guess. 

"what ha elud my sagac may not be beyond the reach of another. 
your own reflect on my tale, or some fact that have fallen under 
your notice, may enabl you to furnish a solution. but, meanwhile, how 
am I to account for your appear on thi spot? thi meet wa 
unexpect and abrupt to you, but it ha not been less so to me. Of all 
mankind, sarsefield wa the furthest from my thought when I saw these 
token of a travel and a stranger. 

"you were imperfectli acquaint with my wanderings. you saw me on the 
ground befor deb' hut. you saw me plung into the river. you 
endeavour to destroy me while swimming; and you knew, befor my 
narr wa heard, that huntli wa the object of your enmity. what wa 
the motiv of your search in the desert, and how were you appriz of my 
condition? these thing are not less wonder that ani of those which I 
have alreadi related." 

dure my tale the featur of sarsefield betoken the deepest 
attention. hi eye stray not a moment from my face. all my peril and 
forebod were fresh in my remembrance: they had scarc gone by; 
their skirts, so to speak, were still visible. No wonder that my 
eloqu wa vivid and pathetic; that I portray the past as if it 
were the present scene; and that not my tongu only, but everi muscl 
and limb, spoke. 

when I had finish my relation, sarsefield sank into thoughtfulness. 
from this, after a time, he recovered, and said, "your tale, huntly, is 
true; yet, did I not see you befor me, were I not acquaint with the 
artless and rectitud of your character, and, abov all, had not my 
own experience, dure the last three days, confirm everi incident, I 
should question it truth. you have ampli gratifi my curiosity, and 
deserv that your own should be gratifi as fully. listen to me. 

"much ha happen sinc we parted, which shall not be now mentioned. I 
promis to inform you of my welfar by letter, and did not fail to 
write; but whether my letter were received, or ani were written by you 
in return, or if written were ever transmitted, I cannot tell: none were 
ever received. 

"some day since, I arrived, in compani with a ladi who is my wife, in 
america. you have never been forgotten by me. I knew your situat to 
be littl in agreement with your wishes, and one of the benefit which 
fortun ha late confer upon me is the power of snatch you from 
a life of labour and obscurity, whose goods, scanti as they are, were 
transient and precarious, and afford you the suitabl leisur and 
mean of intellectu gratif and improvement. 

"your silenc made me entertain some doubt concern your welfare, and 
even your existence. To solv these doubts, I hasten to solesbury. 
some delay upon the road hinder me from accomplish my journey by 
daylight. It wa night befor I enter the norwalk path; but my ancient 
rambl with you made me familiar with it, and I wa not afraid of be 
obstruct or bewildered. 

"just as I gain the southern outlet, I spi a passeng on foot, 
come toward me with a quick pace. the incid wa of no moment; and 
yet the time of night, the seem expedit of the walker, 
recollect of the maze and obstacl which he wa go to encounter, 
and a vagu conjectur that perhap he wa unacquaint with the 
difficulti that await him, made me eye him with attent as he 
passed. 

"he came near, and I thought I recognis a friend in thi traveller. 
the form, the gesture, the stature, bore a power resembl to those 
of edgar huntly. thi resembl wa so strong, that I stopped, and, 
after he had gone by, call him by your name. that no notic wa taken 
of my call prove that the person wa mistaken; but, even though it were 
another, that he should not even hesit or turn at a summon which he 
could not but perceiv to be addressed, though erroneously, to him, wa 
the sourc of some surprise. I did not repeat my call, but proceed on 
my way. 

"all had retir to repos in your uncle' dwelling. I did not scrupl 
to rous them, and wa receiv with affection and joyou greetings. 
that you allow your uncl to rise befor you wa a new topic of 
reflection. To my inquiri concern you, answer were made that 
accord with my wishes. I wa told that you were in good health and 
were then in bed. that you had not heard and risen at my knock wa 
mention with surprise; but your uncl account for your indol by 
say that dure the last week you had fatigu yourself by rambling, 
night and day, in search of some maniac or visionari who wa suppos to 
have retreat into norwalk. 

"I insist upon awaken you myself. I anticip the effect of thi 
sudden and unlooked-for meet with some emot of pride as well as 
of pleasure. To find, in open your eyes, your old preceptor stand 
by your bedsid and gaze in your face, would place you, I conceived, 
in an affect situation. 

"your chamber-door wa open, but your bed wa empty. your uncl and 
sister were made acquaint with thi circumstance. their surpris gave 
way to conjectur that your restless and romant spirit had tempt 
you from your repose, that you had rambl abroad on some fantast 
errand, and would probabl return befor the dawn. I willingli 
acquiesc in thi opinion, and, my feel be too thoroughli 
arous to allow me to sleep, I took possess of your chamber and 
patient await your return. 

"the morn returned, but huntli made not hi appearance. your uncl 
becam somewhat uneasi at thi unseason absence. much specul 
and inquiri as to the possibl reason of your flight wa made. In my 
survey of your chamber, I note that onli part of your cloth remain 
besid your bed. coat, hat, stock and shoe lay upon the spot where 
they had probabl been thrown when you had disrob yourself; but the 
pantaloons, which, accord to mr. huntly' report, complet your 
dress, were nowher to be found. that you should go forth on so cold a 
night so slenderli apparelled, wa almost incredible. your reason or 
your sens had desert you, befor so rash an action could be 
meditated. 

"I now rememb the person I had met in norwalk. hi resembl to 
your figure, hi garb, which want hat, coat, stock and shoes, and 
your absenc from your bed at that hour, were remark coincidences: 
but whi did you disregard my call? your name, utter by a voic that 
could not be unknown, wa sure suffici to arrest your steps. 

"each hour ad to the impati of your friends. To their 
recollect and conjectur I listen with a view to extract from 
them some solut of thi mystery. At length a stori wa allud to of 
some one who, on the preced night, had been heard walk in the long 
room: to thi wa ad the tale of your anxieti and wonder 
occas by the loss of certain manuscripts. 

"while rumin upon these incidents, and endeavour to extract from 
thi intellig a clue explanatori of your present situation, a singl 
word, casual drop by your uncle, instantli illumin my dark 
and dispel my doubts.--'aft all,' said the old man, 'ten to one but 
edgar himself wa the man whom we heard walking, but the lad wa asleep, 
and knew not what he wa about.' 

"'surely,' said I, 'thi infer is just. hi manuscript could not be 
remov by ani hand but hi own, sinc the rest of mankind were 
unacquaint not onli with the place of their concealment, but with 
their existence. none but a man insan or asleep would wander forth so 
slightli dressed, and none but a sleeper would have disregard my 
calls.' thi conclus wa gener adopted; but it gave birth in my 
mind to infinit inquietudes. you had rove into norwalk, a scene of 
inequalities, of promin and pits, among which, thu destitut of 
the guidanc of your senses, you could scarc fail to be destroyed, 
or, at least, irretriev bewildered. I paint to myself the danger 
to which you were subjected. your careless feet would bear you into some 
whirlpool or to the edg of some precipice; some intern revolut or 
outward shock would recal you to conscious at some peril moment. 
surpris and fear would disabl you from take season or suitabl 
precautions, and your destruct be made sure. 

"the laps of everi new hour, without bring tide of your state, 
enhanc these fears. At length the proprieti of search for you 
occurred; mr. huntli and I determin to set out upon thi pursuit, as 
well as to commiss others. A plan wa laid by which everi access 
part of norwalk, the wilder beyond the flat of solesbury, and the 
valley of chetasco, should be travers and explored. 

"scarc had we equip ourselv for thi expedition, when a 
messeng arrived, who brought the disastr news of indian be seen 
within these precincts, and on the last night a farmer wa shot in hi 
fields, a dwell in chetasco wa burnt to the ground, and it 
inhabit murder or made captives. rumour and inquiri had been busy, 
and a plausibl conjectur had been form as to the cours and number 
of the enemies. they were said to be divid into bands, and to amount 
in the whole to thirti or forti warriors. thi messeng had come to 
warn us of danger which might impend, and to summon us to join in the 
pursuit and extirp of these detest foes. 

"your uncle, whose alacr and vigour age had not abated, eagerli 
engag in thi scheme. I wa not avers to contribut my effort to an 
end like this. the road which we had previous design to take, in 
search of my fugit pupil, wa the same by which we must trace or 
intercept the retreat of the savages. thu two purposes, equal 
momentous, would be answer by the same means. 

"mr. huntli arm himself with your fusil; inglefield suppli me with a 
gun. dure our absenc the dwell wa close and locked, and your 
sister place under the protect of inglefield, whose age and pacif 
sentiment unfit him for arduou and sanguinari enterprises. A troop 
of rustic wa collected, half of whom remain to travers solesbury, 
and the other, whom mr. huntli and I accompanied, hasten to chetasco." 




chapter xxv. 


"it wa noonday befor we reach the theatr of action. fear and 
reveng combin to make the peopl of chetasco dilig and zealou in 
their own defence. the havoc alreadi commit had been mournful. To 
prevent a repetit of the same calamities, they resolv to hunt out 
the hostil footstep and exact a merciless retribution. 

"it wa like that the enemy, on the approach of day, had withdrawn 
from the valley and conceal themselv in the thicket between the 
parallel ridg of the mountain. thi space, which, accord to the 
object with which it is compared, is either a vale or the top of a hill, 
wa obscur and desolate. It wa undoubtedli the avenu by which the 
robber had issu forth, and by which they would escap to the ohio. 
here they might still remain, intend to emerg from their conceal 
on the next night and perpetr new horrors. 

"A certain distribut wa made of our number, so as to move in all 
direct at the same time. I will not dwell upon particulars. It will 
suffic to say that keen eye and indefatig feet brought us at last 
to the presenc of the largest number of these marauders. seven of them 
were slain by the edg of a brook, where they sat wholli unconsci of 
the danger which hung over them. five escaped, and one of these secur 
hi retreat by wrest your fusil from your uncl and shoot him 
dead. befor our companion could be rescu or revenged, the assassin, 
with the remnant of the troop, disappeared, and bore away with him the 
fusil as a trophi of hi victory. 

"thi disast wa deplored, not onli on account of that life which had 
thu been sacrificed, but becaus a sagaci guid and intrepid leader 
wa lost. hi acquaint with the habit of the indians, and hi 
experi in their wars, made him trace their footstep with more 
certainti than ani of hi associates. 

"the pursuit wa still continued, and parti were so station that the 
escap of the enemi wa difficult, if not impossible. our search wa 
unremitted, but, dure twelv or fourteen hours, unsuccessful. queen 
mab did not elud all suspicion. her hut wa visit by differ 
parties, but the old woman and her dog had disappeared. 

"meanwhil your situat wa not forgotten. everi one wa charg to 
explor your footstep as well as those of the savages; but thi search 
wa no less unsuccess than the former. none had heard of you or seen 
you. 

"thi continu till midnight. three of us made a paus at a brook, and 
intend to repair our fatigu by a respit of a few hours; but 
scarc had we stretch ourselv on the ground when we were alarm 
by a shot which seem to have been fire at a short distance. We 
start on our feet and consult with each other on the measur to be 
taken. A second, a third, and a fourth shot, from the same quarter, 
excit our attent anew. mab' hut wa known to stand at the distanc 
and in the direct of thi sound, and thither we resolv to repair. 

"thi wa done with speed, but with the utmost circumspection. We 
shortli gain the road that lead near thi hut, and at length gain a 
view of the building. mani person were discovered, in a sort of 
bustl inactivity, befor the hut. they were easili distinguish to 
be friends, and were therefor approach without scruple. 

"the object that present themselv to a nearer view were five bodi 
stretch upon the ground. three of them were savages. the fourth wa a 
girl, who, though alive, seem to have receiv a mortal wound. the 
fifth, breathless and mangled, and hi featur almost conceal by the 
blood that overspread hi face, wa edgar,--th fugit for whom I had 
made such anxiou search. 

"about the same hour on the last night I had met you hasten into 
norwalk. now were you lie in the midst of savages, at the distanc of 
thirti mile from your home, and in a spot which it wa imposs for 
you to have reach unless by an immens circuit over rock and 
thickets. that you had found a rift at the basi of a hill, and thu 
penetr it solidities, and thu preclud so tediou and circuit 
a journey as must otherwis have been made, wa not to be imagined. 

"but whenc aros thi scene? It wa obviou to conclud that my 
associ had surpris their enemi in thi house, and exact from 
them the forfeit of their crimes; but how you should have been 
confound with their foes, or whenc came the wound girl, wa a 
subject of astonishment. 

"you will judg how much thi surpris wa augment when I wa inform 
that the parti whom we found had been attract hither by the same 
signal by which we had been alarmed. that on reach thi spot you had 
been discovered, alive, seat on the ground, and still sustain the 
gun with which you had appar complet the destruct of so mani 
adversaries. In a moment after their arriv you sunk down and expired. 

"thi scene wa attend with inexplic circumstances. the musket 
which lay besid you appear to have belong to one of the savages. 
the wound by which each had die wa single. Of the four shot we had 
distinguish at a distance, three of them were therefor fatal to the 
indians, and the fourth wa doubtless that by which you had fallen; yet 
three musket onli were discoverable. 

"the arm were collected, and the girl carri to the nearest hous in 
the arm of her father. her situat wa deem capabl of remedy, and 
the sorrow and wonder which I felt at your untim and extraordinari 
fate did not hinder me from endeavour to restor the health of thi 
unfortun victim. I reflected, likewise, that some light might be 
thrown upon transact so mysteri by the inform which might be 
collect from her story. numberless question and hint were necessari 
to extract from her a consist or intellig tale. she had been 
dragged, it seems, for miles, at the heel of her conquerors, who at 
length stop in a cavern for the sake of some repose. all slept but 
one, who sat and watched. someth call him away, and, at the same 
moment, you appear at the bottom of the cave, half nake and without 
arms. you instantli suppli the last defici by seiz the gun and 
tomahawk of him who had gone forth, and who had neglig left hi 
weapon behind. then, step over the bodi of the sleepers, you 
rush out of the cavern. 

"she then mention your unexpect return, her deliver and flight, 
and arriv at deb' hut. you watch upon the hearth, and she fell 
asleep upon the blanket. from thi sleep she wa arous by violent and 
cruel blows. she look up: you were gone, and the bed on which she lay 
wa surround by the men from whom she had so late escaped. one 
drag her out of the hut and level hi gun at her breast. At the 
moment when he touch the trigger, a shot came from an unknown quarter, 
and he fell at her feet. Of subsequ event she had an incoher 
recollection. the indian were success slain, and you came to her, 
and interrog and consol her. 

"in your journey to the hut you were armed. thi in some degre 
account for appearances: but where were your arms? three musket onli 
were discovered, and these undoubtedli belong to your enemies. 

"I now had leisur to reflect upon your destiny. I had arriv soon 
enough on thi shore mere to wit the catastroph of two be 
whom I most loved. both were overtaken by the same fate, nearli at the 
same hour. the same hand had possibl accomplish the destruct of 
uncl and nephew. 

"now, however, I began to entertain a hope that your state might not be 
irretrievable. you had walk and spoken after the fire had ceas and 
your enemi had ceas to contend with you. A wound had, no doubt, been 
previous received. I had hastili infer that the wound wa mortal, 
and that life could not be recalled. occupi with attent to the 
wail of the girl, and full of sorrow and perplexity, I had admit 
an opinion which would have never been adopt in differ 
circumstances. My acquaint with wound would have taught me to 
regard sunken muscles, lividness, and cessat of the pulse, as mere 
indic of a swoon, and not as token of death. 

"perhap my error wa not irreparable. By hasten to the hut, I might 
ascertain your condition, and at least transport your remain to some 
dwell and final secur to you the decenc of burial. 

"of twelv savag discov on the preced day, ten were now killed. 
two at least remained, after whom the pursuit wa still zealous 
maintained. attent to the wound girl had withdrawn me from the 
party, and I had now leisur to return to the scene of these disasters. 
the sun had risen, and, accompani by two others, I repair thither. 

"A sharp turn in the road, at the entranc of a field, set befor us a 
startl spectacle. An indian, mangl by repeat wound of bayonet 
and bullet, wa discovered. hi musket wa stuck in the ground, by way 
of beacon attract our attent to the spot. over thi space I had 
gone a few hour before, and noth like thi wa then seen. the 
parti abroad had hie away to a distant quarter. some invis power 
seem to be enlist in our defenc and to preclud the necess of 
our arms. 

"we proceed to the hut. the savag were there, but edgar had risen 
and flown! noth now seem to be incredible. you had slain three 
foes, and the weapon with which the victori had been achiev had 
vanished. you had risen from the dead, had assail one of the surviv 
enemies, had employ bullet and dagger in hi destruction, with both of 
which you could onli be suppli by supernatur means, and had 
disappeared. If ani inhabit of chetasco had done this, we should have 
heard of it. 

"but what remained? you were still alive. your strength wa suffici 
to bear you from thi spot. whi were you still invisible? and to what 
danger might you not be expos befor you could disinvolv yourself 
from the maze of thi wilderness? 

"onc more I procur indefatig search to be made after you. It wa 
continu till the approach of evening, and wa fruitless. inquiri 
were twice made at the hous where you were suppli with food and 
intelligence. On the second call I wa astonish and delight by the 
tide receiv from the good woman. your person, and demeanour, and 
arms, were described, and mention made of your resolut to cross the 
southern ridg and travers the solesburi road with the utmost 
expedition. 

"the greater part of my inquietud were now removed. you were abl to 
eat and to travel, and there wa littl doubt that a meet would take 
place between us on the next morning. meanwhile, I determin to concur 
with those who pursu the remaind of the enemy. I follow you, in 
the path that you were said to have taken, and quickli join a numer 
parti who were search for those who, on the last night, had attack 
a plantat that lie near this, and destroy the inhabitants. 

"I need not dwell upon our doubl and circuities. the enemi wa 
trace to the hous of selby. they had entered, they had put fire on the 
floor, but were compel to relinquish their prey. Of what number they 
consist could not be ascertained; but one, linger behind hi 
fellows, wa shot, at the entranc of the wood, and on the spot where 
you chanc to light upon him. 

"selby' hous wa empty, and befor the fire had made ani progress we 
extinguish it. the drunken wretch whom you encount had probabl 
return from hi nocturn debauch after we had left the spot. 

"the fli enemi wa pursu with fresh diligence. they were found, by 
variou tokens, to have cross the river, and to have ascend the 
mountain. We trod close on their heels. when we arriv at the 
promontori describ by you, the fatigu of the night and day render 
me unqualifi to proceed. I determin that thi should be the bound of 
my excursions. I wa anxiou to obtain an interview with you, and, 
unless I paus here, should not be abl to gain inglefield' as earli 
in the morn as I wished. two other concur with me in thi 
resolution, and prepar to return to thi house, which had been 
desert by it tenant till the danger wa past, and which had been 
select as the place of rendezvous. 

"at thi moment, deject and weary, I approach the ledg which 
sever the headland from the mountain. I mark the appear of some 
one stretch upon the ground where you lay. No domest anim would 
wander hither and place himself upon thi spot. there wa someth 
likewis in the appear of the object that bespok it to be man; but, 
if it were man, it wa incontrovert a savag and a foe. I 
determined, therefore, to rous you by a bullet. 

"mi decis wa perhap absurd. I ought to have gain more certainti 
befor I hazard your destruction. Be that as it will, a moment' 
linger on your part would have probabl been fatal. you start on 
your feet, and fired. see the hole which your random shot made through 
my sleeve! thi sure wa a day destin to be signal by 
hairbreadth escapes. 

"your action seem incontest to confirm my prognostics. everi one 
hurri to the spot and wa eager to destroy an enemy. No one hesit 
to believ that some of the shot aim at you had reach their mark, 
and that you had sunk to rise no more. 

"the gun which wa fire and thrown down wa taken and examined. It had 
been my companion in mani a toilsom expedition. It had rescu me and 
my friend from a thousand deaths. In order to recognis it, I need 
onli to touch and handl it. I instantli discov that I held in my 
hand the fusil which I had left with you on parting, with which your 
uncl had equip himself, and which had been ravish from him by a 
savage. what wa I henc to infer respect the person of the last 
possessor? 

"mi inquiri respect you, of the woman whose milk and bread you had 
eaten, were minute. you entered, she said, with a hatchet and gun in 
your hand. while you ate, the gun wa laid upon the table. she sat near, 
and the piec becam the object of inquisit attention. the stock and 
barrel were describ by her in such term as left no doubt that thi 
wa the _fusil_. 

"A comparison of incid enabl me to trace the manner in which you 
came into possess of thi instrument. one of those whom you found in 
the cavern wa the assassin of your uncle. accord to the girl' 
report, on issu from your hiding-plac you seiz a gun that wa 
unoccupied, and thi gun chanc to be your own. 

"it two barrel were probabl the caus of your success in that unequ 
contest at mab' hut. On recov from _deliquium_, you found it where 
it had been drop by you, out of sight and unsuspect by the parti 
that had afterward arrived. In your passag to the river, had it onc 
more fallen into hostil hands? or had you miss the way, wander to 
thi promontory, and mistaken a troop of friend for a band of indian 
marauders? 

"either supposit wa dreadful. the latter wa the most plausible. No 
motiv were conceiv by which one of the fugit could be induc 
to post himself here, in thi conspicu station; whereas, the road 
which led you to the summit of the hill, to that spot where descent to 
the river-road wa practicable, could not be found but by those who were 
accustom to travers it. the direct which you had exact from 
your hostess prove your previou unacquaint with these tracts. 

"I acquiesc in thi opinion with a heavi and despond heart. fate 
had led us into a maze which could onli termin in the destruct of 
one or of the other. By the breadth of a hair had I escap death from 
your hand. the same fortun had not befriend you. after my tediou 
search, I had light on you, forlorn, bewildered, perish with cold 
and hunger. instead of recognis and afford you relief, I compel 
you to leap into the river, from a peril height, and had desist 
from my persecut onli when I had bereav you of life and plung you 
to the bottom of the gulf. 

"mi motiv in come to america were numer and mixed. among these 
wa the parent affect with which you had inspir me. I came with 
fortune, and a better gift than fortune, in my hand. I intend to 
bestow both upon you, not onli to give you competence, but one who would 
endear to you that competence, who would enhance, by participating, 
everi gratification. 

"mi scheme were now at an end. you were gone, beyond the reach of my 
benevol and justice. I had rob your two sister of a friend and 
guardian. It wa some consol to think that it wa in my power to 
stand, with regard to them, in your place; that I could snatch them from 
the poverty, dependence, and humiliation, to which your death and that 
of your uncl had reduc them. 

"I wa now doubli weari of the enterpris in which I wa engaged, and 
return with speed to thi rendezvous. My companion have gone to know 
the state of the famili who resid under thi roof, and left me to 
beguil the tediou moment in whatev manner I pleased. 

"I have omit mention one incid that happen between the 
detect of your flight and our expedit to chetasco. have form a 
plausibl conjectur as to him who walk in the long room, it wa 
obviou to conclud that he who purloin your manuscript, and the 
walker, wa the same personage. It wa likewis easili infer that the 
letter were secret in the cedar chest or in some other part of the 
room. instanc similar to thi have heretofor occurred. men have 
employ anxiou month in search of that which, in a freak of 
noctambulation, wa hidden by their own hands. 

"A search wa immedi commenced, and your letter were found, 
care conceal between the rafter and shingl of the roof, in a 
spot where, if suspicion had not been previous excited, they would 
have remain till the vernal rain and the summer heat had insens 
destroy them. thi packet I carri with me, know the valu which 
you set upon it, and there be no receptacl equal safe but your own 
cabinet, which wa locked. 

"having, as I said, reach thi house, and be left alone, I 
bethought me of the treasur I possessed. I wa unacquaint with the 
reason for which these paper were so precious. they probabl had some 
moment and intim connect with your own history. As such, they 
could not be of littl valu to me, and thi moment of inoccup and 
regret wa as suitabl as ani other to the task of perus them. I 
drew them forth, therefore, and laid them on the tabl in thi chamber. 

"the rest is known to you. dure a momentari absenc you entered. 
sure no interview of ancient friend ever took place in so unexpect 
and abrupt a manner. you were dead. I mourn for you, as one whom I 
loved, and whom fate had snatch forev from my sight. now, in a 
bliss hour, you had risen, and my happi in thu embrac you is 
tenfold greater than would have been experienc if no uncertainti and 
peril had protract our meeting." 




chapter xxvi. 


here end the tale of sarsefield. humili and joy were mingl in 
my heart. the event that preced my awaken in the cave were now 
lumin and plain. what explic wa more obvious? what but thi 
solut ought to have been suggest by the conduct I had wit in 
clithero? 

clithero? wa not thi the man whom clithero had rob of hi friend? 
wa not thi the lover of mrs. lorimer, the object of the persecut 
of wiatte? wa it not now given me to investig the truth of that 
stupend tale? To dissip the doubt which obstin clung to my 
imagin respect it? 

but soft! had not sarsefield said that he wa married? wa mrs. lorim 
so speedili forgotten by him, or wa the narr of clithero the web 
of impostur or the rave of insanity? 

these new idea banish all person consider from my mind. I 
look eagerli into the face of my friend, and exclaimed, in a dubiou 
accent, "how say you? married? when? To whom?" 

"yes, huntly, I am wed to the most excel of women. To her am I 
indebt for happiness, and wealth, and dignity, and honour. To her do I 
owe the power of be the benefactor and protector of you and your 
sisters. she long to embrac you as a son. To becom truli her son will 
depend upon your own choice, and that of one who wa the companion of 
our voyage." 

"heavens!" cri I, in a transport of exult and astonishment. "of 
whom do you speak? Of the mother of clarice? the sister of wiatte? the 
sister of the ruffian who laid snare for her life? who pursu you and 
the unhappi clithero with the bitterest animosity?" 

My friend start at these sound as if the earth had yawn at hi 
feet. hi counten wa equal signific of terror and rage. As 
soon as he regain the power of utterance, he spoke:--"clithero! curs 
light upon thi lip for have utter that detest name! thousand of 
mile have I flown to shun the hear of it. Is the madman here? have 
you set eye upon him? doe he yet crawl upon the face of the earth? 
unhappy? unparalleled, unheard-of, thankless miscreant! ha he told hi 
execr falsehood here? ha he dare to utter name so sacr as 
those of euphemia lorim and clarice?" 

"he has; he ha told a tale that had all the appear of truth----" 

"out upon the villain! the truth! truth would prove him to be unnatural, 
devilish; a thing for which no languag ha yet provid a name! He ha 
call himself unhappy? No doubt, a victim to injustice! overtaken by 
unmerit calamity. say! ha he fool thee with such tales?" 

"no. hi tale wa a catalogu of crime and miseri of which he wa the 
author and sufferer. you know not hi motives, hi horrors------" 

"hi deed were monstrou and infernal. hi motiv were sordid and 
flagitious. To display all their ugli and infami wa not hi 
province. no; he did not tell you that he stole at midnight to the 
chamber of hi mistress; a woman who astonish the world by her 
lofti and magnanimity, by indefatig benefic and unswerv 
equity; who had lavish on thi wretch, whom she snatch from the 
dirt, all the good of fortune, all the benefit of education; all the 
treasur of love; everi provoc to gratitude; everi stimul to 
justice. 

"he did not tell you that, in recompens for everi benefit, he stole 
upon her sleep and aim a dagger at her breast. there wa no room for 
flight, or ambiguity, or prevarication. she whom he meant to murder 
stood near, saw the lift weapon, and heard him confess and glori in 
hi purposes. 

"no wonder that the shock bereft her, for a time, of life. the interv 
wa seiz by the ruffian to effect hi escape. the rebuk of justic 
were shun by a wretch consciou of hi inexpi guilt. these thing 
he ha hidden from you, and ha suppli their place by a tale speciou 
as false." 

"no. among the number of hi crimes, hypocrisi is not to be numbered. 
these thing are alreadi known to me: he spare himself too littl in 
the narrative. the excel of hi lady, her claim to gratitud and 
veneration, were urg beyond their true bounds. hi attempt upon her 
life were related. It is true that he desir and endeavour to destroy 
her." 

"how? ha he told you this?" 

"he ha told me all. alas! the crimin intent ha been ampli 
expiated." 

"what mean you? whenc and how came he hither? where is he now? I will 
not occupi the same land, the same world, with him. have thi woman and 
her daughter light on the shore haunt by thi infern and 
implac enemy?" 

"alas! It is doubt whether he exists. If he lives, he is no longer to 
be feared; but he live not. famin and remors have utterli consum 
him." 

"famine? remorse? you talk in riddles." 

"he ha immur himself in the desert. He ha abjur the intercours of 
mankind. He ha shut himself in cavern where famin must inevit 
expedit that death for which he long as the onli solac of hi woes. 
To no imagin are hi offenc blacker and more odiou than to hi 
own. I had hope of rescu him from thi fate, but my own infirm 
and error have afford me suffici occupation." 

sarsefield renew hi imprec on the memori of that unfortun 
man, and hi inquiri as to the circumst that led him into thi 
remot district. hi inquiri were not to be answer by one in my 
present condition. My languor and fatigu had now gain a pitch that 
wa insupportable. the wound in my face had been chafe and inflam by 
the cold water and the bleak air; and the pain attend it would no 
longer suffer my attent to stray. I sunk upon the floor, and 
entreat him to afford me the respit of a few hours' repose. 

He wa sensibl of the deplor of my condition, and chid himself 
for the neglig of which he had alreadi been guilty. He lift me to 
the bed, and deliber on the mode he should pursu for my relief. 
some mollifi applic to my wound wa immedi necessary; but, 
in our present lone condition, it wa not at hand. It could onli be 
procur from a distance. It wa proper therefor to hasten to the 
nearest inhabit dwelling, which belong to one by name walton, and 
suppli himself with such medicin as could be found. 

meanwhile, there wa no danger of molest and intrusion. there wa 
reason to expect the speedi return of those who had gone in pursuit of 
the savages. thi wa their place of rendezvous, and hither they 
appoint to reassembl befor the morrow' dawn. the distanc of the 
neighbour farm wa small, and sarsefield promis to be expeditious. 
He left me to myself and my own ruminations. 

harass by fatigu and pain, I had yet power to rumin on that seri 
of unparallel event that had late happened. I wept, but my tear 
flow from a doubl source: from sorrow, on account of the untim 
fate of my uncle, and from joy, that my sister were preserved, that 
sarsefield had return and wa not unhappy. 

I reflect on the untoward destini of clithero. part of hi calam 
consist in the conscious of have kill hi patroness; but it 
now appeared, though by some infatu I had not previous suspected, 
that the first impuls of sorrow in the ladi had been weaken by 
reflect and by time; that the prejudic persuad her that her life 
and that of her brother were to endur and to termin togeth wa 
conquer by experi or by argument. she had come, in compani with 
sarsefield and clarice, to america. what influenc might these event 
have upon the gloomi medit of clithero? wa it possibl to bring 
them together; to win the maniac from hi solitude, wrest from him hi 
fatal purposes, and restor him to communion with the be whose 
imagin indign is the torment of hi life? 

these muse were interrupt by a sound from below, which wa easili 
interpret into token of the return of those with whom sarsefield had 
part at the promontory. voic were confus and busy, but not 
turbulent. they enter the lower room, and the motion of chair and 
tabl show that they were prepar to rest themselv after their 
toils. 

few of them were unacquaint with me, sinc they probabl were 
resid in thi district. No inconvenience, therefore, would follow 
from an interview, though, on their part, wholli unexpected. besides, 
sarsefield would speedili return, and none of the present visit 
would be like to withdraw to thi apartment. 

meanwhile, I lay upon the bed, with my face turn toward the door, and 
languidli gaze at the ceil and walls. just then a musket wa 
discharg in the room below. the shock affect me mechanically, and 
the first impuls of surpris made me almost start upon my feet. 

the sound wa follow by confus and bustle. some rush forth and 
call on each other to run differ ways, and the words, "that is 
he,"--"stop him!" were spoken in a tone of eager and rage. My 
weak and pain were for a moment forgotten, and my whole attent 
wa bent to discov the mean of thi hubbub. the musket which I had 
brought with me to thi chamber lay across the bed. unknow of the 
consequ of thi affray with regard to myself, I wa prompted, by a 
kind of self-preserv instinct, to lay hold of the gun and prepar to 
repel ani attack that might be made upon me. 

A few moment elapsed, when I thought I heard light footstep in the 
entri lead to thi room. I had no time to constru these signals, 
but, watch fear the entrance, I grasp my weapon with new 
force, and rais it so as to be readi at the moment of my danger. I did 
not watch long. A figur cautious thrust itself forward. the first 
glanc wa suffici to inform me that thi intrud wa an indian, 
and, of consequence, an enemy. He wa unarmed. look eagerli on all 
sides, he at last spi me as I lay. My appear threw him into 
consternation, and, after the fluctuat of an instant, he dart to 
the window, threw up the sash, and leap out upon the ground. 

hi flight might have been easili arrest by my shot, but surprise, 
ad to my habitu antipathi to bloodsh unless in case of absolut 
necessity, made me hesitate. He wa gone, and I wa left to mark the 
progress of the drama. the silenc wa present broken by fire at a 
distance. three shots, in quick succession, were follow by the deepest 
pause. 

that the party, recent arrived, had brought with them one or more 
captives, and that by some sudden effort the prison had attempt to 
escape, wa the onli supposit that I could form. By wrhat motiv 
either of them could be induc to seek conceal in my chamber could 
not be imagined. 

I now heard a singl step on the threshold below. some one enter the 
common room. He travers the floor dure a few minutes, and then, 
ascend the staircase, he enter my chamber. It wa sarsefield. 
troubl and dismay were strongli written on hi countenance. He seem 
total unconsci of my presence; hi eye were fix upon the floor, 
and, as he continu to move across the room, he heav forth deep 
sighs. 

thi deport wa mourn and mysterious. It wa littl in unison 
with those appear which he wore at our parting, and must have been 
suggest by some event that had sinc happened. My curios impel 
me to recal him from hi reverie. I rose, and, seiz him by the arm, 
look at him with an air of inquisit anxiety. It wa needless to 
speak. 

He notic my movement, and, turn toward me, spoke in a tone of some 
resentment:--"whi did you deceiv me? did you not say clithero wa 
dead?" 

"I said so becaus it wa my belief. know you ani thing to the contrary? 
heaven grant that he is still alive, and that our mutual effort may 
restor him to peace!" 

"heaven grant," repli my friend, with a vehem that border upon 
fury,--"heaven grant that he may live thousand of years, and know not, 
in their long course, a moment' respit from remors and from anguish! 
but thi prayer is fruitless. He is not dead, but death hover over him. 
should he live, he will live onli to defi justic and perpetr new 
horrors. My skill might perhap save him, but a finger shall not be 
move to avert hi fate. 

"littl did I think that the wretch whom my friend rescu from the 
power of the savages, and brought wound and expir hither, wa 
clithero. they sent for me in hast to afford him surgic assistance. I 
found him stretch upon the floor below, deserted, helpless, and 
bleeding. the moment I beheld him, he wa recognised. the last of evil 
wa to look upon the face of thi assassin; but that evil is past, and 
shall never be endur again. 

"rise, and come with me. accommod is prepar for you at walcot's. 
let us leav thi house, and, the moment you are abl to perform a 
journey, abandon forev thi district." 

I could not readili consent to thi proposal. clithero had been 
deliv from captivity, but wa die for want of that aid which 
sarsefield wa abl to afford. wa it not inhuman to desert him in thi 
extremity? what offenc had he commit that deserv such implac 
vengeance? noth I had heard from sarsefield wa in contradict to 
hi own story. hi deed, imperfectli observed, would appear to be 
atroci and detestable; but the view of all it anteced and 
accompani event and motiv would sure place it in the list, not 
of crimes, but of misfortunes. 

but wrhat is that guilt which no penit can expiate? had not 
clithero' remors been more than adequ to crime far more deadli and 
enorm than this? this, however, wa no time to argu with the 
passion of sarsefield. noth but a repetit of clithero' tale 
could vanquish hi prepossess and mollifi hi rage; but thi 
repetit wa imposs to be given by me, till a moment of safeti and 
composure. 

these thought made me linger, but hinder me from attempt to chang 
the determin of my friend. He renew hi importun for me to 
fli with him. He drag me by the arm, and, waver and reluctant, I 
follow where he chose to lead. He cross the common room, with 
hurri steps, and eye avert from a figur which instantli fasten 
my attention. 

It wa inde clithero whom I now beheld, supine, pollut with blood, 
hi eye closed, and appar insensible. thi object wa gaze at 
with emot that root me to the spot. sarsefield, perceiv me 
determin to remain where I was, rush out of the house, and 
disappeared. 




chapter xxvii. 


I hung over the unhappi wretch, whose emaci form and rueful featur 
suffici bespok that savag hand had onli complet that 
destruct which hi miseri had begun. He wa mangl by the tomahawk 
in a shock manner, and there wa littl hope that human skill could 
save hi life. 

I wa sensibl of noth but compassion. I act without design, when, 
seat myself on the floor, I rais hi head and place it on my 
knees. thi movement awaken hi attention, and, open hi eyes, he 
fix them on my countenance. they testifi neither insensibility, nor 
horror, nor distraction. A faint emot of surpris gave way to an 
appear of tranquillity. have perceiv these token of a state 
less hopeless than I at first imagined, I spoke to him:--"mi friend, how 
do you feel? can ani thing be done for you?" 

He answer me in a tone more firm and with more coher of idea 
than previou appear had taught me to expect. "no," said he; "thi 
kindness, good youth, can avail me nothing. the end of my exist here 
is at hand. may my guilt be expiat by the miseri that I have 
suffered, and my good deed onli attend me to the presenc of my divin 
judge! 

"I am waiting, not with trembl or dismay, for thi close of my 
sorrows. I breath but one prayer, and that prayer ha been answered. I 
ask for an interview with thee, young man; but, feel as I now feel, 
thi interview, so much desired, wa beyond my hope. now thou art come, 
in due season, to hear the last word that I shall need to utter. 

"I want to assur thee that thi effort for my benefit were not 
useless. they have save me from murder myself, a guilt more 
inexpi than ani which it wa in my power to commit. 

"I retir to the innermost recess of norwalk, and gain the summit of 
a hill, by subterranean paths. thi hill I knew to be on all side 
inaccess to human footsteps, and the subterranean passag were 
close up by stones. here I believ my solitud exempt from 
interruption, and my death, in consequ of famine, sure. 

"thi persuas wa not taken away by your appear on the opposit 
steep. the chasm which sever us I knew to be impassable. I withdrew 
from your sight. 

"some time after, awaken from a long sleep, I found victual besid 
me. He that brought it wa invisible. for a time, I doubt whether some 
messeng of heaven had not interpos for my salvation. how other than 
by supernatur mean my retreat should be explored, I wa unabl to 
conceive. the summit wa encompass by dizzi and profound gulfs, and 
the subterranean passag were still closed. 

"thi opinion, though correct by subsequ reflection, tend to 
chang the cours of my desper thoughts. My hunger, thu 
importun urged, would not abstain, and I ate of the food that wa 
provided. henceforth I determin to live, to resum the path of 
obscur and labour which I had relinquished, and wait till my god 
should summon me to retribution. To anticip hi call is onli to 
redoubl our guilt. 

"I design not to return to inglefield' service, but to choos some 
other and remot district. meanwhile, I had left in hi possess a 
treasure, which my determin to die had render of no value, but 
which my chang of resolut restored. enclos in a box at 
inglefield' were the memoir of euphemia lorimer, by which, in all my 
vicissitudes, I had been hitherto accompanied, and from which I 
consent to part onli becaus I had refus to live. My exist wa 
now to be prolonged, and thi manuscript wa onc more to constitut the 
torment and the solac of my being. 

"I hasten to inglefield' by night. there wa no need to warn him of 
my purpose. I desir that my fate should be an etern secret to my 
ancient master and hi neighbours. the apart contain my box wa 
well known, and easili accessible. 

"the box wa found, but broken and rifl of it treasure. My transport 
of astonishment, and indignation, and grief, yield to the resumpt 
of my fatal purpose. I hasten back to the hill, and determin anew to 
perish. 

"thi mood continu to the even of the ensu day. wander over 
rock and pits, I discov the manuscript lie under a jut 
precipice. the chanc that brought it hither wa not less propiti and 
miracul than that by which I had been suppli with food. It produc 
a similar effect upon my feelings, and, while in possess of thi 
manuscript, I wa reconcil to the mean of life. I left the mountain, 
and, travers the wilderness, stop in chetasco. that kind of 
employ which I sought wa instantli procured; but my new vocat 
wa scarc assum when a band of savag invad our security. 

"rambl in the desert by moonlight, I encount these foes. they 
rush upon me, and, after numer wounds, which for the present 
neither kill nor disabl me, they compel me to keep pace with them 
in their retreat. some hour have pass sinc the troop wa overtaken 
and my liberti redeemed. hardships, and repeat wounds, inflict at 
the moment when the invad were surpris and slain, have brought me 
to my present condition. I rejoic that my cours is about to 
terminate." 

here the speaker wa interrupt by the tumultu entranc of the parti 
by whom he had been brought hither. their astonish at see me 
sustain the head of the die man may be easili conceived. their 
surpris wa more strongli excit by the disappear of the captiv 
whom they had left in thi apartment, bound hand and foot. It now 
appear that, of the savag troop who had adventur thu far in search 
of pillag and blood, all had been destroy but two, who had been led 
hither as prisoners. On their entranc into thi house, one of the parti 
had been sent to walcot' to summon sarsefield to the aid of the wound 
man, while other had gone in search of cord to secur the arm and 
leg of the captives, who had hitherto been manacl imperfectly. 

the cord were brought and one of them wa bound; but the other, befor 
the same oper wa begun upon him, broke, by a sudden effort, the 
feebl ligatur by which he wa at present constrained, and, seiz a 
musket that lay near him, fire on hi enemies, and then rush out of 
doors. all eagerli engag in the pursuit. the savag wa fleet as a 
deer, and final elud hi pursuers. 

while their attent wa thu engag abroad, he that remain found 
mean to extric hi wrist and ankl from hi bonds, and, betak 
himself to the stairs, escaped, as I befor described, through the 
window of the room which I had occupied. they pester me with their 
curios and wonder, for I wa known to all of them; but, waiv the 
discuss of my own concerns, I entreat their assist to carri 
clithero to the chamber and the bed which I had just deserted. 

I now, in spite of pain, fatigue, and watchfulness, set out to go to 
walton's. sarsefield wa readi to receiv me at the door, and the 
kind and compass of the famili were activ in my behalf. I wa 
conduct to a chamber and provid with suitabl attend and 
remedies. 

I wa not unmind of the more deplor condit of clithero. I 
incessantli medit on the mean for hi relief. hi case stood in 
need of all the vigil and skill of a physician, and sarsefield wa 
the onli one of that profess whose aid could be season 
administered. sarsefield, therefore, must be persuad to bestow thi 
aid. 

there wa but one mode of conquer hi abhorr of thi man,--to 
prepossess my friend with the belief of the innoc of clithero, or to 
sooth him into piti by a pictur of remors and suffering. thi could 
be done, and in the manner most conform to truth, by a simpl 
recit of the incid that had befallen, and by repeat the 
confess which had been extort from clithero. 

I request all but my friend to leav my chamber, and then, solicit 
a patient hearing, began the narr of waldegrave' death; of the 
detect of clithero beneath the shade of the elm; of the suspicion 
which were thenc produced; and of the forest interview to which these 
suspicion gave birth. I then repeated, without variat or addition, 
the tale which wa then told. I likewis mention my subsequ 
transact in norwalk, so far as they illustr the destini of 
clithero. 

dure thi recital, I fix my eye upon the counten of sarsefield, 
and watch everi emot as it aros or declined. with the progress of 
my tale, hi indign and hi furi grew less, and at length gave 
place to horror and compassion. 

hi seat becam uneasy; hi puls throb with new vehemence. when I 
came to the motiv which prompt the unhappi man to visit the chamber 
of hi mistress, he start from hi seat, and sometim strode across 
the floor in a troubl mood, and sometim stood befor me, with hi 
breath almost suspend in the eager of hi attention. when I 
mention the lift dagger, the shriek from behind, and the apparit 
that interposed, he shudder and drew back, as if a dagger had been 
aim at hi breast. 

when the tale wa done, some time elaps in mutual and profound 
silence. My friend' thought were involv in a mourn and 
indefin reverie. from thi he at length recov and spoke:-- 

"it is true. A tale like thi could never be the fruit of invention, or 
be invent to deceive. He ha done himself injustice. hi charact wa 
spotless and fair. all hi moral properti seem to have resolv 
themselv into gratitude, fidelity, and honour. 

"we part at the door, late in the evening, as he mentioned, and he 
guess truli that subsequ reflect had induc me to return and to 
disclos the truth to mrs. lorimer. clarice, reliev by the sudden 
death of her friend, and unexpectedli by all, arriv at the same hour. 

"these tide astonished, afflicted, and delight the lady. her 
brother' death had been long believ by all but herself. To find her 
doubt verified, and hi exist ascertained, wa the dearest 
consol that he ever could bestow. she wa afflict at the proof 
that had been note of the continu of hi depravity, but she dread 
no danger to herself from hi malign or vengeance. 

"the ignor and prepossess of thi woman were remarkable. On thi 
subject onli she wa perverse, headstrong, obstinate. her anxieti to 
benefit thi archruffian occupi her whole thoughts, and allow her no 
time to reflect upon the reason or remonstr of others. she 
could not be prevail on to deni herself to hi visits, and I part 
from her in the utmost perplexity. 

"A messeng came to me at midnight, entreat my immedi presence. 
some disast had happened, but of what kind the messeng wa unabl to 
tell. My fear easili conjur up the imag of wiatte. terror scarc 
allow me to breathe. when I enter the hous of mrs. lorimer, I wa 
conduct to her chamber. she lay upon the bed in a state of 
stupefaction, that aros from some mental cause. claric sat by her, 
wring her hands, and pour forth her tear without intermission. 
neither could explain to me the natur of the scene. I made inquiri of 
the servant and attendants. they mere said that the famili as usual 
had retir to rest, but their lady' bell rung with great violence, and 
call them in hast to her chamber, where they found her in a swoon 
upon the floor, and the young ladi in the utmost affright and 
perturbation. 

"suitabl mean be used, mrs. lorim had, at length, recovered, but 
wa still nearli insensible. I went to clithero' apartments; but he wa 
not to be found, and the domest inform me that, sinc he had gone 
with me, he had not returned. the door between thi chamber and the 
court were open; hence, that some dread interview had taken place, 
perhap with wiatte, wa an unavoid conjecture. He had withdrawn, 
however, without commit ani person injury. 

"I need not mention my reflect upon thi scene. all wa torment 
doubt and suspense, till the morn arrived, and tide were receiv 
that wiatt had been kill in the streets. thi event wa anteced to 
that which had occas mrs. lorimer' distress and alarm. I now 
rememb that fatal prepossess by which the ladi wa governed, and 
her frantic belief that her death and that of her brother were to fall 
out at the same time. could some wit of hi death have brought her 
tide of it? had he penetrated, unexpect and unlicensed, to her 
chamber? and were these the effect produc by the intelligence? 

"present I knew that not onli wiatt wa dead, but that clithero had 
kill him. clithero had not been known to return, and wa nowher to be 
found. he, then, wa the bearer of these tidings, for none but he could 
have found access or egress without disturb the servants. 

"these doubt were at length at an end. In a broken and confus manner, 
and after the laps of some days, the monstrou and portent truth wa 
disclosed. after our interview, the ladi and her daughter had retir to 
the same chamber; the former had withdrawn to her closet, and the latter 
to bed. some one' entranc alarm the lady, and, come forth after a 
moment' pause, the spectacl which clithero ha too faith 
describ present itself. 

"what could I think? A life of uniform hypocrisy, or a sudden loss of 
reason, were the onli supposit to be formed. clithero wa the parent 
of furi and abhorr in my heart. In either case I start at the 
name. I shudder at the imag of the apost or the maniac. 

"what? kill the brother whose exist wa interwoven with that of hi 
benefactress and hi friend? then hasten to her chamber, and attempt her 
life? lift a dagger to destroy her who had been the author of hi be 
and hi happiness? 

"he that could medit a deed like thi wa no longer man. An agent 
from hell had master hi faculties. He wa becom the engin of 
infern malice, against whom it wa the duti of all mankind to rise up 
in arm and never to desist till, by shatter it to atoms, it power 
to injur wa taken away. 

"all inquiri to discov the place of hi retreat were vain. No 
wonder, methought, that he wrap himself in the fold of impenetr 
secrecy. curbed, checked, baffl in the midst of hi career, no wonder 
that he shrunk into obscurity, that he fled from justic and revenge, 
that he dare not meet the rebuk of that eye which, dissolv in 
tender or flash with disdain, had ever been irresistible. 

"but how shall I describ the lady' condition? clithero she had 
cherish from hi infancy. He wa the stay, the consolation, the pride 
of her life. hi project allianc with her daughter made him still 
more dear. her eloqu wa never tire of expati on hi puriti 
and rectitude. No wonder that she delight in thi theme, for he wa 
her own work. hi virtu were the creatur of her bounty. 

"how hard to be endur wa thi sad reverse! she can be tranquil, but 
never more will she be happy. To promot her forget of him, I 
persuad her to leav her country, which contain a thousand memori 
of past calamity, and which wa laps fast into civil broils. claric 
ha accompani us, and time may effect the happi of other by her 
means, though she can never remov the melancholi of her mother. 

"I have listen to your tale, not without compassion. what would you 
have me to do? To prolong hi life would be mere to protract hi 
misery. 

"he can never be regard with complac by my wife. He can never be 
thought of without shudder by clarice. common ill are not without a 
cure less than death, but here all remedi are vain. conscious 
itself is the malady, the pest, of which he onli is cure who ceas to 
think." 

I could not but assent to thi mourn conclusion: yet, though death 
wa better to clithero than life, could not some of hi mistak be 
rectified? euphemia lorimer, contrari to hi belief, wa still alive. He 
dream that she wa dead, and a thousand evil were imagin to flow 
from that death. thi death, and it progeni of ills, haunt hi fancy, 
and ad keen to hi remorse. wa it not our duti to rectifi thi 
error? 

sarsefield reluctantli assent to the truth of my argument on thi 
head. He consent to return, and afford the die man the consol 
of know that the be whom he ador as a benefactor and parent had 
not been depriv of existence, though bereft of peac by hi act. 

dure sarsefield' absenc my mind wa busi in revolv the incid 
that had just occurred. I rumin on the last word of clithero. there 
wa somewhat in hi narr that wa obscur and contradictory. He had 
left the manuscript, which he so much and so justli prized, in hi 
cabinet. He enter the chamber in my absence, and found the cabinet 
unfasten and the manuscript gone. It wa I by whom the cabinet wa 
opened; but the manuscript suppos to be contain in it wa buri in 
the earth beneath the elm. how should clithero be unacquaint with it 
situation, sinc none but clithero could have dug for it thi grave? 

thi mysteri vanish when I reflect on the histori of my own 
manuscript. clithero had buri hi treasur with hi own hands, as mine 
had been secret by myself; but both act had been perform dure 
sleep. the deed wa neither prompt by the will nor notic by the 
sens of him by whom it wa done. disastr and humili is the 
state of man! By hi own hand is construct the mass of miseri and 
error in which hi step are forev involved. 

thu it wa with thi friend. hurri on by phantom too indistinct to be 
now recalled, I wander from my chamber to the desert. I plung into 
some unvisit cavern, and easili proceed till I reach the edg of a 
pit. there my step wa deceived, and I tumbl headlong from the 
precipice. the fall bereav me of sense, and I continu breathless and 
motionless dure the remaind of the night and the ensu day. 

how littl cogniz have men over the action and motiv of each 
other! how total is our blind with regard to our own performances! 
who would have sought me in the bowel of thi mountain? age might have 
pass away, befor my bone would be discov in thi tomb by some 
travel whom curios had prompt to explor it. 

I wa rous from these reflect by sarsefield' return. inquir 
into clithero' condition, he answer that the unhappi man wa 
insensible, but that, notwithstand numer and dread gash in 
differ part of hi body, it wa possibl that, by submit to the 
necessari treatment, he might recover. 

encourag by thi information, I endeavour to awaken the zeal and 
compass of my friend in clithero' behalf. He recoil with 
involuntari shudder from ani task which would confin him to the 
presenc of thi man. time and reflection, he said, might introduc 
differ sentiment and feelings, but at present he could not but 
regard thi person as a maniac, whose diseas wa irremediable, and 
whose exist could not be protract but to hi own miseri and the 
miseri of others. 

find him irreconcil avers to ani scheme connect with the 
welfar of clithero, I began to think that hi assist as a surgeon 
wa by no mean necessary. He had declar that the suffer need 
noth more than common treatment; and to thi the skill of a score of 
age women in thi district, furnish with simpl cull from the 
forest, and point out, of old time, by indian _leeches_, wa no 
less adequ than that of sarsefield. these women were readi and 
offici in their charity, and none of them were prepossess against 
the suffer by a knowledg of hi genuin story. 

sarsefield, meanwhile, wa impati for my remov to inglefield' 
habitation, and that vener friend wa no less impati to receiv 
me. My hurt were superficial, and my strength suffici repair by 
a night' repose. next day I went thither, leav clithero to the care 
of hi immedi neighbours. 

sarsefield' engag compel him to prosecut hi journey into 
virginia, from which he had somewhat deviat in order to visit 
solesbury. He propos to return in less than a month, and then to take 
me in hi compani to new york. He ha treat me with patern 
tenderness, and insist upon the privileg of consult for my interest 
as if he were my real father. meanwhil these view have been disclos 
to inglefield, and it is with him that I am to remain, with my sisters, 
until hi return. 

My reflect have been variou and tumultuous. they have been busi in 
relat to you, to weymouth, and especi to clithero. the latter, 
pollut with gore and weaken by abstinence, fatigue, and the loss of 
blood, appear in my eye to be in a much more danger condit than 
the event prove him to be. I wa punctual inform of the progress of 
hi cure, and propos in a few day to visit him. the duti of 
explain the truth, respect the present condit of mrs. lorimer, 
had devolv upon me. By impart thi intelligence, I hope to work 
the most auspici revolut in hi feelings, and prepared, 
therefore, with alacrity, for an interview. 

In thi hope I wa destin to be disappointed. On the morn on which 
I intend to visit him, a messeng arriv from the hous in which he 
wa entertained, and inform us that the family, on enter the sick 
man' apartment, had found it deserted. It appear that clithero had, 
dure the night, risen from hi bed and gone secretli forth. No trace 
of hi flight have sinc been discovered. 

but, oh, my friend, the death of waldegrave, thi brother, is at length 
divest of uncertainti and mystery. hitherto, I had been abl to form 
no conjectur respect it; but the solut wa found shortli after 
thi time. 

queen mab, three day after my adventure, wa seiz in her hut on 
suspicion of have aid and counsel her countrymen in their late 
depredations. she wa not to be awe or intimid by the treatment she 
received, but readili confess and glori in the mischief she had 
done, and account for it by enumer the injuri which she had 
receiv from her neighbours. 

these injuri consist in contemptu or neglect treatment, and in 
the reject of groundless and absurd claims. the peopl of chetasco 
were less obsequi to her humour than those of solesbury, her ancient 
neighbourhood, and her imagin brood for a long time over noth 
but scheme of revenge. she becam sullen, irascible, and spent more of 
her time in solitud than ever. 

A troop of her countrymen at length visit her hut. their intent 
be hostile, they conceal from the inhabit their presenc in 
thi quarter of the country. some motiv induc them to withdraw and 
postpone, for the present, the violenc which they meditated. one of 
them, however, more sanguinari and audaci than the rest, would not 
depart without some gratif of hi vengeance. He left hi 
associ and penetr by night into solesbury, resolv to attack 
the first human be whom he should meet. It wa the fate of thi 
unhappi brother to encount thi ruffian, whose sagac made him 
forbear to tear away the usual trophi from the dead, lest he should 
afford ground for suspicion as to the author of the evil. 

satisfi with thi exploit, he rejoin hi companions, and, after an 
interv of three weeks, return with a more numer party, to execut 
a more extens project of destruction. they were counsel and 
guided, in all their movements, by queen mab, who now explain these 
particular and boldli defi her oppressors. her usual obstinaci and 
infatu induc her to remain in her ancient dwell and prepar to 
meet the consequences. 

thi disclosur awaken anew all the regret and anguish which flow 
from that disaster. It ha been productive, however, of some benefit. 
suspicion and doubts, by which my soul wa harassed, and which were 
injuri to the innocent, are now at an end. It is likewis some 
imperfect consol to reflect that the assassin ha himself been 
killed, and probabl by my own hand. the shedder of blood no longer 
live to pursu hi vocation, and justic is satisfied. 

thu have I fulfil my promis to compos a minut relat of my 
sufferings. I rememb my duti to thee, and, as soon as I wa abl to 
hold a pen, employ it to inform thee of my welfare. I could not at 
that time enter into particulars, but reserv a more copiou narr 
till a period of more health and leisure. 

On look back, I am surpris at the length to which my stori ha run. 
I thought that a few day would suffic to complet it; but one page ha 
insens been ad to another, till I have consum week and fill 
volumes. here I will draw to a close; I will send you what I have 
written, and discuss with you in convers my other immedi 
concerns, and my scheme for the future. As soon as I have seen 
sarsefield, I will visit you. farewell. E. H. 

solesbury, novemb 10. 




letter I. 

_to mr. sarsefield._ 



philadelphia. 

I came hither but ten minut ago, and write thi letter in the bar of 
the stage-house. I wish not to lose a moment in inform you of what 
ha happened. I cannot do justic to my own feel when I reflect upon 
the rash of which I have been guilty. 

I will give you the particular to-morrow. At present, I shall onli say 
that clithero is alive, is appriz of your wife' arriv and abod in 
new york, and ha set out with mysteri intent to visit her. 

may heaven avert the consequ of such a design! may you be enabled, 
by some means, to prevent their meeting! If you cannot prevent it--but I 
must not reason on such an event, nor lengthen out thi letter. 

E. H. 




letter ii. 

_to the same._ 



I will now relat the particular which I yesterday promis to send 
you. you heard through your niec of my arriv at inglefield's, in 
solesbury: my inquiries, you may readili suppose, would turn upon the 
fate of my friend' servant clithero, whose last disappear wa so 
strang and abrupt, and of whom, sinc that time, I had heard nothing. 
you are indiffer to hi fate, and are anxiou onli that hi exist 
and misfortun may be speedili forgotten. I confess that it is somewhat 
otherwis with me. I piti him; I wish to reliev him, and cannot admit 
the belief that hi miseri is without a cure. I want to find him out. I 
want to know hi condition, and, if possible, to afford him comfort and 
inspir him with courag and hope. 

inglefield repli to my questions:--"oh yes! He ha appeared. the 
strang be is again upon the stage. shortli after he left hi 
sick-bed, I heard from philip beddington, of chetasco, that deb' hut had 
found a new tenant. At first I imagin that the scotsman who built it 
had returned; but, make closer inquiries, I found that the new tenant 
wa my servant. I had no inclin to visit him myself, but frequent 
inquir respect him of those who live or pass that way, and find 
that he still live there." 

"but how!" said I: "what is hi mode of subsistence? the winter ha been 
no time for cultivation; and he found, I presume, noth in the 
ground." 

"deb' hut," repli my friend, "i hi lodg and hi place of 
retirement, but food and cloth he procur by labour on a 
neighbour farm. thi farm is next to that of beddington, who 
consequ know someth of hi present situation. I find littl or 
no differ in hi present deport and those appear which he 
assum while live with me, except that he retir everi night to hi 
hut, and hold as littl intercours as possibl with the rest of 
mankind. He dine at hi employer' table; but hi supper, which is 
noth but rye-bread, he carri home with him, and, at all those time 
when disengag from employment, he seclud himself in hi hut, or 
wander nobodi know whither." 

thi wa the substanc of inglefield' intelligence. I glean from it 
some satisfaction. It prove the condit of clithero to be less 
deplor and desper than I had previous imagined. hi fatal and 
gloomi thought seem to have somewhat yield to tranquillity. 

In the cours of my reflections, however, I could not but perceiv that 
hi condition, though elig when compar with what it onc was, wa 
likewis disastr and humiliating, compar with hi youth hope 
and hi actual merits. for such a one to mope away hi life in thi 
unsoci and savag state wa deepli to be deplored. It wa my duty, if 
possible, to prevail on him to relinquish hi scheme. and what would be 
requisite, for that end, but to inform him of the truth? 

the sourc of hi deject wa the groundless belief that he had 
occas the death of hi benefactress. It wa thi alon that could 
justli produc remors or grief. It wa a distemp imagin both 
in him and in me that had given birth to thi opinion, sinc the term 
of hi narrative, imparti considered, were far from impli that 
catastrophe. To him, however, the evid which he possess wa 
incontestable. No deduct from probabl could overthrow hi 
belief. thi could onli be effect by similar and counter evidence. To 
appriz him that she wa now alive, in possess of some degre of 
happiness, the wife of sarsefield, and an actual resid on thi shore, 
would dissip the sanguinari apparit that haunt him, cure hi 
diseas intellects, and restor him to those vocat for which hi 
talents, and that rank in societi for which hi education, had qualifi 
him. influenc by these thoughts, I determin to visit hi retreat. 
be oblig to leav solesburi the next day, I resolv to set out the 
same afternoon, and, stop in chetasco for the night, seek hi 
habit at the hour when he had probabl retir to it. 

thi wa done. I arriv at beddington' at nightfall. My inquiri 
respect clithero obtain for me the same intellig from him which 
I had receiv from inglefield. deb' hut wa three mile from thi 
habitation, and thither, when the even had somewhat advanced, I 
repaired. thi wa the spot which had wit so mani peril dure 
the last year; and my emotions, on approach it, were awful. with 
palpit heart and quick step I travers the road, skirt on each 
side by thickets, and the area befor the house. the dwell wa by no 
mean in so ruinou a state as when I last visit it. the cranni 
between the log had been fill up, and the light within wa 
perceiv onli at a crevic in the door. 

look through thi crevice, I perceiv a fire in the chimney, but the 
object of my visit wa nowher to be seen. I knock and request 
admission, but no answer wa made. At length I lift the latch and 
entered. nobodi wa there. 

It wa obviou to suppos that clithero had gone abroad for a short 
time, and would speedili return; or perhap some engag had detain 
him at hi labour later than usual. I therefor seat myself on some 
straw near the fire, which, with a woollen rug, appear to constitut 
hi onli bed. the rude bedstead which I formerli met wa gone. the 
slender furniture, likewise, which had then engag my attention, had 
disappeared. there wa noth capabl of human use but a heap of fagot 
in the corner, which seem intend for fuel. how slender is the 
accommod which natur ha provid for man, and how scanti is the 
portion which our physic necess require! 

while rumin upon thi scene, and compar past event with the 
object befor me, the dull whistl of the gale without gave place to 
the sound of footsteps. present the door opened, and clithero enter 
the apartment. hi aspect and guis were not essenti differ from 
those which he wore when an inhabit of solesbury. 

To find hi hearth occupi by anoth appear to creat the deepest 
surprise. He look at me without ani token of remembrance. hi 
featur assum a more auster expression, and, after scowl on my 
person for a moment, he withdrew hi eyes, and, place in a corner a 
bundl which he bore in hi hand, he turn and seem prepar to 
withdraw. 

I wa anxious attent to hi demeanour, and, as soon as I perceiv 
hi purpos to depart, leap on my feet to prevent it. I took hi hand, 
and, affection press it, said, "do you not know me? have you so 
soon forgotten me, who is truli your friend?" 

He look at me with some attention, but again withdrew hi eyes, and 
place himself in silenc on the seat which I had left. I seat myself 
near him, and a paus of mutual silenc ensued. 

My mind wa full of the purpos that brought me hither, but I knew not 
in what manner to commun my purpose. sever time I open my lip 
to speak, but my perplex continued, and suitabl word refus to 
suggest themselves. At length I said, in a confus tone,-- 

"I came hither with a view to benefit a man with whose misfortun hi 
own lip have made me acquainted, and who ha awaken in my breast the 
deepest sympathy. I know the caus and extent of hi dejection. I know 
the event which ha given birth to horror and remors in hi heart. He 
believ that, by hi means, hi patro and benefactress ha found an 
untim death." 

these word produc a visibl shock in my companion, which evinc that 
I had at least engag hi attention. I proceeded:-- 

"thi unhappi ladi wa curs with a wick and unnatur brother. she 
conceiv a disproportion affect for thi brother, and erron 
imagin that her fate wa blend with his, that their live would 
necessarili termin at the same period, and that, therefore, whoever 
wa the contriv of hi death wa likewise, by a fatal and invinc 
necessity, the author of her own. 

"clithero wa her servant, but wa rais by her bounti to the station 
of her son and the rank of her friend. clithero, in self-defence, took 
away the life of that unnatur brother, and, in that deed, fals but 
cogent believ that he had perpetr the destruct of hi 
benefactress. 

"to ascertain the truth, he sought her presence. she wa found, the 
tide of her brother' death were communicated, and she sank 
breathless at hi feet." 

At these word clithero start from the ground, and cast upon me look 
of furiou indignation. "and come you hither," he muttered, "for thi 
end?--to recount my offenc and drive me again to despair?" 

"no," answer I, with quickness; "I come to outroot a fatal but 
power illusion. I come to assur you that the woman with whose 
destruct you charg yourself is _not dead_." 

these words, utter with the most emphat solemnity, mere produc 
look in which contempt wa mingl with anger. He continu silent. 

"I perceive," resum I, "that my word are disregarded. would to heaven 
I were abl to conquer your incredulity, could show you not onli the 
truth but the probabl of my tale! can you not confid in me? that 
euphemia lorim is now alive, is happy, is the wife of sarsefield? that 
her brother is forgotten and hi murder regard without enmiti or 
vengeance?" 

He look at me with a strang express of contempt. "come," said he, 
at length; "make out thi assert to be true. fall on thi knees, and 
invok the thunder of heaven to light on thi head if thi word be false. 
swear that euphemia lorim is alive; happy; forget of wiatt and 
compassion of me. swear that thou hast seen her; talk with her; 
receiv from her own lip the confess of her piti for him who aim 
a dagger at her bosom. swear that she is sarsefield' wife." 

I put my hand together, and, lift my eye to heaven, exclaimed, "I 
compli with your conditions. I call the omnisci god to wit that 
euphemia lorim is alive; that I have seen her with these eyes; have 
talk with her; have inhabit the same hous for months." 

these assever were listen to with shuddering. He laid not aside, 
however, an air of incredul and contempt. "perhaps," said he, "thou 
canst point out the place of her abode?--canst guid me to the city, the 
street, the veri door of her habitation?" 

"I can. she resid at thi moment in the citi of new york; in broadway; 
in a hous contigu to the--." 

"'ti well!" exclaim my companion, in a tone loud, abrupt, and in the 
utmost degre vehement. "'ti well! rash and infatu youth, thou hast 
ratified, beyond appeal or forgiveness, thi own doom. thou hast onc 
more let loos my steps, and sent me on a fear journey. thou hast 
furnish the mean of detect thi imposture. I will fli to the spot 
which thou describest. I will ascertain thi falsehood with my own eyes. 
If she be alive, then am I reserv for the perform of a new crime. 
My evil destini will have it so. If she be dead, I shall make thee 
expiate." 

So saying, he dart through the door, and wa gone in a moment beyond 
my sight and my reach. I ran to the road, look on everi side, and 
called; but my call were repeat in vain. He had fled with the 
swift of a deer. 

My own embarrassment, confusion, and terror were inexpressible. hi last 
word were incoherent. they denot the tumult and vehem of frenzy. 
they intim hi resolut to seek the presenc of your wife. I had 
furnish a clue which could not fail to conduct him to her presence. 
what might not be dread from the interview? clithero is a maniac. thi 
truth cannot be concealed. your wife can with difficulti preserv her 
tranquil when hi imag occur to her remembrance. what must it be 
when he start up befor her in hi neglect and feroci guise, and 
arm with purpos perhap as terribl as those which had formerli led 
him to her secret chamber and her bedside? 

hi mean wa obscur conveyed. He talk of a deed for the 
perform of which hi malign fate had reserv him, which wa to 
ensu their meeting, and which wa to afford disastr testimoni of the 
infatu which had led me hither. 

heaven grant that some mean may suggest themselv to you of 
intercept hi approach! yet I know not what mean can be conceived. 
some miracul chanc may befriend you; yet thi is scarc to be 
hoped. It is a visionari and fantast base on which to rest our 
security. 

I cannot forget that my unfortun temer ha creat thi evil. yet 
who could forese thi consequ of my intelligence? I imagin that 
clithero wa mere a victim of erron gratitude, a slave of the 
error of hi educ and the prejudic of hi rank; that hi 
understand wa delud by phantom in the mask of virtu and duty, 
and not, as you have strenuous maintained, utterli subverted. 

I shall not escap your censure, but I shall, likewise, gain your 
compassion. I have erred, not through sinist or malign intentions, 
but from the impuls of misguided, indeed, but powerful, benevolence. 




letter iii. 

_to edgar huntly_. 



new york. 

edgar:-- 

after the fatigu of the day, I return home. As I entered, my wife 
wa break the seal of a letter; but, on see me, she forbore, and 
present the letter to me. 

"I saw," said she, "bi the superscript of thi letter, who the writer 
was. so, agreeabl to your wishes, I proceed to open it; but you have 
come just time enough to save me the trouble." 

thi letter wa from you. It contain inform rel to clithero. 
see how immin a chanc it wa that save my wife from a knowledg of 
it contents! It requir all my effort to hide my perturb from 
her and excus myself from show her the letter. 

I know better than you the charact of clithero, and the consequ 
of a meet between him and my wife. you may be sure that I would exert 
myself to prevent a meeting. 

the method for me to pursu wa extrem obvious. clithero is a madman, 
whose liberti is dangerous, and who requir to be fetter and 
imprison as the most atroci criminal. 

I hasten to the chief-magistrate, who is my friend, and, by proper 
representations, obtain from him author to seiz clithero wherev 
I should meet with him, and effectu debar him from the perpetr 
of new mischiefs. 

new york doe not afford a place of confin for lunat as suitabl 
to hi case as pennsylvania. I wa desir of place him as far as 
possibl from the place of my wife' residence. fortunately, there wa a 
packet for philadelphia on the point of set out on her voyage. thi 
vessel I engag to wait a day or two, for the purpos of convey him 
to pennsylvania hospital. meanwhile, proper person were station at 
powl hook, and at the quay where the variou stage-boat from jersey 
arrive. 

these precaut were effectual. not mani hour after the receipt of 
your intelligence, thi unfortun man appli for a passag at 
elizabethtown, wa seiz the moment he set hi foot on shore, and wa 
forthwith convey to the packet, which immedi set sail. 

I design that all these proceed should be conceal from the 
women, but unfortun neglect to take suitabl measur for 
hinder the letter, which you gave me reason to expect on the ensu 
day, from come into their hands. It wa deliv to my wife in my 
absence, and open immedi by her. 

you know what is, at present, her person condition. you know what 
strong reason I had to prevent ani danger or alarm from approach 
her. terror could not assum a shape more ghastli than this. the effect 
have been what might have been easili predicted. her own life ha been 
immin endangered, and an untim birth ha blast my fondest 
hope. her infant, with whose futur exist so mani pleasur were 
entwined, is dead. 

I assur you, edgar, my philosophi ha not found itself lightsom and 
activ under thi burden. I find it hard to forbear comment on your 
rash in no veri mild terms. you act in direct opposit to my 
counsel and to the plainest dictat of propriety. Be more circumspect 
and more obsequi for the future. 

you knew the liberti that would be taken of open my letters; you knew 
of my absenc from home dure the greatest part of the day, and the 
likelihood, therefore, that your letter would fall into my wife' hand 
befor they came into mine. these consider should have prompt 
you to send them under cover to whitworth or harvey, with direct to 
give them immedi to me. 

some of these event happen in my absence; for I determin to 
accompani the packet myself, and see the madman safe deliv to the 
care of the hospital. 

I will not tortur your sensibl by recount the incid of hi 
arrest and detention. you will imagin that hi strong but pervert 
reason exclaim loudli against the injustic of hi treatment. It wa 
easi for him to out-reason hi antagonist, and noth but forc could 
subdu hi opposition. On me devolv the provinc of hi jailer and hi 
tyrant,--a provinc which requir a heart more steel by spectacl of 
suffer and the exercis of cruelti than mine had been. 

scarc had we pass the narrows, when the lunatic, be suffer to 
walk the deck, (a no apprehens were entertain of hi escap in 
such circumstances,) threw himself overboard, with a seem intent 
to gain the shore. the boat wa immedi manned; the fugit wa 
pursued; but, at the moment when hi flight wa overtaken, he forc 
himself beneath the surface, and wa seen no more. 

with the life of thi wretch, let our regret and our forebod 
terminate. He ha save himself from evil for which no time would have 
provid a remedy, from linger for year in the noisom dungeon of a 
hospital. have no reason to continu my voyage, I put myself on board 
a coasting-sloop, and regain thi citi in a few hours. I persuad 
myself that my wife' indisposit will be temporary. It wa imposs 
to hide from her the death of clithero, and it circumstances. may thi 
be the last arrow in the quiver of adversity! farewell. 










end of the project gutenberg ebook of edgar huntley, by charl brockden brown 

*** end OF thi project gutenberg ebook edgar huntley *** 

***** thi file should be name 8223.txt or 8223.zip ***** 
thi and all associ file of variou format will be found in: 
http://www.gutenberg.org/8/2/2/8223/ 

produc by onlin distribut proofread team 
updat edit will replac the previou one--th old edit will 
be renamed. 

creat the work from print edit not protect by u.s. copyright 
law mean that no one own a unit state copyright in these works, 
so the foundat (and you!) can copi and distribut it in the unit 
state without permiss and without pay copyright 
royalties. special rules, set forth in the gener term of use part 
of thi license, appli to copi and distribut project 
gutenberg-tm electron work to protect the project gutenberg-tm 
concept and trademark. project gutenberg is a regist trademark, 
and may not be use if you charg for the ebooks, unless you receiv 
specif permission. If you do not charg anyth for copi of thi 
ebook, compli with the rule is veri easy. you may use thi ebook 
for nearli ani purpos such as creation of deriv works, reports, 
perform and research. they may be modifi and print and given 
away--y may do practic anyth in the unit state with ebook 
not protect by u.s. copyright law. redistribut is subject to the 
trademark license, especi commerci redistribution. 

start: full licens 

the full project gutenberg licens 
pleas read thi befor you distribut OR use thi work 

To protect the project gutenberg-tm mission of promot the free 
distribut of electron works, by use or distribut thi work 
(or ani other work associ in ani way with the phrase "project 
gutenberg"), you agre to compli with all the term of the full 
project gutenberg-tm licens avail with thi file or onlin at 
www.gutenberg.org/license. 

section 1. gener term of use and redistribut project 
gutenberg-tm electron work 

1.a. By read or use ani part of thi project gutenberg-tm 
electron work, you indic that you have read, understand, agre to 
and accept all the term of thi licens and intellectu properti 
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agre to abid by all 
the term of thi agreement, you must ceas use and return or 
destroy all copi of project gutenberg-tm electron work in your 
possession. If you paid a fee for obtain a copi of or access to a 
project gutenberg-tm electron work and you do not agre to be bound 
by the term of thi agreement, you may obtain a refund from the 
person or entiti to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 
1.e.8. 

1.b. "project gutenberg" is a regist trademark. It may onli be 
use on or associ in ani way with an electron work by peopl who 
agre to be bound by the term of thi agreement. there are a few 
thing that you can do with most project gutenberg-tm electron work 
even without compli with the full term of thi agreement. see 
paragraph 1.c below. there are a lot of thing you can do with project 
gutenberg-tm electron work if you follow the term of thi 
agreement and help preserv free futur access to project gutenberg-tm 
electron works. see paragraph 1.e below. 

1.c. the project gutenberg literari archiv foundat ("the 
foundation" or pglaf), own a compil copyright in the collect 
of project gutenberg-tm electron works. nearli all the individu 
work in the collect are in the public domain in the unit 
states. If an individu work is unprotect by copyright law in the 
unit state and you are locat in the unit states, we do not 
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing, 
display or creat deriv work base on the work as long as 
all refer to project gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope 
that you will support the project gutenberg-tm mission of promot 
free access to electron work by freeli share project gutenberg-tm 
work in complianc with the term of thi agreement for keep the 
project gutenberg-tm name associ with the work. you can easili 
compli with the term of thi agreement by keep thi work in the 
same format with it attach full project gutenberg-tm licens when 
you share it without charg with others. 

1.d. the copyright law of the place where you are locat also govern 
what you can do with thi work. copyright law in most countri are 
in a constant state of change. If you are outsid the unit states, 
check the law of your countri in addit to the term of thi 
agreement befor downloading, copying, displaying, performing, 
distribut or creat deriv work base on thi work or ani 
other project gutenberg-tm work. the foundat make no 
represent concern the copyright statu of ani work in ani 
countri outsid the unit states. 

1.e. unless you have remov all refer to project gutenberg: 

1.e.1. the follow sentence, with activ link to, or other 
immedi access to, the full project gutenberg-tm licens must appear 
promin whenev ani copi of a project gutenberg-tm work (ani work 
on which the phrase "project gutenberg" appears, or with which the 
phrase "project gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, 
performed, viewed, copi or distributed: 

thi ebook is for the use of anyon anywher in the unit state and 
most other part of the world at no cost and with almost no 
restrict whatsoever. you may copi it, give it away or re-us it 
under the term of the project gutenberg licens includ with thi 
ebook or onlin at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not locat in the 
unit states, you'll have to check the law of the countri where you 
are locat befor use thi ebook. 

1.e.2. If an individu project gutenberg-tm electron work is 
deriv from text not protect by u.s. copyright law (doe not 
contain a notic indic that it is post with permiss of the 
copyright holder), the work can be copi and distribut to anyon in 
the unit state without pay ani fee or charges. If you are 
redistribut or provid access to a work with the phrase "project 
gutenberg" associ with or appear on the work, you must compli 
either with the requir of paragraph 1.e.1 through 1.e.7 or 
obtain permiss for the use of the work and the project gutenberg-tm 
trademark as set forth in paragraph 1.e.8 or 1.e.9. 

1.e.3. If an individu project gutenberg-tm electron work is post 
with the permiss of the copyright holder, your use and distribut 
must compli with both paragraph 1.e.1 through 1.e.7 and ani 
addit term impos by the copyright holder. addit term 
will be link to the project gutenberg-tm licens for all work 
post with the permiss of the copyright holder found at the 
begin of thi work. 

1.e.4. Do not unlink or detach or remov the full project gutenberg-tm 
licens term from thi work, or ani file contain a part of thi 
work or ani other work associ with project gutenberg-tm. 

1.e.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribut or redistribut thi 
electron work, or ani part of thi electron work, without 
promin display the sentenc set forth in paragraph 1.e.1 with 
activ link or immedi access to the full term of the project 
gutenberg-tm license. 

1.e.6. you may convert to and distribut thi work in ani binary, 
compressed, mark up, nonproprietari or proprietari form, includ 
ani word process or hypertext form. however, if you provid access 
to or distribut copi of a project gutenberg-tm work in a format 
other than "plain vanilla ascii" or other format use in the offici 
version post on the offici project gutenberg-tm web site 
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no addit cost, fee or expens 
to the user, provid a copy, a mean of export a copy, or a mean 
of obtain a copi upon request, of the work in it origin "plain 
vanilla ascii" or other form. ani altern format must includ the 
full project gutenberg-tm licens as specifi in paragraph 1.e.1. 

1.e.7. Do not charg a fee for access to, viewing, displaying, 
performing, copi or distribut ani project gutenberg-tm work 
unless you compli with paragraph 1.e.8 or 1.e.9. 

1.e.8. you may charg a reason fee for copi of or provid 
access to or distribut project gutenberg-tm electron work 
provid that 

* you pay a royalti fee of 20% of the gross profit you deriv from 
the use of project gutenberg-tm work calcul use the method 
you alreadi use to calcul your applic taxes. the fee is owe 
to the owner of the project gutenberg-tm trademark, but he ha 
agre to donat royalti under thi paragraph to the project 
gutenberg literari archiv foundation. royalti payment must be paid 
within 60 day follow each date on which you prepar (or are 
legal requir to prepare) your period tax returns. royalti 
payment should be clearli mark as such and sent to the project 
gutenberg literari archiv foundat at the address specifi in 
section 4, "inform about donat to the project gutenberg 
literari archiv foundation." 

* you provid a full refund of ani money paid by a user who notifi 
you in write (or by e-mail) within 30 day of receipt that s/he 
doe not agre to the term of the full project gutenberg-tm 
license. you must requir such a user to return or destroy all 
copi of the work possess in a physic medium and discontinu 
all use of and all access to other copi of project gutenberg-tm 
works. 

* you provide, in accord with paragraph 1.f.3, a full refund of 
ani money paid for a work or a replac copy, if a defect in the 
electron work is discov and report to you within 90 day of 
receipt of the work. 

* you compli with all other term of thi agreement for free 
distribut of project gutenberg-tm works. 

1.e.9. If you wish to charg a fee or distribut a project 
gutenberg-tm electron work or group of work on differ term than 
are set forth in thi agreement, you must obtain permiss in write 
from both the project gutenberg literari archiv foundat and the 
project gutenberg trademark llc, the owner of the project gutenberg-tm 
trademark. contact the foundat as set forth in section 3 below. 

1.f. 

1.f.1. project gutenberg volunt and employe expend consider 
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcrib and proofread 
work not protect by u.s. copyright law in creat the project 
gutenberg-tm collection. despit these efforts, project gutenberg-tm 
electron works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may 
contain "defects," such as, but not limit to, incomplete, inaccur 
or corrupt data, transcript errors, a copyright or other 
intellectu properti infringement, a defect or damag disk or 
other medium, a comput virus, or comput code that damag or 
cannot be read by your equipment. 

1.f.2. limit warranty, disclaim OF damag - except for the "right 
of replac or refund" describ in paragraph 1.f.3, the project 
gutenberg literari archiv foundation, the owner of the project 
gutenberg-tm trademark, and ani other parti distribut a project 
gutenberg-tm electron work under thi agreement, disclaim all 
liabil to you for damages, cost and expenses, includ legal 
fees. you agre that you have NO remedi for negligence, strict 
liability, breach OF warranti OR breach OF contract except those 
provid IN paragraph 1.f.3. you agre that the foundation, the 
trademark owner, and ani distributor under thi agreement will not BE 
liabl TO you for actual, direct, indirect, consequential, punit OR 
incident damag even IF you give notic OF the possibl OF such 
damage. 

1.f.3. limit right OF replac OR refund - If you discov a 
defect in thi electron work within 90 day of receiv it, you can 
receiv a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by send a 
written explan to the person you receiv the work from. If you 
receiv the work on a physic medium, you must return the medium 
with your written explanation. the person or entiti that provid you 
with the defect work may elect to provid a replac copi in 
lieu of a refund. If you receiv the work electronically, the person 
or entiti provid it to you may choos to give you a second 
opportun to receiv the work electron in lieu of a refund. If 
the second copi is also defective, you may demand a refund in write 
without further opportun to fix the problem. 

1.f.4. except for the limit right of replac or refund set forth 
in paragraph 1.f.3, thi work is provid to you 'as-is', with NO 
other warranti OF ani kind, express OR implied, includ but not 
limit TO warranti OF merchant OR fit for ani purpose. 

1.f.5. some state do not allow disclaim of certain impli 
warranti or the exclus or limit of certain type of 
damages. If ani disclaim or limit set forth in thi agreement 
violat the law of the state applic to thi agreement, the 
agreement shall be interpret to make the maximum disclaim or 
limit permit by the applic state law. the invalid or 
unenforc of ani provis of thi agreement shall not void the 
remain provisions. 

1.f.6. indemn - you agre to indemnifi and hold the foundation, the 
trademark owner, ani agent or employe of the foundation, anyon 
provid copi of project gutenberg-tm electron work in 
accord with thi agreement, and ani volunt associ with the 
production, promot and distribut of project gutenberg-tm 
electron works, harmless from all liability, cost and expenses, 
includ legal fees, that aris directli or indirectli from ani of 
the follow which you do or caus to occur: (a) distribut of thi 
or ani project gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or 
addit or delet to ani project gutenberg-tm work, and (c) ani 
defect you cause. 

section 2. inform about the mission of project gutenberg-tm 

project gutenberg-tm is synonym with the free distribut of 
electron work in format readabl by the widest varieti of 
comput includ obsolete, old, middle-ag and new computers. It 
exist becaus of the effort of hundr of volunt and donat 
from peopl in all walk of life. 

volunt and financi support to provid volunt with the 
assist they need are critic to reach project gutenberg-tm' 
goal and ensur that the project gutenberg-tm collect will 
remain freeli avail for gener to come. In 2001, the project 
gutenberg literari archiv foundat wa creat to provid a secur 
and perman futur for project gutenberg-tm and futur 
generations. To learn more about the project gutenberg literari 
archiv foundat and how your effort and donat can help, see 
section 3 and 4 and the foundat inform page at 
www.gutenberg.org 



section 3. inform about the project gutenberg literari archiv foundat 

the project gutenberg literari archiv foundat is a non profit 
501(c)(3) educ corpor organ under the law of the 
state of mississippi and grant tax exempt statu by the intern 
revenu service. the foundation' ein or feder tax identif 
number is 64-6221541. contribut to the project gutenberg literari 
archiv foundat are tax deduct to the full extent permit by 
u.s. feder law and your state' laws. 

the foundation' princip offic is in fairbanks, alaska, with the 
mail address: PO box 750175, fairbanks, AK 99775, but it 
volunt and employe are scatter throughout numer 
locations. it busi offic is locat at 809 north 1500 west, salt 
lake city, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. email contact link and up to 
date contact inform can be found at the foundation' web site and 
offici page at www.gutenberg.org/contact 

for addit contact information: 

dr. gregori B. newbi 
chief execut and director 
gbnewby@pglaf.org 

section 4. inform about donat to the project gutenberg 
literari archiv foundat 

project gutenberg-tm depend upon and cannot surviv without wide 
spread public support and donat to carri out it mission of 
increas the number of public domain and licens work that can be 
freeli distribut in machin readabl form access by the widest 
array of equip includ outdat equipment. mani small donat 
($1 to $5,000) are particularli import to maintain tax exempt 
statu with the irs. 

the foundat is commit to compli with the law regul 
chariti and charit donat in all 50 state of the unit 
states. complianc requir are not uniform and it take a 
consider effort, much paperwork and mani fee to meet and keep up 
with these requirements. We do not solicit donat in locat 
where we have not receiv written confirm of compliance. To send 
donat or determin the statu of complianc for ani particular 
state visit www.gutenberg.org/don 

while we cannot and do not solicit contribut from state where we 
have not met the solicit requirements, we know of no prohibit 
against accept unsolicit donat from donor in such state who 
approach us with offer to donate. 

intern donat are grate accepted, but we cannot make 
ani statement concern tax treatment of donat receiv from 
outsid the unit states. u.s. law alon swamp our small staff. 

pleas check the project gutenberg web page for current donat 
method and addresses. donat are accept in a number of other 
way includ checks, onlin payment and credit card donations. To 
donate, pleas visit: www.gutenberg.org/don 

section 5. gener inform about project gutenberg-tm electron works. 

professor michael S. hart wa the origin of the project 
gutenberg-tm concept of a librari of electron work that could be 
freeli share with anyone. for forti years, he produc and 
distribut project gutenberg-tm ebook with onli a loos network of 
volunt support. 

project gutenberg-tm ebook are often creat from sever print 
editions, all of which are confirm as not protect by copyright in 
the u.s. unless a copyright notic is included. thus, we do not 
necessarili keep ebook in complianc with ani particular paper 
edition. 

most peopl start at our web site which ha the main PG search 
facility: www.gutenberg.org 

thi web site includ inform about project gutenberg-tm, 
includ how to make donat to the project gutenberg literari 
archiv foundation, how to help produc our new ebooks, and how to 
subscrib to our email newslett to hear about new ebooks. 
