the project gutenberg ebook, the lair of the white worm, by bram stoker 


thi ebook is for the use of anyon anywher at no cost and with 
almost no restrict whatsoever. you may copi it, give it away or 
re-us it under the term of the project gutenberg licens includ 
with thi ebook or onlin at www.gutenberg.net 





title: the lair of the white worm 


author: bram stoker 

releas date: march 27, 2005 [ebook #1188] 

language: english 

charact set encoding: iso-646-u (us-ascii) 


***start OF the project gutenberg ebook the lair OF the white worm*** 





transcrib form the 1911 W. foulsham & co. ltd. edit by david price, 
email ccx074@coventry.ac.uk 





the lair OF the white worm 


To my friend bertha nicol with affection esteem. 




chapter i--adam salton arriv 


adam salton saunter into the empir club, sydney, and found await 
him a letter from hi grand-uncle. He had first heard from the old 
gentleman less than a year before, when richard salton had claim 
kinship, state that he had been unabl to write earlier, as he had 
found it veri difficult to trace hi grand-nephew' address. adam wa 
delight and repli cordially; he had often heard hi father speak of 
the older branch of the famili with whom hi peopl had long lost touch. 
some interest correspond had ensued. adam eagerli open the 
letter which had onli just arrived, and convey a cordial invit to 
stop with hi grand-uncl at lesser hill, for as long a time as he could 
spare. 

"indeed," richard salton went on, "I am in hope that you will make your 
perman home here. you see, my dear boy, you and I are all that remain 
of our race, and it is but fit that you should succeed me when the 
time comes. In thi year of grace, 1860, I am close on eighti year of 
age, and though we have been a long-liv race, the span of life cannot 
be prolong beyond reason bounds. I am prepar to like you, and to 
make your home with me as happi as you could wish. So do come at onc on 
receipt of this, and find the welcom I am wait to give you. I send, 
in case such may make matter easi for you, a banker' draft for 200 
pounds. come soon, so that we may both of us enjoy mani happi day 
together. If you are abl to give me the pleasur of see you, send me 
as soon as you can a letter tell me when to expect you. then when you 
arriv at plymouth or southampton or whatev port you are bound for, 
wait on board, and I will meet you at the earliest hour possible." 

* * * * * 

old mr. salton wa delight when adam' repli arriv and sent a groom 
hot-foot to hi crony, sir nathaniel de salis, to inform him that hi 
grand-nephew wa due at southampton on the twelfth of june. 

mr. salton gave instruct to have readi a carriag earli on the 
import day, to start for stafford, where he would catch the 11.40 a.m. 
train. He would stay that night with hi grand-nephew, either on the 
ship, which would be a new experi for him, or, if hi guest should 
prefer it, at a hotel. In either case they would start in the earli 
morn for home. He had given instruct to hi bailiff to send the 
postillion carriag on to southampton, to be readi for their journey 
home, and to arrang for relay of hi own hors to be sent on at once. 
He intend that hi grand-nephew, who had been all hi life in 
australia, should see someth of rural england on the drive. He had 
plenti of young hors of hi own breed and breaking, and could depend 
on a journey memor to the young man. the luggag would be sent on by 
rail to stafford, where one of hi cart would meet it. mr. salton, 
dure the journey to southampton, often wonder if hi grand-nephew wa 
as much excit as he wa at the idea of meet so near a relat for 
the first time; and it wa with an effort that he control himself. the 
endless railway line and switch round the southampton dock fire hi 
anxieti afresh. 

As the train drew up on the dockside, he wa get hi hand trap 
together, when the carriag door wa wrench open and a young man jump 
in. 

"how are you, uncle? I recognis you from the photo you sent me! I 
want to meet you as soon as I could, but everyth is so strang to me 
that I didn't quit know what to do. however, here I am. I am glad to 
see you, sir. I have been dream of thi happi for thousand of 
miles; now I find that the realiti beat all the dreaming!" As he spoke 
the old man and the young one were heartili wring each other' hands. 

the meet so auspici begun proceed well. adam, see that the 
old man wa interest in the novelti of the ship, suggest that he 
should stay the night on board, and that he would himself be readi to 
start at ani hour and go anywher that the other suggested. thi 
affection willing to fall in with hi own plan quit won the old 
man' heart. He warmli accept the invitation, and at onc they becam 
not onli on term of affection relationship, but almost like old 
friends. the heart of the old man, which had been empti for so long, 
found a new delight. the young man found, on land in the old country, 
a welcom and a surround in full harmoni with all hi dream 
throughout hi wander and solitude, and the promis of a fresh and 
adventur life. It wa not long befor the old man accept him to 
full relationship by call him by hi christian name. after a long 
talk on affair of interest, they retir to the cabin, which the elder 
wa to share. richard salton put hi hand affection on the boy' 
shoulders--though adam wa in hi twenty-seventh year, he wa a boy, and 
alway would be, to hi grand-uncle. 

"I am so glad to find you as you are, my dear boy--just such a young man 
as I had alway hope for as a son, in the day when I still had such 
hopes. however, that is all past. but thank god there is a new life to 
begin for both of us. To you must be the larger part--but there is still 
time for some of it to be share in common. I have wait till we should 
have seen each other to enter upon the subject; for I thought it better 
not to tie up your young life to my old one till we should have 
suffici person knowledg to justifi such a venture. now I can, so 
far as I am concerned, enter into it freely, sinc from the moment my 
eye rest on you I saw my son--a he shall be, god willing--if he 
choos such a cours himself." 

"inde I do, sir--with all my heart!" 

"thank you, adam, for that." the old, man' eye fill and hi voic 
trembled. then, after a long silenc between them, he went on: "when I 
heard you were come I made my will. It wa well that your interest 
should be protect from that moment on. here is the deed--keep it, 
adam. all I have shall belong to you; and if love and good wishes, or 
the memori of them, can make life sweeter, your shall be a happi one. 
now, my dear boy, let us turn in. We start earli in the morn and have 
a long drive befor us. I hope you don't mind driving? I wa go to 
have the old travel carriag in which my grandfather, your 
great-grand-uncle, went to court when william iv. wa king. It is all 
right--they built well in those days--and it ha been kept in perfect 
order. but I think I have done better: I have sent the carriag in which 
I travel myself. the hors are of my own breeding, and relay of them 
shall take us all the way. I hope you like horses? they have long been 
one of my greatest interest in life." 

"I love them, sir, and I am happi to say I have mani of my own. My 
father gave me a hors farm for myself when I wa eighteen. I devot 
myself to it, and it ha gone on. befor I came away, my steward gave me 
a memorandum that we have in my own place more than a thousand, nearli 
all good." 

"I am glad, my boy. anoth link between us." 

"just fanci what a delight it will be, sir, to see so much of england--and 
with you!" 

"thank you again, my boy. I will tell you all about your futur home and 
it surround as we go. We shall travel in old-fashion state, I 
tell you. My grandfath alway drove four-in-hand; and so shall we." 

"oh, thanks, sir, thanks. may I take the ribbon sometimes?" 

"whenev you choose, adam. the team is your own. everi hors we use to- 
day is to be your own." 

"you are too generous, uncle!" 

"not at all. onli an old man' selfish pleasure. It is not everi day 
that an heir to the old home come back. and--oh, by the way . . . no, 
we had better turn in now--i shall tell you the rest in the morning." 




chapter ii--th caswal OF castra regi 


mr. salton had all hi life been an earli riser, and necessarili an earli 
waker. but earli as he woke on the next morning--and although there wa 
an excus for not prolong sleep in the constant whirr and rattl of 
the "donkey" engin winch of the great ship--h met the eye of adam 
fix on him from hi berth. hi grand-nephew had given him the sofa, 
occupi the lower berth himself. the old man, despit hi great 
strength and normal activity, wa somewhat tire by hi long journey of 
the day before, and the prolong and excit interview which follow 
it. So he wa glad to lie still and rest hi body, whilst hi mind wa 
activ exercis in take in all he could of hi strang surroundings. 
adam, too, after the pastor habit to which he had been bred, woke with 
the dawn, and wa readi to enter on the experi of the new day 
whenev it might suit hi elder companion. It wa littl wonder, then, 
that, so soon as each realis the other' readiness, they simultan 
jump up and began to dress. the steward had by previou instruct 
earli breakfast prepared, and it wa not long befor they went down the 
gangway on shore in search of the carriage. 

they found mr. salton' bailiff look out for them on the dock, and he 
brought them at onc to where the carriag wa wait in the street. 
richard salton point out with pride to hi young companion the 
suitabl of the vehicl for everi need of travel. To it were 
har four use horses, with a postillion to each pair. 

"see," said the old man proudly, "how it ha all the luxuri of use 
travel--sil and isol as well as speed. there is noth to 
obstruct the view of those travel and no one to overhear what they 
may say. I have use that trap for a quarter of a century, and I never 
saw one more suitabl for travel. you shall test it shortly. We are 
go to drive through the heart of england; and as we go i'll tell you 
what I wa speak of last night. our rout is to be by salisbury, 
bath, bristol, cheltenham, worcester, stafford; and so home." 

adam remain silent a few minutes, dure which he seem all eyes, for 
he perpetu rang the whole circl of the horizon. 

"ha our journey to-day, sir," he asked, "ani special relat to what 
you said last night that you want to tell me?" 

"not directly; but indirectly, everything." 

"won't you tell me now--i see we cannot be overheard--and if anyth 
strike you as we go along, just run it in. I shall understand." 

So old salton spoke: 

"to begin at the beginning, adam. that lectur of your on 'the roman 
in britain,' a report of which you post to me, set me thinking--in 
addit to tell me your tastes. I wrote to you at onc and ask you 
to come home, for it struck me that if you were fond of histor 
research--a seem a fact--thi wa exactli the place for you, in 
addit to it be the home of your own forbears. If you could learn 
so much of the british roman so far away in new south wales, where there 
cannot be even a tradit of them, what might you not make of the same 
amount of studi on the veri spot. where we are go is in the real 
heart of the old kingdom of mercia, where there are trace of all the 
variou nation which made up the conglomer which becam 
britain." 

"I rather gather that you had some more definite--mor person reason 
for my hurrying. after all, histori can keep--except in the making!" 

"quit right, my boy. I had a reason such as you veri wise guessed. I 
wa anxiou for you to be here when a rather import phase of our local 
histori occurred." 

"what is that, if I may ask, sir?" 

"certainly. the princip landown of our part of the counti is on hi 
way home, and there will be a great home-coming, which you may care to 
see. the fact is, for more than a centuri the variou owner in the 
success here, with the except of a short time, have live abroad." 

"how is that, sir, if I may ask?" 

"the great hous and estat in our part of the world is castra regis, the 
famili seat of the caswal family. the last owner who live here wa 
edgar caswall, grandfath of the man who is come here--and he wa the 
onli one who stay even a short time. thi man' grandfather, also 
name edgar--they keep the tradit of the famili christian 
name--quarrel with hi famili and went to live abroad, not keep up 
ani intercourse, good or bad, with hi relatives, although thi 
particular edgar, as I told you, did visit hi famili estate, yet hi son 
wa born and live and die abroad, while hi grandson, the latest 
inheritor, wa also born and live abroad till he wa over thirty--hi 
present age. thi wa the second line of absentees. the great estat of 
castra regi ha had no knowledg of it owner for five 
generations--cov more than a hundr and twenti years. It ha been 
well administered, however, and no tenant or other connect with it ha 
had anyth of which to complain. all the same, there ha been much 
natur anxieti to see the new owner, and we are all excit about the 
event of hi coming. even I am, though I own my own estate, which, 
though adjacent, is quit apart from castra regis.--her we are now in 
new ground for you. that is the spire of salisburi cathedral, and when 
we leav that we shall be get close to the old roman county, and you 
will natur want your eyes. So we shall shortli have to keep our 
mind on old mercia. however, you need not be disappointed. My old 
friend, sir nathaniel de salis, who, like myself, is a free-hold near 
castra regis--hi estate, doom tower, is over the border of derbyshire, 
on the peak--i come to stay with me for the festiv to welcom 
edgar caswall. He is just the sort of man you will like. He is devot 
to history, and is presid of the mercian archaeolog society. He 
know more of our own part of the country, with it histori and it 
people, than anyon else. I expect he will have arriv befor us, and 
we three can have a long chat after dinner. He is also our local 
geologist and natur historian. So you and he will have mani interest 
in common. amongst other thing he ha a special knowledg of the peak 
and it caverns, and know all the old legend of prehistor times." 

they spent the night at cheltenham, and on the follow morn resum 
their journey to stafford. adam' eye were in constant employment, and 
it wa not till salton declar that they had now enter on the last 
stage of their journey, that he refer to sir nathaniel' coming. 

As the dusk wa close down, they drove on to lesser hill, mr. salton' 
house. It wa now too dark to see ani detail of their surroundings. 
adam could just see that it wa on the top of a hill, not quit so high 
as that which wa cover by the castle, on whose tower flew the flag, 
and which wa all ablaz with move lights, manifestli use in the 
prepar for the festiv on the morrow. So adam defer hi 
curios till daylight. hi grand-uncl wa met at the door by a fine 
old man, who greet him warmly. 

"I came over earli as you wished. I suppos thi is your grand-nephew--i 
am glad to meet you, mr. adam salton. I am nathaniel de salis, and your 
uncl is one of my oldest friends." 

adam, from the moment of their eye meeting, felt as if they were alreadi 
friends. the meet wa a new note of welcom to those that had alreadi 
sound in hi ears. 

the cordial with which sir nathaniel and adam met, made the impart 
of inform easy. sir nathaniel wa a clever man of the world, who 
had travel much, and within a certain area studi deeply. He wa a 
brilliant conversationalist, as wa to be expect from a success 
diplomatist, even under unstimul conditions. but he had been 
touch and to a certain extent fire by the younger man' evid 
admir and willing to learn from him. accordingli the 
conversation, which began on the most friendli basis, soon warm to an 
interest abov proof, as the old man spoke of it next day to richard 
salton. He knew alreadi that hi old friend want hi grand-nephew to 
learn all he could of the subject in hand, and so had dure hi journey 
from the peak put hi thought in sequenc for narrat and explanation. 
accordingly, adam had onli to listen and he must learn much that he 
want to know. when dinner wa over and the servant had withdrawn, 
leav the three men at their wine, sir nathaniel began. 

"I gather from your uncle--bi the way, I suppos we had better speak of 
you as uncl and nephew, instead of go into exact relationship? In 
fact, your uncl is so old and dear a friend, that, with your permission, 
I shall drop formal with you altogeth and speak of you and to you as 
adam, as though you were hi son." 

"I should like," answer the young man, "noth better!" 

the answer warm the heart of both the old men, but, with the usual 
avoid of englishmen of emot subject person to themselves, 
they instinct return to the previou question. sir nathaniel took 
the lead. 

"I understand, adam, that your uncl ha post you regard the 
relationship of the caswal family?" 

"partly, sir; but I understood that I wa to hear minut detail from 
you--if you would be so good." 

"I shall be delight to tell you anyth so far as my knowledg goes. 
well, the first caswal in our immedi record is an edgar, head of the 
famili and owner of the estate, who came into hi kingdom just about the 
time that georg iii. did. He had one son of about twenty-four. there 
wa a violent quarrel between the two. No one of thi gener ha ani 
idea of the cause; but, consid the famili characteristics, we may 
take it for grant that though it wa deep and violent, it wa on the 
surfac trivial. 

"the result of the quarrel wa that the son left the hous without a 
reconcili or without even tell hi father where he wa going. He 
never came back again. A few year after, he died, without have in the 
meantim exchang a word or a letter with hi father. He marri abroad 
and left one son, who seem to have been brought up in ignor of all 
belong to him. the gulf between them appear to have been 
unbridgable; for in time thi son marri and in turn had a son, but 
neither joy nor sorrow brought the sunder together. under such 
condit no _rapprochement_ wa to be look for, and an utter 
indifference, found at best on ignorance, took the place of famili 
affection--even on commun of interests. It wa onli due to the 
watch of the lawyer that the birth of thi new heir wa ever made 
known. He actual spent a few month in the ancestr home. 

"after thi the famili interest mere rest on heirship of the estate. 
As no other children have been born to ani of the newer gener in 
the interven years, all hope of heritag are now centr in the 
grandson of thi man. 

"now, it will be well for you to bear in mind the prevail 
characterist of thi race. these were well preserv and unchanging; 
one and all they are the same: cold, selfish, dominant, reckless of 
consequ in pursuit of their own will. It wa not that they did not 
keep faith, though that wa a matter which gave them littl concern, but 
that they took care to think beforehand of what they should do in order 
to gain their own ends. If they should make a mistake, someon els 
should bear the burthen of it. thi wa so perpetu recurr that it 
seem to be a part of a fix policy. It wa no wonder that, whatev 
chang took place, they were alway ensur in their own possessions. 
they were absolut cold and hard by nature. not one of them--so far as 
we have ani knowledge--wa ever known to be touch by the softer 
sentiments, to swerv from hi purpose, or hold hi hand in obedi to 
the dictat of hi heart. the pictur and effigi of them all show 
their adher to the earli roman type. their eye were full; their 
hair, of raven blackness, grew thick and close and curly. their figur 
were massiv and typic of strength. 

"the thick black hair, grow low down on the neck, told of vast 
physic strength and endurance. but the most remark characterist 
is the eyes. black, piercing, almost unendurable, they seem to contain 
in themselv a remark will power which there is no gainsaying. It 
is a power that is partli racial and partli individual: a power 
impregn with some mysteri quality, partli hypnotic, partli 
mesmeric, which seem to take away from eye that meet them all power of 
resistance--nay, all power of wish to resist. with eye like those, 
set in that all-command face, one would need to be strong inde to 
think of resist the inflex will that lay behind. 

"you may think, adam, that all thi is imagin on my part, especi 
as I have never seen ani of them. So it is, but imagin base on 
deep study. I have made use of all I know or can surmis logic 
regard thi strang race. with such strang compel qualities, is 
it ani wonder that there is abroad an idea that in the race there is some 
demoniac possession, which tend to a more definit belief that certain 
individu have in the past sold themselv to the devil? 

"but I think we had better go to bed now. We have a lot to get through 
to-morrow, and I want you to have your brain clear, and all your 
suscept fresh. moreover, I want you to come with me for an 
earli walk, dure which we may notice, whilst the matter is fresh in our 
minds, the peculiar disposit of thi place--not mere your 
grand-uncle' estate, but the lie of the countri around it. there are 
mani thing on which we may seek--and perhap find--enlightenment. the 
more we know at the start, the more thing which may come into our view 
will develop themselves." 




chapter iii--diana' grove 


curios took adam salton out of bed in the earli morning, but when he 
had dress and gone downstairs; he found that, earli as he was, sir 
nathaniel wa ahead of him. the old gentleman wa quit prepar for a 
long walk, and they start at once. 

sir nathaniel, without speaking, led the way to the east, down the hill. 
when they had descend and risen again, they found themselv on the 
eastern brink of a steep hill. It wa of lesser height than that on 
which the castl wa situated; but it wa so place that it command the 
variou hill that crown the ridge. all along the ridg the rock 
crop out, bare and bleak, but broken in rough natur castellation. 
the form of the ridg wa a segment of a circle, with the higher point 
inland to the west. In the centr rose the castle, on the highest point 
of all. between the variou rocki excresc were group of tree of 
variou size and heights, amongst some of which were what, in the earli 
morn light, look like ruins. these--whatev they were--wer of 
massiv grey stone, probabl limeston rude cut--if inde they were 
not shape naturally. the fall of the ground wa steep all along the 
ridge, so steep that here and there both tree and rock and build 
seem to overhang the plain far below, through which ran mani streams. 

sir nathaniel stop and look around, as though to lose noth of the 
effect. the sun had climb the eastern sky and wa make all detail 
clear. He point with a sweep gesture, as though call adam' 
attent to the extent of the view. have done so, he cover the 
ground more slowly, as though invit attent to detail. adam wa a 
will and attent pupil, and follow hi motion exactly, missing--or 
tri to miss--nothing. 

"I have brought you here, adam, becaus it seem to me that thi is the 
spot on which to begin our investigations. you have now in front of you 
almost the whole of the ancient kingdom of mercia. In fact, we see the 
whole of it except that furthest part, which is cover by the welsh 
march and those part which are hidden from where we stand by the high 
ground of the immedi west. We can see--theoretically--th whole of 
the eastern bound of the kingdom, which ran south from the humber to the 
wash. I want you to bear in mind the trend of the ground, for some time, 
sooner or later, we shall do well to have it in our mind' eye when we 
are consid the ancient tradit and superstitions, and are tri 
to find the _rationale_ of them. each legend, each superstit which we 
receive, will help in the understand and possibl elucid of the 
others. and as all such have a local basis, we can come closer to the 
truth--or the probability--bi know the local condit as we go 
along. It will help us to bring to our aid such geolog truth as we 
may have between us. for instance, the build materi use in 
variou age can afford their own lesson to understand eyes. the 
veri height and shape and materi of these hills--nay, even of the 
wide plain that lie between us and the sea--hav in themselv the 
materi of enlighten books." 

"for instance, sir?" said adam, ventur a question. 

"well, look at those hill which surround the main one where the site for 
the castl wa wise chosen--on the highest ground. take the others. 
there is someth ostens in each of them, and in all probabl 
someth unseen and unproved, but to be imagined, also." 

"for instance?" continu adam. 

"let us take them _seriatim_. that to the east, where the tree are, 
lower down--that wa onc the locat of a roman temple, possibl 
found on a pre-exist druidic one. it name impli the former, 
and the grove of ancient oak suggest the latter." 

"pleas explain." 

"the old name translat mean 'diana' grove.' then the next one higher 
than it, but just beyond it, is call '_mercy_'--in all probabl a 
corrupt or familiaris of the word _mercia_, with a roman pun 
included. We learn from earli manuscript that the place wa call 
_vilula misericordiae_. It wa origin a nunnery, found by queen 
bertha, but done away with by king penda, the reactionari to pagan 
after st. augustine. then come your uncle' place--less hill. though 
it is so close to the castle, it is not connect with it. It is a 
freehold, and, so far as we know, of equal age. It ha alway belong 
to your family." 

"then there onli remain the castle!" 

"that is all; but it histori contain the histori of all the others--in 
fact, the whole histori of earli england." sir nathaniel, see the 
expect look on adam' face, went on: 

"the histori of the castl ha no begin so far as we know. the 
furthest record or surmis or infer simpli accept it as existing. 
some of these--guesses, let us call them--seem to show that there wa 
some sort of structur there when the roman came, therefor it must have 
been a place of import in druid times--if inde that wa the 
beginning. natur the roman accept it, as they did everyth of 
the kind that was, or might be, useful. the chang is shown or infer 
in the name castra. It wa the highest protect ground, and so 
natur becam the most import of their camps. A studi of the map 
will show you that it must have been a most import centre. It both 
protect the advanc alreadi made to the north, and help to domin 
the sea coast. It shelter the western marches, beyond which lay savag 
wales--and danger. It provid a mean of get to the severn, round 
which lay the great roman road then come into existence, and made 
possibl the great waterway to the heart of england--through the severn 
and it tributaries. It brought the east and the west togeth by the 
swiftest and easiest way known to those times. and, finally, it 
provid mean of descent on london and all the expans of countri 
water by the thames. 

"with such a centre, alreadi known and organised, we can easili see that 
each fresh wave of invasion--th angles, the saxons, the danes, and the 
normans--found it a desir possess and so ensur it upholding. In 
the earlier centuri it wa mere a vantag ground. but when the 
victori roman brought with them the heavi solid fortif 
impregn to the weapon of the time, it command posit alon 
ensur it adequ build and equipment. then it wa that the 
fortifi camp of the caesar develop into the castl of the king. As 
we are as yet ignor of the name of the first king of mercia, no 
historian ha been abl to guess which of them made it hi ultim 
defence; and I suppos we shall never know now. In process of time, as 
the art of war developed, it increas in size and strength, and 
although record detail are lacking, the histori is written not mere 
in the stone of it building, but is infer in the chang of 
structure. then the sweep chang which follow the norman conquest 
wipe out all lesser record than it own. to-day we must accept it as 
one of the earliest castl of the conquest, probabl not later than the 
time of henri I. roman and norman were both wise in their retent of 
place of approv strength or utility. So it wa that these surround 
heights, alreadi establish and to a certain extent proved, were 
retained. indeed, such characterist as alreadi pertain to them were 
preserved, and to-day afford to us lesson regard thing which have 
themselv long sinc pass away. 

"so much for the fortifi heights; but the hollow too have their own 
story. but how the time passes! We must hurri home, or your uncl will 
wonder what ha becom of us." 

He start with long step toward lesser hill, and adam wa soon 
furtiv run in order to keep up with him. 




chapter iv--th ladi arabella march 


"now, there is no hurry, but so soon as you are both readi we shall 
start," mr. salton said when breakfast had begun. "I want to take you 
first to see a remark relic of mercia, and then we'll go to liverpool 
through what is call 'the great vale of cheshire.' you may be 
disappointed, but take care not to prepar your mind"--thi to adam--"for 
anyth stupend or heroic. you would not think the place a vale at 
all, unless you were told so beforehand, and had confid in the 
verac of the teller. We should get to the land stage in time to 
meet the _west african_, and catch mr. caswal as he come ashore. We 
want to do him honour--and, besides, it will be more pleasant to have the 
introduct over befor we go to hi _fete_ at the castle." 

the carriag wa ready, the same as had been use the previou day, but 
there were differ horses--magnific animals, and keen for work. 
breakfast wa soon over, and they shortli took their places. the 
postillion had their orders, and were quickli on their way at an 
exhilar pace. 

presently, in obedi to mr. salton' signal, the carriag drew up 
opposit a great heap of stone by the wayside. 

"here, adam," he said, "i someth that you of all men should not pass 
by unnoticed. that heap of stone bring us at onc to the dawn of the 
anglian kingdom. It wa begun more than a thousand year ago--in the 
latter part of the seventh century--in memori of a murder. wulfere, king 
of mercia, nephew of penda, here murder hi two son for embrac 
christianity. As wa the custom of the time, each passer-bi ad a 
stone to the memori heap. penda repres heathen reaction after st. 
augustine' mission. sir nathaniel can tell you as much as you want 
about this, and put you, if you wish, on the track of such accur 
knowledg as there is." 

whilst they were look at the heap of stones, they notic that anoth 
carriag had drawn up besid them, and the passenger--ther wa onli 
one--wa regard them curiously. the carriag wa an old heavi 
travel one, with arm blazon on it gorgeously. the men took off 
their hats, as the occupant, a lady, address them. 

"how do you do, sir nathaniel? how do you do, mr. salton? I hope you 
have not met with ani accident. look at me!" 

As she spoke she point to where one of the heavi spring wa broken 
across, the broken metal show bright. adam spoke up at once: 

"oh, that can soon be put right." 

"soon? there is no one near who can mend a break like that." 

"I can." 

"you!" she look incredul at the dapper young gentleman who spoke. 
"you--why, it' a workman' job." 

"all right, I am a workman--though that is not the onli sort of work I 
do. I am an australian, and, as we have to move about fast, we are all 
train to farrieri and such mechan as come into travel--i am quit at 
your service." 

"I hardli know how to thank you for your kindness, of which I gladli 
avail myself. I don't know what els I can do, as I wish to meet mr. 
caswal of castra regis, who arriv home from africa to-day. It is a 
notabl home-coming; all the countrysid want to do him honour." she 
look at the old men and quickli made up her mind as to the ident of 
the stranger. "you must be mr. adam salton of lesser hill. I am ladi 
arabella march of diana' grove." As she spoke she turn slightli to 
mr. salton, who took the hint and made a formal introduction. 

So soon as thi wa done, adam took some tool from hi uncle' carriage, 
and at onc began work on the broken spring. He wa an expert workman, 
and the breach wa soon made good. adam wa gather the tool which he 
had been using--which, after the manner of all workmen, had been 
scatter about--when he notic that sever black snake had crawl 
out from the heap of stone and were gather round him. thi natur 
occupi hi mind, and he wa not think of anyth els when he 
notic ladi arabella, who had open the door of the carriage, slip from 
it with a quick glide motion. she wa alreadi among the snake when he 
call out to warn her. but there seem to be no need of warning. the 
snake had turn and were wriggl back to the mound as quickli as they 
could. He laugh to himself behind hi teeth as he whispered, "no need 
to fear there. they seem much more afraid of her than she of them." all 
the same he began to beat on the ground with a stick which wa lie 
close to him, with the instinct of one use to such vermin. In an 
instant he wa alon besid the mound with ladi arabella, who appear 
quit unconcern at the incident. then he took a long look at her, and 
her dress alon wa suffici to attract attention. she wa clad in 
some kind of soft white stuff, which clung close to her form, show to 
the full everi movement of her sinuou figure. she wore a close-fit 
cap of some fine fur of dazzl white. coil round her white throat 
wa a larg necklac of emeralds, whose profus of colour dazzl when 
the sun shone on them. her voic wa peculiar, veri low and sweet, and 
so soft that the domin note wa of sibilation. her hands, too, were 
peculiar--long, flexible, white, with a strang movement as of wave 
gentli to and fro. 

she appear quit at ease, and, after thank adam, said that if ani of 
hi uncle' parti were go to liverpool she would be most happi to join 
forces. 

"whilst you are stay here, mr. salton, you must look on the ground of 
diana' grove as your own, so that you may come and go just as you do in 
lesser hill. there are some fine views, and not a few natur 
curios which are sure to interest you, if you are a student of 
natur history--speci of an earlier kind, when the world wa 
younger." 

the hearti with which she spoke, and the warmth of her words--not of 
her manner, which wa cold and distant--mad him suspicious. In the 
meantim both hi uncl and sir nathaniel had thank her for the 
invitation--of which, however, they said they were unabl to avail 
themselves. adam had a suspicion that, though she answer regretfully, 
she wa in realiti relieved. when he had got into the carriag with the 
two old men, and they had driven off, he wa not surpris when sir 
nathaniel spoke. 

"I could not but feel that she wa glad to be rid of us. she can play 
her game better alone!" 

"what is her game?" ask adam unthinkingly. 

"all the counti know it, my boy. caswal is a veri rich man. her 
husband wa rich when she marri him--or seem to be. when he 
commit suicide, it wa found that he had noth left, and the estat 
wa mortgag up to the hilt. her onli hope is in a rich marriage. I 
suppos I need not draw ani conclusion; you can do that as well as I 
can." 

adam remain silent nearli all the time they were travel through the 
alleg vale of cheshire. He thought much dure that journey and came 
to sever conclusions, though hi lip were unmoved. one of these 
conclus wa that he would be veri care about pay ani attent 
to ladi arabella. He wa himself a rich man, how rich not even hi uncl 
had the least idea, and would have been surpris had he known. 

the remaind of the journey wa uneventful, and upon arriv at 
liverpool they went aboard the _west african_, which had just come to the 
landing-stage. there hi uncl introduc himself to mr. caswall, and 
follow thi up by introduc sir nathaniel and then adam. the new- 
comer receiv them graciously, and said what a pleasur it wa to be 
come home after so long an absenc of hi famili from their old seat. 
adam wa pleas at the warmth of the reception; but he could not avoid a 
feel of repugn at the man' face. He wa tri hard to overcom 
thi when a divers wa caus by the arriv of ladi arabella. the 
divers wa welcom to all; the two salton and sir nathaniel were 
shock at caswall' face--so hard, so ruthless, so selfish, so dominant. 
"god help any," wa the common thought, "who is under the domin of 
such a man!" 

present hi african servant approach him, and at onc their thought 
chang to a larger toleration. caswal look inde a savage--but a 
cultur savage. In him were trace of the soften civilis of 
ages--of some of the higher instinct and educ of man, no matter how 
rudimentari these might be. but the face of oolanga, as hi master 
call him, wa unreformed, unsoften savage, and inher in it were 
all the hideou possibl of a lost, devil-ridden child of the forest 
and the swamp--th lowest of all creat thing that could be regard as 
in some form ostens human. ladi arabella and oolanga arriv almost 
simultaneously, and adam wa surpris to notic what effect their 
appear had on each other. the woman seem as if she would not--could 
not--condescend to exhibit ani concern or interest in such a creature. On 
the other hand, the negro' bear wa such as in itself to justifi her 
pride. He treat her not mere as a slave treat hi master, but as a 
worshipp would treat a deity. He knelt befor her with hi hand out- 
stretch and hi forehead in the dust. So long as she remain he did 
not move; it wa onli when she went over to caswal that he relax hi 
attitud of devot and stood by respectfully. 

adam spoke to hi own man, davenport, who wa stand by, have arriv 
with the bailiff of lesser hill, who had follow mr. salton in a poni 
trap. As he spoke, he point to an attent ship' steward, and 
present the two men were conversing. 

"I think we ought to be moving," mr. salton said to adam. "I have some 
thing to do in liverpool, and I am sure that both mr. caswal and ladi 
arabella would like to get under weigh for castra regis." 

"I too, sir, would like to do something," repli adam. "I want to find 
out where ross, the anim merchant, lives--i want to take a small anim 
home with me, if you don't mind. He is onli a littl thing, and will be 
no trouble." 

"of cours not, my boy. what kind of anim is it that you want?" 

"A mongoose." 

"A mongoose! what on earth do you want it for?" 

"to kill snakes." 

"good!" the old man rememb the mound of stones. No explan wa 
needed. 

when ross heard what wa wanted, he asked: 

"do you want someth special, or will an ordinari mongoos do?" 

"well, of cours I want a good one. but I see no need for anyth 
special. It is for ordinari use." 

"I can let you have a choic of ordinari ones. I onli asked, becaus I 
have in stock a veri special one which I got late from nepaul. He ha 
a record of hi own. He kill a king cobra that had been seen in the 
rajah' garden. but I don't suppos we have ani snake of the kind in 
thi cold climate--i daresay an ordinari one will do." 

when adam got back to the carriage, care carri the box with the 
mongoose, sir nathaniel said: "hullo! what have you got there?" 

"A mongoose." 

"what for?" 

"to kill snakes!" 

sir nathaniel laughed. 

"I heard ladi arabella' invit to you to come to diana' grove." 

"well, what on earth ha that got to do with it?" 

"noth directli that I know of. but we shall see." adam waited, and 
the old man went on: "have you by ani chanc heard the other name which 
wa given long ago to that place." 

"no, sir." 

"it wa called--look here, thi subject want a lot of talk over. 
suppos we wait till we are alon and have lot of time befor us." 

"all right, sir." adam wa fill with curiosity, but he thought it 
better not to hurri matters. all would come in good time. then the 
three men return home, leav mr. caswal to spend the night in 
liverpool. 

the follow day the lesser hill parti set out for castra regis, and for 
the time adam thought no more of diana' grove or of what mysteri it 
had contained--or might still contain. 

the guest were crowd in, and special place were mark for import 
people. adam, see so mani person of vari degree, look round for 
ladi arabella, but could not locat her. It wa onli when he saw the old- 
fashion travel carriag approach and heard the sound of cheer 
which went with it, that he realis that edgar caswal had arrived. 
then, on look more closely, he saw that ladi arabella, dress as he 
had seen her last, wa seat besid him. when the carriag drew up at 
the great flight of steps, the host jump down and gave her hi hand. 

It wa evid to all that she wa the chief guest at the festivities. It 
wa not long befor the seat on the dai were filled, while the tenant 
and guest of lesser import had occupi all the coign of vantag 
not reserved. the order of the day had been care arrang by a 
committee. there were some speeches, happili neither mani nor long; and 
then festiv were suspend till the time for feast arrived. In 
the interv caswal walk among hi guests, speak to all in a 
friendli manner and express a gener welcome. the other guest came 
down from the dai and follow hi example, so there wa unceremoni 
meet and greet between gentl and simple. 

adam salton natur follow with hi eye all that went on within 
their scope, take note of all who seem to afford ani interest. He 
wa young and a man and a stranger from a far distance; so on all these 
account he natur took stock rather of the women than of the men, and 
of these, those who were young and attractive. there were lot of pretti 
girl among the crowd, and adam, who wa a handsom young man and well 
set up, got hi full share of admir glances. these did not concern 
him much, and he remain unmov until there came along a group of 
three, by their dress and bearing, of the farmer class. one wa a sturdi 
old man; the other two were good-look girls, one of a littl over 
twenty, the other not quit so old. So soon as adam' eye met those of 
the younger girl, who stood nearest to him, some sort of electr 
flashed--that divin spark which begin by recognition, and end in 
obedience. men call it "love." 

both hi companion notic how much adam wa taken by the pretti girl, 
and spoke of her to him in a way which made hi heart warm to them. 

"did you notic that parti that passed? the old man is michael watford, 
one of the tenant of mr. caswall. He occupi merci farm, which sir 
nathaniel point out to you to-day. the girl are hi grand-daughters, 
the elder, lilla, be the onli child of hi elder son, who die when 
she wa less than a year old. hi wife die on the same day. she is a 
good girl--a good as she is pretty. the other is her first cousin, the 
daughter of watford' second son. He went for a soldier when he wa just 
over twenty, and wa draft abroad. He wa not a good correspondent, 
though he wa a good enough son. A few letter came, and then hi father 
heard from the colonel of hi regiment that he had been kill by dacoit 
in burmah. He heard from the same sourc that hi boy had been marri 
to a burmese, and that there wa a daughter onli a year old. watford had 
the child brought home, and she grew up besid lilla. the onli thing 
that they heard of her birth wa that her name wa mimi. the two 
children ador each other, and do to thi day. strang how differ 
they are! lilla all fair, like the old saxon stock from which she is 
sprung; mimi show a trace of her mother' race. lilla is as gentl as 
a dove, but mimi' black eye can glow whenev she is upset. the onli 
thing that upset her is when anyth happen to injur or threaten or 
annoy lilla. then her eye glow as do the eye of a bird when her young 
are menaced." 




chapter v--the white worm 


mr. salton introduc adam to mr. watford and hi grand-daughters, and 
they all move on together. Of cours neighbour in the posit of the 
watford knew all about adam salton, hi relationship, circumstances, and 
prospects. So it would have been strang inde if both girl did not 
dream of possibl of the future. In agricultur england, elig 
men of ani class are rare. thi particular man wa special eligible, 
for he did not belong to a class in which barrier of cast were strong. 
So when it began to be notic that he walk besid mimi watford and 
seem to desir her society, all their friend endeavour to give the 
promis affair a help hand. when the gong sound for the banquet, 
he went with her into the tent where her grandfath had seats. mr. 
salton and sir nathaniel notic that the young man did not come to claim 
hi appoint place at the dai table; but they understood and made no 
remark, or inde did not seem to notic hi absence. 

ladi arabella sat as befor at edgar caswall' right hand. she wa 
certainli a strike and unusu woman, and to all it seem fit from 
her rank and person qualiti that she should be the chosen partner of 
the heir on hi first appearance. Of cours noth wa said openli by 
those of her own class who were present; but word were not necessari 
when so much could be express by nod and smiles. It seem to be an 
accept thing that at last there wa to be a mistress of castra regis, 
and that she wa present amongst them. there were not lack some who, 
whilst admit all her charm and beauty, place her in the second rank, 
lilla watford be mark as first. there wa suffici diverg of 
type, as well as of individu beauty, to allow of fair comment; ladi 
arabella repres the aristocrat type, and lilla that of the 
commonalty. 

when the dusk began to thicken, mr. salton and sir nathaniel walk 
home--th trap had been sent away earli in the day--leav adam to 
follow in hi own time. He came in earlier than wa expected, and seem 
upset about something. neither of the elder made ani comment. they all 
lit cigarettes, and, as dinner-tim wa close at hand, went to their 
room to get ready. 

adam had evid been think in the interval. He join the other 
in the drawing-room, look ruffl and impatient--a condit of thing 
seen for the first time. the others, with the patience--or the 
experience--of age, trust to time to unfold and explain things. they 
had not long to wait. after sit down and stand up sever times, 
adam suddenli burst out. 

"that fellow seem to think he own the earth. can't he let peopl 
alone! He seem to think that he ha onli to throw hi handkerchief to 
ani woman, and be her master." 

thi outburst wa in itself enlightening. onli thwart affect in 
some guis could produc thi feel in an amiabl young man. sir 
nathaniel, as an old diplomatist, had a way of understanding, as if by 
foreknowledge, the true inward of things, and ask suddenly, but in 
a matter-of-fact, indiffer voice: 

"wa he after lilla?" 

"yes, and the fellow didn't lose ani time either. almost as soon as they 
met, he began to butter her up, and tell her how beauti she was. why, 
befor he left her side, he had ask himself to tea to-morrow at merci 
farm. stupid ass! He might see that the girl isn't hi sort! I never 
saw anyth like it. It wa just like a hawk and a pigeon." 

As he spoke, sir nathaniel turn and look at mr. salton--a keen look 
which impli a full understanding. 

"tell us all about it, adam. there are still a few minut befor 
dinner, and we shall all have better appetit when we have come to some 
conclus on thi matter." 

"there is noth to tell, sir; that is the worst of it. I am bound to 
say that there wa not a word said that a human be could object to. He 
wa veri civil, and all that wa proper--just what a landlord might be to 
a tenant' daughter . . . yet--yet--well, I don't know how it was, but it 
made my blood boil." 

"how did the hawk and the pigeon come in?" sir nathaniel' voic wa 
soft and soothing, noth of contradict or overdon curios in it--a 
tone emin suit to win confidence. 

"I can hardli explain. I can onli say that he look like a hawk and she 
like a dove--and, now that I think of it, that is what they each did look 
like; and do look like in their normal condition." 

"that is so!" came the soft voic of sir nathaniel. 

adam went on: 

"perhap that earli roman look of hi set me off. but I want to 
protect her; she seem in danger." 

"she seem in danger, in a way, from all you young men. I couldn't help 
notic the way that even you looked--a if you wish to absorb her!" 

"I hope both you young men will keep your head cool," put in mr. salton. 
"you know, adam, it won't do to have ani quarrel between you, especi 
so soon after hi home-com and your arriv here. We must think of 
the feel and happi of our neighbours; mustn't we?" 

"I hope so, sir. I assur you that, whatev may happen, or even 
threaten, I shall obey your wish in thi as in all things." 

"hush!" whisper sir nathaniel, who heard the servant in the passag 
bring dinner. 

after dinner, over the walnut and the wine, sir nathaniel return to 
the subject of the local legends. 

"it will perhap be a less danger topic for us to discuss than more 
recent ones." 

"all right, sir," said adam heartily. "I think you may depend on me now 
with regard to ani topic. I can even discuss mr. caswall. indeed, I may 
meet him to-morrow. He is going, as I said, to call at merci farm at 
three o'clock--but I have an appoint at two." 

"I notice," said mr. salton, "that you do not lose ani time." 

the two old men onc more look at each other steadily. then, lest the 
mood of hi listen should chang with delay, sir nathaniel began at 
once: 

"I don't propos to tell you all the legend of mercia, or even to make a 
select of them. It will be better, I think, for our purpos if we 
consid a few facts--record or unrecorded--about thi neighbourhood. I 
think we might begin with diana' grove. It ha root in the differ 
epoch of our history, and each ha it special crop of legend. the 
druid and the roman are too far off for matter of detail; but it seem 
to me the saxon and the angl are near enough to yield materi for 
legendari lore. We find that thi particular place had anoth name 
besid diana' grove. thi wa manifestli of roman origin, or of 
grecian accept as roman. the other is more pregnant of adventur and 
romanc than the roman name. In mercian tongu it wa 'the lair of the 
white worm.' thi need a word of explan at the beginning. 

"in the dawn of the language, the word 'worm' had a somewhat differ 
mean from that in use to-day. It wa an adapt of the anglo-saxon 
'wyrm,' mean a dragon or snake; or from the gothic 'waurms,' a 
serpent; or the iceland 'ormur,' or the german 'wurm.' We gather that 
it convey origin an idea of size and power, not as now in the 
diminut of both these meanings. here legendari histori help us. We 
have the well-known legend of the 'worm well' of lambton castle, and that 
of the 'laidli worm of spindleston heugh' near bamborough. In both these 
legend the 'worm' wa a monster of vast size and power--a verit 
dragon or serpent, such as legend attribut to vast fen or quag where 
there wa illimit room for expansion. A glanc at a geolog map 
will show that whatev truth there may have been of the actual of 
such monster in the earli geolog periods, at least there wa plenti of 
possibility. In england there were origin vast plain where the 
plenti suppli of water could gather. the stream were deep and slow, 
and there were hole of abysm depth, where ani kind and size of 
antediluvian monster could find a habitat. In places, which now we can 
see from our windows, were mud-hol a hundr or more feet deep. who 
can tell us when the age of the monster which flourish in slime came 
to an end? there must have been place and condit which made for 
greater longevity, greater size, greater strength than wa usual. such 
over-lap may have come down even to our earlier centuries. nay, are 
there not now creatur of a vast of bulk regard by the gener 
of men as impossible? even in our own day there are seen the trace of 
animals, if not the anim themselves, of stupend size--verit 
surviv from earlier ages, preserv by some special qualiti in their 
habitats. I rememb meet a distinguish man in india, who had the 
reput of be a great shikaree, who told me that the greatest 
temptat he had ever had in hi life wa to shoot a giant snake which 
he had come across in the terai of upper india. He wa on a 
tiger-shoot expedition, and as hi eleph wa cross a nullah, it 
squealed. He look down from hi howdah and saw that the eleph had 
step across the bodi of a snake which wa drag itself through the 
jungle. 'so far as I could see,' he said, 'it must have been eighti or 
one hundr feet in length. fulli forti or fifti feet wa on each side 
of the track, and though the weight which it drag had thin it, it 
wa as thick round as a man' body. I suppos you know that when you are 
after tiger, it is a point of honour not to shoot at anyth else, as 
life may depend on it. I could easili have spine thi monster, but I 
felt that I must not--so, with regret, I had to let it go.' 

"just imagin such a monster anywher in thi country, and at onc we 
could get a sort of idea of the 'worms,' which possibl did frequent the 
great morass which spread round the mouth of mani of the great 
european rivers." 

"I haven't the least doubt, sir, that there may have been such monster 
as you have spoken of still exist at a much later period than is 
gener accepted," repli adam. "also, if there were such things, 
that thi wa the veri place for them. I have tri to think over the 
matter sinc you point out the configur of the ground. but it 
seem to me that there is a hiatu somewhere. are there not mechan 
difficulties?" 

"in what way?" 

"well, our antiqu monster must have been mighti heavy, and the distanc 
he had to travel were long and the way difficult. from where we are now 
sit down to the level of the mud-hol is a distanc of sever 
hundr feet--i am leav out of consider altogeth ani later 
distance. Is it possibl that there wa a way by which a monster could 
travel up and down, and yet no chanc record have ever seen him? Of 
cours we have the legends; but is not some more exact evid necessari 
in a scientif investigation?" 

"mi dear adam, all you say is perfectli right, and, were we start on 
such an investigation, we could not do better than follow your reasoning. 
but, my dear boy, you must rememb that all thi took place thousand of 
year ago. you must remember, too, that all record of the kind that 
would help us are lacking. also, that the place to be consid were 
desert, so far as human habit or popul are considered. In the 
vast desol of such a place as compli with the necessari 
conditions, there must have been such profus of natur growth as 
would bar the progress of men form as we are. the lair of such a 
monster would not have been disturb for hundreds--or thousands--of 
years. moreover, these creatur must have occupi place quit 
inaccess to man. A snake who could make himself comfort in a 
quagmire, a hundr feet deep, would be protect on the outskirt by 
such stupend morass as now no longer exist, or which, if they exist 
anywher at all, can be on veri few place on the earth' surface. far 
be it from me to say that in more element time such thing could not 
have been. the condit belong to the geolog age--th great birth 
and growth of the world, when natur forc ran riot, when the struggl 
for exist wa so savag that no vital which wa not found in a 
gigant form could have even a possibl of survival. that such a 
time existed, we have evid in geology, but there only; we can never 
expect proof such as thi age demands. We can onli imagin or surmis 
such things--or such condit and such forc as overcam them." 




chapter vi--hawk and pigeon 


At breakfast-tim next morn sir nathaniel and mr. salton were seat 
when adam came hurriedli into the room. 

"ani news?" ask hi uncl mechanically. 

"four." 

"four what?" ask sir nathaniel. 

"snakes," said adam, help himself to a grill kidney. 

"four snakes. I don't understand." 

"mongoose," said adam, and then ad explanatorily: "I wa out with the 
mongoos just after three." 

"four snake in one morning! why, I didn't know there were so mani on 
the brow"--th local name for the western cliff. "I hope that wasn't the 
consequ of our talk of last night?" 

"it was, sir. but not directly." 

"but, god bless my soul, you didn't expect to get a snake like the 
lambton worm, did you? why, a mongoose, to tackl a monster like that--if 
there were one--would have to be bigger than a haystack." 

"these were ordinari snakes, about as big as a walking-stick." 

"well, it' pleasant to be rid of them, big or little. that is a good 
mongoose, I am sure; he'll clear out all such vermin round here," said 
mr. salton. 

adam went quietli on with hi breakfast. kill a few snake in a 
morn wa no new experi to him. He left the room the moment 
breakfast wa finish and went to the studi that hi uncl had arrang 
for him. both sir nathaniel and mr. salton took it that he want to be 
by himself, so as to avoid ani question or talk of the visit that he 
wa to make that afternoon. they saw noth further of him till about 
half-an-hour befor dinner-time. then he came quietli into the smoking- 
room, where mr. salton and sir nathaniel were sit together, readi 
dressed. 

"I suppos there is no use waiting. We had better get it over at once," 
remark adam. 

hi uncle, think to make thing easier for him, said: "get what over?" 

there wa a sign of shyness about him at this. He stammer a littl at 
first, but hi voic becam more even as he went on. 

"mi visit to merci farm." 

mr. salton wait eagerly. the old diplomatist simpli smiled. 

"I suppos you both know that I wa much interest yesterday in the 
watfords?" there wa no denial or fend off the question. both the 
old men smile acquiescence. adam went on: "I meant you to see it--both 
of you. you, uncle, becaus you are my uncl and the nearest of my own 
kin, and, moreover, you couldn't have been more kind to me or made me 
more welcom if you had been my own father." mr. salton said nothing. He 
simpli held out hi hand, and the other took it and held it for a few 
seconds. "and you, sir, becaus you have shown me someth of the same 
affect which in my wildest dream of home I had no right to expect." 
He stop for an instant, much moved. 

sir nathaniel answer softly, lay hi hand on the youth' shoulder. 

"you are right, my boy; quit right. that is the proper way to look at 
it. and I may tell you that we old men, who have no children of our own, 
feel our heart grow warm when we hear word like those." 

then adam hurri on, speak with a rush, as if he want to come to 
the crucial point. 

"mr. watford had not come in, but lilla and mimi were at home, and they 
made me feel veri welcome. they have all a great regard for my uncle. I 
am glad of that ani way, for I like them all--much. We were have tea, 
when mr. caswal came to the door, attend by the negro. lilla open 
the door herself. the window of the living-room at the farm is a larg 
one, and from within you cannot help see anyon coming. mr. caswal 
said he had ventur to call, as he wish to make the acquaint of 
all hi tenants, in a less formal way, and more individually, than had 
been possibl to him on the previou day. the girl made him 
welcome--they are veri sweet girl those, sir; someon will be veri happi 
some day there--with either of them." 

"and that man may be you, adam," said mr. salton heartily. 

A sad look came over the young man' eyes, and the fire hi uncl had 
seen there die out. likewis the timbr left hi voice, make it sound 
lonely. 

"such might crown my life. but that happiness, I fear, is not for me--or 
not without pain and loss and woe." 

"well, it' earli day yet!" cri sir nathaniel heartily. 

the young man turn on him hi eyes, which had now grown excess 
sad. 

"yesterday--a few hour ago--that remark would have given me new hope--new 
courage; but sinc then I have learn too much." 

the old man, skill in the human heart, did not attempt to argu in such 
a matter. 

"too earli to give in, my boy." 

"I am not of a giving-in kind," repli the young man earnestly. "but, 
after all, it is wise to realis a truth. and when a man, though he is 
young, feel as I do--a I have felt ever sinc yesterday, when I first 
saw mimi' eyes--hi heart jumps. He doe not need to learn things. He 
knows." 

there wa silenc in the room, dure which the twilight stole on 
imperceptibly. It wa adam who again broke the silence. 

"do you know, uncle, if we have ani second sight in our family?" 

"no, not that I ever heard about. why?" 

"because," he answer slowly, "I have a convict which seem to answer 
all the condit of second sight." 

"and then?" ask the old man, much perturbed. 

"and then the usual inevitable. what in the hebrid and other places, 
where the sight is a cult--a belief--i call 'the doom'--th court from 
which there is no appeal. I have often heard of second sight--w have 
mani western scot in australia; but I have realis more of it true 
inward in an instant of thi afternoon than I did in the whole of my 
life previously--a granit wall stretch up to the veri heavens, so 
high and so dark that the eye of god himself cannot see beyond. well, if 
the doom must come, it must. that is all." 

the voic of sir nathaniel broke in, smooth and sweet and grave. 

"can there not be a fight for it? there can for most things." 

"for most things, yes, but for the doom, no. what a man can do I shall 
do. there will be--must be--a fight. when and where and how I know not, 
but a fight there will be. but, after all, what is a man in such a 
case?" 

"adam, there are three of us." salton look at hi old friend as he 
spoke, and that old friend' eye blazed. 

"ay, three of us," he said, and hi voic rang. 

there wa again a pause, and sir nathaniel endeavour to get back to 
less emot and more neutral ground. 

"tell us of the rest of the meeting. rememb we are all pledg to 
this. It is a fight _a l'outrance_, and we can afford to throw away or 
forgo no chance." 

"we shall throw away or lose noth that we can help. We fight to win, 
and the stake is a life--perhap more than one--w shall see." then he 
went on in a convers tone, such as he had use when he spoke of 
the come to the farm of edgar caswall: "when mr. caswal came in, the 
negro went a short distanc away and there remained. It gave me the idea 
that he expect to be called, and intend to remain in sight, or within 
hail. then mimi got anoth cup and made fresh tea, and we all went on 
together." 

"wa there anyth uncommon--wer you all quit friendly?" ask sir 
nathaniel quietly. 

"quit friendly. there wa noth that I could notic out of the 
common--except," he went on, with a slight harden of the voice, 
"except that he kept hi eye fix on lilla, in a way which wa quit 
intoler to ani man who might hold her dear." 

"now, in what way did he look?" ask sir nathaniel. 

"there wa noth in itself offensive; but no one could help notic 
it." 

"you did. miss watford herself, who wa the victim, and mr. caswall, who 
wa the offender, are out of rang as witnesses. wa there anyon els 
who noticed?" 

"mimi did. her face flame with anger as she saw the look." 

"what kind of look wa it? over-ard or too admiring, or what? wa it 
the look of a lover, or one who fain would be? you understand?" 

"yes, sir, I quit understand. anyth of that sort I should of cours 
notice. It would be part of my prepar for keep my 
self-control--to which I am pledged." 

"if it were not amatory, wa it threatening? where wa the offence?" 

adam smile kindli at the old man. 

"it wa not amatory. even if it was, such wa to be expected. I should 
be the last man in the world to object, sinc I am myself an offend in 
that respect. moreover, not onli have I been taught to fight fair, but 
by natur I believ I am just. I would be as toler of and as liber 
to a rival as I should expect him to be to me. no, the look I mean wa 
noth of that kind. and so long as it did not lack proper respect, I 
should not of my own part condescend to notic it. did you ever studi 
the eye of a hound?" 

"at rest?" 

"no, when he is follow hi instincts! or, better still," adam went 
on, "the eye of a bird of prey when he is follow hi instincts. not 
when he is swooping, but mere when he is watch hi quarry?" 

"no," said sir nathaniel, "I don't know that I ever did. why, may I 
ask?" 

"that wa the look. certainli not amatori or anyth of that kind--yet 
it was, it struck me, more dangerous, if not so deadli as an actual 
threatening." 

again there wa a silence, which sir nathaniel broke as he stood up: 

"I think it would be well if we all thought over thi by ourselves. then 
we can renew the subject." 




chapter vii--oolanga 


mr. salton had an appoint for six o'clock at liverpool. when he had 
driven off, sir nathaniel took adam by the arm. 

"may I come with you for a while to your study? I want to speak to you 
privat without your uncl know about it, or even what the subject 
is. you don't mind, do you? It is not idl curiosity. no, no. It is 
on the subject to which we are all committed." 

"i it necessari to keep my uncl in the dark about it? He might be 
offended." 

"it is not necessary; but it is advisable. It is for hi sake that I 
asked. My friend is an old man, and it might concern him unduly--even 
alarm him. I promis you there shall be noth that could caus him 
anxieti in our silence, or at which he could take umbrage." 

"go on, sir!" said adam simply. 

"you see, your uncl is now an old man. I know it, for we were boy 
together. He ha led an unev and somewhat self-contain life, so 
that ani such condit of thing as ha now arisen is apt to perplex him 
from it veri strangeness. In fact, ani new matter is tri to old 
people. It ha it own disturb and it own anxieties, and neither 
of these thing are good for live that should be restful. your uncl is 
a strong man, with a veri happi and placid nature. given health and 
ordinari condit of life, there is no reason whi he should not live to 
be a hundred. you and I, therefore, who both love him, though in 
differ ways, should make it our busi to protect him from all 
disturb influences. I am sure you will agre with me that ani labour 
to thi end would be well spent. all right, my boy! I see your answer 
in your eyes; so we need say no more of that. and now," here hi voic 
changed, "tell me all that took place at that interview. there are 
strang thing in front of us--how strang we cannot at present even 
guess. doubtless some of the difficult thing to understand which lie 
behind the veil will in time be shown to us to see and to understand. In 
the meantime, all we can do is to work patiently, fearlessly, and 
unselfishly, to an end that we think is right. you had got so far as 
where lilla open the door to mr. caswal and the negro. you also 
observ that mimi wa disturb in her mind at the way mr. caswal 
look at her cousin." 

"certainly--though 'disturbed' is a poor way of express her 
objection." 

"can you rememb well enough to describ caswall' eyes, and how lilla 
looked, and what mimi said and did? also oolanga, caswall' west african 
servant." 

"i'll do what I can, sir. all the time mr. caswal wa staring, he kept 
hi eye fix and motionless--but not as if he wa in a trance. hi 
forehead wa wrinkl up, as it is when one is tri to see through or 
into something. At the best of time hi face ha not a gentl 
expression; but when it wa screw up like that it wa almost 
diabolical. It frighten poor lilla so that she trembled, and after a 
bit got so pale that I thought she had fainted. however, she held up and 
tri to stare back, but in a feebl kind of way. then mimi came close 
and held her hand. that brace her up, and--still, never ceas her 
return stare--sh got colour again and seem more like herself." 

"did he stare too?" 

"more than ever. the weaker lilla seemed, the stronger he became, just 
as if he were feed on her strength. all at onc she turn round, 
threw up her hands, and fell down in a faint. I could not see what els 
happen just then, for mimi had thrown herself on her knee besid her 
and hid her from me. then there wa someth like a black shadow 
between us, and there wa the nigger, look more like a malign devil 
than ever. I am not usual a patient man, and the sight of that ugli 
devil is enough to make one' blood boil. when he saw my face, he seem 
to realis danger--immedi danger--and slunk out of the room as 
noiselessli as if he had been blown out. I learn one thing, however--h 
is an enemy, if ever a man had one." 

"that still leav us three to two!" put in sir nathaniel. 

"then caswal slunk out, much as the nigger had done. when he had gone, 
lilla recov at once." 

"now," said sir nathaniel, anxiou to restor peace, "have you found out 
anyth yet regard the negro? I am anxiou to be post regard 
him. I fear there will be, or may be, grave troubl with him." 

"yes, sir, i'v heard a good deal about him--of cours it is not 
official; but hearsay must guid us at first. you know my man 
davenport--priv secretary, confidenti man of business, and gener 
factotum. He is devot to me, and ha my full confidence. I ask him 
to stay on board the _west african_ and have a good look round, and find 
out what he could about mr. caswall. naturally, he wa struck with the 
aborigin savage. He found one of the ship' stewards, who had been on 
the regular voyag to south africa. He knew oolanga and had made a 
studi of him. He is a man who get on well with niggers, and they open 
their heart to him. It seem that thi oolanga is quit a great person 
in the nigger world of the african west coast. He ha the two thing 
which men of hi own colour respect: he can make them afraid, and he is 
lavish with money. I don't know whose money--but that doe not matter. 
they are alway readi to trumpet hi greatness. evil great it is--but 
neither doe that matter. briefly, thi is hi history. He wa 
origin a witch-finder--about as low an occup as exist amongst 
aborigin savages. then he got up in the world and becam an obi-man, 
which give an opportun to wealth _via_ blackmail. finally, he 
reach the highest honour in hellish service. He becam a user of 
voodoo, which seem to be a servic of the utmost base and cruelty. I 
wa told some of hi deed of cruelty, which are simpli sickening. they 
made me long for an opportun of help to drive him back to hell. you 
might think to look at him that you could measur in some way the extent 
of hi vileness; but it would be a vain hope. monster such as he is 
belong to an earlier and more rudimentari stage of barbarism. He is in 
hi way a clever fellow--for a nigger; but is none the less danger or 
the less hate for that. the men in the ship told me that he wa a 
collector: some of them had seen hi collections. such collections! all 
that wa potent for evil in bird or beast, or even in fish. beak that 
could break and rend and tear--al the bird repres were of a 
predatori kind. even the fish are those which are born to destroy, to 
wound, to torture. the collection, I assur you, wa an object lesson in 
human malignity. thi be ha enough evil in hi face to frighten even 
a strong man. It is littl wonder that the sight of it put that poor 
girl into a dead faint!" 

noth more could be done at the moment, so they separated. 

adam wa up in the earli morn and took a smart walk round the brow. As 
he wa pass diana' grove, he look in on the short avenu of trees, 
and notic the snake kill on the previou morn by the mongoose. 
they all lay in a row, straight and rigid, as if they had been place by 
hands. their skin seem damp and sticky, and they were cover all 
over with ant and other insects. they look loathsome, so after a 
glance, he pass on. 

A littl later, when hi step took him, natur enough, past the 
entranc to merci farm, he wa pass by the negro, move quickli under 
the tree wherev there wa shadow. laid across one extend arm, 
look like dirti towel across a rail, he had the horrid-look 
snakes. He did not seem to see adam. No one wa to be seen at merci 
except a few workmen in the farmyard, so, after wait on the chanc of 
see mimi, adam began to go slowli home. 

onc more he wa pass on the way. thi time it wa by ladi arabella, 
walk hurriedli and so furious angri that she did not recognis him, 
even to the extent of acknowledg hi bow. 

when adam got back to lesser hill, he went to the coach-hous where the 
box with the mongoos wa kept, and took it with him, intend to finish 
at the mound of stone what he had begun the previou morn with regard 
to the extermination. He found that the snake were even more easili 
attack than on the previou day; no less than six were kill in the 
first half-hour. As no more appeared, he took it for grant that the 
morning' work wa over, and went toward home. the mongoos had by thi 
time becom accustom to him, and wa will to let himself be handl 
freely. adam lift him up and put him on hi shoulder and walk on. 
present he saw a ladi advanc toward him, and recognis ladi 
arabella. 

hitherto the mongoos had been quiet, like a play affection kitten; 
but when the two got close, adam wa horrifi to see the mongoose, in a 
state of the wildest fury, with everi hair stand on end, jump from hi 
shoulder and run toward ladi arabella. It look so furiou and so 
intent on attack that he call a warning. 

"look out--look out! the anim is furiou and mean to attack." 

ladi arabella look more than ever disdain and wa pass on; the 
mongoos jump at her in a furiou attack. adam rush forward with hi 
stick, the onli weapon he had. but just as he got within strike 
distance, the ladi drew out a revolv and shot the animal, break hi 
backbone. not satisfi with this, she pour shot after shot into him 
till the magazin wa exhausted. there wa no cool or hauteur about 
her now; she seem more furiou even than the animal, her face 
transform with hate, and as determin to kill as he had appear to 
be. adam, not know exactli what to do, lift hi hat in apolog and 
hurri on to lesser hill. 




chapter viii--surviv 


At breakfast sir nathaniel notic that adam wa put out about something, 
but he said nothing. the lesson of silenc is better rememb in age 
than in youth. when they were both in the study, where sir nathaniel 
follow him, adam at onc began to tell hi companion of what had 
happened. sir nathaniel look graver and graver as the narrat 
proceeded, and when adam had stop he remain silent for sever 
minutes, befor speaking. 

"thi is veri grave. I have not form ani opinion yet; but it seem to 
me at first impress that thi is wors than anyth I had expected." 

"why, sir?" said adam. "i the kill of a mongoose--no matter by 
whom--so seriou a thing as all that?" 

hi companion smoke on quietli for quit anoth few minut befor he 
spoke. 

"when I have properli thought it over I may moder my opinion, but in 
the meantim it seem to me that there is someth dread behind all 
this--someth that may affect all our lives--that may mean the issu of 
life or death to ani of us." 

adam sat up quickly. 

"do tell me, sir, what is in your mind--if, of course, you have no 
objection, or do not think it better to withhold it." 

"I have no objection, adam--in fact, if I had, I should have to overcom 
it. I fear there can be no more reserv thought between us." 

"indeed, sir, that sound serious, wors than serious!" 

"adam, I greatli fear that the time ha come for us--for you and me, at 
all events--to speak out plainli to one another. doe not there seem 
someth veri mysteri about this?" 

"I have thought so, sir, all along. the onli difficulti one ha is what 
one is to think and where to begin." 

"let us begin with what you have told me. first take the conduct of the 
mongoose. He wa quiet, even friendli and affection with you. He 
onli attack the snakes, which is, after all, hi busi in life." 

"that is so!" 

"then we must tri to find some reason whi he attack ladi arabella." 

"may it not be that a mongoos may have mere the instinct to attack, 
that natur doe not allow or provid him with the fine reason power 
to discrimin who he is to attack?" 

"of cours that may be so. but, on the other hand, should we not satisfi 
ourselv whi he doe wish to attack anything? If for centuries, thi 
particular anim is known to attack onli one kind of other animal, are 
we not justifi in assum that when one of them attack a hitherto 
unclass animal, he recognis in that anim some qualiti which it ha 
in common with the hereditari enemy?" 

"that is a good argument, sir," adam went on, "but a danger one. If 
we follow it out, it would lead us to believ that ladi arabella is a 
snake." 

"we must be sure, befor go to such an end, that there is no point as 
yet unconsid which would account for the unknown thing which puzzl 
us." 

"in what way?" 

"well, suppos the instinct work on some physic basis--for instance, 
smell. If there were anyth in recent juxtaposit to the attack 
which would carri the scent, sure that would suppli the miss cause." 

"of course!" adam spoke with conviction. 

"now, from what you tell me, the negro had just come from the direct 
of diana' grove, carri the dead snake which the mongoos had kill 
the previou morning. might not the scent have been carri that way?" 

"of cours it might, and probabl was. I never thought of that. Is 
there ani possibl way of guess approxim how long a scent will 
remain? you see, thi is a natur scent, and may deriv from a place 
where it ha been effect for thousand of years. then, doe a scent 
of ani kind carri with it ani form or qualiti of anoth kind, either 
good or evil? I ask you becaus one ancient name of the hous live in 
by the ladi who wa attack by the mongoos wa 'the lair of the white 
worm.' If ani of these thing be so, our difficulti have multipli 
indefinitely. they may even chang in kind. We may get into moral 
entanglements; befor we know it, we may be in the midst of a struggl 
between good and evil." 

sir nathaniel smile gravely. 

"with regard to the first question--so far as I know, there are no fix 
period for which a scent may be active--i think we may take it that that 
period doe not run into thousand of years. As to whether ani moral 
chang accompani a physic one, I can onli say that I have met no 
proof of the fact. At the same time, we must rememb that 'good' and 
'evil' are term so wide as to take in the whole scheme of creation, and 
all that is impli by them and by their mutual action and reaction. 
generally, I would say that in the scheme of a first caus anyth is 
possible. So long as the inher forc or tendenc of ani one thing 
are veil from us we must expect mystery." 

"there is one other question on which I should like to ask your opinion. 
suppos that there are ani perman forc appertain to the past, 
what we may call 'survivals,' do these belong to good as well as to evil? 
for instance, if the scent of the primaev monster can so remain in 
proport to the origin strength, can the same be true of thing of 
good import?" 

sir nathaniel thought for a while befor he answered. 

"we must be care not to confus the physic and the moral. I can see 
that alreadi you have switch on the moral entirely, so perhap we had 
better follow it up first. On the side of the moral, we have certain 
justif for belief in the utter of reveal religion. for 
instance, 'the effectu fervent prayer of a righteou man availeth much' 
is altogeth for good. We have noth of a similar kind on the side of 
evil. but if we accept thi dictum we need have no more fear of 
'mysteries': these becom thenceforth mere obstacles." 

adam suddenli chang to anoth phase of the subject. 

"and now, sir, may I turn for a few minut to pure practic things, 
or rather to matter of histor fact?" 

sir nathaniel bow acquiescence. 

"we have alreadi spoken of the history, so far as it is known, of some of 
the place round us--'castra regis,' 'diana' grove,' and 'the lair of 
the white worm.' I would like to ask if there is anyth not 
necessarili of evil import about ani of the places?" 

"which?" ask sir nathaniel shrewdly. 

"well, for instance, thi hous and merci farm?" 

"here we turn," said sir nathaniel, "to the other side, the light side of 
things. let us take merci farm first. when augustin wa sent by pope 
gregori to christianis england, in the time of the romans, he wa 
receiv and protect by ethelbert, king of kent, whose wife, daughter 
of charibert, king of paris, wa a christian, and did much for augustine. 
she found a nunneri in memori of columba, which wa name _sede 
misericordioe_, the hous of mercy, and, as the region wa mercian, the 
two name becam involved. As columba is the latin for dove, the dove 
becam a sort of signif of the nunnery. she seiz on the idea 
and made the newly-found nunneri a hous of doves. someon sent her a 
freshly-discov dove, a sort of carrier, but which had in the white 
feather of it head and neck the form of a religi cowl. the nunneri 
flourish for more than a century, when, in the time of penda, who wa 
the reactionari of heathendom, it fell into decay. In the meantim the 
doves, protect by religi feeling, had increas mightily, and were 
known in all cathol communities. when king offa rule in mercia, about 
a hundr and fifti year later, he restor christianity, and under it 
protect the nunneri of st. columba wa restor and it dove 
flourish again. In process of time thi religi hous again fell 
into desuetude; but befor it disappear it had achiev a great name 
for good works, and in especi for the pieti of it members. If deed 
and prayer and hope and earnest think leav anywher ani moral 
effect, merci farm and all around it have almost the right to be 
consid holi ground." 

"thank you, sir," said adam earnestly, and wa silent. sir nathaniel 
understood. 

after lunch that day, adam casual ask sir nathaniel to come for a 
walk with him. the keen-wit old diplomatist guess that there must 
be some motiv behind the suggestion, and he at onc agreed. 

As soon as they were free from observation, adam began. 

"I am afraid, sir, that there is more go on in thi neighbourhood than 
most peopl imagine. I wa out thi morning, and on the edg of the 
small wood, I came upon the bodi of a child by the roadside. At first, I 
thought she wa dead, and while examin her, I notic on her neck some 
mark that look like those of teeth." 

"some wild dog, perhaps?" put in sir nathaniel. 

"possibly, sir, though I think not--but listen to the rest of my news. I 
glanc around, and to my surprise, I notic someth white move 
among the trees. I place the child down carefully, and followed, but I 
could not find ani further traces. So I return to the child and 
resum my examination, and, to my delight, I discov that she wa 
still alive. I chafe her hand and gradual she revived, but to my 
disappoint she rememb nothing--except that someth had crept up 
quietli from behind, and had grip her round the throat. then, 
apparently, she fainted." 

"grip her round the throat! then it cannot have been a dog." 

"no, sir, that is my difficulty, and explain whi I brought you out here, 
where we cannot possibl be overheard. you have noticed, of course, the 
peculiar sinuou way in which ladi arabella moves--well, I feel certain 
that the white thing that I saw in the wood wa the mistress of diana' 
grove!" 

"good god, boy, be care what you say." 

"yes, sir, I fulli realis the graviti of my accusation, but I feel 
convinc that the mark on the child' throat were human--and made by a 
woman." 

adam' companion remain silent for some time, deep in thought. 

"adam, my boy," he said at last, "thi matter appear to me to be far 
more seriou even than you think. It forc me to break confid with 
my old friend, your uncle--but, in order to spare him, I must do so. for 
some time now, thing have been happen in thi district that have been 
worri him dreadfully--sever peopl have disappeared, without leav 
the slightest trace; a dead child wa found by the roadside, with no 
visibl or ascertain caus of death--sheep and other anim have 
been found in the fields, bleed from open wounds. there have been 
other matters--mani of them appar trivial in themselves. some 
sinist influenc ha been at work, and I admit that I have suspect 
ladi arabella--that is whi I question you so close about the mongoos 
and it strang attack upon ladi arabella. you will think it strang 
that I should suspect the mistress of diana' grove, a beauti woman of 
aristocrat birth. let me explain--th famili seat is near my own 
place, doom tower, and at one time I knew the famili well. when still a 
young girl, ladi arabella wander into a small wood near her home, and 
did not return. she wa found unconsci and in a high fever--th 
doctor said that she had receiv a poison bite, and the girl be at 
a delic and critic age, the result wa serious--so much so that she 
wa not expect to recover. A great london physician came down but 
could do nothing--indeed, he said that the girl would not surviv the 
night. all hope had been abandoned, when, to everyone' surprise, ladi 
arabella made a sudden and startl recovery. within a coupl of day 
she wa go about as usual! but to the horror of her people, she 
develop a terribl crave for cruelty, maim and injur bird and 
small animals--even kill them. thi wa put down to a nervou 
disturb due to her age, and it wa hope that her marriag to captain 
march would put thi right. however, it wa not a happi marriage, and 
eventu her husband wa found shot through the head. I have alway 
suspect suicide, though no pistol wa found near the body. He may have 
discov something--god know what!--so possibl ladi arabella may 
herself have kill him. put togeth mani small matter that have 
come to my knowledge, I have come to the conclus that the foul white 
worm obtain control of her body, just as her soul wa leav it 
earthli tenement--that would explain the sudden reviv of energy, the 
strang and inexplic crave for maim and killing, as well as mani 
other matter with which I need not troubl you now, adam. As I said 
just now, god alon know what poor captain march discovered--it must 
have been someth too ghastli for human endurance, if my theori is 
correct that the onc beauti human bodi of ladi arabella is under the 
control of thi ghastli white worm." 

adam nodded. 

"but what can we do, sir--it seem a most difficult problem." 

"we can do nothing, my boy--that is the import part of it. It would 
be imposs to take action--al we can do is to keep care watch, 
especi as regard ladi arabella, and be readi to act, promptli and 
decisively, if the opportun occurs." 

adam agreed, and the two men return to lesser hill. 




chapter ix--smel death 


adam salton, though he talk little, did not let the grass grow under 
hi feet in ani matter which he had undertaken, or in which he wa 
interested. He had agre with sir nathaniel that they should not do 
anyth with regard to the mysteri of ladi arabella' fear of the 
mongoose, but he steadili pursu hi cours in be _prepared_ to act 
whenev the opportun might come. He wa in hi own mind perpetu 
cast about for inform or clue which might lead to possibl line 
of action. baffl by the kill of the mongoose, he look around for 
anoth line to follow. He wa fascin by the idea of there be a 
mysteri link between the woman and the animal, but he wa alreadi 
prepar a second string to hi bow. hi new idea wa to use the 
faculti of oolanga, so far as he could, in the servic of discovery. 
hi first move wa to send davenport to liverpool to tri to find the 
steward of the _west african_, who had told him about oolanga, and if 
possibl secur ani further information, and then tri to induc (bi 
briberi or other means) the nigger to come to the brow. So soon as he 
himself could have speech of the voodoo-man he would be abl to learn 
from him someth useful. davenport wa success in hi missions, for 
he had to get anoth mongoose, and he wa abl to tell adam that he had 
seen the steward, who told him much that he want to know, and had also 
arrang for oolanga to come to lesser hill the follow day. At thi 
point adam saw hi way suffici clear to admit davenport to some 
extent into hi confidence. He had come to the conclus that it would 
be better--certainli at first--not himself to appear in the matter, with 
which davenport wa fulli compet to deal. It would be time for 
himself to take a person part when matter had advanc a littl 
further. 

If what the nigger said wa in ani wise true, the man had a rare gift 
which might be use in the quest they were after. He could, as it 
were, "smell death." If ani one wa dead, if ani one had died, or if a 
place had been use in connect with death, he seem to know the broad 
fact by intuition. adam made up hi mind that to test thi faculti with 
regard to sever place would be hi first task. natur he wa 
anxious, and the time pass slowly. the onli comfort wa the arriv 
the next morn of a strong pack case, locked, from ross, the key 
be in the custodi of davenport. In the case were two smaller boxes, 
both locked. one of them contain a mongoos to replac that kill by 
ladi arabella; the other wa the special mongoos which had alreadi 
kill the king-cobra in nepaul. when both the anim had been safe 
put under lock and key, he felt that he might breath more freely. No 
one wa allow to know the secret of their exist in the house, 
except himself and davenport. He arrang that davenport should take 
oolanga round the neighbourhood for a walk, stop at each of the 
place which he designated. have gone all along the brow, he wa to 
return the same way and induc him to touch on the same subject in 
talk with adam, who wa to meet them as if by chanc at the farthest 
part--that beyond merci farm. 

the incid of the day prove much as adam expected. At merci farm, at 
diana' grove, at castra regis, and a few other spots, the negro stop 
and, open hi wide nostril as if to sniff boldly, said that he 
smell death. It wa not alway in the same form. At merci farm he 
said there were mani small deaths. At diana' grove hi bear wa 
different. there wa a distinct sens of enjoy about him, especi 
when he spoke of mani great deaths. here, too, he snif in a strang 
way, like a bloodhound at check, and look puzzled. He said no word in 
either prais or disparagement, but in the centr of the grove, where, 
hidden amongst ancient oak stumps, wa a block of granit slightli 
hollow on the top, he bent low and place hi forehead on the ground. 
thi wa the onli place where he show distinct reverence. At the 
castle, though he spoke of much death, he show no sign of respect. 

there wa evid someth about diana' grove which both interest 
and baffl him. befor leaving, he move all over the place 
unsatisfied, and in one spot, close to the edg of the brow, where there 
wa a deep hollow, he appear to be afraid. after return sever 
time to thi place, he suddenli turn and ran in a panic of fear to the 
higher ground, cross as he did so the outcrop rock. then he 
seem to breath more freely, and recov some of hi jaunti 
impudence. 

all thi seem to satisfi adam' expectations. He went back to lesser 
hill with a seren and settl calm upon him. sir nathaniel follow him 
into hi study. 

"bi the way, I forgot to ask you detail about one thing. when that 
extraordinari stare episod of mr. caswal went on, how did lilla take 
it--how did she bear herself?" 

"she look frightened, and trembl just as I have seen a pigeon with a 
hawk, or a bird with a serpent." 

"thanks. It is just as I expected. there have been circumst in the 
caswal famili which lead one to believ that they have had from the 
earliest time some extraordinari mesmer or hypnot faculty. indeed, 
a skill eye could read so much in their physiognomy. that shot of 
yours, whether by instinct or intention, of the hawk and the pigeon wa 
peculiarli apposite. I think we may settl on that as a fix trait to 
be accept throughout our investigation." 

when dusk had fallen, adam took the new mongoose--not the one from 
nepaul--and, carri the box slung over hi shoulder, stroll toward 
diana' grove. close to the gateway he met ladi arabella, clad as usual 
in tightli fit white, which show off her slim figure. 

To hi intens astonish the mongoos allow her to pet him, take him 
up in her arm and fondl him. As she wa go in hi direction, they 
walk on together. 

round the roadway between the entranc of diana' grove and lesser hill 
were mani trees, with not much foliag except at the top. In the dusk 
thi place wa shadowy, and the view wa hamper by the cluster 
trunks. In the uncertain, tremul light which fell through the tree- 
tops, it wa hard to distinguish anyth clearly, and at last, somehow, 
he lost sight of her altogether, and turn back on hi track to find 
her. present he came across her close to her own gate. she wa 
lean over the pale of split oak branch which form the pale of 
the avenue. He could not see the mongoose, so he ask her where it had 
gone. 

"he slipt out of my arm while I wa pet him," she answered, "and 
disappear under the hedges." 

they found him at a place where the avenu widen so as to let carriag 
pass each other. the littl creatur seem quit changed. He had been 
ebulli active; now he wa dull and spiritless--seem to be dazed. 
He allow himself to be lift by either of the pair; but when he wa 
alon with ladi arabella he kept look round him in a strang way, as 
though tri to escape. when they had come out on the roadway adam held 
the mongoos tight to him, and, lift hi hat to hi companion, move 
quickli toward lesser hill; he and ladi arabella lost sight of each 
other in the thicken gloom. 

when adam got home, he put the mongoos in hi box, and lock the door 
of the room. the other mongoose--th one from nepaul--wa safe lock 
in hi own box, but he lay quiet and did not stir. when he got to hi 
studi sir nathaniel came in, shut the door behind him. 

"I have come," he said, "while we have an opportun of be alone, to 
tell you someth of the caswal famili which I think will interest you. 
there is, or use to be, a belief in thi part of the world that the 
caswal famili had some strang power of make the will of other 
person subservi to their own. there are mani allus to the 
subject in memoir and other unimport works, but I onli know of one 
where the subject is spoken of definitely. It is _mercia and it 
worthies_, written by ezra tom more than a hundr year ago. the 
author goe into the question of the close associ of the then edgar 
caswal with mesmer in paris. He speak of caswal be a pupil and the 
fellow worker of mesmer, and state that though, when the latter left 
france, he took away with him a vast quantiti of philosoph and 
electr instruments, he wa never known to use them again. He onc made 
it known to a friend that he had given them to hi old pupil. the term 
he use wa odd, for it wa 'bequeathed,' but no such bequest of mesmer 
wa ever made known. At ani rate the instrument were missing, and never 
turn up." 

A servant came into the room to tell adam that there wa some strang 
nois come from the lock room into which he had gone when he came in. 
He hurri off to the place at once, sir nathaniel go with him. have 
lock the door behind them, adam open the packing-cas where the box 
of the two mongoos were lock up. there wa no sound from one of 
them, but from the other a queer restless struggling. have open both 
boxes, he found that the nois wa from the nepaul animal, which, 
however, becam quiet at once. In the other box the new mongoos lay 
dead, with everi appear of have been strangled! 




chapter x--the kite 


On the follow day, a littl after four o'clock, adam set out for 
mercy. 

He wa home just as the clock were strike six. He wa pale and upset, 
but otherwis look strong and alert. the old man sum up hi 
appear and manner thus: "brace up for battle." 

"now!" said sir nathaniel, and settl down to listen, look at adam 
steadili and listen attent that he might miss nothing--even the 
inflect of a word. 

"I found lilla and mimi at home. watford had been detain by busi 
on the farm. miss watford receiv me as kindli as before; mimi, too, 
seem glad to see me. mr. caswal came so soon after I arrived, that 
he, or someon on hi behalf, must have been watch for me. He wa 
follow close by the negro, who wa puf hard as if he had been 
running--so it wa probabl he who watched. mr. caswal wa veri cool 
and collected, but there wa a more than usual iron look about hi face 
that I did not like. however, we got on veri well. He talk pleasantli 
on all sort of questions. the nigger wait a while and then 
disappear as on the other occasion. mr. caswall' eye were as usual 
fix on lilla. true, they seem to be veri deep and earnest, but there 
wa no offenc in them. had it not been for the draw down of the 
brow and the stern set of the jaws, I should not at first have notic 
anything. but the stare, when present it began, increas in 
intensity. I could see that lilla began to suffer from nervousness, as 
on the first occasion; but she carri herself bravely. however, the 
more nervou she grew, the harder mr. caswal stared. It wa evid to 
me that he had come prepar for some sort of mesmer or hypnot 
battle. after a while he began to throw glanc round him and then 
rais hi hand, without let either lilla or mimi see the action. It 
wa evid intend to give some sign to the negro, for he came, in 
hi usual stealthi way, quietli in by the hall door, which wa open. then 
mr. caswall' effort at stare becam intensified, and poor lilla' 
nervous grew greater. mimi, see that her cousin wa distressed, 
came close to her, as if to comfort or strengthen her with the 
conscious of her presence. thi evid made a difficulti for mr. 
caswall, for hi efforts, without appear to get feebler, seem less 
effective. thi continu for a littl while, to the gain of both lilla 
and mimi. then there wa a diversion. without word or apolog the door 
opened, and ladi arabella march enter the room. I had seen her come 
through the great window. without a word she cross the room and stood 
besid mr. caswall. It realli wa veri like a fight of a peculiar kind; 
and the longer it wa sustain the more earnest--th fiercer--it grew. 
that combin of forces--th over-lord, the white woman, and the black 
man--would have cost some--prob all of them--their live in the 
southern state of america. To us it wa simpli horrible. but all that 
you can understand. thi time, to go on in sport phrase, it wa 
understood by all to be a 'fight to a finish,' and the mix group did 
not slacken a moment or relax their efforts. On lilla the strain began 
to tell disastrously. she grew pale--a patchi pallor, which meant that 
her nerv were out of order. she trembl like an aspen, and though she 
struggl bravely, I notic that her leg would hardli support her. A 
dozen time she seem about to collaps in a faint, but each time, on 
catch sight of mimi' eyes, she made a fresh struggl and pull 
through. 

"bi now mr. caswall' face had lost it appear of passivity. hi 
eye glow with a fieri light. He wa still the old roman in 
inflex of purpose; but graft on to the roman wa a new berserk 
fury. hi companion in the bale work seem to have taken on 
someth of hi feeling. ladi arabella look like a soulless, pitiless 
being, not human, unless it reviv old legend of transform human 
be who had lost their human in some transform or in the sweep 
of natur savagery. As for the negro--well, I can onli say that it wa 
sole due to the self-restraint which you impress on me that I did not 
wipe him out as he stood--without warning, without fair play--without a 
singl one of the grace of life and death. lilla wa silent in the 
helpless concentr of deadli fear; mimi wa all resolv and 
self-forgetfulness, so intent on the soul-struggl in which she wa 
engag that there wa no possibl of ani other thought. As for 
myself, the bond of will which held me inact seem like band of 
steel which numb all my faculties, except sight and hearing. We seem 
fix in an _impasse_. someth must happen, though the power of 
guess wa inactive. As in a dream, I saw mimi' hand move restlessly, 
as if grope for something. mechan it touch that of lilla, and 
in that instant she wa transformed. It wa as if youth and strength 
enter afresh into someth alreadi dead to sensibl and intention. 
As if by inspiration, she grasp the other' band with a forc which 
blench the knuckles. her face suddenli flamed, as if some divin light 
shone through it. her form expand till it stood out majestically. 
lift her right hand, she step forward toward caswall, and with a 
bold sweep of her arm seem to drive some strang forc toward him. 
again and again wa the gestur repeated, the man fall back from her 
at each movement. toward the door he retreated, she following. there 
wa a sound as of the coo sob of doves, which seem to multipli and 
intensifi with each second. the sound from the unseen sourc rose and 
rose as he retreated, till final it swell out in a triumphant peal, 
as she with a fierc sweep of her arm, seem to hurl someth at her 
foe, and he, move hi hand blindli befor hi face, appear to be 
swept through the doorway and out into the open sunlight. 

"all at onc my own faculti were fulli restored; I could see and hear 
everything, and be fulli consciou of what wa go on. even the 
figur of the bale group were there, though dimli seen as through a 
veil--a shadowi veil. I saw lilla sink down in a swoon, and mimi throw 
up her arm in a gestur of triumph. As I saw her through the great 
window, the sunshin flood the landscape, which, however, wa 
momentarili becom eclips by an onrush of a myriad birds." 

By the next morning, daylight show the actual danger which threatened. 
from everi part of the eastern counti report were receiv concern 
the enorm immigr of birds. expert were sending--on their own 
account, on behalf of learn societies, and through local and imperi 
govern bodies--report deal with the matter, and suggest 
remedies. 

the report closer to home were even more disturbing. all day long it 
would seem that the bird were come thicker from all quarters. 
doubtless mani were go as well as coming, but the mass seem never to 
get less. each bird seem to sound some note of fear or anger or 
seeking, and the whir of wing never ceas nor lessened. the air 
wa full of a mutter throb. No window or barrier could shut out the 
sound, till the ear of ani listen becam dull by the ceaseless 
murmur. So monoton it was, so cheerless, so disheartening, so 
melancholy, that all longed, but in vain, for ani variety, no matter how 
terribl it might be. 

the second morn the report from all the district round were more 
alarm than ever. farmer began to dread the come of winter as they 
saw the dwindl of the time fruit of the earth. and as yet it 
wa onli a warn of evil, not the evil accomplished; the ground began 
to look bare whenev some pass sound temporarili frighten the 
birds. 

edgar caswal tortur hi brain for a long time unavailingly, to think 
of some mean of get rid of what he, as well as hi neighbours, had 
come to regard as a plagu of birds. At last he recal a circumst 
which promis a solut of the difficulty. the experi wa of some 
year ago in china, far up-country, toward the head-wat of the yang- 
tze-kiang, where the smaller tributari spread out in a sort of natur 
irrig scheme to suppli the wilder of paddy-fields. It wa at 
the time of the ripen rice, and the myriad of bird which came to 
feed on the come crop wa a seriou menace, not onli to the district, 
but to the countri at large. the farmers, who were more or less 
afflict with the same troubl everi season, knew how to deal with it. 
they made a vast kite, which they caus to be flown over the centr spot 
of the incursion. the kite wa shape like a great hawk; and the moment 
it rose into the air the bird began to cower and seek protection--and 
then to disappear. So long as that kite wa fli overhead the bird 
lay low and the crop wa saved. accordingli caswal order hi men to 
construct an immens kite, adher as well as they could to the line of 
a hawk. then he and hi men, with a suffici of cord, began to fli it 
high overhead. the experi of china wa repeated. the moment the 
kite rose, the bird hid or sought shelter. the follow morning, the 
kite wa still fli high, no bird wa to be seen as far as the eye 
could reach from castra regis. but there follow in turn what prove 
even a wors evil. all the bird were cowed; their sound stopped. 
neither song nor chirp wa heard--sil seem to have taken the place 
of the normal voic of bird life. but that wa not all. the silenc 
spread to all animals. 

the fear and restraint which brood amongst the denizen of the air 
began to affect all life. not onli did the bird ceas song or chirp, 
but the low of the cattl ceas in the field and the vari sound 
of life die away. In place of these thing wa onli a soundless gloom, 
more dreadful, more disheartening, more soul-kil than ani concours 
of sounds, no matter how full of fear and dread. piou individu put 
up constant prayer for relief from the intoler solitude. after a 
littl there were sign of univers depress which those who ran might 
read. one and all, the face of men and women seem bereft of vitality, 
of interest, of thought, and, most of all, of hope. men seem to have 
lost the power of express of their thoughts. the soundless air seem 
to have the same effect as the univers dark when men gnaw their 
tongu with pain. 

from thi inflict of silenc there wa no relief. everyth wa 
affected; gloom wa the predomin note. joy appear to have pass 
away as a factor of life, and thi creativ impuls had noth to take 
it place. that giant spot in high air wa a plagu of evil influence. 
It seem like a new misanthrop belief which had fallen on human 
beings, carri with it the negat of all hope. 

after a few days, men began to grow desperate; their veri word as well 
as their sens seem to be in chains. edgar caswal again tortur hi 
brain to find ani antidot or palli of thi greater evil than 
before. He would gladli have destroy the kite, or caus it fli to 
cease; but the instant it wa pull down, the bird rose up in even 
greater numbers; all those who depend in ani way on agricultur sent 
piti protest to castra regis. 

It wa strang inde what influenc that weird kite seem to exercise. 
even human be were affect by it, as if both it and they were 
realities. As for the peopl at merci farm, it wa like a tast of 
actual death. lilla felt it most. If she had been inde a real dove, 
with a real kite hang over her in the air, she could not have been 
more frighten or more affect by the terror thi created. 

Of course, some of those alreadi drawn into the vortex notic the effect 
on individuals. those who were interest took care to compar their 
information. strang enough, as it seem to the others, the person 
who took the ghastli silenc least to heart wa the negro. By natur he 
wa not sensit to, or afflict by, nerves. thi alon would not have 
produc the seem indifference, so they set their mind to discov 
the real cause. adam came quickli to the conclus that there wa for 
him some compens that the other did not share; and he soon believ 
that that compens wa in one form or anoth the enjoy of the 
suffer of others. thu the black had a never-fail sourc of 
amusement. 

ladi arabella' cold natur render her immun to anyth in the way of 
pain or troubl concern others. edgar caswal wa far too haughti a 
person, and too stern of nature, to concern himself about poor or 
helpless people, much less the lower order of mere animals. mr. watford, 
mr. salton, and sir nathaniel were all concern in the issue, partli 
from kind of heart--for none of them could see suffering, even of 
wild birds, unmoved--and partli on account of their property, which had 
to be protected, or ruin would stare them in the face befor long. 

lilla suffer acutely. As time went on, her face becam pinched, and 
her eye dull with watch and crying. mimi suffer too on account of 
her cousin' suffering. but as she could do nothing, she resolut made 
up her mind to self-restraint and patience. adam' frequent visit 
comfort her. 




chapter xi--mesmer' chest 


after a coupl of week had passed, the kite seem to give edgar caswal 
a new zest for life. He wa never tire of look at it movements. He 
had a comfort armchair put out on the tower, wherein he sat sometim 
all day long, watch as though the kite wa a new toy and he a child 
late come into possess of it. He did not seem to have lost interest 
in lilla, for he still paid an occasion visit at merci farm. 

indeed, hi feel toward her, whatev it had been at first, had now 
so far chang that it had becom a distinct affect of a pure anim 
kind. indeed, it seem as though the man' natur had becom corrupted, 
and that all the baser and more selfish and more reckless qualiti had 
becom more conspicuous. there wa not so much stern appar in hi 
nature, becaus there wa less self-restraint. determin had becom 
indifference. 

the visibl chang in edgar wa that he grew morbid, sad, silent; the 
neighbour thought he wa go mad. He becam absorb in the kite, and 
watch it not onli by day, but often all night long. It becam an 
obsess to him. 

caswal took a person interest in the keep of the great kite flying. 
He had a vast coil of cord effici for the purpose, which work on a 
roller fix on the parapet of the tower. there wa a winch for the 
pull in of the slack; the outgo line be control by a racket. 
there wa invari one man at least, day and night, on the tower to 
attend to it. At such an elev there wa alway a strong wind, and 
at time the kite rose to an enorm height, as well as travel for 
great distanc laterally. In fact, the kite became, in a short time, 
one of the curios of castra regi and all around it. edgar began to 
attribut to it, in hi own mind, almost human qualities. It becam to 
him a separ entity, with a mind and a soul of it own. be idle- 
hand all day, he began to appli to what he consid the servic of 
the kite some of hi spare time, and found a new pleasure--a new object 
in life--in the old schoolboy game of send up "runners" to the kite. 
the way thi is done is to get round piec of paper so cut that there is 
a hole in the centre, through which the string of the kite passes. the 
natur action of the wind-pressur take the paper along the string, and 
so up to the kite itself, no matter how high or how far it may have gone. 

In the earli day of thi amus edgar caswal spent hours. hundr 
of such messeng flew along the string, until soon he bethought him of 
write messag on these paper so that he could make known hi idea to 
the kite. It may be that hi brain gave way under the opportun 
given by hi illus of the entiti of the toy and it power of separ 
thought. from send messag he came to make direct speech to the 
kite--without, however, ceas to send the runners. doubtless, the 
height of the tower, seat as it wa on the hill-top, the rush of the 
ceaseless wind, the hypnot effect of the lofti altitud of the speck in 
the sky at which he gazed, and the rush of the paper messeng up the 
string till sight of them wa lost in distance, all help to further 
affect hi brain, undoubtedli give way under the strain of belief and 
circumst which were at onc stimul to the imagination, 
occup of hi mind, and absorbing. 

the next step of intellectu declin wa to bring to bear on the main 
idea of the consciou ident of the kite all sort of subject which 
had imagin forc or tendenc of their own. He had, in castra regis, 
a larg collect of curiou and interest thing form in the past 
by hi forebears, of similar tast to hi own. there were all sort of 
strang anthropolog specimens, both old and new, which had been 
collect through variou travel in strang places: ancient egyptian 
relic from tomb and mummies; curio from australia, new zealand, and 
the south seas; idol and images--from tartar ikon to ancient egyptian, 
persian, and indian object of worship; object of death and tortur of 
american indians; and, abov all, a vast collect of lethal weapon of 
everi kind and from everi place--chines "high pinders," doubl knives, 
afghan double-edg scimitar made to cut a bodi in two, heavi knive 
from all the eastern countries, ghost dagger from thibet, the terribl 
kukri of the ghourka and other hill tribe of india, assassins' weapon 
from itali and spain, even the knife which wa formerli carri by the 
slave-driv of the mississippi region. death and pain of everi kind 
were fulli repres in that gruesom collection. 

that it had a fascin for oolanga goe without saying. He wa never 
tire of visit the museum in the tower, and spent endless hour in 
inspect the exhibits, till he wa thoroughli familiar with everi 
detail of all of them. He ask permiss to clean and polish and 
sharpen them--a favour which wa readili granted. In addit to the 
abov objects, there were mani thing of a kind to awaken human fear. 
stuf serpent of the most objection and horrid kind; giant insect 
from the tropics, fearsom in everi detail; fish and crustacean 
cover with weird spikes; dri octopus of great size. other things, 
too, there were, not less deadli though seemingli innocuous--dri fungi, 
trap intend for birds, beasts, fishes, reptiles, and insects; machin 
which could produc pain of ani kind and degree, and the onli merci of 
which wa the power of produc speedi death. 

caswall, who had never befor seen ani of these things, except those 
which he had collect himself, found a constant amus and interest 
in them. He studi them, their uses, their mechanism--wher there wa 
such--and their place of origin, until he had an ampl and real 
knowledg of all concern them. mani were secret and intricate, but he 
never rest till he found out all the secrets. when onc he had becom 
interest in strang objects, and the way to use them, he began to 
explor variou like place for similar finds. He began to inquir of 
hi household where strang lumber wa kept. sever of the men spoke of 
old simon chester as one who knew everyth in and about the house. 
accordingly, he sent for the old man, who came at once. He wa veri old, 
nearli nineti year of age, and veri infirm. He had been born in the 
castle, and had serv it success of masters--pres or absent--ev 
since. when edgar began to question him on the subject regard which 
he had sent for him, old simon exhibit much perturbation. In fact, he 
becam so frighten that hi master, fulli believ that he wa 
conceal something, order him to tell at onc what remain unseen, 
and where it wa hidden away. face to face with discoveri of hi secret, 
the old man, in a pitiabl state of concern, spoke out even more fulli 
than mr. caswal had expected. 

"indeed, indeed, sir, everyth is here in the tower that ha ever been 
put away in my time except--except--" here he began to shake and trembl 
it--"except the chest which mr. edgar--h who wa mr. edgar when I first 
took service--brought back from france, after he had been with dr. 
mesmer. the trunk ha been kept in my room for safety; but I shall send 
it down here now." 

"what is in it?" ask edgar sharply. 

"that I do not know. moreover, it is a peculiar trunk, without ani 
visibl mean of opening." 

"i there no lock?" 

"I suppos so, sir; but I do not know. there is no keyhole." 

"send it here; and then come to me yourself." 

the trunk, a heavi one with steel band round it, but no lock or keyhole, 
wa carri in by two men. shortli afterward old simon attend hi 
master. when he came into the room, mr. caswal himself went and close 
the door; then he asked: 

"how do you open it?" 

"I do not know, sir." 

"do you mean to say that you never open it?" 

"most certainli I say so, your honour. how could I? It wa entrust to 
me with the other thing by my master. To open it would have been a 
breach of trust." 

caswal sneered. 

"quit remarkable! leav it with me. close the door behind you. 
stay--did no one ever tell you about it--say anyth regard it--mak 
ani remark?" 

old simon turn pale, and put hi trembl hand together. 

"oh, sir, I entreat you not to touch it. that trunk probabl contain 
secret which dr. mesmer told my master. told them to hi ruin!" 

"how do you mean? what ruin?" 

"sir, he it wa who, men said, sold hi soul to the evil one; I had 
thought that that time and the evil of it had all pass away." 

"that will do. Go away; but remain in your own room, or within call. I 
may want you." 

the old man bow deepli and went out trembling, but without speak a 
word. 




chapter xii--th chest open 


left alon in the turret-room, edgar caswal care lock the door 
and hung a handkerchief over the keyhole. next, he inspect the 
windows, and saw that they were not overlook from ani angl of the main 
building. then he care examin the trunk, go over it with a 
magnifi glass. He found it intact: the steel band were flawless; the 
whole trunk wa compact. after sit opposit to it for some time, and 
the shade of even begin to melt into darkness, he gave up the 
task and went to hi bedroom, after lock the door of the turret-room 
behind him and take away the key. 

He woke in the morn at daylight, and resum hi patient but 
unavail studi of the metal trunk. thi he continu dure the whole 
day with the same result--humili disappointment, which overwrought 
hi nerv and made hi head ache. the result of the long strain wa 
seen later in the afternoon, when he sat lock within the turret-room 
befor the still baffl trunk, distrait, listless and yet agitated, 
sunk in a settl gloom. As the dusk wa fall he told the steward to 
send him two men, strong ones. these he order to take the trunk to hi 
bedroom. In that room he then sat on into the night, without paus 
even to take ani food. hi mind wa in a whirl, a fever of excitement. 
the result wa that when, late in the night, he lock himself in hi 
room hi brain wa full of odd fancies; he wa on the high road to mental 
disturbance. He lay down on hi bed in the dark, still brood over the 
mysteri of the close trunk. 

gradual he yield to the influenc of silenc and darkness. after 
lie there quietli for some time, hi mind becam activ again. but 
thi time there were round him no disturb influences; hi brain wa 
activ and abl to work freeli and to deal with memory. A thousand 
forgotten--or onli half-known--incidents, fragment of convers or 
theori long ago guess at and long forgotten, crowd on hi mind. He 
seem to hear again around him the legion of whir wing to which he 
had been so late accustomed. even to himself he knew that that wa an 
effort of imagin found on imperfect memory. but he wa content 
that imagin should work, for out of it might come some solut of 
the mysteri which surround him. and in thi frame of mind, sleep made 
anoth and more success essay. thi time he enjoy peac 
slumber, rest alik to hi weari bodi and hi overwrought brain. 

In hi sleep he arose, and, as if in obedi to some influenc beyond 
and greater than himself, lift the great trunk and set it on a strong 
tabl at one side of the room, from which he had previous remov a 
quantiti of books. To do this, he had to use an amount of strength which 
was, he knew, far beyond him in hi normal state. As it was, it seem 
easi enough; everyth yield befor hi touch. then he becam 
consciou that somehow--how, he never could remember--th chest wa open. 
He unlock hi door, and, take the chest on hi shoulder, carri it 
up to the turret-room, the door of which also he unlocked. even at the 
time he wa amaz at hi own strength, and wonder whenc it had come. 
hi mind, lost in conjecture, wa too far off to realis more immedi 
things. He knew that the chest wa enorm heavy. He seemed, in a 
sort of vision which lit up the absolut black around, to see the two 
sturdi servant men stagger under it great weight. He lock himself 
again in the turret-room, and laid the open chest on a table, and in 
the dark began to unpack it, lay out the contents, which were 
mainli of metal and glass--great piec in strang forms--on anoth 
table. He wa consciou of be still asleep, and of act rather in 
obedi to some unseen and unknown command than in accord with ani 
reason plan, to be follow by result which he understood. thi 
phase completed, he proceed to arrang in order the compon part of 
some larg instruments, form mostli of glass. hi finger seem to 
have acquir a new and exquisit subtleti and even a volit of their 
own. then weari of brain came upon him; hi head sank down on hi 
breast, and littl by littl everyth becam wrap in gloom. 

He awok in the earli morn in hi bedroom, and look around him, now 
clear-headed, in amazement. In it usual place on the strong tabl stood 
the great steel-hoop chest without lock or key. but it wa now locked. 
He aros quietli and stole to the turret-room. there everyth wa as 
it had been on the previou evening. He look out of the window where 
high in air flew, as usual, the giant kite. He unlock the wicket gate 
of the turret stair and went out on the roof. close to him wa the great 
coil of cord on it reel. It wa hum in the morn breeze, and when 
he touch the string it sent a quick thrill through hand and arm. there 
wa no sign anywher that there had been ani disturb or displac 
of anyth dure the night. 

utterli bewildered, he sat down in hi room to think. now for the first 
time he _felt_ that he wa asleep and dreaming. present he fell asleep 
again, and slept for a long time. He awok hungri and made a hearti 
meal. then toward evening, have lock himself in, he fell asleep 
again. when he woke he wa in darkness, and wa quit at sea as to hi 
whereabouts. He began feel about the dark room, and wa recal to 
the consequ of hi posit by the break of a larg piec of 
glass. have obtain a light, he discov thi to be a glass wheel, 
part of an elabor piec of mechan which he must in hi sleep have 
taken from the chest, which wa now opened. He had onc again open it 
whilst asleep, but he had no recollect of the circumstances. 

caswal came to the conclus that there had been some sort of dual 
action of hi mind, which might lead to some catastroph or some 
discoveri of hi secret plans; so he resolv to forgo for a while the 
pleasur of make discoveri regard the chest. To thi end, he 
appli himself to quit anoth matter--an investig of the other 
treasur and rare object in hi collections. He went amongst them in 
simple, idl curiosity, hi main object be to discov some strang 
item which he might use for experi with the kite. He had alreadi 
resolv to tri some runner other than those made of paper. He had a 
vagu idea that with such a forc as the great kite strain at it 
leash, thi might be use to lift to the altitud of the kite itself 
heavier articles. hi first experi with articl of littl but 
increas weight wa emin successful. So he ad by degre more 
and more weight, until he found out that the lift power of the kite 
wa considerable. He then determin to take a step further, and send to 
the kite some of the articl which lay in the steel-hoop chest. the 
last time he had open it in sleep, it had not been shut again, and he 
had insert a wedg so that he could open it at will. He made 
examin of the contents, but came to the conclus that the glass 
object were unsuitable. they were too light for test weight, and 
they were so frail as to be danger to send to such a height. 

So he look around for someth more solid with which to experiment. 
hi eye caught sight of an object which at onc attract him. thi wa 
a small copi of one of the ancient egyptian gods--that of bes, who 
repres the destruct power of nature. It wa so bizarr and 
mysteri as to commend itself to hi mad humour. In lift it from 
the cabinet, he wa struck by it great weight in proport to it size. 
He made accur examin of it by the aid of some instruments, and 
came to the conclus that it wa carv from a lump of lodestone. He 
rememb that he had read somewher of an ancient egyptian god cut from 
a similar substance, and, think it over, he came to the conclus 
that he must have read it in sir thoma brown' _popular errors_, a book 
of the seventeenth century. He got the book from the library, and look 
out the passage: 

"A great exampl we have from the observ of our learn friend mr. 
graves, in an aegyptian idol cut out of loadston and found among the 
mummies; which still retain it attraction, though probabl taken out of 
the mine about two thousand year ago." 

the strang of the figure, and it be so close akin to hi own 
nature, attract him. He made from thin wood a larg circular runner, 
and in front of it place the weighti god, send it up to the fli 
kite along the throb cord. 




chapter xiii--oolanga' hallucin 


dure the last few day ladi arabella had been get exceedingli 
impatient. her debts, alway pressing, were grow to an embarrass 
amount. the onli hope she had of comfort in life wa a good marriage; 
but the good marriag on which she had fix her eye did not seem to move 
quickli enough--indeed, it did not seem to move at all--in the right 
direction. edgar caswal wa not an ardent wooer. from the veri first 
he seem _difficile_, but he had been keep to hi own room ever sinc 
hi struggl with mimi watford. On that occas ladi arabella had shown 
him in an unmistak way what her feel were; indeed, she had made 
it known to him, in a more overt way than pride should allow, that she 
wish to help and support him. the moment when she had gone across the 
room to stand besid him in hi mesmer struggle, had been the veri 
limit of her voluntari action. It wa quit bitter enough, she felt, 
that he did not come to her, but now that she had made that advance, she 
felt that ani withdraw on hi part would, to a woman of her class, be 
noth less than a flame insult. had she not class herself with hi 
nigger servant, an unreform savage? had she not shown her prefer 
for him at the festiv of hi home-coming? had she not . . . ladi 
arabella wa cold-blooded, and she wa prepar to go through all that 
might be necessari of indifference, and even insult, to becom chatelain 
of castra regis. In the meantime, she would show no hurry--sh must 
wait. she might, in an unostentati way, come to him again. she knew 
him now, and could make a keen guess at hi desir with regard to lilla 
watford. with that secret in her possession, she could bring pressur to 
bear on caswal which would make it no easi matter for him to evad her. 
the great difficulti wa how to get near him. He wa shut up within hi 
castle, and guard by a defenc of convent which she could not pass 
without danger of ill reput to herself. over thi question she thought 
and thought for day and nights. At last she decid that the onli way 
would be to go to him openli at castra regis. her rank and posit 
would make such a thing possible, if care done. she could explain 
matter afterward if necessary. then when they were alone, she would 
use her art and her experi to make him commit himself. after all, 
he wa onli a man, with a man' dislik of difficult or awkward 
situations. she felt quit suffici confid in her own womanhood to 
carri her through ani difficulti which might arise. 

from diana' grove she heard each day the luncheon-gong from castra regi 
sound, and knew the hour when the servant would be in the back of the 
house. she would enter the hous at that hour, and, pretend that she 
could not make anyon hear her, would seek him in hi own rooms. the 
tower was, she knew, away from all the usual sound of the house, and 
moreov she knew that the servant had strict order not to interrupt 
him when he wa in the turret chamber. she had found out, partli by the 
aid of an opera-glass and partli by judici questioning, that sever 
time late a heavi chest had been carri to and from hi room, and 
that it rest in the room each night. she was, therefore, confid 
that he had some import work on hand which would keep him busi for 
long spells. 

meanwhile, anoth member of the household at castra regi had scheme 
which he thought were work to fruition. A man in the posit of a 
servant ha plenti of opportun of watch hi better and form 
opinion regard them. oolanga wa in hi way a clever, unscrupul 
rogue, and he felt that with thing move round him in thi great 
household there should be opportun of self-advancement. be 
unscrupul and stealthy--and a savage--h look to dishonest means. He 
saw plainli enough that ladi arabella wa make a dead set at hi 
master, and he wa watch of the slightest sign of anyth which might 
enhanc thi knowledge. like the other men in the house, he knew of the 
carri to and fro of the great chest, and had got it into hi head that 
the care exercis in it porterag indic that it wa full of 
treasure. He wa for ever lurk around the turret-room on the chanc 
of make some use discovery. but he wa as cautiou as he wa 
stealthy, and took care that no one els watch him. 

It wa thu that the negro becam awar of ladi arabella' ventur into 
the house, as she thought, unseen. He took more care than ever, sinc he 
wa watch another, that the posit were not reversed. more than 
ever he kept hi eye and ear open and hi mouth shut. see ladi 
arabella glide up the stair toward hi master' room, he took it for 
grant that she wa there for no good, and doubl hi watch 
intent and caution. 

oolanga wa disappointed, but he dare not exhibit ani feel lest it 
should betray that he wa hiding. therefor he slunk downstair again 
noiselessly, and wait for a more favour opportun of further 
hi plans. It must be born in mind that he thought that the heavi trunk 
wa full of valuables, and that he believ that ladi arabella had come 
to tri to steal it. hi purpos of use for hi own advantag the 
combin of these two idea wa seen later in the day. oolanga 
secretli follow her home. He wa an expert at thi game, and succeed 
admir on thi occasion. He watch her enter the privat gate of 
diana' grove, and then, take a roundabout cours and keep out of 
her sight, he at last overtook her in a thick part of the grove where no 
one could see the meeting. 

ladi arabella wa much surprised. she had not seen the negro for sever 
days, and had almost forgotten hi existence. oolanga would have been 
startl had he known and been capabl of understand the real valu 
place on him, hi beauty, hi worthiness, by other persons, and compar 
it with the valu in these matter in which he held himself. doubtless 
oolanga had hi dream like other men. In such case he saw himself as a 
young sun-god, as beauti as the eye of duski or even white womanhood 
had ever dwelt upon. He would have been fill with all nobl and 
captiv qualities--or those regard as such in west africa. women 
would have love him, and would have told him so in the overt and fervid 
manner usual in affair of the heart in the shadowi depth of the forest 
of the gold coast. 

oolanga came close behind ladi arabella, and in a hush voice, suitabl 
to the import of hi task, and in defer to the respect he had for 
her and the place, began to unfold the stori of hi love. ladi arabella 
wa not usual a humor person, but no man or woman of the white race 
could have check the laughter which rose spontan to her lips. the 
circumst were too grotesque, the contrast too violent, for subdu 
mirth. the man a debas specimen of one of the most primit race of 
the earth, and of an ugli which wa simpli devilish; the woman of 
high degree, beautiful, accomplished. she thought that her first 
moment' consider of the outrage--it wa noth less in her 
eyes--had given her the full materi for thought. but everi instant 
after threw new and vari light on the affront. her indign wa 
too great for passion; onli ironi or satir would meet the situation. her 
cold, cruel natur helped, and she did not shrink to subject thi 
ignor savag to the merciless fire-lash of her scorn. 

oolanga wa dimli consciou that he wa be flouted; but hi anger wa 
no less keen becaus of the measur of hi ignorance. So he gave way to 
it, as doe a tortur beast. He ground hi great teeth together, raved, 
stamped, and swore in barbar tongu and with barbar imagery. even 
ladi arabella felt that it wa well she wa within reach of help, or he 
might have offer her brutal violence--even have kill her. 

"am I to understand," she said with cold disdain, so much more effect 
to wound than hot passion, "that you are offer me your love? 
your--love?" 

for repli he nod hi head. the scorn of her voice, in a sort of 
bale hiss, sounded--and felt--lik the lash of a whip. 

"and you dared! you--a savage--a slave--th basest thing in the world of 
vermin! take care! I don't valu your worthless life more than I do 
that of a rat or a spider. don't let me ever see your hideou face here 
again, or I shall rid the earth of you." 

As she wa speaking, she had taken out her revolv and wa point it 
at him. In the immedi presenc of death hi impud forsook him, 
and he made a weak effort to justifi himself. hi speech wa short, 
consist of singl words. To ladi arabella it sound mere gibberish, 
but it wa in hi own dialect, and meant love, marriage, wife. from the 
inton of the words, she guessed, with her woman' quick intuition, 
at their meaning; but she quit fail to follow, when, becom more 
pressing, he continu to urg hi suit in a mixtur of the grossest 
anim passion and ridicul threats. He warn her that he knew she 
had tri to steal hi master' treasure, and that he had caught her in 
the act. but if she would be his, he would share the treasur with her, 
and they could live in luxuri in the african forests. but if she 
refused, he would tell hi master, who would flog and tortur her and 
then give her to the police, who would kill her. 




chapter xiv--battl renew 


the consequ of that meet in the dusk of diana' grove were acut 
and far-reaching, and not onli to the two engag in it. from oolanga, 
thi might have been expect by anyon who knew the charact of the 
tropic african savage. To such, there are two passion that are 
inexhaust and insatiable--van and that which they are pleas to 
call love. oolanga left the grove with an absorb hatr in hi heart. 
hi lust and greed were afire, while hi vaniti had been wound to the 
core. ladi arabella' ici natur wa not so deepli stirred, though she 
wa in a seeth passion. more than ever she wa set upon bring 
edgar caswal to her feet. the obstacl she had encountered, the 
insult she had endured, were onli as fuel to the purpos of reveng 
which consum her. 

As she sought her own room in diana' grove, she went over the whole 
subject again and again, alway find in the face of lilla watford a 
key to a problem which puzzl her--th problem of a way to turn 
caswall' powers--hi veri existence--to aid her purpose. 

when in her boudoir, she wrote a note, take so much troubl over it 
that she destroyed, and rewrote, till her dainti waste-basket wa half- 
full of torn sheet of notepaper. when quit satisfied, she copi out 
the last sheet afresh, and then care burn all the spoil 
fragments. she put the copi note in an emblazon envelope, and 
direct it to edgar caswal at castra regis. thi she sent off by one 
of her grooms. the letter ran: 

"dear mr. caswall, 

"I want to have a chat with you on a subject in which I believ you 
are interested. will you kindli call for me one day after lunch--say 
at three or four o'clock, and we can walk a littl way together. onli 
as far as merci farm, where I want to see lilla and mimi watford. We 
can take a cup of tea at the farm. Do not bring your african servant 
with you, as I am afraid hi face frighten the girls. after all, he 
is not pretty, is he? I have an idea you will be pleas with your 
visit thi time. 

"your sincerely, 

"arabella march." 

At half-past three next day, edgar caswal call at diana' grove. ladi 
arabella met him on the roadway outsid the gate. she wish to take the 
servant into her confid as littl as possible. she turn when she 
saw him coming, and walk besid him toward merci farm, keep step 
with him as they walked. when they got near mercy, she turn and look 
around her, expect to see oolanga or some sign of him. He was, 
however, not visible. He had receiv from hi master peremptori order 
to keep out of sight--an order for which the african score a new offenc 
up against her. they found lilla and mimi at home and seemingli glad to 
see them, though both the girl were surpris at the visit come so 
soon after the other. 

the proceed were a repetit of the battl of soul of the former 
visit. On thi occasion, however, edgar caswal had onli the presenc of 
ladi arabella to support him--oolanga be absent; but mimi lack the 
support of adam salton, which had been of such effect servic before. 
thi time the struggl for supremaci of will wa longer and more 
determined. caswal felt that if he could not achiev supremaci he had 
better give up the idea, so all hi pride wa enlist against mimi. when 
they had been wait for the door to be opened, ladi arabella, believ 
in a sudden attack, had said to him in a low voice, which somehow carri 
conviction: 

"thi time you should win. mimi is, after all, onli a woman. show her 
no mercy. that is weakness. fight her, beat her, trampl on her--kil 
her if need be. she stand in your way, and I hate her. never take your 
eye off her. never mind lilla--sh is afraid of you. you are alreadi 
her master. mimi will tri to make you look at her cousin. there lie 
defeat. let noth take your attent from mimi, and you will win. If 
she is overcom you, take my hand and hold it hard whilst you are 
look into her eyes. If she is too strong for you, I shall interfere. 
i'll make a diversion, and under cover of it you must retir unbeaten, 
even if not victorious. hush! they are coming." 

the two girl came to the door together. strang sound were come up 
over the brow from the west. It wa the rustl and crackl of the 
dri reed and rush from the low lands. the season had been an 
unusu dri one. also the strong east wind wa help forward 
enorm flock of birds, most of them pigeon with white cowls. not 
onli were their wing whirring, but their coo wa plainli audible. 
from such a multitud of bird the mass of sound, individu small, 
assum the volum of a storm. surpris at the influx of birds, to 
which they had been stranger so long, they all look toward castra 
regis, from whose high tower the great kite had been fli as usual. but 
even as they looked, the cord broke, and the great kite fell headlong in 
a seri of sweep dives. it own weight, and the aerial forc oppos 
to it, which caus it to rise, combin with the strong easterli breeze, 
had been too much for the great length of cord hold it. 

somehow, the mishap to the kite gave new hope to mimi. It wa as though 
the side issu had been shorn away, so that the main struggl wa 
thenceforth on simpler lines. she had a feel in her heart, as though 
some religi chord had been newli touched. It may, of course, have 
been that with the renew of the bird voic a fresh courage, a fresh 
belief in the good issu of the struggl came too. In the miseri of 
silence, from which they had all suffer for so long, ani new train of 
thought wa almost bound to be a boon. As the inrush of bird continued, 
their wing beat against the crackl rushes, ladi arabella grew 
pale, and almost fainted. 

"what is that?" she ask suddenly. 

To mimi, born and bred in siam, the sound wa strang like an 
exagger of the sound produc by a snake-charmer. 

edgar caswal wa the first to recov from the interrupt of the 
fall kite. after a few minut he seem to have quit recov hi 
_sang froid_, and wa abl to use hi brain to the end which he had in 
view. mimi too quickli recov herself, but from a differ cause. 
with her it wa a deep religi convict that the struggl round her 
wa of the power of good and evil, and that good wa triumphing. the 
veri appear of the snowi birds, with the cowl of saint columba, 
heighten the impression. with thi convict strong upon her, she 
continu the strang battl with fresh vigour. she seem to tower over 
caswall, and he to give back befor her oncoming. onc again her 
vigor pass drove him to the door. He wa just go out backward 
when ladi arabella, who had been gaze at him with fix eyes, caught 
hi hand and tri to stop hi movement. she was, however, unabl to do 
ani good, and so, hold hands, they pass out together. As they did 
so, the strang music which had so alarm ladi arabella suddenli 
stopped. instinct they all look toward the tower of castra 
regis, and saw that the workmen had refix the kite, which had risen 
again and wa begin to float out to it former station. 

As they were looking, the door open and michael watford came into the 
room. By that time all had recov their self-possession, and there 
wa noth out of the common to attract hi attention. As he came in, 
see inquir look all around him, he said: 

"the new influx of bird is onli the annual migrat of pigeon from 
africa. I am told that it will soon be over." 

the second victori of mimi watford made edgar caswal more moodi than 
ever. He felt thrown back on himself, and this, ad to hi absorb 
interest in the hope of a victori of hi mesmer powers, becam a deep 
and settl purpos of revenge. the chief object of hi animos was, 
of course, mimi, whose will had overcom his, but it wa obscur in 
greater or lesser degre by all who had oppos him. lilla wa next to 
mimi in hi hate--lilla, the harmless, tender-hearted, sweet-natur 
girl, whose heart wa so full of love for all thing that in it wa no 
room for the passion of ordinari life--whos natur resembl those 
dove of st. columba, whose colour she wore, whose appear she 
reflected. adam salton came next--aft a gap; for against him caswal 
had no direct animosity. He regard him as an interference, a 
difficulti to be got rid of or destroyed. the young australian had been 
so discreet that the most he had against him wa hi knowledg of what 
had been. caswal did not understand him, and to such a natur as his, 
ignor wa a caus of alarm, of dread. 

caswal resum hi habit of watch the great kite strain at it 
cord, vari hi vigil in thi way by a further examin of the 
mysteri treasur of hi house, especi mesmer' chest. He sat 
much on the roof of the tower, brood over hi thwart passion. the 
vast extent of hi possessions, visibl to him at that altitude, might, 
one would have thought, have restor some of hi complacency. but the 
veri extent of hi ownership, thu perpetu brought befor him, 
creat a fresh sens of grievance. how wa it, he thought, that with so 
much at command that other wish for, he could not achiev the dearest 
wish of hi heart? 

In thi state of intellectu and moral depravity, he found a solac in 
the renew of hi experi with the mechan power of the kite. 
for a coupl of week he did not see ladi arabella, who wa alway on the 
watch for a chanc of meet him; neither did he see the watford girls, 
who studious kept out of hi way. adam salton simpli mark time, 
keep readi to deal with anyth that might affect hi friends. He 
call at the farm and heard from mimi of the last battl of wills, but 
it had onli one consequence. He got from ross sever more mongooses, 
includ a second king-cobra-killer, which he gener carri with him 
in it box whenev he walk out. 

mr. caswall' experi with the kite went on successfully. each day 
he tri the lift of greater weight, and it seem almost as if the 
machin had a sentienc of it own, which wa increas with the 
obstacl place befor it. all thi time the kite hung in the sky at an 
enorm height. the wind wa steadili from the north, so the trend of 
the kite wa to the south. all day long, runner of increas magnitud 
were sent up. these were onli of paper or thin cardboard, or leather, or 
other flexibl materials. the great height at which the kite hung made a 
great concav curv in the string, so that as the runner went up they 
made a flap sound. If one laid a finger on the string, the sound 
answer to the flap of the runner in a sort of hollow intermitt 
murmur. edgar caswall, who wa now wholli obsess by the kite and all 
belong to it, found a distinct resembl between that intermitt 
rumbl and the snake-charm music produc by the pigeon fli 
through the dri reeds. 

one day he made a discoveri in mesmer' chest which he thought he would 
utilis with regard to the runners. thi wa a great length of wire, 
"fine as human hair," coil round a fine made wheel, which ran to a 
wondrou distanc freely, and as lightly. He tri thi on runners, and 
found it work admirably. whether the runner wa alone, or carri 
someth much more weighti than itself, it work equal well. also it 
wa strong enough and light enough to draw back the runner without undu 
strain. He tri thi a good mani time successfully, but it wa now 
grow dusk and he found some difficulti in keep the runner in sight. 
So he look for someth heavi enough to keep it still. He place the 
egyptian imag of be on the fine wire, which cross the wooden ledg 
which protect it. then, the dark growing, he went indoor and 
forgot all about it. 

He had a strang feel of uneasi that night--not sleeplessness, for 
he seem consciou of be asleep. At daylight he rose, and as usual 
look out for the kite. He did not see it in it usual posit in the 
sky, so look round the point of the compass. He wa more than 
astonish when present he saw the miss kite struggl as usual 
against the control cord. but it had gone to the further side of the 
tower, and now hung and strain _against the wind_ to the north. He 
thought it so strang that he determin to investig the phenomenon, 
and to say noth about it in the meantime. 

In hi mani travels, edgar caswal had been accustom to use the 
sextant, and wa now an expert in the matter. By the aid of thi and 
other instruments, he wa abl to fix the posit of the kite and the 
point over which it hung. He wa startl to find that exactli under 
it--so far as he could ascertain--wa diana' grove. He had an 
inclin to take ladi arabella into hi confid in the matter, but 
he thought better of it and wise refrained. for some reason which he 
did not tri to explain to himself, he wa glad of hi silence, when, on 
the follow morning, he found, on look out, that the point over 
which the kite then hover wa merci farm. when he had verifi thi 
with hi instruments, he sat befor the window of the tower, look out 
and thinking. the new local wa more to hi like than the other; 
but the whi of it puzzl him, all the same. He spent the rest of the 
day in the turret-room, which he did not leav all day. It seem to him 
that he wa now drawn by forc which he could not control--of which, 
indeed, he had no knowledge--in direct which he did not understand, 
and which were without hi own volition. In sheer helpless inabl to 
think the problem out satisfactorily, he call up a servant and told him 
to tell oolanga that he want to see him at onc in the turret-room. the 
answer came back that the african had not been seen sinc the previou 
evening. 

caswal wa now so irrit that even thi small thing upset him. As he 
wa distrait and want to talk to somebody, he sent for simon chester, 
who came at once, breathless with hurri and upset by the unexpect 
summons. caswal bade him sit down, and when the old man wa in a less 
uneasi frame of mind, he again ask him if he had ever seen what wa in 
mesmer' chest or heard it spoken about. 

chester admit that he had once, in the time of "the then mr. edgar," 
seen the chest open, which, know someth of it histori and guess 
more, so upset him that he had fainted. when he recovered, the chest wa 
closed. from that time the then mr. edgar had never spoken about it 
again. 

when caswal ask him to describ what he had seen when the chest wa 
open, he got veri agitated, and, despit all hi effort to remain calm, 
he suddenli went off into a faint. caswal summon servants, who 
appli the usual remedies. still the old man did not recover. after 
the laps of a consider time, the doctor who had been summon made 
hi appearance. A glanc wa suffici for him to make up hi mind. 
still, he knelt down by the old man, and made a care examination. then 
he rose to hi feet, and in a hush voic said: 

"I griev to say, sir, that he ha pass away." 




chapter xv--on the track 


those who had seen edgar caswal familiarli sinc hi arrival, and had 
alreadi estim hi cold-blood natur at someth of it true value, 
were surpris that he took so to heart the death of old chester. the 
fact wa that not one of them had guess correctli at hi character. 
they thought, natur enough, that the concern which he felt wa that 
of a master for a faith old servant of hi family. they littl 
thought that it wa mere the selfish express of hi disappointment, 
that he had thu lost the onli remain clue to an interest piec of 
famili history--on which wa now and would be for ever wrap in 
mystery. caswal knew enough about the life of hi ancestor in pari to 
wish to know more fulli and more thoroughli all that had been. the 
period cover by that ancestor' life in pari wa one invit everi 
form of curiosity. 

ladi arabella, who had her own game to play, saw in the _metier_ of 
sympathet friend, a seri of meet with the man she want to 
secure. she made the first use of the opportun the day after old 
chester' death; indeed, as soon as the news had filter in through the 
back door of diana' grove. At that meeting, she play her part so well 
that even caswall' cold natur wa impressed. 

oolanga wa the onli one who did not credit her with at least some sens 
of fine feel in the matter. In emotional, as in other matters, 
oolanga wa distinctli a utilitarian, and as he could not understand 
anyon feel grief except for hi own suffering, pain, or for the loss 
of money, he could not understand anyon simul such an emot 
except for show intend to deceive. He thought that she had come to 
castra regi again for the opportun of steal something, and wa 
determin that on thi occas the chanc of press hi advantag 
over her should not pass. He felt, therefore, that the occas wa one 
for extra care in the watch of all that went on. ever sinc he 
had come to the conclus that ladi arabella wa tri to steal the 
treasure-chest, he suspect nearli everyon of the same design, and made 
it a point to watch all suspici person and places. As adam wa 
engag on hi own research regard ladi arabella, it wa onli 
natur that there should be some cross of each other' tracks. thi 
is what did actual happen. 

adam had gone for an earli morn survey of the place in which he wa 
interested, take with him the mongoos in it box. He arriv at the 
gate of diana' grove just as ladi arabella wa prepar to set out for 
castra regi on what she consid her mission of comfort. see adam 
from her window go through the shadow of the tree round the gate, 
she thought that he must be engag on some purpos similar to her own. 
so, quickli make her toilet, she quietli left the house, and, take 
advantag of everi shadow and substanc which could hide her, follow 
him on hi walk. 

oolanga, the experienc tracker, follow her, but succeed in hide 
hi movement better than she did. He saw that adam had on hi shoulder 
a mysteri box, which he took to contain someth valuable. see 
that ladi arabella wa secretli follow adam, he wa confirm in thi 
idea. hi mind--such as it was--wa fix on her tri to steal, and he 
credit her at onc with make use of thi new opportunity. 

In hi walk, adam went into the ground of castra regis, and oolanga saw 
her follow him with great secrecy. He fear to go closer, as now on 
both side of him were enemi who might make discovery. when he 
realis that ladi arabella wa bound for the castle, he devot himself 
to follow her with singl of purpose. He therefor miss see 
that adam branch off the track and return to the high road. 

that night edgar caswal had slept badly. the tragic occurr of the 
day wa on hi mind, and he kept wake and think of it. after an 
earli breakfast, he sat at the open window watch the kite and think 
of mani things. from hi room he could see all round the neighbourhood, 
but the two place that interest him most were merci farm and diana' 
grove. At first the movement about those spot were of a humbl 
kind--thos that belong to domest servic or agricultur needs--th 
open of door and windows, the sweep and brushing, and gener 
the restor of habitu order. 

from hi high window--whos height made it a screen from the observ 
of others--h saw the chain of watcher move into hi own grounds, and 
then present break up--adam salton go one way, and ladi arabella, 
follow by the nigger, another. then oolanga disappear amongst the 
trees; but caswal could see that he wa still watching. ladi arabella, 
after look around her, slip in by the open door, and he could, of 
course, see her no longer. 

presently, however, he heard a light tap at hi door, then the door 
open slowly, and he could see the flash of ladi arabella' white dress 
through the opening. 




chapter xvi--a visit OF sympathi 


caswal wa genuin surpris when he saw ladi arabella, though he need 
not have been, after what had alreadi occur in the same way. the look 
of surpris on hi face wa so much greater than ladi arabella had 
expected--though she thought she wa prepar to meet anyth that might 
occur--that she stood still, in sheer amazement. cold-blood as she wa 
and readi for all social emergencies, she wa nonpluss how to go on. 
she wa plucky, however, and began to speak at once, although she had not 
the slightest idea what she wa go to say. 

"I came to offer you my veri warm sympathi with the grief you have so 
late experienced." 

"mi grief? i'm afraid I must be veri dull; but I realli do not 
understand." 

alreadi she felt at a disadvantage, and hesitated. 

"I mean about the old man who die so suddenly--your old . . . retainer." 

caswall' face relax someth of it puzzl concentration. 

"oh, he wa onli a servant; and he had over-stay hi three-scor and 
ten year by someth like twenti years. He must have been ninety!" 

"still, as an old servant . . . " 

caswall' word were not so cold as their inflection. 

"I never interfer with servants. He wa kept on here mere becaus he 
had been so long on the premises. I suppos the steward thought it might 
make him unpopular if the old fellow had been dismissed." 

how on earth wa she to proceed on such a task as her if thi wa the 
utmost genial she could expect? So she at onc tri anoth 
tack--thi time a person one. 

"I am sorri I disturb you. I am realli not unconventional--though 
certainli no slave to convention. still there are limit . . . it is bad 
enough to intrud in thi way, and I do not know what you can say or 
think of the time selected, for the intrusion." 

after all, edgar caswal wa a gentleman by custom and habit, so he rose 
to the occasion. 

"I can onli say, ladi arabella, that you are alway welcom at ani time 
you may deign to honour my hous with your presence." 

she smile at him sweetly. 

"thank you _so_ much. you _do_ put one at ease. My breach of convent 
make me glad rather than sorry. I feel that I can open my heart to you 
about anything." 

forthwith she proceed to tell him about oolanga and hi strang 
suspicion of her honesty. caswal laugh and made her explain all the 
details. hi final comment wa enlightening. 

"let me give you a word of advice: If you have the slightest fault to 
find with that infern nigger, shoot him at sight. A swelled-head 
nigger, with a bee in hi bonnet, is one of the worst difficulti in the 
world to deal with. So better make a clean job of it, and wipe him out 
at once!" 

"but what about the law, mr. caswall?" 

"oh, the law doesn't concern itself much about dead niggers. A few more 
or less do not matter. To my mind it' rather a relief!" 

"i'm afraid of you," wa her onli comment, made with a sweet smile and in 
a soft voice. 

"all right," he said, "let us leav it at that. anyhow, we shall be rid 
of one of them!" 

"I don't love nigger ani more than you do," she replied, "and I suppos 
one mustn't be too particular where that sort of clean up is 
concerned." then she chang in voic and manner, and ask genially: 
"and now tell me, am I forgiven?" 

"you are, dear lady--if there is anyth to forgive." 

As he spoke, see that she had move to go, he came to the door with 
her, and in the most natur way accompani her downstairs. He pass 
through the hall with her and down the avenue. As he went back to the 
house, she smile to herself. 

"well, that is all right. I don't think the morn ha been altogeth 
thrown away." 

and she walk slowli back to diana' grove. 

adam salton follow the line of the brow, and refresh hi memori as to 
the variou localities. He got home to lesser hill just as sir nathaniel 
wa begin lunch. mr. salton had gone to walsal to keep an earli 
appointment; so he wa all alone. when the meal wa over--se in 
adam' face that he had someth to speak about--h follow into the 
studi and shut the door. 

when the two men had light their pipes, sir nathaniel began. 

"I have rememb an interest fact about diana' grove--ther is, I 
have long understood, some strang mysteri about that house. It may be 
of some interest, or it may be trivial, in such a tangl skein as we are 
tri to unravel." 

"pleas tell me all you know or suspect. To begin, then, of what sort 
is the mystery--physical, mental, moral, historical, scientific, occult? 
ani kind of hint will help me." 

"quit right. I shall tri to tell you what I think; but I have not put 
my thought on the subject in sequence, so you must forgiv me if due 
order is not observ in my narration. I suppos you have seen the hous 
at diana' grove?" 

"the outsid of it; but I have that in my mind' eye, and I can fit into 
my memori whatev you may mention." 

"the hous is veri old--prob the first hous of some sort that stood 
there wa in the time of the romans. thi wa probabl renewed--perhap 
sever time at later periods. the hous stands, or, rather, use to 
stand here when mercia wa a kingdom--i do not suppos that the basement 
can be later than the norman conquest. some year ago, when I wa 
presid of the mercian archaeolog society, I went all over it veri 
carefully. thi wa when it wa purchas by captain march. the hous 
had then been done up, so as to be suitabl for the bride. the basement 
is veri strong,--almost as strong and as heavi as if it had been intend 
as a fortress. there are a whole seri of room deep underground. one 
of them in particular struck me. the room itself is of consider 
size, but the masonri is more than massive. In the middl of the room is 
a sunk well, built up to floor level and evid go deep 
underground. there is no windlass nor ani trace of there ever have 
been any--no rope--nothing. now, we know that the roman had well of 
immens depth, from which the water wa lift by the 'old rag rope'; 
that at woodhul use to be nearli a thousand feet. here, then, we have 
simpli an enorm deep well-hole. the door of the room wa massive, 
and wa fasten with a lock nearli a foot square. It wa evid 
intend for some kind of protect to someon or something; but no one 
in those day had ever heard of anyon have been allow even to see 
the room. all thi is _a propos_ of a suggest on my part that the 
well-hol wa a way by which the white worm (whatev it was) went and 
came. At that time I would have had a search made--even excav if 
necessary--at my own expense, but all suggest were met with a prompt 
and explicit negative. so, of course, I took no further step in the 
matter. then it die out of recollection--even of mine." 

"do you remember, sir," ask adam, "what wa the appear of the room 
where the well-hol was? wa there furniture--in fact, ani sort of thing 
in the room?" 

"the onli thing I rememb wa a sort of green light--veri clouded, veri 
dim--which came up from the well. not a fix light, but intermitt 
and irregular--quit unlik anyth I had ever seen." 

"do you rememb how you got into the well-room? wa there a separ 
door from outside, or wa there ani interior room or passag which open 
into it?" 

"I think there must have been some room with a way into it. I rememb 
go up some steep steps; they must have been worn smooth by long use or 
someth of the kind, for I could hardli keep my feet as I went up. onc 
I stumbl and nearli fell into the well-hole." 

"wa there anyth strang about the place--ani queer smell, for 
instance?" 

"queer smell--yes! like bilg or a rank swamp. It wa distinctli 
nauseating; when I came out I felt as if I had just been go to be 
sick. I shall tri back on my visit and see if I can recal ani more of 
what I saw or felt." 

"then perhaps, sir, later in the day you will tell me anyth you may 
chanc to recollect." 

"I shall be delighted, adam. If your uncl ha not return by then, 
i'll join you in the studi after dinner, and we can resum thi 
interest chat." 




chapter xvii--th mysteri OF "the grove" 


that afternoon adam decid to do a littl exploring. As he pass 
through the wood outsid the gate of diana' grove, he thought he saw the 
african' face for an instant. So he went deeper into the undergrowth, 
and follow along parallel to the avenu to the house. He wa glad that 
there wa no workman or servant about, for he did not care that ani of 
ladi arabella' peopl should find him wander about her grounds. 
take advantag of the dens of the trees, he came close to the 
hous and skirt round it. He wa repaid for hi trouble, for on the 
far side of the house, close to where the rocki frontag of the cliff 
fell away, he saw oolanga crouch behind the irregular trunk of a great 
oak. the man wa so intent on watch someone, or something, that he 
did not guard against be himself watched. thi suit adam, for he 
could thu make scrutini at will. 

the thick wood, though the tree were mostli of small girth, threw a 
heavi shadow, so that the steep declension, in front of which grew the 
tree behind which the african lurked, wa almost in darkness. adam drew 
as close as he could, and wa amaz to see a patch of light on the 
ground befor him; when he realis what it was, he wa determined, more 
than ever to follow on hi quest. the nigger had a dark lantern in hi 
hand, and wa throw the light down the steep incline. the glare 
show a seri of stone steps, which end in a low-li heavi iron 
door fix against the side of the house. all the strang thing he had 
heard from sir nathaniel, and all those, littl and big, which he had 
himself noticed, crowd into hi mind in a chaotic way. instinct 
he took refug behind a thick oak stem, and set himself down, to watch 
what might occur. 

after a short time it becam appar that the african wa tri to find 
out what wa behind the heavi door. there wa no way of look in, for 
the door fit tight into the massiv stone slabs. the onli opportun 
for the entranc of light wa through a small hole between the great 
stone abov the door. thi hole wa too high up to look through from 
the ground level. oolanga, have tri stand tipto on the highest 
point near, and hold the lantern as high as he could, threw the light 
round the edg of the door to see if he could find anywher a hole or a 
flaw in the metal through which he could obtain a glimpse. foil in 
this, he brought from the shrubberi a plank, which he leant against the 
top of the door and then climb up with great dexterity. thi did not 
bring him near enough to the window-hol to look in, or even to throw the 
light of the lantern through it, so he climb down and carri the plank 
back to the place from which he had got it. then he conceal himself 
near the iron door and waited, manifestli with the intent of remain 
there till someon came near. present ladi arabella, move 
noiselessli through the shade, approach the door. when he saw her 
close enough to touch it, oolanga step forward from hi concealment, 
and spoke in a whisper, which through the gloom sound like a hiss. 

"I want to see you, missy--soon and secret." 

"what do you want?" 

"you know well, missy; I told you already." 

she turn on him with blaze eyes, the green tint in them glow like 
emeralds. 

"come, none of that. If there is anyth sensibl which you wish to say 
to me, you can see me here, just where we are, at seven o'clock." 

He made no repli in words, but, put the back of hi hand together, 
bent lower and lower till hi forehead touch the earth. then he rose 
and went slowli away. 

adam salton, from hi hiding-place, saw and wondered. In a few minut 
he move from hi place and went home to lesser hill, fulli determin 
that seven o'clock would find him in some hidden place behind diana' 
grove. 

At a littl befor seven adam stole softli out of the hous and took the 
back-way to the rear of diana' grove. the place seem silent and 
deserted, so he took the opportun of conceal himself near the spot 
whenc he had seen oolanga tri to investig whatev wa conceal 
behind the iron door. He waited, perfectli still, and at last saw a 
gleam of white pass soundlessli through the undergrowth. He wa not 
surpris when he recognis the colour of ladi arabella' dress. she 
came close and waited, with her face to the iron door. from some place 
of conceal near at hand oolanga appeared, and came close to her. adam 
noticed, with surpris amusement, that over hi shoulder wa the box 
with the mongoose. Of cours the african did not know that he wa seen 
by anyone, least of all by the man whose properti he had with him. 

silent-foot as he was, ladi arabella heard him coming, and turn to 
meet him. It wa somewhat hard to see in the gloom, for, as usual, he 
wa all in black, onli hi collar and cuff show white. ladi arabella 
open the convers which ensu between the two. 

"what do you want? To rob me, or murder me?" 

"no, to lub you!" 

thi frighten her a little, and she tri to chang the tone. 

"i that a coffin you have with you? If so, you are wast your time. 
It would not hold me." 

when a nigger suspect he is be laugh at, all the feroc of hi 
natur come to the front; and thi man wa of the lowest kind. 

"di ain't no coffin for nobody. di box is for you. somefin you lub. 
Me give him to you!" 

still anxiou to keep off the subject of affection, on which she believ 
him to have becom crazed, she made anoth effort to keep hi mind 
elsewhere. 

"i thi whi you want to see me?" He nodded. "then come round to the 
other door. but be quiet. I have no desir to be seen so close to my 
own hous in convers with a--a--a nigger like you!" 

she had chosen the word deliberately. she wish to meet hi passion 
with anoth kind. such would, at all events, help to keep him quiet. In 
the deep gloom she could not see the anger which suffus hi face. 
roll eyebal and grind teeth are, however, suffici sign of 
anger to be decipher in the dark. she move round the corner of the 
hous to her right. oolanga wa follow her, when she stop him by 
rais her hand. 

"no, not that door," she said; "that is not for niggers. the other door 
will do well enough for you!" 

ladi arabella took in her hand a small key which hung at the end of her 
watch-chain, and move to a small door, low down, round the corner, and a 
littl downhil from the edg of the brow. oolanga, in obedi to her 
gesture, went back to the iron door. adam look care at the 
mongoos box as the african went by, and wa glad to see that it wa 
intact. unconsciously, as he looked, he finger the key that wa in hi 
waistcoat pocket. when oolanga wa out of sight, adam hurri after ladi 
arabella. 




chapter xviii--exit oolanga 


the woman turn sharpli as adam touch her shoulder. 

"one moment whilst we are alone. you had better not trust that nigger!" 
he whispered. 

her answer wa crisp and concise: 

"I don't." 

"forewarn is forearmed. tell me if you will--it is for your own 
protection. whi do you mistrust him?" 

"mi friend, you have no idea of that man' impudence. would you believ 
that he want me to marri him?" 

"no!" said adam incredulously, amus in spite of himself. 

"yes, and want to bribe me to do it by share a chest of treasure--at 
least, he thought it was--stolen from mr. caswall. whi do you distrust 
him, mr. salton?" 

"did you notic that box he had slung on hi shoulder? that belong to 
me. I left it in the gun-room when I went to lunch. He must have crept 
in and stolen it. doubtless he think that it, too, is full of 
treasure." 

"he does!" 

"how on earth do you know?" ask adam. 

"A littl while ago he offer to give it to me--anoth bribe to accept 
him. faugh! I am asham to tell you such a thing. the beast!" 

whilst they had been speaking, she had open the door, a narrow iron 
one, well hung, for it open easili and close tightli without ani 
creak or sound of ani kind. within all wa dark; but she enter as 
freeli and with as littl misgiv or restraint as if it had been broad 
daylight. for adam, there wa just suffici green light from somewher 
for him to see that there wa a broad flight of heavi stone step lead 
upward; but ladi arabella, after shut the door behind her, when it 
close tightli without a clang, trip up the step lightli and swiftly. 
for an instant all wa dark, but there came again the faint green light 
which enabl him to see the outlin of things. anoth iron door, 
narrow like the first and fairli high, led into anoth larg room, the 
wall of which were of massiv stones, so close join togeth as to 
exhibit onli one smooth surface. thi present the appear of have 
at one time been polished. On the far side, also smooth like the walls, 
wa the revers of a wide, but not high, iron door. here there wa a 
littl more light, for the high-up apertur over the door open to the 
air. 

ladi arabella took from her girdl anoth small key, which she insert 
in a keyhol in the centr of a massiv lock. the great bolt seem 
wonder hung, for the moment the small key wa turned, the bolt of 
the great lock move noiselessli and the iron door swung open. On the 
stone step outsid stood oolanga, with the mongoos box slung over hi 
shoulder. ladi arabella stood a littl on one side, and the african, 
accept the movement as an invitation, enter in an obsequi way. 
the moment, however, that he wa inside, he gave a quick look around him. 

"much death here--big death. mani deaths. good, good!" 

He snif round as if he wa enjoy the scent. the matter and manner 
of hi speech were so revolt that instinct adam' hand wander 
to hi revolver, and, with hi finger on the trigger, he rest satisfi 
that he wa readi for ani emergency. 

there wa certainli opportun for the nigger' enjoyment, for the open 
well-hol wa almost under hi nose, send up such a stench as almost 
made adam sick, though ladi arabella seem not to mind it at all. It 
wa like noth that adam had ever met with. He compar it with all 
the noxiou experi he had ever had--th drainag of war hospitals, 
of slaughter-houses, the refus of dissect rooms. none of these wa 
like it, though it had someth of them all, with, added, the sour 
of chemic wast and the poison effluvium of the bilg of a water- 
log ship whereon a multitud of rat had been drowned. 

then, quit unexpectedly, the negro notic the presenc of a third 
person--adam salton! He pull out a pistol and shot at him, happili 
missing. adam wa himself usual a quick shot, but thi time hi mind 
had been on someth els and he wa not ready. however, he wa quick 
to carri out an intention, and he wa not a coward. In anoth moment 
both men were in grips. besid them wa the dark well-hole, with that 
horrid effluvium steal up from it mysteri depths. 

adam and oolanga both had pistols; ladi arabella, who had not one, wa 
probabl the most readi of them all in the theori of shooting, but that 
be impossible, she made her effort in anoth way. glide forward, 
she tri to seiz the african; but he elud her grasp, just missing, in 
do so, fall into the mysteri hole. As he sway back to firm 
foothold, he turn hi own gun on her and shot. instinct adam 
leap at hi assailant; clutch at each other, they totter on the 
veri brink. 

ladi arabella' anger, now fulli awake, wa all for oolanga. she move 
toward him with her hand extended, and had just seiz him when the 
catch of the lock box--du to some movement from within--flew open, and 
the king-cobra-kil flew at her with a venom furi imposs to 
describe. As it seiz her throat, she caught hold of it, and, with a 
furi superior to it own, tore it in two just as if it had been a sheet 
of paper. the strength use for such an act must have been terrific. In 
an instant, it seem to spout blood and entrails, and wa hurl into 
the well-hole. In anoth instant she had seiz oolanga, and with a 
swift rush had drawn him, her white arm encircl him, down with her 
into the gape aperture. 

adam saw a medley of green and red light blaze in a whirl circle, and 
as it sank down into the well, a pair of blaze green eye becam fixed, 
sank lower and lower with fright rapidity, and disappeared, throw 
upward the green light which grew more and more vivid everi moment. As 
the light sank into the noisom depths, there came a shriek which chill 
adam' blood--a prolong agoni of pain and terror which seem to have 
no end. 

adam salton felt that he would never be abl to free hi mind from the 
memori of those dread moments. the gloom which surround that 
horribl charnel pit, which seem to go down to the veri bowel of the 
earth, convey from far down the sight and sound of the nethermost 
hell. the ghastli fate of the african as he sank down to hi terribl 
doom, hi black face grow grey with terror, hi white eyeballs, now 
like vein bloodstone, roll in the helpless extrem of fear. the 
mysteri green light wa in itself a milieu of horror. and through it 
all the aw cri came up from that fathomless pit, whose entranc wa 
flood with spot of fresh blood. even the death of the fearless littl 
snake-killer--so fierce, so frightful, as if stain with a feroc 
which told of no live forc abov earth, but onli of the devil of the 
pit--wa onli an incident. adam wa in a state of intellectu tumult, 
which had no parallel in hi experience. He tri to rush away from the 
horribl place; even the bale green light, thrown up through the 
gloomi well-shaft, wa die away as it sourc sank deeper into the 
primev ooze. the dark wa close in on him in overwhelm 
density--dark in such a place and with such a memori of it! 

He made a wild rush forward--slipt on the step in some sticky, acrid- 
smell mass that felt and smelt like blood, and, fall forward, felt 
hi way into the inner room, where the well-shaft wa not. 

then he rub hi eye in sheer amazement. Up the stone step from the 
narrow door by which he had entered, glide the white-clad figur of ladi 
arabella, the onli colour to be seen on her be blood-mark on her face 
and hand and throat. otherwise, she wa calm and unruffled, as when 
earlier she stood asid for him to pass in through the narrow iron door. 




chapter xix--an enemi IN the dark 


adam salton went for a walk befor return to lesser hill; he felt that 
it might be well, not onli to steadi hi nerves, shaken by the horribl 
scene, but to get hi thought into some sort of order, so as to be readi 
to enter on the matter with sir nathaniel. He wa a littl embarrass 
as to tell hi uncle, for affair had so vastli progress beyond hi 
origin view that he felt a littl doubt as to what would be the old 
gentleman' attitud when he should hear of the strang event for the 
first time. mr. salton would certainli not be satisfi at be treat 
as an outsid with regard to such things, most of which had point of 
contact with the inmat of hi own house. It wa with an immens sens 
of relief that adam heard that hi uncl had telegraph to the 
housekeep that he wa detain by busi at walsall, where he would 
remain for the night; and that he would be back in the morn in time 
for lunch. 

when adam got home after hi walk, he found sir nathaniel just go to 
bed. He did not say anyth to him then of what had happened, but 
content himself with arrang that they would walk togeth in the 
earli morning, as he had much to say that would requir seriou 
attention. 

strang enough he slept well, and awok at dawn with hi mind clear and 
hi nerv in their usual unshaken condition. the maid brought up, with 
hi earli morn cup of tea, a note which had been found in the letter- 
box. It wa from ladi arabella, and wa evid intend to put him on 
hi guard as to what he should say about the previou evening. 

He read it over care sever times, befor he wa satisfi that he 
had taken in it full import. 

"dear mr. salton, 

"I cannot go to bed until I have written to you, so you must forgiv 
me if I disturb you, and at an unseemli time. indeed, you must also 
forgiv me if, in tri to do what is right, I err in say too much 
or too little. the fact is that I am quit upset and unnerv by all 
that ha happen in thi terribl night. I find it difficult even to 
write; my hand shake so that they are not under control, and I am 
trembl all over with memori of the horror we saw enact befor 
our eyes. I am griev beyond measur that I should be, howev 
remotely, a caus of thi horror come on you. forgiv me if you 
can, and do not think too hardli of me. thi I ask with confidence, 
for sinc we share togeth the danger--th veri pangs--of death, I 
feel that we should be to one anoth someth more than mere 
friends, that I may lean on you and trust you, assur that your 
sympathi and piti are for me. you realli must let me thank you for 
the friendliness, the help, the confidence, the real aid at a time of 
deadli danger and deadli fear which you show me. that aw man--i 
shall see him for ever in my dreams. hi black, malign face will 
shut out all memori of sunshin and happiness. I shall etern see 
hi evil eye as he threw himself into that well-hol in a vain effort 
to escap from the consequ of hi own misdoing. the more I think 
of it, the more appar it seem to me that he had premedit the 
whole thing--of course, except hi own horribl death. 

"perhap you have notic a fur collar I occasion wear. It is one 
of my most valu treasures--an ermin collar stud with emeralds. I 
had often seen the nigger' eye gleam covet when he look at 
it. unhappily, I wore it yesterday. that may have been the caus 
that lure the poor man to hi doom. On the veri brink of the abyss 
he tore the collar from my neck--that wa the last I saw of him. when 
he sank into the hole, I wa rush to the iron door, which I pull 
behind me. when I heard that soul-sicken yell, which mark hi 
disappear in the chasm, I wa more glad than I can say that my 
eye were spare the pain and horror which my ear had to endure. 

"when I tore myself out of the negro' grasp as he sank into the well- 
hole; I realis what freedom meant. freedom! freedom! not onli 
from that noisom prison-house, which ha now such a memory, but from 
the more noisom embrac of that hideou monster. whilst I live, I 
shall alway thank you for my freedom. A woman must sometim express 
her gratitude; otherwis it becom too great to bear. I am not a 
sentiment girl, who mere like to thank a man; I am a woman who 
know all, of bad as well as good, that life can give. I have known 
what it is to love and to lose. but you must not let me bring ani 
unhappi into your life. I must live on--a I have lived--alone, 
and, in addition, bear with other woe the memori of thi latest 
insult and horror. In the meantime, I must get away as quickli as 
possibl from diana' grove. In the morn I shall go up to town, 
where I shall remain for a week--i cannot stay longer, as busi 
affair demand my presenc here. I think, however, that a week in the 
rush of busi london, surround with multitud of commonplac people, 
will help to soften--i cannot expect total obliteration--th terribl 
imag of the bygon night. when I can sleep easily--which will be, I 
hope, after a day or two--i shall be fit to return home and take up 
again the burden which will, I suppose, alway be with me. 

"I shall be most happi to see you on my return--or earlier, if my good 
fortun send you on ani errand to london. I shall stay at the 
mayfair hotel. In that busi spot we may forget some of the danger 
and horror we have share together. adieu, and thank you, again and 
again, for all your kind and consider to me. 

"arabella marsh." 

adam wa surpris by thi effus epistle, but he determin to say 
noth of it to sir nathaniel until he should have thought it well over. 
when adam met sir nathaniel at breakfast, he wa glad that he had taken 
time to turn thing over in hi mind. the result had been that not onli 
wa he familiar with the fact in all their bearings, but he had alreadi 
so far differenti them that he wa abl to arrang them in hi own 
mind accord to their values. breakfast had been a silent function, so 
it did not interfer in ani way with the process of thought. 

So soon as the door wa closed, sir nathaniel began: 

"I see, adam, that someth ha occurred, and that you have much to tell 
me." 

"that is so, sir. I suppos I had better begin by tell you all I 
know--al that ha happen sinc I left you yesterday?" 

accordingli adam gave him detail of all that had happen dure the 
previou evening. He confin himself rigidli to the narrat of 
circumstances, take care not to colour event by ani comment of hi 
own, or ani opinion of the mean of thing which he did not fulli 
understand. At first, sir nathaniel seem dispos to ask questions, 
but shortli gave thi up when he recognis that the narrat wa 
concis and self-explanatory. thenceforth, he content himself with 
quick look and glances, easili interpreted, or by some acquiesc 
motion of hi hands, when such could be convenient, to emphasis hi 
idea of the correct of ani inference. until adam ceas speaking, 
have evid come to an end of what he had to say with regard to thi 
section of hi story, the elder man made no comment whatever. even when 
adam took from hi pocket ladi arabella' letter, with the manifest 
intent of read it, he did not make ani comment. finally, when adam 
fold up the letter and put it, in it envelope, back in hi pocket, as 
an intim that he had now quit finished, the old diplomatist 
care made a few note in hi pocket-book. 

"your narrative, my dear adam, is altogeth admirable. I think I may 
now take it that we are both well vers in the actual facts, and that 
our confer had better take the shape of a mutual exchang of ideas. 
let us both ask question as they may arise; and I do not doubt that we 
shall arriv at some enlighten conclusions." 

"will you kindli begin, sir? I do not doubt that, with your longer 
experience, you will be abl to dissip some of the fog which envelop 
certain of the thing which we have to consider." 

"I hope so, my dear boy. for a beginning, then, let me say that ladi 
arabella' letter make clear some thing which she intended--and also 
some thing which she did not intend. but, befor I begin to draw 
deductions, let me ask you a few questions. adam, are you heart-whole, 
quit heart-whole, in the matter of ladi arabella?" 

hi companion answer at once, each look the other straight in the 
eye dure question and answer. 

"ladi arabella, sir, is a charm woman, and I should have deem it a 
privileg to meet her--to talk to her--even--sinc I am in the 
confessional--to flirt a littl with her. but if you mean to ask if my 
affect are in ani way engaged, I can emphat answer 'no!'--a 
inde you will understand when present I give you the reason. apart 
from that, there are the unpleas detail we discuss the other day." 

"could you--would you mind give me the reason now? It will help us to 
understand what is befor us, in the way of difficulty." 

"certainly, sir. My reason, on which I can fulli depend, is that I love 
anoth woman!" 

"that clinch it. may I offer my good wishes, and, I hope, my 
congratulations?" 

"I am proud of your good wishes, sir, and I thank you for them. but it 
is too soon for congratulations--th ladi doe not even know my hope 
yet. indeed, I hardli knew them myself, as definite, till thi moment." 

"I take it then, adam, that at the right time I may be allow to know 
who the ladi is?" 

adam laugh a low, sweet laugh, such as rippl from a happi heart. 

"there need not be an hour's, a minute' delay. I shall be glad to share 
my secret with you, sir. the lady, sir, whom I am so happi as to love, 
and in whom my dream of life-long happi are centred, is mimi 
watford!" 

"then, my dear adam, I need not wait to offer congratulations. she is 
inde a veri charm young lady. I do not think I ever saw a girl who 
unit in such perfect the qualiti of strength of charact and 
sweet of disposition. with all my heart, I congratul you. then I 
may take it that my question as to your heart-whol is answer in 
the affirmative?" 

"yes; and now, sir, may I ask in turn whi the question?" 

"certainly! I ask becaus it seem to me that we are come to a point 
where my question might be pain to you." 

"it is not mere that I love mimi, but I have reason to look on ladi 
arabella as her enemy," adam continued. 

"her enemy?" 

"yes. A rank and unscrupul enemi who is bent on her destruction." 

sir nathaniel went to the door, look outsid it and returned, lock 
it care behind him. 




chapter xx--metabol 


"am I look grave?" ask sir nathaniel inconsequ when he 
re-ent the room. 

"you certainli are, sir." 

"we littl thought when first we met that we should be drawn into such a 
vortex. alreadi we are mix up in robbery, and probabl murder, but--a 
thousand time wors than all the crime in the calendar--in an affair of 
ghastli mysteri which ha no bottom and no end--with forc of the most 
unnerv kind, which had their origin in an age when the world wa 
differ from the world which we know. We are go back to the origin 
of superstition--to an age when dragon tore each other in their slime. 
We must fear nothing--no conclusion, howev improbable, almost 
imposs it may be. life and death is hang on our judgment, not 
onli for ourselves, but for other whom we love. remember, I count on 
you as I hope you count on me." 

"I do, with all confidence." 

"then," said sir nathaniel, "let us think justli and boldli and fear 
nothing, howev terrifi it may seem. I suppos I am to take as exact 
in everi detail your account of all the strang thing which happen 
whilst you were in diana' grove?" 

"so far as I know, yes. Of cours I may be mistaken in recollect of 
some detail or another, but I am certain that in the main what I have 
said is correct." 

"you feel sure that you saw ladi arabella seiz the negro round the neck, 
and drag him down with her into the hole?" 

"absolut certain, sir, otherwis I should have gone to her 
assistance." 

"we have, then, an account of what happen from an eye-wit whom we 
trust--that is yourself. We have also anoth account, written by ladi 
arabella under her own hand. these two account do not agree. therefor 
we must take it that one of the two is lying." 

"apparently, sir." 

"and that ladi arabella is the liar!" 

"apparently--a I am not." 

"we must, therefore, tri to find a reason for her lying. she ha noth 
to fear from oolanga, who is dead. therefor the onli reason which could 
actuat her would be to convinc someon els that she wa blameless. 
thi 'someone' could not be you, for you had the evid of your own 
eyes. there wa no one els present; therefor it must have been an 
absent person." 

"that seem beyond dispute, sir." 

"there is onli one other person whose good opinion she could wish to 
keep--edgar caswall. He is the onli one who fill the bill. her lie 
point to other thing besid the death of the african. she evid 
want it to be accept that hi fall into the well wa hi own act. 
I cannot suppos that she expect to convinc you, the eye-witness; but 
if she wish later on to spread the story, it wa wise of her to tri to 
get your accept of it." 

"that is so!" 

"then there were other matter of untruth. that, for instance, of the 
ermin collar embroid with emeralds. If an understand reason be 
requir for this, it would be to draw attent away from the green 
light which were seen in the room, and especi in the well-hole. ani 
unprejud person would accept the green light to be the eye of a 
great snake, such as tradit point to live in the well-hole. In 
fine, therefore, ladi arabella want the gener belief to be that there 
wa no snake of the kind in diana' grove. for my own part, I don't 
believ in a partial liar--thi art doe not deal in veneer; a liar is a 
liar right through. self-interest may prompt falsiti of the tongue; but 
if one prove to be a liar, noth that he say can ever be believed. 
thi lead us to the conclus that becaus she said or infer that 
there wa no snake, we should look for one--and expect to find it, too. 

"now let me digress. I live, and have for mani year lived, in 
derbyshire, a counti more celebr for it cave than ani other counti 
in england. I have been through them all, and am familiar with everi 
turn of them; as also with other great cave in kentucky, in france, in 
germany, and a host of other places--in mani of these are tremend 
deep cave of narrow aperture, which are valu by intrepid explorers, 
who descend narrow gullet of abysm depth--and sometim never return. 
In mani of the cavern in the peak I am convinc that some of the 
smaller passag were use in primev time as the lair of some of the 
great serpent of legend and tradition. It may have been that such 
cavern were form in the usual geolog way--bubbl or flaw in the 
earth' crust--which were later use by the monster of the period of the 
young world. It may have been, of course, that some of them were worn 
origin by water; but in time they all found a use when suitabl for 
live monsters. 

"thi bring us to anoth point, more difficult to accept and understand 
than ani other requir belief in a base not usual accepted, or inde 
enter on--wheth such abnorm growth could have ever chang in 
their nature. some day the studi of metabol may progress so far as to 
enabl us to accept structur chang proceed from an intellectu or 
moral base. We may lean toward a belief that great anim strength may 
be a sound base for chang of all sorts. If thi be so, what could be a 
more fit subject than primev monster whose strength wa such as to 
allow a surviv of thousand of years? We do not know yet if brain can 
increas and develop independ of other part of the live 
structure. 

"after all, the mediaev belief in the philosopher' stone which could 
transmut metals, ha it counterpart in the accept theori of 
metabol which chang live tissue. In an age of investig like 
our own, when we are return to scienc as the base of wonders--almost 
of miracles--w should be slow to refus to accept facts, howev 
imposs they may seem to be. 

"let us suppos a monster of the earli day of the world--a dragon of the 
prime--of vast age run into thousand of years, to whom had been 
convey in some way--it matter not--a brain just suffici for the 
begin of growth. suppos the monster to be of incalcul size and 
of a strength quit abnormal--a verit incarn of anim strength. 
suppos thi anim is allow to remain in one place, thu be remov 
from accid of interrupt development; might not, would not thi 
creature, in process of time--ages, if necessary--hav that rudimentari 
intellig developed? there is no imposs in this; it is onli 
the natur process of evolution. In the beginning, the instinct of 
anim are confin to alimentation, self-protection, and the 
multipl of their species. As time goe on and the need of life 
becom more complex, power follow need. We have been long accustom to 
consid growth as appli almost exclus to size in it variou 
aspects. but nature, who ha no doctrinair ideas, may equal appli it 
to concentration. A develop thing may expand in ani given way or 
form. now, it is a scientif law that increas impli gain and loss of 
variou kinds; what a thing gain in one direct it may lose in 
another. may it not be that mother natur may deliber encourag 
decreas as well as increase--that it may be an axiom that what is gain 
in concentr is lost in size? take, for instance, monster that 
tradit ha accept and localised, such as the worm of lambton or that 
of spindleston heugh. If such a creatur were, by it own process of 
metabolism, to chang much of it bulk for intellectu growth, we should 
at onc arriv at a new class of creature--mor dangerous, perhaps, than 
the world ha ever had ani experi of--a forc which can think, which 
ha no soul and no morals, and therefor no accept of responsibility. 
A snake would be a good illustr of this, for it is cold-blooded, and 
therefor remov from the temptat which often weaken or restrict 
warm-blood creatures. if, for instance, the worm of lambton--if such 
ever existed--wer guid to it own end by an organis intellig 
capabl of expansion, what form of creatur could we imagin which would 
equal it in potenti of evil? why, such a be would devast a 
whole country. now, all these thing requir much thought, and we want 
to appli the knowledg usefully, and we should therefor be exact. would 
it not be well to resum the subject later in the day?" 

"I quit agree, sir. I am in a whirl already; and want to attend 
care to what you say; so that I may tri to digest it." 

both men seem fresher and better for the "easy," and when they met in 
the afternoon each of them had someth to contribut to the gener 
stock of information. adam, who wa by natur of a more milit 
disposit than hi elderli friend, wa glad to see that the confer 
at onc assum a practic trend. sir nathaniel recognis this, and, 
like an old diplomatist, turn it to present use. 

"tell me now, adam, what is the outcome, in your own mind, of our 
conversation?" 

"that the whole difficulti alreadi assum practic shape; but with 
ad dangers, that at first I did not imagine." 

"what is the practic shape, and what are the ad dangers? I am not 
disputing, but onli tri to clear my own idea by the consider of 
yours--" 

So adam went on: 

"in the past, in the earli day of the world, there were monster who 
were so vast that they could exist for thousand of years. some of them 
must have overlap the christian era. they may have progress 
intellectu in process of time. If they had in ani way so progressed, 
or even got the most rudimentari form of brain, they would be the most 
danger thing that ever were in the world. tradit say that one of 
these monster live in the marsh of the east, and came up to a cave in 
diana' grove, which wa also call the lair of the white worm. such 
creatur may have grown down as well as up. they _may_ have grown into, 
or someth like, human beings. ladi arabella march is of snake nature. 
she ha commit crime to our knowledge. she retain someth of the 
vast strength of her primal being--can see in the dark--ha the eye of a 
snake. she use the nigger, and then drag him through the snake' 
hole down to the swamp; she is intent on evil, and hate some one we 
love. result . . . " 

"yes, the result?" 

"first, that mimi watford should be taken away at once--then--" 

"yes?" 

"the monster must be destroyed." 

"bravo! that is a true and fearless conclusion. At whatev cost, it 
must be carri out." 

"at once?" 

"soon, at all events. that creature' veri exist is a danger. her 
presenc in thi neighbourhood make the danger immediate." 

As he spoke, sir nathaniel' mouth harden and hi eyebrow came down 
till they met. there wa no doubt hi concurr in the resolution, 
or hi readi to help in carri it out. but he wa an elderli man 
with much experi and knowledg of law and diplomacy. It seem to 
him to be a stern duti to prevent anyth irrevoc take place till 
it had been thought out and all wa ready. there were all sort of legal 
crux to be thought out, not onli regard the take of life, even of 
a monstros in human form, but also of property. ladi arabella, be she 
woman or snake or devil, own the ground she move in, accord to 
british law, and the law is jealou and swift to aveng wrong done 
within it ken. all such difficulti should be--must be--avoid for 
mr. salton' sake, for adam' own sake, and, most of all, for mimi 
watford' sake. 

befor he spoke again, sir nathaniel had made up hi mind that he must 
tri to postpon decis action until the circumst on which they 
depended--which, after all, were onli problematical--should have been 
test satisfactorily, one way or another. when he did speak, adam at 
first thought that hi friend wa waver in hi intention, or "funking" 
the responsibility. however, hi respect for sir nathaniel wa so great 
that he would not act, or even come to a conclus on a vital point, 
without hi sanction. 

He came close and whisper in hi ear: 

"we will prepar our plan to combat and destroy thi horribl menace, 
after we have clear up some of the more baffl points. meanwhile, we 
must wait for the night--i hear my uncle' footstep echo down the 
hall." 

sir nathaniel nod hi approval. 




chapter xxi--green light 


when old mr. salton had retir for the night, adam and sir nathaniel 
return to the study. thing went with great regular at lesser hill, 
so they knew that there would be no interrupt to their talk. 

when their cigar were lighted, sir nathaniel began. 

"I hope, adam, that you do not think me either slack or changeabl of 
purpose. I mean to go through thi busi to the bitter end--whatev 
it may be. Be satisfi that my first care is, and shall be, the 
protect of mimi watford. To that I am pledged; my dear boy, we who 
are interest are all in the same danger. that semi-human monster out 
of the pit hate and mean to destroy us all--you and me certainly, and 
probabl your uncle. I want especi to talk with you to-night, for 
I cannot help think that the time is fast coming--if it ha not come 
already--when we must take your uncl into our confidence. It wa one 
thing when fanci evil threatened, but now he is probabl mark for 
death, and it is onli right that he should know all." 

"I am with you, sir. thing have chang sinc we agre to keep him out 
of the trouble. now we dare not; consider for hi feel might 
cost hi life. It is a duty--and no light or pleasant one, either. I 
have not a shadow of doubt that he will want to be one with us in this. 
but remember, we are hi guests; hi name, hi honour, have to be thought 
of as well as hi safety." 

"all shall be as you wish, adam. and now as to what we are to do? We 
cannot murder ladi arabella off-hand. therefor we shall have to put 
thing in order for the killing, and in such a way that we cannot be 
tax with a crime." 

"it seem to me, sir, that we are in an exceedingli tight place. our 
first difficulti is to know where to begin. I never thought thi 
fight an antediluvian monster would be such a complic job. thi 
one is a woman, with all a woman' wit, combin with the heartless 
of a _cocotte_. she ha the strength and impregn of a diplodocus. 
We may be sure that in the fight that is befor us there will be no 
semblanc of fair-play. also that our unscrupul oppon will not 
betray herself!" 

"that is so--but be feminine, she will probabl over-reach herself. 
now, adam, it strike me that, as we have to protect ourselv and other 
against feminin nature, our strong game will be to play our masculin 
against her feminine. perhap we had better sleep on it. she is a thing 
of the night; and the night may give us some ideas." 

So they both turn in. 

adam knock at sir nathaniel' door in the grey of the morning, and, on 
be bidden, came into the room. He had sever letter in hi hand. 
sir nathaniel sat up in bed. 

"well!" 

"I should like to read you a few letters, but, of course, I shall not 
send them unless you approve. In fact"--with a smile and a blush--"ther 
are sever thing which I want to do; but I hold my hand and my tongu 
till I have your approval." 

"go on!" said the other kindly. "tell me all, and count at ani rate on 
my sympathy, and on my approv and help if I can see my way." 

accordingli adam proceeded: 

"when I told you the conclus at which I had arrived, I put in the 
foreground that mimi watford should, for the sake of her own safety, be 
removed--and that the monster which had wrought all the harm should be 
destroyed." 

"yes, that is so." 

"to carri thi into practice, sir, one preliminari is required--unless 
harm of anoth kind is to be faced. mimi should have some protector 
whom all the world would recognise. the onli form recognis by 
convent is marriage!" 

sir nathaniel smile in a fatherli way. 

"to marry, a husband is required. and that husband should be you." 

"yes, yes." 

"and the marriag should be immedi and secret--or, at least, not 
spoken of outsid ourselves. would the young ladi be agreeabl to that 
proceeding?" 

"I do not know, sir!" 

"then how are we to proceed?" 

"I suppos that we--or one of us--must ask her." 

"i thi a sudden idea, adam, a sudden resolution?" 

"A sudden resolution, sir, but not a sudden idea. If she agrees, all is 
well and good. the sequenc is obvious." 

"and it is to be kept a secret amongst ourselves?" 

"I want no secret, sir, except for mimi' good. for myself, I should 
like to shout it from the house-tops! but we must be discreet; untim 
knowledg to our enemi might work incalcul harm." 

"and how would you suggest, adam, that we could combin the moment 
question with secrecy?" 

adam grew red and move uneasily. 

"someon must ask her--a soon as possible!" 

"and that someone?" 

"I thought that you, sir, would be so good!" 

"god bless my soul! thi is a new kind of duti to take on--at my time of 
life. adam, I hope you know that you can count on me to help in ani way 
I can!" 

"I have alreadi count on you, sir, when I ventur to make such a 
suggestion. I can onli ask," he added, "that you will be more than ever 
kind to me--to us--and look on the pain duti as a voluntari act of 
grace, prompt by kind and affection." 

"pain duty!" 

"yes," said adam boldly. "pain to you, though to me it would be all 
joyful." 

"it is a strang job for an earli morning! well, we all live and learn. 
I suppos the sooner I go the better. you had better write a line for me 
to take with me. for, you see, thi is to be a somewhat unusu 
transaction, and it may be embarrass to the lady, even to myself. So 
we ought to have some sort of warrant, someth to show that we have 
been mind of her feelings. It will not do to take acquiesc for 
granted--although we act for her good." 

"sir nathaniel, you are a true friend; I am sure that both mimi and I 
shall be grate to you for all our lives--howev long they may be!" 

So the two talk it over and agre as to point to be born in mind by 
the ambassador. It wa strike ten when sir nathaniel left the house, 
adam see him quietli off. 

As the young man follow him with wist eyes--almost jealou of the 
privileg which hi kind deed wa about to bring him--h felt that hi 
own heart wa in hi friend' breast. 

the memori of that morn wa like a dream to all those concern in it. 
sir nathaniel had a confus recollect of detail and sequence, though 
the main fact stood out in hi memori boldli and clearly. adam salton' 
recollect wa of an illimit wait, fill with anxiety, hope, and 
chagrin, all domin by a sens of the slow passag of time and 
accompani by vagu fears. mimi could not for a long time think at all, 
or recollect anything, except that adam love her and wa save her from 
a terribl danger. when she had time to think, later on, she wonder 
when she had ani ignor of the fact that adam love her, and that she 
love him with all her heart. everything, everi recollect howev 
small, everi feeling, seem to fit into those element fact as though 
they had all been mould together. the main and crown recollect 
wa her say goodby to sir nathaniel, and entrust to him love 
messages, straight from her heart, to adam salton, and of hi bear 
when--with an impuls which she could not check--sh put her lip to hi 
and kiss him. later, when she wa alon and had time to think, it wa 
a pass grief to her that she would have to be silent, for a time, to 
lilla on the happi event of that strang mission. 

she had, of course, agre to keep all secret until adam should give her 
leav to speak. 

the advic and assist of sir nathaniel wa a great help to adam in 
carri out hi idea of marri mimi watford without publicity. He 
went with him to london, and, with hi influence, the young man obtain 
the licens of the archbishop of canterburi for a privat marriage. sir 
nathaniel then persuad old mr. salton to allow hi nephew to spend a 
few week with him at doom tower, and it wa here that mimi becam adam' 
wife. but that wa onli the first step in their plans; befor go 
further, however, adam took hi bride off to the isl of man. He wish 
to place a stretch of sea between mimi and the white worm, while thing 
matured. On their return, sir nathaniel met them and drove them at onc 
to doom, take care to avoid ani one that he knew on the journey. 

sir nathaniel had taken care to have the door and window shut and 
locked--al but the door use for their entry. the shutter were up and 
the blind down. moreover, heavi curtain were drawn across the windows. 
when adam comment on this, sir nathaniel said in a whisper: 

"wait till we are alone, and i'll tell you whi thi is done; in the 
meantim not a word or a sign. you will approv when we have had a talk 
together." 

they said no more on the subject till after dinner, when they were 
ensconc in sir nathaniel' study, which wa on the top storey. doom 
tower wa a lofti structure, situat on an emin high up in the peak. 
the top command a wide prospect, rang from the hill abov the 
ribbl to the near side of the brow, which mark the northern bound of 
ancient mercia. It wa of the earli norman period, less than a centuri 
younger than castra regis. the window of the studi were bar and 
locked, and heavi dark curtain close them in. when thi wa done not a 
gleam of light from the tower could be seen from outside. 

when they were alone, sir nathaniel explain that he had taken hi old 
friend, mr. salton, into full confidence, and that in futur all would 
work together. 

"it is import for you to be extrem careful. In spite of the fact 
that our marriag wa kept secret, as also your temporari absence, both 
are known." 

"how? To whom?" 

"how, I know not; but I am begin to have an idea." 

"to her?" ask adam, in momentari consternation. 

sir nathaniel shiver perceptibly. 

"the white worm--yes!" 

adam notic that from now on, hi friend never spoke of ladi arabella 
otherwise, except when he wish to divert the suspicion of others. 

sir nathaniel switch off the electr light, and when the room wa 
pitch dark, he came to adam, took him by the hand, and led him to a seat 
set in the southern window. then he softli drew back a piec of the 
curtain and motion hi companion to look out. 

adam did so, and immedi shrank back as though hi eye had open on 
press danger. hi companion set hi mind at rest by say in a low 
voice: 

"it is all right; you may speak, but speak low. there is no danger 
here--at present!" 

adam lean forward, take care, however, not to press hi face against 
the glass. what he saw would not under ordinari circumst have 
caus concern to anybody. with hi special knowledge, it wa 
appalling--though the night wa now so dark that in realiti there wa 
littl to be seen. 

On the western side of the tower stood a grove of old trees, of forest 
dimensions. they were not group closely, but stood a littl apart from 
each other, produc the effect of a row wide planted. over the top 
of them wa seen a green light, someth like the danger signal at a 
railway-crossing. It seem at first quit still; but presently, when 
adam' eye becam accustom to it, he could see that it move as if 
trembling. thi at onc recal to adam' mind the light quiver 
abov the well-hol in the dark of that inner room at diana' grove, 
oolanga' aw shriek, and the hideou black face, now grown grey with 
terror, disappear into the impenetr gloom of the mysteri 
orifice. instinct he laid hi hand on hi revolver, and stood up 
readi to protect hi wife. then, see that noth happened, and that 
the light and all outsid the tower remain the same, he softli pull 
the curtain over the window. 

sir nathaniel switch on the light again, and in it comfort glow 
they began to talk freely. 




chapter xxii--at close quarter 


"she ha diabol cunning," said sir nathaniel. "ever sinc you left, 
she ha rang along the brow and wherev you were accustom to 
frequent. I have not heard whenc the knowledg of your movement came 
to her, nor have I been abl to learn ani data whereon to found an 
opinion. she seem to have heard both of your marriag and your absence; 
but I gather, by inference, that she doe not actual know where you and 
mimi are, or of your return. So soon as the dusk fails, she goe out on 
her rounds, and befor dawn cover the whole ground round the brow, and 
away up into the heart of the peak. the white worm, in her own proper 
shape, certainli ha great facil for the busi on which she is 
now engaged. she can look into window of ani ordinari kind. happily, 
thi hous is beyond her reach, if she wishes--a she manifestli does--to 
remain unrecognised. but, even at thi height, it is wise to show no 
lights, lest she might learn someth of our presenc or absence." 

"would it not be well, sir, if one of us could see thi monster in her 
real shape at close quarters? I am will to run the risk--for I take 
it there would be no slight risk in the doing. I don't suppos anyon of 
our time ha seen her close and live to tell the tale." 

sir nathaniel held up an expostulatori hand. 

"good god, lad, what are you suggesting? think of your wife, and all 
that is at stake." 

"it is of mimi that I think--for her sake that I am will to risk 
whatev is to be risked." 

adam' young bride wa proud of her man, but she blanch at the thought 
of the ghastli white worm. adam saw thi and at onc reassur her. 

"so long as her ladyship doe not know whereabout I am, I shall have as 
much safeti as remain to us; bear in mind, my darling, that we cannot be 
too careful." 

sir nathaniel realis that adam wa right; the white worm had no 
supernatur power and could not harm them until she discov their 
hide place. It wa agreed, therefore, that the two men should go 
together. 

when the two men slip out by the back door of the house, they walk 
cautious along the avenu which trend toward the west. everyth 
wa pitch dark--so dark that at time they had to feel their way by the 
pale and tree-trunks. they could still see, seemingli far in front of 
them and high up, the bale light which at the height and distanc 
seem like a faint line. As they were now on the level of the ground, 
the light seem infinit higher than it had from the top of the tower. 
At the sight adam' heart fell; the danger of the desper enterpris 
which he had undertaken burst upon him. but thi feel wa shortli 
follow by anoth which restor him to himself--a fierc loathing, and 
a desir to kill, such as he had never experienc before. 

they went on for some distanc on a level road, fairli wide, from which 
the green light wa visible. here sir nathaniel spoke softly, place 
hi lip to adam' ear for safety. 

"we know noth whatev of thi creature' power of hear or 
smelling, though I presum that both are of no great strength. As to 
seeing, we may presum the opposite, but in ani case we must tri to keep 
in the shade behind the tree-trunks. the slightest error would be fatal 
to us." 

adam onli nodded, in case there should be ani chanc of the monster 
see the movement. 

after a time that seem interminable, they emerg from the circl 
wood. It wa like come out into sunlight by comparison with the misti 
black which had been around them. there wa light enough to see by, 
though not suffici to distinguish thing at a distance. adam' eye 
sought the green light in the sky. It wa still in about the same place, 
but it surround were more visible. It wa now at the summit of what 
seem to be a long white pole, near the top of which were two pendant 
white masses, like rudimentari arm or fins. the green light, strang 
enough, did not seem lessen by the surround starlight, but had a 
clearer effect and a deeper green. whilst they were care regard 
this--adam with the aid of an opera-glass--their nostril were assail 
by a horrid stench, someth like that which rose from the well-hol in 
diana' grove. 

By degrees, as their eye got the right focus, they saw an immens 
tower mass that seem snowi white. It wa tall and thin. the lower 
part wa hidden by the tree which lay between, but they could follow the 
tall white shaft and the duplic green light which top it. As they 
look there wa a movement--th shaft seem to bend, and the line of 
green light descend amongst the trees. they could see the green light 
twinkl as it pass between the obstruct branches. 

see where the head of the monster was, the two men ventur a littl 
further forward, and saw that the hidden mass at the base of the shaft 
wa compos of vast coil of the great serpent' body, form a base 
from which the upright mass rose. As they looked, thi lower mass moved, 
the glisten fold catch the moonlight, and they could see that the 
monster' progress wa along the ground. It wa come toward them at a 
swift pace, so they turn and ran, take care to make as littl nois 
as possible, either by their footfal or by disturb the undergrowth 
close to them. they did not stop or paus till they saw befor them the 
high dark tower of doom. 




chapter xxiii--in the enemy' hous 


sir nathaniel wa in the librari next morning, after breakfast, when adam 
came to him carri a letter. 

"her ladyship doesn't lose ani time. she ha begun work already!" 

sir nathaniel, who wa write at a tabl near the window, look up. 

"what is it?" said he. 

adam held out the letter he wa carrying. It wa in a blazon envelope. 

"ha!" said sir nathaniel, "from the white worm! I expect someth of 
the kind." 

"but," said adam, "how could she have known we were here? she didn't 
know last night." 

"I don't think we need troubl about that, adam. there is so much we do 
not understand. thi is onli anoth mystery. suffic it that she doe 
know--perhap it is all the better and safer for us." 

"how is that?" ask adam with a puzzl look. 

"gener process of reasoning, my boy; and the experi of some year 
in the diplomat world. thi creatur is a monster without heart or 
consider for anyth or anyone. she is not nearli so danger in 
the open as when she ha the dark to protect her. besides, we know, by 
our own experi of her movements, that for some reason she shun 
publicity. In spite of her vast bulk and abnorm strength, she is 
afraid to attack openly. after all, she is onli a snake and with a 
snake' nature, which is to keep low and squirm, and proceed by stealth 
and cunning. she will never attack when she can run away, although she 
know well that run away would probabl be fatal to her. what is the 
letter about?" 

sir nathaniel' voic wa calm and self-possessed. when he wa engag 
in ani struggl of wit he wa all diplomatist. 

"she ask mimi and me to tea thi afternoon at diana' grove, and hope 
that you also will favour her." 

sir nathaniel smiled. 

"pleas ask mrs. salton to accept for us all." 

"she mean some deadli mischief. surely--sur it would be wiser not." 

"it is an old trick that we learn earli in diplomacy, adam--to fight on 
ground of your own choice. It is true that she suggest the place on 
thi occasion; but by accept it we make it ours. moreover, she will 
not be abl to understand our reason for do so, and her own bad 
conscience--if she ha any, bad or good--and her own fear and doubt 
will play our game for us. no, my dear boy, let us accept, by all 
means." 

adam said nothing, but silent held out hi hand, which hi companion 
shook: no word were necessary. 

when it wa get near tea-time, mimi ask sir nathaniel how they were 
going. 

"we must make a point of go in state. We want all possibl 
publicity." mimi look at him inquiringly. "certainly, my dear, in the 
present circumst public is a part of safety. Do not be surpris 
if, whilst we are at diana' grove, occasion messag come for you--for 
all or ani of us." 

"I see!" said mrs. salton. "you are take no chances." 

"none, my dear. all I have learn at foreign courts, and amongst 
civilis and uncivilis people, is go to be utilis within the next 
coupl of hours." 

sir nathaniel' voic wa full of seriousness, and it brought to mimi in 
a convinc way the aw graviti of the occasion. 

In due course, they set out in a carriag drawn by a fine pair of horses, 
who soon devour the few mile of their journey. befor they came to 
the gate, sir nathaniel turn to mimi. 

"I have arrang with adam certain signal which may be necessari if 
certain eventu occur. these need be noth to do with you 
directly. but bear in mind that if I ask you or adam to do anything, do 
not lose a second in the do of it. We must tri to pass off such 
moment with an appear of unconcern. In all probability, noth 
requir such care will occur. the white worm will not tri force, 
though she ha so much of it to spare. whatev she may attempt to-day, 
of harm to ani of us, will be in the way of secret plot. some other time 
she may tri force, but--if I am abl to judg such a thing--not to-day. 
the messeng who may ask for ani of us will not be wit only, they 
may help to stave off danger." see queri in her face, he went on: "of 
what kind the danger may be, I know not, and cannot guess. It will 
doubtless be some ordinari circumstance; but none the less danger on 
that account. here we are at the gate. now, be care in all matters, 
howev small. To keep your head is half the battle." 

there were a number of men in liveri in the hall when they arrived. the 
door of the drawing-room were thrown open, and ladi arabella came forth 
and offer them cordial welcome. thi have been got over, ladi 
arabella led them into anoth room where tea wa served. 

adam wa acut watch and suspici of everything, and saw on the 
far side of thi room a panel iron door of the same colour and 
configur as the outer door of the room where wa the well-hol 
wherein oolanga had disappeared. someth in the sight alarm him, and 
he quietli stood near the door. He made no movement, even of hi eyes, 
but he could see that sir nathaniel wa watch him intently, and, he 
fancied, with approval. 

they all sat near the tabl spread for tea, adam still near the door. 
ladi arabella fan herself, complain of heat, and told one of the 
footmen to throw all the outer door open. 

tea wa in progress when mimi suddenli start up with a look of fright 
on her face; at the same moment, the men becam cognis of a thick 
smoke which began to spread through the room--a smoke which made those 
who experienc it gasp and choke. the footmen began to edg uneasili 
toward the inner door. denser and denser grew the smoke, and more acrid 
it smell. mimi, toward whom the draught from the open door waft the 
smoke, rose up choking, and ran to the inner door, which she threw open 
to it fullest extent, disclos on the outsid a curtain of thin silk, 
fix to the doorposts. the draught from the open door sway the thin 
silk toward her, and in her fright, she tore down the curtain, which 
envelop her from head to foot. then she ran through the still open 
door, heedless of the fact that she could not see where she wa going. 
adam, follow by sir nathaniel, rush forward and join her--adam 
catch hi wife by the arm and hold her tight. It wa well that he 
did so, for just befor her lay the black orific of the well-hole, 
which, of course, she could not see with the silk curtain round her head. 
the floor wa extrem slippery; someth like thick oil had been 
spill where she had to pass; and close to the edg of the hole her feet 
shot from under her, and she stumbl forward toward the well-hole. 

when adam saw mimi slip, he flung himself backward, still hold her. 
hi weight told, and he drag her up from the hole and they fell 
togeth on the floor outsid the zone of slipperiness. In a moment he 
had rais her up, and togeth they rush out through the open door 
into the sunlight, sir nathaniel close behind them. they were all pale 
except the old diplomatist, who look both calm and cool. It sustain 
and cheer adam and hi wife to see him thu master of himself. both 
manag to follow hi example, to the wonder of the footmen, who saw 
the three who had just escap a terribl danger walk togeth gaily, 
as, under the guid pressur of sir nathaniel' hand, they turn to re- 
enter the house. 

ladi arabella, whose face had blanch to a deadli white, now resum her 
ministr at the tea-board as though noth unusu had happened. 
the slop-basin wa full of half-burn brown paper, over which tea had 
been poured. 

sir nathaniel had been narrowli observ hi hostess, and took the first 
opportun afford him of whisper to adam: 

"the real attack is to come--sh is too quiet. when I give my hand to 
your wife to lead her out, come with us--and caution her to hurry. don't 
lose a second, even if you have to make a scene. hs-s-s-h!" 

then they resum their place close to the table, and the servants, in 
obedi to ladi arabella' order, brought in fresh tea. 

thenc on, that tea-parti seem to adam, whose faculti were at their 
utmost intensity, like a terribl dream. As for poor mimi, she wa so 
overwrought both with present and futur fear, and with horror at the 
danger she had escaped, that her faculti were numb. however, she wa 
brace up for a trial, and she felt assur that whatev might come she 
would be abl to go through with it. sir nathaniel seem just as 
usual--suave, dignified, and thoughtful--perfect master of himself. 

To her husband, it wa evid that mimi wa ill at ease. the way she 
kept turn her head to look around her, the quick come and go of 
the colour of her face, her hurri breathing, altern with period 
of suspici calm, were evid of mental perturbation. To her, the 
attitud of ladi arabella seem compound of social sweet and 
person consideration. It would be hard to imagin more thought and 
tender kind toward an honour guest. 

when tea wa over and the servant had come to clear away the cups, ladi 
arabella, put her arm round mimi' waist, stroll with her into an 
adjoin room, where she collect a number of photograph which were 
scatter about, and, sit down besid her guest, began to show them 
to her. while she wa do this, the servant close all the door of 
the suit of rooms, as well as that which open from the room 
outside--that of the well-hol into the avenue. suddenly, without ani 
seem cause, the light in the room began to grow dim. sir nathaniel, 
who wa sit close to mimi, rose to hi feet, and, crying, "quick!" 
caught hold of her hand and began to drag her from the room. adam caught 
her other hand, and between them they drew her through the outer door 
which the servant were begin to close. It wa difficult at first to 
find the way, the dark wa so great; but to their relief when adam 
whistl shrilly, the carriag and horses, which had been wait in the 
angl of the avenue, dash up. her husband and sir nathaniel 
lifted--almost threw--mimi into the carriage. the postillion pli whip 
and spur, and the vehicle, rock with it speed, swept through the gate 
and tore up the road. behind them wa a hubbub--serv rush about, 
order be shout out, door shutting, and somewhere, seemingli far 
back in the house, a strang noise. everi nerv of the hors wa 
strain as they dash recklessli along the road. the two men held mimi 
between them, the arm of both of them round her as though protectingly. 
As they went, there wa a sudden rise in the ground; but the horses, 
breath heavily, dash up it at race speed, not slacken their 
pace when the hill fell away again, leav them to hurri along the 
downgrade. 

It would be foolish to say that neither adam nor mimi had ani fear in 
return to doom tower. mimi felt it more keenli than her husband, 
whose nerv were harder, and who wa more inur to danger. still she 
bore up bravely, and as usual the effort wa help to her. when onc 
she wa in the studi in the top of the turret, she almost forgot the 
terror which lay outsid in the dark. she did not attempt to peep out 
of the window; but adam did--and saw nothing. the moonlight show all 
the surround country, but nowher wa to be observ that tremul 
line of green light. 

the peac night had a good effect on them all; danger, be unseen, 
seem far off. At time it wa hard to realis that it had ever been. 
with courag restored, adam rose earli and walk along the brow, see 
no chang in the sign of life in castra regis. what he did see, to hi 
wonder and concern, on hi return homeward, wa ladi arabella, in her 
tight-fit white dress and ermin collar, but without her emeralds; 
she wa emerg from the gate of diana' grove and walk toward the 
castle. ponder on this, and tri to find some mean in it, 
occupi hi thought till he join mimi and sir nathaniel at breakfast. 
they began the meal in silence. what had been had been, and wa known to 
them all. moreover, it wa not a pleasant topic. 

A fillip wa given to the convers when adam told of hi see ladi 
arabella, on her way to castra regis. they each had someth to say of 
her, and of what her wish or intent were toward edgar caswall. 
mimi spoke bitterli of her in everi aspect. she had not forgotten--and 
never would--nev could--th occas when, to harm lilla, the woman had 
consort even with the nigger. As a social matter, she wa disgust 
with her for follow up the rich landowner--"throw herself at hi 
head so shamelessly," wa how she express it. she wa interest to 
know that the great kite still flew from caswall' tower. but beyond 
such matter she did not tri to go. the onli comment she made wa of 
strongli express surpris at her ladyship' "cheek" in ignor her own 
crimin acts, and her impud in take it for grant that other had 
overlook them also. 




chapter xxiv--a startl proposit 


the more mimi thought over the late events, the more puzzl she was. 
what did it all mean--what could it mean, except that there wa an error 
of fact somewhere. could it be possibl that some of them--al of them 
had been mistaken, that there had been no white worm at all? On either 
side of her wa a belief imposs of reception. not to believ in what 
seem appar wa to destroy the veri foundat of belief . . . yet 
in old day there had been monster on the earth, and certainli some 
peopl had believ in just such mysteri chang of identity. It wa 
all veri strange. just fanci how ani stranger--say a doctor--would 
regard her, if she were to tell him that she had been to a tea-parti with 
an antediluvian monster, and that they had been wait on by up-to-d 
men-servants. 

adam had returned, exhilar by hi walk, and more settl in hi mind 
than he had been for some time. like mimi, he had gone through the phase 
of doubt and inabl to believ in the realiti of things, though it had 
not affect him to the same extent. the idea, however, that hi wife 
wa suffer ill-effect from her terribl ordeal, brace him up. He 
remain with her for a time, then he sought sir nathaniel in order to 
talk over the matter with him. He knew that the calm common sens and 
self-reli of the old man, as well as hi experience, would be help 
to them all. 

sir nathaniel had come to the conclus that, for some reason which he 
did not understand, ladi arabella had chang her plans, and, for the 
present at all events, wa pacific. He wa inclin to attribut her 
chang demeanour to the fact that her influenc over edgar caswal wa 
so far increased, as to justifi a more fix belief in hi submiss to 
her charms. 

As a matter of fact, she had seen caswal that morn when she visit 
castra regis, and they had had a long talk together, dure which the 
possibl of their union had been discussed. caswall, without be 
enthusiast on the subject, had been courteou and attentive; as she had 
walk back to diana' grove, she almost congratul herself on her new 
settlement in life. that the idea wa becom fix in her mind, wa 
shown by a letter which she wrote later in the day to adam salton, and 
sent to him by hand. It ran as follows: 

"dear mr. salton, 

"I wonder if you would kindli advise, and, if possible, help me in a 
matter of business. I have been for some time tri to make up my 
mind to sell diana' grove, I have put off and put off the do of it 
till now. the place is my own property, and no one ha to be 
consult with regard to what I may wish to do about it. It wa 
bought by my late husband, captain adolphu ranger march, who had 
anoth residence, the crest, appleby. He acquir all right of all 
kinds, includ mine and sporting. when he died, he left hi whole 
properti to me. I shall feel leav thi place, which ha becom 
endear to me by mani sacr memori and affections--th 
recollect of mani happi day of my young marri life, and the more 
than happi memori of the man I love and who love me so much. I 
should be will to sell the place for ani fair price--so long, of 
course, as the purchas wa one I like and of whom I approved. may 
I say that you yourself would be the ideal person. but I dare not 
hope for so much. It strike me, however, that among your australian 
friend may be someon who wish to make a settlement in the old 
country, and would care to fix the spot in one of the most histor 
region in england, full of romanc and legend, and with a 
never-end vista of histor interest--an estat which, though 
small, is in perfect condit and with illimit possibl of 
development, and mani doubtful--or unsettled--right which have 
exist befor the time of the roman or even celts, who were the 
origin possessors. In addition, the hous ha been kept up to the 
_dernier cri_. immedi possess can be arranged. My lawyer can 
provid you, or whoever you may suggest, with all busi and 
histor details. A word from you of accept or refus is all 
that is necessary, and we can leav detail to be thrash out by our 
agents. forgiv me, won't you, for troubl you in the matter, and 
believ me, your veri sincerely. 

"arabella march." 

adam read thi over sever times, and then, hi mind be made up, he 
went to mimi and ask if she had ani objection. she answered--aft a 
shudder--that she was, in this, as in all things, will to do whatev 
he might wish. 

"dearest, I am will that you should judg what is best for us. Be 
quit free to act as you see your duty, and as your inclin calls. We 
are in the hand of god, and He ha hitherto guid us, and will do so to 
hi own end." 

from hi wife' room adam salton went straight to the studi in the tower, 
where he knew sir nathaniel would be at that hour. the old man wa 
alone, so, when he had enter in obedi to the "come in," which 
answer hi query, he close the door and sat down besid him. 

"do you think, sir, that it would be well for me to buy diana' grove?" 

"god bless my soul!" said the old man, startled, "whi on earth would you 
want to do that?" 

"well, I have vow to destroy that white worm, and my be abl to do 
whatev I may choos with the lair would facilit matter and avoid 
complications." 

sir nathaniel hesit longer than usual befor speaking. He wa 
think deeply. 

"yes, adam, there is much common sens in your suggestion, though it 
startl me at first. I think that, for all reasons, you would do well 
to buy the properti and to have the convey settl at once. If you 
want more money than is immedi convenient, let me know, so that I 
may be your banker." 

"thank you, sir, most heartily; but I have more money at immedi call 
than I shall want. I am glad you approve." 

"the properti is historic, and as time goe on it will increas in value. 
moreover, I may tell you something, which inde is onli a surmise, but 
which, if I am right, will add great valu to the place." adam listened. 
"ha it ever struck you whi the old name, 'the lair of the white worm,' 
wa given? We know that there wa a snake which in earli day wa call 
a worm; but whi white?" 

"I realli don't know, sir; I never thought of it. I simpli took it for 
granted." 

"so did I at first--long ago. but later I puzzl my brain for a 
reason." 

"and what wa the reason, sir?" 

"simpli and sole becaus the snake or worm _was_ white. We are near 
the counti of stafford, where the great industri of china-burn wa 
origin and grew. stafford owe much of it wealth to the larg 
deposit of the rare china clay found in it from time to time. these 
deposit becom in time pretti well exhausted; but for centuri stafford 
adventur look for the special clay, as ohio and pennsylvania farmer 
and explor look for oil. anyon own real estat on which china 
clay can be discov strike a sort of gold mine." 

"yes, and then--" the young man look puzzled. 

"the origin 'worm' so-called, from which the name of the place came, 
had to find a direct way down to the marsh and the mud-holes. now, the 
clay is easili penetrable, and the origin hole probabl pierc a bed 
of china clay. when onc the way wa made it would becom a sort of 
highway for the worm. but as much movement wa necessari to ascend such 
a great height, some of the clay would becom attach to it rough skin 
by attrition. the downway must have been easi work, but the ascent wa 
different, and when the monster came to view in the upper world, it would 
be fresh from contact with the white clay. henc the name, which ha no 
cryptic significance, but onli fact. now, if that surmis be true--and I 
do not see whi not--ther must be a deposit of valuabl clay--poss of 
immens depth." 

adam' comment pleas the old gentleman. 

"I have it in my bones, sir, that you have struck--or rather reason 
out--a great truth." 

sir nathaniel went on cheerfully. "when the world of commerc wake up 
to the valu of your find, it will be as well that your titl to 
ownership ha been perfectli secured. If anyon ever deserv such a 
gain, it is you." 

with hi friend' aid, adam secur the properti without loss of time. 
then he went to see hi uncle, and told him about it. mr. salton wa 
delight to find hi young rel alreadi construct the owner of 
so fine an estate--on which gave him an import statu in the county. 
He made mani anxiou enquiri about mimi, and the do of the white 
worm, but adam reassur him. 

the next morning, when adam went to hi host in the smoking-room, sir 
nathaniel ask him how he purpos to proceed with regard to keep hi 
vow. 

"it is a difficult matter which you have undertaken. To destroy such a 
monster is someth like one of the labour of hercules, in that not 
onli it size and weight and power of use them in little-known way are 
against you, but the occult side is alon an unsurpass difficulty. 
the worm is alreadi master of all the element except fire--and I do not 
see how fire can be use for the attack. It ha onli to sink into the 
earth in it usual way, and you could not overtak it if you had the 
resourc of the biggest coal-min in existence. but I daresay you have 
map out some plan in your mind," he ad courteously. 

"I have, sir. but, of course, it may not stand the test of practice." 

"may I know the idea?" 

"well, sir, thi wa my argument: At the time of the chartist trouble, an 
idea spread amongst financi circl that an attack wa go to be made 
on the bank of england. accordingly, the director of that institut 
consult mani person who were suppos to know what step should be 
taken, and it wa final decid that the best protect against 
fire--which is what wa feared--wa not water but sand. To carri the 
scheme into practic great store of fine sea-sand--th kind that blow 
about and is use to fill hour-glasses--wa provid throughout the 
building, especi at the point liabl to attack, from which it could 
be brought into use. 

"I propos to provid at diana' grove, as soon as it come into my 
possession, an enorm amount of such sand, and shall take an earli 
occas of pour it into the well-hole, which it will in time choke. 
thu ladi arabella, in her guis of the white worm, will find herself cut 
off from her refuge. the hole is a narrow one, and is some hundr of 
feet deep. the weight of the sand thi can contain would not in itself 
be suffici to obstruct; but the friction of such a bodi work up 
against it would be tremendous." 

"one moment. what use would the sand be for destruction?" 

"none, directly; but it would hold the struggl bodi in place till the 
rest of my scheme came into practice." 

"and what is the rest?" 

"a the sand is be pour into the well-hole, quantiti of dynamit 
can also be thrown in!" 

"good. but how would the dynamit explode--for, of course, that is what 
you intend. would not some sort of wire or fuse he requir for each 
parcel of dynamite?" 

adam smiled. 

"not in these days, sir. that wa prove in new york. A thousand pound 
of dynamite, in seal canisters, wa place about some workings. At the 
last a charg of gunpowd wa fired, and the concuss explod the 
dynamite. It wa most successful. those who were non-expert in high 
explos expect that everi pane of glass in new york would be 
shattered. but, in reality, the explos did no harm outsid the area 
intended, although sixteen acr of rock had been mine and onli the 
support wall and pillar had been left intact. the whole of the 
rock were shattered." 

sir nathaniel nod approval. 

"that seem a good plan--a veri excel one. but if it ha to tear 
down so mani feet of precipice, it may wreck the whole neighbourhood." 

"and free it for ever from a monster," ad adam, as he left the room to 
find hi wife. 




chapter xxv--the last battl 


ladi arabella had instruct her solicitor to hurri on with the 
convey of diana' grove, so no time wa lost in let adam salton 
have formal possess of the estate. after hi interview with sir 
nathaniel, he had taken step to begin put hi plan into action. In 
order to accumul the necessari amount of fine sea-sand, he order the 
steward to prepar for an elabor system of top-dress all the 
grounds. A great heap of the sand, brought from bay on the welsh coast, 
began to grow at the back of the grove. No one seem to suspect that it 
wa there for ani purpos other than what had been given out. 

ladi arabella, who alon could have guessed, wa now so absorb in her 
matrimoni pursuit of edgar caswall, that she had neither time nor 
inclin for thought extran to this. she had not yet move from 
the house, though she had formal hand over the estate. 

adam put up a rough corrugated-iron shed behind the grove, in which he 
store hi explosives. all be readi for hi great attempt whenev 
the time should come, he wa now content to wait, and, in order to pass 
the time, interest himself in other things--even in caswall' great 
kite, which still flew from the high tower of castra regis. 

the mound of fine sand grew to proport so vast as to puzzl the 
bailiff and farmer round the brow. the hour of the intend cataclysm 
wa approach apace. adam wished--but in vain--for an opportunity, 
which would appear to be natural, of visit caswal in the turret of 
castra regis. At last, one morning, he met ladi arabella move toward 
the castle, so he took hi courag _a deux mains_ and ask to be allow 
to accompani her. she wa glad, for her own purposes, to compli with hi 
wishes. So togeth they entered, and found their way to the 
turret-room. caswal wa much surpris to see adam come to hi house, 
but lent himself to the task of seem to be pleased. He play the 
host so well as to deceiv even adam. they all went out on the turret 
roof, where he explain to hi guest the mechan for rais and 
lower the kite, take also the opportun of test the movement 
of the multitud of birds, how they answer almost instantan to 
the lower or rais of the kite. 

As ladi arabella walk home with adam from castra regis, she ask him 
if she might make a request. permiss have been accorded, she 
explain that befor she final left diana' grove, where she had live 
so long, she had a desir to know the depth of the well-hole. adam wa 
realli happi to meet her wishes, not from ani sentiment, but becaus he 
wish to give some valid and ostens reason for examin the passag 
of the worm, which would obviat ani suspicion result from hi be 
on the premises. He brought from london a kelvin sound apparatus, 
with a suffici length of piano-wir for test ani probabl depth. 
the wire pass easili over the run wheel, and when thi wa onc 
fix over the hole, he wa satisfi to wait till the most advantag 
time for hi final experiment. 

* * * * * 

In the meantime, affair had been go quietli at merci farm. lilla, of 
course, felt lone in the absenc of her cousin, but the even tenor of 
life went on for her as for others. after the first shock of part wa 
over, thing went back to their accustom routine. In one respect, 
however, there wa a mark difference. So long as home condit had 
remain unchanged, lilla wa content to put ambit far from her, and 
to settl down to the life which had been her as long as she could 
remember. but mimi' marriag set her thinking; naturally, she came to 
the conclus that she too might have a mate. there wa not for her 
much choice--ther wa littl movement in the matrimoni direct at 
the farmhouse. she did not approv of the person of edgar caswall, 
and hi struggl with mimi had frighten her; but he wa unmistak an 
excel _parti_, much better than she could have ani right to expect. 
thi weigh much with a woman, and more particularli one of her class. 
so, on the whole, she wa content to let thing take their course, and to 
abid by the issue. 

As time went on, she had reason to believ that thing did not point to 
happiness. she could not shut her eye to certain disturb facts, 
amongst which were the exist of ladi arabella and her grow 
intimaci with edgar caswall; as well as hi own cold and haughti nature, 
so littl in accord with the ardour which is the foundat of a young 
maid' dream of happiness. how thing would, of necessity, alter if she 
were to marry, she wa afraid to think. all told, the prospect wa not 
happi for her, and she had a secret long that someth might occur to 
upset the order of thing as at present arranged. 

when lilla receiv a note from edgar caswal ask if he might come to 
tea on the follow afternoon, her heart sank within her. If it wa 
onli for her father' sake, she must not refus him or show ani 
disinclin which he might constru into incivility. she miss mimi 
more than she could say or even dare to think. hitherto, she had alway 
look to her cousin for sympathy, for understanding, for loyal support. 
now she and all these things, and a thousand others--gentle, assuring, 
supporting--wer gone. and instead there wa a horribl ach void. 

for the whole afternoon and evening, and for the follow forenoon, poor 
lilla' loneli grew to be a posit agony. for the first time she 
began to realis the sens of her loss, as though all the previou 
suffer had been mere a preparation. everyth she look at, 
everyth she rememb or thought of, becam laden with poignant 
memory. then on the top of all wa a new sens of dread. the reaction 
from the sens of security, which had surround her all her life, to a 
never-quiet apprehension, wa at time almost more than she could bear. 
It so fill her with fear that she had a haunt feel that she would 
as soon die as live. however, whatev might be her own feelings, duti 
had to be done, and as she had been brought up to consid duti first, 
she brace herself to go through, to the veri best of her ability, what 
wa befor her. 

still, the sever and prolong struggl for self-control told upon 
lilla. she looked, as she felt, ill and weak. she wa realli in a 
nerveless and prostrat condition, with black circl round her eyes, 
pale even to her lips, and with an instinct trembl which she wa 
quit unabl to repress. It wa for her a sad mischanc that mimi wa 
away, for her love would have seen through all obscur causes, and have 
brought to light the girl' unhappi condit of health. lilla wa 
utterli unabl to do anyth to escap from the ordeal befor her; but 
her cousin, with the experi of her former struggl with mr. caswal 
and of the condit in which these left her, would have taken steps--even 
peremptori ones, if necessary--to prevent a repetition. 

edgar arriv punctual to the time appoint by herself. when lilla, 
through the great window, saw him approach the house, her condit of 
nervou upset wa pitiable. she brace herself up, however, and manag 
to get through the interview in it preliminari stage without ani 
percept chang in her normal appear and bearing. It had been to 
her an ad terror that the black shadow of oolanga, whom she dreaded, 
would follow hard on hi master. A load wa lift from her mind when he 
did not make hi usual stealthi approach. she had also feared, though in 
lesser degree, lest ladi arabella should be present to make troubl for 
her as before. 

with a woman' natur forethought in a difficult position, she had 
provid the furnish of the tea-tabl as a subtl indic of the 
social differ between her and her guest. she had chosen the 
implement of service, as well as all the provend set forth, of the 
humblest kind. instead of arrang the silver teapot and china cups, 
she had set out an earthen teapot, such as wa in common use in the farm 
kitchen. the same idea wa carri out in the cup and saucer of thick 
home delft, and in the cream-jug of similar kind. the bread wa of 
simpl whole-meal, home-baked. the butter wa good, sinc she had made 
it herself, while the preserv and honey came from her own garden. her 
face beam with satisfact when the guest eye the appoint with a 
supercili glance. It wa a shock to the poor girl herself, for she 
enjoy offer to a guest the littl hospit possibl to her; but 
that had to be sacrif with other pleasures. 

caswall' face wa more set and iron-clad than ever--hi pierc eye 
seem from the veri begin to look her through and through. her 
heart quail when she thought of what would follow--of what would be the 
end, when thi wa onli the beginning. As some protection, though it 
could be onli of a sentiment kind, she brought from her own room the 
photograph of mimi, of her grandfather, and of adam salton, whom by now 
she had grown to look on with reliance, as a brother whom she could 
trust. she kept the pictur near her heart, to which her hand natur 
stray when her feel of constraint, distrust, or fear becam so 
poignant as to interfer with the calm which she felt wa necessari to 
help her through her ordeal. 

At first edgar caswal wa courteou and polite, even thoughtful; but 
after a littl while, when he found her resist to hi domin 
grow, he abandon all form of self-control and appear in the same 
domin as he had previous shown. she wa prepared, however, for 
this, both by her former experi and the natur fight instinct 
within her. By thi means, as the minut went on, both develop the 
power and preserv the equal in which they had begun. 

without warning, the psychic battl between the two individu began 
afresh. thi time both the posit and neg caus were all in 
favour of the man. the woman wa alon and in bad spirits, unsupported; 
noth at all wa in her favour except the memori of the two victori 
contests; wherea the man, though unaided, as before, by either ladi 
arabella or oolanga, wa in full strength, well rested, and in 
flourish circumstances. It wa not, therefore, to be wonder at that 
hi nativ domin of charact had full opportun of assert 
itself. He began hi preliminari stare with a consciou sens of power, 
and, as it appear to have immedi effect on the girl, he felt an ever- 
grow convict of ultim victory. 

after a littl lilla' resolut began to flag. she felt that the 
contest wa unequal--that she wa unabl to put forth her best efforts. 
As she wa an unselfish person, she could not fight so well in her own 
battl as in that of someon whom she love and to whom she wa devoted. 
edgar saw the relax of the muscl of face and brow, and the almost 
collaps of the heavi eyelid which seem tumbl downward in sleep. 
lilla made gallant effort to brace her dwindl powers, but for a time 
unsuccessfully. At length there came an interruption, which seem like 
a power stimulant. through the wide window she saw ladi arabella 
enter the plain gateway of the farm, and advanc toward the hall door. 
she wa clad as usual in tight-fit white, which accentu her thin, 
sinuou figure. 

the sight did for lilla what no voluntari effort could have done. her 
eye flashed, and in an instant she felt as though a new life had 
suddenli develop within her. ladi arabella' entry, in her usual 
unconcerned, haughty, supercili way, heighten the effect, so that 
when the two stood close to each other battl wa joined. mr. caswall, 
too, took new courag from her coming, and all hi master and 
power came back to him. hi looks, intensified, had more obviou effect 
than had been notic that day. lilla seem at last overcom by hi 
dominance. her face becam red and pale--viol red and ghastli 
pale--bi rapid turns. her strength seem gone. her knee collapsed, 
and she wa actual sink on the floor, when to her surpris and joy 
mimi came into the room, run hurriedli and breath heavily. 

lilla rush to her, and the two clasp hands. with that, a new sens 
of power, greater than lilla had ever seen in her, seem to quicken her 
cousin. her hand swept the air in front of edgar caswall, seem to 
drive him backward more and more by each movement, till at last he seem 
to be actual hurl through the door which mimi' entranc had left 
open, and fell at full length on the gravel path without. 

then came the final and complet collaps of lilla, who, without a sound, 
sank down on the floor. 




chapter xxvi--fac TO face 


mimi wa greatli distress when she saw her cousin lie prone. she had 
a few time in her life seen lilla on the verg of fainting, but never 
senseless; and now she wa frightened. she threw herself on her knee 
besid lilla, and tried, by rub her hand and other measur commonli 
known, to restor her. but all her effort were unavailing. lilla still 
lay white and senseless. In fact, each moment she look worse; her 
breast, that had been heav with the stress, becam still, and the 
pallor of her face grew like marble. 

At these succeed chang mimi' fright grew, till it altogeth 
master her. she succeed in control herself onli to the extent 
that she did not scream. 

ladi arabella had follow caswall, when he had recov suffici to 
get up and walk--though stumblingly--in the direct of castra regis. 
when mimi wa quit alon with lilla and the need for effort had ceased, 
she felt weak and trembled. In her own mind, she attribut it to a 
sudden chang in the weather--it wa momentarili becom appar that a 
storm wa come on. 

she rais lilla' head and laid it on her warm young breast, but all in 
vain. the cold of the white featur thrill through her, and she 
utterli collaps when it wa born in on her that lilla had pass away. 

the dusk gradual deepen and the shade of even close in, but mimi 
did not seem to notic or to care. she sat on the floor with her arm 
round the bodi of the girl whom she loved. darker and blacker grew the 
sky as the come storm and the close night join forces. still she 
sat on--alone--tearless--un to think. mimi did not know how long she 
sat there. though it seem to her that age had passed, it could not 
have been more than half-an-hour. she suddenli came to herself, and wa 
surpris to find that her grandfath had not returned. for a while she 
lay quiet, think of the immedi past. lilla' hand wa still in 
hers, and to her surpris it wa still warm. somehow thi help her 
consciousness, and without ani special act of will she stood up. she lit 
a lamp and look at her cousin. there wa no doubt that lilla wa dead; 
but when the lamp-light fell on her eyes, they seem to look at mimi 
with intent--with meaning. In thi state of dark isol a new 
resolut came to her, and grew and grew until it becam a fix 
definit purpose. she would face caswal and call him to account for hi 
murder of lilla--that wa what she call it to herself. she would also 
take steps--sh knew not what or how--to aveng the part taken by ladi 
arabella. 

In thi frame of mind she lit all the lamp in the room, got water and 
linen from her room, and set about the decent order of lilla' body. 
thi took some time; but when it wa finished, she put on her hat and 
cloak, put out the lights, and set out quietli for castra regis. 

As mimi drew near the castle, she saw no light except those in and 
around the tower room. the light show her that mr. caswal wa there, 
so she enter by the hall door, which as usual wa open, and felt her 
way in the dark up the staircas to the lobbi of the room. the door 
wa ajar, and the light from within show brilliantli through the 
opening. she saw edgar caswal walk restlessli to and fro in the 
room, with hi hand clasp behind hi back. she open the door 
without knocking, and walk right into the room. As she entered, he 
ceas walking, and stare at her in surprise. she made no remark, no 
comment, but continu the fix look which he had seen on her entrance. 

for a time silenc reigned, and the two stood look fixedli at each 
other. mimi wa the first to speak. 

"you murderer! lilla is dead!" 

"dead! good god! when did she die?" 

"she die thi afternoon, just after you left her." 

"are you sure?" 

"yes--and so are you--or you ought to be. you kill her!" 

"I kill her! Be care what you say!" 

"a god see us, it is true; and you know it. you came to merci farm on 
purpos to break her--if you could. and the accomplic of your guilt, 
ladi arabella march, came for the same purpose." 

"be careful, woman," he said hotly. "do not use such name in that way, 
or you shall suffer for it." 

"I am suffer for it--hav suffer for it--shal suffer for it. not 
for speak the truth as I have done, but becaus you two, with devilish 
malignity, did my darl to death. It is you and your accomplic who 
have to dread punishment, not i." 

"take care!" he said again. 

"oh, I am not afraid of you or your accomplice," she answer spiritedly. 
"I am content to stand by everi word I have said, everi act I have done. 
moreover, I believ in god' justice. I fear not the grind of hi 
mills; if necessari I shall set the wheel in motion myself. but you 
don't care for god, or believ in him. your god is your great kite, 
which cow the bird of a whole district. but be sure that hi hand, 
when it rises, alway fall at the appoint time. It may be that your 
name is be call even at thi veri moment at the great assize. repent 
while there is still time. happi you, if you may be allow to enter 
those mighti hall in the compani of the pure-soul angel whose voic 
ha onli to whisper one word of justice, and you disappear for ever into 
everlast torment." 

the sudden death of lilla caus constern among mimi' friend and 
well-wishers. such a tragedi wa total unexpected, as adam and sir 
nathaniel had been expect the white worm' vengeanc to fall upon 
themselves. 

adam, leav hi wife free to follow her own desir with regard to 
lilla and her grandfather, busi himself with fill the well-hol with 
the fine sand prepar for the purpose, take care to have lower at 
state interv quantiti of the store of dynamite, so as to be readi 
for the final explosion. He had under hi immedi supervis a corp 
of workmen, and wa assist by sir nathaniel, who had come over for the 
purpose, and all were now stay at lesser hill. 

mr. salton, too, show much interest in the job, and wa constantli 
come in and out, noth escap hi observation. 

sinc her marriag to adam and their come to stay at doom tower, mimi 
had been fetter by fear of the horribl monster at diana' grove. but 
now she dread it no longer. she accept the fact of it assum at 
will the form of ladi arabella. she had still to tax and upbraid her for 
her part in the unhappi which had been wrought on lilla, and for her 
share in caus her death. 

one evening, when mimi enter her own room, she went to the window and 
threw an eager look round the whole circl of sight. A singl glanc 
satisfi her that the white worm in _propria persona_ wa not visible. 
So she sat down in the window-seat and enjoy the pleasur of a full 
view, from which she had been so long cut off. the maid who wait on 
her had told her that mr. salton had not yet return home, so she felt 
free to enjoy the luxuri of peac and quiet. 

As she look out of the window, she saw someth thin and white move 
along the avenue. she thought she recognis the figur of ladi 
arabella, and instinct drew back behind the curtain. when she had 
ascertained, by peep out sever times, that the ladi had not seen 
her, she watch more carefully, all her instinct hatr flood back 
at the sight of her. ladi arabella wa move swiftli and stealthily, 
look back and around her at intervals, as if she fear to be 
followed. thi gave mimi an idea that she wa up to no good, so she 
determin to seiz the occas for watch her in more detail. 

hastili put on a dark cloak and hat, she ran downstair and out into 
the avenue. ladi arabella had moved, but the sheen of her white dress 
wa still to be seen among the young oak around the gateway. keep in 
shadow, mimi followed, take care not to come so close as to awak the 
other' suspicion, and watch her quarri pass along the road in the 
direct of castra regis. 

she follow on steadili through the gloom of the trees, depend on the 
glint of the white dress to keep her right. the wood began to thicken, 
and presently, when the road widen and the tree grew farther back, she 
lost sight of ani indic of her whereabouts. under the present 
condit it wa imposs for her to do ani more, so, after wait 
for a while, still hidden in the shadow to see if she could catch anoth 
glimps of the white frock, she determin to go on slowli toward castra 
regis, and trust to the chapter of accid to pick up the trail again. 
she went on slowly, take advantag of everi obstacl and shadow to keep 
herself concealed. 

At last she enter on the ground of the castle, at a spot from which 
the window of the turret were dimli visible, without have seen again 
ani sign of ladi arabella. 

meanwhile, dure most of the time that mimi salton had been move 
warili along in the gloom, she wa in realiti be follow by ladi 
arabella, who had caught sight of her leav the hous and had never 
again lost touch with her. It wa a case of the hunter be hunted. for 
a time mimi' mani turnings, with the natur obstacl that were 
perpetu intervening, caus ladi arabella some trouble; but when she 
wa close to castra regis, there wa no more possibl of concealment, 
and the strang doubl follow went swiftli on. 

when she saw mimi close to the hall door of castra regi and ascend 
the steps, she followed. when mimi enter the dark hall and felt her 
way up the staircase, still, as she believed, follow ladi arabella, 
the latter kept on her way. when they reach the lobbi of the turret- 
rooms, mimi believ that the object of her search wa ahead of her. 

edgar caswal sat in the gloom of the great room, occasion stir to 
curios when the drift cloud allow a littl light to fall from 
the storm-swept sky. but noth realli interest him now. sinc he 
had heard of lilla' death, the gloom of hi remorse, emphasis by 
mimi' upbraiding, had made more hopeless hi cruel, selfish, saturnin 
nature. He heard no sound, for hi normal faculti seem benumbed. 

mimi, when she came to the door, which stood ajar, gave a light tap. So 
light wa it that it did not reach caswall' ears. then, take her 
courag in both hands, she boldli push the door and entered. As she 
did so, her heart sank, for now she wa face to face with a difficulti 
which had not, in her state of mental perturbation, occur to her. 




chapter xxvii--on the turret roof 


the storm which wa come wa alreadi make itself manifest, not onli 
in the wide scope of nature, but in the heart and natur of human 
beings. electr disturb in the sky and the air is reproduc in 
anim of all kinds, and particularli in the highest type of them 
all--th most receptive--th most electrical. So it wa with edgar 
caswall, despit hi selfish natur and cold of blood. So it wa 
with mimi salton, despit her unselfish, unchang devot for those 
she loved. So it wa even with ladi arabella, who, under the instinct 
of a primev serpent, carri the ever-vari wish and custom of 
womanhood, which is alway old--and alway new. 

edgar, after he had turn hi eye on mimi, resum hi apathet 
posit and sullen silence. mimi quietli took a seat a littl way 
apart, whenc she could look on the progress of the come storm and 
studi it appear throughout the whole visibl circl of the 
neighbourhood. she wa in brighter and better spirit than she had been 
for mani day past. ladi arabella tri to effac herself behind the now 
open door. 

without, the cloud grew thicker and blacker as the storm-centr came 
closer. As yet the forces, from whose link the lightn springs, 
were held apart, and the silenc of natur proclaim the calm befor the 
storm. caswal felt the effect of the gather electr force. A sort 
of wild exult grew upon him, such as he had sometim felt just 
befor the break of a tropic storm. As he becam consciou of this, 
he rais hi head and caught sight of mimi. He wa in the grip of an 
emot greater than himself; in the mood in which he wa he felt the 
need upon him of do some desper deed. He wa now absolut 
reckless, and as mimi wa associ with him in the memori which drove 
him on, he wish that she too should be engag in thi enterprise. He 
had no knowledg of the proxim of ladi arabella, and thought that he 
wa far remov from all he knew and whose interest he shared--alon 
with the wild elements, which were be lash to fury, and with the 
woman who had struggl with him and vanquish him, and on whom he would 
shower the full measur of hi hate. 

the fact wa that edgar caswal was, if not mad, close to the 
border-line. mad in it first stage--monomania--i a lack of 
proportion. So long as thi is general, it is not alway noticeable, for 
the uninspir onlook is without the necessari mean of comparison. but 
in monomania the errant faculti protrud itself in a way that may not be 
denied. It put aside, obscures, or take the place of someth 
else--just as the head of a pin place befor the centr of the iri will 
block out the whole scope of vision. the most usual form of monomania 
ha commonli the same begin as that from which edgar caswal 
suffered--an over-larg idea of self-importance. alienists, who studi 
the matter exactly, probabl know more of human vaniti and it effect 
than do ordinari men. caswall' mental disturb wa not hard to 
identify. everi asylum is full of such cases--men and women, who, 
natur selfish and egotistical, so apprais to themselv their own 
import that everi other circumst in life becom subservi to 
it. the diseas suppli in itself the materi for self-magnification. 
when the decad attack a natur natur proud and selfish and vain, 
and lack both the aptitud and habit of self-restraint, the 
develop of the diseas is more swift, and rang to farther limits. 
It is such person who becom imbu with the idea that they have the 
attribut of the almighty--even that they themselv are the almighty. 

mimi had a suspicion--or rather, perhaps, an intuition--of the true state 
of thing when she heard him speak, and at the same time notic the 
abnorm flush on hi face, and hi roll eyes. there wa a certain 
want of fixed of purpos which she had certainli not notic before--a 
quick, spasmod utter which belong rather to the insan than to 
those of intellectu equilibrium. she wa a littl frightened, not onli 
by hi thoughts, but by hi staccato way of express them. 

caswal move to the door lead to the turret stair by which the roof 
wa reached, and spoke in a peremptori way, whose tone alon made her 
feel defiant. 

"come! I want you." 

she instinct drew back--sh wa not accustom to such words, more 
especi to such a tone. her answer wa indic of a new contest. 

"whi should I go? what for?" 

He did not at onc reply--anoth indic of hi overwhelm egotism. 
she repeat her questions; habit reassert itself, and he spoke without 
think the word which were in hi heart. 

"I want you, if you will be so good, to come with me to the turret roof. 
I am much interest in certain experi with the kite, which would 
be, if not a pleasure, at least a novel experi to you. you would see 
someth not easili seen otherwise." 

"I will come," she answer simply; edgar move in the direct of the 
stair, she follow close behind him. 

she did not like to be left alon at such a height, in such a place, in 
the darkness, with a storm about to break. Of himself she had no fear; 
all that had been seem to have pass away with her two victori over 
him in the struggl of wills. moreover, the more recent 
apprehension--that of hi madness--had also ceased. In the convers 
of the last few minut he seem so rational, so clear, so unaggressive, 
that she no longer saw reason for doubt. So satisfi wa she that even 
when he put out a hand to guid her to the steep, narrow stairway, she 
took it without thought in the most convent way. 

ladi arabella, crouch in the lobbi behind the door, heard everi word 
that had been said, and form her own opinion of it. It seem evid 
to her that there had been some rapproch between the two who had so 
late been hostil to each other, and that made her furious angry. 
mimi wa interf with her plans! she had made certain of her captur 
of edgar caswall, and she could not toler even the lightest and most 
contemptu fanci on hi part which might divert him from the main 
issue. when she becam awar that he wish mimi to come with him to the 
roof and that she had acquiesced, her rage got beyond bounds. she becam 
oblivi to ani danger there might be in a visit to such an expos 
place at such a time, and to all lesser considerations, and made up her 
mind to forestal them. she stealthili and noiselessli crept through the 
wicket, and, ascend the stair, step out on the roof. It wa 
bitterli cold, for the fierc gust of the storm which swept round the 
turret drove in through everi unimped way, whistl at the sharp 
corner and sing round the trembl flagstaff. the kite-str and 
the wire which control the runner made a concours of weird sound 
which somehow, perhap from the violenc which surround them, act on 
their length, resolv themselv into some kind of harmony--a fit 
accompani to the tragedi which seem about to begin. 

mimi' heart beat heavily. just befor leav the turret-chamb she 
had a shock which she could not shake off. the light of the room had 
momentarili reveal to her, as they pass out, edgar' face, 
concentr as it wa whenev he intend to use hi mesmer power. 
now the black eyebrow made a thick line across hi face, under which hi 
eye shone and glitter ominously. mimi recognis the danger, and 
assum the defiant attitud that had twice alreadi serv her so well. 
she had a fear that the circumst and the place were against her, and 
she want to be forearmed. 

the sky wa now somewhat lighter than it had been. either there wa 
lightn afar off, whose reflect were carri by the roll clouds, 
or els the gather force, though not yet break into lightning, had 
an incipi power of light. It seem to affect both the man and the 
woman. edgar seem altogeth under it influence. hi spirit were 
boisterous, hi mind exalted. He wa now at hi worst; madder than he 
had been earlier in the night. 

mimi, tri to keep as far from him as possible, move across the stone 
floor of the turret roof, and found a nich which conceal her. It wa 
not far from ladi arabella' place of hiding. 

edgar, left thu alon on the centr of the turret roof, found himself 
altogeth hi own master in a way which tend to increas hi madness. 
He knew that mimi wa close at hand, though he had lost sight of her. He 
spoke loudly, and the sound of hi own voice, though it wa carri from 
him on the sweep wind as fast as the word were spoken, seem to 
exalt him still more. even the rage of the element round him appear 
to add to hi exaltation. To him it seem that these manifest 
were obedi to hi own will. He had reach the sublim of hi 
madness; he wa now in hi own mind actual the almighty, and whatev 
might happen would be the direct carri out of hi own commands. As he 
could not see mimi, nor fix whereabout she was, he shout loudly: 

"come to me! you shall see now what you are despising, what you are 
war against. all that you see is mine--th dark as well as the 
light. I tell you that I am greater than ani other who is, or was, or 
shall be. when the master of evil took christ up on a high place and 
show him all the kingdom of the earth, he wa do what he thought no 
other could do. He wa wrong--h forgot _me_. I shall send you light, 
up to the veri rampart of heaven. A light so great that it shall 
dissip those black cloud that are rush up and pile around us. 
look! look! At the veri touch of my hand that light spring into be 
and mount up--and up--and up!" 

He made hi way whilst he wa speak to the corner of the turret whenc 
flew the giant kite, and from which the runner ascended. mimi look 
on, appal and afraid to speak lest she should precipit some 
calamity. within the nich ladi arabella cower in a paroxysm of fear. 

edgar took up a small wooden box, through a hole in which the wire of the 
runner ran. thi evid set some machineri in motion, for a sound as 
of whir came. from one side of the box float what look like a 
piec of stiff ribbon, which snap and crackl as the wind took it. 
for a few second mimi saw it as it rush along the sag line to the 
kite. when close to it, there wa a loud crack, and a sudden light 
appear to issu from everi chink in the box. then a quick flame 
flash along the snap ribbon, which glow with an intens light--a 
light so great that the whole of the countrysid around stood out against 
the background of black drive clouds. for a few second the light 
remained, then suddenli disappear in the black around. It wa 
simpli a magnesium light, which had been fire by the mechan within 
the box and carri up to the kite. edgar wa in a state of tumultu 
excitement, shout and yell at the top of hi voic and danc 
about like a lunatic. 

thi wa more than ladi arabella' curiou dual natur could stand--th 
ghoulish element in her rose triumphant, and she abandon all idea of 
marriag with edgar caswall, gloat fiendishli over the thought of 
revenge. 

she must lure him to the white worm' hole--but how? she glanc around 
and quickli made up her mind. the man' whole thought were absorb by 
hi wonder kite, which he wa show off, in order to fascin her 
imaginari rival, mimi. 

On the instant she glide through the dark to the wheel whereon the 
string of the kite wa wound. with deft finger she unship this, took 
it with her, reel out the wire as she went, thu keeping, in a way, in 
touch with the kite. then she glide swiftli to the wicket, through 
which she passed, lock the gate behind her as she went. 

down the turret stair she ran quickly, let the wire run from the 
wheel which she carri carefully, and, pass out of the hall door, 
hurri down the avenu with all her speed. she soon reach her own 
gate, ran down the avenue, and with her key open the iron door lead 
to the well-hole. 

she felt well satisfi with herself. all her plan were maturing, or 
had alreadi matured. the master of castra regi wa within her grasp. 
the woman whose interfer she had feared, lilla watford, wa dead. 
truly, all wa well, and she felt that she might paus a while and rest. 
she tore off her clothes, with feverish fingers, and in full enjoy of 
her natur freedom, stretch her slim figur in anim delight. then 
she lay down on the sofa--to await her victim! edgar caswall' life 
blood would more than satisfi her for some time to come. 




chapter xxviii--th break OF the storm 


when ladi arabella had crept away in her usual noiseless fashion, the two 
other remain for a while in their place on the turret roof: caswal 
becaus he had noth to say, mimi becaus she had much to say and 
wish to put her thought in order. for quit a while--which seem 
interminable--sil reign between them. At last mimi made a 
beginning--sh had made up her mind how to act. 

"mr. caswall," she said loudly, so as to make sure of be heard through 
the bluster of the wind and the perpetu crack of the electricity. 

caswal said someth in reply, but hi word were carri away on the 
storm. however, one of her object wa effected: she knew now exactli 
whereabout on the roof he was. So she move close to the spot befor she 
spoke again, rais her voic almost to a shout. 

"the wicket is shut. pleas to open it. I can't get out." 

As she spoke, she wa quietli finger a revolv which adam had given 
to her in case of emerg and which now lay in her breast. she felt 
that she wa cage like a rat in a trap, but did not mean to be taken at 
a disadvantage, whatev happened. caswal also felt trapped, and all 
the brute in him rose to the emergency. In a voic which wa raucou and 
brutal--much like that which is heard when a wife is be beaten by her 
husband in a slum--h hiss out, hi syllabl cut through the 
roar of the storm: 

"you came of your own accord--without permission, or even ask it. now 
you can stay or go as you choose. but you must manag it for yourself; 
i'll have noth to do with it." 

her answer wa spoken with danger suaviti 

"I am going. blame yourself if you do not like the time and manner of 
it. I daresay adam--mi husband--wil have a word to say to you about 
it!" 

"let him say, and be damn to him, and to you too! i'll show you a 
light. you shan't be abl to say that you could not see what you were 
doing." 

As he spoke, he wa light anoth piec of the magnesium ribbon, which 
made a blind glare in which everyth wa plainli discernible, down 
to the smallest detail. thi exactli suit mimi. she took accur 
note of the wicket and it fasten befor the glare had die away. she 
took her revolv out and fire into the lock, which wa shiver on the 
instant, the piec fli round in all directions, but happili without 
caus hurt to anyone. then she push the wicket open and ran down the 
narrow stair, and so to the hall door. open thi also, she ran down 
the avenue, never lessen her speed till she stood outsid the door of 
lesser hill. the door wa open at onc on her ringing. 

"i mr. adam salton in?" she asked. 

"he ha just come in, a few minut ago. He ha gone up to the study," 
repli a servant. 

she ran upstair at onc and join him. He seem reliev when he saw 
her, but scrutinis her face keenly. He saw that she had been in some 
concern, so led her over to the sofa in the window and sat down besid 
her. 

"now, dear, tell me all about it!" he said. 

she rush breathlessli through all the detail of her adventur on the 
turret roof. adam listen attentively, help her all he could, and 
not embarrass her by ani questioning. hi thought silenc wa a 
great help to her, for it allow her to collect and organis her 
thoughts. 

"I must go and see caswal to-morrow, to hear what he ha to say on the 
subject." 

"but, dear, for my sake, don't have ani quarrel with mr. caswall. I have 
had too much trial and pain late to wish it increas by ani anxieti 
regard you." 

"you shall not, dear--if I can help it--pleas god," he said solemnly, 
and he kiss her. 

then, in order to keep her interest so that she might forget the fear 
and anxieti that had disturb her, he began to talk over the detail 
of her adventure, make shrewd comment which attract and held her 
attention. presently, _inter alia_, he said: 

"that' a danger game caswal is up to. It seem to me that that 
young man--though he doesn't appear to know it--i ride for a fall!" 

"how, dear? I don't understand." 

"kite fli on a night like thi from a place like the tower of castra 
regi is, to say the least of it, dangerous. It is not mere court 
death or other accid from lightning, but it is bring the lightn 
into where he lives. everi cloud that is blow up here--and they all 
make for the highest point--i bound to develop into a flash of 
lightning. that kite is up in the air and is bound to attract the 
lightning. it cord make a road for it on which to travel to earth. 
when it doe come, it will strike the top of the tower with a weight a 
hundr time greater than a whole park of artillery, and will knock 
castra regi into pieces. where it will go after that, no one can tell. 
If there should be ani metal by which it can travel, such will not onli 
point the road, but be the road itself." 

"would it be danger to be out in the open air when such a thing is 
take place?" she asked. 

"no, littl woman. It would be the safest possibl place--so long as one 
wa not in the line of the electr current." 

"then, do let us go outside. I don't want to run into ani foolish 
danger--or, far more, to ask you to do so. but sure if the open is 
safest, that is the place for us." 

without anoth word, she put on again the cloak she had thrown off, and 
a small, tight-fit cap. adam too put on hi cap, and, after see 
that hi revolv wa all right, gave her hi hand, and they left the 
hous together. 

"I think the best thing we can do will be to go round all the place 
which are mix up in thi affair." 

"all right, dear, I am ready. but, if you don't mind, we might go first 
to mercy. I am anxiou about grandfather, and we might see that--a yet, 
at all events--noth ha happen there." 

So they went on the high-hung road along the top of the brow. the wind 
here wa of great force, and made a strang boom nois as it swept 
high overhead; though not the sound of crack and tear as it pass 
through the wood of high slender tree which grew on either side of the 
road. mimi could hardli keep her feet. she wa not afraid; but the 
forc to which she wa oppos gave her a good excus to hold on to her 
husband extra tight. 

At merci there wa no one up--at least, all the light were out. but to 
mimi, accustom to the nightli routin of the house, there were manifest 
sign that all wa well, except in the littl room on the first floor, 
where the blind were down. mimi could not bear to look at that, to 
think of it. adam understood her pain, for he had been keenli interest 
in poor lilla. He bent over and kiss her, and then took her hand and 
held it hard. thu they pass on together, return to the high road 
toward castra regis. 

At the gate of castra regi they were extra careful. when draw near, 
adam stumbl upon the wire that ladi arabella had left trail on the 
ground. 

adam drew hi breath at this, and spoke in a low, earnest whisper: 

"I don't want to frighten you, mimi dear, but wherev that wire is there 
is danger." 

"danger! how?" 

"that is the track where the lightn will go; at ani moment, even now 
whilst we are speak and searching, a fear forc may be loos upon 
us. run on, dear; you know the way to where the avenu join the 
highroad. If you see ani sign of the wire, keep away from it, for god' 
sake. I shall join you at the gateway." 

"are you go to follow that wire alone?" 

"yes, dear. one is suffici for that work. I shall not lose a moment 
till I am with you." 

"adam, when I came with you into the open, my main wish wa that we 
should be togeth if anyth seriou happened. you wouldn't deni me 
that right, would you, dear?" 

"no, dear, not that or ani right. thank god that my wife ha such a 
wish. come; we will go together. We are in the hand of god. If He 
wishes, we shall be togeth at the end, whenev or wherev that may 
be." 

they pick up the trail of the wire on the step and follow it down 
the avenue, take care not to touch it with their feet. It wa easi 
enough to follow, for the wire, if not bright, wa self-coloured, and 
show clearly. they follow it out of the gateway and into the avenu 
of diana' grove. 

here a new graviti cloud adam' face, though mimi saw no caus for 
fresh concern. thi wa easili enough explained. adam knew of the 
explos work in progress regard the well-hole, but the matter had 
been kept from hi wife. As they stood near the house, adam ask mimi 
to return to the road, ostens to watch the cours of the wire, 
tell her that there might be a branch wire lead somewher else. she 
wa to search the undergrowth, and if she found it, wa to warn him by 
the australian nativ "coo-ee!" 

whilst they were stand together, there came a blind flash of 
lightning, which lit up for sever second the whole area of earth and 
sky. It wa onli the first note of the celesti prelude, for it wa 
follow in quick success by numer flashes, whilst the crash and 
roll of thunder seem continuous. 

adam, appalled, drew hi wife to him and held her close. As far as he 
could estim by the interv between lightn and thunder-clap, the 
heart of the storm wa still some distanc off, so he felt no present 
concern for their safety. still, it wa appar that the cours of the 
storm wa move swiftli in their direction. the lightn flash came 
faster and faster and closer together; the thunder-rol wa almost 
continuous, not stop for a moment--a new crash begin befor the 
old one had ceased. adam kept look up in the direct where the kite 
strain and struggl at it detain cord, but, of course, the dull 
even light prevent ani distinct scrutiny. 

At length there came a flash so appallingli bright that in it glare 
natur seem to be stand still. So long did it last, that there wa 
time to distinguish it configuration. It seem like a mighti tree 
inverted, pendent from the sky. the whole countri around within the 
angl of vision wa lit up till it seem to glow. then a broad ribbon 
of fire seem to drop on to the tower of castra regi just as the 
thunder crashed. By the glare, adam could see the tower shake and 
tremble, and final fall to piec like a hous of cards. the pass 
of the lightn left the sky again dark, but a blue flame fell downward 
from the tower, and, with inconceiv rapidity, run along the 
ground in the direct of diana' grove, reach the dark silent house, 
which in the instant burst into flame at a hundr differ points. 

At the same moment there rose from the hous a rending, crash sound of 
woodwork, broken or thrown about, mix with a quick scream so appal 
that adam, stout of heart as he undoubtedli was, felt hi blood turn into 
ice. instinctively, despit the danger and their conscious of it, 
husband and wife took hand and listened, trembling. someth wa go 
on close to them, mysterious, terrible, deadly! the shriek continued, 
though less sharp in sound, as though muffled. In the midst of them wa 
a terrif explosion, seemingli from deep in the earth. 

the flame from castra regi and from diana' grove made all around 
almost as light as day, and now that the lightn had ceas to flash, 
their eyes, unblinded, were abl to judg both perspect and detail. 
the heat of the burn hous caus the iron door to warp and collapse. 
seemingli of their own accord, they fell open, and expos the interior. 
the salton could now look through to the room beyond, where the well- 
hole yawned, a deep narrow circular chasm. from thi the agonis 
shriek were rising, grow ever more terribl with each second that 
passed. 

but it wa not onli the heart-rend sound that almost paralys poor 
mimi with terror. what she saw wa suffici to fill her with evil 
dream for the remaind of her life. the whole place look as if a sea 
of blood had been beat against it. each of the explos from below 
had thrown out from the well-hole, as if it had been the mouth of a 
cannon, a mass of fine sand mix with blood, and a horribl repuls 
slime in which were great red mass of rent and torn flesh and fat. As 
the explos kept on, more and more of thi repuls mass wa shot up, 
the great bulk of it fall back again. mani of the aw fragment 
were of someth which had late been alive. they quiver and 
trembl and writh as though they were still in torment, a supposit 
to which the unend scream gave a horribl credence. At moment some 
mountain mass of flesh surg up through the narrow orifice, as though 
forc by a measureless power through an open infinit smaller than 
itself. some of these fragment were partial cover with white skin 
as of a human being, and others--th largest and most numerous--with 
scale skin as of a gigant lizard or serpent. once, in a sort of lull 
or pause, the seeth content of the hole rose, after the manner of a 
bubbl spring, and adam saw part of the thin form of ladi arabella, 
forc up to the top amid a mass of blood and slime, and what look as 
if it had been the entrail of a monster torn into shreds. sever time 
some mass of enorm bulk were forc up through the well-hol with 
inconceiv violence, and, suddenli expand as they came into larger 
space, disclos section of the white worm which adam and sir nathaniel 
had seen look over the tree with it enorm eye of emerald-green 
flicker like great lamp in a gale. 

At last the explos power, which wa not yet exhausted, evid 
reach the main store of dynamit which had been lower into the worm 
hole. the result wa appalling. the ground for far around quiver and 
open in long deep chasms, whose edg shook and fell in, throw up 
cloud of sand which fell back and hiss amongst the rise water. the 
heavili built hous shook to it foundations. great stone were thrown 
up as from a volcano, some of them, great mass of hard stone, squar 
and groov with implement wrought by human hands, break up and 
split in mid air as though riven by some infern power. tree near 
the house--and therefor presum in some way abov the hole, which 
sent up cloud of dust and steam and fine sand mingled, and which carri 
an appal stench which sicken the spectators--wer torn up by the 
root and hurl into the air. By now, flame were burst violent 
from all over the ruins, so danger that adam caught up hi wife in 
hi arms, and ran with her from the proxim of the flames. 

then almost as quickli as it had begun, the whole cataclysm ceased, 
though a deep-down rumbl continu intermitt for some time. then 
silenc brood over all--sil so complet that it seem in itself a 
sentient thing--sil which seem like incarn darkness, and 
convey the same idea to all who came within it radius. To the young 
peopl who had suffer the long horror of that aw night, it brought 
relief--relief from the presenc or the fear of all that wa 
horrible--relief which seem perfect when the red ray of sunris shot 
up over the far eastern sea, bring a promis of a new order of thing 
with the come day. 

* * * * * 

hi bed saw littl of adam salton for the remaind of that night. He 
and mimi walk hand in hand in the brighten dawn round by the brow to 
castra regi and on to lesser hill. they did so deliberately, in an 
attempt to think as littl as possibl of the terribl experi of the 
night. the morn wa bright and cheerful, as a morn sometim is 
after a devast storm. the clouds, of which there were plenti in 
evidence, brought no linger idea of gloom. all natur wa bright and 
joyous, be in strike contrast to the scene of wreck and 
devastation, the effect of obliter fire and last ruin. 

the onli evid of the onc state pile of castra regi and it 
inhabit wa a shapeless huddl of shatter architecture, dimli seen 
as the keen breez swept asid the cloud of acrid smoke which mark the 
site of the onc lordli castle. As for diana' grove, they look in 
vain for a sign which had a suggest of permanence. the oak tree of 
the grove were still to be seen--som of them--emerg from a haze of 
smoke, the great trunk solid and erect as ever, but the larger branch 
broken and twist and rent, with bark strip and chipped, and the 
smaller branch broken and dishevel look from the constant stress 
and thresh of the storm. 

Of the hous as such, there was, even at the short distanc from which 
they looked, no trace. adam resolut turn hi back on the 
devast and hurri on. mimi wa not onli upset and shock in mani 
ways, but she wa physic "dog tired," and fall asleep on her feet. 
adam took her to her room and made her undress and get into bed, take 
care that the room wa well light both by sunshin and lamps. the onli 
obstruct wa from a silk curtain, drawn across the window to keep out 
the glare. He sat besid her, hold her hand, well know that the 
comfort of hi presenc wa the best restor for her. He stay with 
her till sleep had overmast her weari body. then he went softli 
away. He found hi uncl and sir nathaniel in the study, have an earli 
cup of tea, amplifi to the dimens of a possibl breakfast. adam 
explain that he had not told hi wife that he wa go over the 
horribl place again, lest it should frighten her, for the rest and 
sleep in ignor would help her and make a gap of peac between 
the horrors. 

sir nathaniel agreed. 

"we know, my boy," he said, "that the unfortun ladi arabella is dead, 
and that the foul carcas of the worm ha been torn to pieces--pray god 
that it evil soul will never more escap from the nethermost hell." 

they visit diana' grove first, not onli becaus it wa nearer, but 
also becaus it wa the place where most descript wa required, and 
adam felt that he could tell hi stori best on the spot. the absolut 
destruct of the place and everyth in it seen in the broad daylight 
wa almost inconceivable. To sir nathaniel, it wa as a stori of horror 
full and complete. but to adam it was, as it were, onli on the fringes. 
He knew what wa still to be seen when hi friend had got over the 
knowledg of externals. As yet, they had onli seen the outsid of the 
house--or rather, where the outsid of the hous onc had been. the 
great horror lay within. however, age--and the experi of age--counts. 

A strange, almost elemental, chang in the aspect had taken place in the 
time which had elaps sinc the dawn. It would almost seem as if natur 
herself had tri to obliter the evil sign of what had occurred. 
true, the utter ruin of the hous wa made even more manifest in the 
search daylight; but the more appal destruct which lay beneath 
wa not visible. the rent, torn, and disloc stonework look wors 
than before; the upheav foundations, the piled-up fragment of masonry, 
the fissur in the torn earth--al were at the worst. the worm' hole 
wa still evident, a round fissur seemingli lead down into the veri 
bowel of the earth. but all the horrid mass of blood and slime, of 
torn, evil-smel flesh and the sicken remnant of violent death, 
were gone. either some of the later explos had thrown up from the 
deep quantiti of water which, though foul and corrupt itself, had still 
some cleans power left, or els the writh mass which stir from 
far below had help to drag down and obliter the item of horror. A 
grey dust, partli of fine sand, partli of the wast of the fall ruin, 
cover everything, and, though ghastli itself, help to mask someth 
still worse. 

after a few minut of watching, it becam appar to the three men that 
the turmoil far below had not yet ceased. At short irregular interv 
the hell-broth in the hole seem as if boil up. It rose and fell 
again and turn over, show in fresh form much of the nauseou detail 
which had been visibl earlier. the worst part were the great mass of 
the flesh of the monstrou worm, in all it red and sicken aspect. 
such fragment had been bad enough before, but now they were infinit 
worse. corrupt come with startl rapid to be whose 
destruct ha been due wholli or in part to lightning--th whole mass 
seem to have becom all at onc corrupt! the whole surfac of the 
fragments, onc alive, wa cover with insects, worms, and vermin of all 
kinds. the sight wa horribl enough, but, with the aw smell added, 
wa simpli unbearable. the worm' hole appear to breath forth death 
in it most repuls forms. the friends, with one impulse, move to the 
top of the brow, where a fresh breez from the sea wa blow up. 

At the top of the brow, beneath them as they look down, they saw a 
shine mass of white, which look strang out of place amongst such 
wreckag as they had been viewing. It appear so strang that adam 
suggest tri to find a way down, so that they might see it more 
closely. 

"we need not go down; I know what it is," sir nathaniel said. "the 
explos of last night have blown off the outsid of the cliffs--that 
which we see is the vast bed of china clay through which the worm 
origin found it way down to it lair. I can catch the glint of the 
water of the deep quag far down below. well, her ladyship didn't 
deserv such a funeral--or such a monument." 

* * * * * 

the horror of the last few hour had play such havoc with mimi' 
nerves, that a chang of scene wa imperative--if a perman breakdown 
wa to be avoided. 

"I think," said old mr. salton, "it is quit time you young peopl 
depart for that honeymoon of yours!" there wa a twinkl in hi eye as 
he spoke. 

mimi' soft shi glanc at her stalwart husband, wa suffici answer. 



***end OF the project gutenberg ebook the lair OF the white worm*** 


******* thi file should be name 1188.txt or 1188.zip ******* 


thi and all associ file of variou format will be found in: 
http://www.gutenberg.org/dirs/1/1/8/1188 



updat edit will replac the previou one--th old edit 
will be renamed. 

creat the work from public domain print edit mean that no 
one own a unit state copyright in these works, so the foundat 
(and you!) can copi and distribut it in the unit state without 
permiss and without pay copyright royalties. special rules, 
set forth in the gener term of use part of thi license, appli to 
copi and distribut project gutenberg-tm electron work to 
protect the project gutenberg-tm concept and trademark. project 
gutenberg is a regist trademark, and may not be use if you 
charg for the ebooks, unless you receiv specif permission. If you 
do not charg anyth for copi of thi ebook, compli with the 
rule is veri easy. you may use thi ebook for nearli ani purpos 
such as creation of deriv works, reports, perform and 
research. they may be modifi and print and given away--y may do 
practic anyth with public domain ebooks. redistribut is 
subject to the trademark license, especi commerci 
redistribution. 



*** start: full licens *** 

the full project gutenberg licens 
pleas read thi befor you distribut OR use thi work 

To protect the project gutenberg-tm mission of promot the free 
distribut of electron works, by use or distribut thi work 
(or ani other work associ in ani way with the phrase "project 
gutenberg"), you agre to compli with all the term of the full project 
gutenberg-tm licens (avail with thi file or onlin at 
http://gutenberg.net/license). 


section 1. gener term of use and redistribut project gutenberg-tm 
electron work 

1.a. By read or use ani part of thi project gutenberg-tm 
electron work, you indic that you have read, understand, agre to 
and accept all the term of thi licens and intellectu properti 
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agre to abid by all 
the term of thi agreement, you must ceas use and return or destroy 
all copi of project gutenberg-tm electron work in your possession. 
If you paid a fee for obtain a copi of or access to a project 
gutenberg-tm electron work and you do not agre to be bound by the 
term of thi agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or 
entiti to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.e.8. 

1.b. "project gutenberg" is a regist trademark. It may onli be 
use on or associ in ani way with an electron work by peopl who 
agre to be bound by the term of thi agreement. there are a few 
thing that you can do with most project gutenberg-tm electron work 
even without compli with the full term of thi agreement. see 
paragraph 1.c below. there are a lot of thing you can do with project 
gutenberg-tm electron work if you follow the term of thi agreement 
and help preserv free futur access to project gutenberg-tm electron 
works. see paragraph 1.e below. 

1.c. the project gutenberg literari archiv foundat ("the foundation" 
or pglaf), own a compil copyright in the collect of project 
gutenberg-tm electron works. nearli all the individu work in the 
collect are in the public domain in the unit states. If an 
individu work is in the public domain in the unit state and you are 
locat in the unit states, we do not claim a right to prevent you from 
copying, distributing, performing, display or creat deriv 
work base on the work as long as all refer to project gutenberg 
are removed. Of course, we hope that you will support the project 
gutenberg-tm mission of promot free access to electron work by 
freeli share project gutenberg-tm work in complianc with the term of 
thi agreement for keep the project gutenberg-tm name associ with 
the work. you can easili compli with the term of thi agreement by 
keep thi work in the same format with it attach full project 
gutenberg-tm licens when you share it without charg with others. 

1.d. the copyright law of the place where you are locat also govern 
what you can do with thi work. copyright law in most countri are in 
a constant state of change. If you are outsid the unit states, check 
the law of your countri in addit to the term of thi agreement 
befor downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distribut or 
creat deriv work base on thi work or ani other project 
gutenberg-tm work. the foundat make no represent concern 
the copyright statu of ani work in ani countri outsid the unit 
states. 

1.e. unless you have remov all refer to project gutenberg: 

1.e.1. the follow sentence, with activ link to, or other immedi 
access to, the full project gutenberg-tm licens must appear promin 
whenev ani copi of a project gutenberg-tm work (ani work on which the 
phrase "project gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "project 
gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed, 
copi or distributed: 

thi ebook is for the use of anyon anywher at no cost and with 
almost no restrict whatsoever. you may copi it, give it away or 
re-us it under the term of the project gutenberg licens includ 
with thi ebook or onlin at www.gutenberg.net 

1.e.2. If an individu project gutenberg-tm electron work is deriv 
from the public domain (doe not contain a notic indic that it is 
post with permiss of the copyright holder), the work can be copi 
and distribut to anyon in the unit state without pay ani fee 
or charges. If you are redistribut or provid access to a work 
with the phrase "project gutenberg" associ with or appear on the 
work, you must compli either with the requir of paragraph 1.e.1 
through 1.e.7 or obtain permiss for the use of the work and the 
project gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraph 1.e.8 or 
1.e.9. 

1.e.3. If an individu project gutenberg-tm electron work is post 
with the permiss of the copyright holder, your use and distribut 
must compli with both paragraph 1.e.1 through 1.e.7 and ani addit 
term impos by the copyright holder. addit term will be link 
to the project gutenberg-tm licens for all work post with the 
permiss of the copyright holder found at the begin of thi work. 

1.e.4. Do not unlink or detach or remov the full project gutenberg-tm 
licens term from thi work, or ani file contain a part of thi 
work or ani other work associ with project gutenberg-tm. 

1.e.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribut or redistribut thi 
electron work, or ani part of thi electron work, without 
promin display the sentenc set forth in paragraph 1.e.1 with 
activ link or immedi access to the full term of the project 
gutenberg-tm license. 

1.e.6. you may convert to and distribut thi work in ani binary, 
compressed, mark up, nonproprietari or proprietari form, includ ani 
word process or hypertext form. however, if you provid access to or 
distribut copi of a project gutenberg-tm work in a format other than 
"plain vanilla ascii" or other format use in the offici version 
post on the offici project gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net), 
you must, at no addit cost, fee or expens to the user, provid a 
copy, a mean of export a copy, or a mean of obtain a copi upon 
request, of the work in it origin "plain vanilla ascii" or other 
form. ani altern format must includ the full project gutenberg-tm 
licens as specifi in paragraph 1.e.1. 

1.e.7. Do not charg a fee for access to, viewing, displaying, 
performing, copi or distribut ani project gutenberg-tm work 
unless you compli with paragraph 1.e.8 or 1.e.9. 

1.e.8. you may charg a reason fee for copi of or provid 
access to or distribut project gutenberg-tm electron work provid 
that 

- you pay a royalti fee of 20% of the gross profit you deriv from 
the use of project gutenberg-tm work calcul use the method 
you alreadi use to calcul your applic taxes. the fee is 
owe to the owner of the project gutenberg-tm trademark, but he 
ha agre to donat royalti under thi paragraph to the 
project gutenberg literari archiv foundation. royalti payment 
must be paid within 60 day follow each date on which you 
prepar (or are legal requir to prepare) your period tax 
returns. royalti payment should be clearli mark as such and 
sent to the project gutenberg literari archiv foundat at the 
address specifi in section 4, "inform about donat to 
the project gutenberg literari archiv foundation." 

- you provid a full refund of ani money paid by a user who notifi 
you in write (or by e-mail) within 30 day of receipt that s/he 
doe not agre to the term of the full project gutenberg-tm 
license. you must requir such a user to return or 
destroy all copi of the work possess in a physic medium 
and discontinu all use of and all access to other copi of 
project gutenberg-tm works. 

- you provide, in accord with paragraph 1.f.3, a full refund of ani 
money paid for a work or a replac copy, if a defect in the 
electron work is discov and report to you within 90 day 
of receipt of the work. 

- you compli with all other term of thi agreement for free 
distribut of project gutenberg-tm works. 

1.e.9. If you wish to charg a fee or distribut a project gutenberg-tm 
electron work or group of work on differ term than are set 
forth in thi agreement, you must obtain permiss in write from 
both the project gutenberg literari archiv foundat and michael 
hart, the owner of the project gutenberg-tm trademark. contact the 
foundat as set forth in section 3 below. 

1.f. 

1.f.1. project gutenberg volunt and employe expend consider 
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcrib and proofread 
public domain work in creat the project gutenberg-tm 
collection. despit these efforts, project gutenberg-tm electron 
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain 
"defects," such as, but not limit to, incomplete, inaccur or 
corrupt data, transcript errors, a copyright or other intellectu 
properti infringement, a defect or damag disk or other medium, a 
comput virus, or comput code that damag or cannot be read by 
your equipment. 

1.f.2. limit warranty, disclaim OF damag - except for the "right 
of replac or refund" describ in paragraph 1.f.3, the project 
gutenberg literari archiv foundation, the owner of the project 
gutenberg-tm trademark, and ani other parti distribut a project 
gutenberg-tm electron work under thi agreement, disclaim all 
liabil to you for damages, cost and expenses, includ legal 
fees. you agre that you have NO remedi for negligence, strict 
liability, breach OF warranti OR breach OF contract except those 
provid IN paragraph f3. you agre that the foundation, the 
trademark owner, and ani distributor under thi agreement will not BE 
liabl TO you for actual, direct, indirect, consequential, punit OR 
incident damag even IF you give notic OF the possibl OF such 
damage. 

1.f.3. limit right OF replac OR refund - If you discov a 
defect in thi electron work within 90 day of receiv it, you can 
receiv a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by send a 
written explan to the person you receiv the work from. If you 
receiv the work on a physic medium, you must return the medium with 
your written explanation. the person or entiti that provid you with 
the defect work may elect to provid a replac copi in lieu of a 
refund. If you receiv the work electronically, the person or entiti 
provid it to you may choos to give you a second opportun to 
receiv the work electron in lieu of a refund. If the second copi 
is also defective, you may demand a refund in write without further 
opportun to fix the problem. 

1.f.4. except for the limit right of replac or refund set forth 
in paragraph 1.f.3, thi work is provid to you 'as-is', with NO other 
warranti OF ani kind, express OR implied, includ but not limit TO 
warranti OF merchant OR fit for ani purpose. 

1.f.5. some state do not allow disclaim of certain impli 
warranti or the exclus or limit of certain type of damages. 
If ani disclaim or limit set forth in thi agreement violat the 
law of the state applic to thi agreement, the agreement shall be 
interpret to make the maximum disclaim or limit permit by 
the applic state law. the invalid or unenforc of ani 
provis of thi agreement shall not void the remain provisions. 

1.f.6. indemn - you agre to indemnifi and hold the foundation, the 
trademark owner, ani agent or employe of the foundation, anyon 
provid copi of project gutenberg-tm electron work in accord 
with thi agreement, and ani volunt associ with the production, 
promot and distribut of project gutenberg-tm electron works, 
harmless from all liability, cost and expenses, includ legal fees, 
that aris directli or indirectli from ani of the follow which you do 
or caus to occur: (a) distribut of thi or ani project gutenberg-tm 
work, (b) alteration, modification, or addit or delet to ani 
project gutenberg-tm work, and (c) ani defect you cause. 


section 2. inform about the mission of project gutenberg-tm 

project gutenberg-tm is synonym with the free distribut of 
electron work in format readabl by the widest varieti of comput 
includ obsolete, old, middle-ag and new computers. It exist 
becaus of the effort of hundr of volunt and donat from 
peopl in all walk of life. 

volunt and financi support to provid volunt with the 
assist they need, is critic to reach project gutenberg-tm' 
goal and ensur that the project gutenberg-tm collect will 
remain freeli avail for gener to come. In 2001, the project 
gutenberg literari archiv foundat wa creat to provid a secur 
and perman futur for project gutenberg-tm and futur generations. 
To learn more about the project gutenberg literari archiv foundat 
and how your effort and donat can help, see section 3 and 4 
and the foundat web page at http://www.gutenberg.net/fundraising/pglaf. 


section 3. inform about the project gutenberg literari archiv 
foundat 

the project gutenberg literari archiv foundat is a non profit 
501(c)(3) educ corpor organ under the law of the 
state of mississippi and grant tax exempt statu by the intern 
revenu service. the foundation' ein or feder tax identif 
number is 64-6221541. contribut to the project gutenberg 
literari archiv foundat are tax deduct to the full extent 
permit by u.s. feder law and your state' laws. 

the foundation' princip offic is locat at 4557 melan dr. S. 
fairbanks, ak, 99712., but it volunt and employe are scatter 
throughout numer locations. it busi offic is locat at 
809 north 1500 west, salt lake city, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email 
business@pglaf.org. email contact link and up to date contact 
inform can be found at the foundation' web site and offici 
page at http://www.gutenberg.net/about/contact 

for addit contact information: 
dr. gregori B. newbi 
chief execut and director 
gbnewby@pglaf.org 

section 4. inform about donat to the project gutenberg 
literari archiv foundat 

project gutenberg-tm depend upon and cannot surviv without wide 
spread public support and donat to carri out it mission of 
increas the number of public domain and licens work that can be 
freeli distribut in machin readabl form access by the widest 
array of equip includ outdat equipment. mani small donat 
($1 to $5,000) are particularli import to maintain tax exempt 
statu with the irs. 

the foundat is commit to compli with the law regul 
chariti and charit donat in all 50 state of the unit 
states. complianc requir are not uniform and it take a 
consider effort, much paperwork and mani fee to meet and keep up 
with these requirements. We do not solicit donat in locat 
where we have not receiv written confirm of compliance. To 
send donat or determin the statu of complianc for ani 
particular state visit http://www.gutenberg.net/fundraising/don 

while we cannot and do not solicit contribut from state where we 
have not met the solicit requirements, we know of no prohibit 
against accept unsolicit donat from donor in such state who 
approach us with offer to donate. 

intern donat are grate accepted, but we cannot make 
ani statement concern tax treatment of donat receiv from 
outsid the unit states. u.s. law alon swamp our small staff. 

pleas check the project gutenberg web page for current donat 
method and addresses. donat are accept in a number of other 
way includ includ checks, onlin payment and credit card 
donations. To donate, pleas visit: 
http://www.gutenberg.net/fundraising/don 


section 5. gener inform about project gutenberg-tm electron 
works. 

professor michael S. hart is the origin of the project gutenberg-tm 
concept of a librari of electron work that could be freeli share 
with anyone. for thirti years, he produc and distribut project 
gutenberg-tm ebook with onli a loos network of volunt support. 

project gutenberg-tm ebook are often creat from sever print 
editions, all of which are confirm as public domain in the u.s. 
unless a copyright notic is included. thus, we do not necessarili 
keep ebook in complianc with ani particular paper edition. 

most peopl start at our web site which ha the main PG search facility: 

http://www.gutenberg.net 

thi web site includ inform about project gutenberg-tm, 
includ how to make donat to the project gutenberg literari 
archiv foundation, how to help produc our new ebooks, and how to 
subscrib to our email newslett to hear about new ebooks. 
