the project gutenberg ebook of the beetle, by richard marsh 

thi ebook is for the use of anyon anywher in the unit state and most 
other part of the world at no cost and with almost no restrict 
whatsoever. you may copi it, give it away or re-us it under the term of 
the project gutenberg licens includ with thi ebook or onlin at 
www.gutenberg.org. If you are not locat in the unit states, you'll have 
to check the law of the countri where you are locat befor use thi ebook. 

title: the beetl 
A mysteri 

author: richard marsh 

post date: octob 18, 2014 [ebook #5164] 
releas date: february, 2004 
first posted: may 27, 2002 
last updated: march 19, 2015 

language: english 


*** start OF thi project gutenberg ebook the beetl *** 




produc by charl frank and the onlin distribut proofread team. 









the beetle: A mysteri 

BY 

richard marsh 


with four illustr BY john williamson 






content 


book I 

the hous with the open window 


chapter I, outsid 

chapter ii, insid 

chapter iii, the man IN the bed 

chapter iv, A lone vigil 

chapter V, AN instruct TO commit burglari 

chapter vi, A singular feloni 

chapter vii, the great paul lessingham 

chapter viii, the man IN the street 

chapter ix, the content OF the packet 




book II 

the haunt man 


chapter X, reject 

chapter xi, A midnight episod 

chapter xii, A morn visitor 

chapter xiii, the pictur 

chapter xiv, the duchess' ball 

chapter xv, MR lessingham speak 

chapter xvi, atherton' magic vapour 

chapter xvii, magic?--or miracle? 

chapter xviii, the apotheosi OF the beetl 

chapter xix, the ladi rage 

chapter xx, A heavi father 

chapter xxi, the terror IN the night 

chapter xxii, the haunt man 




book iii 

the terror By night and the terror by day 


chapter xxiii, the way HE told her 

chapter xxiv, A woman' view 

chapter xxv, the man IN the street 

chapter xxvi, A father' NO 

chapter xxvii, the terror BY night 

chapter xxviii, the strang stori OF the man IN the street 

chapter xxix, the hous ON the road from the workhous 

chapter xxx, the singular behaviour OF MR holt 

chapter xxxi, the terror BY day 




book IV 

In pursuit 


chapter xxxii, A new client 

chapter xxxiii, what came OF look through A lattic 

chapter xxxiv, after twenti year 

chapter xxxv, A bringer OF tide 

chapter xxxvi, what the tide were 

chapter xxxvii, what wa hidden under the floor 

chapter xxxviii, the rest OF the find 

chapter xxxix, miss louisa coleman 

chapter xl, what miss coleman saw through the window 

chapter xli, the constable,--hi clue,--and the cab 

chapter xlii, the quarri doubl 

chapter xliii, the murder AT mr 'enderson' 

chapter xliv, the man who wa murder 

chapter xlv, all that mr 'enderson knew 

chapter xlvi, the sudden stop 

chapter xlvii, the content OF the third-class carriag 

chapter xlviii, the conclus OF the matter 






book I 

the hous with the open window 


the surpris narrat of robert holt 

chapter I 

outsid 


'no room!--ful up!' 

He bang the door in my face. 

that wa the final blow. 

To have tramp about all day look for work; to have beg even for 
a job which would give me money enough to buy a littl food; and to 
have tramp and to have beg in vain,--that wa bad. but, sick at 
heart, depress in mind and in body, exhaust by hunger and fatigue, 
to have been compel to pocket ani littl pride I might have left, 
and solicit, as the penniless, homeless tramp which inde I was, a 
night' lodg in the casual ward,--and to solicit it in vain!--that 
wa worse. much worse. about as bad as bad could be. 

I stared, stupidly, at the door which had just been bang in my face. 
I could scarc believ that the thing wa possible. I had hardli 
expect to figur as a tramp; but, suppos it conceiv that I 
could becom a tramp, that I should be refus admiss to that abod 
of all ignominy, the tramp' ward, wa to have attain a depth of 
miseri of which never even in nightmar I had dreamed. 

As I stood wonder what I should do, a man slouch toward me out of 
the shadow of the wall. 

'won't 'e let yer in?' 

'he say it' full.' 

'say it' full, doe 'e? that' the lay at fulham,--they alway say 
it' full. they want to keep the number down.' 

I look at the man askance. hi head hung forward; hi hand were in 
hi trouser pockets; hi cloth were rags; hi tone wa husky. 

'do you mean that they say it' full when it isn't,--that they won't 
let me in although there' room?' 

'that' it,--bloke' a-kiddin' yer.' 

'but, if there' room, aren't they bound to let me in?' 

'cours they are,--and, blimey, if I wa you i'd make 'em. blimey I 
would!' 

He broke into a volley of execrations. 

'but what am I to do?' 

'why, give 'em anoth rouser--let 'em know as you won't be kidded!' 

I hesitated; then, act on hi suggestion, for the second time I rang 
the bell. the door wa flung wide open, and the grizzl pauper, who 
had previous respond to my summons, stood in the open doorway. had 
he been the chairman of the board of guardian himself he could not 
have address me with greater scorn. 

'what, here again! what' your littl game? think i'v noth better 
to do than to wait upon the like of you?' 

'I want to be admitted.' 

'then you won't be admitted!' 

'I want to see someon in authority.' 

'ain't yer seein' someon in authority?' 

'I want to see someon besid you,--i want to see the master.' 

'then you won't see the master!' 

He move the door swiftli to; but, prepar for such a manoeuvre, I 
thrust my foot suffici insid to prevent hi shut it. I 
continu to address him. 

'are you sure that the ward is full?' 

'full two hour ago!' 

'but what am I to do?' 

'I don't know what you'r to do!' 

'which is the next nearest workhouse?' 

'kensington.' 

suddenli open the door, as he answer me, put out hi arm he 
thrust me backwards. befor I could recov the door wa closed. the 
man in rag had continu a grim spectat of the scene. now he spoke. 

'nice bloke, ain't he?' 

'he' onli one of the paupers,--ha he ani right to act as one of the 
officials?' 

'I tell yer some of them pauper is wuss than the orficers,--a long 
sight wuss! they think they own the 'ouses, blimey they do. Oh it' 
a----fin world, thi is!' 

He paused. I hesitated. for some time there had been a suspicion of 
rain in the air. now it wa commenc to fall in a fine but soak 
drizzle. It onli need that to fill my cup to overflowing. My 
companion wa regard me with a sort of sullen curiosity. 

'ain't you got no money?' 

'not a farthing.' 

'done much of thi sort of thing?' 

'it' the first time i'v been to a casual ward,--and it doesn't seem 
as if i'm go to get in now.' 

'I thought you look as if you wa a bit fresh.--what are yer goin' to 
do?' 

'how far is it to kensington?' 

'work'us?--about three mile;--but, if I wa you, i'd tri St george's.' 

'where' that?' 

'in the fulham road. kensington' onli a small place, they do you well 
there, and it' alway full as soon as the door' opened;--you'd 'ave 
more chawnc at St george's.' 

He wa silent. I turn hi word over in my mind, feel as littl 
dispos to tri the one place as the other. present he began again. 

'i'v travel from read this----day, I 'ave,--tramp 
every----foot!--and all the way as I come along, i'll 'ave a shakedown 
at 'ammersmith, I says,--and now i'm as fur off from it as ever! thi 
is a----fin country, thi is,--i wish every----soul in it wa swept 
into the----sea, blimey I do! but I ain't goin' to go no further,--i'l 
'ave a bed in 'ammersmith or i'll know the reason why.' 

'how are you go to manag it,--hav you got ani money?' 

'got ani money?--mi crikey!--i look as though I 'ad,--i sound as though 
I 'ad too! I ain't 'ad no brads, 'cept now and then a brown, thi larst 
six months.' 

'how are you go to get a bed then?' 

'ow am I go to?--why, like thi way.' He pick up two stones, one 
in either hand. the one in hi left he flung at the glass which wa 
over the door of the casual ward. It crash through it, and through 
the lamp beyond. 'that' 'ow i'm goin' to get a bed.' 

the door wa hastili opened. the grizzl pauper reappeared. He 
shouted, as he peer at us in the darkness, 

'who done that?' 

'I done it, guvnor,--and, if you like, you can see me do the other. It 
might do your eyesight good.' 

befor the grizzl pauper could interfere, he had hurl the stone in 
hi right hand through anoth pane. I felt that it wa time for me to 
go. He wa earn a night' rest at a price which, even in my 
extremity, I wa not dispos to pay. 

when I left two or three other person had appear upon the scene, and 
the man in rag wa address them with a degre of frankness, which, 
in that direction, left littl to be desired. I slunk away unnoticed. 
but had not gone far befor I had almost decid that I might as well 
have thrown in my fortun with the bolder wretch, and smash a window 
too. indeed, more than onc my feet faltered, as I all but return to 
do the feat which I had left undone. 

A more miser night for an out-of-door excurs I could hardli have 
chosen. the rain wa like a mist, and wa not onli drench me to the 
skin, but it wa render it difficult to see more than a littl 
distanc in ani direction. the neighbourhood wa badli lighted. It wa 
one in which I wa a stranger, I had come to hammersmith as a last 
resource. It had seem to me that I had tri to find some occup 
which would enabl me to keep bodi and soul togeth in everi other 
part of london, and that now onli hammersmith wa left. and, at 
hammersmith, even the workhous would have none of me! 

retreat from the inhospit portal of the casual ward, I had taken 
the first turn to the left,--and, at the moment, had been glad to 
take it. In the dark and the rain, the local which I wa 
enter appear unfinished. I seem to be leav civilis 
behind me. the path wa unpaved; the road rough and uneven, as if it 
had never been properli made. hous were few and far between. those 
which I did encounter, seemed, in the imperfect light, amid the gener 
desolation, to be cottag which were crumbl to decay. 

exactli where I wa I could not tell. I had a faint notion that, if I 
onli kept on long enough, I should strike some part of walham green. 
how long I should have to keep on I could onli guess. not a creatur 
seem to be about of whom I could make inquiries. It wa as if I wa 
in a land of desolation. 

I suppos it wa between eleven o'clock and midnight. I had not given 
up my quest for work till all the shop were closed,--and in 
hammersmith, that night, at ani rate, they were not earli closers. then 
I had loung about dispiritedly, wonder what wa the next thing I 
could do. It wa onli becaus I fear that if I attempt to spend the 
night in the open air, without food, when the morn came I should be 
broken up, and fit for nothing, that I sought a night' free board and 
lodging. It wa realli hunger which drove me to the workhous door. 
that wa wednesday. sinc the sunday night preced noth had pass 
my lip save water from the public fountains,--with the except of a 
crust of bread which a man had given me whom I had found crouch at 
the root of a tree in holland park. for three day I had been 
fasting,--pract all the time upon my feet. It seem to me that 
if I had to go hungri till the morn I should collapse,--ther would 
be an end. yet, in that strang and inhospit place, where wa I to 
get food at that time of night, and how? 

I do not know how far I went. everi yard I covered, my feet drag 
more. I wa dead beat, insid and out. I had neither strength nor 
courag left. and within there wa that fright craving, which wa as 
though it shriek aloud. I leant against some palings, daze and 
giddy. If onli death had come upon me quickly, painlessly, how true a 
friend I should have thought it! It wa the agoni of die inch by inch 
which wa so hard to bear. 

It wa some minut befor I could collect myself suffici to 
withdraw from the support of the railings, and to start afresh. I 
stumbl blindli over the uneven road. once, like a drunken man, I 
lurch forward, and fell upon my knees. such wa my backboneless state 
that for some second I remain where I was, half dispos to let 
thing slide, accept the good the god had sent me, and make a night of 
it just there. A long night, I fancy, it would have been, stretch 
from time unto eternity. 

have regain my feet, I had gone perhap anoth coupl of hundr 
yard along the road--heaven know that it seem to me just then a 
coupl of miles!--when there came over me again that overpow 
giddi which, I take it, wa born of my agoni of hunger. I 
staggered, helplessly, against a low wall which, just there, wa at the 
side of the path. without it I should have fallen in a heap. the attack 
appear to last for hours; I suppos it wa onli seconds; and, when I 
came to myself, it wa as though I had been arous from a swoon of 
sleep,--aroused, to an extrem of pain. I exclaim aloud, 

'for a loaf of bread what wouldn't I do!' 

I look about me, in a kind of frenzy. As I did so I for the first 
time becam consciou that behind me wa a house. It wa not a larg 
one. It wa one of those so-cal villa which are spring up in 
multitud all round london, and which are let at rental of from 
twenty-f to forti pound a year. It wa detached. So far as I could 
see, in the imperfect light, there wa not anoth build within 
twenti or thirti yard of either side of it. It wa in two storeys. 
there were three window in the upper storey. behind each the blind 
were close drawn. the hall door wa on my right. It wa approach by 
a littl wooden gate. 

the hous itself wa so close to the public road that by lean over 
the wall I could have touch either of the window on the lower floor. 
there were two of them. one of them wa a bow window. the bow window 
wa open. the bottom centr sash wa rais about six inches. 




chapter II 

insid 


I realised, and, so to speak, mental photograph all the littl 
detail of the hous in front of which I wa stand with what almost 
amount to a gleam of preternatur perception. An instant before, the 
world swam befor my eyes. I saw nothing. now I saw everything, with a 
clear which, as it were, wa shocking. 

abov all, I saw the open window. I stare at it, conscious, as I did 
so, of a curiou catch of the breath. It wa so near to me; so veri 
near. I had but to stretch out my hand to thrust it through the 
aperture. onc inside, my hand would at least be dry. how it rain out 
there! My scanti cloth wa soaked; I wa wet to the skin! I wa 
shivering. and, each second, it seem to rain still faster. My teeth 
were chattering. the damp wa liquefi the veri marrow in my bones. 

and, insid that open window, it was, it must be, so warm, so dry! 

there wa not a soul in sight. not a human be anywher near. I 
listened; there wa not a sound. I alon wa at the merci of the sodden 
night. Of all god' creatur the onli one unshelt from the 
fountain of heaven which He had opened. there wa not one to see what 
I might do; not one to care. I need fear no spy. perhap the hous wa 
empty; nay, probably. It wa my plain duti to knock at the door, rous 
the inmates, and call attent to their oversight,--th open window. 
the least they could do would be to reward me for my pains. but, 
suppos the place wa empty, what would be the use of knocking? It 
would be to make a useless clatter. possibl to disturb the 
neighbourhood, for nothing. and, even if the peopl were at home, I 
might go unrewarded. I had learned, in a hard school, the world' 
ingratitude. To have caus the window to be closed--th invit 
window, the tempt window, the conveni window!--and then to be no 
better for it after all, but still to be penniless, hopeless, hungry, 
out in the cold and the rain--bett anyth than that. In such a 
situation, too late, I should say to myself that mine had been the 
conduct of a fool. and I should say it justli too. To be sure. 

lean over the low wall I found that I could veri easili put my hand 
insid the room. how warm it wa in there! I could feel the differ 
of temperatur in my fingertips. veri quietli I step right over the 
wall. there wa just room to stand in comfort between the window and 
the wall. the ground felt to the foot as if it were cemented. stoop 
down, I peer through the opening. I could see nothing. It wa black 
as pitch inside. the blind wa drawn right up; it seem incred 
that anyon could be at home, and have gone to bed, leav the blind 
up, and the window open. I place my ear to the crevice. how still it 
was! beyond doubt, the place wa empty. 

I decid to push the window up anoth inch or two, so as to enabl me 
to reconnoitre. If anyon caught me in the act, then there would be an 
opportun to describ the circumstances, and to explain how I wa 
just on the point of give the alarm. only, I must go carefully. In 
such damp weather it wa probabl that the sash would creak. 

not a bit of it. It move as readili and as noiselessli as if it had 
been oiled. thi silenc of the sash so embolden me that I rais it 
more than I intended. In fact, as far as it would go. not by a sound 
did it betray me. bend over the sill I put my head and half my bodi 
into the room. but I wa no forwarder. I could see nothing. not a 
thing. for all I could tell the room might be unfurnished. indeed, the 
likelihood of such an explan began to occur to me. I might have 
chanc upon an empti house. In the dark there wa noth to 
suggest the contrary. what wa I to do? 

well, if the hous wa empty, in such a plight as mine I might be said 
to have a moral, if not a legal, right, to it bare shelter. who, with 
a heart in hi bosom, would deni it me? hardli the most punctili 
landlord. rais myself by mean of the sill I slip my leg into 
the room. 

the moment I did so I becam consciou that, at ani rate, the room wa 
not entir unfurnished. the floor wa carpeted. I have had my feet on 
some good carpet in my time; I know what carpet are; but never did I 
stand upon a softer one than that. It remind me, somehow, even then, 
of the turf in richmond park,--it caress my instep, and sprang 
beneath my tread. To my poor, travel-worn feet, it wa luxuri after the 
puddly, uneven road. should I, now I had ascertain that--th room 
was, at least, partial furnished, beat a retreat? Or should I push my 
research further? It would have been raptur to have thrown off my 
clothes, and to have sunk down, on the carpet, then and there, to 
sleep. but,--i wa so hungry; so famine-goaded; what would I not have 
given to have light on someth good to eat! 

I move a step or two forward, gingerly, reach out with my hands, 
lest I struck, unawares, against some unseen thing. when I had taken 
three or four such steps, without encount an obstacle, or, indeed, 
anyth at all, I began, all at once, to wish I had not seen the 
house; that I had pass it by; that I had not come through the window; 
that I were safe out of it again. I became, on a sudden, aware, that 
someth wa with me in the room. there wa nothing, ostensible, to 
lead me to such a conviction; it may be that my faculti were 
unnatur keen; but, all at once, I knew that there wa someth 
there. what wa more, I had a horribl persuas that, though 
unseeing, I wa seen; that my everi movement wa be watched. 

what it wa that wa with me I could not tell; I could not even guess. 
It wa as though someth in my mental organis had been stricken 
by a sudden paralysis. It may seem childish to use such language; but I 
wa overwrought, play out; physic speaking, at my last counter; 
and, in an instant, without the slightest warning, I wa consciou of a 
veri curiou sensation, the like of which I had never felt before, and 
the like of which I pray that I never may feel again,--a sensat of 
panic fear. I remain root to the spot on which I stood, not dare 
to move, fear to draw my breath. I felt that the presenc with me in 
the room wa someth strange, someth evil. 

I do not know how long I stood there, spell-bound, but certainli for 
some consider space of time. By degrees, as noth moved, noth 
wa seen, noth wa heard, and noth happened, I made an effort to 
better play the man. I knew that, at the moment, I play the cur. and 
endeavour to ask myself of what it wa I wa afraid. I wa shiver 
at my own imaginings. what could be in the room, to have suffer me to 
open the window and to enter unopposed? whatev it was, wa sure to 
the full as great a coward as I was, or whi permit, unchecked, my 
burglari entry. sinc I had been allow to enter, the probabl 
wa that I should be at liberti to retreat,--and I wa sensibl of a 
much keener desir to retreat than I had ever had to enter. 

I had to put the greatest amount of pressur upon myself befor I could 
summon up suffici courag to enabl me to even turn my head upon my 
shoulders,--and the moment I did so I turn it back again. what 
constrain me, to save my soul I could not have said,--but I wa 
constrained. My heart wa palpit in my bosom; I could hear it 
beat. I wa trembl so that I could scarc stand. I wa overwhelm 
by a fresh flood of terror. I stare in front of me with eye in which, 
had it been light, would have been seen the frenzi of unreason fear. 
My ear were strain so that I listen with an acut of tension 
which wa painful. 

someth moved. slightly, with so slight a sound, that it would 
scarc have been audibl to other ear save mine. but I heard. I wa 
look in the direct from which the movement came, and, as I 
looked, I saw in front of me two speck of light. they had not been 
there a moment before, that I would swear. they were there now. they 
were eyes,--i told myself they were eyes. I had heard how cats' eye 
gleam in the dark, though I had never seen them, and I said to myself 
that these were cats' eyes; that the thing in front of me wa noth 
but a cat. but I knew I lied. I knew that these were eyes, and I knew 
they were not cats' eyes, but what eye they were I did not know,--nor 
dare to think. 

they moved,--toward me. the creatur to which the eye belong wa 
come closer. So intens wa my desir to fli that I would much rather 
have die than stood there still; yet I could not control a limb; my 
limb were as if they were not mine. the eye came on,--noiselessly. At 
first they were between two and three feet from the ground; but, on a 
sudden, there wa a squelch sound, as if some yield bodi had been 
squash upon the floor. the eye vanished,--to reappear, a moment 
afterwards, at what I judg to be a distanc of some six inch from 
the floor. and they again came on. 

So it seem that the creature, whatev it wa to which the eye 
belonged, was, after all, but small. whi I did not obey the frantic 
long which I had to flee from it, I cannot tell; I onli know, I 
could not. I take it that the stress and privat which I had late 
undergone, and which I was, even then, still undergoing, had much to do 
with my conduct at that moment, and with the part I play in all that 
followed. ordinarili I believ that I have as high a spirit as the 
averag man, and as solid a resolution; but when one ha been drag 
through the valley of humiliation, and plunged, again and again, into 
the water of bitter and privation, a man can be constrain to a 
cours of action of which, in hi happier moments, he would have deem 
himself incapable. I know thi of my own knowledge. 

slowli the eye came on, with a strang slowness, and as they came they 
move from side to side as if their owner walk unevenly. noth 
could have exceed the horror with which I await their 
approach,--except my incapac to escap them. not for an instant did 
my glanc pass from them,--i could not have shut my eye for all the 
gold the world contains!--so that as they came closer I had to look 
right down to what seem to be almost the level of my feet. and, at 
last, they reach my feet. they never paused. On a sudden I felt 
someth on my boot, and, with a sens of shrinking, horror, nausea, 
render me momentarili more helpless, I realis that the creatur 
wa begin to ascend my legs, to climb my body. even then what it 
wa I could not tell,--it mount me, apparently, with as much eas as 
if I had been horizont instead of perpendicular. It wa as though it 
were some gigant spider,--a spider of the nightmares; a monstrou 
concept of some dread vision. It press lightli against my 
cloth with what might, for all the world, have been spider' legs. 
there wa an amaz host of them,--i felt the pressur of each 
separ one. they embrac me softly, stickily, as if the creatur 
glu and unglu them, each time it moved. 

higher and higher! It had gain my loins. It wa move toward the 
pit of my stomach. the helpless with which I suffer it invas 
wa not the least part of my agony,--it wa that helpless which we 
know in dread dreams. I understood, quit well, that if I did but 
give myself a hearti shake, the creatur would fall off; but I had not 
a muscl at my command. 

As the creatur mount it eye began to play the part of two small 
lamps; they posit emit ray of light. By their ray I began to 
perceiv faint outlin of it body. It seem larger than I had 
supposed. either the bodi itself wa slightli phosphorescent, or it wa 
of a peculiar yellow hue. It gleam in the darkness. what it wa there 
wa still noth to posit show, but the impress grew upon me 
that it wa some member of the spider family, some monstrou member, of 
the like of which I had never heard or read. It wa heavy, so heavi 
indeed, that I wonder how, with so slight a pressure, it manag to 
retain it hold,--that it did so by the aid of some adhes substanc 
at the end of it leg I wa sure,--i could feel it stick. it weight 
increas as it ascended,--and it smelt! I had been for some time awar 
that it emit an unpleasant, foetid odour; as it near my face it 
becam so intens as to be unbearable. 

It wa at my chest. I becam more and more consciou of an 
uncomfort wobbl motion, as if each time it breath it bodi 
heaved. it foreleg touch the bare skin about the base of my neck; 
they stuck to it,--shal I ever forget the feeling? I have it often in 
my dreams. while it hung on with those in front it seem to draw it 
other leg up after it. It crawl up my neck, with hideou slowness, a 
quarter of an inch at a time, it weight compel me to brace the 
muscl of my back. It reach my chin, it touch my lips,--and I 
stood still and bore it all, while it envelop my face with it huge, 
slimy, evil-smel body, and embrac me with it myriad legs. the 
horror of it made me mad. I shook myself like one stricken by the 
shake ague. I shook the creatur off. It squash upon the floor. 
shriek like some lost spirit, turning, I dash toward the window. 
As I went, my foot, catch in some obstacle, I fell headlong to the 
floor. 

pick myself up as quickli as I could I resum my flight,--rain or 
no rain, oh to get out of that room! I alreadi had my hand upon the 
sill, in anoth instant I should have been over it,--then, despit my 
hunger, my fatigues, let anyon have stop me if they could!--when 
someon behind me struck a light. 




chapter iii 

the man IN the bed 


the illumin which instantli follow wa unexpected. It startl 
me, caus a moment' check, from which I wa just recov when a 
voic said, 

'keep still!' 

there wa a qualiti in the voic which I cannot describe. not onli an 
accent of command, but a someth malicious, a someth saturnine. It 
wa a littl guttural, though whether it wa a man speak I could not 
have posit said; but I had no doubt it wa a foreigner. It wa the 
most disagre voic I had ever heard, and it had on me the most 
disagre effect; for when it said, 'keep still!' I kept still. It 
wa as though there wa noth els for me to do. 

'turn round!' 

I turn round, mechanically, like an automaton. such passiv wa 
wors than undignified, it wa galling; I knew that well. I resent it 
with secret rage. but in that room, in that presence, I wa 
invertebrate. 

when I turn I found myself confront someon who wa lie in bed. 
At the head of the bed wa a shelf. On the shelf wa a small lamp which 
gave the most brilliant light I had ever seen. It caught me full in the 
eyes, have on me such a blind effect that for some second I could 
see nothing. throughout the whole of that strang interview I cannot 
affirm that I saw clearly; the dazzl glare caus danc speck to 
obscur my vision. yet, after an interv of time, I did see something; 
and what I did see I had rather have left unseen. 

I saw someon in front of me lie in a bed. I could not at onc decid 
if it wa a man or a woman. inde at first I doubt if it wa 
anyth human. but, afterwards, I knew it to be a man,--for thi 
reason, if for no other, that it wa imposs such a creatur could 
be feminine. the bedcloth were drawn up to hi shoulders; onli hi 
head wa visible. He lay on hi left side, hi head rest on hi left 
hand; motionless, eye me as if he sought to read my inmost soul. 
and, in veri truth, I believ he read it. hi age I could not guess; 
such a look of age I had never imagined. had he assert that he had 
been live through the ages, I should have been forc to admit that, 
at least, he look it. and yet I felt that it wa quit within the 
rang of possibl that he wa no older than myself,--ther wa a 
vital in hi eye which wa startling. It might have been that he 
had been afflict by some terribl disease, and it wa that which had 
made him so supernatur ugly. 

there wa not a hair upon hi face or head, but, to make up for it, the 
skin, which wa a saffron yellow, wa an amaz mass of wrinkles. the 
cranium, and, indeed, the whole skull, wa so small as to be 
disagre suggest of someth animal. the nose, on the other 
hand, wa abnorm large; so extravag were it dimensions, and so 
peculiar it shape, it resembl the beak of some bird of prey. A 
characterist of the face--and an uncomfort one!--wa that, 
practically, it stop short at the mouth. the mouth, with it blubber 
lips, came immedi underneath the nose, and chin, to all intent 
and purposes, there wa none. thi deformity--for the absenc of chin 
amount to that--it wa which gave to the face the appear of 
someth not human,--that, and the eyes. for so mark a featur of 
the man were hi eyes, that, ere long, it seem to me that he wa 
noth but eyes. 

hi eye ran, literally, across the whole of the upper portion of hi 
face,--remember, the face wa unwontedli small, and the columna of the 
nose wa razor-edged. they were long, and they look out of narrow 
windows, and they seem to be light by some intern radiance, for 
they shone out like lamp in a lighthous tower. escap them I could 
not, while, as I endeavour to meet them, it wa as if I shrivel 
into nothingness. never befor had I realis what wa meant by the 
power of the eye. they held me enchained, helpless, spell-bound. I felt 
that they could do with me as they would; and they did. their gaze wa 
unfaltering, have the bird-lik trick of never blinking; thi man 
could have glare at me for hour and never move an eyelid. 

It wa he who broke the silence. I wa speechless. 

'shut the window.' I did as he bade me. 'pull down the blind.' I 
obeyed. 'turn round again.' I wa still obedient. 'what is your name?' 

then I spoke,--to answer him. there wa thi odd thing about the word 
I uttered, that they came from me, not in respons to my will power, 
but in respons to his. It wa not I who will that I should speak; it 
wa he. what he will that I should say, I said. just that, and 
noth more. for the time I wa no longer a man; my manhood wa merg 
in his. I was, in the extremest sense, an exampl of passiv obedience. 

'robert holt.' 

'what are you?' 

'A clerk.' 

'you look as if you were a clerk.' there wa a flame of scorn in hi 
voic which scorch me even then. 'what sort of a clerk are you?' 

'I am out of a situation.' 

'you look as if you were out of a situation.' again the scorn. 'are you 
the sort of clerk who is alway out of a situation? you are a thief.' 

'I am not a thief.' 

'do clerk come through the window?' I wa still,--h put no 
constraint on me to speak. 'whi did you come through the window?' 

'becaus it wa open.' 

'so!--do you alway come through a window which is open?' 

'no.' 

'then whi through this?' 

'becaus I wa wet--and cold--and hungry--and tired.' 

the word came from me as if he had drag them one by one,--which, in 
fact, he did. 

'have you no home?' 

'no.' 

'money?' 

'no.' 

'friends?' 

'no.' 

'then what sort of a clerk are you?' 

I did not answer him,--i did not know what it wa he wish me to say. 
I wa the victim of bad luck, noth else,--i swear it. misfortun had 
follow hard upon misfortune. the firm by whom I had been employ for 
year suspend payment. I obtain a situat with one of their 
creditors, at a lower salary. they reduc their staff, which entail 
my going. after an interv I obtain a temporari engagement; the 
occas which requir my servic passed, and I with it. after 
another, and a longer interval, I again found temporari employment, the 
pay for which wa but a pittance. when that wa over I could find 
nothing. that wa nine month ago, and sinc then I had not earn a 
penny. It is so easi to grow shabby, when you are on the everlast 
tramp, and are live on your stock of clothes. I had trudg all over 
london in search of work,--work of ani kind would have been welcome, so 
long as it would have enabl me to keep bodi and soul together. and I 
had trudg in vain. now I had been refus admitt as a 
casual,--how easi is the descent! but I did not tell the man lie on 
the bed all this. He did not wish to hear,--had he wish he would have 
made me tell him. 

It may be that he read my story, unspoken though it was,--it is 
conceivable. hi eye had power of penetr which were peculiarli 
their own,--that I know. 

'undress!' 

when he spoke again that wa what he said, in those guttur tone of 
hi in which there wa a reminisc of some foreign land. I obeyed, 
let my sodden, shabbi cloth fall anyhow upon the floor. A look 
came on hi face, as I stood nake in front of him, which, if it wa 
meant for a smile, wa a satyr' smile, and which fill me with a 
sensat of shudder repulsion. 

'what a white skin you have,--how white! what would I not give for a 
skin as white as that,--ah yes!' He paused, devour me with hi 
glances; then continued. 'go to the cupboard; you will find a cloak; 
put it on.' 

I went to a cupboard which wa in a corner of the room, hi eye 
follow me as I moved. It wa full of clothing,--gar which might 
have form the stock-in-trad of a costumi whose special wa 
provid costum for masquerades. A long dark cloak hung on a peg. My 
hand move toward it, appar of it own volition. I put it on, it 
ampl fold fall to my feet. 

'in the other cupboard you will find meat, and bread, and wine. eat and 
drink.' 

On the opposit side of the room, near the head of hi bed, there wa a 
second cupboard. In this, upon a shelf, I found what look like 
press beef, sever round cake of what tast like rye bread, and 
some thin, sour wine, in a straw-cov flask. but I wa in no mood to 
criticise; I cram myself, I believe, like some famish wolf, he 
watch me, in silence, all the time. when I had done, which wa when 
I had eaten and drunk as much as I could hold, there return to hi 
face that satyr' grin. 

'I would that I could eat and drink like that,--ah yes!--put back what 
is left.' I put it back,--which seem an unnecessari exertion, there 
wa so littl to put. 'look me in the face.' 

I look him in the face,--and immedi becam conscious, as I did 
so, that someth wa go from me,--th capacity, as it were, to be 
myself. hi eye grew larger and larger, till they seem to fill all 
space--til I becam lost in their immensity. He move hi hand, do 
someth to me, I know not what, as it pass through the air--cut 
the solid ground from underneath my feet, so that I fell headlong to 
the ground. where I fell, there I lay, like a log. 

and the light went out. 




chapter IV 

A lone vigil 


I knew that the light went out. for not the least singular, nor, 
indeed, the least distress part of my condit wa the fact that, 
to the best of my knowledg and belief, I never onc lost conscious 
dure the long hour which followed. I wa awar of the extinct of 
the lamp, and of the black dark which ensued. I heard a rustl 
sound, as if the man in the bed wa settl himself between the 
sheets. then all wa still. and throughout that intermin night I 
remained, my brain awake, my bodi dead, waiting, watching, for the day. 
what had happen to me I could not guess. that I probabl wore some of 
the extern evid of death my instinct told me,--i knew I did. 
paradox though it may sound, I felt as a man might feel who had 
actual died,--as, in moment of speculation, in the day gone by, I 
had imagin it as quit possibl that he would feel. It is veri far 
from certain that feel necessarili expir with what we call life. I 
continu ask myself if I could be dead,--th inquiri press 
itself on me with aw iteration. doe the bodi die, and the 
brain--th I, the ego--stil live on? god onli knows. but, then! the 
agoni of the thought. 

the hour passed. By slow degrees, the silenc wa eclipsed. sound of 
traffic, of hurri footsteps,--life!--wer usher of the morn. 
outsid the window sparrow twittered,--a cat mewed, a dog 
barked--ther wa the clatter of a milk can. shaft of light stole past 
the blind, increas in intensity. It still rained, now and again it 
patter against the pane. the wind must have shifted, because, for the 
first time, there came, on a sudden, the clang of a distant clock 
strike the hour,--seven. then, with the interv of a lifetim 
between each chiming, eight,--nine,--ten. 

So far, in the room itself there had not been a sound. when the clock 
had struck ten, as it seem to me, year ago, there came a rustl 
noise, from the direct of the bed. feet step upon the 
floor,--mov toward where I wa lying. It was, of course, now broad 
day, and I, presently, perceiv that a figure, clad in some queer 
colour garment, wa stand at my side, look down at me. It 
stooped, then knelt. My onli cover wa unceremoni thrown from 
off me, so that I lay there in my nakedness. finger prod me then 
and there, as if I had been some beast readi for the butcher' stall. A 
face look into mine, and, in front of me, were those dread eyes. 
then, whether I wa dead or living, I said to myself that thi could be 
noth human,--noth fashion in god' imag could wear such a 
shape as that. finger were press into my cheeks, they were thrust 
into my mouth, they touch my stare eyes, shut my eyelids, then 
open them again, and--horror of horrors!--th blubber lip were 
press to mine--th soul of someth evil enter into me in the 
guis of a kiss. 

then thi travesti of manhood reascend to hi feet, and said, whether 
speak to me or to himself I could not tell, 

'dead!--dead!--a good as dead!--and better! we'll have him buried.' 

He move away from me. I heard a door open and shut, and knew that he 
wa gone. 

and he continu gone throughout the day. I had no actual knowledg of 
hi issu out into the street, but he must have done so, becaus the 
hous appear deserted. what had becom of the dread creatur of 
the night befor I could not guess. My first fear wa that he had left 
it behind him in the room with me,--it might be, as a sort of watchdog. 
but, as the minut and the hour passed, and there wa still no sign 
or sound of anyth living, I conclud that, if the thing wa there, 
it was, possibly, as helpless as myself, and that dure it owner' 
absence, at ani rate, I had noth to fear from it too press 
attentions. 

that, with the except of myself, the hous held noth human, I had 
strong presumpt proof more than onc in the cours of the day. 
sever times, both in the morn and the afternoon, peopl without 
endeavour to attract the attent of whoever wa within. 
vehicles--prob tradesmen' carts--drew up in front, their stop 
be follow by more or less assidu assault upon the knocker and 
the bell. but in everi case their appeal remain unheeded. whatev 
it wa they wanted, they had to go unsatisfi away. ly there, 
torpid, with noth to do but listen, I was, possibly, struck by veri 
little, but it did occur to me that one among the caller wa more 
persist than the rest. 

the distant clock had just struck noon when I heard the gate open, and 
someon approach the front door. sinc noth but silenc followed, 
I suppos that the occup of the place had returned, and had chosen 
to do so as silent as he had gone. presently, however, there came 
from the doorstep a slight but peculiar call, as if a rat wa 
squeaking. It wa repeat three times, and then there wa the sound of 
footstep quietli retreating, and the gate re-closing. between one and 
two the caller came again; there wa a repetit of the same 
signal,--that it wa a signal I did not doubt; follow by the same 
retreat. about three the mysteri visit returned. the signal wa 
repeated, and, when there wa no response, finger tap softli 
against the panel of the front door. when there wa still no answer, 
footstep stole softli round the side of the house, and there came the 
signal from the rear,--and then, again, tap of finger against what 
was, apparently, the back door. No notic be taken of these variou 
proceedings, the footstep return the way they went, and, as before, 
the gate wa closed. 

shortli after dark had fallen thi assidu caller returned, to 
make a fourth and more resolut attempt to call attent to hi 
presence. from the peculiar charact of hi manoeuvr it seem that 
he suspect that whoever wa within had particular reason for 
ignor him without. He went through the familiar pantomim of the 
three squeaki call both at the front door and the back,--follow by 
the tap of the finger on the panels. thi time, however, he also 
tri the window panes,--i could hear, quit distinctly, the clear, yet 
distinct, nois of what seem like knuckl rap against the 
window behind. disappoint there, he renew hi effort at the 
front. the curious quiet footstep came round the house, to paus 
befor the window of the room in which I lay,--and then someth 
singular occurred. 

while I wait for the tapping, there came, instead, the sound of 
someon or something, scrambl on to the window-sill,--a if some 
creature, unabl to reach the window from the ground, wa endeavour 
to gain the vantag of the sill. some ungainli creature, unskil in 
surmount such an obstacl as a perpendicular brick wall. there wa 
the nois of what seem to be the scratch of claws, as if it 
experienc consider difficulti in obtain a hold on the 
unyield surface. what kind of creatur it wa I could not think,--i 
wa astonish to find that it wa a creatur at all. I had taken it 
for grant that the persev visitor wa either a woman or a man. 
if, however, as now seem likely, it wa some sort of animal, the fact 
explain the squeak sounds,--though what, except a rat, did squeak 
like that wa more than I could say--and the absenc of ani knock or 
ringing. 

whatev it was, it had gain the summit of it desires,--th 
window-sill. It pant as if it effort at climb had made it short 
of breath. then began the tapping. In the light of my new discovery, I 
perceived, clearli enough, that the tap wa hardli that which wa 
like to be the product of human fingers,--it wa sharp and definite, 
rather resembl the strike of the point of a nail against the 
glass. It wa not loud, but in time--it continu with much 
persistency--it becam plainli vicious. It wa accompani by what I 
can onli describ as the most extraordinari noises. there were squeaks, 
grow angrier and shriller as the minut passed; what seem like 
gasp for breath; and a peculiar buzz sound like, yet unlike, the 
pur of a cat. 

the creature' resent at it want of success in attract 
attent wa unmistakable. the tap becam like the clatter of 
hailstones; it kept up a continu nois with it cri and pantings; 
there wa the sound as of some larg bodi be rub against the 
glass, as if it were extend itself against the window, and 
endeavouring, by forc of pressure, to gain an entranc through the 
pane. So violent did it contort becom that I momentarili 
anticip the yield of the glass, and the excit assail come 
crash through. consider to my relief the window prove more 
impregn than seem at one time likely. the stolid resist 
proved, in the end, to be too much either for it endur or it 
patience. just as I wa look for some fresh manifest of fury, 
it seem rather to tumbl than to spring off the sill; then came, onc 
more, the same sound of quietli retreat footsteps; and what, under 
the circumstances, seem odder still, the same close of the gate. 

dure the two or three hour which immedi ensu noth happen 
at all out of the way,--and then took place the most surpris 
incid of all. the clock had struck ten some time before. sinc 
befor the strike of the hour noth and no one had pass along 
what wa evid the littl frequent road in front of that uncanni 
house. On a sudden two sound broke the still without,--of someon 
running, and of cries. judg from hi hurri step someon seem 
to be fli for hi life,--to the accompani of curiou cries. It 
wa onli when the runner reach the front of the hous that, in the 
cries, I recognis the squeak of the persist caller. I imagin 
that he had returned, as before, alone, to renew hi attack upon the 
window,--until it wa made plain, as it quickli was, that, with him, 
wa some sort of a companion. immedi there arose, from without, 
the nois of battle. two creatures, whose cri were, to me, of so 
unusu a character, that I found it imposs to even guess at their 
identity, seem to be wage war to the knife upon the doorstep. after 
a minut or two of furiou contention, victori seem to rest with one 
of the combatants, for the other fled, squeak as with pain. while I 
listened, with strain attention, for the next episod in thi queer 
drama, expect that now would come anoth assault upon the window, 
to my unbound surpris I heard a key thrust in the keyhole, the lock 
turned, and the front door thrown open with a furiou bang. It wa 
close as loudli as it wa opened. then the door of the room in which I 
was, wa dash open, with the same display of excitement, and of 
clamour, footstep came hurri in, the door wa slam to with a 
forc which shook the hous to it foundations, there wa a rustl as 
of bed-clothes, the brilliant illumin of the night before, and a 
voice, which I had onli too good reason to rememb said, 

'stand up.' 

I stood up, automatically, at the word of command, face toward the 
bed. 

there, between the sheets, with hi head rest on hi hand, in the 
attitud in which I had seen him last, wa the be I had made 
acquaint with under circumst which I wa never like to 
forget,--th same, yet not the same. 




chapter V 

AN instruct TO commit burglari 


that the man in the bed wa the one whom, to my cost, I had suffer 
myself to stumbl on the night before, there could, of course, not be 
the faintest doubt. and yet, directli I saw him, I recognis that some 
astonish alter had taken place in hi appearance. To begin 
with, he seem younger,--th decrepitud of age had given place to 
someth veri like the fire of youth. hi featur had undergon some 
subtl change. hi nose, for instance, wa not by ani mean so 
grotesque; it beak-lik qualiti wa less conspicuous. the most part of 
hi wrinkl had disappeared, as if by magic. and, though hi skin wa 
still as yellow as saffron, hi contour had rounded,--h had even come 
into possess of a modest allow of chin. but the most astound 
novelti wa that about the face there wa someth which wa 
essenti feminine; so feminine, indeed, that I wonder if I could 
by ani possibl have blundered, and mistaken a woman for a man; some 
ghoulish exampl of her sex, who had so yield to her deprav 
instinct as to have becom noth but a ghastli reminisc of 
womanhood. 

the effect of the chang which had come about in hi appearance--for, 
after all, I told myself that it wa imposs that I could have been 
such a simpleton as to have been mistaken on such a question as 
gender--wa heighten by the self-evid fact that, veri recently, he 
had been engag in some pitch battle; some hand to hand, and, 
probably, discredit encounter, from which he had born away 
uncomfort proof of hi opponent' prowess. hi antagonist could 
hardli have been a chivalr fighter, for hi counten wa mark 
by a dozen differ scratch which seem to suggest that the weapon 
use had been someone' finger-nails. It was, perhaps, becaus the heat 
of the battl wa still in hi vein that he wa in such a state of 
excitement. He seem to be almost overwhelm by the strength of hi 
own feelings. hi eye seem liter to flame with fire. the muscl 
of hi face were work as if they were wholli beyond hi own control. 
when he spoke hi accent wa markedli foreign; the word rush from 
hi lip in an inarticul torrent; he kept repeat the same thing 
over and over again in a fashion which wa not a littl suggest of 
insanity. 

'so you'r not dead!--you'r not dead:--you'r alive!--you'r alive! 
well,--how doe it feel to be dead? I ask you!--i it not good to be 
dead? To keep dead is better,--it is the best of all! To have made an 
end of all things, to ceas to strive and to ceas to weep, to ceas to 
want and to ceas to have, to ceas to annoy and to ceas to long, to 
no more care,--no!--not for anything, to put from you the curs of 
life,--forever!--i that not the best? Oh yes!--i tell you!--do I not 
know? but for you such knowledg is not yet. for you there is the 
return to life, the come out of death,--you shall live on!--for 
me!--liv on!' 

He made a movement with hi hand, and, directli he did so, it happen 
as on the previou evening, that a metamorphosi took place in the veri 
abyss of my being. I woke from my torpor, as he put it, I came out of 
death, and wa aliv again. I wa far, yet, from be my own man; I 
realis that he exercis on me a degre of mesmer forc which I had 
never dream that one creatur could exercis on another; but, at 
least, I wa no longer in doubt as to whether I wa or wa not dead. I 
knew I wa alive. 

He lay, watch me, as if he wa read the thought which occupi 
my brain,--and, for all I know, he was. 

'robert holt, you are a thief.' 

'I am not.' 

My own voice, as I heard it, startl me,--it wa so long sinc it had 
sound in my ears. 

'you are a thief! onli thiev come through windows,--did you not come 
through the window?' I wa still,--what would my contradict have 
avail me? 'but it is well that you came through the window,--wel you 
are a thief,--wel for me! for me! It is you that I am wanting,--at the 
happi moment you have drop yourself into my hands,--in the nick of 
time. for you are my slave,--at my beck and call,--mi familiar spirit, 
to do with as I will,--you know this,--eh?' 

I did know it, and the knowledg of my impot wa terrible. I felt 
that if I could onli get away from him; onli releas myself from the 
bond with which he had bound me about; onli remov myself from the 
horribl glamour of hi near neighbourhood; onli get one or two squar 
meal and have an opportun of recov from the enerv stress 
of mental and bodili fatigue;--i felt that then I might be someth 
like hi match, and that, a second time, he would endeavour in vain to 
bring me within the compass of hi magic. but, as it was, I wa 
consciou that I wa helpless, and the conscious wa agony. He 
persist in reiter hi former falsehood. 

'I say you are a thief!--a thief, robert holt, a thief! you came 
through a window for your own pleasure, now you will go through a 
window for mine,--not thi window, but another.' where the jest lay I 
did not perceive; but it tickl him, for a grate sound came from hi 
throat which wa meant for laughter. 'thi time it is as a thief that 
you will go,--oh yes, be sure.' 

He paused, as it seemed, to transfix me with hi gaze. hi unblink 
eye never for an instant quit my face. with what a fright 
fascin they constrain me,--and how I loath them! 

when he spoke again there wa a new inton in hi 
speech,--someth bitter, cruel, unrelenting. 

'do you know paul lessingham?' 

He pronounc the name as if he hate it,--and yet as if he love to 
have it on hi tongue. 

'what paul lessingham?' 

'there is onli one paul lessingham! the paul lessingham,--th great 
paul lessingham!' 

He shrieked, rather than said this, with an outburst of rage so 
frenzi that I thought, for the moment, that he wa go to spring on 
me and rend me. I shook all over. I do not doubt that, as I replied, my 
voic wa suffici tremulous. 

'all the world know paul lessingham,--th politician,--th statesman.' 

As he glare at me hi eye dilated. I still stood in expect of a 
physic assault. but, for the present, he content himself with words. 

'to-night you are go through hi window like a thief!' 

I had no inkl of hi meaning,--and, apparently, judg from hi 
next words, I look someth of the bewilder I felt. 

'you do not understand?--no!--it is simple!--what could be simpler? I 
say that to-night--to-night!--y are go through hi window like a 
thief. you came through my window,--whi not through the window of paul 
lessingham, the politician--th statesman.' 

He repeat my word as if in mockery. I am--i make it my boast!--of 
that great multitud which regard paul lessingham as the greatest 
live forc in practic politics; and which look to him, with 
confidence, to carri through that great work of constitut and 
social reform which he ha set himself to do. I daresay that my tone, 
in speak of him, savour of laudation,--which, plainly, the man in 
the bed resented. what he meant by hi wild word about my go 
through paul lessingham' window like a thief, I still had not the 
faintest notion. they sound like the rave of a madman. 

As I continu silent, and he yet stared, there came into hi tone 
anoth note,--a note of tenderness,--a note of which I had not deem 
him capable. 

'he is good to look at, paul lessingham,--i he not good to look at?' 

I wa awar that, physically, Mr lessingham wa a fine specimen of 
manhood, but I wa not prepar for the assert of the fact in such a 
quarter,--nor for the manner in which the temporari master of my fate 
continu to harp and enlarg upon the theme. 

'he is straight,--straight as the mast of a ship,--h is tall,--hi 
skin is white; he is strong--do I not know that he is strong--how 
strong!--oh yes! Is there a better thing than to be hi wife? hi 
well-beloved? the light of hi eyes? Is there for a woman a happier 
chance? Oh no, not one! hi wife!--paul lessingham!' 

as, with soft cadences, he gave vent to these unlooked-for sentiments, 
the fashion of hi counten wa changed. A look of long came into 
hi face--of savage, frantic longing--which, unallur though it was, 
for the moment transfigur him. but the mood wa transient. 

'to be hi wife,--oh yes!--th wife of hi scorn! the despis and 
rejected!' 

the return to the venom of hi former bitter wa rapid,--i could 
not but feel that thi wa the natur man. though whi a creatur such 
as he wa should go out of hi way to apostrophise, in such a manner, a 
publicist of Mr lessingham' eminence, surpass my comprehension. yet 
he stuck to hi subject like a leech,--a if it had been one in which 
he had an engross person interest. 

'he is a devil,--hard as the granit rock,--cold as the snow of 
ararat. In him there is none of life' warm blood,--h is accursed! He 
is false,--ay, fals as the fabl of those who lie for love of 
lies,--h is all treachery. her whom he ha taken to hi bosom he would 
put away from him as if she had never been,--h would steal from her 
like a thief in the night,--h would forget she ever was! but the 
aveng follow after, lurk in the shadows, hide among the rocks, 
waiting, watching, till hi time shall come. and it shall come!--th 
day of the avenger!--ay, the day!' 

rais himself to a sit posture, he threw hi arm abov hi head, 
and shriek with a demoniac fury. present he becam a trifl calmer. 
revert to hi recumb position, rest hi head upon hi hand, he 
eye me steadily; then ask me a question which struck me as being, 
under the circumstances, more than a littl singular. 

'you know hi house,--th hous of the great paul lessingham,--th 
politician,--th statesman?' 

'I do not.' 

'you lie!--you do!' 

the word came from him with a sort of snarl,--a if he would have 
lash me across the face with them. 

'I do not. men in my posit are not acquaint with the resid of 
men in his. I may, at some time, have seen hi address in print; but, 
if so, I have forgotten it.' 

He look at me intently, for some moments, as if to learn if I spoke 
the truth; and apparently, at last, wa satisfi that I did. 

'you do not know it?--well!--i will show it you,--i will show the hous 
of the great paul lessingham.' 

what he meant I did not know; but I wa soon to learn,--an astound 
revel it prove to be. there wa about hi manner someth hardli 
human; someth which, for want of a better phrase, I would call 
vulpine. In hi tone there wa a mixtur of mockeri and bitterness, as 
if he wish hi word to have the effect of corros sublimate, and 
to sear me as he utter them. 

'listen with all your ears. give me your whole attention. hearken to my 
bidding, so that you may do as I bid you. not that I fear your 
obedience,--oh no!' 

He paused,--a if to enabl me to fulli realis the pictur of my 
helpless conjur up by hi jibes. 

'you came through my window, like a thief. you will go through my 
window, like a fool. you will go to the hous of the great paul 
lessingham. you say you do not know it? well, I will show it you. I 
will be your guide. unseen, in the dark and the night, I will stalk 
besid you, and will lead you to where I would have you go.--you will 
go just as you are, with bare feet, and head uncovered, and with but a 
singl garment to hide your nakedness. you will be cold, your feet will 
be cut and bleeding,--but what better doe a thief deserve? If ani see 
you, at the least they will take you for a madman; there will be 
trouble. but have no fear; bear a bold heart. none shall see you while 
I stalk at your side. I will cover you with the cloak of 
invisibility,--so that you may come in safeti to the hous of the great 
paul lessingham.' 

He paus again. what he said, wild and wanton though it was, wa 
begin to fill me with a sens of the most extrem discomfort. hi 
sentences, in some strange, indescrib way, seemed, as they came 
from hi lips, to warp my limbs; to enwrap themselv about me; to 
confin me, tighter and tighter, within, as it were, swaddl clothes; 
to make me more and more helpless. I wa alreadi consciou that 
whatev mad freak he chose to set me on, I should have no option but 
to carri it through. 

'when you come to the house, you will stand, and look, and seek for a 
window conveni for entry. It may be that you will find one open, as 
you did mine; if not, you will open one. how,--that is your affair, not 
mine. you will practis the art of a thief to steal into hi house.' 

the monstros of hi suggest fought against the spell which he 
again wa cast upon me, and forc me into speech,--endow me with 
the power to show that there still wa in me someth of a man; though 
everi second the strand of my manhood, as it seemed, were slip 
faster through the finger which were strain to clutch them. 

'I will not.' 

He wa silent. He look at me. the pupil of hi eye dilated,--until 
they seem all pupil. 

'you will.--do you hear?--i say you will.' 

'I am not a thief, I am an honest man,--whi should I do thi thing?' 

'becaus I bid you.' 

'have mercy!' 

'on whom--on you, or on paul lessingham?--who, at ani time, ha shown 
merci unto me, that I should show merci unto any?' 

He stopped, and then again went on,--reiter hi former incred 
suggest with an emphasi which seem to eat it way into my brain. 

'you will practis the art of a thief to steal into hi house; and, 
be in, will listen. If all be still, you will make your way to the 
room he call hi study.' 

'how shall I find it? I know noth of hi house.' 

the question wa wrung from me; I felt that the sweat wa stand in 
great drop upon my brow. 

'I will show it you.' 

'shall you go with me?' 

'ay,--i shall go with you. all the time I shall be with you. you will 
not see me, but I shall be there. Be not afraid.' 

hi claim to supernatur powers, for what he said amount to noth 
less, was, on the face of it, preposterous, but, then, I wa in no 
condit to even hint at it absurdity. He continued. 

'when you have gain the study, you will go to a certain drawer, which 
is in a certain bureau, in a corner of the room--i see it now; when you 
are there you shall see it too--and you will open it.' 

'should it be locked?' 

'you still will open it.' 

'but how shall I open it if it is locked?' 

'bi those art in which a thief is skilled. I say to you again that 
that is your affair, not mine.' 

I made no attempt to answer him. even suppos that he forc me, by 
the wicked, and unconscion exercis of what, I presumed, were the 
hypnot power with which natur had to such a danger degre 
endow him, to carri the adventur to a certain stage, sinc he could 
hardly, at an instant' notice, endow me with the knack of pick 
locks, should the drawer he allud to be locked--which might 
provid permit!--noth seriou might issu from it after all. He 
read my thoughts. 

'you will open it,--though it be doubli and trebli locked, I say that 
you will open it.--in it you will find--' he hesitated, as if to 
reflect--'som letters; it may be two or three,--i know not just how 
many,--they are bound about by a silken ribbon. you will take them out 
of the drawer, and, have taken them, you will make the best of your 
way out of the house, and bear them back to me.' 

'and should anyon come upon me while engag in these nefari 
proceedings,--for instance, should I encount Mr lessingham himself, 
what then?' 

'paul lessingham?--y need have no fear if you encount him.' 

'I need have no fear!--if he find me, in hi own house, at dead of 
night, commit burglary!' 

'you need have no fear of him.' 

'on your account, or on my own?--at least he will have me hale to 
gaol.' 

'I say you need have no fear of him. I say what I mean.' 

'how, then, shall I escap hi righteou vengeance? He is not the man 
to suffer a midnight robber to escap him scatheless,--shal I have to 
kill him?' 

'you will not touch him with a finger,--nor will he touch you.' 

'bi what spell shall I prevent him?' 

'bi the spell of two words.' 

'what word are they?' 

'should paul lessingham chanc to come upon you, and find you in hi 
house, a thief, and should seek to stay you from whatev it is you may 
be at, you will not flinch nor flee from him, but you will stand still, 
and you will say--' 

someth in the crescendo accent of hi voice, someth weird and 
ominous, caus my heart to press against my ribs, so that when he 
stopped, in my eager I cri out, 

'what?' 

'the beetle!' 

As the word came from him in a kind of screech, the lamp went out, and 
the place wa all in darkness, and I knew, so that the knowledg fill 
me with a sens of loathing, that with me, in the room, wa the evil 
presenc of the night before. two bright speck gleam in front of me; 
someth flop from off the bed on to the ground; the thing wa 
come toward me across the floor. It came slowli on, and on, and on. 
I stood still, speechless in the sick of my horror. until, on my 
bare feet, it touch me with slimi feelers, and my terror lest it 
should creep up my nake bodi lent me voice, and I fell shriek like 
a soul in agony. 

It may be that my shriek drove it from me. At least, it went. I knew 
it went. and all wa still. until, on a sudden, the lamp flame out 
again, and there, lying, as before, in bed, glare at me with hi 
bale eyes, wa the be whom, in my folly, or in my 
wisdom,--whichev it was!--i wa begin to credit with the 
possess of unhallowed, unlaw powers. 

'you will say that to him; those two words; they only; no more. and you 
will see what you will see. but paul lessingham is a man of resolution. 
should he still persist in interference, or seek to hinder you, you 
will say those two word again. you need do no more. twice will 
suffice, I promis you.--now go.--draw up the blind; open the window; 
climb through it. hasten to do what I have bidden you. I wait here for 
your return,--and all the way I shall be with you.' 




chapter VI 

A singular feloni 


I went to the window; I drew up the blind, unlatch the sash, I threw 
it open; and clad, or, rather, unclad as I was, I clamber through it 
into the open air. I wa not onli incap of resistance, I wa 
incap of distinctli formul the desir to offer resistance. 
some compel influenc move me hither and hither, with completest 
disregard of whether I would or would not. 

and yet, when I found myself without, I wa consciou of a sens of 
exult at have escap from the miasmic atmospher of that room 
of unholi memories. and a faint hope began to dawn within my bosom 
that, as I increas the distanc between myself and it, I might shake 
off someth of the nightmar helpless which numb and tortur 
me. I linger for a moment by the window; then step over the short 
divid wall into the street; and then again I lingered. 

My condit wa one of dual personality,--while, physically, I wa 
bound, mentally, to a consider extent, I wa free. but thi measur 
of freedom on my mental side made my plight no better. for, among other 
things, I realis what a ridicul figur I must be cutting, 
barefoot and bareheaded, abroad, at such an hour of the night, in 
such a boister breeze,--for I quickli discov that the wind 
amount to someth like a gale. apart from all other considerations, 
the notion of parad the street in such a condit fill me with 
profound disgust. and I do believ that if my tyrann oppressor had 
onli permit me to attir myself in my own garments, I should have 
start with a compar light heart on the feloni mission on 
which he appar wa send me. I believe, too, that the 
conscious of the incongru of my attir increas my sens of 
helplessness, and that, had I been dress as englishmen are wont to 
be, who take their walk abroad, he would not have found in me, on that 
occasion, the facil instrument which, in fact, he did. 

there wa a moment, in which the gravel pathway first made itself 
known to my nake feet, and the cut wind to my nake flesh, when I 
think it possibl that, had I grit my teeth, and strain my everi 
nerve, I might have shaken myself free from the bond which shackl 
me, and bade defianc to the ancient sinner who, for all I knew, wa 
peep at me through the window. but so depress wa I by the 
knowledg of the ridicul appear I present that, befor I could 
take advantag of it the moment passed,--not to return again that night. 

I did catch, as it were, at it fringe, as it wa fli past me, 
make a hurri movement to one side,--th first I had made, of my own 
initiative, for hours. but it wa too late. My tormentor,--a if, 
though unseen, he saw--tighten hi grip, I wa whirl round, and 
sped hastili onward in a direct in which I certainli had no desir 
of travelling. 

all the way I never met a soul. I have sinc wonder whether in that 
respect my experi wa not a normal one; whether it might not have 
happen to any. If so, there are street in london, long line of 
streets, which, at a certain period of the night, in a certain sort of 
weather--prob the weather had someth to do with it--ar clean 
deserted; in which there is neither foot-passeng nor vehicle,--not 
even a policeman. the greater part of the rout along which I wa 
driven--i know no juster word--wa one with which I had some sort of 
acquaintance. It led, at first, through what, I take it, wa some part 
of walham green; then along the lilli road, through brompton, across 
the fulham road, through the network of street lead to sloan 
street, across sloan street into lownd square. who goe that way 
goe some distance, and goe through some import thorough fares; yet 
not a creatur did I see, nor, I imagine, wa there a creatur who saw 
me. As I cross sloan street, I fanci that I heard the distant 
rumbl of a vehicl along the knightsbridg road, but that wa the 
onli sound I heard. 

It is pain even to recollect the plight in which I wa when I wa 
stopped,--for stop I was, as shortli and as sharply, as the beast of 
burden, with a bridl in it mouth, whose driver put a period to hi 
career. I wa wet,--intermitt gust of rain were born on the 
scurri wind; in spite of the pace at which I had been brought, I wa 
chill to the bone; and--worst of all!--mi mud-stain feet, all cut 
and bleeding, were so painful--for, unfortunately, I wa still 
suscept enough to pain--that it wa agoni to have them come into 
contact with the cold and the slime of the hard, unyield pavement. 

I had been stop on the opposit side of the square,--that nearest to 
the hospital; in front of a hous which struck me as be somewhat 
smaller than the rest. It wa a hous with a portico; about the pillar 
of thi portico wa trelliswork, and on the trelliswork wa train 
some climb plant. As I stood, shivering, wonder what would happen 
next, some strang impuls master me, and, immediately, to my own 
unbound amazement, I found myself scrambl up the trelli toward 
the verandah above. I am no gymnast, either by natur or by education; 
I doubt whether, previously, I had ever attempt to climb anyth 
more difficult than a step ladder. the result was, that, though the 
impuls might be given me, the skill could not, and I had onli ascend 
a yard or so when, lose my footing, I came slither down upon my 
back. bruis and shaken though I was, I wa not allow to inquir 
into my injuries. In a moment I wa on my feet again, and again I wa 
impel to climb,--only, however, again to come to grief. thi time 
the demon, or whatev it was, that had enter into me, seem to 
appreci the imposs of get me to the top of that verandah, 
direct me to tri anoth way. I mount the step lead to the 
front door, got on to the low parapet which wa at one side, thenc on 
to the sill of the adjac window,--had I slip then I should have 
fallen a sheer descent of at least twenti feet to the bottom of the 
deep area down below. but the sill wa broad, and--if it is proper to 
use such languag in connect with a transact of the sort in which 
I wa engaged--fortun favour me. I did not fall. In my clench fist 
I had a stone. with thi I struck the pane of glass, as with a hammer. 
through the hole which resulted, I could just insert my hand, and reach 
the latch within. In anoth minut the sash wa raised, and I wa in 
the house,--i had commit burglary. 

As I look back and reflect upon the audac of the whole proceeding, 
even now I tremble. hapless slave of another' will although in veri 
truth I was, I cannot repeat too often that I realis to the full just 
what it wa that I wa be compel to do--a fact which wa veri far 
from render my situat less distressful!--and everi detail of my 
involuntari action wa project upon my brain in a seri of 
pictures, whose clear-cut outlines, so long as memori endures, will 
never fade. certainli no profession burglar, nor, indeed, ani 
creatur in hi senses, would have ventur to emul my surpris 
rashness. the process of smash the pane of glass--it wa plate 
glass--wa anyth but a noiseless one. there was, first, the blow 
itself, then the shiver of the glass, then the clatter of 
fragment into the area beneath. one would have thought that the whole 
thing would have made din enough to have rous the seven sleepers. 
but, here, again the weather wa on my side. about that time the wind 
wa howl wildly,--it came shriek across the square. It is 
possibl that the tumult which it made deaden all other sounds. 

anyhow, as I stood within the room which I had violated, listen for 
sign of someon be on the alert, I could hear nothing. within the 
hous there seem to be the silenc of the grave. I drew down the 
window, and made for the door. 

It prove by no mean easi to find. the window were obscur by heavi 
curtains, so that the room insid wa dark as pitch. It appear to be 
unusu full of furniture,--an appear due, perhaps, to my be a 
stranger in the midst of such cimmerian blackness. I had to feel my 
way, veri gingerli indeed, among the variou impedimenta. As it wa I 
seem to come into contact with most of the obstacl there were to 
come into contact with, stumbl more than onc over footstools, and 
over what seem to be dwarf chairs. It wa a miracl that my movement 
still continu to be unheard,--but I believ that the explan was, 
that the hous wa well built; that the servant were the onli person 
in it at the time; that their bedroom were on the top floor; that they 
were fast asleep; and that they were littl like to be disturb by 
anyth that might occur in the room which I had entered. 

reach the door at last, I open it,--listen for ani promis of 
be interrupted--and--to adapt a hackney phrase--direct by the 
power which shape my end, I went across the hall and up the stairs. I 
pass up the first landing, and, on the second, move to a door upon 
the right. I turn the handle, it yielded, the door opened, I entered, 
close it behind me. I went to the wall just insid the door, found a 
handle, jerk it, and switch on the electr light,--doing, I make 
no doubt, all these things, from a spectator' point of view, so 
naturally, that a judg and juri would have been with difficulti 
persuad that they were not the product of my own volition. 

In the brilliant glow of the electr light I took a leisur survey 
of the content of the room. It was, as the man in the bed had said it 
would be, a study,--a fine, spaciou apartment, evid intend 
rather for work than for show. there were three separ 
writing-tables, one veri larg and two smaller ones, all cover with 
an orderli array of manuscript and papers. A typewrit stood at the 
side of one. On the floor, under and about them, were pile of books, 
portfolios, and official-look documents. everi avail foot of 
wall space on three side of the room wa line with shelves, full as 
they could hold with books. On the fourth side, face the door, wa a 
larg lock-up oak bookcase, and, in the farther corner, a quaint old 
bureau. So soon as I saw thi bureau I went for it, straight as an 
arrow from a bow,--indeed, it would be no abus of metaphor to say that 
I wa propel toward it like an arrow from a bow. 

It had drawer below, glass door above, and between the drawer and 
the door wa a flap to let down. It wa to thi flap my attent wa 
directed. I put out my hand to open it; it wa lock at the top. I 
pull at it with both hands; it refus to budge. 

So thi wa the lock I was, if necessary, to practis the art of a 
thief to open. I wa no picklock; I had flatter myself that nothing, 
and no one, could make me such a thing. yet now that I found myself 
confront by that unyield flap, I found that pressure, irresist 
pressure, wa be put upon me to gain, by ani and everi means, access 
to it interior. I had no option but to yield. I look about me in 
search of some conveni tool with which to pli the felon' trade. I 
found it close besid me. lean against the wall, within a yard of 
where I stood, were exampl of variou kind of weapons,--among them, 
spear-heads. take one of these spear-heads, with much difficulti I 
forc the point between the flap and the bureau. use the leverag 
thu obtained, I attempt to prise it open. the flap held fast; the 
spear-head snap in two. I tri another, with the same result; a 
third, to fail again. there were no more. the most conveni thing 
remain wa a queer, heavy-headed, sharp-edg hatchet. thi I took, 
brought the sharp edg down with all my forc upon the refractori flap. 
the hatchet went through,--befor I had done with it, it wa open with 
a vengeance. 

but I wa destin on the occas of my first--and, I trust, 
last--experi of the burglar' calling, to carri the part complet 
through. I had gain access to the flap itself onli to find that at 
the back were sever small drawers, on one of which my observ wa 
brought to bear in a fashion which it wa quit imposs to 
disregard. As a matter of cours it wa locked, and, onc more, I had 
to search for someth which would serv as a rough-and-readi 
substitut for the miss key. 

there wa noth at all suitabl among the weapons,--i could hardli 
for such a purpos use the hatchet; the drawer in question wa such a 
littl one that to have done so would have been to shiver it to 
splinters. On the mantelshelf, in an open leather case, were a pair of 
revolvers. statesmen, nowadays, sometim stand in actual peril of 
their lives. It is possibl that Mr lessingham, consciou of 
continu threaten danger, carri them about with him as a 
necessari protection. they were servic weapons, large, and 
somewhat weighty,--of the type with which, I believe, upon occas the 
polic are armed. not onli were all the barrel loaded, but, in the 
case itself there wa a suppli of cartridg more than suffici to 
charg them all again. 

I wa handl the weapons, wondering--if, in my condition, the word 
wa applicable--what use I could make of them to enabl me to gain 
admiss to that drawer, when there came, on a sudden, from the street 
without, the sound of approach wheels. there wa a whir within 
my brain, as if someon wa endeavour to explain to me to what 
servic to appli the revolvers, and I, perforce, strain everi nerv 
to grasp the mean of my invis mentor. while I did so, the wheel 
drew rapidli nearer, and, just as I wa expect them to go whirl 
by, stopped,--in front of the house. My heart leapt in my bosom. In a 
convuls of frantic terror, again, dure the passag of one frenzi 
moment, I all but burst the bond that held me, and fled, haphazard, 
from the immin peril. but the bond were stronger than i,--it wa as 
if I had been root to the ground. 

A key wa insert in the keyhol of the front door, the lock wa 
turned, the door thrown open, firm footstep enter the house. If I 
could I would not have stood upon the order of my going, but gone at 
once, anywhere, anyhow; but, at that moment, my come and go were 
not matter in which I wa consulted. panic fear rage within, 
outwardli I wa calm as possible, and stood, turn the revolv over 
and over, ask myself what it could be that I wa intend to do with 
them. all at onc it came to me in an illumin flash,--i wa to 
fire at the lock of the drawer, and blow it open. 

A madder scheme it would have been imposs to hit upon. the servant 
had slept through a good deal, but they would hardli sleep through the 
discharg of a revolv in a room below them,--not to speak of the 
person who had just enter the premises, and whose footstep were 
alreadi audibl as he came up the stairs. I struggl to make a dumb 
protest against the insens folli which wa hurri me to infal 
destruction, without success. for me there wa onli obedience. with a 
revolv in either hand I march toward the bureau as unconcernedli 
as if I would not have given my life to have escap the denouement 
which I need but a slight modicum of common sens to be awar wa 
close at hand. I place the muzzl of one of the revolv against the 
keyhol of the drawer to which my unseen guid had previous direct 
me, and pull the trigger. the lock wa shattered, the content of the 
drawer were at my mercy. I snatch up a bundl of letters, about which 
a pink ribbon wa wrapped. startl by a nois behind me, immedi 
follow the report of the pistol, I glanc over my shoulder. 

the room door wa open, and Mr lessingham wa stand with the handl 
in hi hand. 




chapter vii 

the great paul lessingham 


He wa in even dress. He carri a small portfolio in hi left hand. 
If the discoveri of my presenc startl him, as it could scarc have 
fail to do, he allow no sign of surpris to escap him. paul 
lessingham' impenetr is proverbial. whether on platform 
address excit crowds, or in the midst of heat discuss in the 
hous of commons, all the world know that hi cool remain 
unruffled. It is gener understood that he owe hi success in the 
polit arena in no slight measur to the adroit which is born of 
hi invulner presenc of mind. He gave me a tast of it qualiti 
then. stand in the attitud which ha been familiaris to us by 
caricaturists, hi feet apart, hi broad shoulder well set back, hi 
handsom head a littl advanced, hi keen blue eye have in them 
someth suggest of a bird of prey consid just when, where, 
and how to pounce, he regard me for some second in perfect 
silence,--wheth outwardli I flinch I cannot say; inwardli I know I 
did. when he spoke, it wa without move from where he stood, and in 
the calm, airi tone in which he might have address an acquaint 
who had just drop in. 

'may I ask, sir, to what I am indebt for the pleasur of your 
company?' 

He paused, as if wait for my answer. when none came, he put hi 
question in anoth form. 

'pray, sir, who are you, and on whose invit do I find you here?' 

As I still stood speechless, motionless, meet hi glanc without a 
twitch of an eyebrow, nor a tremor of the hand, I imagin that he 
began to consid me with an even closer intent than before. and 
that the--to say the least of it--peculiar of my appearance, caus 
him to suspect that he wa face to face with an adventur of a peculiar 
kind. whether he took me for a lunat I cannot certainli say; but, 
from hi manner, I think it possibl he did. He began to move toward 
me from across the room, address me with the utmost suaviti and 
courtesy. 

'be so good as to give me the revolver, and the paper you are hold 
in your hand.' 

As he came on, someth enter into me, and forc itself from 
between my lips, so that I said, in a low, hiss voice, which I vow 
wa never mine, 

'the beetle!' 

whether it was, or wa not, owing, in some degree, to a trick of my 
imagination, I cannot determine, but, as the word were spoken, it 
seem to me that the light went low, so that the place wa all in 
darkness, and I again wa fill with the nauseou conscious of the 
presenc of someth evil in the room. but if, in that matter, my 
abnorm strain imagin play me a trick, there could be no 
doubt whatev as to the effect which the word had on Mr lessingham. 
when the mist of the blackness--r or supposititious--had pass from 
befor my eyes, I found that he had retreat to the extremest limit 
of the room, and wa crouching, hi back against the bookshelves, 
clutch at them, in the attitud of a man who ha receiv a 
stagger blow, from which, as yet, he ha had no opportun of 
recovering. A most extraordinari chang had taken place in the 
express of hi face; in hi counten amazement, fear, and horror 
seem struggl for the mastery. I wa fill with a most 
discomfort qualm, as I gaze at the frighten figur in front of 
me, and realis that it wa that of the great paul lessingham, the god 
of my polit idolatry. 

'who are you?--in god' name, who are you?' 

hi veri voic seem changed; hi frenzied, choke accent would 
hardli have been recognis by either friend or foe. 

'who are you?--do you hear me ask, who are you? In the name of god, I 
bid you say!' 

As he perceiv that I wa still, he began to show a speci of 
excit which it wa unpleas to witness, especi as he 
continu to crouch against the bookshelf, as if he wa afraid to stand 
up straight. So far from exhibit the impass for which he wa 
renowned, all the muscl in hi face and all the limb in hi bodi 
seem to be in motion at once; he wa like a man afflict with the 
shiver ague,--hi veri finger were twitch aimlessly, as they 
were stretch out on either side of him, as if seek for support 
from the shelv against which he leaned. 

'where have you come from? what do you want? who sent you here? what 
concern have you with me? is it necessari that you should come and play 
these childish trick with me? why? why?' 

the question came from him with astonish rapidity. when he saw that 
I continu silent, they came still faster, mingl with what sound 
to me like a stream of inchoat abuse. 

'whi do you stand there in that extraordinari garment,--it' wors than 
nakedness, yes, wors than nakedness! for that alon I could have you 
punished, and I will!--and tri to play the fool? Do you think I am a 
boy to be bamboozl by everi bogey a blunder may tri to conjur up? 
If so, you'r wrong, as whoever sent you might have had sens enough to 
let you know. If you tell me who you are, and who sent you here, and 
what it is you want, I will be merciful; if not, the polic shall be 
sent for, and the law shall take it course,--to the bitter end!--i 
warn you.--do you hear? you fool! tell me who you are?' 

the last word came from him in what wa veri like a burst of childish 
fury. He himself seem conscious, the moment after, that hi passion 
wa sadli lack in dignity, and to be asham of it. He drew himself 
straight up. with a pocket-handkerchief which he took from an inner 
pocket of hi coat, he wipe hi lips. then, clutch it tightli in 
hi hand, he eye me with a fixed which, under ani other 
circumstances, I should have found unbearable. 

'well, sir, is your continu silenc part of the busi of the role 
you have set yourself to play?' 

hi tone wa firmer, and hi bear more in keep with hi character. 

'if it be so, I presum that I, at least have liberti to speak. when I 
find a gentleman, even one gift with your eloqu of silence, 
play the part of burglar, I think you will grant that a few word on 
my part cannot justli be consid to be out of place.' 

again he paused. I could not but feel that he wa employ the vehicl 
of somewhat cumbrou sarcasm to gain time, and to give himself the 
opportun of recovering, if the thing wa possible, hi pristin 
courage. that, for some caus wholli hidden from me, the mysteri 
utter had shaken hi natur to it deepest foundations, wa made 
plainer by hi endeavour to treat the whole busi with a sort of 
cynic levity. 

'to commenc with, may I ask if you have come through london, or 
through ani portion of it, in that costume,--or, rather, in that want 
of costume? It would seem out of place in a cairen street,--would it 
not?--even in the rue de rabagas,--wa it not the rue de rabagas?' 

He ask the question with an emphasi the mean of which wa wholli 
lost on me. what he refer to either then, or in what immedi 
followed, I, of course, knew no more than the man in the moon,--though 
I should probabl have found great difficulti in convinc him of my 
ignorance. 

'I take it that you are a reminisc of the rue de rabagas,--that, of 
course;--i it not of course? the littl hous with the blue-grey 
venetians, and the piano with the F sharp missing? Is there still the 
piano? with the tinni treble,--indeed, the whole atmosphere, wa it not 
tinny?--y agre with me?--i have not forgotten. I am not even afraid 
to remember,--y perceiv it?' 

A new idea seem to strike him,--born, perhaps, of my continu 
silence. 

'you look english,--i it possibl that you are not english? what are 
you then--french? We shall see!' 

He address me in a tongu which I recognis as french, but with 
which I wa not suffici acquaint to understand. although, I 
flatter myself that,--a the present narr should show--i have not 
made an ill-us of the opportun which I have had to improv my, 
originally, modest education, I regret that I have never had so much as 
a ghost of a chanc to acquir an even rudimentari knowledg of ani 
languag except my own. recognising, I suppose, from my looks, that he 
wa address me in a tongu to which I wa a stranger, after a time 
he stopped, ad someth with a smile, and then began to talk to me 
in a lingo to which, in a manner of speaking, I wa even stranger, for 
thi time I had not the faintest notion what it was,--it might have 
been gibberish for all that I could tell. quickli perceiv that he 
had succeed no better than before, he return to english. 

'you do not know french?--nor the patoi of the rue de rabagas? veri 
good,--then what is it that you do know? are you under a vow of 
silence, or are you dumb,--except upon occasion? your face is 
english,--what can be seen of it, and I will take it, therefore, that 
english spoken word convey some mean to your brain. So listen, sir, 
to what I have to say,--do me the favour to listen carefully.' 

He wa becom more and more hi former self. In hi clear, modul 
tone there wa a ring of someth like a threat,--a someth which 
went veri far beyond hi words. 

'you know someth of a period which I choos to have forgotten,--that 
is plain; you come from a person who, probably, know still more. Go 
back to that person and say that what I have forgotten I have 
forgotten; noth will be gain by anyon by an endeavour to induc 
me to remember,--b veri sure upon that point, say that noth will be 
gain by anyone. that time wa one of mirage, of delusion, of disease. 
I wa in a condition, mental and bodily, in which prank could have 
been play upon me by ani trickster. such prank were played. I know 
that now quit well. I do not pretend to be profici in the modu 
operandi of the hankey-pankey man, but I know that he ha a method, all 
the same,--on susceptible, too, of facil explanation. Go back to your 
friend, and tell him that I am not again like to be made the butt of 
hi old method,--nor of hi new one either.--y hear me, sir?' 

I remain motionless and silent,--an attitud which, plainly, he 
resented. 

'are you deaf and dumb? you certainli are not dumb, for you spoke to me 
just now. Be advis by me, and do not compel me to resort to measur 
which will be the caus to you of seriou discomfort.--y hear me, 
sir?' 

still, from me, not a sign of comprehension,--to hi increas 
annoyance. 

'so be it. keep your own counsel, if you choose. your will be the 
bitterness, not mine. you may play the lunatic, and play it excel 
well, but that you do understand what is said to you is clear.--com to 
business, sir. give me that revolver, and the packet of letter which 
you have stolen from my desk.' 

He had been speak with the air of one who desir to convinc 
himself as much as me,--and about hi last word there wa almost a 
flavour of braggadocio. I remain unheeding. 

'are you go to do as I require, or are you insan enough to 
refuse?--in which case I shall summon assistance, and there will 
quickli be an end of it. pray do not imagin that you can trick me into 
suppos that you do not grasp the situation. I know better.--onc 
more, are you go to give me that revolv and those letters?' 

yet no reply. hi anger wa grow momentarili greater,--and hi 
agit too. On my first introduct to paul lessingham I wa not 
destin to discov in him ani one of those qualiti of which the 
world held him to be the undisput possessor. He show himself to be 
as unlik the statesman I had conceived, and esteemed, as he easili 
could have done. 

'do you think I stand in awe of you?--you!--of such a thing as you! Do 
as I tell you, or I myself will make you,--and, at the same time, teach 
you a much-need lesson.' 

He rais hi voice. In hi bear there wa a would-b defiance. He 
might not have been awar of it, but the repetit of the threat 
were, in themselves, confess of weakness. He came a step or two 
forward,--then, stop short, began to tremble. the perspir 
broke out upon hi brow; he made spasmod littl dab at it with hi 
crumpled-up handkerchief. hi eye wander hither and thither, as if 
search for someth which they fear to see yet were constrain 
to seek. He began to talk to himself, out loud, in odd disconnect 
sentences,--appar ignor me entirely. 

'what wa that?--it wa nothing.--it wa my imagination.--mi nerv are 
out of order.--i have been work too hard.--i am not well.--what' 
that?' 

thi last inquiri came from him in a half-stifl shriek,--a the door 
open to admit the head and bodi of an elderli man in a state of 
consider undress. He had the tousl appear of one who had been 
unexpectedli rous out of slumber, and unwillingli drag from bed. 
Mr lessingham stare at him as if he had been a ghost, while he stare 
back at Mr lessingham as if he found a difficulti in credit the 
evid of hi own eyes. It wa he who broke the 
silence,--stutteringly. 

'I am sure I beg your pardon, sir, but one of the maid thought that 
she heard the sound of a shot, and we came down to see if there wa 
anyth the matter,--i had no idea, sir, that you were here.' hi eye 
travel from Mr lessingham toward me,--suddenli increasing, when 
they saw me, to about twice their previou size. 'god save us!--who is 
that?' 

the man' self-evid cowardic possibl impress Mr lessingham with 
the convict that he himself wa not cut the most dignifi of 
figures. At ani rate, he made a notabl effort to, onc more, assum a 
bear of greater determination. 

'you are quit right, matthews, quit right. I am oblig by your 
watchfulness. At present you may leav the room--i propos to deal with 
thi fellow myself,--onli remain with the other men upon the landing, 
so that, if I call, you may come to my assistance.' 

matthew did as he wa told, he left the room,--with, I fancy, more 
rapid than he had enter it. Mr lessingham return to me, hi 
manner distinctli more determined, as if he found hi resolut 
reinforc by the near neighbourhood of hi retainers, 

'now, my man, you see how the case stands, at a word from me you will 
be overpow and doom to undergo a long period of imprisonment. yet 
I am still will to listen to the dictat of mercy. put down that 
revolver, give me those letters,--y will not find me dispos to 
treat you hardly.' 

for all the attent I paid him, I might have been a graven image. He 
misunderstood, or pretend to misunderstand, the caus of my silence. 

'come, I see that you suppos my intent to be harsher than they 
realli are,--do not let us have a scandal, and a scene,--b 
sensible!--g me those letters!' 

again he move in my direction; again, after he had taken a step or 
two, to stumbl and stop, and look about him with frighten eyes; 
again to begin to mumbl to himself aloud. 

'it' a conjurer' trick!--of course!--noth more,--what els could 
it be?--i'm not to be fooled.--i'm older than I was. i'v been 
overdo it,--that' all.' 

suddenli he broke into cries. 

'matthews! matthews!--help! help!' 

matthew enter the room, follow by three other men, younger than 
himself. evid all had slip into the first articl of cloth 
they could lay their hand upon, and each carri a stick, or some 
similar rudimentari weapon. 

their master spur them on. 

'strike the revolv out of hi hand, matthews!--knock him down!--tak 
the letter from him!--don't be afraid!--i'm not afraid!' 

In proof of it, he rush at me, as it seem half blindly. As he did 
so I wa constrain to shout out, in tone which I should not have 
recognis as mine, 

'the beetle!' 

and that moment the room wa all in darkness, and there were scream as 
of someon in an agoni of terror or of pain. I felt that someth had 
come into the room, I knew not whenc nor how,--someth of horror. 
and the next action of which I wa consciou was, that under cover of 
the darkness, I wa fli from the room, propel by I knew not what. 




chapter viii 

the man IN the street 


whether anyon pursu I cannot say. I have some dim recollection, as I 
came out of the room, of women be huddl against the wall upon the 
landing, and of their scream as I went past. but whether ani effort 
wa made to arrest my progress I cannot tell. My own impress is that 
not the slightest attempt to imped my headlong flight wa made by 
anyone. 

In what direct I wa go I did not know. I wa like a man fli 
through the phantasmagor happen of a dream, know neither how 
nor whither. I tore along what I suppos wa a broad passage, through a 
door at the end into what, I fancy, wa a drawing-room. across thi 
room I dashed, helter-skelter, bring down, in the gloom, unseen 
articl of furniture, with myself sometim on top, and sometim 
under them. In a trice, each time I fell, I wa on my feet 
again,--until I went crash against a window which wa conceal by 
curtains. It would not have been strang had I crash through it,--but 
I wa spare that. thrust asid the curtains, I fumbl for the 
fasten of the window. It wa a tall french casement, extending, so 
far as I could judge, from floor to ceiling. when I had it open I 
step through it on to the verandah without,--to find that I wa on 
the top of the portico which I had vainli essay to ascend from below. 

I tri the road down which I had tri up,--proceed with a 
breakneck reckless of which now I shudder to think. It was, 
probably, some thirti feet abov the pavement, yet I rush at the 
descent with as much disregard for the safeti of life and limb as if it 
had been onli three. over the edg of the parapet I went, obtaining, 
with my nake feet, a precari foothold on the latticework,--then 
down I commenc to scramble. I never did get a proper hold, and when I 
had descended, perhaps, rather more than half the distance--scraping, 
as it seem to me, everi scrap of skin off my bodi in the process--i 
lost what littl hold I had. down to the bottom I went tumbling, 
roll right across the pavement into the muddi road. It wa a miracl 
I wa not serious injured,--but in that sense, certainly, that night 
the miracl were on my side. hardli wa I down, than I wa up 
again,--mud and all. 

just as I wa get on to my feet I felt a firm hand grip me by the 
shoulder. turn I found myself confront by a tall, slenderli built 
man, with a long, droop moustache, and an overcoat button up to 
the chin, who held me with a grasp of steel. He look at me,--and I 
look back at him. 

'after the ball,--eh?' 

even then I wa struck by someth pleasant in hi voice, and some 
qualiti as of sunshin in hi handsom face. 

see that I said noth he went on,--with a curious, half mock 
smile. 

'i that the way to come slither down the apostle' pillar?--i it 
simpl burglary, or simpler murder?--tel me the glad tide that 
you'v kill St paul, and i'll let you go.' 

whether he wa mad or not I cannot say,--ther wa some excus for 
think so. He did not look mad, though hi word and action alik 
were strange. 

'although you have confin yourself to gentl felony, shall I not 
shower bless on the head of him who ha been rob paul?--away 
with you!' 

He remov hi grip, give me a gentl push as he did so,--and I wa 
away. I neither stay nor paused. 

I knew littl of records, but if anyon ha made a better record than I 
did that night between lownd squar and walham green I should like to 
know just what it was,--i should, too, like to have seen it done. 

In an incred short space of time I wa onc more in front of the 
hous with the open window,--th packet of letters--which were like to 
have cost me so dear!--grip tightli in my hand. 




chapter IX 

the content OF the packet 


I pull up sharply,--a if a brake had been suddenly, and even 
mercilessly, appli to bring me to a standstill. In front of the 
window I stood shivering. A shower had recent commenced,--th fall 
rain wa be blown befor the breeze. I wa in a terribl sweat,--yet 
tremul as with cold; cover with mud; bruised, and cut, and 
bleeding,--a piteou an object as you would care to see. everi limb in 
my bodi ached; everi muscl wa exhausted; mental and physic I 
wa done; had I not been held up, willi nilly, by the spell which wa 
upon me, I should have sunk down, then and there, in a hopeless, 
helpless, hapless heap. 

but my tormentor wa not yet at an end with me. 

As I stood there, like some broken and beaten hack, wait for the 
word of command, it came. It wa as if some strong magnet current had 
been switch on to me through the window to draw me into the room. 
over the low wall I went, over the sill,--onc more I stood in that 
chamber of my humili and my shame. and onc again I wa consciou 
of that aw sens of the presenc of an evil thing. how much of it 
wa fact, and how much of it wa the product of imagin I cannot 
say; but, look back, it seem to me that it wa as if I had been 
taken out of the corpor bodi to be plung into the inner chamber 
of all nameless sin. there wa the sound of someth flop from off 
the bed on to the ground, and I knew that the thing wa come at me 
across the floor. My stomach quaked, my heart melt within me,--th 
veri anguish of my terror gave me strength to scream,--and scream! 
sometimes, even now, I seem to hear those scream of mine ring 
through the night, and I buri my face in the pillow, and it is as 
though I wa pass through the veri valley of the shadow. 

the thing went back,--i could hear it slip and slide across the 
floor. there wa silence. and, presently, the lamp wa lit, and the 
room wa all in brightness. there, on the bed, in the familiar attitud 
between the sheets, hi head rest on hi hand, hi eye blaze like 
live coals, wa the dread caus of all my agonies. He look at me 
with hi unpitying, unblink glance. 

'so!--through the window again!--lik a thief!--i it alway through 
that door that you come into a house?' 

He paused,--a if to give me time to digest hi gibe. 

'you saw paul lessingham,--well?--th great paul lessingham!--wa he, 
then, so great?' 

hi rasp voice, with it queer foreign twang, remind me, in some 
uncomfort way, of a rusti saw,--th thing he said, and the manner 
in which he said them, were alik intend to add to my discomfort. It 
wa sole becaus the feat wa bare possibl that he onli partial 
succeeded. 

'like a thief you went into hi house,--did I not tell you that you 
would? like a thief he found you,--wer you not ashamed? since, like a 
thief he found you, how come it that you have escaped,--bi what 
robber' artific have you save yourself from gaol?' 

hi manner changed,--so that, all at once, he seem to snarl at me. 

'i he great?--well!--i he great,--paul lessingham? you are small, but 
he is smaller,--your great paul lessingham!--wa there ever a man so 
less than nothing?' 

with the recollect fresh upon me of Mr lessingham as I had so late 
seen him I could not but feel that there might be a modicum of truth in 
what, with such an intens of bitterness, the speaker suggested. the 
pictur which, in my mental gallery, I had hung in the place of honour, 
seemed, to say the least, to have becom a trifl smudged. 

As usual, the man in the bed seem to experi not the slightest 
difficulti in deciph what wa pass through my mind. 

'that is so,--you and he, you are a pair,--th great paul lessingham is 
as great a thief as you,--and greater!--for, at least, than you he ha 
more courage.' 

for some moment he wa still; then exclaimed, with sudden fierceness, 

'give me what you have stolen!' 

I move toward the bed--most unwillingly--and held out to him the 
packet of letter which I had abstract from the littl drawer. 
perceiv my disinclin to hi near neighbourhood, he set himself 
to play with it. ignor my outstretch hand, he stare me straight 
in the face. 

'what ail you? are you not well? Is it not sweet to stand close at my 
side? you, with your white skin, if I were a woman, would you not take 
me for a wife?' 

there wa someth about the manner in which thi wa said which wa 
so essenti feminin that onc more I wonder if I could possibl 
be mistaken in the creature' sex. I would have given much to have been 
abl to strike him across the face,--or, better, to have taken him by 
the neck, and thrown him through the window, and roll him in the mud. 

He condescend to notic what I wa hold out to him. 

'so!--that is what you have stolen!--that is what you have taken from 
the drawer in the bureau--th drawer which wa locked--and which you 
use the art in which a thief is skill to enter. give it to 
me,--thief!' 

He snatch the packet from me, scratch the back of my hand as he 
did so, as if hi nail had been talons. He turn the packet over and 
over, glare at it as he did so,--it wa strang what a relief it wa 
to have hi glanc remov from off my face. 

'you kept it in your inner drawer, paul lessingham, where none but you 
could see it,--did you? you hid it as one hide treasure. there should 
be someth here worth having, worth seeing, worth knowing,--yes, 
worth knowing!--sinc you found it worth your while to hide it up so 
closely.' 

As I have said, the packet wa bound about by a string of pink 
ribbon,--a fact on which he present began to comment. 

'with what a pretti string you have encircl it,--and how neatli it is 
tied! sure onli a woman' hand could tie a knot like that,--who would 
have guess your were such agil fingers?--so! An endors on the 
cover! what' this?--let' see what' written!--"th letter of my dear 
love, marjori lindon."' 

As he read these words, which, as he said, were endors upon the outer 
sheet of paper which serv as a cover for the letter which were 
enclos within, hi face becam transfigured. never did I suppos that 
rage could have so possess a human countenance. hi jaw drop open 
so that hi yellow fang gleam though hi part lips,--h held hi 
breath so long that each moment I look to see him fall down in a fit; 
the vein stood out all over hi face and head like seam of blood. I 
know not how long he continu speechless. when hi breath returned, it 
wa with choke and gaspings, in the midst of which he hiss out hi 
words, as if their mere passag through hi throat brought him near to 
strangulation. 

'the letter of hi dear love!--of hi dear love!--his!--paul 
lessingham's!--so!--it is as I guessed,--a I knew,--a I 
saw!--marjori lindon!--sweet marjorie!--hi dear love!--paul 
lessingham' dear love!--sh with the lili face, the corn-hu 
hair!--what is it hi dear love ha found in her fond heart to write 
paul lessingham?' 

sit up in bed he tore the packet open. It contained, perhaps, eight 
or nine letters,--som mere notes, some long epistles. but, short or 
long, he devour them with equal appetite, each one over and over 
again, till I thought he never would have done re-read them. they 
were on thick white paper, of a peculiar shade of whiteness, with 
untrim edges, On each sheet a crest and an address were stamp in 
gold, and all the sheet were of the same shape and size. I told myself 
that if anywhere, at ani time, I saw write paper like that again, I 
should not fail to know it. the caligraphi was, like the paper, 
unusual, bold, decided, and, I should have guessed, produc by a J pen. 

all the time that he wa read he kept emit sounds, more 
resembl yelp and snarl than anyth more human,--lik some savag 
beast nurs it pent-up rage. when he had made an end of 
reading,--for the season,--h let hi passion have full vent. 

'so!--that is what hi dear love ha found it in her heart to write 
paul lessingham!--paul lessingham!' 

pen cannot describ the concentr frenzi of hatr with which the 
speaker dwelt upon the name,--it wa demoniac. 

'it is enough!--it is the end!--it is hi doom! He shall be ground 
between the upper and the nether stone in the tower of anguish, and 
all that is left of him shall be cast on the accurs stream of the 
bitter waters, to stink under the blood-grim sun! and for her--for 
marjori lindon!--for hi dear love!--it shall come to pass that she 
shall wish that she wa never born,--nor he!--and the god of the 
shadow shall smell the sweet incens of her suffering!--it shall be! 
it shall be! It is I that say it,--even i!' 

In the mad of hi rhapsod frenzi I believ that he had actual 
forgotten I wa there. but, on a sudden, glanc aside, he saw me, and 
remembered,--and wa prompt to take advantag of an opportun to 
wreak hi rage upon a tangibl object. 

'it is you!--you thief!--you still live!--to make a mock of one of the 
children of the gods!' 

He leaped, shrieking, off the bed, and sprang at me, clasp my throat 
with hi horrid hands, bear me backward on to the floor; I felt hi 
breath mingl with mine * * * and then god, in hi mercy, sent oblivion. 




book II 

the haunt man 


the stori accord to sydney atherton, esquir 




chapter X 

reject 


It wa after our second waltz I did it. In the usual quiet 
corner--which, that time, wa in the shadow of a palm in the hall. 
befor I had got into my stride she check me,--touch my sleev 
with her fan, turn toward me with startl eyes. 

'stop, please!' 

but I wa not to be stopped. cliff challon passed, with gerti cazell. 
I fanci that, as he passed, he nodded. I did not care. I wa wound up 
to go, and I went it. No man know how he can talk till he doe 
talk,--to the girl he want to marry. It is my impress that I gave 
her recollect of the restor poets. she seem surprised,--not 
have previous detect in me the poetic strain, and insist on 
cut in. 

'mr atherton, I am so sorry.' 

then I did let fly. 

'sorri that I love you!--why? whi should you be sorri that you have 
becom the one thing need in ani man' eyes,--even in mine? the one 
thing precious,--th one thing to be altogeth esteemed! Is it so 
common for a woman to come across a man who would be will to lay 
down hi life for her that she should be sorri when she find him?' 

'I did not know that you felt like this, though I confess that I have 
had my--mi doubts.' 

'doubts!--i thank you.' 

'you are quit aware, Mr atherton, that I like you veri much.' 

'like me!--bah!' 

'I cannot help like you,--though it may be "bah."' 

'I don't want you to like me,--i want you to love me.' 

'precisely,--that is your mistake.' 

'mi mistake!--in want you to love me!--when I love you--' 

'then you shouldn't,--though I can't help think that you are 
mistaken even there.' 

'mistaken!--in suppos that I love you!--when I assert and reassert 
it with the whole forc of my being! what do you want me to do to prove 
I love you,--tak you in my arm and crush you to my bosom, and make a 
spectacl of you befor everi creatur in the place?' 

'i'd rather you wouldn't, and perhap you wouldn't mind not talk 
quit so loud. Mr challon seem to be wonder what you'r shout 
about.' 

'you shouldn't tortur me.' 

she open and shut her fan,--a she look down at it I am dispos to 
suspect that she smiled. 

'I am glad we have had thi littl explanation, because, of course, you 
are my friend.' 

'I am not your friend.' 

'pardon me, you are.' 

'I say i'm not,--if I can't be someth else, i'll be no friend.' 

she went on,--calmli ignor me,--play with her fan. 

'a it happens, I am, just now, in rather a delic position, in which 
a friend is welcome.' 

'what' the matter? who' been worri you,--your father?' 

'well,--h ha not,--a yet; but he may be soon.' 

'what' in the wind?' 

'mr lessingham.' 

she drop her voice,--and her eyes. for the moment I did not catch 
her meaning. 

'what?' 

'your friend, Mr lessingham.' 

'excus me, miss lindon, but I am by no mean sure that anyon is 
entitl to call Mr lessingham a friend of mine.' 

'what!--not when I am go to be hi wife?' 

that took me aback. I had had my suspicion that paul lessingham wa 
more with marjori than he had ani right to be, but I had never 
suppos that she could see anyth desir in a stick of a man like 
that. not to speak of a hundr and one other 
considerations,--lessingham on one side of the house, and her father on 
the other; and old lindon gird at him anywher and everywhere--with 
hi high-dri tori notion of hi famili importance,--to say noth 
of hi fortune. 

I don't know if I look what I felt,--if I did, I look uncommonli 
blank. 

'you have chosen an appropri moment, miss lindon, to make to me such 
a communication.' 

she chose to disregard my irony. 

'I am glad you think so, becaus now you will understand what a 
difficult posit I am in.' 

'I offer you my hearti congratulations.' 

'and I thank you for them, Mr atherton, in the spirit in which they are 
offered, becaus from you I know they mean so much.' 

I bit my lip,--for the life of me I could not tell how she wish me to 
read her words. 

'do I understand that thi announc ha been made to me as one of 
the public?' 

'you do not. It is made to you, in confidence, as my friend,--a my 
greatest friend; becaus a husband is someth more than friend.' My 
puls tingled. 'you will be on my side?' 

she had paused,--and I stay silent. 

'on your side,--or Mr lessingham's?' 

'hi side is my side, and my side is hi side;--y will be on our 
side?' 

'I am not sure that I altogeth follow you.' 

'you are the first I have told. when papa hear it is possibl that 
there will be trouble,--a you know. He think so much of you and of 
your opinion; when that troubl come I want you to be on our side,--on 
my side.' 

'whi should i?--what doe it matter? you are stronger than your 
father,--it is just possibl that lessingham is stronger than you; 
together, from your father' point of view, you will be invincible.' 

'you are my friend,--ar you not my friend?' 

'in effect, you offer me an appl of sodom.' 

'thank you;--i did not think you so unkind.' 

'and you,--ar you kind? I make you an avow of my love, and, 
straightway, you ask me to act as choru to the love of another.' 

'how could I tell you love me,--a you say! I had no notion. you have 
known me all your life, yet you have not breath a word of it till 
now.' 

'if I had spoken before?' 

I imagin that there wa a slight movement of her shoulders,--almost 
amount to a shrug. 

'I do not know that it would have made ani difference.--i do not 
pretend that it would. but I do know this, I believ that you yourself 
have onli discov the state of your own mind within the last 
half-hour.' 

If she had slap my face she could not have startl me more. I had 
no notion if her word were utter at random, but they came so near 
the truth they held me breathless. It wa a fact that onli dure the 
last few minut had I realli realis how thing were with me,--onli 
sinc the end of that first waltz that the flame had burst out in my 
soul which wa now consum me. she had read me by what seem so like 
a flash of inspir that I hardli knew what to say to her. I tri 
to be stinging. 

'you flatter me, miss lindon, you flatter me at everi point. had you 
onli discov to me the state of your mind a littl sooner I should 
not have discov to you the state of mine at all.' 

'we will consid it terra incognita.' 

'sinc you wish it.' her provok calm stung me,--and the 
suspicion that she wa laugh at me in her sleeve. I gave her a 
glimps of the cloven hoof. 'but, at the same time, sinc you assert 
that you have so long been innocent, I beg that you will continu so no 
more. At least, your innoc shall be without excuse. for I wish you 
to understand that I love you, that I have love you, that I shall love 
you. ani understand you may have with Mr lessingham will not make 
the slightest difference. I warn you, miss lindon, that, until death, 
you will have to write me down your lover.' 

she look at me, with wide open eyes,--a if I almost frighten her. 
To be frank, that wa what I wish to do. 

'mr atherton!' 

'miss lindon?' 

'that is not like you at all.' 

'we seem to be make each other' acquaint for the first time.' 

she continu to gaze at me with her big eyes,--which, to be candid, I 
found it difficult to meet. On a sudden her face wa light by a 
smile,--which I resented. 

'not after all these years,--not after all these years! I know you, and 
though I daresay you'r not flawless, I fanci you'll be found to ring 
pretti true.' 

her manner wa almost sisterly,--elder-sisterly. I could have shaken 
her. hartridg come to claim hi danc gave me an opportun to 
escap with such remnant of digniti as I could gather about me. He 
dawdl up,--hi thumbs, as usual, in hi waistcoat pockets. 

'I believe, miss lindon, thi is our dance.' 

she acknowledg it with a bow, and rose to take hi arm. I got up, and 
left her, without a word. 

As I cross the hall I chanc on perci woodville. He wa in hi 
familiar state of fluster, and wa gape about him as if he had 
mislaid the koh-i-noor, and wonder where in thunder it had got to. 
when he saw it wa I he caught me by the arm. 

'I say, atherton, have you seen miss lindon?' 

'I have.' 

'no!--hav you?--bi jove!--where? i'v been look for her all over 
the place, except in the cellar and the attics,--and I wa just go 
to commenc on them. thi is our dance.' 

'in that case, she' shunt you.' 

'no!--impossible!' hi mouth went like an o,--and hi eye ditto, hi 
eyeglass clatter down on to hi shirt front. 'I expect the mistake' 
mine. fact is, i'v made a mess of my programme. it' either the last 
dance, or thi dance, or the next, that i'v book with her, but i'm 
hang if I know which. just take a squint at it, there' a good chap, 
and tell me which one you think it is.' 

I 'took a squint'--sinc he held the thing within an inch of my nose I 
could hardli help it; one 'squint,' and that wa enough--and more. some 
men' ball programm are studi in impressionism, percy' seem to 
me to be a studi in madness. It wa cover with hieroglyphics, but 
what they meant, or what they did there anyhow, it wa absurd to 
suppos that I could tell,--i never put them there!--proverbially, the 
man' a champion hasher. 

'I regret, my dear percy, that I am not an expert in cuneiform writing. 
If you have ani doubt as to which danc is yours, you'd better ask the 
lady,--she'l feel flattered.' 

leav him to do hi own addl I went to find my coat,--i pant to 
get into the open air; as for danc I felt that I loath it. just as 
I near the cloak-room someon stop me. It wa dora grayling. 

'have you forgotten that thi is our dance?' 

I had forgotten,--clean. and I wa not oblig by her remembering. 
though as I look at her sweet, grey eyes, and at the soft contour of 
her gentl face, I felt that I deserv well kicking. she is an 
angel,--on of the best!--but I wa in no mood for angels. not for a 
veri great deal would I have gone through that danc just then, nor, 
with dora grayling, of all women in the world, would I have sat it 
out.--so I wa a brute and blundered. 

'you must forgiv me, miss grayling, but--i am not feel veri well, 
and--i don't think i'm up to ani more dancing.--good-night.' 




chapter XI 

A midnight episod 


the weather out of door wa in tune with my frame of mind,--i wa in a 
deuc of a temper, and it wa a deuc of a night. A keen north-east 
wind, warrant to take the skin right off you, wa play 
catch-who-catch-can with intermitt gust of blind rain. sinc it 
wa not fit for a dog to walk, none of your cab for me,--noth would 
serv but pedestrian exercise. 

So I had it. 

I went down park lane,--and the wind and rain went with me,--also, 
thought of dora grayling. what a bounder I had been,--and was! If 
there is anyth in wors tast than to book a ladi for a dance, and 
then to leav her in the lurch, I should like to know what that thing 
is,--when found it ought to be made a note of. If ani man of my 
acquaint allow himself to be guilti of such a feloni in the first 
degree, I should cut him. I wish someon would tri to cut me,--i 
should like to see him at it. 

It wa all marjorie' fault,--everything! past, present, and to come. I 
had known that girl when she wa in long frocks--i had, at that period 
of our acquaintance, pretti recent got out of them; when she wa 
advanc to short ones; and when, onc more, she return to long. and 
all that time,--well, I wa nearli persuad that the whole of the time 
I had love her. If I had not mention it, it wa becaus I had 
suffer my affection, 'like the worm, to lie hidden in the bud,'--or 
whatev it is the fellow says. 

At ani rate, I wa perfectli posit that if I had had the faintest 
notion that she would ever serious consid such a man as lessingham 
I should have love her long ago. lessingham! why, he wa old enough to 
be her father,--at least he wa a good mani year older than I was. and 
a wretch radical! It is true that on certain point I, also, am what 
some peopl would call a radical,--but not a radic of the kind he is. 
thank heaven, no! No doubt I have admir trait in hi character, 
until I learnt thi thing of him. I am even prepar to admit that he 
is a man of ability,--in hi way! which is, emphatically, not mine. but 
to think of him in connect with such a girl as marjori 
lindon,--preposterous! why, the man' as dri as a stick,--drier! and 
cold as an iceberg. noth but a politician, absolutely. He a 
lover!--how I could fanci such a stroke of humour set all the 
bench in a roar. both by education, and by nature, he wa incap 
of even play such a part; as for be the thing,--absurd! If you 
were to sink a shaft from the crown of hi head to the sole of hi 
feet, you would find insid him noth but the dri bone of parti 
and of politics. 

what my marjorie--if everyon had hi own, she is mine, and, in that 
sense, she alway will be mine--what my marjori could see in such a 
dry-as-dust out of which even to construct the rudiment of a husband 
wa beyond my fathoming. 

suchlik agreeabl reflect were fit compani for the wind and the 
wet, so they bore me compani all down the lane. I cross at the 
corner, go round the hospit toward the square. thi brought me to 
the abiding-plac of paul the apostle. like the idiot I was, I went out 
into the middl of the street, and stood awhil in the mud to curs him 
and hi house,--on the whole, when one consid that that is the kind 
of man I can be, it is, perhaps, not surpris that marjori disdain 
me. 

'may your following,' I cried,--it is an absolut fact that the word 
were shouted!--'both in the hous and out of it, no longer regard you 
as a leader! may your parti follow after other gods! may your polit 
aspir wither, and your speech be listen to by empti benches! 
may the speaker persist and strenuous refus to allow you to 
catch hi eye, and, at the next election, may your constitu reject 
you!--jehoram!--what' that?' 

I might well ask. until that moment I had appear to be the onli 
lunat at large, either outsid the hous or in it, but, on a sudden, 
a second lunat came on the scene, and that with a vengeance. A window 
wa crash open from within,--th one over the front door, and someon 
came plung through it on to the top of the portico. that it wa a 
case of intend suicid I made sure,--and I began to be in hope that 
I wa about to wit the suicid of paul. but I wa not so assur of 
the intent when the individu in question began to scrambl down 
the pillar of the porch in the most extraordinari fashion I ever 
witnessed,--i wa not even convinc of a suicid purpos when he came 
tumbl down, and lay sprawl in the mud at my feet. 

I fancy, if I had perform that portion of the act I should have lain 
quiet for a second or two, to consid whereabout I was, and which end 
of me wa uppermost. but there wa no nonsens of that sort about that 
singularli agil stranger,--if he wa not made of india-rubb he ought 
to have been. So to speak, befor he wa down he wa up,--it wa all I 
could do to grab at him befor he wa off like a rocket. 

such a figur as he present is seldom seen,--at least, in the street 
of london. what he had done with the rest of hi apparel I am not in a 
posit to say,--al that wa left of it wa a long, dark cloak which 
he strove to wrap round him. save for that,--and mud!--h wa bare as 
the palm of my hand, yet it wa hi face that held me. In my time I 
have seen strang express on men' faces, but never befor one such 
as I saw on his. He look like a man might look who, after live a 
life of undilut crime, at last find himself face to face with the 
devil. It wa not the look of a madman,--far from it; it wa someth 
worse. 

It wa the express on the man' countenance, as much as anyth 
else, which made me behav as I did. I said someth to him,--som 
nonsense, I know not what. He regard me with a silenc which wa 
supernatural. I spoke to him again;--not a word issu from those rigid 
lips; there wa not a tremor of those aw eyes,--ey which I wa 
toler convinc saw someth which I had never seen, or ever 
should. then I took my hand from off hi shoulder, and let him go. I 
know not why,--i did. 

He had remain as motionless as a statu while I held him,--indeed, 
for ani evid of life he gave, he might have been a statue; but, 
when my grasp wa loosed, how he ran! He had turn the corner and wa 
out of sight befor I could say, 'how do!' 

It wa onli then,--when he had gone, and I had realis the 
extra-double-express-flash-of-lightn rate at which he had taken hi 
departure--that it occur to me of what an extrem sensibl act I 
had been guilti in let him go at all. here wa an individu who 
had been commit burglary, or someth veri like it, in the hous 
of a bud cabinet minister, and who had tumbl plump into my arms, 
so that all I had to do wa to call a policeman and get him 
quodded,--and all that I had done wa someth of a total differ 
kind. 

'you'r a nice type of an ideal citizen!' I wa address myself, 'A 
first chop specimen of a low-down idiot,--to conniv at the escap of 
the robber who' been rob paul. sinc you'v let the villain go, 
the least you can do is to leav a card on the apostle, and inquir how 
he' feeling.' 

I went to lessingham' front door and knocked,--i knock once, I 
knock twice, I knock thrice, and the third time, I give you my 
word, I made the echo ring,--but still there wa not a soul that 
answered. 

'if thi is a case of a seven or seventy-fold murder, and the gentleman 
in the cloak ha made a fair clearanc of everi live creatur the 
hous contains, perhap it' just as well i'v chanc upon the 
scene,--stil I do think that one of the corps might get up to answer 
the door. If it is possibl to make nois enough to waken the dead, you 
bet i'm on to it.' 

and I was,--i punish that knocker! until I warrant the pound I 
gave it wa audibl on the other side of green park. and, at last, I 
woke the dead,--or, rather, I rous matthew to a conscious that 
someth wa go on. open the door about six inches, through the 
interstic he protrud hi ancient nose. 

'who' there?' 

'nothing, my dear sir, noth and no one. It must have been your 
vigor imagin which induc you to suppos that there was,--you 
let it run away with you.' 

then he knew me,--and open the door about two feet. 

'oh, it' you, Mr atherton. I beg your pardon, sir,--i thought it might 
have been the police.' 

'what then? Do you stand in terror of the minion of the law,--at last?' 

A most discreet servant, matthews,--just the fellow for a bud 
cabinet minister. He glanc over hi shoulder,--i had suspect the 
presenc of a colleagu at hi back, now I wa assured. He put hi hand 
up to hi mouth,--and I thought how exceedingli discreet he looked, in 
hi trouser and hi stocking feet, and with hi hair all rumpled, 
and hi brace dangl behind, and hi nightshirt creased. 

'well, sir, I have receiv instruct not to admit the police.' 

'the deuc you have!--from whom?' 

cough behind hi hand, lean forward, he address me with an air 
which wa flatteringli confidential. 

'from Mr lessingham, sir.' 

'possibl Mr lessingham is not awar that a robberi ha been commit 
on hi premises, that the burglar ha just come out of hi drawing-room 
window with a hop, skip, and a jump, bound out of the window like a 
tennis-ball, flash round the corner like a rocket,' 

again matthew glanc over hi shoulder, as if not clear which way 
discret lay, whether fore or aft. 

'thank you, sir. I believ that Mr lessingham is awar of someth of 
the kind.' He seem to come to a sudden resolution, drop hi voic 
to a whisper. 'the fact is, sir, that I fanci Mr lessingham' a good 
deal upset.' 

'upset?' I stare at him. there wa someth in hi manner I did not 
understand. 'what do you mean by upset? ha the scoundrel attempt 
violence?' 

'who' there?' 

the voic wa lessingham's, call to matthew from the staircase, 
though, for an instant, I hardli recognis it, it wa so curious 
petulant. push past matthews, I step into the hall. A young man, 
I suppos a footman, in the same undress as matthews, wa hold a 
candle,--it seem the onli light about the place. By it glimmer I 
perceiv lessingham stand half-way up the stairs. He wa in full 
war paint,--a he is not the sort of man who dress for the house, I 
took it that he had been mix pleasur with business. 

'it' I, lessingham,--atherton. Do you know that a fellow ha jump 
out of your drawing-room window?' 

It wa a second or two befor he answered. when he did, hi voic had 
lost it petulance. 

'ha he escaped?' 

'clean,--he' a mile away by now.' 

It seem to me that in hi tone, when he spoke again, there wa a note 
of relief. 

'I wonder if he had. poor fellow! more sin against than sinning! 
take my advice, atherton, and keep out of politics. they bring you into 
contact with all the lunat at large. good night! I am much oblig 
to you for knock us up. matthews, shut the door.' 

toler cool, on my honour,--a man who bring news big with the fate 
of rome doe not expect to receiv such treatment. He expect to be 
listen to with deference, and to hear all that there is to hear, and 
not to be sent to the right-about befor he ha had a chanc of realli 
open hi lips. befor I knew it--almost!--th door wa shut, and I 
wa on the doorstep. confound the apostle' impudence! next time he 
might have hi hous burnt down--and him in it!--befor I took the 
troubl to touch hi dirti knocker. 

what did he mean by hi allus to lunat in politics,--did he think 
to fool me? there wa more in the busi than met the eye,--and a 
good deal more than he wish to meet mine,--h hi insolence. the 
creature. 

what marjori lindon could see in such an opusculum surpass my 
comprehension; especi when there wa a man of my sort walk 
about, who ador the veri ground she trod upon. 




chapter xii 

A morn visitor 


all through the night, wake and sleeping, and in my dreams, I 
wonder what marjori could see in him! In those same dream I 
satisfi myself that she could, and did, see noth in him, but 
everyth in me,--oh the comfort! the misfortun wa that when I awok 
I knew it wa the other way round,--so that it wa a sad awakening. An 
awaken to thought of murder. 

so, swallow a mouth and a peg, I went into my laboratori to plan 
murder--legalis murder--on the biggest scale it ever ha been 
planned. I wa on the track of a weapon which would make war not onli 
an affair of a singl campaign, but of a singl half-hour. It would not 
want an armi to work it either. onc let an individual, or two or three 
at most, in possess of my weapon-that-was-to-be, get within a mile 
or so of even the largest bodi of disciplin troop that ever yet a 
nation put into the field, and--pouf!--in about the time it take you 
to say that they would be all dead men. If weapon of precision, which 
may be reli upon to slay, are preserv of the peace--and the man is 
a fool who say that they are not!--then I wa within reach of the 
finest preserv of the peac imagin ever yet conceived. 

what a sublim thought to think that in the hollow of your own hand 
lie the life and death of nations,--and it wa almost in mine. 

I had in front of me some of the finest destruct agent you could 
wish to light upon--carbon-monoxide, chlorine-trioxide, mercuric-oxide, 
conine, potassamide, potassium-carboxide, cyanogen--when edward 
entered. I wa wear a mask of my own invention, a thing that cover 
ear and head and everything, someth like a diver' helmet--i wa 
deal with gase a sniff of which meant death; onli a few day 
before, unmasked, I had been do some fool' trick with a coupl of 
acids--sulphur and cyanid of potassium--when, somehow, my hand 
slipped, and, befor I knew it, minut portion of them combined. By 
the merci of provid I fell backward instead of forwards;--sequel, 
about an hour afterward edward found me on the floor, and it took the 
remaind of that day, and most of the doctor in town, to bring me 
back to life again. 

edward announc hi presenc by touch me on the shoulder,--when I 
am wear that mask it isn't alway easi to make me hear. 

'someon wish to see you, sir.' 

'then tell someon that I don't wish to see him.' 

well-train servant, edwards,--h walk off with the messag as 
decor as you please. and then I thought there wa an end,--but 
there wasn't. 

I wa regul the valv of a cylind in which I wa fuse some 
oxid when, onc more, someon touch me on the shoulder. without 
turn I took it for grant it wa edward back again. 

'I have onli to give a tini twist to thi tap, my good fellow, and you 
will be in the land where the bogi bloom. whi will you come where 
you'r not wanted?' then I look round. 'who the devil are you?' 

for it wa not edward at all, but quit a differ class of character. 

I found myself confront an individu who might almost have sat for 
one of the bogi I had just allud to. hi costum wa reminisc of 
the 'algerians' whom one find all over france, and who are the most 
persistent, insol and amus of pedlars. I rememb one who use to 
haunt the repetit at the alcazar at tours,--but there! thi 
individu wa like the originals, yet unlike,--h wa less gaudy, and 
a good deal dingier, than hi gallic prototyp are apt to be. then he 
wore a burnoose,--th yellow, grimy-look articl of the arab of the 
soudan, not the spick and span arab of the boulevard. chief differ 
of all, hi face wa clean shaven,--and whoever saw an algerian of 
pari whose chiefest glori wa not hi well-trim moustach and beard? 

I expect that he would address me in the lingo which these gentlemen 
call french,--but he didn't. 

'you are Mr atherton?' 

'and you are mr--who?--how did you come here? where' my servant?' 

the fellow held up hi hand. As he did so, as if in accord with a 
pre-arrang signal, edward came into the room look excess 
startled. I turn to him. 

'i thi the person who wish to see me?' 

'yes, sir.' 

'didn't I tell you to say that I didn't wish to see him?' 

'yes, sir.' 

'then whi didn't you do as I told you?' 

'I did, sir.' 

'then how come he here?' 

'really, sir,'--edward put hi hand up to hi head as if he wa half 
asleep--'i don't quit know.' 

'what do you mean by you don't know? whi didn't you stop him?' 

'I think, sir, that I must have had a touch of sudden faintness, 
becaus I tri to put out my hand to stop him, and--i couldn't.' 

'you'r an idiot.--go!' and he went. I turn to the stranger. 'pray, 
sir, are you a magician?' 

He repli to my question with another. 

'you, Mr atherton,--ar you also a magician?' 

He wa stare at my mask with an evid lack of comprehension. 

'I wear thi because, in thi place, death lurk in so mani subtl 
forms, that, without it, I dare not breathe,' He inclin hi 
head--though I doubt if he understood. 'be so good as to tell me, 
briefly, what it is you wish with me.' 

He slip hi hand into the fold of hi burnoose, and, take out a 
slip of paper, laid it on the shelf by which we were standing. I 
glanc at it, expect to find on it a petition, or a testimonial, or 
a true statement of hi sad case; instead it contain two word 
only,--'marjori lindon.' the unlooked-for sight of that well-lov 
name brought the blood into my cheeks. 

'you come from miss lindon?' He narrow hi shoulders, brought hi 
finger-tip together, inclin hi head, in a fashion which wa 
peculiarli oriental, but not particularli explanatory,--so I repeat 
my question. 

'do you wish me to understand that you do come from miss lindon?' 

again he slip hi hand into hi burnoose, again he produc a slip 
of paper, again he laid it on the shelf, again I glanc at it, again 
noth wa written on it but a name,--'paul lessingham.' 

'well?--i see,--paul lessingham.--what then?' 

'she is good,--h is bad,--i it not so?' 

He touch first one scrap of paper, then the other. I stared. 

'pray how do you happen to know?' 

'he shall never have her,--eh?' 

'what on earth do you mean?' 

'ah!--what do I mean!' 

'precisely, what do you mean? and also, and at the same time, who the 
devil are you?' 

'it is as a friend I come to you.' 

'then in that case you may go; I happen to be over-stock in that line 
just now.' 

'not with the kind of friend I am!' 

'the saint forefend!' 

'you love her,--you love miss lindon! can you bear to think of him in 
her arms?' 

I took off my mask,--feel that the occas requir it. As I did so 
he brush asid the hang fold of the hood of hi burnoose, so that 
I saw more of hi face. I wa immedi consciou that in hi eye 
there was, in an especi degree, what, for want of a better term, one 
may call the mesmer quality. that hi wa one of those morbid 
organis which are often found, thank goodness, in the east than 
in the west, and which are apt to exercis an uncanni influenc over 
the weak and the foolish folk with whom they come in contact,--th kind 
of creatur for whom it is alway just as well to keep a season rope 
close handy. I was, also, consciou that he wa take advantag of the 
remov of my mask to tri hi strength on me,--than which he could not 
have found a tougher job. the sensit someth which is found in the 
hypnot subject happens, in me, to be wholli absent. 

'I see you are a mesmerist.' 

He started. 

'I am nothing,--a shadow!' 

'and i'm a scientist. I should like, with your permission--or without 
it!--to tri an experi or two on you.' 

He move further back. there came a gleam into hi eye which suggest 
that he possess hi hideou power to an unusu degree,--that, in the 
estim of hi own people, he wa qualifi to take hi stand as 
a regular devil-doctor. 

'we will tri experi together, you and i,--on paul lessingham.' 

'whi on him?' 

'you do not know?' 

'I do not.' 

'whi do you lie to me?' 

'I don't lie to you,--i haven't the faintest notion what is the natur 
of your interest in Mr lessingham.' 

'mi interest?--that is anoth thing; it is your interest of which we 
are speaking.' 

'pardon me,--it is yours.' 

'listen! you love her,--and he! but at a word from you he shall not 
have her,--never! It is I who say it,--i!' 

'and, onc more, sir, who are you?' 

'I am of the children of isis!' 

'i that so?--it occur to me that you have made a slight 
mistake,--thi is london, not a dog-hol in the desert.' 

'do I not know?--what doe it matter?--y shall see! there will come a 
time when you will want me,--you will find that you cannot bear to 
think of him in her arms,--her whom you love! you will call to me, and 
I shall come, and of paul lessingham there shall be an end.' 

while I wa wonder whether he wa realli as mad as he sounded, or 
whether he wa some impud charlatan who had an axe of hi own to 
grind, and thought that he had found in me a grindstone, he had 
vanish from the room. I move after him. 

'hang it all!--stop!' I cried. 

He must have made pretti good travelling, because, befor I had a foot 
in the hall, I heard the front door slam, and, when I reach the 
street, intent on call him back, neither to the right nor to the 
left wa there a sign of him to be seen. 




chapter xiii 

the pictur 


'I wonder what that nice-look beggar realli means, and who he 
happen to be?' that wa what I said to myself when I return to the 
laboratory. 'if it is true that, now and again, provid doe write a 
man' charact on hi face, then there can't be the slightest shred of 
a doubt that a curiou one' been written on his. I wonder what hi 
connect ha been with the apostle,--or if it' onli part of hi game 
of bluff.' 

I strode up and down,--for the moment my interest in the experi I 
wa conduct had waned. 

'if it wa all bluff I never saw a better piec of acting,--and yet 
what sort of finger can such a precisian as St paul have in such a pie? 
the fellow seem to squirm at the mere mention of the 
rising-hope-of-the-radicals' name. can the object be political? let 
me consider,--what ha lessingham done which could offend the religi 
or patriot suscept of the most fanat of orientals? 
politically, I can recal nothing. foreign affairs, as a rule, he ha 
care eschewed. If he ha offended--and if he hasn't the seem 
wa uncommonli good!--th caus will have to be sought upon some other 
track. but, then, what track?' 

the more I strove to puzzl it out, the greater the puzzlement grew. 

'absurd!--th rascal ha had no more connect with St paul than St 
peter. the probabl is that he' a crackpot; and if he isn't, he ha 
some littl game on foot--in close associ with the hunt of the 
oof-bird!--which he tri to work off on me, but couldn't. As for--for 
marjorie--mi marjorie!--onli she isn't mine, confound it!--if I had had 
my sens about me, I should have broken hi head in sever place for 
dare to allow her name to pass hi lips,--th unbaptis 
mohammedan!--now to return to the chase of splendid murder!' 

I snatch up my mask--on of the most ingeni inventions, by the 
way, of recent years; if the armi of the futur wear my mask they 
will defi my weapon!--and wa about to re-adjust it in it place, when 
someon knock at the door. 

'who' there?--com in!' 

It wa edwards. He look round him as if surprised. 

'I beg your pardon, sir,--i thought you were engaged. I didn't know 
that--that gentleman had gone.' 

'he went up the chimney, as all that kind of gentlemen do.--whi the 
deuc did you let him in when I told you not to?' 'really, sir, I don't 
know. I gave him your message, and--h look at me, and--that is all I 
rememb till I found myself stand in thi room.' 

had it not been edward I might have suspect him of have had hi 
palm well greased,--but, in hi case, I knew better. It wa as I 
thought,--mi visitor wa a mesmerist of the first class; he had 
actual play some of hi tricks, in broad daylight, on my servant, 
at my own front door,--a man worth studying. edward continued. 

'there is someon else, sir, who wish to see you,--mr lessingham.' 

'mr lessingham!' At that moment the juxtaposit seem odd, though I 
daresay it wa so rather in appear than in reality. 'show him in.' 

present in came paul. 

I am free to confess,--i have own it before!--that, in a sense, I 
admir that man,--so long as he doe not presum to thrust himself into 
a certain position. He possess physic qualiti which pleas my 
eye--speak as a mere biologist like the suggest convey by hi 
everi pose, hi everi movement, of a tenaci hold on life,--of 
reserv force, of a repositori of bone and gristl on which he can fall 
back at pleasure. the fellow' lith and active; not hasty, yet agile; 
clean built, well hung,--th sort of man who might be reli upon to 
make a good recovery. you might beat him in a sprint,--ment or 
physical--though to do that you would have to be spry!--but in a 
stay race he would see you out. I do not know that he is exactli the 
kind of man whom I would trust,--unless I knew that he wa on the 
job,--which knowledge, in hi case, would be uncommonli hard to attain. 
He is too calm; too self-contained; with the knack of look all round 
him even in moment of extremest peril,--and for whatev he doe he 
ha a good excuse. He ha the reputation, both in the hous and out of 
it, of be a man of iron nerve,--and with some reason; yet I am not 
so sure. unless I read him wrongli hi is one of those individu 
which, confront by certain eventualities, collapse,--to rise, the 
moment of trial have passed, like phoenix from her ashes. howev it 
might be with hi adherents, he would show no trace of hi disaster. 

and thi wa the man whom marjori loved. well, she could show some 
cause. He wa a man of position,--destined, probably, to rise much 
higher; a man of parts,--with capac to make the most of them; not 
ill-looking; with agreeabl manners,--when he chose; and he came within 
the lady' definit of a gentleman, 'he alway did the right thing, 
at the right time, in the right way.' and yet--! well, I take it that 
we are all cads, and that we most of us are prigs; for mercy' sake do 
not let us all give ourselv away. 

He wa dress as a gentleman should be dressed,--black frock coat, 
black vest, dark grey trousers, stand-up collar, smartly-ti bow, 
glove of the proper shade, neatli brush hair, and a smile, which if 
wa not childlike, at ani rate wa bland. 

'I am not disturb you?' 

'not at all.' 

'sure?--i never enter a place like this, where a man is match 
himself with nature, to wrest from her her secrets, without feel 
that I am cross the threshold of the unknown. the last time I wa in 
thi room wa just after you had taken out the final patent for your 
system of telegraphi at sea, which the admiralti 
purchased,--wisely--what is it, now?' 

'death.' 

'no?--really?--what do you mean?' 

'if you are a member of the next government, you will possibl learn; I 
may offer them the refus of a new wrinkl in the art of murder.' 

'I see,--a new projectile.--how long is thi race to continu between 
attack and defence?' 

'until the sun grow cold.' 

'and then?' 

'there'l be no defence,--noth to defend.' 

He look at me with hi calm, grave eyes. 

'the theori of the age of ice toward which we are advanc is not a 
cheer one.' He began to finger a glass retort which lay upon a 
table. 'bi the way, it wa veri good of you to give me a look in last 
night. I am afraid you thought me peremptory,--i have come to 
apologise.' 

'I don't know that I thought you peremptory; I thought you--queer.' 

'yes.' He glanc at me with that expressionless look upon hi face 
which he could summon at will, and which is at the bottom of the 
superstit about hi iron nerve. 'I wa worried, and not well. 
besides, one doesn't care to be burgled, even by a maniac.' 

'wa he a maniac?' 

'did you see him?' 

'veri clearly.' 

'where?' 

'in the street.' 

'how close were you to him?' 

'closer than I am to you.' 

'indeed. I didn't know you were so close to him as that. did you tri to 
stop him?' 

'easier said than done,--h wa off at such a rate.' 

'did you see how he wa dressed,--or, rather, undressed?' 

'I did.' 

'in noth but a cloak on such a night. who but a fanat would have 
attempt burglari in such a costume?' 

'did he take anything?' 

'absolut nothing.' 

'it seem to have been a curiou episode.' 

He move hi eyebrows,--accord to member of the hous the onli 
gestur in which he ha been known to indulge. 

'we becom accustom to curiou episodes. oblig me by not mention 
it to anyone,--to anyone.' He repeat the last two words, as if to 
give them emphasis. I wonder if he wa think of marjorie. 'I am 
commun with the police. until they move I don't want it to get 
into the papers,--or to be talk about. it' a worry,--y understand?' 

I nodded. He chang the theme. 

'thi that you'r engag upon,--i it a projectil or a weapon?' 

'if you are a member of the next govern you will possibl know; if 
you aren't you possibl won't.' 

'I suppos you have to keep thi sort of thing secret?' 

'I do. It seem that matter of much less moment you wish to keep 
secret.' 

'you mean that busi of last night? If a trifl of that sort get 
into the papers, or get talk about,--which is the same thing!--you 
have no notion how we are pestered. It becom an almost unbear 
nuisance. jone the unknown can commit murder with less inconveni 
to himself than jone the notori can have hi pocket picked,--ther 
is not so much exagger in that as there sounds.--good-bye,--thank 
for your promise.' I had given him no promise, but that wa by the way. 
He turn as to go,--then stopped. 'there' anoth thing,--i believ 
you'r a specialist on question of ancient superstit and extinct 
religions.' 

'I am interest in such subjects, but I am not a specialist.' 

'can you tell me what were the exact tenet of the worshipp of isis?' 

'neither I nor ani man,--with scientif certainty. As you know, she 
had a brother; the cult of osiri and isi wa one and the same. what, 
precisely, were it dogmas, or it practices, or anyth about it, 
none, now, can tell. the papyri, hieroglyphics, and so on, which remain 
are veri far from be exhaustive, and our knowledg of those which do 
remain, is still less so.' 

'I suppos that the marvel which are told of it are pure legendary?' 

'to what marvel do you particularli refer?' 

'weren't supernatur power attribut to the priest of isis?' 

'broadli speaking, at that time, supernatur power were attribut to 
all the priest of all the creeds.' 

'I see.' present he continued. 'I presum that her cult is long sinc 
extinct,--that none of the worshipp of isi exist to-day.' 

I hesitated,--i wa wonder whi he had hit on such a subject; if he 
realli had a reason, or if he wa mere ask question as a cover 
for someth else,--y see, I knew my paul. 

'that is not so sure.' 

He look at me with that passionless, yet search glanc of his. 

'you think that she still is worshipped? 

'I think it possible, even probable, that, here and there, in 
africa--africa is a larg order!--homag is paid to isis, quit in the 
good old way.' 

'do you know that as a fact?' 

'excus me, but do you know it as a fact?--ar you awar that you are 
treat me as if I wa on the wit stand?--hav you ani special 
purpos in make these inquiries?' 

He smiled. 

'in a kind of a way I have. I have recent come across rather a 
curiou story; I am tri to get to the bottom of it.' 

'what is the story?' 

'I am afraid that at present I am not at liberti to tell it you; when I 
am I will. you will find it interesting,--a an instanc of a singular 
survival.--didn't the follow of isi believ in transmigration?' 

'some of them,--no doubt.' 

'what did they understand by transmigration?' 

'transmigration.' 

'yes,--but of the soul or of the body?' 

'how do you mean?--transmigr is transmigration. are you drive at 
someth in particular? If you'll tell me fairli and squar what it 
is i'll do my best to give you the inform you require; as it is, 
your question are a bit perplexing.' 

'oh, it doesn't matter,--a you say, "transmigr is 
transmigration."' I wa eye him keenly; I seem to detect in hi 
manner an odd reluct to enlarg on the subject he himself had 
started. He continu to trifl with the retort upon the table. 'hadn't 
the follow of isi a--what shall I say?--a sacr emblem?' 

'how?' 

'hadn't they an especi regard for some sort of a--wasn't it some sort 
of a--beetle?' 

'you mean scarabaeu sacer,--accord to latreille, scarabaeu 
egyptiorum? undoubtedly,--th scarab wa vener throughout 
egypt,--indeed, speak generally, most thing that had life, for 
instance, cats; as you know, orisi continu among men in the figur 
of apis, the bull.' 

'weren't the priest of isis--or some of them--suppos to assume, 
after death, the form of a--scarabaeus?' 

'I never heard of it.' 

'are you sure?--think!' 

'I shouldn't like to answer such a question positively, offhand, but I 
don't, on the spur of the moment, recal ani supposit of the kind.' 

'don't laugh at me--i'm not a lunatic!--but I understand that recent 
research have shown that even in some of the most astound of the 
ancient legend there wa a substratum of fact. Is it absolut 
certain that there could be no shred of truth in such a belief?' 

'in what belief?' 

'in the belief that a priest of isis--or anyone--assum after death 
the form of a scarabaeus?' 

'it seem to me, lessingham, that you have late come across some 
uncommonli interest data, of a kind, too, which it is your bounden 
duti to give to the world,--or, at ani rate, to that portion of the 
world which is repres by me. come,--tel us all about it!--what 
are you afraid of?' 

'I am afraid of nothing,--and some day you shall be told,--but not now. 
At present, answer my question.' 

'then repeat your question,--clearly.' 

'i it absolut certain that there could be no foundat of truth in 
the belief that a priest of isis--or anyone--assum after death the 
form of a beetle?' 

'I know no more than the man in the moon,--how the dicken should I? 
such a belief may have been symbolical. christian believ that after 
death the bodi take the shape of worms--and so, in a sense, it 
does,--and, sometimes, eels.' 

'that is not what I mean.' 

'then what do you mean?' 

'listen. If a person, of whose verac there could not be a vestig of 
a doubt, assur you that he had seen such a transform actual 
take place, could it conceiv be explain on natur grounds?' 

'seen a priest of isi assum the form of a beetle?' 

'or a follow of isis?' 

'before, or after death?' 

He hesitated. I had seldom seen him wear such an appear of 
interest,--to be frank, I wa keenli interest too!--but, on a sudden 
there came into hi eye a glint of someth that wa almost terror. 
when he spoke, it wa with the most unwont awkwardness. 

'in--in the veri act of dying.' 

'in the veri act of dying?' 

'if--h had seen a follow of isi in--th veri act of dying, 
assume--th form of a--a beetle, on ani conceiv ground would such 
a transform be suscept of a natur explanation?' 

I stared,--a who would not? such an extraordinari question wa 
render more extraordinari by come from such a man,--yet I wa 
almost begin to suspect that there wa someth behind it more 
extraordinari still. 

'look here, lessingham, I can see you'v a capit tale to tell,--so 
tell it, man! unless i'm mistaken, it' not the kind of tale in which 
ordinari scrupl can have ani part or parcel,--anyhow, it' hardli 
fair of you to set my curios all agog, and then to leav it 
unappeased.' 

He eye me steadily, the appear of interest fade more and more, 
until, presently, hi face assum it wont expressionless 
mask,--somehow I wa consciou that what he had seen in my face wa not 
altogeth to hi liking. hi voic wa onc more bland and 
self-contained. 

'I perceiv you are of opinion that I have been told a taradiddle. I 
suppos I have.' 

'but what is the taradiddle?--don't you see i'm burning?' 

'unfortunately, atherton, I am on my honour. until I have permiss to 
unloos it, my tongu is tied.' He pick up hi hat and umbrella from 
where he had place them on the table. hold them in hi left hand, 
he advanc to me with hi right outstretched. 'it is veri good of you 
to suffer my continu interruption; I know, to my sorrow, what such 
interrupt mean,--believ me, I am not ungrateful. what is this?' 

On the shelf, within a foot or so of where I stood, wa a sheet of 
paper,--th size and shape of half a sheet of post note. At thi he 
stoop to glance. As he did so, someth surpris occurred. On the 
instant a look came on to hi face which, literally, transfigur him. 
hi hat and umbrella fell from hi grasp on to the floor. He retreated, 
gibbering, hi hand held out as if to ward someth off from him, 
until he reach the wall on the other side of the room. A more amaz 
spectacl than he present I never saw. 

'lessingham!' I exclaimed. 'what' wrong with you?' 

My first impress wa that he wa struck by a fit of 
epilepsy,--though anyon less like an epilept subject it would be 
hard to find. In my bewilder I look round to see what could be 
the immedi cause. My eye fell upon the sheet of paper, I stare at 
it with consider surprise. I had not notic it there previously, I 
had not put it there,--wher had it come from? the curiou thing wa 
that, on it, produc appar by some process of photogravure, wa 
an illustr of a speci of beetl with which I felt that I ought 
to be acquainted, and yet wa not. It wa of a dull golden green; the 
colour wa so well brought out,--even to the extent of seem to 
scintillate, and the whole thing wa so dexter done that the 
creatur seem alive. the semblanc of realiti was, indeed, so vivid 
that it need a second glanc to be assur that it wa a mere trick 
of the reproducer. it presenc there wa odd,--aft what we had been 
talk about it might seem to need explanation; but it wa absurd to 
suppos that that alon could have had such an effect on a man like 
lessingham. 

with the thing in my hand, I cross to where he was,--press hi 
back against the wall, he had shrunk lower inch by inch till he wa 
actual crouch on hi haunches. 

'lessingham!--come, man, what' wrong with you?' 

take him by the shoulder, I shook him with some vigour. My touch had 
on him the effect of seem to wake him out of a dream, of restor 
him to conscious as against the nightmar horror with which he wa 
struggling. He gaze up at me with that look of cun on hi face 
which one associ with abject terror. 

'atherton?--i it you?--it' all right,--quit right.--i'm well,--veri 
well.' 

As he spoke, he slowli drew himself up, till he wa stand erect. 

'then, in that case, all I can say is that you have a queer way of 
be veri well.' 

He put hi hand up to hi mouth, as if to hide the trembl of hi 
lips. 

'it' the pressur of overwork,--i'v had one or two attack like 
this,--but it' nothing, only--a local lesion.' 

I observ him keenly; to my think there wa someth about him 
which wa veri odd indeed. 

'onli a local lesion!--if you take my strongly-urg advic you'll get 
a medic opinion without delay,--if you haven't been wise enough to 
have done so already.' 

'i'll go to-day;--at once; but I know it' onli mental overstrain.' 

'you'r sure it' noth to do with this?' 

I held out in front of him the photogravur of the beetle. As I did so 
he back away from me, shrieking, trembl as with palsy. 

'take it away! take it away!' he screamed. 

I stare at him, for some seconds, astonish into speechlessness. then 
I found my tongue. 

'lessingham!--it' onli a picture!--ar you stark mad?' 

He persist in hi ejaculations. 

'take it away! take it away!--tear it up!--burn it!' 

hi agit wa so unnatural,--from whatev caus it arose!--that, 
fear the recurr of the attack from which he had just recovered, 
I did as he bade me. I tore the sheet of paper into quarters, and, 
strike a match, set fire to each separ piece. He watch the 
process of inciner as if fascinated. when it wa concluded, and 
noth but ash remained, he gave a gasp of relief. 

'lessingham,' I said, 'you'r either mad already, or you'r go 
mad,--which is it?' 

'I think it' neither. I believ I am as sane as you. it's--it' that 
stori of which I wa speaking; it--it seem curious, but i'll tell you 
all about it--som day. As I observed, I think you will find it an 
interest instanc of a singular survival.' He made an obviou effort 
to becom more like hi usual self. 'it is extrem unfortunate, 
atherton, that I should have troubl you with such a display of 
weakness,--especi as I am abl to offer you so scant an 
explanation. one thing I would ask of you,--to observ strict 
confidence. what ha taken place ha been between ourselves. I am in 
your hands, but you are my friend, I know I can reli on you not to 
speak of it to anyone,--and, in particular, not to breath a hint of it 
to miss lindon.' 

'why, in particular, not to miss lindon?' 

'can you not guess?' 

I hunch my shoulder. 

'if what I guess is what you mean is not that a caus the more whi 
silenc would be unfair to her?' 

'it is for me to speak, if for anyone. I shall not fail to do what 
should be done.--g me your promis that you will not hint a word to 
her of what you have so unfortun seen?' 

I gave him the promis he required. 

. . . . . . . 

there wa no more work for me that day. the apostle, hi divagations, 
hi exampl of the coleoptera, hi arabian friend,--thes thing were 
as microb which, act on a system alreadi predispos for their 
reception, produc high fever; I wa in a fever,--of unrest. brain in 
a whirl!--marjorie, paul, isis, beetle, mesmerism, in deliri jumble. 
love' upsetting!--in itself a suffici sever disease; but when 
complic intervene, suggest of mysteri and novelties, so that 
you do not know if you are move in an atmospher of dream or of 
frozen facts,--if, then, your temperatur doe not rise, like that 
rocket of M. verne's,--which reach the moon, then you are a freak of 
an entir genuin kind, and if the surgeon do not preserv you, and 
place you on view, in pickle, they ought to, for the sake of histor 
doubters, for no one will believ that there ever wa a man like you, 
unless you yourself are somewher around to prove them thomases. 

myself,--i am not that kind of man. when I get warm I grow heated, and 
when I am heat there is like to be a varieti show of a gaudi kind. 
when paul had gone I tri to think thing out, and if I had kept on 
tri someth would have happened--so I went on the river instead. 




chapter xiv 

the duchess' ball 


that night wa the duchess of datchet' ball--th first person I saw as 
I enter the dancing-room wa dora grayling. 

I went straight up to her. 

'miss grayling, I behav veri badli to you last night, I have come to 
make to you my apologies,--to sue for your forgiveness!' 

'mi forgiveness?' her head went back,--sh ha a pretti bird-lik trick 
of cock it a littl on one side. 'you were not well. are you better?' 

'quite.--y forgiv me? then grant me plenari absolut by give me 
a danc for the one I lost last night.' 

she rose. A man came up,--a stranger to me; she' one of the best 
hunt women in england,--there' a million with her. 

'thi is my dance, miss grayling.' 

she look at him. 

'you must excus me. I am afraid I have made a mistake. I had forgotten 
that I wa alreadi engaged.' 

I had not thought her capabl of it. she took my arm, and away we went, 
and left him staring. 

'it' he who' the suffer now,' I whispered, as we went round,--sh 
can waltz! 

'you think so? It wa I last night,--i did not mean, if I could help 
it, to suffer again. To me a danc with you mean something.' she went 
all red,--adding, as an afterthought, 'nowaday so few men realli 
dance. I expect it' becaus you danc so well.' 

'thank you.' 

We danc the waltz right through, then we went to an impromptu shelter 
which had been rig up on a balcony. and we talked. there' someth 
sympathet about miss grayl which lead one to talk about one' 
self,--befor I wa half awar of it I wa tell her of all my plan 
and projects,--actu tell her of my latest notion which, 
ultimately, wa to result in the destruct of whole armi as by a 
flash of lightning. she took an amount of interest in it which wa 
surprising. 

'what realli stand in the way of thing of thi sort is not theori but 
practice,--on can prove one' fact on paper, or on a small scale in a 
room; what is want is proof on a larg scale, by actual experiment. 
if, for instance, I could take my plant to one of the forest of south 
america, where there is plenti of anim life but no human, I could 
demonstr the sound of my posit then and there.' 

'whi don't you?' 

'think of the money it would cost.' 

'I thought I wa a friend of yours.' 

'I had hope you were.' 

'then whi don't you let me help you?' 

'help me?--how?' 

'bi let you have the money for your south american experiment;--it 
would be an invest on which I should expect to receiv good 
interest.' 

I fidgeted. 

'it is veri good of you, miss grayling, to talk like that.' 

she becam quit frigid. 

'pleas don't be absurd!--i perceiv quit clearli that you are 
snub me, and that you are tri to do it as delic as you know 
how.' 

'miss grayling!' 

'I understand that it wa an impertin on my part to volunt 
assist which wa unasked; you have made that suffici plain.' 

'I assur you--' 

'pray don't. Of course, if it had been miss lindon it would have been 
different; she would at least have receiv a civil answer. but we are 
not all miss lindon.' 

I wa aghast. the outburst wa so uncal for,--i had not the faintest 
notion what I had said or done to caus it; she wa in such a 
surpris passion--and it suit her!--i thought I had never seen her 
look prettier,--i could do noth els but stare. So she went 
on,--with just as littl reason. 

'here is someon come to claim thi dance,--i can't throw all my 
partner over. have I offend you so irremedi that it will be 
imposs for you to danc with me again?' 

'miss grayling!--i shall be onli too delighted.' she hand me her 
card. 'which may I have?' 

'for your own sake you had better place it as far off as you possibl 
can.' 

'they all seem taken.' 

'that doesn't matter; strike off ani name you please, anywher and put 
your own instead.' 

It wa give me an almost embarrassingli free hand. I book myself 
for the next waltz but two--who it wa who would have to give way to me 
I did not troubl to inquire. 

'mr atherton!--i that you?' 

It was,--it wa also she. It wa marjorie! and so soon as I saw her I 
knew that there wa onli one woman in the world for me,--th mere sight 
of her sent the blood tingl through my veins. turn to her 
attend cavalier, she dismiss him with a bow. 

'i there an empti chair?' 

she seat herself in the one miss grayl had just vacated. I sat 
down besid her. she glanc at me, laughter in her eyes. I wa all in 
a stupid tremblement. 

'you rememb that last night I told you that I might requir your 
friendli servic in diplomat intervention?' I nodded,--i felt that 
the allus wa unfair. 'well, the occasion' come,--or, at least, 
it' veri near.' she wa still,--and I said noth to help her. 'you 
know how unreason papa can be.' 

I did,--nev a more pig-head man in england than geoffrey 
lindon,--or, in a sense, a duller. but, just then, I wa not prepar 
to admit it to hi child. 

'you know what an absurd object he ha to--paul.' 

there wa an appreci hesit befor she utter the fellow' 
christian name,--when it came it wa with an accent of tender which 
stung me like a gadfly. To speak to me--of all men,--of the fellow in 
such a tone was--lik a woman. 

'ha Mr lindon no notion of how thing stand between you?' 

'except what he suspects. that is just where you are to come in, papa 
think so much of you--i want you to sound paul' prais in hi 
ear--to prepar him for what must come.' wa ever reject lover 
burden with such a task? it enorm kept me still. 'sydney, you 
have alway been my friend,--mi truest, dearest friend. when I wa a 
littl girl you use to come between papa and me, to shield me from hi 
wrath. now that I am a big girl I want you to be on my side onc more, 
and to shield me still.' 

her voic softened. she laid her hand upon my arm. how, under her 
touch, I burned. 

'but I don't understand what caus there ha been for secrecy,--whi 
should there have been ani secreci from the first?' 

'it wa paul' wish that papa should not be told.' 

'i Mr lessingham asham of you?' 

'sydney!' 

'or doe he fear your father?' 

'you are unkind. you know perfectli well that papa ha been prejud 
against him all along, you know that hi polit posit is just now 
one of the greatest difficulty, that everi nerv and muscl is kept on 
the continu strain, that it is in the highest degre essenti that 
further complic of everi and ani sort should be avoided. He is 
quit awar that hi suit will not be approv of by papa, and he 
simpli wish that noth shall be said about it till the end of the 
session,--that is all' 

'I see! Mr lessingham is cautiou even in love-making,--politician 
first, and lover afterwards.' 

'well!--whi not?--would you have him injur the caus he ha at heart 
for want of a littl patience?' 

'it depend what caus it is he ha at heart.' 

'what is the matter with you?--whi do you speak to me like that?--it is 
not like you at all.' she look at me shrewdly, with flash eyes. 
'i it possibl that you are--jealous?--that you were in earnest in 
what you said last night?--i thought that wa the sort of thing you 
said to everi girl.' 

I would have given a great deal to take her in my arms, and press her 
to my bosom then and there,--to think that she should taunt me with 
have said to her the sort of thing I said to everi girl. 

'what do you know of Mr lessingham?' 

'what all the world knows,--that histori will be made by him.' 

'there are kind of histori in the make of which one would not desir 
to be associated. what do you know of hi privat life,--it wa to that 
that I wa referring.' 

'really,--y go too far. I know that he is one of the best, just as he 
is one of the greatest, of men; for me, that is sufficient.' 

'if you do know that, it is sufficient.' 

'I do know it,--al the world know it. everyon with whom he come in 
contact is aware--must be aware, that he is incap of a 
dishonour thought or action.' 

'take my advice, don't appreci ani man too highly. In the book of 
everi man' life there is a page which he would wish to keep turn 
down.' 

'there is no such page in paul's,--ther may be in yours; I think that 
probable.' 

'thank you. I fear it is more than probable. I fear that, in my case, 
the page may extend to several. there is noth apostol about 
me,--not even the name.' 

'sydney!--y are unendurable!--it is the more strang to hear you talk 
like thi sinc paul regard you as hi friend.' 

'he flatter me.' 

'are you not hi friend?' 

'i it not suffici to be yours?' 

'no,--who is against paul is against me.' 

'that is hard.' 

'how is it hard? who is against the husband can hardli be for the 
wife,--when the husband and the wife are one.' 

'but as yet you are not one.--i my caus so hopeless?' 

'what do you call your cause?--ar you think of that nonsens you 
were talk about last night?' 

she laughed! 

'you call it nonsense.--y ask for sympathy, and give--so much!' 

'I will give you all the sympathi you stand in need of,--i promis it! 
My poor, dear sydney!--don't be so absurd! Do you think that I don't 
know you? you'r the best of friends, and the worst of lovers,--a the 
one, so true; so fickl as the other. To my certain knowledge, with how 
mani girl have you been in love,--and out again. It is true that, to 
the best of my knowledg and belief, you have never been in love with 
me before,--but that' the merest accident. believ me, my dear, dear 
sydney, you'll be in love with someon els tomorrow,--if you'r not 
half-way there to-night. I confess, quit frankly, that, in that 
direction, all the experi I have had of you ha in nowis 
strengthen my prophet instinct. cheer up!--on never knows!--who is 
thi that' coming?' 

It wa dora grayl who wa coming,--i went off with her without a 
word,--w were half-way through the danc befor she spoke to me. 

'I am sorri that I wa cross to you just now, and--disagreeable. 
somehow I alway seem destin to show to you my most unpleas side.' 

'the blame wa mine,--what sort of side do I show you? you are far 
kinder to me than I deserve,--now, and always. 'that is what you say.' 

'pardon me, it' true,--els how come it that, at thi time of day, 
i'm without a friend in all the world?' 

'you!--without a friend!--i never knew a man who had so many!--i never 
knew a person of whom so mani men and women join in speak well!' 

'miss grayling!' 

'a for never have done anyth worth doing, think of what you have 
done. think of your discoveries, think of your inventions, think 
of--but never mind! the world know you have done great things, and it 
confid look to you to do still greater. you talk of be 
friendless, and yet when I ask, as a favour--a a great favour!--to be 
allow to do someth to show my friendship, you--well, you snub me.' 

'I snub you!' 

'you know you snub me.' 

'do you realli mean that you take an interest in--in my work?' 

'you know I mean it.' 

she turn to me, her face all glowing,--and I did know it. 

'will you come to my laboratori to-morrow morning?' 

'will i!--won't i!' 

'with your aunt?' 

'yes, with my aunt.' 

'i'll show you round, and tell you all there is to be told, and then if 
you still think there' anyth in it, i'll accept your offer about 
that south american experiment,--that is, if it still hold good.' 

'of cours it still hold good.' 

'and we'll be partners.' 

'partners?--yes,--w will be partners.' 

'it will cost a terrif sum.' 

'there are some thing which never can cost too much.' 

'that' not my experience.' 

'I hope it will be mine.' 

'it' a bargain?' 

'on my side, I promis you that it' a bargain.' 

when I got outsid the room I found that perci woodvil wa at my 
side. hi round face was, in a manner of speak as long as my arm. He 
took hi glass out of hi eye, and rub it with hi handkerchief,--and 
directli he put it back he took it out and rub it again, I believ 
that I never saw him in such a state of fluster,--and, when one speak 
of woodville, that mean something. 

'atherton, I am in a devil of a stew.' He look it. 'all of a 
heap!--i'v had a blow which I shall never get over!' 

'then get under.' 

woodvil is one of those fellow who will insist on tell me their 
most privat matters,--even to what they owe their washerwomen for the 
ruinat of their shirts. why, good alon can tell,--heaven know 
I am not sympathetic. 

'don't be an idiot!--y don't know what i'm suffering!--i'm as nearli 
as possibl stark mad.' 

'that' all right, old chap,--i'v seen you that way more than onc 
before.' 

'don't talk like that,--you'r not a perfect brute!' 

'I bet you a shill that I am.' 

'don't tortur me,--you'r not. atherton!' He seiz me by the lapel 
of my coat, seem half besid himself,--fortun he had drawn me 
into a recess, so that we were notic by few observers. 'what do you 
think ha happened?' 

'mi dear chap, how on earth am I to know?' 

'she' refus me!' 

'ha she!--wel I never!--buck up,--tri some other address,--ther are 
quit as good fish in the sea as ever came out of it.' 

'atherton, you'r a blackguard.' 

He had crumpl hi handkerchief into a ball, and wa actual bob 
at hi eye with it,--th idea of perci woodvil be dissolv in 
tear wa excruciatingli funny,--but, just then, I could hardli tell 
him so. 

'there' not a doubt of it,--it' my way of be sympathetic. don't be 
so down, man,--tri her again!' 

'it' not the slightest use--i know it isn't--from the way she treat 
me.' 

'don't be so sure--women often say what they mean least. who' the 
lady?' 

'who?--i there more women in the world than one for me, or ha there 
ever been? you ask me who! what doe the word mean to me but marjori 
lindon!' 

'marjori lindon?' 

I fanci that my jaw drop open,--that, to use hi own vernacular, I 
wa 'all of a heap.' I felt like it. 

I strode away--leav him mazed--and all but ran into marjorie' arms. 

'i'm just leaving. will you see me to the carriage, Mr atherton?' I saw 
her to the carriage. 'are you off?--can I give you a lift?' 

'thank you,--i am not think of be off.' 

'i'm go to the hous of commons,--won't you come?' 

'what are you go there for?' 

directli she spoke of it I knew whi she wa going,--and she knew that I 
knew, as her word showed. 

'you are quit well awar of what the magnet is. you are not so 
ignor as not to know that the agricultur amend act is on 
to-night, and that paul is to speak. I alway tri to be there when paul 
is to speak, and I mean to alway keep on trying.' 

'he is a fortun man.' 

'indeed,--and again indeed. A man with such gift as hi is 
inadequ describ as fortunate.--but I must be off. He expect to 
be up before, but I heard from him a few minut ago that there ha 
been a delay, but that he will be up within half-an-hour.--til our 
next meeting.' 

As I return into the house, in the hall I met perci woodville. He had 
hi hat on. 

'where are you off to?' 

'i'm off to the house.' 

'to hear paul lessingham?' 

'damn paul lessingham!' 

'with all my heart!' 

'there' a divis expected,--i'v got to go.' 

'someon els ha gone to hear paul lessingham,--marjori lindon.' 

'no!--you don't say so!--bi jove!--i say, atherton, I wish I could make 
a speech,--i never can. when i'm election I have to have my 
speech written for me, and then I have to read 'em. but, by jove, if 
I knew miss lindon wa in the gallery, and if I knew anyth about the 
thing, or could get someon to tell me something, hang me if I wouldn't 
speak,--i'd show her i'm not the fool she think I am!' 

'speak, percy, speak!--you'd knock 'em silly, sir!--i tell you what 
i'll do,--i'l come with you! i'll to the hous as well!--paul 
lessingham shall have an audienc of three.' 




chapter XV 

MR lessingham speak 


the hous wa full. perci and I went upstairs,--to the galleri which is 
theoret suppos to be reserv for what are call 
'distinguish strangers,'--thos curiou animals. trumperton wa up, 
hammer out those sentenc which smell, not so much of the lamp as 
of the dunderhead. nobodi wa listening,--except the men in the press 
gallery; where is the brain of the house, and nineti per cent, of it 
wisdom. 

It wa not till trumperton had finish that I discov lessingham. 
the tediou ancient resum hi seat amidst a murmur of sound which, I 
have no doubt, some of the press-men interpret next day as 'loud and 
continu applause.' there wa movement in the house, possibl 
express of relief; a hum of voices; men came flock in. then, from 
the opposit benches, there rose a sound which wa applause,--and I 
perceiv that, on a cross bench close to the gangway, paul lessingham 
wa stand up bareheaded. 

I eye him critically,--a a collector might eye a valuabl specimen, 
or a pathologist a curiou subject. dure the last four and twenti 
hour my interest in him had grown apace. just then, to me, he wa the 
most interest man the world contained. 

when I rememb how I had seen him that same morning, a nerveless, 
terror-stricken wretch, grovelling, like some craven cur, upon the 
floor, frightened, to the verg of imbecility, by a shadow, and less 
than a shadow, I wa confront by two hypotheses. either I had 
exagger hi condit then, or I exagger hi condit now. So 
far as appear went, it wa incred that thi man could be that 
one. 

I confess that my feel rapidli becam one of admiration. I love the 
fighter. I quickli recognis that here we had him in perfection. there 
wa no seem about him then,--th man wa to the manner born. To hi 
finger-tip a fight man. I had never realis it so clearli before. 
He wa cool itself. He had all hi faculti under complet 
command. while never, for a moment, realli expos himself, he would 
be swift in perceiv the slightest weak in hi opponents' 
defence, and, so soon as he saw it, like lightning, he would slip in a 
tell blow. though defeated, he would hardli be disgraced; and one 
might easili believ that their veri victori would be so expens to 
hi assailants, that, in the end, they would actual conduc to hi 
own triumph. 

'hang me!' I told myself, 'if, after all, I am surpris if marjori 
doe see someth in him.' for I perceiv how a clever and 
imagin young woman, see him at hi best, hold hi own, like 
a gallant knight, against overwhelm odds, in the list in which he 
wa so much at home, might come to think of him as if he were alway 
and onli there, ignor altogeth the kind of man he wa when the 
joust wa finished. 

It did me good to hear him, I do know that,--and I could easili imagin 
the effect he had on one particular auditor who wa in the ladies' 
cage. It wa veri far from be an 'oration' in the american sense; it 
had littl or noth of the fire and furi of the french tribune; it 
wa mark neither by the ponderos nor the sentiment of the eloqu 
german; yet it wa as satisfi as are the effort of either of the 
three, producing, without doubt, precis the effect which the speaker 
intended. hi voic wa clear and calm, not exactli musical, yet 
distinctli pleasant, and it wa so manag that each word he utter 
wa as audibl to everi person present as if it had been address 
particularli to him. hi sentenc were short and crisp; the word 
which he use were not big ones, but they came from him with an 
agreeabl ease; and he spoke just fast enough to keep one' interest 
alert without invok a strain on the attention. 

He commenc by making, in the quietest and most courteou manner, 
sarcast comment on the speech and method of trumperton and hi 
friend which tickl the hous amazingly. but he did not make the 
mistak of push hi person too far. To a speaker of a certain 
sort noth is easier than to sting to madness. If he likes, hi everi 
word is barbed. wound so given fester; they are not easili 
forgiven;--it is essenti to a politician that he should have hi 
firmest friend among the fools; or hi climb day will soon be 
over. soon hi sarcasm were at an end. He began to exchang them for 
sweet-sound phrases. He actual began to say pleasant thing to hi 
opponents; appar to mean them. To put them in a good conceit with 
themselves. He point out how much truth there wa in what they said; 
and then, as if by accident, with what eas and at how littl cost, 
amend might be made. He found their arguments, and took them for 
hi own, and flatter them, whether they would or would not, by 
show how firmli they were found upon fact; and graft other 
argument upon them, which seem their natur sequelae; and 
transform them, and drove them hither and thither; and brought 
them--their own arguments!--to a round, irrefrag conclusion, which 
wa diametr the revers of that to which they themselv had 
brought them. and he did it all with an aptness, a readiness, a grace, 
which wa incontestable. So that, when he sat down, he had perform 
that most difficult of all feats, he had deliv what, in a hous of 
commons' sense, wa a practical, statesmanlik speech, and yet one 
which left hi hearer in an excel humour. 

It wa a great success,--an immens success. A parliamentari triumph of 
almost the highest order. paul lessingham had been come on by leap 
and bounds. when he resum hi seat, amidst applaus which, thi time, 
realli wa applause, there were, probably, few who doubt that he wa 
destin to go still farther. how much farther it is true that time 
alon could tell; but, so far as appear went, all the prizes, 
which are as the crown and climax of a statesman' career, were well 
within hi reach. 

for my part, I wa delighted. I had enjoy an intellectu 
exercise,--a speci of enjoy not so common as it might be. the 
apostl had almost persuad me that the polit game wa one worth 
playing, and that it triumph were thing to be desired. It is 
something, after all, to be abl to appeal success to the passion 
and aspir of your peers; to gain their plaudits; to prove your 
skill at the game you yourself have chosen; to be look up to and 
admired. and when a woman' eye look down on you, and her ear drink 
in your everi word, and her heart beat time with yours,--each man to 
hi own temperament, but when that woman is the woman whom you love, to 
know that your triumph mean her glory, and her gladness, to me that 
would be the best part of it all. 

In that hour,--th apostle' hour!--i almost wish that I were a 
politician too! 

the divis wa over. the busi of the night wa practic done. 
I wa back again in the lobby! the theme of convers wa the 
apostle' speech,--on everi side they talk of it. 

suddenli marjori wa at my side. her face wa glowing. I never saw her 
look more beautiful,--or happier. she seem to be alone. 

'so you have come, after all!--wasn't it splendid?--wasn't it 
magnificent? isn't it grand to have such great gifts, and to use them 
to such good purpose?--speak, sydney! don't feign a cool which is 
foreign to your nature!' 

I saw that she wa hungri for me to prais the man whom she delight 
to honour. but, somehow, her enthusiasm cool mine. 

'it wa not a bad speech, of a kind.' 

'of a kind!' how her eye flash fire! with what disdain she treat 
me! 'what do you mean by "of a kind?" My dear sydney, are you not awar 
that it is an attribut of small mind to attempt to belittl those 
which are greater? even if you are consciou of inferiority, it' 
unwis to show it. Mr lessingham' wa a great speech, of ani kind; 
your incapac to recognis the fact simpli reveal your lack of the 
critic faculty.' 

'it is fortun for Mr lessingham that there is at least one person in 
whom the critic faculti is so bounti developed. apparently, in 
your judgment, he who discrimin is lost.' 

I thought she wa go to burst into passion. but, instead, laughing, 
she place her hand upon my shoulder. 

'poor sydney!--i understand!--it is so sad!--do you know you are like a 
littl boy who, when he is beaten, declar that the victor ha cheat 
him. never mind! as you grow older, you will learn better.' 

she stung me almost beyond bearing,--i care not what I said. 

'you, unless I am mistaken, will learn better befor you are older.' 

'what do you mean?' 

befor I could have told her--if I had meant to tell; which I did 
not--lessingham came up. 

'I hope I have not kept you waiting; I have been delay longer than I 
expected.' 

'not at all,--though I am quit readi to get away; it' a littl 
tiresom wait here.' 

thi with a mischiev glanc toward me,--a glanc which compel 
lessingham to notic me. 

'you do not often favour us.' 

'I don't. I find better employ for my time.' 

'you are wrong. it' the cant of the day to underr the hous of 
commons, and the work which it performs; don't you suffer yourself to 
join in the choru of the simpletons. your time cannot be better 
employ than in endeavour to improv the bodi politic.' 

'I am oblig to you.--i hope you are feel better than when I saw 
you last.' 

A gleam came into hi eyes, fade as quickli as it came. He show no 
other sign of comprehension, surprise, or resentment. 

'thank you.--i am veri well.' 

marjori perceiv that I meant more than met the eye, and that what I 
meant wa meant unpleasantly. 

'come,--let us be off. It is Mr atherton to-night who is not well.' 

she had just slip her arm through lessingham' when her father 
approached. old lindon stare at her on the apostle' arm, as if he 
could hardli believ that it wa she. 

'I thought that you were at the duchess'?' 

'so I have been, papa; and now i'm here.' 

'here!' old lindon began to stutter and stammer, and to grow red in the 
face, as is hi wont when at all excited. 'w--what do you mean by 
here?--wh--where' the carriage?' 

'where should it be, except wait for me outside,--unless the hors 
have run away.' 

'i--i--i'l take you down to it. i--i don't approv of y--your 
w--w--wait in a place like this.' 

'thank you, papa, but Mr lessingham is go to take me down.--i shall 
see you afterwards.--good bye.' 

anyth cooler than the way in which she walk off I do not think I 
ever saw. thi is the age of feminin advancement. young women think 
noth of twist their mother round their fingers, let alon their 
fathers; but the fashion in which that young woman walk off, on the 
apostle' arm, and left her father stand there, was, in it way, a 
study. 

lindon seem scarc abl to realis that the pair of them had gone. 
even after they had disappear in the crowd he stood stare after 
them, grow redder and redder, till the vein stood out upon hi 
face, and I thought that an apoplect seizur threatened. then, with a 
gasp, he turn to me. 

'damn scoundrel!' I took it for grant that he allud to the 
gentleman,--even though hi follow word hardli suggest it. 'onli 
thi morn I forbad her to have anyth to do with him, and n--now 
he' w--walk off with her! c--confound adventurer! that' what he 
is, an adventurer, and befor mani hour have pass i'll take the 
liberti to tell him so!' 

jam hi fist into hi pockets, and puf like a grampu in 
distress, he took himself away,--and it wa time he did, for hi word 
were as audibl as they were pointed, and alreadi peopl were wonder 
what the matter was. woodvil came up as lindon wa going,--just as 
sore distress as ever. 

'she went away with lessingham,--did you see her?' 

'of cours I saw her. when a man make a speech like lessingham' ani 
girl would go away with him,--and be proud to. when you are endow 
with such great power as he is, and use them for such lofti purposes, 
she'll walk away with you,--but, till then, never.' 

He wa at hi old trick of polish hi eyeglass. 

'it' bitter hard. when I knew that she wa there, i'd half a mind to 
make a speech myself, upon my word I had, onli I didn't know what to 
speak about, and I can't speak anyhow,--how can a fellow speak when 
he' shove into the gallery?' 

'a you say, how can he?--h can't stand on the rail and 
shout,--even with a friend hold him behind.' 

'I know I shall speak one day,--bound to; and then she won't be there.' 

'it'll be better for you if she isn't.' 

'think so?--perhap you'r right. i'd be safe to make a mess of it, and 
then, if she were to see me at it, it'd be the devil! 'pon my word, 
i'v been wishing, lately, I wa clever.' 

He rub hi nose with the rim of hi eyeglass, look the most 
comic disconsol figure. 

'put black care behind you, percy!--buck up, my boy! the division' 
over--y are free--now we'll go "on the fly."' 

and we did 'go on the fly.' 




chapter xvi 

atherton' magic vapour 


I bore him off to supper at the helicon. all the way in the cab he wa 
tri to tell me the stori of how he propos to marjorie,--and he wa 
veri far from be through with it when we reach the club. there wa 
the usual crowd of supperites, but we got a littl tabl to ourselves, 
in a corner of the room, and befor anyth wa brought for us to eat 
he wa at it again. A good mani of the peopl were pretti near to 
shouting, and as they seem to be all speak at once, and the band 
wa playing, and as the helicon supper band is not piano, perci did not 
have it quit all to himself, but, consid the delicaci of hi 
subject, he talk as loudli as wa decent,--get more so as he went 
on. but perci is peculiar. 

'I don't know how mani time i'v tri to tell her,--ov and over 
again.' 

'have you now?' 

'yes, pretti near everi time I met her,--but I never seem to get 
quit to it, don't you know.' 

'how wa that?' 

'why, just as I wa go to say, "miss lindon, may I offer you the 
gift of my affection---"' 

'wa that how you invari intend to begin?' 

'well, not always--on time like that, anoth time anoth way. fact 
is, I got off a littl speech by heart, but I never got a chanc to 
reel it off, so I made up my mind to just say anything.' 

'and what did you say?' 

'well, nothing,--y see, I never got there. just as I wa feel my 
way, she'd ask me if I prefer big sleev to littl ones, or top 
hat to billycocks, or some nonsens of the kind.' 

'would she now?' 

'yes,--of cours I had to answer, and by the time i'd answer the 
chanc wa lost.' perci wa polish hi eye-glass. 'I tri to get 
there so mani times, and she choke me off so often, that I can't help 
think that she suspect what it wa that I wa after.' 

'you think she did?' 

'she must have done. onc I follow her down piccadilly, and chivi 
her into a glove shop in the burlington arcade. I meant to propos to 
her in there,--i hadn't had a wink of sleep all night through dream 
of her, and I wa just about desperate.' 

'and did you propose?' 

'the girl behind the counter made me buy a dozen pair of glove 
instead. they turn out to be three size too larg for me when they 
came home. I believ she thought i'd gone to spoon the glove girl,--sh 
went out and left me there. that girl load me with all sort of 
thing when she wa gone,--i couldn't get away. she held me with her 
bless eye. I believ it wa a glass one.' 

'miss linden's--or the glove girl's?' 

'the glove girl's. she sent me home a whole cartload of green ties, and 
declar i'd order them. I shall never forget that day. i'v never 
been up the arcad since, and never mean to.' 

'you gave miss lindon a wrong impression.' 

'I don't know. I wa alway give her wrong impressions. onc she said 
that she knew I wa not a marri man, that I wa the sort of chap who 
never would marry, becaus she saw it in my face.' 

'under the circumstances, that wa trying.' 

'bitter hard.' perci sigh again. 'I shouldn't mind if I wasn't so 
gone. i'm not a fellow who doe get gone, but when I do get gone, I get 
so beastli gone.' 

'I tell you what, percy,--hav a drink!' 

'i'm a teetotaler,--y know I am.' 

'you talk of your heart be broken, and of your be a teetotal in 
the same breath,--if your heart were realli broken you'd throw 
teetot to the winds.' 

'do you think so,--why?' 

'becaus you would,--men whose heart are broken alway do,--you'd 
swallow a magnum at the least.' 

perci groaned. 

'when I drink i'm alway ill,--but i'll have a try.' 

He had a try,--mak a good begin by empti at a draught the 
glass which the waiter had just now filled. then he relaps into 
melancholy. 

'tell me, percy,--honest indian!--do you realli love her?' 

'love her?' hi eye grew round as saucers. 'don't I tell you that I 
love her?' 

'I know you tell me, but that sort of thing is easi telling. what doe 
it make you feel like, thi love you talk so much about?' 

'feel like?--just anyhow,--and nohow. you should look insid me, and 
then you'd know.' 

'I see.--it' like that, is it?--suppos she love anoth man, what 
sort of feel would you feel toward him?' 

'doe she love anoth man?' 

'I say, suppose.' 

'I dare say she does. I expect that' it.--what an idiot I am not to 
have thought of that before.' He sighed,--and refil hi glass. 'he' 
a lucki chap, whoever he is. i'd--i'd like to tell him so.' 

'you'd like to tell him so?' 

'he' such a jolli lucki chap, you know.' 

'possibly,--but hi jolli good luck is your jolli bad luck. would you 
be will to resign her to him without a word?' 

'if she love him.' 

'but you say you love her.' 

'of cours I do.' 

'well then?' 

'you don't suppos that, becaus I love her, I shouldn't like to see 
her happy?--i'm not such a beast!--i'd sooner see her happi than 
anyth els in all the world.' 

'I see,--even happi with another?--i'm afraid that my philosophi is not 
like yours. If I love miss lindon, and she loved, say, jones, i'm 
afraid I shouldn't feel like that toward jone at all.' 

'what would you feel like?' 

'murder.--percy, you come home with me,--we'v begun the night 
together, let' end it together,--and i'll show you one of the finest 
notion for commit murder on a scale of real magnific you ever 
dream of. I should like to make use of it to show my feel toward 
the supposititi jones,--he'd know what I felt for him when onc he 
had been introduc to it.' 

perci went with me without a word. He had not had much to drink, but it 
had been too much for him, and he wa in a condit of maunder 
sentimentality. I got him into a cab. We dash along piccadilly. 

He wa silent, and sat look in front of him with an air of vacuou 
sullen which ill-becam hi cast of countenance. I bade the cabman 
pass though lownd square. As we pass the apostle' I pull him up. 
I point out the place to woodville. 

'you see, percy, that' lessingham' house!--that' the hous of the 
man who went away with marjorie!' 

'yes.' word came from him slowly, with a quit unnecessari stress on 
each. 'becaus he made a speech.--i'd like to make a speech.--on day 
i'll make a speech.' 

'becaus he made a speech,--onli that, and noth more! when a man 
speak with an apostle' tongue, he can witch ani woman in the 
land.--hallo, who' that?--lessingham, is that you?' 

I saw, or thought I saw, someone, or something, glide up the steps, and 
withdraw into the shadow of the doorway, as if unwil to be seen. 
when I hail no one answered. I call again. 

'don't be shy, my friend!' 

I sprang out of the cab, ran across the pavement, and up the steps. To 
my surprise, there wa no one in the doorway. It seem incredible, but 
the place wa empty. I felt about me with my hands, as if I had been 
play at blind man' buff, and grasp at vacancy. I came down a step 
or two. 

'ostensibly, there' a vacuum,--which natur abhors.--i say, driver, 
didn't you see someon come up the steps?' 

'I thought I did, sir,--i could have sworn I did.' 

'so could i.--it' veri odd.' 

'perhap whoever it wa ha gone into the 'ouse, sir.' 

'I don't see how. We should have heard the door open, if we hadn't seen 
it,--and we should have seen it, it' not so dark as that.--i'v half a 
mind to ring the bell and inquire.' 

'I shouldn't do that if I wa you, sir,--you jump in, and i'll get 
along. thi is Mr lessingham's,--th great Mr lessingham's.' 

I believ the cabman thought that I wa drunk,--and not respect 
enough to claim acquaint with the great Mr lessingham. 

'wake up, woodville! Do you know I believ there' some mysteri about 
thi place,--i feel assur of it. I feel as if I were in the presenc 
of someth uncanny,--someth which I can neither see, nor touch, 
nor hear.' 

the cabman bent down from hi seat, wheedl me. 

'jump in, sir, and we'll be get along.' 

I jump in, and we got along,--but not far. befor we had gone a dozen 
yards, I wa out again, without troubl the driver to stop. He pull 
up, aggrieved. 

'well, sir, what' the matter now? you'll be damag yourself befor 
you'v done, and then you'll be blame me.' 

I had caught sight of a cat crouch in the shadow of the railings,--a 
black one. that cat wa my quarry. either the creatur wa unusu 
sleepy, or slow, or stupid, or it had lost it wits--which a cat seldom 
doe lose!--anyhow, without make an attempt to escap it allow me 
to grab it by the nape of the neck. 

So soon as we were insid my laboratory, I put the cat into my glass 
box. perci stared. 

'what have you put it there for?' 

'that, my dear percy, is what you are shortli about to see. you are 
about to be the wit of an experi which, to a legislator--such 
as you are!--ought to be of the greatest possibl interest. I am go 
to demonstrate, on a small scale, the action of the forc which, on a 
larg scale, I propos to employ on behalf of my nativ land.' 

He show no sign of be interested. sink into a chair, he 
recommenc hi wearisom reiteration. 

'I hate cats!--do let it go!--i'm alway miser when there' a cat 
in the room.' 

'nonsense,--that' your fancy! what you want' a tast of 
whisky--you'l be as chirpi as a cricket.' 

'I don't want anyth more to drink!--i'v had too much already!' 

I paid no heed to what he said. I pour two stiff dose into a coupl 
of tumblers. without seem to be awar of what it wa that he wa 
do he dispos of the better half of the one I gave him at a 
draught. put hi glass upon the table, he drop hi head upon hi 
hands, and groaned. 

'what would marjori think of me if she saw me now?' 

'think?--nothing. whi should she think of a man like you, when she ha 
so much better fish to fry?' 

'i'm feel fright ill!--i'l be drunk befor i'v done!' 

'then be drunk!--only, for graciou sake, be live drunk, not deadli 
doleful.--ch up, percy!' I clap him on the shoulder,--almost 
knock him off hi seat on to the floor. 'I am now go to show you 
that littl experi of which I wa speaking!--y see that cat?' 

'of cours I see it!--th beast!--i wish you'd let it go!' 

'whi should I let it go?--do you know whose cat that is? that cat' 
paul lessingham's.' 

'paul lessingham's?' 

'yes, paul lessingham's,--th man who made the speech,--th man whom 
marjori went away with.' 

'how do you know it' his?' 

'I don't know it is, but I believ it is,--i choos to believ it 
is!--i intend to believ it is!--it wa outsid hi house, therefor 
it' hi cat,--that' how I argue. I can't get lessingham insid that 
box, so I get hi cat instead.' 

'whatev for?' 

'you shall see.--you observ how happi it is?' 

'it don't seem happy.' 

'we'v all our way of seem happy,--that' it way,' 

the creatur wa behav like a cat gone mad, dash itself against 
the side of it glass prison, leap to and fro, and from side to 
side, squeal with rage, or with terror, or with both. perhap it 
foresaw what wa coming,--ther is no fathom the intellig of 
what we call the lower animals. 

'it' a funni way.' 

'we some of us have funni ways, besid cats. now, attention! observ 
thi littl toy,--you'v seen someth of it kind before. it' a 
spring gun; you pull the spring-drop the charg into the 
barrel--releas the spring--and the charg is fired. i'll unlock thi 
safe, which is built into the wall. it' a letter lock, the combin 
just now, is "whisky,"--y see, that' a hint to you. you'll notic 
the safe is strongli made,--it' air-tight, fire-proof, the outer 
case is of triple-pl drill-proof steel,--th content are 
valuable--to me!--and devilish dangerous,--i'd piti the thief who, in 
hi innoc ignorance, broke in to steal. look inside--y see it' 
full of balls,--glass balls, each in it own littl separ nest; 
light as feathers; transparent,--y can see right through them. here 
are a couple, like tini pills. they contain neither dynamite, nor 
cordite, nor anyth of the kind, yet, given a fair field and no 
favour, they'll work more mischief than all the explos man ha 
fashioned. take hold of one--y say your heart is broken!--squeez 
thi under your nose--it want but a gentl pressure--and in less time 
than no time you'll be in the land where they say there are no broken 
hearts.' 

He shrunk back. 

'I don't know what you'r talk about.--i don't want the thing.--tak 
it away.' 

'think twice,--th chanc may not recur.' 

'I tell you I don't want it.' 

'sure?--consider!' 

'of cours i'm sure!' 

'then the cat shall have it.' 

'let the poor brute go!' 

'the poor brute' going,--to the land which is so near, and yet so far. 
onc more, if you please, attention. notic what I do with thi toy 
gun. I pull back the spring; I insert thi small glass pellet; I thrust 
the muzzl of the gun through the open in the glass box which 
contain the apostle' cat,--you'l observ it fit quit close, which, 
on the whole, is perhap as well for us.--i am about to releas the 
spring.--clos attention, please.--notic the effect.' 

'atherton, let the brute go!' 

'the brute' gone! i'v releas the spring--th pellet ha been 
discharged--it ha struck against the roof of the glass box--it ha 
been broken by the contact,--and, hey presto! the cat lie dead,--and 
that in face of it nine lives. you perceiv how still it is,--how 
still! let' hope that, now, it' realli happy. the cat which I choos 
to believ is paul lessingham' ha receiv it quietus; in the 
morn i'll send it back to him, with my respect compliments. he'll 
miss it if I don't.--reflect! think of a huge bomb, fill with what 
we'll call atherton' magic vapour, fired, say, from a hundr and 
twenti ton gun, burst at a given elev over the head of an 
oppos force. properli managed, in less than an instant of time, a 
hundr thousand men,--quit possibl more!--would drop down dead, as 
if smitten by the lightn of the skies. isn't that someth like a 
weapon, sir?' 

'i'm not well!--i want to get away!--i wish i'd never come!' 

that wa all woodvil had to say. 

'rubbish!--you'r ad to your stock of inform everi second, 
and, in these days, when a member of parliament is suppos to know all 
about everything, information' the one thing wanted. empti your glass, 
man,--that' the time of day for you!' 

I hand him hi tumbler. He drain what wa left of it contents, 
then, in a fit of tipsy, childish temper he flung the tumbler from him. 
I had placed--carelessli enough--th second pellet within a foot of the 
edg of the table. the shock of the heavi beaker strike the board 
close to it, set it rolling. I wa at the other side. I start forward 
to stop it motion, but I wa too late. befor I could reach the 
crystal globule, it had fallen off the edg of the tabl on to the 
floor at woodville' feet, and smash in falling. As it smashed, he 
wa look down, wondering, no doubt, in hi stupidity, what the 
pother wa about,--for I wa shouting, and make someth of a 
clatter in my effort to prevent the catastroph which I saw wa 
coming. On the instant, as the vapour secret in the broken pellet 
gain access to the air, he fell forward on to hi face. rush to 
him, I snatch hi senseless bodi from the ground, and drag it, 
staggeringly, toward the door which open on to the yard. fling 
the door open, I got him into the open air. 

As I did so, I found myself confront by someon who stood outside. It 
wa lessingham' mysteri egypto-arabian friend,--mi morning' 
visitor. 




chapter xvii 

magic?--or miracle? 


the passag into the yard from the electr lit laboratori wa a 
passag from brillianc to gloom. the shroud figure, stand in the 
shadow, wa like some object in a dream. My own sens reeled. It wa 
onli becaus I had resolut held my breath, and kept my face avert 
that I had not succumb to the fate which had overtaken woodville. had 
I been a moment longer in gain the open air, it would have been too 
late. As it was, in place woodvil on the ground, I stumbl over 
him. My sens left me. even as they went I wa consciou of 
exclaiming,--rememb the say about the engin be hoist by 
hi own petard, 

'atherton' magic vapour!' 

My sensat on return to conscious were curious. I found 
myself be support in someone' arms, a stranger' face wa bend 
over me, and the most extraordinari pair of eye I had ever seen were 
look into mine. 

'who the deuc are you?' I asked. 

then, understand that it wa my uninvit visitor, with scant 
ceremoni I drew myself away from him. By the light which wa stream 
through the laboratori door I saw that woodvil wa lie close besid 
me,--stark and still. 

'i he dead?' I cried. 'percy.--speak, man!--it' not so bad with you 
as that!' 

but it wa pretti bad,--so bad that, as I bent down and look at him, 
my heart beat uncomfort fast lest it wa as bad as it could be. hi 
heart seem still,--th vapour took effect directli on the cardiac 
centres. To reviv their action and that instantly, wa indispensable. 
yet my brain wa in such a whirl that I could not even think of how to 
set about beginning. had I been alone, it is more than probabl 
woodvil would have died. As I stare at him, senselessly, aimlessly, 
the stranger, pass hi arm beneath hi body, extend himself at 
full length upon hi motionless form. put hi lip to percy's, he 
seem to be pump life from hi own bodi into the unconsci man's. 
As I gaze bewildered, surprised, present there came a movement of 
percy' body. hi limb twitched, as if he wa in pain. By degrees, the 
motion becam convulsive,--til on a sudden he bestir himself to 
such effect that the stranger wa roll right off him. I bent 
down,--to find that the young gentleman' condit still seem veri 
far from satisfactory. there wa a rigid about the muscl of hi 
face, a clammi about hi skin, a disagre suggest about 
the way in which hi teeth and the white of hi eye were exposed, 
which wa uncomfort to contemplate. 

the stranger must have seen what wa pass through my mind,--not a 
veri difficult thing to see. point to the recumb percy, he said, 
with that queer foreign twang of his, which, whatev it had seem 
like in the morning, sound music enough just then. 

'all will be well with him.' 

'I am not so sure.' 

the stranger did not deign to answer. He wa kneel on one side of 
the victim of modern science, I on the other. pass hi hand to and 
fro in front of the unconsci countenance, as if by magic all 
semblanc of discomfort vanish from percy' features, and, to all 
appearances, he wa placidli asleep. 

'have you hypnotis him?' 

'what doe it matter?' 

If it wa a case of hypnotism, it wa veri neatli done. the condit 
were both unusu and trying, the effect produc seem all that could 
be desired,--th chang brought about in half a dozen second wa quit 
remarkable. I began to be awar of a feel of quasi-respect for paul 
lessingham' friend. hi moral might be peculiar, and manner he might 
have none, but in thi case, at ani rate, the end seem to have 
justifi the means. He went on. 

'he sleeps. when he awak he will rememb noth that ha been. 
leav him,--th night is warm,--al will be well.' 

As he said, the night wa warm,--and it wa dry. perci would come to 
littl harm by be allow to enjoy, for a while, the pleasant 
breezes. So I act on the stranger' advice, and left him lie in the 
yard, while I had a littl interview with the impromptu physician. 




chapter xviii 

the apotheosi OF the beetl 


the laboratori door wa closed. the stranger wa stand a foot or two 
away from it. I wa further within the room, and wa subject him to 
as keen a scrutini as circumst permitted. beyond doubt he wa 
consciou of my observation, yet he bore himself with an air of 
indifference, which wa suggest of perfect unconcern. the fellow wa 
orient to the finger-tips,--that much wa certain; yet in spite of a 
pretti wide person knowledg of orient peopl I could not make up 
my mind as to the exact part of the east from which he came. He wa 
hardli an arab, he wa not a fellah,--h wa not, unless I erred, a 
mohammedan at all. there wa someth about him which wa distinctli 
not mussulmanic. So far as look were concerned, he wa not a 
flatter exampl of hi race, whatev hi race might be. the 
portent size of hi beak-lik nose would have been, in itself, 
suffici to damn him in ani court of beauty. hi lip were thick and 
shapeless,--and this, join to anoth peculiar in hi appearance, 
seem to suggest that, in hi vein there ran more than a streak of 
negro blood. the peculiar allud to wa hi semblanc of great age. 
As one eye him one wa remind of the legend told of peopl who have 
been suppos to have retain someth of their pristin vigour after 
have live for centuries. as, however, one continu to gaze, one 
began to wonder if he realli wa so old as he seemed,--if, indeed, he 
wa except old at all. negroes, and especi negresses, are 
apt to age with extrem rapidity. among colour folk one sometim 
encount women whose face seem to have been line by the passag of 
centuries, yet whose actual tale of year would entitl them to regard 
themselves, here in england, as in the prime of life. the senil of 
the fellow' countenance, besides, wa contradict by the juvenesc 
of hi eyes. No realli old man could have had eye like that. they were 
curious shaped, remind me of the elongated, facet eye of some 
queer creature, with whose appear I wa familiar, although I could 
not, at the instant, recal it name. they glow not onli with the 
forc and fire, but, also, with the frenzi of youth. more 
uncanny-look eye I had never encountered,--their possessor could 
not be, in ani sens of the word, a clubabl person. owing, probably, 
to some peculiar format of the optic-nerv one felt, as one met hi 
gaze, that he wa look right through you. more obviou danger 
signal never yet were place in a creature' head. the individu who, 
have onc caught sight of him, still sought to cultiv their 
owner' acquaintance, had onli himself to thank if the veri worst 
result of frequent evil compani promptli ensued. 

It happen that I am myself endow with an unusu tenac of vision. 
I could, for instance, easili outstar ani man I ever met. yet, as I 
continu to stare at thi man, I wa consciou that it wa onli by an 
effort of will that I wa abl to resist a bale someth which 
seem to be pass from hi eye to mine. It might have been 
imagination, but, in that sense, I am not an imagin man; and, if 
it was, it wa imagin of an unpleasantli vivid kind. I could 
understand how, in the case of a nervous, or a sensit temperament, 
the fellow might exercise, by mean of the peculiar qualiti of hi 
glanc alone, an influenc of a most disastr sort, which given an 
appropri subject in the manifest of it power might approach 
almost to the supernatural. If ever man wa endow with the 
tradit evil eye, in which italians, among modern nations, are such 
profound believers, it wa he. 

when we had stare at each other for, I daresay, quit five minutes, I 
began to think I had had about enough of it. so, by way of break the 
ice, I put to him a question. 

'may I ask how you found your way into my back yard?' 

He did not repli in words, but, rais hi hand he lower them, 
palm downward, with a gestur which wa peculiarli oriental. 

'indeed?--i that so?--your mean may be lucid itself to you, but, 
for my benefit, perhap you would not mind translat it into words. 
onc more I ask, how did you find your way into my back yard?' 

again noth but the gesture. 

'possibl you are not suffici acquaint with english manner and 
custom to be awar that you have place yourself within reach of the 
pain and penalti of the law. were I to call in the polic you would 
find yourself in an awkward situation,--and, unless you are present 
more explanatory, call in they will be.' 

By way of answer he indulg in a distort of the counten which 
might have been meant for a smile,--and which seem to suggest that he 
regard the polic with a contempt which wa too great for words. 

'whi do you laugh--do you think that be threaten with the polic 
is a joke? you are not like to find it so.--hav you suddenli been 
bereft of the use of your tongue?' 

He prove that he had not by use it. 

'I have still the use of my tongue.' 

'that, at least, is something. perhaps, sinc the subject of how you 
got into my back yard seem to be a delic one, you will tell me whi 
you got there.' 

'you know whi I have come.' 

'pardon me if I appear to flatli contradict you, but that is precis 
what I do not know.' 

'you do know.' 

'do i?--then, in that case, I presum that you are here for the reason 
which appear upon the surface,--to commit a felony.' 

'you call me thief?' 

'what els are you?' 

'I am no thief.--you know whi I have come.' 

He rais hi head a little. A look came into hi eye which I felt 
that I ought to understand, yet to the mean of which I seemed, for 
the instant, to have mislaid the key. I shrug my shoulders. 

'I have come becaus you want me.' 

'becaus I want you!--on my word!--that' sublime!' 

'all night you have want me,--do I not know? when she talk to you 
of him, and the blood boil in your veins; when he spoke, and all the 
peopl listened, and you hate him, becaus he had honour in her eyes.' 

I wa startled. either he meant what it appear incred that he 
could mean, or--ther wa confus somewhere. 

'take my advice, my friend, and don't tri to come the bunco-steer 
over me,--i'm a bit in that line myself, you know.' 

thi time the score wa mine,--h wa puzzled. 

'I know not what you talk of.' 

'in that case, we'r equal,--i know not what you talk of either.' 

hi manner, for him, wa childlik and bland. 

'what is it you do not know? thi morn did I not say,--if you want 
me, then I come?' 

'I fanci I have some faint recollect of your be so good as to say 
someth of the kind, but--where' the application?' 

'do you not feel for him the same as i?' 

'who' the him?' 

'paul lessingham.' 

It wa spoken quietly, but with a degre of--to put it 
gently--spit which show that at least the will to do the 
apostl harm would not be lacking. 

'and, pray, what is the common feel which we have for him?' 

'hate.' 

plainly, with thi gentleman, hate meant hate,--in the solid orient 
sense. I should hardli have been surpris if the mere utter of the 
word had sear hi lips. 

'I am by no mean prepar to admit that I have thi feel which you 
attribut to me, but, even grant that I have, what then?' 

'those who hate are kin.' 

'that, also, I should be slow to admit; but--to go a step farther--what 
ha all thi to do with your presenc on my premis at thi hour of 
the night?' 

'you love her.' thi time I did not ask him to suppli the name,--b 
unwil that it should be soil by the traffic of hi lips. 'she 
love him,--that is not well. If you choose, she shall love you,--that 
will be well.' 

'indeed.--and pray how is thi consumm which is so devoutli to be 
desir to be brought about?' 

'put your hand into mine. say that you wish it. It shall be done.' 

move a step forward, he stretch out hi hand toward me. I 
hesitated. there wa that in the fellow' manner which, for the moment, 
had for me an unwholesom fascination. memori flash through my mind 
of stupid stori which have been told of compact made with the devil. 
I almost felt as if I wa stand in the actual presenc of one of the 
power of evil. I thought of my love for marjorie,--which had reveal 
itself after all these years; of the delight of hold her in my arms, 
of feel the pressur of her lip to mine. As my gaze met his, the 
lower side of what the conquest of thi fair ladi would mean, burn in 
my brain; fierc imagin blaze befor my eyes. To win her,--onli to 
win her! 

what nonsens he wa talking! what empti brag it was! suppose, just for 
the sake of the joke, I did put my hand in his, and did wish, right 
out, what it wa plain he knew. If I wished, what harm would it do! It 
would be the purest jest. out of hi own mouth he would be confounded, 
for it wa certain that noth would come of it. whi should I not do 
it then? 

I would act on hi suggestion,--i would carri the thing right through. 
alreadi I wa advanc toward him, when--i stopped. I don't know why. 
On the instant, my thought went off at a tangent. 

what sort of a blackguard did I call myself that I should take a 
woman' name in vain for the sake of play fool' trick with such 
scum of the earth as the hideou vagabond in front of me,--and that the 
name of the woman whom I loved? rage took hold of me. 

'you hound!' I cried. 

In my sudden passag from one mood to another, I wa fill with the 
desir to shake the life half out of him. but so soon as I move a step 
in hi direction, intend war instead of peace, he alter the 
posit of hi hand, hold it out toward me as if forbid my 
approach. directli he did so, quit involuntarily, I pull up 
dead,--a if my progress had been stay by bar of iron and wall of 
steel. 

for the moment, I wa astonish to the verg of stupefaction. the 
sensat wa peculiar. I wa as incap of advanc anoth inch in 
hi direct as if I had lost the use of my limbs,--i wa even 
incap of attempt to attempt to advance. At first I could onli 
stare and gape. present I began to have an inkl of what had 
happened. 

the scoundrel had almost succeed in hypnotis me. 

that wa a nice thing to happen to a man of my sort at my time of life. 
A shiver went down my back,--what might have occur if I had not 
pull up in time! what prank might a creatur of that charact not 
have been dispos to play. It wa the old stori of the peril of 
play with edg tools; I had made the danger mistak of 
underr the enemy' strength. evidently, in hi own line, the 
fellow wa altogeth someth out of the usual way. 

I believ that even as it wa he thought he had me. As I turn away, 
and lean against the tabl at my back, I fanci that he shivered,--a 
if thi proof of my be still my own master wa unexpected. I wa 
silent,--it took some second to enabl me to recov from the shock of 
the discoveri of the peril in which I had been standing. then I 
resolv that I would endeavour to do someth which should make me 
equal to thi gentleman of mani talents. 

'take my advice, my friend, and don't attempt to play that hankey 
pankey off on to me again.' 

'I don't know what you talk of.' 

'don't lie to me,--or i'll burn you into ashes.' 

behind me wa an electr machine, give an eighteen inch spark. It 
wa set in motion by a lever fit into the table, which I could 
easili reach from where I sat. As I spoke the visitor wa treat to a 
littl exhibit of electricity. the chang in hi bear wa 
amusing. He shook with terror. He salaam down to the ground. 

'mi lord!--mi lord!--hav mercy, oh my lord!' 

'then you be careful, that' all. you may suppos yourself to be 
someth of a magician, but it happens, unfortun for you, that I 
can do a bit in that line myself,--perhap i'm a trifl better at the 
game than you are. especi as you have ventur into my stronghold, 
which contain magic enough to make a show of a hundr thousand such 
as you.' 

take down a bottl from a shelf, I sprinkl a drop or two of it 
content on the floor. immedi flame arose, accompani by a 
blind vapour. It wa a suffici simpl illustr of one of 
the qualiti of phosphorous-bromide, but it effect upon my visitor 
wa as startl as it wa unexpected. If I could believ the evid 
of my own eyesight, in the veri act of give utter to a scream of 
terror he disappeared, how, or why, or whither, there wa noth to 
show,--in hi place, where he had been standing, there seem to be a 
dim object of some sort in a state of frenzi agit on the floor. 
the phosphoresc vapour wa confusing; the light appear to be 
suddenli burn low; befor I had sens enough to go and see if there 
wa anyth there, and, if so, what, the flame had vanished, the man 
himself had reappeared, and, prostrat on hi knees, wa salaam in 
a condit of abject terror. 

'mi lord! my lord!' he whined. 'I entreat you, my lord, to use me as 
your slave!' 

'i'll use you as my slave!' whether he or I wa the more agit it 
would have been difficult to say,--but, at least, it would not have 
done to betray my feel as he did his. 

'stand up!' 

He stood up. I eye him as he did with an interest which, so far as I 
wa concerned, wa of a distinctli new and origin sort. whether or 
not I had been the victim of an ocular delus I could not be sure. It 
wa incred to suppos that he could have disappear as he had 
seem to disappear,--it wa also incred that I could have imagin 
hi disappearance. If the thing had been a trick, I had not the 
faintest notion how it had been worked; and, if it wa not a trick, 
then what wa it? wa it someth new in scientif marvels? could he 
give me as much instruct in the qualiti of unknown forc as I 
could him? 

In the meanwhil he stood in an attitud of complet submission, with 
downcast eyes, and hand cross upon hi breast. I start to 
cross-examin him. 

'I am go to ask you some questions. So long as you answer them 
promptly, truthfully, you will be safe. otherwis you had best beware.' 

'ask, oh my lord.' 

'what is the natur of your object to Mr lessingham?' 

'revenge.' 

'what ha he done to you that you should wish to be reveng on him?' 

'it is the feud of the innoc blood.' 

'what do you mean by that?' 

'on hi hand is the blood of my kin. It cri aloud for vengeance.' 

'who ha he killed?' 

'that, my lord, is for me,--and for him.' 

'I see.--am I to understand that you do not choos to answer me, and 
that I am again to use my--magic?' 

I saw that he quivered. 

'mi lord, he ha spill the blood of her who ha lain upon hi breast.' 

I hesitated. what he meant appear clear enough. perhap it would be 
as well not to press for further details. the word point to what it 
might be courteou to call an eastern romance,--though it wa hard to 
conceiv of the apostl figur as the hero of such a theme. It wa 
the old tale retold, that to the life of everi man there is a 
background,--that it is precis in the unlikeliest case that the 
background' darkest. what would that penny-plain-and-twopence-colour 
bogey, the nonconformist conscience, make of such a stori if it were 
blazon through the land. would paul not come down with a run? 

'"spill blood" is a figur of speech; pretty, perhaps, but vague. If 
you mean that Mr lessingham ha been kill someone, your surest and 
most effectu reveng would be gain by an appeal to the law.' 

'what ha the englishman' law to do with me?' 

'if you can prove that he ha been guilti of murder it would have a 
great deal to do with you. I assur you that at ani rate, in that 
sense, the englishman' law is no respect of persons. show him to be 
guilty, and it would hang paul lessingham as indifferently, and as 
cheerfully, as it would hang bill brown.' 

'i that so?' 

'it is so, as, if you choose, you will be easili abl to prove to your 
own entir satisfaction.' 

He had rais hi head, and wa look at someth which he seem to 
see in front of him with a malefic glare in hi sensit eye which 
it wa not nice to see. 

'he would be shamed?' 

'inde he would be shamed.' 

'befor all men?' 

'befor all men,--and, I take it, befor all women too.' 

'and he would hang?' 

'if shown to have been guilti of wil murder,--yes.' 

hi hideou face wa light up by a sort of diabol exult 
which made it, if that were possible, more hideou still. I had 
appar given him a wrinkl which pleas him most consummately. 

'perhap I will do that in the end,--in the end!' He open hi eye to 
their widest limits, then shut them tight,--a if to gloat on the 
pictur which hi fanci painted. then reopen them. 'in the meantim I 
will have vengeanc in my own fashion. He know alreadi that the 
aveng is upon him,--h ha good reason to know it. and through the 
day and the night the knowledg shall be with him still, and it shall 
be to him as the bitter of death,--aye, of mani deaths. for he will 
know that escap there is none, and that for him there shall be no more 
sun in the sky, and that the terror shall be with him by night and by 
day, at hi rise up and at hi lie down, wherev hi eye shall 
turn it shall be there,--yet, behold, the sap and the juic of my 
vengeanc is in this, in that though he shall be veri sure that the 
day that are, are as the day of hi death, yet shall he know that the 
death, the great death, is coming--coming--and shall be on him--when I 
will!' 

the fellow spoke like an inspir maniac. If he meant half what he 
said,--and if he did not then hi look and hi tone beli him!--then 
a promis futur bade fair to be in store for Mr lessingham,--and, 
also, circumst be as they were, for marjorie. It wa thi 
latter reflect which gave me pause. either thi imprecatori fanat 
would have to be dispos of, by lessingham himself, or by someon 
act on hi behalf, and, so far as their power of do mischief 
went, hi big word prove empti windbags, or marjori would have to be 
warn that there wa at least one passag in her suitor' life, into 
which, ere it wa too late, it wa advis that inquiri should be 
made. To allow marjori to irrevoc link her fate with the 
apostle's, without be first of all made awar that he was, to all 
intent and purposes, a haunt man--that wa not to be thought of. 

'you employ larg phrases.' 

My word cool the other' heat blood. onc more hi eye were cast 
down, hi hand cross upon hi breast 

'I crave my lord' pardon. My wound is ever new.' 

'bi the way, what wa the secret history, thi morning, of that littl 
incid of the cockroach?' 

He glanc up quickly. 

'cockroach?--i know not what you say.' 

'well,--wa it beetle, then?' 

'beetle!' 

He seemed, all at once, to have lost hi voice,--th word wa gasped. 

'after you went we found, upon a sheet of paper, a capit execut 
draw of a beetle, which, I fancy, you must have left behind 
you,--scaraboeu sacer, wasn't it?' 

'I know not what you talk of.' 

'it discoveri seem to have quit a singular effect on Mr lessingham. 
now, whi wa that?' 

'I know nothing.' 

'oh ye you do,--and, befor you go, I mean to know someth too.' 

the man wa trembling, look thi way and that, show sign of 
mark discomfiture. that there wa someth about that ancient 
scarab, which figur so larg in the still unravel tangl of the 
egyptian mythologies, and the effect which the mere sight of it 
cartouch--for the draw had resembl someth of the kind--had had 
on such a season vessel as paul lessingham, which might be well worth 
my find out, I felt convinced,--th man' demeanour, on my recur 
to the matter, told it own plain tale. I made up my mind, if possible, 
to probe the busi to the bottom, then and there. 

'listen to me, my friend. I am a plain man, and I use plain 
speech,--it' a kind of hobbi I have. you will give me the inform 
I require, and that at once, or I will pit my magic against yours,--in 
which case I think it extrem probabl that you will come off worst 
from the encounter.' 

I reach out for the lever, and the exhibit of electr 
recommenced. immedi hi tremor were redoubled. 

'mi lord, I know not of what you talk.' 

'none of your lie for me.--tel me why, at the sight of the thing on 
that sheet of paper, paul lessingham went green and yellow.' 

'ask him, my lord.' 

'probably, later on, that is what I shall do. In the meantime, I am 
ask you. answer,--or look out for squalls.' 

the electr exhibit wa go on. He wa glare at it as if he 
wish that it would stop. As if asham of hi cowardice, plainly, on 
a sudden, he made a desper effort to get the better of hi 
fears,--and succeed better than I had expect or desired. He drew 
himself up with what, in him, amount to an air of dignity. 

'I am a child of isis!' 

It struck me that he made thi remark, not so much to impress me, as 
with a view of elev hi own low spirits, 

'are you?--then, in that case, I regret that I am unabl to 
congratul the ladi on her offspring.' 

when I said that, a ring came into hi voic which I had not heard 
before. 

'silence!--y know not of what you speak!--i warn you, as I warn 
paul lessingham, be care not to go too far. Be not like him,--he 
my warning.' 

'what is it I am be warn against,--th beetle?' 

'yes,--th beetle!' 

were I upon oath, and thi statement be made, in the presenc of 
witnesses, say, in a solicitor' office, I stand in fear of pain 
and penalties, I think that, at thi point, I should leav the paper 
blank. No man like to own himself a fool, or that he ever wa a 
fool,--and ever sinc I have been wonder whether, on that occasion, 
that 'child of isis' did, or did not, play the fool with me. hi 
perform wa realist enough at the time, heaven knows. but, as it 
get farther and farther away, I ask myself, more and more confidently, 
as time effluxes, whether, after all, it wa not clever 
juggling,--superhumanli clever juggling, if you will; that, and noth 
more. If it wa someth more, then, with a vengeance! there is more 
in heaven and earth than is dream of in our philosophy. the mere 
possibl open vista which the sane mind fear to contemplate. 

since, then, I am not on oath, and, should I fall short of verbal 
accuracy, I do not need to fear the engin of the law, what seem to 
happen wa this. 

He wa stand within about ten feet of where I lean against the 
edg of the table. the light wa full on, so that it wa difficult to 
suppos that I could make a mistak as to what took place in front of 
me. As he repli to my mock allus to the beetl by echo my 
own words, he vanished,--or, rather, I saw him take a differ shape 
befor my eyes. hi loos draperi all fell off him, and, as they were 
in the veri act of falling, there issued, or there seem to issu out 
of them, a monstrou creatur of the beetl type,--th man himself wa 
gone. On the point of size I wish to make myself clear. My impression, 
when I saw it first, wa that it wa as larg as the man had been, and 
that it was, in some way, stand up on end, the leg toward me. but, 
the moment it came in view, it began to dwindle, and that so rapidli 
that, in a coupl of second at most, a littl heap of draperi wa 
lie on the floor, on which wa a truli astonish exampl of the 
coleoptera. It appear to be a beetle. It was, perhaps, six or seven 
inch high, and about a foot in length. it scale were of a vivid 
golden green. I could distinctli see where the wing were sheath 
along the back, and, as they seem to be slightli agitated, I looked, 
everi moment, to see them opened, and the thing take wing. 

I wa so astonished,--a who would not have been?--that for an 
appreci space of time I wa practic in a state of stupefaction. 
I could do noth but stare. I wa acquaint with the legendari 
transmigr of isis, and with the stori of the beetl which issu 
from the woman' womb through all eternity, and with the other pretti 
tales, but this, of which I wa an actual spectator, wa someth new, 
even in legends. If the man, with whom I had just been speaking, wa 
gone, where had he gone to? If thi glitter creatur wa there, in 
hi stead, whenc had it come? 

I do protest thi much, that, after the first shock of surpris had 
passed, I retain my presenc of mind. I felt as an investig might 
feel, who ha stumbled, haphazard, on some astounding, some 
epoch-making, discovery. I wa consciou that I should have to make the 
best use of my mental faculti if I wa to take full advantag of so 
astonish an accident. I kept my glanc rivet on the creature, with 
the idea of photograph it on my brain. I believ that if it were 
possibl to take a retin print--which it someday will be--you would 
have a perfect pictur of what it wa I saw, beyond doubt it wa a 
lamellicorn, one of the copridae. with the one except of it 
monstrou size, there were the characterist in plain view;--th 
convex body, the larg head, the project clypeus. more, it smooth 
head and throat seem to suggest that it wa a female. equal beyond 
a doubt, apart from it size, there were unusu featur present too. 
the eye were not onli unwontedli conspicuous, they gleam as if they 
were light by intern flames,--in some indescrib fashion they 
remind me of my vanish visitor. the colour wa superb, and the 
creatur appear to have the chameleon-lik faculti of lighten and 
darken the shade at will. it not least curiou featur wa it 
restlessness. It wa in a state of continu agitation; and, as if it 
resent my inspection, the more I look at it the more it agit 
grew. As I have said, I expect everi moment to see it take wing and 
circl through the air. 

all the while I wa cast about in my mind as to what mean I could 
use to effect it capture. I did think of kill it, and, on the 
whole, I rather wish that I had at ani rate attempt slaughter,--ther 
were dozen of things, lie readi to my hand, ani one of which would 
have sever tri it constitution;--but, on the spur of the moment, 
the onli method of take it aliv which occur to me, wa to pop 
over it a big tin canist which had contain soda-lime. thi canist 
wa on the floor to my left. I move toward it, as nonchalantli as I 
could, keep an eye on that shine wonder all the time. directli I 
moved, it agit percept increased,--it was, so to speak, all 
one whirr of tremblement; it scintillated, as if it colour scale 
had been so mani prisms; it began to unsheath it wings, as if it had 
final decid that it would make use of them. pick up the tin, 
disembarrass it of it lid, I sprang toward my intend victim. it 
wing open wide; obvious it wa about to rise; but it wa too late. 
befor it had clear the ground, the tin wa over it. 

It remain over it, however, for an instant only. I had stumbled, in 
my haste, and, in my effort to save myself from fall face foremost 
on to the floor, I wa compel to remov my hand from the tin. 
befor I wa abl to replac them, the tin wa sent flying, and, while 
I wa still partial recumbent, within eighteen inch of me, that 
beetl swell and swelled, until it had assum it former portent 
dimensions, when, as it seemed, it wa envelop by a human shape, and 
in less time than no time, there stood in front of me, nake from top 
to toe, my truli versatil orient friend. one startl fact nuditi 
revealed,--that I had been egregi mistaken on the question of sex. 
My visitor wa not a man, but a woman, and, judg from the brief 
glimps which I had of her body, by no mean old or ill-shap either. 

If that transform wa not a bewild one, then two and two make 
five. the most level-head scientist would temporarili have lost hi 
mental equipois on wit such a quick chang as that within a 
span or two of hi own nose I wa not onli witless, I wa breathless 
too,--i could onli gape. and, while I gaped, the woman, stoop down, 
pick up her draperies, began to huddl them on her anyhow,--and, 
also, to skeddadl toward the door which led into the yard. when I 
observ thi last manoeuvre, to some extent I did rise to the 
requir of the situation. leap up, I rush to stay her flight. 

'stop!' I shouted. 

but she wa too quick for me. ere I could reach her, she had open the 
door, and wa through it,--and, what wa more, she had slam it in my 
face. In my excitement, I did some fumbl with the handle. when, in 
my turn, I wa in the yard, she wa out of sight. I did fanci I saw a 
dim form disappear over the wall at the further side, and I made for 
it as fast as I knew how. I clamber on to the wall, look thi way 
and that, but there wa noth and no one to be seen. I listen for 
the sound of retreat footsteps, but all wa still. appar I had 
the entir neighbourhood to my own sweet self. My visitor had vanished. 
time devot to pursuit I felt would be time ill-spent. 

As I return across the yard, woodville, who still wa take hi rest 
under the open canopi of heaven, sat up. seemingli my approach had 
rous him out of slumber. At sight of me he rub hi eyes, and 
yawned, and blinked. 

'I say,' he remarked, not at all unreasonably, 'where am i?' 

'you'r on holy--or on haunt ground,--hang me if I quit know 
which!--but that' where you are, my boy.' 

'bi jove!--i am feel queer!--i have got a headache, don't you know.' 

'I shouldn't be in the least surpris at anyth you have, or 
haven't,--i'm beyond surprise. it' a drop of whiski you are 
wanting,--and what i'm want too,--only, for good sake, drop me 
none of your drops! mine is a case for a bottl at the least.' 

I put my arm through his, and went with him into the laboratory. and, 
when we were in, I shut, and locked, and bar the door. 




chapter xix 

the ladi rage 


dora grayl stood in the doorway. 

'I told your servant he need not troubl to show me in,--and i'v come 
without my aunt. I hope i'm not intruding.' 

she was--confoundedly; and it wa on the tip of my tongu to tell her 
so. she came into the room, with twinkl eyes, look radiantli 
happy,--that sort of look which make even a plain young woman 
prepossessing. 

'am I intruding?--i believ I am.' 

she held out her hand, while she wa still a dozen feet away, and when 
I did not at onc dash forward to make a clutch at it, she shook her 
head and made a littl mouth at me. 

'what' the matter with you?--aren't you well?' 

I wa not well,--i wa veri far from well. I wa as unwel as I could 
be without be posit ill, and ani person of common discern 
would have perceiv it at a glance. At the same time I wa not go 
to admit anyth of the kind to her. 

'thank you,--i am perfectli well.' 

'then, if I were you, I would endeavour to becom imperfectli well; a 
littl imperfect in that direct might make you appear to more 
advantage.' 

'I am afraid that that I am not one of those person who ever do appear 
to much advantage,--did I not tell you so last night?' 

'I believ you did say someth of the kind,--it' veri good of you to 
remember. have you forgotten someth els which you said to me last 
night?' 

'you can hardli expect me to keep fresh in my memori all the folli of 
which my tongu is guilty.' 

'thank you.--that is quit enough.--good-day.' 

she turn as if to go. 

'miss grayling!' 

'mr atherton?' 

'what' the matter?--what have I been say now?' 

'last night you invit me to come and see you thi morning,--i that 
one of the folli of which your tongu wa guilty?' 

the engag had escap my recollection--it is a fact--and my face 
betray me. 

'you had forgotten?' her cheek flamed; her eye sparkled. 'you must 
pardon my stupid for not have understood that the imit wa of 
that gener kind which is never meant to be act on.' 

she wa half way to the door befor I stop her,--i had to take her 
by the shoulder to do it. 

'miss grayling!--y are hard on me.' 

'I suppos I am.--i anyth harder than to be intrud on by an 
undesired, and unexpected, guest?' 

'now you are harder still.--if you knew what I have gone through sinc 
our convers of last night, in your strength you would be merciful.' 

'indeed?--what have you gone through?' 

I hesitated. what I actual had gone through I certainli did not 
propos to tell her. other reason apart I did not desir to seem 
madder than I admittedli am,--and I lack suffici plausibl to 
enabl me to concoct, on the spur of the moment, a plain tale of the 
do of my midnight visitor which would have suggest that the 
narrat wa perfectli sane. So I fenced,--or tri to. 

'for one thing,--i have had no sleep.' 

I had not,--not one singl wink. when I did get between the sheets, 
'all night I lay in agony,' I suffer from that worst form of 
nightmare,--th nightmar of the man who is wide awake. there wa 
continu befor my fever eye the strang figur of that nameless 
thing. I had often smile at tale of haunt folk,--her wa I one of 
them. My feel were not render more agreeabl by a strengthen 
convict that if I had onli retain the normal attitud of a 
scientif observ I should, in all probability, have solv the 
mysteri of my orient friend, and that hi exampl of the genu of 
coprida might have been pinned,--bi a veri larg pin!--on a piece--a 
monstrou piece!--of cork. It wa gall to reflect that he and I had 
play togeth a game of bluff,--a game at which civilis wa onc 
more prove to be a failure. 

she could not have seen all thi in my face; but she saw 
something--becaus her own look softened. 

'you do look tired.' she seem to be cast about in her own mind for 
a cause. 'you have been worrying.' she glanc round the big 
laboratory. 'have you been spend the night in this--wizard' cave?' 

'pretti well' 

'oh!' 

the monosyllable, as she utter it, wa big with meaning. uninvited, 
she seat herself in an arm-chair, a huge old thing, of shagreen 
leather, which would have held half a dozen of her. demur in it she 
looked, like an agreeabl reminiscence, alive, and a littl up-to-date, 
of the women of long ago. her dove grey eye seem to perceiv so much 
more than they care to show. 

'how is it that you have forgotten that you ask me to come?--didn't 
you mean it?' 

'of cours I meant it.' 

'then how is it you'v forgotten?' 

'I didn't forget.' 

'don't tell fibs.--someth is the matter,--tel me what it is.--i it 
that I am too early?' 

'noth of the sort,--you couldn't be too early.' 

'thank you.--when you pay a compliment, even so neat an one as that, 
sometimes, you should look as if you meant it.--it is early,--i know 
it' early, but afterward I want you to come to lunch. I told aunt 
that I would bring you back with me.' 

'you are much better to me than I deserve.' 

'perhaps.' A tone came into her voic which wa almost pathetic. 'I 
think that to some men women are almost better than they deserve. I 
don't know why. I suppos it pleas them. It is odd.' there wa a 
differ intonation,--a dryness. 'have you forgotten what I came for?' 

'not a bit of it,--i am not quit the brute I seem. you came to see an 
illustr of that pleasant littl fanci of mine for slaughter my 
fellows. the fact is, i'm hardli in a mood for that just now,--i'v 
been illustr it too much already.' 

'what do you mean?' 

'well, for one thing it' been murder lessingham' cat.' 

'mr lessingham' cat?' 

'then it almost murder perci woodville.' 

'mr atherton!--i wish you wouldn't talk like that.' 

'it' a fact. It wa a question of a littl matter in a wrong place, 
and, if it hadn't been for someth veri like a miracle, he'd be dead.' 

'I wish you wouldn't have anyth to do with such things--i hate them.' 

I stared. 

'hate them?--i thought you'd come to see an illustration.' 

'and pray what wa your notion of an illustration?' 

'well, anoth cat would have had to be killed, at least.' 

'and do you suppos that I would have sat still while a cat wa be 
kill for my--edification?' 

'it needn't necessarili have been a cat, but someth would have had 
to be killed,--how are you go to illustr the death-deal 
propens of a weapon of that sort without it?' 

'i it possibl that you imagin that I came here to see someth 
killed?' 

'then for what did you come?' 

I do not know what there wa about the question which wa startling, 
but as soon as it wa out, she went a fieri red. 

'becaus I wa a fool.' 

I wa bewildered. either she had got out of the wrong side of bed, or I 
had,--or we both had. here she was, assail me, hammer and tongs, so 
far as I could see, for absolut nothing. 

'you are pleas to be satir at my expense.' 

'I should not dare. your detect of me would be so pain rapid.' 

I wa in no mood for jangling. I turn a littl away from her. 
immedi she wa at my elbow. 

'mr atherton?' 

'miss grayling.' 

'are you cross with me?' 

'whi should I be? If it pleas you to laugh at my stupid you are 
complet justified.' 

'but you are not stupid.' 

'no?--nor you satirical.' 

'you are not stupid,--y know you are not stupid; it wa onli 
stupid on my part to pretend that you were.' 

'it is veri good of you to say so.--but I fear that I am an indiffer 
host. although you would not care for an illustration, there may be 
other thing which you might find amusing.' 

'whi do you keep on snub me?' 

'I keep on snub you!' 

'you are alway snub me,--you know you are. some time I feel as if 
I hate you.' 

'miss grayling!' 

'I do! I do! I do!' 

'after all, it is onli natural.' 

'that is how you talk,--a if I were a child, and you were,--oh I don't 
know what.--well, Mr atherton, I am sorri to be oblig to leav you. I 
have enjoy my visit veri much. I onli hope I have not seem too 
intrusive.' 

she flounced--'flounce' wa the onli appropri word!--out of the room 
befor I could stop her. I caught her in the passage. 

'miss grayling, I entreat you--' 

'pray do not entreat me, Mr atherton.' stand still she turn to me. 
'I would rather show myself to the door as I show myself in, but, if 
that is impossible, might I ask you not to speak to me between thi and 
the street?' 

the hint wa broad enough, even for me. I escort her through the hall 
without a word,--in perfect silenc she shook the dust of my abod from 
off her feet. 

I had made a pretti mess of things. I felt it as I stood on the top of 
the step and watch her going,--sh wa walk off at four mile an 
hour; I had not even ventur to ask to be allow to call a hansom. 

It wa begin to occur to me that thi wa a case in which anoth 
blow upon the river might be, to say the least of it, advisable--and I 
wa just return into the hous with the intent of put myself 
into my flannels, when a cab drew up, and old lindon got out of it. 




chapter XX 

A heavi father 


Mr lindon wa excited,--ther is no mistak it when he is, becaus 
with him excit mean perspiration, and as soon as he wa out of 
the cab he took off hi hat and began to wipe the lining. 

'atherton, I want to speak to you--most particularly--somewher in 
private.' 

I took him into my laboratory. It is my rule to take no one there; it 
is a workshop, not a playroom,--th place is private; but, recently, my 
rule had becom dead letters. directli he wa inside, lindon began 
puf and stewing, wipe hi forehead, throw out hi chest, as if 
he were oppress by a sens of hi own importance. then he start off 
talk at the top of hi voice,--and it is not a low one either. 

'atherton, i--i'v alway look on you as a--a kind of a son.' 

'that' veri kind of you.' 

'i'v alway regard you as a--a level-head fellow; a man from whom 
sound advic can be obtain when sound advice--is--i most to be 
desired.' 

'that also is veri kind of you.' 

'and therefor I make no apolog for come to you at--at what may be 
regard as a--a strictli domest crisis; at a moment in the histori 
of the lindon when delicaci and common sens are--ar essenti 
required.' 

thi time I content myself with nodding. alreadi I perceiv what wa 
coming; somehow, when I am with a man I feel so much more clear-head 
than I do when I am with a woman,--realis so much better the natur of 
the ground on which I am standing. 

'what do you know of thi man lessingham?' 

I knew it wa coming. 

'what all the world knows.' 

'and what doe all the world know of him?--i ask you that! A flashy, 
plausible, shallow-pated, carpet-bagger,--that is what all the world 
know of him. the man' a polit adventurer,--h snatch a 
precarious, and criminal, notoriety, by trade on the folli of hi 
fellow-countrymen. He is devoid of decency, destitut of principle, and 
impervi to all the feel of a gentleman. what do you know of him 
besid this?' 

'I am not prepar to admit that I do know that.' 

'oh ye you do!--don't talk nonsense!--y choos to screen the fellow! 
I say what I mean,--i alway have said, and I alway shall say.--what 
do you know of him outsid politics,--of hi family--of hi privat 
life?' 

'well,--not veri much.' 

'of cours you don't!--nor doe anybodi else! the man' a mushroom,--or 
a toadstool, rather!--sprung up in the cours of a singl night, 
appar out of some dirti ditch.--why, sir, not onli is he without 
ordinari intelligence, he is even without a brummagen substitut for 
manners.' 

He had work himself into a state of heat in which hi counten 
present a not too agreeabl assort of scarlet and purples. He 
flung himself into a chair, threw hi coat wide open, and hi arm too, 
and start off again. 

'the famili of the lindon is, at thi moment, repres by a--a 
young woman,--bi my daughter, sir. she repres me, and it' her duti 
to repres me adequately--adequately, sir! and what' more, between 
ourselves, sir, it' her duti to marry. My property' my own, and I 
wouldn't have it pass to either of my confound brother on ani 
account. they'r next door to fools, and--and they don't repres me 
in ani possibl sens of the word. My daughter, sir, can marri whom she 
pleases,--whom she pleases! there' no one in england, peer or 
commoner, who would not esteem it an honour to have her for hi 
wife--i'v told her so,--yes, sir, i'v told her, though you--you'd 
think that she, of all peopl in the world, wouldn't requir telling. 
yet what do you think she does? she--sh actual carri on what i--i 
can't help call a--a compromis acquaint with thi man 
lessingham!' 

'no!' 

'but I say yes!--and I wish to heaven I didn't. i--i'v warn her 
against the scoundrel more than once; i--i'v told her to cut him dead. 
and yet, as--a you saw yourself, last night, in--in the face of the 
assembl hous of commons, after that twaddl clap-trap speech of 
his, in which there wa not one sound sentiment, nor an idea 
which--which would hold water, she posit went away with him, 
in--in the most ostentati and--and disgrac fashion, on--on hi 
arm, and--and actual snub her father.--it is monstrou that a 
parent--a father!--should be subject to such treatment by hi child.' 

the poor old boy polish hi brow with hi pocket-handkerchief. 

'when I got home i--i told her what I thought of her, I promis you 
that,--and I told her what I thought of him,--i didn't minc my word 
with her. there are occas when plain speak is demanded,--and 
that wa one. I posit forbad her to speak to the fellow again, or 
to recognis him if she met him in the street. I point out to her, 
with perfect candour, that the fellow wa an infern scoundrel,--that 
and noth else!--and that he would bring disgrac on whoever came 
into contact with him, even with the end of a barg pole.--and what do 
you think she said?' 

'she promis to obey you, I make no doubt.' 

'did she, sir!--bi gad, did she!--that show how much you know 
her!--sh said, and, by gad, by her manner, and--and the way she went 
on, you'd--you'd have thought that she wa the parent and I wa the 
child--sh said that i--i griev her, that she wa disappoint in me, 
that time have changed,--yes, sir, she said that time have 
changed!--that, nowadays, parent weren't russian autocrats--no, sir, 
not russian autocrats!--that--that she wa sorri she couldn't oblig 
me,--yes, sir, that wa how she put it,--sh wa sorri she couldn't 
oblig me, but it wa altogeth out of the question to suppos that 
she could put a period to a friendship which she valued, simpli on 
account of-of my unreason prejudices,--and--and--and, in short, 
she--sh told me to go the devil, sir!' 

'and did you--' 

I wa on the point of ask him if he went,--but I check myself in 
time. 

'let us look at the matter as men of the world. what do you know 
against lessingham, apart from hi politics?' 

'that' just it,--i know nothing.' 

'in a sense, isn't that in hi favour?' 

'I don't see how you make that out. i--i don't mind tell you that 
i--i'v had inquiri made. he' not been in the hous six years--thi 
is hi second parliament--he' jump up like a jack-in-the-box. hi 
first constitu wa harwich--they'v got him still, and much good 
may he do 'em!--but how he came to stand for the place,--or who, or 
what, or where he wa befor he stood for the place, no one seem to 
have the faintest notion.' 

'hasn't he been a great traveller?' 

'I never heard of it.' 

'not in the east?' 

'ha he told you so?' 

'no,--i wa onli wondering. well, it seem to me that to find out that 
noth is known against him is someth in hi favour!' 

'mi dear sydney, don't talk nonsense. what it prove is simply,--that 
he' a noth and a nobody. had he been anyth or anyone, someth 
would have been known about him, either for or against. I don't want my 
daughter to marri a man who--who--who' shot up through a trap, simpli 
becaus noth is known against him. ha-hang me, if I wouldn't ten 
time sooner she should marri you.' 

when he said that, my heart leap in my bosom. I had to turn away. 

'I am afraid that is out of the question.' 

He stop in hi tramping, and look at me askance. 

'why?' 

I felt that, if I wa not careful, I should be done for,--and, 
probably, in hi present mood, marjori too. 

'mi dear lindon, I cannot tell you how grate I am to you for your 
suggestion, but I can onli repeat that--unfortunately, anyth of the 
kind is out of the question.' 

'I don't see why.' 

'perhap not.' 

'you--you'r a pretti lot, upon my word!' 

'i'm afraid we are.' 

'i--i want you to tell her that lessingham is a damn scoundrel.' 

'I see.--but I would suggest that if I am to use the influenc with 
which you credit me to the best advantage, or to preserv a shred of 
it, I had hardli better state the fact quit so bluntli as that.' 

'I don't care how you state it,--stat it as you like. only--onli I 
want you to soak her mind with a loath of the fellow; i--i--i want 
you to paint him in hi true colours; in--in--in fact, i--i want you to 
choke him off.' 

while he still struggl with hi words, and with the perspir on 
hi brow, edward entered. I turn to him. 

'what is it?' 

'miss lindon, sir, wish to see you particularly, and at once.' 

At that moment I found the announc a trifl perplexing,--it 
delight lindon. He began to stutter and to stammer. 

't-the veri thing!--c-couldn't have been better!--show her in here! 
h--hide me somewhere,--i don't care where,--behind that screen! y-you 
use your influenc with her;--g-giv her a good talk to;--t-tel her 
what i'v told you; and at--at the critic moment i'll come in, and 
then--then if we can't manag her between us, it'll be a wonder.' 

the proposit stagger me. 

'but, my dear Mr lindon, I fear that I cannot--' 

He cut me short. 

'here she comes!' 

ere I could stop him he wa behind the screen,--i had not seen him move 
with such agil before!--and befor I could expostul marjori wa 
in the room. someth which wa in her bearing, in her face, in her 
eyes, quicken the beat of my pulses,--sh look as if someth 
had come into her life, and taken the joy clean out of it. 




chapter xxi 

the terror IN the night 


'sydney!' she cried, 'i'm so glad that I can see you!' 

she might be,--but, at that moment, I could scarc assert that I wa 
a sharer of her joy. 

'I told you that if troubl overtook me I should come to you, and--i'm 
in troubl now. such strang trouble.' 

So wa i,--and in perplex as well. An idea occur to me,--i would 
outwit her eavesdrop father. 

'come with me into the house,--tel me all about it there.' 

she refus to budge. 

'no,--i will tell you all about it here.' she look about her,--a it 
struck me queerly. 'thi is just the sort of place in which to unfold a 
tale like mine. It look uncanny.' 

'but--' 

'"but me no buts!" sydney, don't tortur me,--let me stop here where I 
am,--don't you see i'm haunted?' 

she had seat herself. now she stood up, hold her hand out in 
front of her in a state of extraordinari agitation, her manner as wild 
as her words. 

'whi are you stare at me like that? Do you think i'm mad?--i wonder 
if i'm go mad.--sydney, do peopl suddenli go mad? you'r a bit of 
everything, you'r a bit of a doctor too, feel my pulse,--ther it 
is!--tel me if i'm ill!' 

I felt her pulse,--it did not need it swift beat to inform me that 
fever of some sort wa in her veins. I gave her someth in a glass. 
she held it up to the level of her eyes. 

'what' this?' 

'it' a decoct of my own. you might not think it, but my brain 
sometim get into a whirl. I use it as a sedative. It will do you 
good.' 

she drain the glass. 

'it' done me good already,--i believ it has; that' be someth 
like a doctor.--well, sydney, the storm ha almost burst. last night 
papa forbad me to speak to paul lessingham--bi way of a prelude.' 

'exactly. Mr lindon---' 

'yes, Mr lindon,--that' papa. I fanci we almost quarrelled. I know 
papa said some surpris things,--but it' a way he has,--he' apt to 
say surpris things. he' the best father in the world, but--it' not 
in hi natur to like a realli clever person; your good high dri old 
tori never can;--i'v alway thought that that' whi he' so fond of 
you.' 

'thank you, I presum that is the reason, though it had not occur to 
me before.' 

sinc her entry, I had, to the best of my ability, been turn the 
posit over in my mind. I came to the conclus that, all thing 
considered, her father had probabl as much right to be a sharer of hi 
daughter' confid as I had, even from the vantag of the 
screen,--and that for him to hear a few home truth proceed from her 
lip might serv to clear the air. from such a clearanc the ladi would 
not be like to come off worst. I had not the faintest inkl of what 
wa the actual purport of her visit. 

she start off, as it seem to me, at a tangent. 

'did I tell you last night about what took place yesterday 
morning,--about the adventur of my find the man?' 

'not a word.' 

'I believ I meant to,--i'm half dispos to think he' brought me 
trouble. isn't there some superstit about evil befal whoever 
shelter a homeless stranger?' 

'we'll hope not, for humanity' sake.' 

'I fanci there is,--i feel sure there is.--anyhow, listen to my story. 
yesterday morning, befor breakfast,--to be accurate, between eight and 
nine, I look out of the window, and I saw a crowd in the street. I 
sent peter out to see what wa the matter. He came back and said there 
wa a man in a fit. I went out to look at the man in the fit. I found, 
lie on the ground, in the centr of the crowd, a man who, but for the 
tatter remnant of what had appar onc been a cloak, would have 
been stark naked. He wa cover with dust, and dirt, and blood,--a 
dread sight. As you know, I have had my smatter of instruct in 
first aid to the injured, and that kind of thing, so, as no one els 
seem to have ani sense, and the man seem as good as dead, I thought 
I would tri my hand. directli I knelt down besid him, what do you 
think he said?' 

'thank you.' 

'nonsense.--h said, in such a queer, hollow, croak voice, "paul 
lessingham." I wa dread startled. To hear a perfect stranger, a 
man in hi condition, utter that name in such a fashion--to me, of all 
peopl in the world!--took me aback. the policeman who wa hold hi 
head remarked, "that' the first time he' open hi mouth. I thought 
he wa dead." He open hi mouth a second time. A convuls movement 
went all over him, and he exclaimed, with the strangest earnestness, 
and so loudli that you might have heard him at the other end of the 
street, "be warned, paul lessingham, be warned!" It wa veri silli of 
me, perhaps, but I cannot tell you how hi words, and hi manner--th 
two together--affect me.--well, the long and the short of it was, 
that I had him taken into the house, and washed, and put to bed,--and I 
had the doctor sent for. the doctor could make noth of it at all. He 
report that the man seem to be suffer from some sort of 
catalept seizure,--i could see that he thought it like to turn out 
almost as interest a case as I did.' 

'did you acquaint your father with the addit to hi household?' 

she look at me, quizzically. 

'you see, when one ha such a father as mine one cannot tell him 
everything, at once. there are occas on which one requir time.' 

I felt that thi would be wholesom hear for old lindon. 

'last night, after papa and I had exchang our littl 
courtesies,--which, it is to be hoped, were to papa' satisfaction, 
sinc they were not to be mine--i went to see the patient. I wa told 
that he had neither eaten nor drunk, move nor spoken. but, so soon as 
I approach hi bed, he show sign of agitation. He half rais 
himself upon hi pillow, and he call out, as if he had been 
address some larg assembly--i can't describ to you the dread 
someth which wa in hi voice, and on hi face,--"paul 
lessingham!--beware!--th beetle!"' 

when she said that, I wa startled. 

'are you sure those were the word he used?' 

'quit sure. Do you think I could mistak them,--especi after what 
ha happen since? I hear them sing in my ears,--they haunt me all 
the time.' 

she put her hand up to her face, as if to veil someth from her 
eyes. I wa becom more and more convinc that there wa someth 
about the apostle' connect with hi orient friend which need 
probe to the bottom. 

'what sort of a man is he to look at, thi patient of yours?' 

I had my doubt as to the gentleman' identity,--which her word 
dissolved; only, however, to increas my mystif in anoth 
direction. 

'he seem to be between thirti and forty. He ha light hair, and 
straggl sandi whiskers. He is so thin as to be noth but skin and 
bone,--th doctor say it' a case of starvation.' 

'you say he ha light hair, and sandi whiskers. are you sure the 
whisker are real?' 

she open her eyes. 

'of cours they'r real. whi shouldn't they be real?' 

'doe he strike you as be a--foreigner?' 

'certainli not. He look like an englishman, and he speak like one, 
and not, I should say, of the lowest class. It is true that there is a 
veri curious, a weird, qualiti in hi voice, what I have heard of it, 
but it is not un-english. If it is catalepsi he is suffer from, then 
it is a kind of catalepsi I never heard of. have you ever seen a 
clairvoyant?' I nodded. 'he seem to me to be in a state of 
clairvoyance. Of cours the doctor laugh when I told him so, but we 
know what doctor are, and I still believ that he is in some condit 
of the kind. when he said that last night he struck me as be under 
what those sort of peopl call 'influence,' and that whoever had him 
under influenc wa forc him to speak against hi will, for the 
word came from hi lip as if they had been wrung from him in agony.' 

know what I did know, that struck me as be rather a remark 
conclus for her to have reached, by the exercis of her own unaid 
power of intuition,--but I did not choos to let her know I thought so. 

'mi dear marjorie!--y who pride yourself on have your imagin 
so strictli under control!--on suffer it to take no errant flights!' 

'i not the fact that I do so pride myself proof that I am not like 
to make assert wildly,--proof, at ani rate, to you? listen to me. 
when I left that unfortun creature' room,--i had had a nurs sent 
for, I left him in her charge--and reach my own bedroom, I wa 
possess by a profound convict that some appalling, intangible, but 
veri real danger, wa at that moment threaten paul.' 

'remember,--y had had an excit evening; and a discuss with your 
father. your patient' word came as a climax.' 

'that is what I told myself,--or, rather, that wa what I tri to tell 
myself; because, in some extraordinari fashion, I had lost the command 
of my power of reflection.' 

'precisely.' 

'it wa not precisely,--or, at least, it wa not precis in the sens 
you mean. you may laugh at me, sydney, but I had an altogeth 
indescrib feeling, a feel which amount to knowledge, that I 
wa in the presenc of the supernatural.' 

'nonsense!' 

'it wa not nonsense,--i wish it had been nonsense. As I have said, I 
wa conscious, complet conscious, that some fright peril wa 
assail paul. I did not know what it was, but I did know that it wa 
someth altogeth awful, of which mere to think wa to shudder. I 
want to go to hi assistance, I tri to, more than once; but I 
couldn't, and I knew that I couldn't,--i knew that I couldn't move as 
much as a finger to help him.--stop,--let me finish!--i told myself 
that it wa absurd, but it wouldn't do; absurd or not, there wa the 
terror with me in the room. I knelt down, and I prayed, but the word 
wouldn't come. I tri to ask god to remov thi burden from my brain, 
but my long wouldn't shape themselv into words, and my tongu wa 
palsied. I don't know how long I struggled, but, at last, I came to 
understand that, for some cause, god had chosen to leav me to fight 
the fight alone. So I got up, and undressed, and went to bed,--and that 
wa the worst of all. I had sent my maid away in the first rush of my 
terror, afraid, and, I think, ashamed, to let her see my fear. now I 
would have given anyth to summon her back again, but I couldn't do 
it, I couldn't even ring the bell. so, as I say, I got into bed.' 

she paused, as if to collect her thoughts. To listen to her words, and 
to think of the suffer which they meant to her, wa almost more than 
I could endure. I would have thrown away the world to have been abl to 
take her in my arms, and sooth her fears. I knew her to be, in 
general, the least hyster of young women; littl wont to becom the 
prey of mere delusions; and, incred though it sounded, I had an 
innat convict that, even in it wildest periods, her stori had some 
sort of basi in solid fact. what that basi amount to, it would be 
my business, at ani and everi cost, quickli to determine. 

'you know how you have alway laugh at me becaus of my object 
to--cockroaches, and how, in spring, the neighbourhood of may-bug ha 
alway made me uneasy. As soon as I got into bed I felt that someth 
of the kind wa in the room.' 

'someth of what kind?' 

'some kind of--beetle. I could hear the whir of it wings; I could 
hear it drone in the air; I knew that it wa hover abov my head; 
that it wa come lower and lower, nearer and nearer. I hid myself; I 
cover myself all over with the clothes,--then I felt it bump 
against the coverlet. and, sydney!' she drew closer. her blanch 
cheek and frighten eye made my heart bleed. her voic becam but an 
echo of itself. 'it follow me.' 

'marjorie!' 

'it got into the bed.' 

'you imagin it.' 

'I didn't imagin it. I heard it crawl along the sheets, till it found 
a way between them, and then it crawl toward me. and I felt 
it--against my face.--and it' there now.' 

'where?' 

she rais the forefing of her left hand. 

'there!--can't you hear it droning?' 

she listened, intently. I listen too. oddli enough, at that instant 
the drone of an insect did becom audible. 

'it' onli a bee, child, which ha found it way through the open 
window.' 

'I wish it were onli a bee, I wish it were.--sydney, don't you feel as 
if you were in the presenc of evil? don't you want to get away from 
it, back into the presenc of god?' 

'marjorie!' 

'pray, sydney, pray!--i can't!--i don't know why, but I can't! 

she flung her arm about my neck, and press herself against me in 
paroxysm agitation. the violenc of her emot bade fair to unman me 
too. It wa so unlik marjorie,--and I would have given my life to save 
her from a toothache. she kept repeat her own words,--a if she 
could not help it. 

'pray, sydney, pray!' 

At last I did as she wish me. At least, there is no harm in 
praying,--i never heard of it bring hurt to anyone. I repeat 
aloud the lord' prayer,---th first time for I know not how long. As 
the divin sentenc came from my lips, hesitatingli enough, I make no 
doubt, her tremor ceased. she becam calmer. until, as I reach the 
last great petition, 'deliv us from evil,' she loos her arm from 
about my neck, and drop upon her knees, close to my feet. and she 
join me in the close words, as a sort of chorus. 

'for thine is the kingdom, the power, and the glory, for ever and ever. 
amen.' 

when the prayer wa ended, we both of us were still. she with her head 
bowed, and her hand clasped; and I with someth tug at my 
heart-str which I had not felt there for mani and mani a year, 
almost as if it had been my mother' hand;--i daresay that sometim 
she doe stretch out her hand, from her place among the angels, to 
touch my heart-strings, and I know noth of it all the while. 

As the silenc still continued, I chanc to glanc up, and there wa 
old lindon peep at us from hi hiding-plac behind the screen. the 
look of amaz perplex which wa on hi big red face struck me with 
such a keen sens of the incongru that it wa all I could do to keep 
from laughter. appar the sight of us did noth to lighten the fog 
which wa in hi brain, for he stammer out, in what wa possibl 
intend for a whisper, 

'is--i she m-mad?' 

the whisper,--if it wa meant for a whisper--wa more than suffici 
audibl to catch hi daughter' ears. she started--rais her 
head--sprang to her feet--turned--and saw her father. 

'papa!' 

immedi her sire wa seiz with an access of stuttering. 

'w-w-what the d-devil' the--th m-m-mean of this?' 

her utter wa clear enough,--i fanci her parent found it almost 
pain clear. 

'rather it is for me to ask, what is the mean of this! Is it 
possible, that, all the time, you have actual been conceal behind 
that--screen?' 

unless I am mistaken the old gentleman cower befor the direct of 
hi daughter' gaze,--and endeavour to conceal the fact by an 
explos of passion. 

do-don't you s-speak to me li-lik that, you un-unduti girl! i--i'm 
your father!' 

'you certainli are my father; though I wa unawar until now that my 
father wa capabl of play the part of eavesdropper.' 

rage render him speechless,--or, at ani rate, he chose to let us 
believ that that wa the determin caus of hi continu silence. 
So marjori turn to me,--and, on the whole, I had rather she had not. 
her manner wa veri differ from what it had been just now,--it wa 
more than civil, it wa freezing. 

'am I to understand, Mr atherton, that thi ha been done with your 
cognisance? that while you suffer me to pour out my heart to you 
unchecked, you were aware, all the time, that there wa a listen 
behind the screen?' 

I becam keenli aware, on a sudden, that I had born my share in 
play her a veri shabbi trick,--i should have like to throw old 
lindon through the window. 

'the thing wa not of my contriving. had I had the opportun I would 
have compel Mr lindon to face you when you came in. but your 
distress caus me to lose my balance. and you will do me the justic 
to rememb that I endeavour to induc you to come with me into 
anoth room.' 

'but I do not seem to rememb your hint at there be ani 
particular reason whi I should have gone.' 

'you never gave me a chance.' 

'sydney!--i had not thought you would have play me such a trick!' 

when she said that--in such a tone!--th woman whom I loved!--i could 
have hammer my head against the wall. the hound I wa to have treat 
her so scurvily! 

perceiv I wa crush she turn again to face her father, cool, 
calm, stately;--sh was, on a sudden, onc more, the marjori with whom 
I wa familiar. the demeanour of parent and child wa in strike 
contrast. If appear went for aught, the odd were heavi that in 
ani encount which might be come the senior would suffer. 

'I hope, papa, that you are go to tell me that there ha been some 
curiou mistake, and that noth wa farther from your intent than 
to listen at a keyhole. what would you have thought--and said--if I had 
attempt to play the spi on you? and I have alway understood that men 
were so particular on point of honour.' 

old lindon wa still hardli fit to do much els than 
splutter,--certainli not qualifi to chop phrase with thi 
sharp-tongu maiden. 

'd-don't talk to me li-lik that, girl!--i--i believ you'r s-stark 
mad!' He turn to me. 'w-what wa that tomfooleri she wa talk to 
you about?' 

'to what do you allude?' 

'about a rub-rubbish b-beetle, and g-good alon know 
what,--d-diseas and m-morbid imagination,--r-rear on the literatur 
of the gutter!--i never thought that a child of mine could have s-sunk 
to such a depth!--now, atherton, I ask you to t-tell me frankly,--what 
do you think of a child who behav as she ha done? who t-take a 
nameless vagabond into the hous and con-conc hi presenc from her 
father? and m-mark the sequel! even the vagabond warn her against the 
r-rascal lessingham!--now, atherton, tell me what you think of a girl 
who behav like that?' I shrug my shoulders. 'i--i know veri well 
what you d-do think of her,--don't be afraid to say it out becaus 
she' present.' 

'no; sydney, don't be afraid.' 

I saw that her eye were dancing,--in a manner of speaking, her look 
brighten under the sunshin of her father' displeasure. 

'let' hear what you think of her as a--a a m-man of the world!' 

'pray, sydney, do!' 

'what you feel for her in your--your heart of hearts!' 

'yes, sydney, what do you feel for me in your heart of hearts?' 

the baggag beam with heartless sweetness,--sh wa make a mock of 
me. her father turn as if he would have rent her. 

'd-don't you speak until you'r spoken to! atherton, i--i hope i'm not 
deceiv in you; i--i hope you'r the man i--i took you for; that 
you'r will and--and readi to play the part of a-a-an honest friend 
to thi mis-misguid simpleton. t-thi is not the time for minc 
words, it--it' the time for candid speech. tell this--thi weak mind 
young woman, right out, whether thi man lessingham is, or is not, a 
damn scoundrel.' 

'papa!--do you realli think that sydney' opinion, or your opinion, is 
like to alter facts?' 

'do you hear, atherton, tell thi wretch girl the truth!' 

'mi dear Mr lindon, I have alreadi told you that I know noth either 
for or against Mr lessingham except what is known to all the world.' 

'exactly,--and all the world know him to be a miser adventur who 
is scheme to entrap my daughter.' 

'I am bound to say, sinc you press me, that your languag appear to 
me to be unnecessarili strong.' 

'atherton, i--i'm asham of you!' 

'you see, sydney, even papa is asham of you; now you are outsid the 
pale.--mi dear papa, if you will allow me to speak, I will tell you 
what I know to be the truth, the whole truth, and noth but the 
truth.--that Mr lessingham is a man with great gift goe without 
saying,--permit me, papa! He is a man of genius. He is a man of honour. 
He is a man of the loftiest ambitions, of the highest aims. He ha 
dedic hi whole life to the improv of the condit amidst 
which the less fortun of hi fellow countrymen are at present 
compel to exist. that seem to me to be an object well worth having. 
He ha ask me to share hi life-work, and I have told him that I 
will; when, and where, and how, he want me to. and I will. I do not 
suppos hi life ha been free from peccadilloes. I have no delus on 
the point. what man' life has? who among men can claim to be without 
sin? even the member of our highest famili sometim hide behind 
screens. but I know that he is, at least, as good a man as I ever met, 
I am persuad that I shall never meet a better; and I thank god that I 
have found favour in hi eyes.--good-bye, sydney.--i suppos I shall 
see you again, papa.' 

with the merest inclin of her head to both of us she straightway 
left the room. lindon would have stop her. 

's-stay, y-y-y-you--' he stuttered. 

but I caught him by the arm. 

'if you will be advis by me, you will let her go. No good purpos 
will be serv by a multipl of words.' 

'atherton, i--i'm disappoint in you. you--you haven't behav as I 
expected. i--i haven't receiv from you the assist which I look 
for.' 

'mi dear lindon, it seem to me that your method of divert the young 
ladi from the path which she ha set herself to tread is calcul to 
send her furious along it.' 

'c-confound the women! c-confound the women! I don't mind tell you, 
in c-confidence, that at--at times, her mother wa the devil, and i'll 
be--i'l be hang if her daughter isn't worse.--what wa the 
tomfooleri she wa talk to you about? Is she mad?' 

'no,--i don't think she' mad.' 

'I never heard such stuff, it made my blood run cold to hear her. 
what' the matter with the girl?' 

'well,--you must excus my say that I don't fanci you quit 
understand women.' 

'i--i don't,--and i--i--i don't want to either.' 

I hesitated; then resolv on a taradiddle,--in marjorie' interest. 

'marjori is high-strung,--extrem sensitive. her imagin is 
quickli aflame. perhaps, last night, you drove her as far as wa safe. 
you heard for yourself how, in consequence, she suffered. you don't 
want peopl to say you have driven her into a lunat asylum.' 

'i--good heavens, no! i--i'l send for the doctor directli I get 
home,--i--i'l have the best opinion in town.' 

'you'll do noth of the kind,--you'l onli make her worse. what you 
have to do is to be patient with her, and let her have peace.--a for 
thi affair of lessingham's, I have a suspicion that it may not be all 
such plain sail as she supposes.' 

'what do you mean?' 

'I mean nothing. I onli wish you to understand that until you hear from 
me again you had better let matter slide. give the girl her head.' 

'give the girl her head! h-haven't i--i g-given the g-girl her h-head 
all her l-life!' He look at hi watch. 'why, the day' half gone!' He 
began scurri toward the front door, I follow at hi heels. 'i'v 
got a committe meet on at the club,--m-most important! for week 
they'v been give us the worst food you ever tast in your 
life,--p-play havoc with my digestion, and i--i'm go to tell them 
if--th aren't changed, they--they'l have to pay my doctor' 
bills.--a for that man, lessingham--' 

As he spoke, he himself open the hall door, and there, stand on 
the step wa 'that man lessingham' himself. lindon wa a picture. the 
apostl wa as cool as a cucumber. He held out hi hand. 

'good morning, Mr lindon. what delight weather we are having.' 

lindon put hi hand behind hi back,--and behav as stupidli as he 
veri well could have done. 

'you will understand, Mr lessingham, that, in future, I don't know you, 
and that I shall declin to recognis you anywhere; and that what I say 
appli equal to ani member of my family.' 

with hi hat veri much on the back of hi head he went down the step 
like an inflat turkeycock. 




chapter xxii 

the haunt man 


To have receiv the cut discourt from hi futur father-in-law 
might have been the most commonplac of incidents,--lessingham evinc 
not a trace of discomposure. So far as I could judge, he took no notic 
of the episod whatever, behav exactli as if noth had happened. 
He mere wait till Mr lindon wa well off the steps; then, turn 
to me, he placidli observed, 

'interrupt you again, you see.--may i?' 

the sight of him had set up such a turmoil in my veins, that, for the 
moment, I could not trust myself to speak. I felt, acutely, that an 
explan with him was, of all things, the thing most to be 
desired,--and that quickly. provid could not have thrown him more 
opportun in the way. if, befor he went away, we did not understand 
each other a good deal more clearly, upon certain points, the fault 
should not be mine. without a respons word, turn on my heels, I 
led the way into the laboratory. 

whether he notic anyth peculiar in my demeanour, I could not tell. 
within he look about him with that pure facial smile, the sight of 
which had alway engend in me a certain distrust of him. 

'do you alway receiv visitor in here?' 

'bi no means.' 

'what is this?' 

stoop down, he pick up someth from the floor. It wa a lady' 
purse,--a gorgeou affair, of crimson leather and gleam gold. 
whether it wa marjorie' or miss grayling' I could not tell. He 
watch me as I examin it. 

'i it yours?' 

'no. It is not mine.' 

place hi hat and umbrella on one chair, he place himself upon 
another,--veri leisurely. cross hi legs, lay hi fold hand 
upon hi knees, he sat and look at me. I wa quit consciou of hi 
observation; but endur it in silence, be a littl wish that he 
should begin. 

present he had, as I suppose, enough of look at me, and spoke. 

'atherton, what is the matter with you?--hav I done someth to 
offend you too?' 

'whi do you ask?' 

'your manner seem a littl singular.' 

'you think so?' 

'I do.' 

'what have you come to see me about?' 

'just now, nothing.--i like to know where I stand.' 

hi manner wa courteous, easy, even graceful. I wa outmanoeuvred. I 
understood the man suffici well to be awar that when onc he wa 
on the defensive, the first blow would have to come from me. So I 
struck it. 

'i, also, like to know where I stand.--lessingham, I am aware, and you 
know that I am aware, that you have made certain overtur to miss 
lindon. that is a fact in which I am keenli interested.' 

'as--how?' 

'the lindon and the atherton are not the acquaint of one 
gener only. marjori lindon and I have been friend sinc 
childhood. she look upon me as a brother--' 

'a a brother?' 

'a a brother.' 

'yes.' 

'mr lindon regain me as a son. He ha given me hi confidence; as I 
believ you are aware, marjori ha given me hers; and now I want you 
to give me yours.' 

'what do you want to know?' 

'I wish to explain my posit befor I say what I have to say, becaus 
I want you to understand me clearly.--i believe, honestly, that the 
thing I most desir in thi world is to see marjori lindon happy. If I 
thought she would be happi with you, I should say, god speed you both! 
and I should congratul you with all my heart, becaus I think that 
you would have won the best girl in the whole world to be your wife.' 

'I think so too.' 

'but, befor I did that, I should have to see, at least, some 
reason probabl that she would be happi with you.' 

'whi should she not?' 

'will you answer a question?' 

'what is the question?' 

'what is the stori in your life of which you stand in such hideou 
terror?' 

there wa a percept paus befor he answered. 

'explain yourself.' 

'no explan is needed,--y know perfectli well what I mean.' 

'you credit me with miracul acumen.' 

'don't juggle, lessingham,--b frank!' 

'the frank should not be all on one side.--ther is that in your 
frankness, although you may be unconsci of it, which some men might 
not unreason resent.' 

'do you resent it?' 

'that depends. If you are arrog to yourself the right to place 
yourself between miss lindon and me, I do resent it, strongly.' 

'answer my question!' 

'I answer no question which is address to me in such a tone.' 

He wa as calm as you please. I recognis that alreadi I wa in peril 
of lose my temper,--which wa not at all what I desired. I eye him 
intently, he return me look for look. hi counten betray no 
sign of a guilti conscience; I had not seen him more complet at hi 
ease. He smiled,--facially, and also, as it seem to me, a littl 
derisively. I am bound to admit that hi bear show not the 
faintest shadow of resentment, and that in hi eye there wa a 
gentleness, a softness, which I had not observ in them before,--i 
could almost have suspect him of be sympathetic. 

'in thi matter, you must know, I stand in the place of Mr lindon.' 

'well?' 

'sure you must understand that befor anyon is allow to think of 
marriag with marjori lindon he will have to show that hi past, as 
the advertis have it, will bear the fullest investigation.' 

'i that so?--wil your past bear the fullest investigation?' 

I winced. 

'at ani rate, it is known to all the world.' 

'i it?--forg me if I say, I doubt it. I doubt if, of ani wise man, 
that can be said with truth. In all our live there are episod which 
we keep to ourselves.' 

I felt that that wa so true that, for the instant, I hardli knew what 
to say. 

'but there are episod and episodes, and when it come to a man be 
haunt one draw the line.' 

'haunted?' 

'a you are.' 

He got up. 

'atherton, I think that I understand you, but I fear that you do not 
understand me.' He went to where a self-act mercuri air-pump wa 
stand on a shelf. 'what is thi curiou arrang of glass tube 
and bulbs?' 

'I do not think that you do understand me, or you would know that I am 
in no mood to be trifl with.' 

'i it some kind of an exhauster?' 

'mi dear lessingham, I am entir at your service. I intend to have an 
answer to my question befor you leav thi room, but, in the 
meanwhile, your conveni is mine. there are some veri interest 
thing here which you might care to see.' 

'marvellous, is it not, how the human intellect progresses,--from 
conquest unto conquest.' 

'among the ancient the progress had proceed farther than with us.' 

'in what respect?' 

'for instance, in the affair of the apotheosi of the beetle;--i saw it 
take place last night.' 

'where?' 

'here,--within a few feet of where you are standing.' 

'are you serious?' 

'perfectly.' 

'what did you see?' 

'I saw the legendari apotheosi of the beetl performed, last night, 
befor my eyes, with a gaudi magnific at which the legend never 
hinted.' 

'that is odd. I onc thought that I saw someth of the kind myself.' 

'so I understand.' 

'from whom?' 

'from a friend of yours.' 

'from a friend of mine?--ar you sure it wa from a friend of mine?' 

the man' attempt at cool did him credit,--but it did not deceiv 
me. that he thought I wa endeavour to bluff him out of hi secret I 
perceiv quit clearly; that it wa a secret which he would onli 
render with hi life I wa begin to suspect. had it not been for 
marjorie, I should have care nothing,--hi affair were hi affairs; 
though I realis perfectli well that there wa someth about the man 
which, from the scientif explorer' point of view, might be well 
worth find out. still, as I say, if it had not been for marjorie, I 
should have let it go; but, sinc she wa so intim concern in 
it, I wonder more and more what it could be. 

My attitud toward what is call the supernatur is an open one. 
that all thing are possibl I unhesitatingli believe,--i have, even in 
my short time, seen so mani so-cal imposs prove possible. 
that we know everything, I doubt;--that our 
great-great-great-great-grandsires, our forebear of thousand of year 
ago, of the extinct civilisations, knew more on some subject than we 
do, I think is, at least, probable. all the legend can hardli be false. 

becaus men claim to be abl to do thing in those day which we 
cannot do, and which we do not know how they did we profess to think 
that their claim are final dismiss by exclaiming--lies! but it is 
not so sure. 

for my part, what I had seen I had seen. I had seen some devil' trick 
play befor my veri eyes. some trick of the same sort seem to have 
been play upon my marjorie,--i repeat that I write 'mi marjorie' 
because, to me, she will alway be 'my' marjorie! It had driven her 
half out of her senses. As I look at lessingham, I seem to see her 
at hi side, as I had seen her not long ago, with her white, drawn 
face, and stare eyes, dumb with an agoni of fear. her life wa 
bid fair to be knit with his,--what upa tree of horror wa root 
in hi veri bones? the thought that her sweet puriti wa like to be 
engulf in a devil' slough in which he wa wallow wa not to be 
endured. As I realis that the man wa more than my match at the game 
which I wa playing--in which such vital interest were at stake!--mi 
hand itch to clutch him by the throat, and tri anoth way. 

doubtless my face reveal my feelings, because, presently, he said, 

'are you awar how strang you are look at me, atherton? were my 
counten a mirror I think you would be surpris to see in it your 
own.' 

I drew back from him,--i daresay, sullenly. 

'not so surpris as, yesterday morning, you would have been to have 
seen yours,--at the mere sight of a pictur scarab.' 

'how easili you quarrel.' 

'I do not quarrel.' 

'then perhap it' I. If that is so, then, at once, the quarrel' 
ended,--pouf! it' done. Mr lindon, I fear, because, politically, we 
differ, regard me as anathema. ha he put some of hi spirit into 
you?--you are a wiser man.' 

'I am awar that you are an adept with words. but thi is a case in 
which word onli will not serve.' 

'then what will serve?' 

'I am myself begin to wonder.' 

'and i.' 

'a you so courteous suggest, I believ I am wiser than lindon. I do 
not care for your politics, or for what you call your politics, one 
fig. I do not care if you are as other men are, as I am,--not unspot 
from the world! but I do care if you are leprous. and I believ you 
are.' 

'atherton!' 

'ever sinc I have known you I have been consciou of there be 
someth about you which I found it difficult to diagnose;--in an 
unwholesom sense, someth out of the common, non-natural; an 
atmospher of your own. events, so far as you are concerned, have, 
dure the last few day move quickly. they have thrown an 
uncomfort lurid light on that peculiar of your which I have 
noticed. unless you can explain them to my satisfaction, you will 
withdraw your pretens to miss lindon' hand, or I shall place 
certain fact befor that lady, and, if necessary, publish them to the 
world.' 

He grew visibl paler but he smiled--facially. 

'you have your own way of conduct a conversation, Mr atherton.--what 
are the event to whose rapid transit you are alluding?' 

'who wa the individual, practic stark naked, who came out of your 
house, in such singular fashion, at dead of night?' 

'i that one of the fact with which you propos to tickl the public 
ear?' 

'i that the onli explan which you have to offer?' 

'proceed, for the present, with your indictment.' 

'I am not so unobserv as you appear to imagine. there were featur 
about the episod which struck me forcibl at the time, and which have 
struck me more forcibl since. To suggest, as you did yesterday 
morning, that it wa an ordinari case of burglary, or that the man wa 
a lunatic, is an absurdity. 

'pardon me,--i did noth of the kind.' 

'then what do you suggest?' 

'I suggested, and do suggest, nothing. all the suggest come from 
you.' 

'you went veri much out of your way to beg me to keep the matter quiet. 
there is an appear of suggest about that.' 

'you take a jaundic view of all my actions, Mr atherton. nothing, to 
me, could seem more natural.--however,--proceed.' 

He had hi hand behind hi back, and rest them on the edg of the 
tabl against which he wa leaning. He wa undoubtedli ill at ease; but 
so far I had not made the impress on him, either mental or 
morally, which I desired. 

'who is your orient friend?' 

'I do not follow you.' 

'are you sure?' 

'I am certain. repeat your question.' 

'who is your orient friend?' 

'I wa not awar that I had one.' 

'do you swear that?' 

He laughed, a strang laugh. 

'do you seek to catch me tripping? you conduct your case with too much 
animus. you must allow me to grasp the exact purport of your inquiri 
befor I can undertak to repli to it on oath.' 

'are you not awar that at present there is in london an individu who 
claim to have had a veri close, and a veri curious, acquaint with 
you in the east?' 

'I am not.' 

'that you swear?' 

'that I do swear.' 

'that is singular.' 

'whi is it singular?' 

'becaus I fanci that that individu haunt you.' 

'haunt me?' 

'haunt you.' 

'you jest.' 

'you think so?--you rememb that pictur of the scarabaeu which, 
yesterday morning, frighten you into a state of semi-idiocy.' 

'you use strong language.--i know what you allud to.' 

'do you mean to say that you don't know that you were indebt for that 
to your orient friend?' 

'I don't understand you.' 

'are you sure?' 

'certainli I am sure.--it occur to me, Mr atherton, that an 
explan is demand from you rather than from me. are you awar 
that the purport of my presenc here is to ask you how that pictur 
found it way into your room?' 

'it wa project by the lord of the beetle.' 

the word were chanc ones,--but they struck a mark. 

'the lord--' He faltered,--and stopped. He show sign of 
discomposure. 'I will be frank with you,--sinc frank is what you 
ask.' hi smile, that time, wa obvious forced. 'recent I have been 
the victim of delusions;' there wa a paus befor the word, 'of a 
singular kind. I have fear that they were the result of mental 
overstrain. Is it possibl that you can enlighten me as to their 
source?' 

I wa silent. He wa put a great strain upon himself, but the 
twitch of hi lip betray him. A littl more, and I should reach 
the other side of Mr lessingham,--th side which he kept hidden from 
the world. 

'who is this--individu whom you speak of as my--orient friend?' 

'be your friend, you should know better than I do.' 

'what sort of man is he to look at?' 

'I did not say it wa a man.' 

'but I presum it is a man.' 

'I did not say so.' 

He seemed, for a moment, to hold hi breath,--and he look at me with 
eye which were not friendly. then, with a display of self-command 
which did him credit, he drew himself upright, with an air of digniti 
which well becam him. 

'atherton, consciously, or unconsciously, you are do me a seriou 
injustice. I do not know what concept it is which you have form of 
me, or on what the concept is founded, but I protest that, to the 
best of my knowledg and belief, I am as reputable, as honest, and as 
clean a man as you are.' 

'but you'r haunted.' 

'haunted?' He held himself erect, look me straight in the face. then 
a shiver went all over him; the muscl of hi mouth twitched; and, in 
an instant, he wa livid. He stagger against the table. 'yes, god 
know it' true,--i'm haunted.' 

'so either you'r mad, and therefor unfit to marry; or els you'v 
done someth which place you outsid the toler gener 
boundari of civilis society, and are therefor still more unfit to 
marry. you'r on the horn of a dilemma.' 

'i--i'm the victim of a delusion.' 

'what is the natur of the delusion? doe it take the shape of 
a--beetle?' 

'atherton!' 

without the slightest warning, he collapsed,--wa transformed; I can 
describ the chang which took place in him in no other way. He sank in 
a heap on the floor; he held up hi hand abov hi head; and he 
gibbered,--lik some frenzi animal. A more uncomfort spectacl 
than he present it would be difficult to find. I have seen it match 
in the pad room of lunat asylums, but nowher else. the sight of 
him set everi nerv of my bodi on edge. 

'in heaven' name, what is the matter with you, man? are you stark, 
stare mad? here,--drink this!' 

fill a tumbler with brandy, I forc it between hi quiver 
fingers. then it wa some moment befor I could get him to understand 
what it wa I want him to do. when he did get the glass to hi lips, 
he swallow it content as if they were so much water. By degre hi 
sens return to him. He stood up. He look about him, with a smile 
which wa posit ghastly. 

'it's--it' a delusion.' 

'it' a veri queer kind of a delusion, if it is.' 

I eye him, curiously. He wa evid make the most strenuou 
effort to regain hi self-control,--al the while with that horribl 
smile about hi lips. 

'atherton, you--you take me at an advantage.' I wa still. 'who--who' 
your orient friend?' 

'mi orient friend?--you mean yours. I supposed, at first, that the 
individu in question wa a man; but it appear that she' a woman.' 

'A woman?--oh.--how do you mean?' 

'well, the face is a man's--of an uncommonli disagre type, of 
which the power forbid that there are many!--and the voic is a 
man's,--also of a kind!--but the body, as, last night, I chanc to 
discover, is a woman's.' 

'that sound veri odd.' He close hi eyes. I could see that hi cheek 
were clammy. 'do you--do you believ in witchcraft?' 

'that depends.' 

'have you heard of obi?' 

'I have.' 

'I have been told that an obeah man can put a spell upon a person which 
compel a person to see whatev he--th obeah man--may please. Do you 
think that' possible?' 

'it is not a question to which I should be dispos to answer either 
ye or no.' 

He look at me out of hi half-clos eyes. It struck me that he wa 
make conversation,--say anyth for the sake of gain time. 

'I rememb read a book entitl "obscur diseas of the brain." It 
contain some interest data on the subject of hallucinations.' 

'possibly.' 

'now, candidly, would you recommend me to place myself in the hand of 
a mental pathologist?' 

'I don't think that you'r insane, if that' what you mean.' 

'no?--that is good hearing. Of all diseas insan is the most to be 
dreaded.--well, atherton, i'm keep you. the truth is that, insan or 
not, I am veri far from well. I think I must give myself a holiday.' 

He move toward hi hat and umbrella. 

'there is someth els which you must do.' 

'what is that?' 

'you must resign your pretens to miss lindon' hand. 

'mi dear atherton, if my health is realli fail me, I shall resign 
everything,--everything!' 

He repeat hi own word with a littl movement of hi hand which wa 
pathetic. 

'understand me, lessingham. what els you do is no affair of mine. I am 
concern onli with miss lindon. you must give me your definit 
promise, befor you leav thi room, to termin your engag with 
her befor to-night.' 

hi back wa toward me. 

'there will come a time when your conscienc will prick you becaus of 
your treatment of me; when you will realis that I am the most 
unfortun of men.' 

'I realis that now. It is becaus I realis it that I am so desir 
that the shadow of your evil fortun shall not fall upon an innoc 
girl.' 

He turned. 

'atherton, what is your actual posit with refer to marjori 
lindon?' 

'she regard me as a brother.' 

'and do you regard her as a sister? are your sentiment toward her 
pure fraternal?' 

'you know that I love her.' 

'and do you suppos that my remov will clear the path for you?' 

'I suppos noth of the kind. you may believ me or not, but my one 
desir is for her happiness, and surely, if you love her, that is your 
desir too.' 

'that is so.' He paused. An express of sad stole over hi face 
of which I had not thought it capable. 'that is so to an extent of 
which you do not dream. No man like to have hi hand forced, 
especi by one whom he regards--may I say it?--a a possibl rival. 
but I will tell you thi much. If the blight which ha fallen on my 
life is like to continue, I would not wish,--god forbid that I should 
wish to join her fate with mine,--not for all that the world could 
offer me.' 

He stopped. and I wa still. present he continued. 

'when I wa younger I wa subject to a--similar delusion. but it 
vanished,--i saw no trace of it for years,--i thought that I had done 
with it for good. recently, however, it ha returned,--a you have 
witnessed. I shall institut inquiri into the caus of it 
reappearance; if it seem like to be irremovable, or even if it bid 
fair to be prolonged, I shall not only, as you phrase it, withdraw my 
pretens to miss linden' hand, but to all my other ambitions. In 
the interim, as regard miss lindon I shall be care to hold myself 
on the foot of a mere acquaintance.' 

'you promis me?' 

'I do.--and on your side, atherton, in the meantime, deal with me more 
gently. judgment in my case ha still to be given. you will find that I 
am not the guilti wretch you appar imagine. and there are few 
thing more disagre to one' self-esteem than to learn, too late, 
that one ha persist in judg anoth man too harshly. think of all 
that the world has, at thi moment, to offer me, and what it will mean 
if I have to turn my back on it,--ow to a mischiev twist of 
fortune' wheel.' 

He turned, is if to go. then stopped, and look round, in an attitud 
of listening. 

'what' that?' 

there wa a sound of droning,--i recal what marjori had said of her 
experi of the night before, it wa like the drone of a beetle. 
the instant the apostl heard it, the fashion of hi counten began 
to change,--it wa pitiabl to witness. I rush to him. 

'lessingham!--don't be a fool!--play the man!' 

He grip my left arm with hi right hand till it felt as if it were 
be compress in a vice. 

'then--i shall have to have some more brandy.' 

fortun the bottl wa within reach from where I stood, otherwis I 
doubt if he would have releas my arm to let me get at it. I gave him 
the decant and the glass. He help himself to a copiou libation. By 
the time that he had swallow it the drone sound had gone. He put 
down the empti tumbler. 

'when a man ha to resort to alcohol to keep hi nerv up to concert 
pitch, thing are in a bad way with him, you may be sure of that,--but 
then you have never known what it is to stand in momentari expect 
of a tete-a-tet with the devil.' 

again he turn to leav the room,--and thi time he actual went. I 
let him go alone. I heard hi footstep pass along the passage, and 
the hall-door close. then I sat in an arm-chair, stretch my leg out 
in front of me, thrust my hand in my trouser pockets, and--i wondered. 

I had been there, perhaps, four or five minutes, when there wa a 
slight nois at my side. glanc round, I saw a sheet of paper come 
flutter through the open window. It fell almost at my feet. I pick 
it up. It wa a pictur of a beetle,--a facsimil of the one which had 
had such an extraordinari effect on Mr lessingham the day before. 

'if thi wa intend for St paul, it' a trifl late;--unless--' 

I could hear that someon wa approach along the corridor. I look 
up, expect to see the apostl reappear;--in which expect I wa 
agreeabl disappointed. the newcom wa feminine. It wa miss 
grayling. As she stood in the open doorway, I saw that her cheek were 
red as roses. 

'I hope I am not interrupt you again, but--i left my purs here.' 
she stopped; then added, as if it were an afterthought, 'and--i want 
you to come and lunch with me.' 

I lock the pictur of the beetl in the drawer,--and I lunch with 
dora grayling. 




book iii 

the terror by night and the terror by day 


miss marjori lindon tell the tale 




chapter xxiii 

the way HE told her 


I am the happiest woman in the world! I wonder how mani women have said 
that of themselv in their time,--but I am. paul ha told me that he 
love me. how long I have made inward confess of my love for him, I 
should be asham to say. It sound prosaic, but I believ it is a fact 
that the first stir of my puls wa caus by the report of a 
speech of hi which I read in the times. It wa on the eight hours' 
bill. papa wa most unflattering. He said that he wa an oili spouter, 
an ignor agitator, an irrespons firebrand, and a good deal more 
to the same effect. I rememb veri well how papa fidget with the 
paper, declar that it read even wors than it had sounded, and 
good knew that it had sound bad enough. He wa so veri emphat 
that when he had gone I thought I would see what all the pother wa 
about, and read the speech for myself. So I read it. It affect me 
quit differently. the speaker' word show such knowledge, charity, 
and sympathi that they went straight to my heart. 

after that I read everyth of paul lessingham' which I came across. 
and the more I read the more I wa impressed. but it wa some time 
befor we met. consid what papa' opinion were, it wa not like 
that he would go out of hi way to facilit a meeting. To him, the 
mere mention of the name wa like a red rag to a bull. but at last we 
did meet. and then I knew that he wa stronger, greater, better even 
than hi words. It is so often the other way; one find that men, and 
women too, are so apt to put their best, as it were, into their shop 
windows, that the discoveri wa as novel as it wa delightful. 

when the ice wa onc broken, we often met. I do not know how it was. 
We did not plan our meetings,--at first, at ani rate. yet we seem 
alway meeting. seldom a day pass on which we did not 
meet,--sometim twice or thrice. It wa odd how we were alway come 
across each other in the most unlik places. I believ we did not 
notic it at the time, but look back I can see that we must have 
manag our engag so that somewhere, somehow, we should be 
certain to have an opportun of exchang half a dozen words. those 
constant encount could not have all been chanc ones. 

but I never suppos he love me,--never. I am not even sure that, for 
some time, I wa awar that I love him. We were great on friendship, 
both of us.--i wa quit awar that I wa hi friend,--that he regard 
me as hi friend; he told me so more than once. 

'I tell you this,' he would say, refer to this, that, or the other, 
'becaus I know that, in speak to you, I am speak to a friend.' 

with him those were not empti words. all kind of peopl talk to one 
like that,--especi men; it is a kind of formula which they use with 
everi woman who show herself dispos to listen. but paul is not like 
that. He is chari of speech; not by ani mean a woman' man. I tell him 
that is hi weakest point. If legend doe not lie more even than is 
common, few politician have achiev prosper without the aid of 
women. He repli that he is not a politician; that he never mean to 
be a politician. He simpli wish to work for hi country; if hi 
countri doe not need hi services--well, let it be. papa' polit 
friend have alway so mani axe of their own to grind, that, at first, 
to hear a member of parliament talk like that wa almost disquieting. I 
had dream of men like that; but I never encount one till I met 
paul lessingham. 

our friendship wa a pleasant one. It becam pleasant and pleasanter. 
until there came a time when he told me everything; the dream he 
dreamed; the plan which he had planned; the great purpos which, if 
health and strength were given him, he intend to carri to a great 
fulfilment. and, at last, he told me someth else. 

It wa after a meet at a work women' club in westminster. He had 
spoken, and I had spoken too. I don't know what papa would have said, 
if he had known, but I had. A formal resolut had been proposed, and 
I had second it,--in perhap a coupl of hundr words; but that 
would have been quit enough for papa to have regard me as an 
abandon wretch,--papa alway put those sort of word into capitals. 
papa regard a speechifi woman as a thing of horror,--i have known 
him look askanc at a primros dame. 

the night wa fine. paul propos that I should walk with him down the 
westminst bridg road, until we reach the house, and then he would 
see me into a cab. I did as he suggested. It wa still early, not yet 
ten, and the street were aliv with people. our conversation, as we 
went, wa entir political. the agricultur amend act wa then 
befor the commons, and paul felt veri strongli that it wa one of 
those measur which give with one hand, while take with the other. 
the committe stage wa at hand, and alreadi sever amend were 
threatened, the effect of which would be to strengthen the landlord at 
the expens of the tenant. more than one of these, and they not the 
most moderate, were to be propos by papa. paul wa point out how 
it would be hi duti to oppos these tooth and nail, when, all at once, 
he stopped. 

'I sometim wonder how you realli feel upon thi matter.' 

'what matter?' 

'on the differ of opinion, in polit matters, which exist 
between your father and myself. I am consciou that Mr lindon regard 
my action as a person question, and resent it so keenly, that I am 
sometim move to wonder if at least a portion of hi resent is 
not share by you.' 

'I have explained; I consid papa the politician as one person, and 
papa the father as quit another.' 

'you are hi daughter.' 

'certainli I am;--but would you, on that account, wish me to share hi 
polit opinions, even though I believ them to be wrong?' 

'you love him.' 

'of cours I do,--h is the best of fathers.' 

'your defect will be a grievou disappointment.' 

I look at him out of the corner of my eye. I wonder what wa 
pass through hi mind. the subject of my relat with papa wa one 
which, without say anyth at all about it, we had consent to 
taboo. 

'I am not so sure. I am permeat with a suspicion that papa ha no 
politics.' 

'miss lindon!--i fanci that I can adduc proof to the contrary.' 

'I believ that if papa were to marri again, say, a home ruler, within 
three week hi wife' polit would be hi own.' 

paul thought befor he spoke; then he smiled. 

'I suppos that men sometim do chang their coat to pleas their 
wives,--even their polit ones.' 

'papa' opinion are the opinion of those with whom he mixes. the 
reason whi he consort with tori of the crust school is becaus he 
fear that if he associ with anybodi else--with radicals, 
say,--befor he knew it, he would be a radic too. with him, 
associ is synonymu with logic.' 

paul laugh outright. By thi time we had reach westminst bridge. 
standing, we look down upon the river. A long line of lantern wa 
glide mysteri over the waters; it wa a tug tow a string of 
barges. for some moment neither spoke. then paul recur to what I 
had just been saying. 

'and you,--do you think marriag would colour your convictions?' 

'would it yours?' 

'that depends.' He wa silent. then he said, in that tone which I had 
learn to look for when he wa most in earnest, 'it depend on whether 
you would marri me.' 

I wa still. hi word were so unexpect that they took my breath 
away. I knew not what to make of them. My head wa in a whirl. then he 
address to me a monosyllab interrogation. 

'well?' 

'I found my voice,--or a part of it. 

'well?--to what?' 

He came a littl closer. 

'will you be my wife?' 

the part of my voic which I had found, wa lost again. tear came into 
my eyes. I shivered. I had not thought that I could be so absurd. just 
then the moon came from behind a cloud; the rippl water were tip 
with silver. He spoke again, so gentli that hi word just reach my 
ears. 

'you know that I love you.' 

then I knew that I love him too. that what I had fanci wa a feel 
of friendship wa someth veri different. It wa as if somebody, in 
tear a veil from befor my eyes, had reveal a spectacl which 
dazzl me. I wa speechless. He misconstru my silence. 

'have I offend you?' 

'no.' 

I fanci that he note the tremor which wa in my voice, and read it 
rightly. for he too wa still. present hi hand stole along the 
parapet, and fasten upon mine, and held it tight. 

and that wa how it came about. other thing were said; but they were 
hardli of the first importance. though I believ we took some time in 
say them. Of myself I can say with truth, that my heart wa too full 
for copiou speech; I wa dumb with a great happiness. and, I believe, 
I can say the same of paul. He told me as much when we were parting. 

It seem that we had onli just come there when paul started. turning, 
he stare up at big ben. 

'midnight!--th hous up!--impossible!' 

but it wa more than possible, it wa fact. We had actual been on the 
bridg two hours, and it had not seem ten minutes. never had I 
suppos that the flight of time could have been so entir unnoticed. 
paul wa consider taken aback. hi legisl conscienc prick 
him. He excus himself--in hi own fashion. 

'fortunately, for onc in a way, my busi in the hous wa not so 
import as my busi out of it.' 

He had hi arm through mine. We were stand face to face. 

'so you call thi business!' 

He laughed. 

He not onli saw me into a cab, but he saw me home in it. and in the cab 
he kiss me. I fanci I wa a littl out of sort that night. My 
nervou system was, perhaps, demoralised. because, when he kiss me, I 
did a thing which I never do,--i have my own standard of behaviour, and 
that sort of thing is quit outsid of it; I behav like a sentiment 
chit. I cried. and it took him all the way to my father' door to 
comfort me. 

I can onli hope that, perceiv the singular of the occasion, he 
consent to excus me. 




chapter xxiv 

A woman' view 


sydney atherton ha ask me to be hi wife. It is not onli annoying; 
worse, it is absurd. 

thi is the result of paul' wish that our engag should not be 
announced. He is afraid of papa;--not really, but for the moment. the 
atmospher of the hous is charg with electricity. parti feel run 
high. they are at each other, hammer and tongs, about thi agricultur 
amend act. the strain on paul is tremendous. I am begin to feel 
posit concerned. littl thing which I have notic about him 
late convinc me that he is be overwrought. I suspect him of 
have sleepless nights. the amount of work which he ha been get 
through late ha been too much for ani singl human being, I care not 
who he is. He himself admit that he shall be glad when the session is 
at an end. So shall I. 

In the meantime, it is hi desir that noth shall be said about our 
engag until the hous rises. It is reason enough. papa is sure 
to be violent,--lately, the barest allus to paul' name ha been 
enough to make him explode. when the discoveri doe come, he will be 
unmanageable,--i forese it clearly. from littl incid which have 
happen recent I predict the worst. He will be capabl of make a 
scene within the precinct of the house. and, as paul says, there is 
some truth in the say that the last straw break the camel' back. 
He will be better abl to face papa' wild wrath when the hous ha 
risen. 

So the news is to bide a wee. Of cours paul is right. and what he 
wish I wish too. still, it is not all such plain sail for me as he 
perhap thinks. the domest atmospher is almost as electr as that 
in the house. papa is like the terrier who scent a rat,--h is alway 
snif the air. He ha not actual forbidden me to speak to 
paul,--hi courag is not quit at the stick point; but he is 
constantli make uncomfort allus to person who number among 
their acquaint 'polit adventurers,' 'grasp carpet-baggers,' 
'radic riff-raff,' and that kind of thing. sometim I ventur to 
call my soul my own; but such a tempest invari follow that I 
becom discreet again as soon as I possibl can. so, as a rule, I 
suffer in silence. 

still, I would with all my heart that the conceal were at an end. 
No one need imagin that I am asham of be about to marri 
paul,--papa least of all. On the contrary, I am as proud of it as a 
woman can be. sometimes, when he ha said or done someth unusu 
wonderful, I fear that my pride will out,--i do feel it so strong 
within me. I should be delight to have a trial of strength with papa; 
anywhere, at ani time,--i should not be so rude to him as he would be 
to me. At the bottom of hi heart papa know that I am the more 
sensibl of the two; after a pitch battl or so he would understand 
it better still. I know papa! I have not been hi daughter for all 
these year in vain. I feel like hot-blood soldier must feel, who, 
burn to attack the enemi in the open field, are order to skulk 
behind hedges, and be shot at. 

one result is that sydney ha actual made a propos of marriage,--h 
of all people! It is too comical. the best of it wa that he took 
himself quit seriously. I do not know how mani time he ha confid 
to me the suffer which he ha endur for love of other women--som 
of them, I am sorri to say, decent marri women too; but thi is the 
first occas on which the theme ha been a person one. He wa so 
frantic, as he is wont to be, that, to calm him, I told him about 
paul,--which, under the circumstances, to him I felt myself at liberti 
to do. In return, he wa melodramatic; hint darkli at I know not 
what, I wa almost cross with him. 

He is a curiou person, sydney atherton. I suppos it is becaus I have 
known him all my life, and have alway look upon him, in case of 
necessity, as a capit substitut for a brother, that I criticis him 
with so much frankness. In some respects, he is a genius; in others--i 
will not write fool, for that he never is, though he ha often done 
some extrem foolish things. the fame of hi invent is in the 
mouth of all men; though the half of them ha never been told. He is 
the most extraordinari mixture. the thing which most peopl would like 
to have proclaim in the street, he keep tightli lock in hi own 
bosom; while those which the same person would be onli too glad to 
conceal, he shout from the roofs. A veri famou man onc told me that 
if Mr atherton chose to becom a specialist, to take up one branch of 
inquiry, and devot hi life to it, hi fame, befor he died, would 
bridg the spheres. but stick to one thing is not in sydney' line 
at all. He prefers, like the bee, to roam from flower to flower. 

As for hi be in love with me, it is ridiculous. He is as much in 
love with the moon. I cannot think what ha put the idea into hi head. 
some girl must have been ill-us him, or he imagin that she has. 
the girl whom he ought to marry, and whom he ultim will marry, is 
dora grayling. she is young, charming, immens rich, and over head 
and ear in love with him;--if she were not, then he would be over head 
and ear in love with her. I believ he is veri near it as it 
is,--sometim he is so veri rude to her. It is a characterist of 
sydney's, that he is apt to be rude to a girl whom he realli likes. As 
for dora, I suspect she dream of him. He is tall, straight, veri 
handsome, with a big moustache, and the most extraordinari eyes;--i 
fanci that those eye of hi have as much to do with dora' state as 
anything. I have heard it said that he possess the hypnot power to 
an unusu degree, and that, if he chose to exercis it, he might 
becom a danger to society. I believ he ha hypnotis dora. 

He make an excel brother. I have gone to him, mani and mani a 
time, for help,--and some excel advic I have received. I daresay I 
shall consult him still. there are matter of which one would hardli 
dare to talk to paul. In all thing he is the great man. He could 
hardli condescend to chiffons. now sydney can and does. when he is in 
the mood, on the vital subject of trim a woman could not appeal to 
a sounder authority. I tell him, if he had been a dressmaker, he would 
have been magnificent. I am sure he would. 




chapter xxv 

the man IN the street 


thi morn I had an adventure. 

I wa in the breakfast-room. papa, as usual, wa late for breakfast, 
and I wa wonder whether I should begin without him, when, chanc 
to look round, someth caught my eye in the street. I went to the 
window to see what it was. A small crowd of peopl wa in the middl of 
the road, and they were all stare at someth which, apparently, wa 
lie on the ground. what it wa I could not see. 

the butler happen to be in the room. I spoke to him. 

'peter, what is the matter in the street? Go and see.' 

He went and saw; and, presently, he returned. peter is an excel 
servant; but the fashion of hi speech, even when convey the most 
trivial information, is slightli sesquipedalian. He would have made a 
capit cabinet minist at question time,--h wrap up the smallest 
petit of mean in the largest possibl words. 

'an unfortun individu appear to have been the victim of a 
catastrophe. I am inform that he is dead. the constabl assert that 
he is drunk.' 

'drunk?--dead? Do you mean that he is dead drunk?--at thi hour!' 

'he is either one or the other. I did not behold the individu myself. 
I deriv my inform from a bystander.' 

that wa not suffici explicit for me. I gave way to a, seemingly, 
quit causeless impuls of curiosity, I went out into the street, just 
as I was, to see for myself. It was, perhaps, not the most sensibl 
thing I could have done, and papa would have been shocked; but I am 
alway shock papa. It had been rain in the night, and the shoe 
which I had on were not so well suit as they might have been for an 
encount with the mud. 

I made my way to the point of interest. 

'what' the matter?' I asked. 

A workman, with a bag of tool over hi shoulder, answer me. 

'there' someth wrong with someone. policeman say he' drunk, but 
he look to me as if he wa someth worse.' 

'will you let me pass, please?' 

when they saw I wa a woman, they permit me to reach the centr of 
the crowd. 

A man wa lie on hi back, in the greas and dirt of the road. He wa 
so plaster with mud, that it wa difficult, at first, to be sure that 
he realli wa a man. hi head and feet were bare. hi bodi wa 
partial cover by a long rag cloak. It wa obviou that that one 
wretched, dirt-stained, sop wet rag wa all the cloth he had on. 
A huge constabl wa hold hi shoulder in hi hands, and wa 
regard him as if he could not make him out at all. He seem 
uncertain as to whether it wa or wa not a case of shamming. 

He spoke to him as if he had been some refractori child. 

'come, my lad, thi won't do!--wak up!--what' the matter?' 

but he neither woke up, nor explain what wa the matter. I took hold 
of hi hand. It wa ici cold. appar the wrist wa pulseless. 
clearli thi wa no ordinari case of drunkenness. 

'there is someth serious wrong, officer. medic assist ought 
to be had at once.' 

'do you think he' in a fit, miss?' 

'that a doctor should be abl to tell you better than I can. there 
seem to be no pulse. I should not be surpris to find that he was--' 

the word 'dead' wa actual on my lips, when the stranger save me 
from make a glare exposur of my ignor by snatch hi wrist 
away from me, and sit up in the mud. He held out hi hand in front 
of him, open hi eyes, and exclaimed, in a loud, but pain 
raucou tone of voice, as if he wa suffer from a veri bad cold, 

'paul lessingham!' 

I wa so surpris that I all but sat down in the mud. To hear paul--mi 
paul!--apostrophis by an individu of hi appearance, in that 
fashion, wa someth which I had not expected. directli the word 
were uttered, he close hi eye again, sank backward, and seemingli 
relaps into unconsciousness,--th constabl grip him by the 
shoulder just in time to prevent him bang the back of hi head 
against the road. 

the offic shook him,--scarc gently. 

'now, my lad, it' plain that you'r not dead!--what' the mean of 
this?--mov yourself!' 

look round I found that peter wa close behind. appar he had 
been struck by the singular of hi mistress' behaviour, and had 
follow to see that it did not meet with the reward which it deserved. 
I spoke to him. 

'peter, let someon go at onc for Dr cotes!' 

Dr cote live just round the corner, and sinc it wa evid that the 
man' laps into conscious had made the policeman sceptic as to 
hi case be so seriou as it seemed, I thought it might be advis 
that a compet opinion should be obtain without delay. 

peter wa starting, when again the stranger return to 
consciousness,--that is, if it realli wa consciousness, as to which I 
wa more than a littl in doubt. He repeat hi previou pantomime; 
sat up in the mud, stretch out hi arms, open hi eye unnatur 
wide,--and yet they appear unseeing!--a sort of convuls went all 
over him, and he shrieked--it realli amount to shrieking--a a man 
might shriek who wa in mortal terror. 

'be warned, paul lessingham--b warned!' 

for my part, that settl it. there wa a mysteri here which need to 
be unravelled. twice had he call upon paul' name,--and in the 
strangest fashion! It wa for me to learn the whi and the wherefore; to 
ascertain what connect there wa between thi lifeless creatur and 
paul lessingham. provid might have cast him there befor my door. I 
might be entertain an angel unawares. My mind wa made up on the 
instant. 

'peter, hasten for Dr cotes.' peter pass the word, and immedi a 
footman start run as fast as hi leg would carri him. 'officer, 
I will have thi man taken into my father' house.--wil some of you 
men help to carri him?' 

there were volunt enough, and to spare. I spoke to peter in the 
hall. 

'i papa down yet?' 

'mr lindon ha sent down to say that you will pleas not wait for him 
for breakfast. He ha issu instruct to have hi breakfast 
convey to him upstairs.' 

'that' all right.' I nod toward the poor wretch who wa be 
carri through the hall. 'you will say noth to him about thi 
unless he particularli asks. you understand?' 

peter bowed. He is discret itself. He know I have my vagaries, and 
it is not hi fault if the savour of them travel to papa. 

the doctor wa in the hous almost as soon as the stranger. 

'want washing,' he remarked, directli he saw him. 

and that certainli wa true,--i never saw a man who stood more 
obvious in need of the good offic of soap and water. then he went 
through the usual medic formula, I watch all the while. So far as 
I could see the man show not the slightest sign of life. 

'i he dead?' 

'he will be soon, if he doesn't have someth to eat. the fellow' 
starving.' 

the doctor ask the policeman what he knew of him. 

that sagaci officer' repli wa vague. A boy had run up to him 
cri that a man wa lie dead in the street. He had straightway 
follow the boy, and discov the stranger. that wa all he knew. 

'what is the matter with the man?' I inquir of the doctor, when the 
constabl had gone. 

'don't know.--it may be catalepsy, and it mayn't.--when I do know, you 
may ask again.' 

Dr cotes' manner wa a trifl brusque,--particularly, I believe, to me. 
I rememb that onc he threaten to box my ears. when I wa a small 
child I use to think noth of box his. 

realis that no satisfact wa to be got out of a speechless 
man--particularli as regard hi mysteri refer to paul--i went 
upstairs. I found that papa wa under the impress that he wa 
suffer from a sever attack of gout. but as he wa eat a capit 
breakfast, and appar enjoy it,--whil I wa still fasting--i 
ventur to hope that the matter wa not so seriou as he feared. 

I mention noth to him about the person whom I had found in the 
street,--lest it should aggrav hi gout. when he is like that, the 
slightest thing does. 




chapter xxvi 

A father' NO 


paul ha storm the hous of common with one of the greatest speech 
which even he ha delivered, and I have quarrel with papa. and, 
also, I have veri nearli quarrel with sydney. 

sydney' littl affair is nothing. He actual still persist in 
think himself in love with me,--a if, sinc last night, when he 
what he call 'proposed' to me, he ha not time to fall out of love, 
and in again, half a dozen times; and, on the strength of it, he seem 
to consid himself entitl to make himself as disagre as he can. 
that I should not mind,--for sydney disagre is about as nice as 
sydney ani other way; but when it come to hi shoot poison shaft 
at paul, I object. If he imagin that anyth he can say, or hint, 
will lessen my estim of paul lessingham by one hair' breadth, he 
ha less wisdom even than I gave him credit for. By the way, perci 
woodvil ask me to be hi wife tonight,--which, also, is nothing; he 
ha been tri to do it for the last three years,--though, under the 
circumstances, it is a littl trying; but he would not spit venom 
mere becaus I prefer anoth man,--and he, I believe, doe care 
for me. 

papa' affair is serious. It is the first clash of the foils,--and 
thi time, I imagine, the button are realli off. thi morn he said 
a few words, not so much to, as at me. He inform me that paul wa 
expect to speak to-night,--a if I did not know it!--and avail 
himself of the open to load him with the abus which, in hi case, 
he think is not unbecom to a gentleman. I don't know--or, rather, I 
do know what he would think, if he heard anoth man use, in the 
presenc of a woman, the kind of languag which he habitu employs. 
however, I said nothing. I had a motiv for allow the chaff to fli 
befor the wind. 

but, to-night, issu wa joined. 

I, of course, went to hear paul speak,--a I have done over and over 
again before. afterwards, paul came and fetch me from the cage. He 
had to leav me for a moment, while he gave somebodi a message; and in 
the lobby, there wa sydney,--al sneers! I could have pinch him. 
just as I wa come to the conclus that I should have to stick a 
pin into hi arm, paul returned,--and, positively, sydney wa rude to 
him. I wa ashamed, if Mr atherton wa not. As if it wa not enough 
that he should be insult by a mere popinjay, at the veri moment when 
he had been ad anoth stone to the fabric of hi country' 
glory,--papa came up. He actual want to take me away from paul. I 
should have like to see him do it. Of cours I went down with paul to 
the carriage, leav papa to follow if he chose. He did not 
choose,--but, none the less, he manag to be home within three minut 
after I had myself returned. 

then the battl began. 

It is imposs for me to give an idea of papa in a rage. there may be 
men who look well when they lose their temper, but, if there are, papa 
is certainli not one. He is alway talk about the magnificence, and 
the high breed of the lindons, but anyth less high-br than the 
head of the lindons, in hi moment of wrath, it would be hard to 
conceive. hi languag I will not attempt to portray,--but hi 
observ consisted, mainly, of abus of paul, glorif of the 
lindons, and order to me. 

'I forbid you--i forbid you--' when papa wish to be impress he 
repeat hi own word three or four time over; I don't know if he 
imagin that they are improv by repetition; if he does, he is 
wrong--'i forbid you ever again to speak to that--that--that--' 

here follow language. 

I wa silent. 

My cue wa to keep cool. I believ that, with the exception, perhaps, 
of be a littl white, and exceedingli sorri that papa should so 
forget himself, I wa about the same as I gener am. 

'do you hear me?--do you hear what I say?--do you hear me, miss?' 

'yes, papa; I hear you.' 

'then--then--then promis me!--promis that you will do as I tell 
you!--mark my words, my girl, you shall promis befor you leav thi 
room!' 

'mi dear papa!--do you intend me to spend the remaind of my life in 
the drawing-room?' 

'don't you be impertinent!--do-do-don't you speak to me like 
that!--i--i--i won't have it!' 

'I tell you what it is, papa, if you don't take care you'll have 
anoth attack of gout.' 

'damn gout.' 

that wa the most sensibl thing he said; if such a tormentor as gout 
can be consign to the nether region by the mere utter of a word, 
by all mean let the word be uttered. off he went again. 

'the man' a ruffianly, rascally,--' and so on. 'there' not such a 
villain vagabond--' and all the rest of it. 'and I order you,--i'm a 
lindon, and I order you! i'm your father, and I order you!--i order you 
never to speak to such a--such a'--vari vain repetitions--'again, 
and--and--and I order you never to look at him!' 

'listen to me, papa. I will promis you never to speak to paul 
lessingham again, if you will promis me never to speak to lord 
cantilev again,--or to recognis him if you meet him in the street.' 

'you should have seen how papa glared. lord cantilev is the head of 
hi party. it august, and, I presume, reverenc leader. He is papa' 
particular fetish. I am not sure that he doe regard him as be ani 
lower than the angels, but if he doe it is certainli someth in 
decimals. My suggest seem as outrag to him as hi suggest 
seem to me. but it is papa' misfortun that he can onli see one side 
of a question,--and that' hi own.' 

'you--you dare to compar lord cantilev to--to that--that--that--!' 

'I am not compar them. I am not awar of there be anyth in 
particular against lord cantilever,--that is against hi character. 
but, of course, I should not dream of compar a man of hi calibre, 
with one of real ability, like paul lessingham. It would be to treat 
hi lordship with too much severity.' 

I could not help it,--but that did it. the rest of papa' convers 
wa a jumbl of explosions. It wa all so sad. 

papa pour all the vial of hi wrath upon paul,--to hi own sore 
disfigurement. He threaten me with all the pain and penalti of the 
inquisit if I did not immedi promis to hold no further 
commun with Mr lessingham,--of cours I did noth of the kind. 
He curs me, in default, by bell, book, and candle,--and by ever so 
mani other thing beside. He call me the most dread names,--me! 
hi onli child. He warn me that I should find myself in prison befor 
I had done,--i am not sure that he did not hint darkli at the gallows. 
finally, he drove me from the room in a whirlwind of anathemas. 




chapter xxvii 

the terror BY night 


when I left papa,--or, rather, when papa had driven me from him--i went 
straight to the man whom I had found in the street. It wa late, and I 
wa feel both tire and worried, so that I onli thought of see 
for myself how he was. In some way, he seem to be a link between paul 
and myself, and as, at that moment, link of that kind were precious, I 
could not have gone to bed without learn someth of hi condition. 

the nurs receiv me at the door. 

'well, nurse, how' the patient?' 

nurs wa a plump, motherli woman, who had attend more than one odd 
proteg of mine, and whom I kept pretti constantli at my beck and call. 
she held out her hands. 

'it' hard to tell. He hasn't move sinc I came.' 

'not moved?--i he still insensible?' 

'he seem to me to be in some sort of trance. He doe not appear to 
breathe, and I can detect no pulsation, but the doctor say he' still 
alive,--it' the queerest case I ever saw.' 

I went farther into the room. directli I did so the man in the bed gave 
sign of life which were suffici unmistakable. nurs hasten to 
him. 

'why,' she exclaimed, 'he' moving!--h might have heard you enter!' 

He not onli might have done, but it seem possibl that that wa what 
he actual had done. As I approach the bed, he rais himself to a 
sit posture, as, in the morning, he had done in the street, and he 
exclaimed, as if he address himself to someon whom he saw in front 
of him,--i cannot describ the almost more than human agoni which wa 
in hi voice, 

'paul lessingham!--beware!--th beetle!' 

what he meant I had not the slightest notion. probabl that wa whi 
what seem more like a pronounc of delirium than anyth els 
had such an extraordinari effect upon my nerves. No sooner had he 
spoken than a sort of blank horror seem to settl down upon my mind. 
I actual found myself trembl at the knees. I felt, all at once, as 
if I wa stand in the immedi presenc of someth aw yet 
unseen. 

As for the speaker, no sooner were the word out of hi lips, than, as 
wa the case in the morning, he relaps into a condit of trance. 
nurse, bend over him, announc the fact. 

'he' gone off again!--what an extraordinari thing!--i suppos it is 
real.' It wa clear, from the tone of her voice, that she share the 
doubt which had troubl the policeman, 'there' not a trace of a 
pulse. from the look of thing he might be dead. Of one thing i'm sure, 
that there' someth unnatur about the man. No natur ill I 
ever heard of, take hold of a man like this.' 

glanc up, she saw that there wa someth unusu in my face; an 
appear which startl her. 

'why, miss marjorie, what' the matter!--y look quit ill!' 

I felt ill, and wors than ill; but, at the same time, I wa quit 
incap of describ what I felt to nurse. for some inscrut 
reason I had even lost the control of my tongue,--i stammered. 

'i--i--i'm not feel veri well, nurse; i--i--i think i'll be better 
in bed.' 

As I spoke, I stagger toward the door, conscious, all the while, 
that nurs wa stare at me with eye wide open, when I got out of the 
room, it seemed, in some incomprehens fashion, as if someth had 
left it with me, and that It and I were alon togeth in the corridor. 
So overcom wa I by the conscious of it immedi propinquity, 
that, all at once, I found myself cower against the wall,--a if I 
expect someth or someon to strike me. 

how I reach my bedroom I do not know. I found fanchett await me. 
for the moment her presenc wa a posit comfort,--until I realis 
the amaz with which she wa regard me. 

'mademoisel is not well?' 

'thank you, fanchette, i--i am rather tired. I will undress myself 
to-night--y can go to bed.' 

'but if mademoisel is so tired, will she not permit me to assist her?' 

the suggest wa reason enough,--and kindli too; for, to say the 
least of it, she had as much caus for fatigu as I had. I hesitated. I 
should have like to throw my arm about her neck, and beg her not to 
leav me; but, the plain truth is, I wa ashamed. In my inner 
conscious I wa persuad that the sens of terror which had 
suddenli come over me wa so absolut causeless, that I could not 
bear the notion of play the craven in my maid' eyes. while I 
hesitated, someth seem to sweep past me through the air, and to 
brush against my cheek in passing. I caught at fanchette' arm. 

'fanchette!--i there someth with us in the room?' 

'someth with us in the room?--mademoiselle?--what doe mademoisel 
mean?' 

she look disturbed,--which was, on the whole, excusable. fanchett is 
not exactli a strong-mind person, and not like to be much of a 
support when a support wa most required. If I wa go to play the 
fool, I would be my own audience. So I sent her off. 

'did you not hear me tell you that I will undress myself?--y are to 
go to bed.' 

she went to bed,--with quit suffici willingness. 

the instant that she wa out of the room I wish that she wa back 
again. such a paroxysm of fear came over me, that I wa incap of 
stir from the spot on which I stood, and it wa all I could do to 
prevent myself from collaps in heap on the floor. I had never, till 
then, had reason to suppos that I wa a coward. nor to suspect myself 
of be the possessor of 'nerves.' I wa as littl like as anyon to 
be frighten by shadows. I told myself that the whole thing wa sheer 
absurdity, and that I should be thoroughli asham of my own conduct 
when the morn came. 'if you don't want to be self-brand as a 
contempt idiot, marjori lindon, you will call up your courage, and 
these foolish fear will fly.' but it would not do. instead of flying, 
they grew worse. I becam convinced,--and the process of convict wa 
terribl beyond words!--that there actual wa someth with me in 
the room, some invis horror,--which, at ani moment, might becom 
visible. I seem to understand--with a sens of agoni which noth 
can describe!--that thi thing which wa with me wa with paul. that we 
were link togeth by the bond of a common, and a dread terror. 
that, at that moment, that same aw peril which wa threaten me, 
wa threaten him, and that I wa powerless to move a finger in hi 
aid. As with a sort of second sight, I saw out of the room in which I 
was, into another, in which paul wa crouch on the floor, cover 
hi face with hi hands, and shrieking. the vision came again and again 
with a degre of vivid of which I cannot give the least conception. 
At last the horror, and the realiti of it, goad me to frenzy. 'paul! 
paul!' I screamed. As soon as I found my voice, the vision faded. onc 
more I understood that, as a matter of simpl fact, I wa stand in 
my own bedroom; that the light were burn brightly; that I had not 
yet commenc to remov a particl of dress. 'am I go mad?' I 
wondered. I had heard of insan take extraordinari forms, but what 
could have caus soften of the brain in me I had not the faintest 
notion. sure that sort of thing doe not come on one--in such a 
wholli unmitig form!--without the slightest notice,--and that my 
mental faculti were sound enough a few minut back I wa certain. 
the first premonit of anyth of the kind had come upon me with the 
melodramat utter of the man I had found in the street. 

'paul lessingham!--beware!--th beetle!' 

the word were ring in my ears.--what wa that?--. there wa a 
buzz sound behind me. I turn to see what it was. It move as I 
moved, so that it wa still at my back. I swung, swiftly, right round 
on my heels. It still elud me,--it wa still behind. 

I stood and listened,--what wa it that hover so persist at my 
back? 

the buzz wa distinctli audible. It wa like the hum of a bee. 
or--could it be a beetle? 

My whole life long I have had an antipathi to beetles,--of ani sort or 
kind. I have object neither to rat nor mice, nor cows, nor bulls, 
nor snakes, nor spiders, nor toads, nor lizards, nor ani of the 
thousand and one other creatures, anim or otherwise, to which so 
mani peopl have a rooted, and, apparently, illog dislike. My 
pet--and only--horror ha been beetles. the mere suspicion of a 
harmless, and, I am told, necessari cockroach, be within sever 
feet ha alway made me serious uneasy. the thought that a great, 
wing beetle--to me, a fli beetl is the horror of horrors!--wa 
with me in my bedroom,--good alon knew how it had got there!--wa 
unendurable. anyon who had beheld me dure the next few moment would 
certainli have suppos I wa deranged. I turn and twisted, sprang 
from side to side, screw myself into imposs positions, in order 
to obtain a glimps of the detest visitant,--but in vain. I could 
hear it all the time; but see it--never! the buzz sound wa 
continu behind. 

the terror returned,--i began to think that my brain must be softening. 
I dash to the bed. fling myself on my knees, I tri to pray. but 
I wa speechless,--word would not come; my thought would not take 
shape. I all at onc becam conscious, as I struggl to ask help of 
god, that I wa wrestl with someth evil,--that if I onli could 
ask kelp of him, evil would flee. but I could not. I wa 
helpless,--overmastered. I hid my face in the bedclothes, cram my 
finger into my ears. but the buzz wa behind me all the time. 

I sprang up, strike out, blindly, wildly, right and left, hit 
nothing,--th buzz alway came from a point at which, at the moment, 
I wa not aiming. 

I tore off my clothes. I had on a love frock which I had worn for the 
first time that night; I had had it special made for the occas of 
the duchess' ball, and--mor especially--in honour of paul' great 
speech. I had said to myself, when I saw my imag in a mirror, that it 
wa the most exquisit gown I had ever had, that it suit me to 
perfection, and that it should continu in my wardrob for mani a day, 
if onli as a souvenir of a memor night. now, in the mad of my 
terror, all reflect of that sort were forgotten. My onli desir wa 
to away with it. I tore it off anyhow, let it fall in rag on the 
floor at my feet. all els that I had on I flung in the same way after 
it; it wa a verit holocaust of dainti garments,--i act as 
relentless execution who am, as a rule, so tender with my things. I 
leap upon the bed, switch off the electr light, hurri into bed, 
buri myself, over head and all, deep down between the sheets. 

I had hope that by shut out the light, I might regain my senses. 
that in the dark I might have opportun for sane reflection. but 
I had made a grievou error. I had exchang bad for worse. the 
dark lent ad terrors. the light had not been out five second 
befor I would have given all that I wa worth to be abl to switch it 
on again. 

As I cower beneath the bedcloth I heard the buzz sound abov my 
head,--th sudden silenc of the dark had render it more audibl 
than it had been before. the thing, whatev it was, wa hover abov 
the bed. It came nearer and nearer; it grew clearer and clearer. I felt 
it alight upon the coverlet;--shal I ever forget the sensat with 
which I did feel it? It weigh upon me like a ton of lead. how much of 
the seem weight wa real, and how much imaginary, I cannot pretend 
to say; but that it wa much heavier than ani beetl I have ever seen 
or heard of, I am sure. 

for a time it wa still,--and dure that time I doubt if I even drew 
my breath. then I felt it begin to move, in wobbl fashion, with 
awkward, ungainli gait, stop everi now and then, as if for rest. I 
wa consciou that it wa progressing, slowly, yet surely, toward the 
head of the bed. the emot of horror with which I realis what thi 
progress might mean, will be, I fear, with me to the end of my 
life,--not onli in dreams, but too often, also, in my wake hours. My 
heart, as the psalmist ha it, melt like wax within me, I wa 
incap of movement,--domin by someth as hideou as, and 
infinit more power than, the fascin of the serpent. 

when it reach the head of the bed, what I feared--with what a 
fear!--would happen, did happen. It began to find it way inside,--to 
creep between the sheets; the wonder is I did not die! I felt it come 
nearer and nearer, inch by inch; I knew that it wa upon me, that 
escap there wa none; I felt someth touch my hair. 

and then oblivion did come to my aid. for the first time in my life I 
swooned. 




chapter xxviii 

the strang stori OF the man IN the street 


I have been anticip for some week past, that thing would becom 
exciting,--and they have. but hardli in the way which I foresaw. It is 
the old stori of the unexpect happening. suddenli event of the most 
extraordinari natur have come crowd on me from the most 
unlooked-for quarters. 

let me tri to take them in someth like their proper order. 

To begin with, sydney ha behav veri badly. So badli that it seem 
like that I shall have to re-cast my whole concept of hi 
character. It wa nearli nine o'clock thi morn when i,--i cannot 
say woke up, becaus I do not believ that I had realli been 
asleep--but when I return to consciousness. I found myself sit up 
in bed, trembl like some frighten child. what had actual 
happen to me I did not know,--could not guess. I wa consciou of an 
overwhelm sens of nausea, and, generally, I wa feel veri far 
from well. I endeavour to arrang my thoughts, and to decid upon 
some plan of action. finally, I decid to go for advic and help where 
I had so often gone before,--to sydney atherton. 

I went to him. I told him the whole gruesom story. He saw, he could 
not help but see what a deep impress the event of the night had made 
on me. He heard me to the end with everi appear of sympathy,--and 
then all at onc I discov that all the time papa had been conceal 
behind a larg screen which wa in the room, listen to everi word I 
had been uttering. that I wa dumfoundered, goe without saying. It wa 
bad enough in papa, but in sydney it seemed, and it was, such 
treachery. He and I have told each other secret all our lives; it ha 
never enter my imagination, as he veri well knows, to play him false, 
in one jot or tittle; and I have alway understood that, in thi sort 
of matter, men pride themselv on their sens of honour be so much 
keener than women's. I told them some plain truths; and I fanci that I 
left them both feel heartili asham of themselves. 

one result the experi had on me,--it wound me up. It had on me the 
revivifi effect of a cold douche. I realis that mine wa a 
situat in which I should have to help myself. 

when I return home I learn that the man whom I had found in the 
street wa himself again, and wa as consciou as he wa ever like to 
be. burn with curios to learn the natur of the connect which 
exist between paul and him, and what wa the mean of hi oracular 
apostrophes, I mere paus to remov my hat befor hasten into hi 
apartment. 

when he saw me, and heard who I was, the express of hi gratitud 
were pain in their intensity. the tear stream down hi cheeks. He 
look to me like a man who had veri littl life left in him. He look 
weak, and white, and worn to a shadow. probabl he never had been 
robust, and it wa onli too plain that privat had rob him of what 
littl strength he had ever had. He wa noth els but skin and bone. 
physic and mental debil wa written larg all over him. 

He wa not bad-looking,--in a milk and wateri sort of way. He had pale 
blue eye and veri fair hair, and, I daresay, at one time, had been a 
spruce enough clerk. It wa difficult to guess hi age, one age so 
rapidli under the stress of misfortune, but I should have set him down 
as be about forty. hi voice, though faint enough at first, wa that 
of an educ man, and as he went on, and gather courage, and becam 
more and more in earnest, he spoke with a simpl direct which wa 
close akin to eloquence. It wa a curiou stori which he had to tell. 

So curious, so astound indeed, that, by the time it wa finished, I 
wa in such a state of mind, that I could perceiv no altern but 
to forgiv sydney, and, in spite of hi recent, and scandal 
misbehaviour, again appeal to him for assistance. It seemed, if the 
stori told by the man whom I had found in the street wa true,--and 
incred though it sounded, he spoke like a truth man!--that paul 
wa threaten by some dreadful, and, to me, wholli incomprehens 
danger; that it wa a case in which even moment were precious; and I 
felt that, with the best will in the world, it wa a posit in which 
I could not move alone. the shadow of the terror of the night wa with 
me still, and with that fresh in my recollect how could I hope, 
single-handed, to act effectu against the mysteri be of whom 
thi amaz tale wa told? no! I believ that sydney did care for me, 
in hi own peculiar way; I knew that he wa quick, and cool, and 
fertil in resource, and that he show to most advantag in a 
difficult situation; it wa possibl that he had a conscience, of a 
sort, and that, thi time, I might not appeal to it in vain. 

So I sent a servant off to fetch him, helter skelter. 

As luck would have it, the servant return with him within five 
minutes. It appear that he had been lunch with dora grayling, who 
live just at the end of the street, and the footman had met him come 
down the steps. I had him shown into my own room. 

'I want you to go to the man whom I found in the street, and listen to 
what he ha to say.' 

'with pleasure.' 

'can I trust you?' 

'to listen to what he ha to say?--i believ so.' 

'can I trust you to respect my confidence?' 

He wa not at all abashed,--i never saw sydney atherton when he wa 
abashed. whatev the offenc of which he ha been guilty, he alway 
seem complet at hi ease. hi eye twinkled. 

'you can,--i will not breath a syllabl even to papa.' 

'in that case, come! but, you understand, I am go to put to the test 
the affirm which you have made dure all these years, and to 
prove if you have ani of the feel for me which you pretend.' 

directli we were in the stranger' room, sydney march straight up to 
the bed, stare at the man who wa lie in it, cram hi hand into 
hi trouser pockets, and whistled. I wa amazed. 

'so!' he exclaimed. 'it' you!' 

'do you know thi man?' I asked. 

'I am hardli prepar to go so far as to say that I know him, but, I 
chanc to have a memori for faces, and it happen that I have met thi 
gentleman on at least one previou occasion. perhap he rememb 
me.--do you?' 

the stranger seem uneasy,--a if he found sidney' tone and manner 
disconcerting. 

'I do. you are the man in the street.' 

'precisely. I am that--individual. and you are the man who came through 
the window. and in a much more comfort condit you appear to be 
than when first I saw you.' sydney turn to me. 'it is just possible, 
miss lindon, that I may have a few remark to make to thi gentleman 
which would be better made in private,--if you don't mind.' 

'but I do mind,--i mind veri much. what do you suppos I sent for you 
here for?' 

sydney smile that absurd, provok smile of his,--a if the occas 
were not suffici serious. 

'to show that you still repos in me a vestig of your confidence.' 

'don't talk nonsense. thi man ha told me a most extraordinari story, 
and I have sent for you--a you may believe, not too willingly'--sydney 
bowed--'in order that he may repeat it in your presence, and in mine.' 

'i that so?--well!-permit me to offer you a chair,--thi tale may turn 
out to be a trifl long.' 

To humour him I accept the chair he offered, though I should have 
prefer to stand;--h seat himself on the side of the bed, fix 
on the stranger those keen, quizzical, not too merciful, eye of his. 

'well, sir, we are at your service,--if you will be so good as to 
favour us with a second edit of that pleasant yarn you have been 
spinning. but--let us begin at the right end!--what' your name?' 

'mi name is robert holt.' 

'that so?--then, Mr robert holt,--let her go!' 

thu encouraged, Mr holt repeat the tale which he had told me, onli 
in more connect fashion than before. I fanci that sydney' glanc 
exercis on him a sort of hypnot effect, and thi kept him to the 
point,--h scarc need a word of prompt from the first syllabl 
to the last. 

He told how, tired, wet, hungry, desperate, despairing, he had been 
refus admitt to the casual ward,--that unfail resource, as one 
would have supposed, of those who had abandon even hope. how he had 
come upon an open window in an appar empti house, and, think of 
noth but shelter from the inclement night, he had clamber through 
it. how he had found himself in the presenc of an extraordinari being, 
who, in hi debilit and nervou state, had seem to him to be onli 
half human. how thi dread creatur had given utter to wild 
sentiment of hatr toward paul lessingham,--mi paul! how he had 
taken advantag of holt' enfeebl state to gain over him the most 
complete, horrible, and, indeed, almost incred ascendency. how he 
actual had sent holt, practic naked, into the storm-driven 
streets, to commit burglari at paul' house,--and how he,--holt,--had 
actual gone without be abl to offer even a shadow of opposition. 
how paul, suddenli return home, had come upon holt engag in the 
veri act of commit burglary, and how, on hi hear holt make a 
cabalist refer to some mysteri beetle, the manhood had gone 
out of him, and he had suffer the intrud to make good hi escap 
without an effort to detain him. 

the stori had seem suffici astonish the first time, it seem 
still more astonish the second,--but, as I watch sydney listening, 
what struck me chiefli wa the convict that he had heard it all 
before. I charg him with it directli holt had finished. 

'thi is not the first time you have been told thi tale.' 

'pardon me,--but it is. Do you suppos I live in an atmospher of fairi 
tales?' 

someth in hi manner made me feel sure he wa deceiv me. 

'sydney!--don't tell me a story!--paul ha told you!' 

'I am not tell you a story,--at least, on thi occasion; and Mr 
lessingham ha not told me. suppos we postpon these detail to a 
littl later. and perhaps, in the interim, you will permit me to put a 
question or two to Mr holt.' 

I let him have hi way,--though I knew he wa conceal someth from 
me; that he had a more intim acquaint with Mr holt' strang 
tale than he chose to confess. and, for some cause, hi retic 
annoy me. 

He look at Mr holt in silenc for a second or two. 

then he said, with the quizzic littl air of bland impertin which 
is peculiarli hi own, 

'I presume, Mr holt, you have been entertain us with a novelti in 
fables, and that we are not expect to believ thi pleasant littl 
yarn of yours.' 

'I expect nothing. but I have told you the truth. and you know it.' 

thi seem to take sydney aback. 

'I protest that, like miss lindon, you credit me with a more extens 
knowledg than I possess. however, we will let that pass.--i take it 
that you paid particular attent to thi mysteri habit of thi 
mysteri dwelling.' 

I saw that Mr holt shuddered. 

'I am not like ever to forget him.' 

'then, in that case, you will be abl to describ him to us.' 

'to do so adequ would be beyond my powers. but I will do my best.' 

If the origin wa more remark than the descript which he gave 
of him, then he must have been remark indeed. the impress 
convey to my mind wa rather of a monster than a human being. I 
watch sydney attent as he follow Mr holt' somewhat lurid 
language, and there wa someth in hi demeanour which made me more 
and more persuad that he wa more behind the scene in thi strang 
busi than he pretended, or than the speaker suspected. He put a 
question which seem uncal for by anyth which Mr holt had said. 

'you are sure thi thing of beauti wa a man?' 

'no, sir, that is exactli what I am not sure.' 

there wa a note in sydney' voic which suggest that he had receiv 
precis the answer which he had expected. 

'did you think it wa a woman?' 

'I did think so, more than once. though I can hardli explain what made 
me think so. there wa certainli noth womanli about the face.' He 
paused, as if to reflect. then added, 'I suppos it wa a question of 
instinct.' 

'I see.--just so.--it occur to me, Mr holt, that you are rather strong 
on question of instinct.' sydney got off the bed. He stretch 
himself, as if fatigued,--which is a way he has. 'I will not do you the 
injustic to hint that I do not believ a word of your charming, and 
simple, narrative. On the contrary, I will demonstr my perfect 
credenc by remark that I have not the slightest doubt that you will 
be abl to point out to me, for my particular satisfaction, the 
delight resid on which the whole is founded.' 

Mr holt coloured,--sydney' tone could scarc have been more 
significant. 

'you must remember, sir, that it wa a dark night, that I had never 
been in that neighbourhood before, and that I wa not in a condit to 
pay much attent to locality.' 

'all of which is granted, but--how far wa it from hammersmith 
workhouse?' 

'possibl under half a mile.' 

'then, in that case, sure you can rememb which turn you took on 
leav hammersmith workhouse,--i suppos there are not mani turn 
you could have taken.' 

'I think I could remember.' 

'then you shall have an opportun to try. It isn't a veri far cri to 
hammersmith,--don't you think you are well enough to drive there now, 
just you and I togeth in a cab?' 

'I should say so. I wish to get up thi morning. It is by the 
doctor' order I have stay in bed.' 

'then, for onc in a while, the doctor' order shall be ignored,--i 
prescrib fresh air.' sydney turn to me. 'sinc Mr holt' wardrob 
seem rather to seek, don't you think a suit of one of the men might 
fit him,--if Mr holt wouldn't mind make shift for the moment?--then, 
by the time you'v finish dressing, Mr holt, I shall be ready.' 

while they were ascertain which suit of cloth would be best 
adapt to hi figure, I went with sydney to my room. So soon as we 
were in, I let him know that thi wa not a matter in which I intend 
to be trifl with. 

'of cours you understand, sydney, that I am come with you.' 

He pretend not to know what I meant. 

'come with me?--i am delight to hear it,--but where?' 

'to the hous of which Mr holt ha been speaking.' 

'noth could give me greater pleasure, but--might I point out?--mr 
holt ha to find it yet?' 

'I will come to help you to help him find it.' 

sydney laughed,--but I could see he did not altogeth relish the 
suggestion. 

'three in a hansom?' 

'there is such a thing as a four-wheel cab,--or I could order a 
carriag if you'd like one.' 

sydney look at me out of the corner of hi eyes; then began to walk 
up and down the room, with hi hand in hi trouser pockets. present 
he began to talk nonsense. 

'I need not say with what a sensat of joy I should anticip the 
delight of a drive with you,--even in a four-wheel cab; but, were I 
in your place, I fanci that I should allow holt and your humbl servant 
to go hunt out thi hous of hi alone. It may prove a more tediou 
busi than you imagine. I promis that, after the hunt is over, I 
will describ the proceed to you with the most liter accuracy.' 

'I daresay.--do you think I don't know you'v been deceiv me all the 
time?' 

'deceiv you?--i!' 

'yes,--you! Do you think i'm quit an idiot?' 

'mi dear marjorie!' 

'do you think I can't see that you know all about what Mr holt ha been 
tell us,--perhap more about it than he know himself?' 

'on my word!--with what an amount of knowledg you do credit me.' 

'yes, I do,--or discredit you, rather. If I were to trust you, you 
would tell me just as much as you chose,--which would be nothing. i'm 
come with you,--so there' an end.' 

'veri well.--do you happen to know if there are ani revolv in the 
house?' 

'revolvers?--whatev for?' 

'becaus I should like to borrow one. I will not conceal from 
you--sinc you press me--that thi is a case in which a revolv is 
quit like to be required.' 

'you are tri to frighten me.' 

'I am do noth of the kind, only, under the circumstances, I am 
bound to point out to you what it is you may expect.' 

'oh, you think that you'r bound to point that out, do you,--then now 
your bounden duty' done. As for there be ani revolv in the 
house, papa ha a perfect arsenal,--would you like to take them all?' 

'thanks, but I daresay I shall be abl to manag with one,--unless you 
would like one too. you may find yourself in need of it.' 

'I am oblig to you, but, on thi occasion, I don't think i'll 
trouble. i'll run the risk.--oh, sydney, what a hypocrit you are!' 

'it' for your sake, if I seem to be. I tell you most seriously, that I 
earnestli advis you to allow Mr holt and I to manag thi affair 
alone. I don't mind go so far as to say that thi is a matter with 
which, in day to come, you will wish that you had not allow yourself 
to be associated.' 

'what do you mean by that? Do you dare to insinu anyth 
against--paul?' 

'I insinu nothing. what I mean, I say right out; and, my dear 
marjorie, what I actual do mean is this,--that if, in spite of my 
urgent solicitations, you will persist in accompani us, the 
expedition, so far as I am concerned, will be postponed.' 

'that is what you do mean, is it? then that' settled.' I rang the 
bell. the servant came. 'order a four-wheel cab at once. and let me 
know the moment Mr holt is ready.' the servant went. I turn to 
sydney. 'if you will excus me, I will go and put my hat on. you are, 
of course, at liberti to pleas yourself as to whether you will or will 
not go, but, if you don't, then I shall go with Mr holt alone.' 

I move to the door. He stop me. 

'mi dear marjorie, whi will you persist in treat me with such 
injustice? believ me, you have no idea what sort of adventur thi is 
which you are set out upon,--or you would hear reason. I assur you 
that you are gratuit propos to thrust yourself into immin 
peril.' 

'what sort of peril? whi do you beat about the bush,--whi don't you 
speak right out?' 

'I can't speak right out, there are circumst which render it 
practic impossible--and that' the plain truth,--but the danger is 
none the less real on that account. I am not jesting,--i am in earnest; 
won't you take my word for it?' 

'it is not a question of take your word only,--it is a question of 
someth els beside. I have not forgotten my adventur of last 
night,--and Mr holt' stori is mysteri enough in itself; but there 
is someth more mysteri still at the back of it,--someth which 
you appear to suggest point unpleasantli at paul. My duti is clear, 
and noth you can say will turn me from it. paul, as you are veri 
well aware, is alreadi over-weight with affair of state, pretti 
nearli born down by them,--or I would take the tale to him, and he 
would talk to you after a fashion of hi own. thing be as they are, 
I propos to show you that, although I am not yet paul' wife, I can 
make hi interest my own as complet as though I were. I can, 
therefore, onli repeat that it is for you to decid what you intend to 
do; but, if you prefer to stay, I shall go with Mr holt,--alone.' 

'understand that, when the time for regret comes--a it will come!--y 
are not to blame me for have done what I advis you not to do.' 

'mi dear Mr atherton, I will undertak to do my utmost to guard your 
spotless reputation; I should be sorri that anyon should hold you 
respons for anyth I either said or did.' 

'veri well!--your blood be on your own head!' 

'mi blood?' 

'yes,--your blood. I shouldn't be surpris if it come to blood befor 
we'r through.--perhap you'll oblig me with the loan of one of that 
arsen of revolv of which you spoke.' 

I let him have hi old revolver,--or, rather, I let him have one of 
papa' new ones. He put it in the hip pocket in hi trousers. and the 
expedit started,--in a four-wheel car. 




chapter xxix 

the hous ON the road from the workhous 


Mr holt look as if he wa in somebodi else' garments. He wa so 
thin, and worn, and wasted, that the suit of cloth which one of the 
men had lent him hung upon him as on a scarecrow. I wa almost asham 
of myself for have incur a share of the respons of take 
him out of bed. He seem so weak and bloodless that I should not have 
been surpris if he had faint on the road. I had taken care that he 
should eat as much as he could eat befor we started--th suggest of 
starvat which he had convey to one' mind wa dreadful!--and I had 
brought a flask of brandi in case of accidents, but, in spite of 
everything, I could not conceal from myself that he would be more at 
home in a sick-b than in a jolt cab. 

It wa not a cheer drive. there wa in sydney' manner toward me an 
air of protect which I instinct resented,--h appear to be 
regard me as a careful, and anxious, nurs might regard a 
wrong-head and disobedi child. convers distinctli languished. 
sinc sydney seem dispos to patronis me, I wa bent on snub 
him. the result was, that the major of the remark which were 
utter were address to Mr holt. 

the cab stopped,--aft what had appear to me to be an intermin 
journey. I wa rejoic at the prospect of it be at an end. sydney 
put hi head out of the window. A short parley with the driver ensued. 

'thi is 'ammersmith workhouse, it' a larg place, sir,--which part of 
it might you be wanting?' 

sydney appeal to Mr holt. He put hi head out of the window in hi 
turn,--h did not seem to recognis our surround at all. 

'we have come a differ way,--thi is not the way I went; I went 
through hammersmith,--and to the casual ward; I don't see that here.' 

sydney spoke to the cabman. 

'driver, where' the casual ward?' 

'that' the other end, sir.' 

'then take us there.' 

He took us there. then sydney appeal again to Mr holt. 

'shall I dismiss the cabman,--or don't you feel equal to walking?' 

'thank you, I feel quit equal to walking,--i think the exercis will 
do me good.' 

So the cabman wa dismissed,--a step which we--and I, in 
particular--had subsequ caus to regret. Mr holt took hi bearings. 
He point to a door which wa just in front of us. 

'that' the entranc to the casual ward, and that, over it, is the 
window through which the other man threw a stone. I went to the 
right,--back the way I had come.' We went to the right. 'I reach thi 
corner.' We had reach a corner. Mr holt look about him, 
endeavour to recal the way he had gone. A good mani road appear 
to converg at that point, so that he might have wander in either of 
sever directions. 

present he arriv at someth like a decision. 

'I think thi is the way I went,--i am nearli sure it is.' 

He led the way, with someth of an air of dubitation, and we 
followed. the road he had chosen seem to lead to noth and nowhere. 
We had not gone mani yard from the workhous gate befor we were 
confront by someth like chaos. In front and on either side of us 
were larg space of wast land. At some more or less remot period 
attempt appear to have been made at brick-making,--ther were untidi 
stack of bilious-look brick in evidence. here and there enorm 
weather-stain board announc that 'thi desir land wa to be 
let for build purposes.' the road itself wa unfinished. there wa 
no pavement, and we had the bare uneven ground for sidewalk. It seemed, 
so far as I could judge, to lose itself in space, and to be swallow 
up by the wilder of 'desir land' which lay beyond. In the near 
distanc there were hous enough, and to spare--of a kind. but they 
were in other roads. In the one in which we actual were, on the 
right, at the end, there wa a row of unfurnish carcases, but onli 
two build which were in anyth like a fit state for occupation. 
one stood on either side, not face each other,--ther wa a distanc 
between them of perhap fifti yards. the sight of them had a more 
excit effect on Mr holt than it had on me. He move rapidli 
forward,--com to a standstil in front of the one upon our left, 
which wa the nearer of the pair. 

'thi is the house!' he exclaimed. 

He seem almost exhilarated,--i confess that I wa depressed. A more 
dismal-look habit one could hardli imagine. It wa one of those 
dread jerry-built hous which, while they are still new, look old. 
It had quit possibl onli been built a year or two, and yet, owe to 
neglect, or to poverti of construction, or to a combin of the two, 
it wa alreadi threaten to tumbl down. It wa a small place, a 
coupl of storey high, and would have been dear--i should think!--at 
thirti pound a year. the window had sure never been wash sinc 
the hous wa built,--thos on the upper floor seem all either 
crack or broken. the onli sign of occup consist in the fact 
that a blind wa down behind the window of the room on the ground 
floor. curtain there were none. A low wall ran in front, which had 
appar at one time been surmount by someth in the shape of an 
iron railing,--a rusti piec of metal still remain on one end; but, 
sinc there wa onli about a foot between it and the building, which 
wa practic built upon the road,--wheth the wall wa intend to 
ensur privacy, or wa mere for ornament, wa not clear. 

'thi is the house!' repeat Mr holt, show more sign of life than 
I had hitherto seen in him. 

sydney look it up and down,--it appar appeal to hi aesthet 
sens as littl as it did to mine. 

'are you sure?' 

'I am certain.' 

'it seem empty.' 

'it seem empti to me that night,--that is whi I got into it in search 
of shelter.' 

'which is the window which serv you as a door?' 

'thi one.' Mr holt point to the window on the ground floor,--th one 
which wa screen by a blind. 'there wa no sign of a blind when I 
first saw it, and the sash wa up,--it wa that which caught my eye.' 

onc more sydney survey the place, in comprehens fashion, from 
roof to basement,--then he scrutinisingli regard Mr holt. 

'you are quit sure thi is the house? It might be awkward if you 
prove mistaken. I am go to knock at the door, and if it turn out 
that that mysteri acquaint of your doe not, and never ha 
live here, we might find an explan difficult.' 

'I am sure it is the house,--certain! I know it,--i feel it here,--and 
here.' 

Mr holt touch hi breast, and hi forehead. hi manner wa distinctli 
odd. He wa trembling, and a fever express had come into hi eyes. 
sydney glanc at him, for a moment, in silence. then he bestow hi 
attent upon me. 

'may I ask if I may reli upon your preserv your presenc of mind?' 

the mere question ruffl my plumes. 

'what do you mean?' 

'what I say. I am go to knock at that door, and I am go to get 
through it, somehow. It is quit within the rang of possibl that, 
when I am through, there will be some strang happenings,--a you have 
heard from Mr holt. the hous is commonplac enough without; you may 
not find it so commonplac within. you may find yourself in a posit 
in which it will be in the highest degre essenti that you should 
keep your wit about you.' 

'I am not like to let them stray.' 

'then that' all right.--do I understand that you propos to come in 
with me?' 

'of cours I do,--what do you suppos i'v come for? what nonsens you 
are talking. 

'I hope that you will still continu to consid it nonsens by the 
time thi littl adventure' done.' 

that I resent hi impertin goe without saying--to be talk to 
in such a strain by sydney atherton, whom I had kept in subject ever 
sinc he wa in knickerbockers, wa a littl trying,--but I am forc 
to admit that I wa more impress by hi manner, or hi words, or by 
Mr holt' manner, or something, than I should have care to own. I had 
not the least notion what wa go to happen, or what horror that 
woebegone-look dwell contained. but Mr holt' stori had been of 
the most astonish sort, my experi of the previou night were 
still fresh, and, altogether, now that I wa in such close 
neighbourhood with the unknown--with a capit u!--although it wa 
broad daylight, it loom befor me in a shape for which,--candidly!--i 
wa not prepared. 

A more disreputable-look front door I have not seen,--it wa in 
perfect harmoni with the remaind of the establishment. the paint wa 
off; the woodwork wa scratch and dented; the knocker wa red with 
rust. when sydney took it in hi hand I wa consciou of quit a littl 
thrill. As he brought it down with a sharp rat-tat, I half expect to 
see the door fli open, and disclos some gruesom object glare out at 
us. noth of the kind took place; the door did not budge,--noth 
happened. sydney wait a second or two, then knock again; anoth 
second or two, then anoth knock. there wa still no sign of ani 
notic be taken of our presence. sydney turn to Mr holt. 

'seem as if the place wa empty.' 

Mr holt wa in the most singular condit of agitation,--it made me 
uncomfort to look at him. 

'you do not know,--you cannot tell; there may be someon there who 
hear and pay no heed.' 

'i'll give them anoth chance.' 

sydney brought down the knocker with thunder reverberations. the din 
must have been audibl half a mile away. but from within the hous 
there wa still no sign that ani heard. sydney came down the step. 

'i'll tri anoth way,--i may have better fortun at the back.' 

He led the way round to the rear, Mr holt and I follow in singl 
file. there the place seem in wors case even than in the front. 
there were two empti room on the ground floor at the back,--ther wa 
no mistak about their be empty, without the slightest difficulti we 
could see right into them. one wa appar intend for a kitchen 
and wash-hous combined, the other for a sitting-room. there wa not a 
stick of furnitur in either, nor the slightest sign of human 
habitation. sydney comment on the fact. 

'not onli is it plain that no one live in these charm apartments, 
but it look to me uncommonli as if no one ever had live in them.' 

To my think Mr holt' agit wa increas everi moment. for 
some reason of hi own, sydney took no notic of it whatever,--poss 
becaus he judg that to do so would onli tend to make it worse. An 
odd chang had even taken place in Mr holt' voice,--h spoke in a sort 
of tremul falsetto. 

'it wa onli the front room which I saw.' 

'veri good; then, befor veri long, you shall see that front room 
again.' 

sydney rap with hi knuckl on the glass panel of the back door. 
He tri the handle; when it refus to yield he gave it a vigor 
shaking. He salut the dirti windows,--so far as succeed in 
attract attent wa concerned, entir in vain. then he turn 
again to Mr holt,--half mockingly. 

'I call you to wit that I have use everi law mean to gain the 
favour notic of your mysteri friend. I must therefor beg to 
stand excus if I tri someth slightli unlaw for a change. It is 
true that you found the window alreadi open; but, in my case, it soon 
will be.' 

He took a knife out of hi pocket, and, with the open blade, forc 
back the catch,--a I am told that burglar do. then he lift the sash. 

'behold!' he exclaimed. 'what did I tell you?--now, my dear marjorie, 
if I get in first and Mr holt get in after me, we shall be in a 
posit to open the door for you.' 

I immedi saw through hi design. 

'no, Mr atherton; you will get in first, and I will get in after you, 
through the window,--befor Mr holt. I don't intend to wait for you to 
open the door.' 

sydney rais hi hand and open hi eyes, as if griev at my want 
of confidence. but I did not mean to be left in the lurch, to wait 
their pleasure, while on pretenc of open the door, they search 
the house. So sydney climb in first, and I second,--it wa not a 
difficult operation, sinc the window-sil wa under three feet from 
the ground--and Mr holt last. directli we were in, sydney put hi hand 
up to hi mouth, and shouted. 

'i there anybodi in thi house? If so, will he kindli step thi way, 
as there is someon wish to see him.' 

hi word went echo through the empti room in a way which wa 
almost uncanny. I suddenli realis that if, after all, there did 
happen to be somebodi in the house, and he wa at all disagreeable, our 
presenc on hi premis might prove rather difficult to explain. 
however, no one answered. while I wa wait for sydney to make the 
next move, he divert my attent to Mr holt. 

'hollo, holt, what' the matter with you? man, don't play the fool like 
that!' 

someth wa the matter with Mr holt. He wa trembl all over as if 
attack by a shake palsy. everi muscl in hi bodi seem twitch 
at once. A strain look had come on hi face, which wa not nice to 
see. He spoke as with an effort. 

'i'm all right.--it' nothing.' 

'oh, is it nothing? then perhap you'll drop it. where' that brandy?' 
I hand sydney the flask. 'here, swallow this.' 

Mr holt swallow the cup of neat spirit which sydney offer 
without an attempt at parley. beyond bring some remnant of colour 
to hi ashen cheek it seem to have no effect on him whatever. sydney 
eye him with a mean in hi glanc which I wa at a loss to 
understand. 

'listen to me, my lad. don't think you can deceiv me by play ani of 
your fool tricks, and don't delud yourself into suppos that I shall 
treat you as anyth but danger if you do. i'v got this.' He 
show the revolv of papa' which I had lent him. 'don't imagin that 
miss lindon' presenc will deter me from use it.' 

whi he address Mr holt in such a strain surpass my comprehension. 
Mr holt, however, evinc not the faintest symptom of resentment,--h 
had become, on a sudden, more like an automaton than a man. sydney 
continu to gaze at him as if he would have like hi glanc to 
penetr to hi inmost soul. 

'keep in front of me, if you please, Mr holt, and lead the way to thi 
mysteri apart in which you claim to have had such a remark 
experience.' 

Of me he ask in a whisper, 

'did you bring a revolver?' 

I wa startled. 

'A revolver?--th idea!--how absurd you are!' 

sydney said someth which wa so rude--and so uncal for!--that it 
wa worthi of papa in hi most violent moments. 

'i'd sooner be absurd than a fool in petticoats.' I wa so angri that I 
did not know what to say,--and befor I could say it he went on. 'keep 
your eye and ear well open; be surpris at noth you see or hear. 
stick close to me. and for good sake remain mistress of as mani of 
your sens as you conveni can.' 

I had not the least idea what wa the mean of it all. To me there 
seem noth to make such a pother about. and yet I wa consciou of 
a flutter of the heart as if there soon might be something, I knew 
sydney suffici well to be awar that he wa one of the last men in 
the world to make a fuss without reason,--and that he wa as littl 
like to suppos that there wa a reason when as a matter of fact 
there wa none. 

Mr holt led the way, as sydney desired--or, rather, commanded, to the 
door of the room which wa in front of the house. the door wa closed. 
sydney tap on a panel. all wa silence. He tap again. 

'anyon in there?' he demanded. 

As there wa still no answer, he tri the handle. the door wa locked. 

'the first sign of the presenc of a human be we have had,--door 
don't lock themselves. it' just possibl that there may have been 
someon or someth about the place, at some time or other, after all.' 

grasp the handl firmly, he shook it with all hi might,--a he had 
done with the door at the back. So flimsili wa the place construct 
that he made even the wall to tremble. 

'within there!--if anyon is in there!--if you don't open thi door, I 
shall.' 

there wa no response. 

So be it!--i'm go to pursu my wild career of defianc of 
establish law and order, and gain admiss in one way, if I can't in 
another.' 

put hi right shoulder against the door, he push with hi whole 
force. sydney is a big man, and veri strong, and the door wa weak. 
shortly, the lock yield befor the continu pressure, and the door 
flew open. sydney whistled. 

'so!--it begin to occur to me, Mr holt, that that stori of your may 
not have been such pure romanc as it seemed.' 

It wa plain enough that, at ani rate, thi room had been occupied, and 
that recently,--and, if hi tast in furnitur could be taken as a 
test, by an eccentr occup to boot. My own first impress wa 
that there wa someone, or something, live in it still,--an 
uncomfort odour greet our nostrils, which wa suggest of some 
evil-smel animal. sydney seem to share my thought. 

'A pretti perfume, on my word! let' shed a littl more light on the 
subject, and see what caus it. marjorie, stop where you are until I 
tell you.' 

I had notic nothing, from without, peculiar about the appear of 
the blind which screen the window, but it must have been made of some 
unusu thick material, for, within, the room wa strang dark. 
sydney entered, with the intent of draw up the blind, but he had 
scarc taken a coupl of step when he stopped. 

'what' that?' 

'it' it,' said Mr holt, in a voic which wa so unlik hi own that it 
wa scarc recognisable. 

'it?--what do you mean by it?' 

'the beetle!' 

judg from the sound of hi voic sydney wa all at onc in a state 
of odd excitement. 

'oh, is it!--then, if thi time I don't find out the how and the whi 
and the wherefor of that charm conjur trick, i'll give you leav 
to write me down an ass,--with a great, big a.' 

He rush farther into the room,--appar hi effort to lighten it 
did not meet with the immedi success which he desired. 

'what' the matter with thi confound blind? there' no cord! how do 
you pull it up?--what the--' 

In the middl of hi sentenc sydney ceas speaking. suddenli Mr holt, 
who wa stand by my side on the threshold of the door, wa seiz 
with such a fit of trembling, that, fear he wa go to fall, I 
caught him by the arm. A most extraordinari look wa on hi face. hi 
eye were distend to their fullest width, as if with horror at what 
they saw in front of them. great bead of perspir were on hi 
forehead. 

'it' coming!' he screamed. 

exactli what happen I do not know. but, as he spoke, I heard, 
proceed from the room, the sound of the buzz of wings. instantli 
it recal my experi of the night before,--a it did so I wa 
consciou of a most unpleas qualm. sydney swore a great oath, as if 
he were besid himself with rage. 

'if you won't go up, you shall come down.' 

I suppose, fail to find a cord, he seiz the blind from below, and 
drag it down,--it came, roller and all, clatter to the floor. the 
room wa all in light. I hurri in. sydney wa stand by the window, 
with a look of perplex upon hi face which, under ani other 
circumstances, would have been comical. He wa hold papa' revolv 
in hi hand, and wa glare round and round the room, as if wholli at 
a loss to understand how it wa he did not see what he wa look for. 

'marjorie!' he exclaimed. 'did you hear anything?' 

'of cours I did. It wa that which I heard last night,--which so 
frighten me.' 

'oh, wa it? then, by--' in hi excit he must have been complet 
oblivi of my presence, for he use the most terribl language, 'when 
I find it there'l be a small discussion. It can't have got out of the 
room,--i know the creature' here; I not onli heard it, I felt it brush 
against my face.--holt, come insid and shut that door.' 

Mr holt rais hi arms, as if he were exert himself to make a 
forward movement,--but he remain root to the spot on which he stood. 

'I can't!' he cried. 

'you can't.'--why?' 

'it won't let me.' 

'what won't let you?' 

'the beetle!' 

sydney move till he wa close in front of him. He survey him with 
eager eyes. I wa just at hi back. I heard him murmur,--poss to me. 

'bi george!--it' just as I thought!--th beggar' hypnotised!' 

then he said aloud, 

'can you see it now?' 

'yes.' 

'where?' 

'behind you.' 

As Mr holt spoke, I again heard, quit close to me, that buzz sound. 
sydney seem to hear it too,--it caus him to swing round so quickli 
that he all but whirl me off my feet. 

'I beg your pardon, marjorie, but thi is of the natur of an 
unparallel experience,--didn't you hear someth then?' 

'I did,--distinctly; it wa close to me,--within an inch or two of my 
face.' 

We stare about us, then back at each other,--ther wa noth els to 
be seen. sydney laughed, doubtfully. 

'it' uncommonli queer. I don't want to suggest that there are vision 
about, or I might suspect myself of soften of the brain. but--it' 
queer. there' a trick about it somewhere, I am convinced; and no doubt 
it' simpl enough when you know how it' done,--but the difficulti is 
to find that out.--do you think our friend over there is acting?' 

'he look to me as if he were ill.' 

'he doe look ill. He also look as if he were hypnotised. If he is, it 
must be by suggestion,--and that' what make me doubtful, becaus it 
will be the first plainli establish case of hypnot by suggest 
i'v encountered.--holt!' 

'yes.' 

'that,' said sydney in my ear, 'i the voic and that is the manner of 
a hypnotis man, but, on the other hand, a person under influenc 
gener respond onli to the hypnotist,--which is anoth featur 
about our peculiar friend which arous my suspicions.' then, aloud, 
'don't stand there like an idiot,--com inside.' 

again Mr holt made an appar futil effort to do as he wa bid. It 
wa pain to look at him,--h wa like a feeble, frightened, 
totter child, who would come on, but cannot. 

'I can't.' 

'no nonsense, my man! Do you think that thi is a perform in a 
booth, and that I am to be taken in by all the humbug of the 
profession mesmerist? Do as I tell you,--com into the room.' 

there wa a repetition, on Mr holt' part, of hi previou piti 
struggle; thi time it wa longer sustain than before,--but the 
result wa the same. 

'I can't!' he wailed. 

'then I say you can,--and shall! If I pick you up, and carri you, 
perhap you will not find yourself so helpless as you wish me to 
suppose.' 

sydney move forward to put hi threat into execution. As he did so, a 
strang alter took place in Mr holt' demeanour. 




chapter xxx 

the singular behaviour OF MR holt 


I wa stand in the middl of the room, sydney wa between the door 
and me; Mr holt wa in the hall, just outsid the doorway, in which he, 
so to speak, wa framed. As sydney advanc toward him he wa seiz 
with a kind of convulsion,--h had to lean against the side of the door 
to save himself from falling. sydney paused, and watched. the spasm 
went as suddenli as it came,--mr holt becam as motionless as he had 
just now been the other way. He stood in an attitud of febril 
expectancy,--hi chin raised, hi head thrown back, hi eye glanc 
upwards,--with the dread fix glare which had come into them ever 
sinc we had enter the house. He look to me as if hi everi faculti 
wa strain in the act of listening,--not a muscl in hi bodi seem 
to move; he wa as rigid as a figur carv in stone. present the 
rigid gave place to what, to an onlooker, seem causeless agitation. 

'I hear!' he exclaimed, in the most curiou voic I had ever heard. 'I 
come!' 

It wa as though he wa speak to someon who wa far away. turning, 
he walk down the passag to the front door. 

'hollo!' cri sydney. 'where are you off to?' 

We both of us hasten to see. He wa fumbl with the latch; befor 
we could reach him, the door wa open, and he wa through it. sydney, 
rush after him, caught him on the step and held him by the arm. 

'what' the mean of thi littl caper?--wher do you think you'r 
go now?' 

Mr holt did not condescend to turn and look at him. He said, in the 
same dreamy, faraway, unnatur tone of voice,--and he kept hi 
unwav gaze fix on what wa appar some distant object which 
wa visibl onli to himself. 

'I am go to him. He call me.' 

'who call you?' 

'the lord of the beetle.' 

whether sydney releas hi arm or not I cannot say. As he spoke, he 
seem to me to slip away from sydney' grasp. pass through the 
gateway, turn to the right, he commenc to retrac hi step in the 
direct we had come. sydney stare after him in unequivoc 
amazement. then he look at me. 

'well!--thi is a pretti fix!--now what' to be done?' 

'what' the matter with him?' I inquired. 'i he mad?' 

'there' method in hi mad if he is. he' in the same condit in 
which he wa that night I saw him come out of the apostle' window.' 
sydney ha a horribl habit of call paul 'the apostle'; I have 
spoken to him about it over and over again,--but my word have not made 
much impression. 'he ought to be followed,--h may be sail off to 
that mysteri friend of hi thi instant.--but, on the other hand, he 
mayn't, and it may be noth but a trick of our friend the conjurer' 
to get us away from thi eleg abod of his. he' done me twice 
already, I don't want to be done again,--and I distinctli do not want 
him to return and find me missing. he' quit capabl of take the 
hint, and remov himself into the ewigkeit,--when the clue to as 
pretti a mysteri as ever I came across will have vanished.' 

'I can stay,' I said. 

'you?--alone?' 

He eye me doubtingly,--evid not altogeth relish the 
proposition. 

'whi not? you might send the first person you meet,--policeman, cabman, 
or whoever it is--to keep me company. It seem a piti now that we 
dismiss that cab.' 

'yes, it doe seem a pity.' sydney wa bite hi lip. 'confound that 
fellow! how fast he moves.' 

Mr holt wa alreadi near the end of the road. 

'if you think it necessary, by all mean follow to see where he 
goes,--you are sure to meet somebodi whom you will be abl to send 
befor you have gone veri far.' 

'I suppos I shall.--you won't mind be left alone?' 

'whi should i?--i'm not a child.' 

Mr holt, reach the corner, turn it, and vanish out of sight. 
sydney gave an exclam of impatience. 

'if I don't make hast I shall lose him. i'll do as you 
suggest--dispatch the first individu I come across to hold watch and 
ward with you.' 

'that'll be all right.' 

He start off at a run,--shout to me as he went. 

'it won't be five minut befor somebodi comes!' 

I wave my hand to him. I watch him till he reach the end of the 
road. turning, he wave hi hand to me. then he vanished, as Mr holt 
had done. 

and I wa alone. 




chapter xxxi 

the terror BY day 


My first impulse, after sydney' disappearance, wa to laugh. whi 
should he display anxieti on my behalf mere becaus I wa to be the 
sole occup of an otherwis empti hous for a few minut more or 
less,--and in broad daylight too! To say the least, the anxieti seem 
unwarranted. 

I linger at the gate, for a moment or two, wonder what wa at the 
bottom of Mr holt' singular proceedings, and what sydney realli 
propos to gain by act as a spi upon hi wanderings. then I turn 
to re-ent the house. As I did so, anoth problem suggest itself to 
my mind,--what connection, of the slightest importance, could a man in 
paul lessingham' posit have with the eccentr be who had 
establish himself in such an unsatisfactori dwelling-place? Mr holt' 
stori I had onli dimli understood,--it struck me that it would requir 
a deal of understanding. It wa more like a farrago of nonsense, an 
outcom of delirium, than a plain statement of solid facts. To tell the 
truth, sydney had taken it more serious than I expected. He seem to 
see someth in it which I emphat did not. what wa doubl dutch 
to me, seem clear as print to him. So far as I could judge, he 
actual had the presumpt to imagin that paul--mi paul!--paul 
lessingham!--th great paul lessingham!--wa mix up in the veri 
mysteri adventur of poor, weak-minded, hyster Mr holt, in a 
manner which wa hardli to hi credit. 

Of course, ani idea of the kind wa pure and simpli balderdash. 
exactli what bee sydney had got in hi bonnet, I could not guess. but I 
did know paul. onli let me find myself face to face with the fantast 
author of Mr holt' weird tribulations, and I, a woman, single-handed, 
would do my best to show him that whoever play prank with paul 
lessingham trifl with edg tools. 

I had return to that histor front room which, accord to Mr 
holt, had been the scene of hi most disastr burglari entry. 
whoever had furnish it had had origin notion of the resourc of 
modern upholstery. there wa not a tabl in the place,--no chair or 
couch, noth to sit down upon except the bed. On the floor there wa 
a marvel carpet which wa appar of eastern manufacture. It wa 
so thick, and so pliant to the tread, that move over it wa like 
walk on thousand-year-old turf. It wa woven in gorgeou colours, 
and cover with-- 

when I discov what it actual wa cover with, I wa consciou of 
a disagre sens of surprise. 

It wa cover with beetles! 

all over it, with onli a few inch of space between each, were 
represent of some peculiar kind of beetle,--it wa the same 
beetle, over, and over, and over. the artist had woven hi undesir 
subject into the warp and woof of the materi with such cun skill 
that, as one continu to gaze, one began to wonder if by ani 
possibl the creatur could be alive. 

In spite of the soft of the texture, and the art--of a kind!--which 
had been display in the workmanship, I rapidli arriv at the 
conclus that it wa the most uncomfort carpet I had ever seen. I 
wag my finger at the repeat portray of the--to me!--unspeak 
insect. 

'if I had discov that you were there befor sydney went, I think it 
just possibl that I should have hesit befor I let him go.' 

then there came a revuls of feeling. I shook myself. 

'you ought to be asham of yourself, marjori lindon, to even think 
such nonsense. are you all nerv and morbid imaginings,--y who have 
pride yourself on be so strong-minded! A pretti sort you are to do 
battl for anyone.--why, they'r onli make-believes!' 

half involuntarily, I drew my foot over one of the creatures. Of 
course, it wa noth but imagination; but I seem to feel it squelch 
beneath my shoe. It wa disgusting. 

'come!' I cried. 'thi won't do! As sydney would phrase it,--am I go 
to make an idiot of myself?' 

I turn to the window,--look at my watch. 

'it' more than five minut ago sinc sydney went. that companion of 
mine ought to be alreadi on the way. i'll go and see if he is coming.' 

I went to the gate. there wa not a soul in sight. It wa with such a 
distinct sens of disappoint that I perceiv thi wa so, that I 
wa in two mind what to do. To remain where I was, looking, with 
gape eyes, for the policeman, or the cabman, or whoever it wa sydney 
wa dispatch to act as my temporari associate, wa tantamount to 
acknowledg myself a simpleton,--whil I wa consciou of a most 
unmistak reluct to return within the house. 

common sense, or what I took for common sense, however, triumphed, and, 
after loiter for anoth five minutes, I did go in again. 

thi time, ignoring, to the best of my ability, the beetl on the 
floor, I proceed to expend my curiosity--and occupi my thoughts--in 
an examin of the bed. It onli need a veri cursori examination, 
however, to show that the seem bed was, in reality, none at all,--or 
if it wa a bed after the manner of the eastern it certainli wa not 
after the fashion of the britons. there wa no framework,--noth to 
repres the bedstead. It wa simpli a heap of rug pile appar 
indiscrimin upon the floor. A huge mass of them there seem to 
be; of all sorts, and shapes, and sizes,--and materi too. 

the top one wa of white silk,--in quality, exquisite. It wa of huge 
size, yet, with a littl compression, one might almost have pass it 
through the proverbi wed ring. So far as space admit I spread 
it out in front of me. In the middl wa a picture,--wheth it wa 
embroid on the substanc or woven in it, I could not quit make 
out. nor, at first, could I gather what it wa the artist had intend 
to depict,--ther wa a brillianc about it which wa rather dazzling. 
By degrees, I realis that the lurid hue were meant for flames,--and, 
when one had got so far, one perceiv that they were by no mean badli 
imit either. then the mean of the thing dawn on me,--it wa a 
represent of a human sacrifice. In it way, as ghastli a piec of 
realism as one could see. 

On the right wa the majest seat figur of a goddess. her hand 
were cross upon her knees, and she wa nake from her waist upwards. 
I fanci it wa meant for isis. On her brow wa perch a 
gaily-apparel beetle--that ubiquit beetle!--form a bright spot 
of colour against her copperi skin,--it wa an exact reproduct of 
the creatur which were imag on the carpet. In front of the idol wa 
an enorm fieri furnace. In the veri heart of the flame wa an 
altar. On the altar wa a nake white woman be burn alive. there 
could be no doubt as to her be alive, for she wa secur by chain 
in such a fashion that she wa permit a certain amount of freedom, 
of which she wa avail herself to contort and twist her bodi into 
shape which were horribl suggest of the agoni which she wa 
enduring,--th artist, indeed, seem to have exhaust hi power in 
hi effort to convey a vivid impress of the pain which were 
torment her. 

'A pretti picture, on my word! A pleasant tast in art the garnitur 
of thi establish suggest! the person who like to live with thi 
kind of thing, especi as a cover to hi bed, must have hi own 
notion as to what constitut agreeabl surroundings.' 

As I continu stare at the thing, all at onc it seem as if the 
woman on the altar moved. It wa preposterous, but she appear to 
gather her limb together, and turn half over. 

'what can be the matter with me? Am I go mad? she can't be moving!' 

If she wasn't, then certainli someth was,--sh wa lift right into 
the air. An idea occur to me. I snatch the rug aside. 

the mysteri wa explained! 

A thin, yellow, wrinkl hand wa protrud from amidst the heap of 
rugs,--it wa it action which had caus the seem movement of the 
figur on the altar. I stared, confounded. the hand wa follow by an 
arm; the arm by a shoulder; the shoulder by a head,--and the most 
awful, hideous, wicked-look face I had ever pictur even in my most 
dread dreams. A pair of bale eye were glare up at mine. 

I understood the posit in a flash of startl amazement. 

sydney, in follow Mr holt, had start on a wild goos chase after 
all. I wa alon with the occup of that mysteri house,--th chief 
actor in Mr holt' astound tale. He had been hidden in the heap of 
rug all the while. 




book IV 

In pursuit 


the conclus of the matter is extract from the case-book of the 
hon. augustu champnell, confidenti agent. 




chapter xxxii 

A new client 


On the afternoon of friday, june 2, 18--, I wa enter in my 
case-book some memoranda have refer to the veri curiou matter of 
the duchess of datchet' deed-box. It wa about two o'clock. andrew 
came in and laid a card upon my desk. On it wa inscrib 'mr paul 
lessingham.' 

'show Mr lessingham in.' 

andrew show him in. I was, of course, familiar with Mr lessingham' 
appearance, but it wa the first time I had had with him ani person 
communication. He held out hi hand to me. 

'you are Mr champnell?' 

'I am.' 

'I believ that I have not had the honour of meet you before, Mr 
champnell, but with your father, the earl of glenlivet, I have the 
pleasur of some acquaintance.' 

I bowed. He look at me, fixedly, as if he were tri to make out 
what sort of man I was. 'you are veri young, Mr champnell.' 

'I have been told that an emin offend in that respect onc 
assert that youth is not of necess a crime.' 

'and you have chosen a singular profession,--on in which one hardli 
look for juvenility.' 

'you yourself, Mr lessingham, are not old. In a statesman one expect 
grey hairs.--i trust that I am suffici ancient to be abl to do 
you service.' 

He smiled. 

'I think it possible. I have heard of you more than once, Mr champnell, 
alway to your advantage. My friend, sir john seymour, wa tell me, 
onli the other day, that you have recent conduct for him some 
business, of a veri delic nature, with much skill and tact; and he 
warmli advis me, if ever I found myself in a predicament, to come to 
you. I find myself in a predica now.' 

again I bowed. 

'A predicament, I fancy, of an altogeth unparallel sort. I take it 
that anyth I may say to you will be as though it were said to a 
father confessor.' 

'you may rest assur of that.' 

'good.--then, to make the matter clear to you I must begin by tell 
you a story,--if I may trespass on your patienc to that extent. I will 
endeavour not to be more verbos than the occas requires.' 

I offer him a chair, place it in such a posit that the light 
from the window would have shone full upon hi face. with the calmest 
possibl air, as if unconsci of my design, he carri the chair to 
the other side of my desk, twist it right round befor he sat on 
it,--so that now the light wa at hi back and on my face. cross hi 
legs, clasp hi hand about hi knee, he sat in silenc for some 
moments, as if turn someth over in hi mind. He glanc round the 
room. 

'I suppose, Mr champnell, that some singular tale have been told in 
here.' 

'some veri singular tale indeed. I am never appal by singularity. 
It is my normal atmosphere.' 

'and yet I should be dispos to wager that you have never listen to 
so strang a stori as that which I am about to tell you now. So 
astonishing, indeed, is the chapter in my life which I am about to open 
out to you, that I have more than onc had to take myself to task, and 
fit the incid togeth with mathemat accuraci in order to 
assur myself of it perfect truth.' 

He paused. there wa about hi demeanour that suggest of reluct 
which I not uncommonli discov in individu who are about to take 
the skeleton from their cupboard and parad them befor my eyes. hi 
next remark seem to point to the fact that he perceiv what wa 
pass through my thoughts. 

'mi posit is not render easier by the circumst that I am not 
of a commun nature. I am not in sympathi with the spirit of the 
age which crave for person advertisement. I hold that the privat 
life even of a public man should be held inviolate. I resent, with 
peculiar bitterness, the attempt of pri eye to peer into matter 
which, as it seem to me, concern myself alone. you must, therefore, 
bear with me, Mr champnell, if I seem awkward in disclos to you 
certain incid in my career which I had hope would continu lock 
in the secret depositori of my own bosom, at ani rate till I wa 
carri to the grave. I am sure you will suffer me to stand excus if 
I frankli admit that it is onli an irresist chain of incid 
which ha constrain me to make of you a confidant.' 

'mi experi tell me, Mr lessingham, that no one ever doe come to 
me until they are compelled. In that respect I am regard as someth 
wors even than a medic man.' 

A wintri smile flit across hi features,--it wa clear that he 
regard me as a good deal wors than a medic man. present he began 
to tell me one of the most remark tale which even I had heard. As 
he proceed I understood how strong, and how natural, had been hi 
desir for reticence. On the mere score of credibl he must have 
greatli prefer to have kept hi own counsel. for my part I own, 
unreservedly, that I should have deem the tale incred had it been 
told me by tom, dick, or harry, instead of by paul lessingham. 




chapter xxxiii 

what came OF look through A lattic 


He began in accent which halt not a little. By degre hi voic 
grew firmer. word came from him with greater fluency. 

'I am not yet forty. So when I tell you that twenti year ago I wa a 
mere youth I am state what is a suffici obviou truth. It is 
twenti year ago sinc the event of which I am go to speak 
transpired. 

'I lost both my parent when I wa quit a lad, and by their death I 
wa left in a posit in which I was, to an unusu extent in one so 
young, my own master. I wa ever of a rambl turn of mind, and when, 
at the matur age of eighteen, I left school, I decid that I should 
learn more from travel than from sojourn at a university. so, sinc 
there wa no one to say me nay, instead of go either to oxford or 
cambridge, I went abroad. after a few month I found myself in 
egypt,--i wa down with fever at shepheard' hotel in cairo. I had 
caught it by drink pollut water dure an excurs with some 
bedouin to palmyra. 

'when the fever had left me I went out one night into the town in 
search of amusement. I went, unaccompanied, into the nativ quarter, 
not a wise thing to do, especi at night, but at eighteen one is not 
alway wise, and I wa weari of the monotoni of the sick-room, and 
eager for someth which had in it a spice of adventure, I found 
myself in a street which I have reason to believ is no longer 
existing. It had a french name, and wa call the rue de rabagas,--i 
saw the name on the corner as I turn into it, and it ha left an 
impress on the tablet of my memori which is never like to be 
obliterated. 

'it wa a narrow street, and, of course, a dirti one, ill-lit, and, 
apparently, at the moment of my appearance, deserted. I had gone, 
perhaps, half-way down it tortuou length, blunder more than onc 
into the kennel, wonder what fantast whim had brought me into such 
unsavouri quarters, and what would happen to me if, as seem extrem 
possible, I lost my way. On a sudden my ear were salut by sound 
which proceed from a hous which I wa passing,--sound of music and 
of singing. 

'I paused. I stood awhil to listen. 

'there wa an open window on my right, which wa screen by lattic 
blinds. from the room which wa behind these blind the sound were 
coming. someon wa singing, accompani by an instrument resembl a 
guitar,--sing uncommonli well.' 

Mr lessingham stopped. A stream of recollect seem to come flood 
over him. A dreami look came into hi eyes. 

'I rememb it all as clearli as if it were yesterday. how it all come 
back,--th dirti street, the evil smells, the imperfect light, the 
girl' voic fill all at onc the air. It wa a girl' voice,--full, 
and round, and sweet; an organ seldom met with, especi in such a 
place as that. she sang a littl chansonnette, which, just then, half 
europ wa humming,--it occur in an opera which they were act at 
one of the boulevard theatres,--"la p'tite voyageuse." the effect, 
come so unexpectedly, wa startling. I stood and heard her to an end. 

'inspir by I know not what impuls of curiosity, when the song wa 
finished, I move one of the lattic blind a littl aside, so as to 
enabl me to get a glimps of the singer. I found myself look into 
what seem to be a sort of cafe,--on of those place which are found 
all over the continent, in which women sing in order to attract custom. 
there wa a low platform at one end of the room, and on it were seat 
three women. one of them had evid just been accompani her own 
song,--sh still had an instrument of music in her hands, and wa 
strike a few idl notes. the other two had been act as audience. 
they were attir in the fantast apparel which the women who are 
found in such place gener wear. An old woman wa sit knit 
in a corner, whom I took to be the inevit patronne. with the 
except of these four the place wa empty. 

'they must have heard me touch the lattice, or seen it moving, for no 
sooner did I glanc within than the three pair of eye on the platform 
were rais and fix on mine. the old woman in the corner alon show 
no conscious of my neighbourhood. We eye one anoth in silenc 
for a second or two. then the girl with the harp,--th instrument she 
wa manipul prove to be fashion more like a harp than a 
guitar--cal out to me, 

'"entrez, monsieur!--soy le bienvenu!" 

'I wa a littl tired. rather curiou as to whereabout I was,--th 
place struck me, even at that first momentari glimpse, as hardli in the 
ordinari line of that kind of thing. and not unwil to listen to a 
repetit of the former song, or to anoth sung by the same singer. 

'"on condition," I replied, "that you sing me anoth song." 

'"ah, monsieur, with the greatest pleasur in the world I will sing you 
twenty." 

'she wa almost, if not quite, as good as her word. she entertain me 
with song after song. I may safe say that I have seldom if ever heard 
melodi more enchanting. all languag seem to be the same to her. she 
sang in french and italian, german and english,--in tongu with which 
I wa unfamiliar. It wa in these eastern harmoni that she wa most 
successful. they were indescrib weird and thrilling, and she 
deliv them with a verv and sweet which wa amazing. I sat at 
one of the littl tabl with which the room wa dotted, listen 
entranced. 

'time pass more rapidli than I supposed. while she sang I sip the 
liquor with which the old woman had suppli me. So enthral wa I by 
the display of the girl' astonish gift that I did not notic what 
it wa I wa drinking. look back I can onli surmis that it wa some 
poison concoct of the creature' own. that one small glass had on 
me the strangest effect. I wa still weak from the fever which I had 
onli just succeed in shake off, and that, no doubt, had someth 
to do with the result. but, as I continu to sit, I wa consciou that 
I wa sink into a letharg condition, against which I wa incap 
of struggling. 

'after a while the origin perform ceas her efforts, and, her 
companion take her place, she came and join me at the littl 
table. look at my watch I wa surpris to perceiv the late of 
the hour. I rose to leave. she caught me by the wrist. 

'"do not go," she said;--sh spoke english of a sort, and with the 
queerest accent. "all is well with you. rest awhile." 

'you will smile,--i should smile, perhaps, were I the listen instead 
of you, but it is the simpl truth that her touch had on me what I can 
onli describ as a magnet influence. As her finger close upon my 
wrist, I felt as powerless in her grasp as if she held me with band of 
steel. what seem an invit wa virtual a command. I had to stay 
whether I would or wouldn't. she call for more liquor, and at what 
again wa realli her command I drank of it. I do not think that after 
she touch my wrist I utter a word. she did all the talking. and, 
while she talked, she kept her eye fix on my face. those eye of 
hers! they were a devil's. I can posit affirm that they had on me 
a diabol effect. they rob me of my consciousness, of my power of 
volition, of my capac to think,--they made me as wax in her hands. 
My last recollect of that fatal night is of her sit in front of 
me, bend over the table, stroke my wrist with her extend 
fingers, stare at me with her aw eyes. after that, a curtain seem 
to descend. there come a period of oblivion.' 

Mr lessingham ceased. hi manner wa calm and self-contain enough; 
but, in spite of that I could see that the mere recollect of the 
thing which he told me move hi natur to it foundations. there wa 
eloqu in the drawn line about hi mouth, and in the strain 
express of hi eyes. 

So far hi tale wa suffici commonplace. place such as the one 
which he describ abound in the cairo of to-day; and mani are the 
englishmen who have enter them to their exceed bitter cost. with 
that keen intuit which ha done him yeoman' servic in the 
polit arena, Mr lessingham at onc perceiv the direct my 
thought were taking. 

'you have heard thi tale before?--no doubt. and often. the trap are 
many, and the fool and the unwari are not a few. the singular of my 
experi is still to come. you must forgiv me if I seem to stumbl 
in the telling. I am anxiou to present my case as baldly, and with as 
littl appear of exagger as possible. I say with as littl 
appearance, for some appear of exagger I fear is unavoidable. 
My case is so unique, and so out of the common run of our every-day 
experience, that the plainest possibl statement must smack of the 
sensational. 

'as, I fancy, you have guessed, when understand return to me, I 
found myself in an apart with which I wa unfamiliar. I wa lying, 
undressed, on a heap of rug in a corner of a low-pitch room which 
wa furnish in a fashion which, when I grasp the details, fill me 
with amazement. By my side knelt the woman of the songs. lean over, 
she woo my mouth with kisses. I cannot describ to you the sens of 
horror and of loath with which the contact of her lip oppress me. 
there wa about her someth so unnatural, so inhuman, that I believ 
even then I could have destroy her with as littl sens of moral 
turpitud as if she had been some noxiou insect. 

'"where am i?" I exclaimed. 

'"you are with the children of isis," she replied. what she meant I did 
not know, and do not to thi hour. "you are in the hand of the great 
goddess,--of the mother of men." 

'"how did I come here?" 

'"bi the love kind of the great mother." 

'I do not, of course, pretend to give you the exact text of her words, 
but they were to that effect. 

'half rais myself on the heap of rugs, I gaze about me,--and wa 
astound at what I saw. 

'the place in which I was, though the revers of lofty, wa of 
consider size,--i could not conceiv whereabout it could be. the 
wall and roof were of bare stone,--a though the whole had been hew 
out of the solid rock. It seem to be some sort of temple, and wa 
redol with the most extraordinari odour. An altar stood about the 
centre, fashion out of a singl block of stone. On it a fire burn 
with a faint blue flame,--th fume which rose from it were no doubt 
chiefli respons for the prevail perfumes. behind it wa a huge 
bronz figure, more than life size. It wa in a sit posture, and 
repres a woman. although it resembl no portray of her I have 
seen either befor or since, I came afterward to understand that it 
wa meant for isis. On the idol' brow wa pois a beetle. that the 
creatur wa aliv seem clear, for, as I look at it, it open and 
shut it wings. 

'if the one on the forehead of the goddess wa the onli live beetl 
which the place contained, it wa not the onli representation. It wa 
model in the solid stone of the roof, and depict in flame 
colour on hang which here and there were hung against the walls. 
wherev the eye turn it rest on a scarab. the effect wa 
bewildering. It wa as though one saw thing through the distort 
glamour of a nightmare. I ask myself if I were not still dreaming; if 
my appear of conscious were not after all a mere delusion; if I 
had realli regain my senses. 

'and, here, Mr champnell, I wish to point out, and to emphasis the 
fact, that I am not prepar to posit affirm what portion of my 
adventur in that extraordinary, and horribl place, wa actuality, 
and what the product of a feverish imagination. had I been persuad 
that all I thought I saw, I realli did see, I should have open my 
lip long ago, let the consequ to myself have been what they 
might. but there is the crux. the happen were of such an incred 
character, and my condit wa such an abnorm one,--i wa never 
realli myself from the first moment to the last--that I have hesitated, 
and still do hesitate, to assert where, precisely, fiction end and 
fact began. 

'with some misti notion of test my actual condit I endeavour to 
get off the heap of rug on which I reclined. As I did so the woman at 
my side laid her hand against my chest, lightly. but, had her gentl 
pressur been the equival of a ton of iron, it could not have been 
more effectual. I collapsed, sank back upon the rugs, and lay there, 
pant for breath, wonder if I had cross the border line which 
divid mad from sanity. 

'"let me get up!--let me go!" I gasped. 

'"nay," she murmured, "stay with me yet awhile, O my beloved." 

'and again she kiss me.' 

onc more Mr lessingham paused. An involuntari shudder went all over 
him. In spite of the evid great effort which he wa make to 
retain hi self-control hi featur were contort by an anguish 
spasm. for some second he seem at a loss to find word to enabl him 
to continue. 

when he did go on, hi voic wa harsh and strained. 

'I am altogeth incap of even hint to you the nauseou natur 
of that woman' kisses. they fill me with an indescrib repulsion. 
I look back at them with a feel of physical, mental, and moral 
horror, across an interv of twenti years. the most dread part of 
it wa that I wa wholli incap of offer even the faintest 
resist to her caresses. I lay there like a log. she did with me as 
she would, and in dumb agoni I endured.' 

He took hi handkerchief from hi pocket, and, although the day wa 
cool, with it he wipe the perspir from hi brow. 

'to dwell in detail on what occur dure my involuntari sojourn in 
that fear place is beyond my power. I cannot even ventur to attempt 
it. the attempt, were it made, would be futile, and, to me, pain 
beyond measure. I seem to have seen all that happen as in a glass 
darkly,--with about it all an element of unreality. As I have alreadi 
remarked, the thing which reveal themselves, dimly, to my 
perception, seem too bizarre, too hideous, to be true. 

'it wa onli afterwards, when I wa in a posit to compar dates, 
that I wa enabl to determin what had been the length of my 
imprisonment. It appear that I wa in that horribl den more than two 
months,--two unspeak months. and the whole time there were come 
and goings, a phantasmagor array of eeri figur continu pass 
to and fro befor my hazi eyes. what I judg to have been religi 
servic took place; in which the altar, the bronz image, and the 
beetl on it brow, figur largely. not onli were they conduct with a 
bewild confus of mysteri rites, but, if my memori is in the 
least degre trustworthy, they were orgi of nameless horrors. I seem 
to have seen thing take place at them at the mere thought of which the 
brain reel and trembles. 

'inde it is in connect with the cult of the obscen deiti to whom 
these wretch creatur paid their scandal vow that my most aw 
memori seem to have been associated. It may have been--i hope it was, 
a mirag born of my half deliri state, but it seem to me that they 
offer human sacrifices.' 

when Mr lessingham said this, I prick up my ears. for reason of my 
own, which will immedi transpire, I had been wonder if he would 
make ani refer to a human sacrifice. He note my display of 
interest,--but misapprehend the cause. 

'I see you start, I do not wonder. but I repeat that unless I wa the 
victim of some extraordinari speci of doubl sight--in which case the 
whole busi would resolv itself into the fabric of a dream, and I 
should inde thank god!--i saw, on more than one occasion, a human 
sacrific offer on that stone altar, presum to the grim imag 
which look down on it. and, unless I err, in each case the 
sacrifici object wa a woman, strip to the skin, as white as you 
or i,--and befor they burn her they subject her to everi varieti 
of outrag of which even the mind of demon could conceive. more than 
onc sinc then I have seem to hear the shriek of the victim 
ring through the air, mingl with the triumphant cri of her 
frenzi murderers, and the music of their harps. 

'it wa the cumul horror of such a scene which gave me the 
strength, or the courage, or the madness, I know not which it was, to 
burst the bond which bound me, and which, even in the bursting, made 
of me, even to thi hour, a haunt man. 

'there had been a sacrifice,--unless, as I have repeatedli observed, 
the whole wa noth but a dream. A woman--a young and love 
englishwoman, if I could believ the evid of my own eyes, had been 
outraged, and burnt alive, while I lay there helpless, look on. the 
busi wa concluded. the ash of the victim had been consum by 
the participants. the worshipp had departed. I wa left alon with 
the woman of the songs, who appar act as the guardian of that 
wors than slaughterhouse. she was, as usual after such an orgie, 
rather a devil than a human being, drunk with an insens frenzy, 
deliri with inhuman longings. As she approach to offer to me her 
loath caresses, I wa on a sudden consciou of someth which I had 
not felt befor when in her company. It wa as though someth had 
slip away from me,--som weight which had oppress me, some bond by 
which I had been bound. I wa aroused, all at once, to a sens of 
freedom; to a knowledg that the blood which cours through my vein 
wa after all my own, that I wa master of my own honour. 

'I can onli suppos that through all those week she had kept me there 
in a state of mesmer stupor. that, take advantag of the weak 
which the fever had left behind, by the exercis of her diabol 
arts, she had not allow me to pass out of a condit of hypnot 
trance. now, for some reason, the cord wa loosed. possibl her 
absorpt in her religi duti had caus her to forget to tighten 
it. anyhow, as she approach me, she approach a man, and one who, 
for the first time for mani a day, wa hi own man. she herself seem 
wholli unconsci of anyth of the kind. As she drew nearer to me, 
and nearer, she appear to be entir oblivi of the fact that I 
wa anyth but the fibreless, emascul creatur which, up to that 
moment, she had made of me. 

'but she knew it when she touch me,--when she stoop to press her 
lip to mine. At that instant the accumul rage which had been 
smoulder in my breast through all those leaden tortur hours, 
sprang into flame. leap off my couch of rugs, I flung my hand about 
her throat,--and then she knew I wa awake. then she strove to tighten 
the cord which she had suffer to becom unduli loose. her bale 
eye were fix on mine. I knew that she wa put out her utmost 
forc to trick me of my manhood. but I fought with her like one 
possessed, and I conquered--in a fashion. I compress her throat with 
my two hand as with an iron vice. I knew that I wa struggl for 
more than life, that the odd were all against me, that I wa stake 
my all upon the cast of a die,--i stuck at noth which could make 
me victor. 

'tighter and tighter my pressur grew,--i did not stay to think if I 
wa kill her--til on a sudden--' 

Mr lessingham stopped. He stare with fixed, glassi eyes, as if the 
whole wa be re-enact in front of him. hi voic faltered. I 
thought he would break down. but, with an effort, he continued. 

'on a sudden, I felt her slip from between my fingers. without the 
slightest warning, in an instant she had vanished, and where, not a 
moment before, she herself had been, I found myself confront a 
monstrou beetle,--a huge, writh creation of some wild nightmare. 

'at first the creatur stood as high as I did. but, as I stare at it, 
in stupefi amazement,--a you may easili imagine,--th thing dwindl 
while I gazed. I did not stop to see how far the process of dwindl 
continued,--a stark rave madman for the nonce, I fled as if all the 
fiend in hell were at my heels.' 




chapter xxxiv 

after twenti year 


'how I reach the open air I cannot tell you,--i do not know. I have a 
confus recollect of rush through vault passages, through 
endless corridors, of trampl over peopl who tri to arrest my 
passage,--and the rest is blank. 

'when I again came to myself I wa lie in the hous of an american 
missionari name clements. I had been found, at earli dawn, stark 
naked, in a cairo street, and pick up for dead. judg from 
appear I must have wander for miles, all through the night. 
whenc I had come, or whither I wa going, none could tell,--i could 
not tell myself. for week I hover between life and death. the 
kind of Mr and mr clement wa not to be measur by words. I wa 
brought to their hous a penniless, helpless, batter stranger, and 
they gave me all they had to offer, without money and without 
price,--with no expect of an earthli reward. let no one pretend 
that there is no christian chariti under the sun. the debt I owe that 
man and woman I wa never abl to repay. befor I wa properli myself 
again, and in a posit to offer some adequ testimoni of the 
gratitud I felt, mr clement wa dead, drown dure an excurs on 
the nile, and her husband had depart on a missionari expedit into 
central africa, from which he never returned. 

'although, in a measure, my physic health returned, for month after 
I had left the roof of my hospit hosts, I wa in a state of 
semi-imbecility. I suffer from a speci of aphasia. for day 
togeth I wa speechless, and could rememb nothing,--not even my own 
name. and, when that stage had passed, and I began to move more freeli 
among my fellows, for year I wa but a wreck of my former self. I wa 
visited, at all hour of the day and night, by frightful--i know not 
whether to call them visions, they were real enough to me, but sinc 
they were visibl to no one but myself, perhap that is the word which 
best describ them. their presenc invari plung me into a state 
of abject terror, against which I wa unabl to even make a show of 
fighting. To such an extent did they embitt my existence, that I 
voluntarili place myself under the treatment of an expert in mental 
pathology. for a consider period of time I wa under hi constant 
supervision, but the visit were as inexplic to him as they 
were to me. 

'bi degrees, however, they becam rarer and rarer, until at last I 
flatter myself that I had onc more becom as other men. after an 
interval, to make sure, I devot myself to politics. thenceforward I 
have lived, as they phrase it, in the public eye. privat life, in ani 
peculiar sens of the term, I have had none.' 

Mr lessingham ceased. hi tale wa not uninteresting, and, to say the 
least of it, wa curious. but I still wa at a loss to understand what 
it had to do with me, or what wa the purport of hi presenc in my 
room. sinc he remain silent, as if the matter, so far as he wa 
concerned, wa at an end, I told him so. 

'I presume, Mr lessingham, that all thi is but a prelud to the play. 
At present I do not see where it is that I come in.' 

still for some second he wa silent. when he spoke hi voic wa grave 
and sombre, as if he were burden by a weight of woe. 

'unfortunately, as you put it, all thi ha been but a prelud to the 
play. were it not so I should not now stand in such press want of 
the servic of a confidenti agent,--that is, of an experienc man 
of the world, who ha been endow by natur with phenomen percept 
faculties, and in whose capac and honour I can place the completest 
confidence.' 

I smiled,--th compliment wa a point one. 

'I hope your estim of me is not too high.' 

'I hope not,--for my sake, as well as for your own. I have heard great 
thing of you. If ever man stood in need of all that human skill and 
acumen can do for him, I certainli am he.' 

hi word arous my curiosity. I wa consciou of feel more 
interest than heretofore. 

'I will do my best for you. man can do no more. onli give my best a 
trial.' 

'I will. At once.' 

He look at me long and earnestly. then, lean forward, he said, 
lower hi voic perhap unconsciously, 

'the fact is, Mr champnell, that quit recent event have happen 
which threaten to bridg the chasm of twenti years, and to place me 
face to face with that plagu spot of the past. At thi moment I stand 
in immin peril of becom again the wretch thing I wa when I 
fled from that den of all the devils. It is to guard me against thi 
that I have come to you. I want you to unravel the tangl thread which 
threaten to drag me to my doom,--and, when unravel to sunder 
it--for ever, if god wills!--in twain.' 

'explain.' 

To be frank, for the moment I thought him mad. He went on. 

'three week ago, when I return late one night from a sit in the 
hous of commons, I found, on my studi table, a sheet of paper on which 
there wa a representation--marvel like!--of the creatur into 
which, as it seem to me, the woman of the song wa transform as I 
clutch her throat between my hands. the mere sight of it brought back 
one of those visit of which I have told you, and which I thought 
I had done with for ever,--i wa convuls by an agoni of fear, thrown 
into a state approxim to a paralysi both of mind and body.' 

'but why?' 

'I cannot tell you. I onli know that I have never dare to allow my 
thought to recur to that last dread scene, lest the mere recurr 
should drive me mad.' 

'what wa thi you found upon your studi table,--mer a drawing?' 

'it wa a representation, produc by what process I cannot say, which 
wa so wonderfully, so diabolically, like the original, that for a 
moment I thought the thing itself wa on my table.' 

'who put it there?' 

'that is precis what I wish you to find out,--what I wish you to 
make it your instant busi to ascertain. I have found the thing, 
under similar circumstances, on three separ occasions, on my studi 
table,--and each time it ha had on me the same hideou effect.' 

'each time after you have return from a late sit in the hous of 
commons?' 

'exactly.' 

'where are these--what shall I call them--delineations?' 

'that, again, I cannot tell you.' 

'what do you mean?' 

'what I say. each time, when I recovered, the thing had vanished.' 

'sheet of paper and all?' 

'apparently,--though on that point I could not be positive. you will 
understand that my studi tabl is apt to be litter with sheet of 
paper, and I could not absolut determin that the thing had not 
stare at me from one of those. the delin itself, to use your 
word, certainli had vanished.' 

I began to suspect that thi wa a case rather for a doctor than for a 
man of my profession. and hint as much. 

'don't you think it is possible, Mr lessingham, that you have been 
overwork yourself--that you have been drive your brain too hard, 
and that you have been the victim of an optic delusion?' 

'I thought so myself; I may say that I almost hope so. but wait till I 
have finished. you will find that there is no loophol in that 
direction.' 

He appear to be recal event in their due order. hi manner wa 
studious cold,--a if he were endeavouring, despit the strang 
of hi story, to impress me with the liter accuraci of each syllabl 
he uttered. 

'the night befor last, on return home, I found in my studi a 
stranger.' 

'A stranger?' 

'yes.--in other words, a burglar.' 

'A burglar?--i see.--go on.' 

He had paused. hi demeanour wa becom odder and odder. 

'on my entri he wa engag in forc an entri into my bureau. I need 
hardli say that I advanc to seiz him. but--i could not.' 

'you could not?--how do you mean you could not?' 

'I mean simpli what I say. you must understand that thi wa no 
ordinari felon. Of what nation he wa I cannot tell you. He onli 
utter two words, and they were certainli in english, but apart from 
that he wa dumb. He wore no cover on hi head or feet. indeed, hi 
onli garment wa a long dark flow cloak which, as it flutter about 
him, reveal that hi limb were bare.' 

'an uniqu costum for a burglar.' 

'the instant I saw him I realis that he wa in some way connect 
with that adventur in the rue de rabagas. what he said and did, prove 
it to the hilt.' 

'what did he say and do?' 

'a I approach to effect hi capture, he pronounc aloud two word 
which recal that aw scene the recollect of which alway 
linger in my brain, and of which I never dare to permit myself to 
think. their veri utter threw me into a sort of convulsion.' 

'what were the words?' 

Mr lessingham open hi mouth,--and shut it. A mark chang took 
place in the express of hi countenance. hi eye becam fix and 
staring,--resembl the glassi orb of the somnambulist. for a moment 
I fear that he wa go to give me an object lesson in the 
'visitations' of which I had heard so much. I rose, with a view of 
offer him assistance. He motion me back. 

'thank you.--it will pass away.' 

hi voic wa dri and husky,--unlik hi usual silvern tones. after an 
uncomfort interv he manag to continue. 

'you see for yourself, Mr champnell, what a miser weakling, when 
thi subject is broached, I still remain. I cannot utter the word the 
stranger uttered, I cannot even write them down. for some inscrut 
reason they have on me an effect similar to that which spell and 
incant had on peopl in tale of witchcraft.' 

'I suppose, Mr lessingham, that there is no doubt that thi mysteri 
stranger wa not himself an optic delusion?' 

'scarcely. there is the evid of my servant to prove the contrary.' 

'did your servant see him?' 

'some of them,--yes. then there is the evid of the bureau. the 
fellow had smash the top right in two. when I came to examin the 
content I learn that a packet of letter wa missing. they were 
letter which I had receiv from miss lindon, a ladi whom I hope to 
make my wife. this, also, I state to you in confidence.' 

'what use would he be like to make of them?' 

'if matter stand as I fear they do, he might make a veri seriou 
misus of them. If the object of these wretches, after all these years, 
is a wild revenge, they would be capable, have discov what she is 
to me, of work miss lindon a fatal mischief,--or, at the veri least, 
of poison her mind.' 

'I see.--how did the thief escape,--did he, like the delineation, 
vanish into air?' 

'he escap by the much more prosaic method of dash through the 
drawing-room window, and clamber down from the verandah into the 
street, where he ran right into someone' arms.' 

'into whose arms,--a constable's?' 

'no; into Mr atherton's,--sydney atherton's.' 

'the inventor?' 

'the same.--do you know him?' 

'I do. sydney atherton and I are friend of a good mani years' 
standing.--but atherton must have seen where he came from;--and, 
anyhow, if he wa in the state of undress which you have described, whi 
didn't he stop him?' 

'mr atherton' reason were hi own. He did not stop him, and, so far 
as I can learn, he did not attempt to stop him. instead, he knock at 
my hall door to inform me that he had seen a man climb out of my 
window.' 

'I happen to know that, at certain seasons, atherton is a queer 
fish,--but that sound veri queer indeed.' 

'the truth is, Mr champnell, that, if it were not for Mr atherton, I 
doubt if I should have troubl you even now. the accid of hi be 
an acquaint of your make my task easier.' 

He drew hi chair closer to me with an air of brisk which had been 
foreign to him before. for some reason, which I wa unabl to fathom, 
the introduct of atherton' name seem to have enliven him. 
however, I wa not long to remain in darkness. In half a dozen 
sentenc he threw more light on the real caus of hi visit to me than 
he had done in all that had gone before. hi bearing, too, wa more 
businesslik and to the point. for the first time I had some 
glimmer of the politician,--alert, keen, eager,--a he is known to 
all the world. 

'mr atherton, like myself, ha been a postul for miss lindon' hand. 
becaus I have succeed where he ha failed, he ha chosen to be 
angry. It seem that he ha had dealings, either with my visitor of 
tuesday night, or with some other hi acquaintance, and he propos to 
use what he ha glean from him to the disadvantag of my character. I 
have just come from Mr atherton. from hint he drop I conclud that, 
probabl dure the last few hours, he ha had an interview with 
someon who wa connect in some way with that lurid patch in my 
career; that thi person made so-cal revelations, which were noth 
but a seri of monstrou lies; and these so-cal revel Mr 
atherton ha threatened, in so mani words, to place befor miss lindon. 
that is an eventu which I wish to avoid. My own convict is that 
there is at thi moment in london an emissari from that den in the 
whilom rue de rabagas--for all I know it may be the woman of the song 
herself. whether the sole purport of thi individual' presenc is to 
do me injury, I am, as yet, in no posit to say, but that it is 
propos to work me mischief, at ani rate, by the way, is plain. I 
believ that Mr atherton know more about thi person' individu 
and whereabout than he ha been willing, so far, to admit. I want you, 
therefore, to ascertain these thing on my behalf; to find out what, 
and where, thi person is, to drag her!--or him;--out into the light of 
day. In short, I want you to effectu protect me from the terror 
which threaten onc more to overwhelm my mental and my physic 
powers,--which bid fair to destroy my intellect, my career, my life, 
my all.' 

'what reason have you for suspect that Mr atherton ha seen thi 
individu of whom you speak,--ha he told you so?' 

'practically,--yes.' 

'I know atherton well. In hi not infrequ moment of excit he 
is apt to use strong language, but it goe no further. I believ him to 
be the last person in the world to do anyon an intent injustice, 
under ani circumst whatever. If I go to him, arm with 
credenti from you, when he understand the real graviti of the 
situation,--which it will be my busi to make him do, I believ 
that, spontaneously, of hi own accord, he will tell me as much about 
thi mysteri individu as he know himself.' 

'then go to him at once.' 

'good. I will. the result I will commun to you.' 

I rose from my seat. As I did so, someon rush into the outer offic 
with a din and a clatter. andrews' voice, and another, becam 
distinctli audible,--andrews' appar rais in vigor 
expostulation. raised, seemingly, in vain, for present the door of my 
own particular sanctum wa thrown open with a crash, and Mr sydney 
atherton himself came dash in,--evid conspicu under the 
influenc of one of those not infrequ 'moment of excitement' of 
which I had just been speaking. 




chapter xxxv 

A bringer OF tide 


atherton did not wait to see who might or might not be present, but, 
without even paus to take breath, he broke into full cri on the 
instant,--a is occasion hi wont. 

'champnell!--thank good i'v found you in!--i want you!--at 
once!--don't stop to talk, but stick your hat on, and put your best 
foot forward,--i'l tell you all about it in the cab.' 

I endeavour to call hi attent to Mr lessingham' presence,--but 
without success. 

'mi dear fellow--' 

when I had got as far as that he cut me short. 

'don't "dear fellow" me!--non of your jabber! and none of your excus 
either! I don't care if you'v got an engag with the queen, you'll 
have to chuck it. where' that dash hat of yours,--or are you go 
without it? don't I tell you that everi second cut to wast may mean 
the differ between life and death?--do you want me to drag you down 
to the cab by the hair of your head?' 

'I will tri not to constrain you to quit so drastic a resource,--and I 
wa come to you at onc in ani case. I onli want to call your 
attent to the fact that I am not alone.--her is Mr lessingham.' 

In hi harum-scarum hast Mr lessingham had gone unnoticed. now that 
hi observ wa particularli direct to him, atherton started, 
turned, and glare at my latest client in a fashion which wa scarc 
flattering. 

'oh!--it' you, is it?--what the deuc are you do here?' 

befor lessingham could repli to thi most unceremoni query, 
atherton, rush forward, grip him by the arm. 

'have you seen her?' 

lessingham, not unnatur nonpluss by the other' curiou conduct, 
stare at him in unmistak amazement. 

'have I seen whom?' 

'marjori lindon!' 

'marjori lindon?' 

lessingham paused. He wa evid ask himself what the inquiri 
meant. 

'I have not seen miss lindon sinc last night. whi do you ask?' 

'then heaven help us!--a i'm a live man I believ he, she, or it ha 
got her!' 

hi word were incomprehens enough to stand in copiou need of 
explanation,--a Mr lessingham plainli thought. 

'what is it that you mean, sir?' 

'what I say,--i believ that that orient friend of your ha got her 
in her clutches,--if it is a "her;" good alon know what the 
infern conjurer' real sex may be.' 

'atherton!--explain yourself!' 

On a sudden lessingham' tone rang out like a trumpet call. 

'if damag come to her I shall be fit to cut my throat,--and yours!' 

Mr lessingham' next proceed surpris me,--i imagin it surpris 
atherton still more. spring at sydney like a tiger, he caught him by 
the throat. 

'you--you hound! Of what wretch folli have you been guilty? If so 
much as a hair of her head is injur you shall repay it me ten 
thousandfold!--y mischief-making, intermeddling, jealou fool!' 

He shook sydney as if he had been a rat,--then flung him from him 
headlong on to the floor. It remind me of noth so much as 
othello' treatment of iago. never had I seen a man so transform by 
rage. lessingham seem to have posit increas in stature. As he 
stood glower down at the prostrat sydney, he might have stood for a 
materialist concept of human retribution. 

sydney, I take it, wa rather surpris than hurt. for a moment or two 
he lay quit still. then, lift hi head, he look up hi assailant. 
then, rais himself to hi feet, he shook himself,--a if with a view 
of learn if all hi bone were whole. put hi hand up to hi 
neck, he rub it, gently. and he grinned. 

'bi god, lessingham, there' more in you than I thought. after all, you 
are a man. there' some hold power in those wrist of 
yours,--they'v nearli broken my neck. when thi busi is finished, 
I should like to put on the glove with you, and fight it out. you'r 
clean wast upon politics,--damn it, man, give me your hand!' 

Mr lessingham did not give him hi hand. atherton took it,--and gave it 
a hearti shake with both of his. 

If the first paroxysm of hi passion had passed, lessingham wa still 
suffici stern. 

'be so good as not to trifle, Mr atherton. If what you say is correct, 
and the wretch to whom you allud realli ha miss lindon at her mercy, 
then the woman I love--and whom you also pretend to love!--stand in 
immin peril not onli of a ghastli death, but of what is infinit 
wors than death.' 

'the deuc she does!' atherton wheel round toward me. 'champnell, 
haven't you got that dash hat of your yet? don't stand there like a 
tailor' dummy, keep me on tenter-hooks,--mov yourself! i'll tell 
you all about it in the cab.--and, lessingham, if you'll come with us 
i'll tell you too.' 




chapter xxxvi 

what the tide were 


three in a hansom cab is not, under all circumstances, the most 
comfort method of conveyance,--when one of the trio happen to be 
sydney atherton in one of hi 'moment of excitement' it is distinctli 
the opposite; as, on that occasion, Mr lessingham and I both quickli 
found. sometim he sat on my knees, sometim on lessingham's, and 
frequently, when he unexpectedli stood up, and all but precipit 
himself on to the horse' back, on nobody's. In the eager of hi 
gesticulations, first he knock off my hat, then he knock off 
lessingham's, then hi own, then all three together,--once, hi own hat 
roll into the mud, he sprang into the road, without previous go 
through the empti form of advis the driver of hi intention, to pick 
it up. when he turn to speak to lessingham, he thrust hi elbow into 
my eye; and when he turn to speak to me, he thrust it into 
lessingham's. never, for one solitari instant, wa he at rest, or 
either of us at ease. the wonder is that the gymnast in which he 
incessantli indulg did not suffici attract public notic to 
induc a policeman to put at least a momentari period to our progress. 
had speed not been of primari import I should have insist on the 
transfer of the expedit to the somewhat wider limit of a 
four-wheeler. 

hi elucid of the caus of hi agit wa appar more 
comprehens to lessingham than it wa to me. I had to piec thi and 
that togeth under consider difficulties. By degre I did arriv 
at someth like a clear notion of what had actual taken place. 

He commenc by address lessingham,--and thrust hi elbow into my 
eye. 

'did marjori tell you about the fellow she found in the street?' Up 
went hi arm to forc the trap-door open overhead,--and off went my 
hat. 'now then, william henry!--let her go!--if you kill the hors i'll 
buy you another!' 

We were alreadi go much faster than, legally, we ought to have 
done,--but that, seemingli to him wa not a matter of the slightest 
consequence. lessingham repli to hi inquiry. 

'she did not.' 

'you know the fellow I saw come out of your drawing-room window?' 

'yes.' 

'well, marjori found him the morn after in front of her 
breakfast-room window--in the middl of the street. seem he had been 
wander about all night, unclothed,--in the rain and the mud, and all 
the rest of it,--in a condit of hypnot trance.' 

'who is the----gentleman you are allud to?' 

'say hi name' holt, robert holt.' 

'holt?--i he an englishman?' 

'veri much so,--citi quill-driv out of a shop,--stoni broke 
absolutely! got the chuck from the casual ward,--wouldn't let him 
in,--hous full, and that sort of thing,--poor devil! pretti pass you 
politician bring men to!' 

'are you sure?' 

'of what?' 

'are you sure that thi man, robert holt, is the same person whom, as 
you put it, you saw come out of my drawing-room window?' 

'sure!--of cours i'm sure!--think I didn't recognis him?--besides, 
there wa the man' own tale,--own to it himself,--besid all the 
rest, which sent one rush fulham way.' 

'you must remember, Mr atherton, that I am wholli in the dark as to 
what ha happened. what ha the man, holt, to do with the errand on 
which we are bound?' 

'am I not come to it? If you would let me tell the tale in my own way 
I should get there in less than no time, but you will keep on cut 
in,--how the deuc do you suppos champnel is to make head or tail of 
the busi if you will persist in interrupting?--marjori took the 
beggar in,--h told hi tale to her,--sh sent for me--that wa just 
now; caught me on the step after I had been lunch with dora 
grayling. holt re-dish hi yarn--i smelt a rat--saw that a connect 
possibl exist between the thief who'd been play confound 
conjur trick off on to me and thi interest parti down fulham 
way--' 

'what parti down fulham way?' 

'thi friend of holt's--am I not tell you? there you are, you 
see,--won't let me finish! when holt slip through the window--which 
is the most sensibl thing he seem to have done; if i'd been in hi 
shoe i'd have slip through forti windows!--duski colour charmer 
caught him on the hop,--doctor him--sent him out to commit burglari 
by deputy. I said to holt, "show us thi agreeabl littl crib, young 
man." holt wa game--then marjori chip in--sh want to go and see 
it too. I said, "you'll be sorri if you do,"--that settl it! after 
that she'd have gone if she'd died,--i never did have a persuas way 
with women. So off we toddled, marjorie, holt, and I, in a 
growler,--spot the crib in less than no time,--invit ourselv in 
by the kitchen window--hous seem empty. present holt becam 
hypnotis befor my eyes,--th best establish case of hypnot by 
suggest I ever yet encountered--start off on a pilgrimag of one. 
like an idiot I followed, leav marjori to wait for me--' 

'alone?' 

'alone!--am I not tell you?--great scott, lessingham, in the hous 
of common they must be hazi to think you smart! I said, "i'll send the 
first sane soul I meet to keep you company." As luck would have it, I 
never met one,--onli kids, and a baker, who wouldn't leav hi cart, or 
take it with him either. i'd cover pretti nearli two mile befor I 
came across a peeler,--and when I did the man wa cracked--and he 
thought me mad, or drunk, or both. By the time i'd got myself within 
nod distanc of be run in for obstruct the polic in the 
execut of their duty, without induc him to move a singl one of 
hi twenty-four-inch feet, holt wa out of sight. so, sinc all my 
pain in hi direct were clean thrown away, there wa noth left 
for me but to scurri back to marjorie,--so I scurried, and I found the 
hous empty, no one there, and marjori gone.' 

'but, I don't quit follow--' 

atherton impetu declin to allow Mr lessingham to conclude. 

'of cours you don't quit follow, and you'll follow still less if you 
will keep get in front. I went upstair and downstairs, insid and 
out--shout myself hoars as a crow--noth wa to be seen of 
marjorie,--or heard; until, as I wa come down the stair for about 
the five-and-fiftieth time, I step on someth hard which wa lie 
in the passage. I pick it up,--it wa a ring; thi ring. it shape is 
not just what it was,--i'm not as light as gossamer, especi when I 
come jump downstair six at a time,--but what' left of it is here.' 

sydney held someth in front of him. Mr lessingham wriggl to one 
side to enabl him to see. then he made a snatch at it. 

'it' mine!' 

sydney dodg it out of hi reach. 

'what do you mean, it' yours?' 

'it' the ring I gave marjori for an engag ring. give it me, you 
hound!--unless you wish me to do you violenc in the cab.' 

with complet disregard of the limit of space,--or of my 
comfort,--lessingham thrust him vigor aside. then grip sydney 
by the wrist, he seiz the gaud,--sydney yield it just in time to 
save himself from be precipit into the street. ravish of hi 
treasure, sydney turn and survey the ravish with someth like a 
glanc of admiration. 

'hang me, lessingham, if I don't believ there is some warm blood in 
those fishlik vein of yours. pleas the piper, i'll live to fight you 
after all,--with the bare ones, sir, as a gentleman should do.' 

lessingham seem to pay no attent to him whatever. He wa survey 
the ring, which sydney had trampl out of shape, with look of the 
deepest concern. 

'marjorie' ring!--th one I gave her! someth seriou must have 
happen to her befor she would have drop my ring, and left it 
lie where it fell.' 

atherton went on. 

'that' it!--what ha happen to her!--i'l be dash if I know!--when 
it wa clear that there she wasn't, I tore off to find out where she 
was. came across old lindon,--h knew nothing;--i rather fanci I 
startl him in the middl of pall mall, when I left he stare after me 
like one possessed, and hi hat wa lie in the gutter. went 
home,--sh wasn't there. ask dora grayling,--she'd seen noth of 
her. No one had seen anyth of her,--sh had vanish into air. then 
I said to myself, "you'r a first-class idiot, on my honour! while 
you'r look for her, like a lost sheep, the bet is that the 
girl' in holt' friend' hous the whole jolli time. when you were 
there, the chanc are that she'd just step out for a stroll, and 
that now she' back again, and wonder where on earth you'v gone!" 
So I made up my mind that i'd fli back and see,--becaus the idea of 
her stand on the front doorstep look for me, while I wa go 
off my nut look for her, commend itself to what I call my sens of 
humour; and on my way it struck me that it would be the part of wisdom 
to pick up champnell, becaus if there is a man who can be back to 
find a needl in ani amount of hay-stack it is the great 
augustus.--that hors ha move itself after all, becaus here we are. 
now, cabman, don't go drive further on,--you'l have to put a girdl 
round the earth if you do; becaus you'll have to reach thi point 
again befor you get your fare.--thi is the magician' house!' 




chapter xxxvii 

what wa hidden under the floor 


the cab pull up in front of a tumbledown cheap 'villa' in an 
unfinish cheap neighbourhood,--th whole place a live monument of 
the defeat of the specul builder. 

atherton leap out on to the grass-grown rubbl which wa meant for a 
footpath. 

'I don't see marjori look for me on the doorstep.' 

nor did i,--i saw noth but what appear to be an unoccupi 
ramshackl brick abomination. suddenli sydney gave an exclamation. 

'hullo!--th front door' closed!' 

I wa hard at hi heels. 

'what do you mean?' 

'why, when I went I left the front door open. It look as if i'v made 
an idiot of myself after all, and marjorie' returned,--let' hope to 
good that I have.' 

He knocked. while we wait for a respons I question him. 

'whi did you leav the door open when you went?' 

'I hardli know,--i imagin that it wa with some dim idea of marjorie' 
be abl to get in if she return while I wa absent,--but the truth 
is I wa in such a condit of helter skelter that I am not prepar 
to swear that I had ani reason reason.' 

'I suppos there is no doubt that you did leav it open?' 

'absolut none,--on that i'll stake my life.' 

'wa it open when you return from your pursuit of holt?' 

'wide open,--i walk straight in expect to find her wait for me 
in the front room,--i wa struck all of a heap when I found she wasn't 
there.' 

'were there ani sign of a struggle?' 

'none,--ther were no sign of anything. everyth wa just as I had 
left it, with the except of the ring which I trod on in the passage, 
and which lessingham has.' 

'if miss lindon ha returned, it doe not look as if she were in the 
hous at present.' 

It did not,--unless silenc had such meaning. atherton had knock 
loudli three time without succeed in attract the slightest 
notic from within. 

'it strike me that thi is anoth case of seek admiss through 
that hospit window at the back.' 

atherton led the way to the rear. lessingham and I followed. there wa 
not even an apolog for a yard, still less a garden,--ther wa not 
even a fenc of ani sort, to serv as an enclosure, and to shut off the 
hous from the wilder of wast land. the kitchen window wa open. I 
ask sydney if he had left it so. 

'I don't know,--i dare say we did; I don't fanci that either of us 
stood on the order of hi coming.' 

while he spoke, he scrambl over the sill. We followed. when he wa 
in, he shout at the top of hi voice, 

'marjorie! marjorie! speak to me, marjorie,--it is i,--sydney!' 

the word echo through the house. onli silenc answered. He led the 
way to the front room. suddenli he stopped. 

'hollo!' he cried. 'the blind' down!' I had noticed, when we were 
outside, that the blind wa down at the front room window. 'it wa up 
when I went, that i'll swear. that someon ha been here is pretti 
plain,--let' hope it' marjorie.' 

He had onli taken a step forward into the room when he again stop 
short to exclaim. 

'mi stars!--here' a sudden clearance!--why, the place is 
empty,--everything' clean gone!' 

'what do you mean?--wa it furnish when you left?' 

the room wa empti enough then. 

'furnished?--i don't know that it wa exactli what you'd call 
furnished,--th parti who ran thi establish had a tast in 
upholsteri which wa all hi own,--but there wa a carpet, and a bed, 
and--and lot of things,--for the most part, I should have said, 
distinctli eastern curiosities. they seem to have evapor into 
smoke,--which may be a way which is common enough among eastern 
curiosities, though it' queer to me.' 

atherton wa stare about him as if he found it difficult to credit 
the evid of hi own eyes. 

'how long ago is it sinc you left?' 

He refer to hi watch. 

'someth over an hour,--poss an hour and a half; I couldn't swear 
to the exact moment, but it certainli isn't more.' 

'did you notic ani sign of pack up?' 

'not a sign.' go to the window he drew up the blind,--speak as he 
did so. 'the queer thing about thi busi is that when we first got 
in thi blind wouldn't draw up a littl bit, so, sinc it wouldn't go 
up I pull it down, roller and all, now it draw up as easili and 
smoothli as if it had alway been the best blind that ever lived.' 

stand at sydney' back I saw that the cabman on hi box wa 
signal to us with hi outstretch hand. sydney perceiv him too. 
He threw up the sash. 

'what' the matter with you?' 

'excus me, sir, but who' the old gent?' 

'what old gent?' 

'whi the old gent peep through the window of the room upstairs?' 

the word were hardli out of the driver' mouth when sydney wa through 
the door and fli up the staircase. I follow rather more 
soberly,--hi method were a littl too flighti for me. when I reach 
the landing, dash out of the front room he rush into the one at 
the back,--then through a door at the side. He came out shouting. 

'what' the idiot mean!--with hi old gent! i'd old gent him if I got 
him!--there' not a creatur about the place!' 

He return into the front room,--i at hi heels. that certainli wa 
empty,--and not onli empty, but it show no trace of recent 
occupation. the dust lay thick upon the floor,--ther wa that mouldy, 
earthi smell which is so frequent found in apart which have been 
long untenanted. 

'are you sure, atherton, that there is no one at the back?' 

'of cours i'm sure,--y can go and see for yourself if you like; do 
you think i'm blind? jehu' drunk.' throw up the sash he address 
the driver. 'what do you mean with your old gent at the window?--what 
window?' 

'that window, sir.' 

'go to!--you'r dreaming, man!--there' no one here.' 

'beg your pardon, sir, but there wa someon there not a minut 
ago.' 

'imagination, cabman,--th slant of the light on the glass,--or your 
eyesight' defective.' 

'excus me, sir, but it' not my imagination, and my eyesight' as good 
as ani man' in england,--and as for the slant of the light on the 
glass, there ain't much glass for the light to slant on. I saw him 
peep through that bottom broken pane on your left hand as plainli as 
I see you. He must be somewher about,--h can't have got away,--he' 
at the back. ain't there a cupboard nor noth where he could hide?' 

the cabman' manner wa so extrem earnest that I went myself to see. 
there wa a cupboard on the landing, but the door of that stood wide 
open, and that obvious wa bare. the room behind wa small, and, 
despit the splinter glass in the window frame, stuffy. fragment of 
glass kept compani with the dust on the floor, togeth with a choic 
collect of stones, brickbats, and other missiles,--which not 
improb were the caus of their be there. In the corner stood a 
cupboard,--but a momentari examin show that that wa as bare as 
the other. the door at the side, which sydney had left wide open, 
open on to a closet, and that wa empty. I glanc up,--ther wa no 
trap door which led to the roof. No practic nook or cranny, in 
which a live be could lie concealed, wa anywher at hand. 

I return to sydney' shoulder to tell the cabman so. 

'there is no place in which anyon could hide, and there is no one in 
either of the rooms,--you must have been mistaken, driver.' 

the man wax wroth. 

'don't tell me! how could I come to think I saw someth when I 
didn't?' 

'one' eye are apt to play us tricks;--how could you see what wasn't 
there?' 

'that' what I want to know. As I drove up, befor you told me to stop, 
I saw him look through the window,--th one at which you are. he'd 
got hi nose glu to the broken pane, and wa stare as hard as he 
could stare. when I pull up, off he started,--i saw him get up off 
hi knees, and go to the back of the room. when the gentleman took to 
knocking, back he came,--to the same old spot, and flop down on hi 
knees. I didn't know what caper you wa up to,--you might be bum 
bailiff for all I knew!--and I suppos that he wasn't so anxiou to 
let you in as you might be to get inside, and that wa whi he didn't 
take no notic of your knocking, while all the while he kept a eye on 
what wa go on. when you goe round to the back, up he get again, 
and I reckon that he wa go to meet yer, and perhap give yer a 
bit of hi mind, and that present I should hear a shindy, or that 
someth would happen. but when you pull up the blind downstairs, to 
my surpris back he come onc more. He shove hi old nose right 
through the smash in the pane, and wag hi old head at me like a 
chatter magpie. that didn't seem to me quit the civil thing to 
do,--i hadn't done no harm to him; so I give you the office, and let 
you know that he wa there. but for you to say that he wasn't there, 
and never had been,--blimey! that cop the biscuit. If he wasn't there, 
all I can say is I ain't here, and my 'ors ain't here, and my cab 
ain't neither,--damn it!--th hous ain't here, and noth ain't!' 

He settl himself on hi perch with an air of the most extrem ill 
usage,--h had been stand up to tell hi tale. that the man wa 
seriou wa unmistakable. As he himself suggested, what induc 
could he have had to tell a lie like that? that he believ himself to 
have seen what he declar he saw wa plain. but, on the other hand, 
what could have become--in the space of fifti seconds!--of hi 'old 
gent'? 

atherton put a question. 

'what did he look like,--thi old gent of yours?' 

'well, that I shouldn't hardli like to say. It wasn't much of hi face 
I could see, onli hi face and hi eyes,--and they wasn't pretty. He 
kept a thing over hi head all the time, as if he didn't want too much 
to be seen.' 

'what sort of a thing?' 

'why,--on of them cloak sort of things, like them arab bloke use to 
wear what use to be at earl' court exhibition,--y know!' 

thi piec of inform seem to interest my companion more than 
anyth he had said before. 

'A burnoos do you mean?' 

'how am I to know what the thing' called? I ain't up in foreign 
languages,--'tain't likely! all I know that them arab bloke what wa 
at earl' court use to walk about in them all over the 
place,--sometim they wore them over their heads, and sometim they 
didn't. In fact if you'd ask me, instead of tri to make out as I 
see double, or thing what wa onli insid my own noddle, or someth 
or other, I should have said thi here old gent what i'v been tell 
you about wa a arab bloke,--when he get off hi knee to sneak away 
from the window, I could see that he had hi cloak thing, what wa over 
hi head, wrap all round him.' 

Mr lessingham turn to me, all quiver with excitement. 

'I believ that what he say is true!' 

'then where can thi mysteri old gentleman have got to,--can you 
suggest an explanation? It is strange, to say the least of it, that the 
cabman should be the onli person to see or hear anyth of him.' 

'some devil' trick ha been played,--i know it, I feel it!--mi 
instinct tell me so!' 

I stared. In such a matter one hardli expect a man of paul 
lessingham' stamp to talk of 'instinct.' atherton stare too. then, on 
a sudden, he burst out, 

'bi the lord, I believ the apostle' right,--th whole place reek to 
me of hankey-pankey,--it did as soon as I put my nose inside. In 
matter of prestidigitation, champnell, we western are among the 
rudiments,--we'v everyth to learn,--orient leav us at the post. 
If their civilisation' what we'r pleas to call extinct, their 
conjuring--when you get to know it!--i all aliv oh!' 

He move toward the door. As he went he slipped, or seem to, all but 
stumbl on to hi knees. 

'someth trip me up,--what' this?' He wa stamp on the floor 
with hi foot. 'here' a board loose. come and lend me a hand, one of 
you fellows, to get it up. who know what mystery' beneath?' 

I went to hi aid. As he said, a board in the floor wa loose. hi 
step on it unawar had caus hi stumble. togeth we prise it 
out of it place,--lessingham stand by and watch us the while. 
have remov it, we peer into the caviti it disclosed. 

there wa someth there. 

'why,' cri atherton 'it' a woman' clothing!' 




chapter xxxviii 

the rest OF the find 


It wa a woman' clothing, beyond a doubt, all thrown in anyhow,--a if 
the person who had place it there had been in a desper hurry. An 
entir outfit wa there, shoes, stockings, bodi linen, corsets, and 
all,--even to hat, gloves, and hairpins;--thes latter were mix up 
with the rest of the garment in strang confusion. It seem plain 
that whoever had worn those cloth had been strip to the skin. 

lessingham and sydney stare at me in silenc as I drag them out and 
laid them on the floor. the dress wa at the bottom,--it wa an alpaca, 
of a pretti shade in blue, bedeck with lace and ribbons, as is the 
fashion of the hour, and line with sea-green silk. It had perhap been 
a 'charm confection' once--and that a veri recent one!--but now it 
wa all soil and creas and torn and tumbled. the two spectat 
made a simultan pounc at it as I brought it to the light. 

'mi god!' cri sydney, 'it' marjorie's!--sh wa wear it when I 
saw her last!' 

'it' marjorie's!' gasp lessingham,--h wa clutch at the ruin 
costume, stare at it like a man who ha just receiv sentenc of 
death. 'she wore it when she wa with me yesterday,--i told her how it 
suit her, and how pretti it was!' 

there wa silence,--it wa an eloqu find; it spoke for itself. the 
two men gaze at the heap of feminin glories,--it might have been the 
most wonder sight they ever had seen. lessingham wa the first to 
speak,--hi face had all at onc grown grey and haggard. 

'what ha happen to her?' 

I repli to hi question with another. 

'are you sure thi is miss linden' dress?' 

'I am sure,--and were proof needed, here it is.' 

He had found the pocket, and wa turn out the contents. there wa a 
purse, which contain money and some visit card on which were her 
name and address; a small bunch of keys, with her namepl attached; a 
handkerchief, with her initi in a corner. the question of ownership 
wa place beyond a doubt. 

'you see,' said lessingham, exhibit the money which wa in the 
purse, 'it is not robberi which ha been attempted. here are two 
ten-pound notes, and one for five, besid gold and silver,--ov 
thirti pound in all.' 

atherton, who had been turn over the accumul of rubbish between 
the joists, proclaim anoth find. 

'here are her rings, and watch, and a bracelet,--no, it certainli doe 
not look as if theft had been an object.' 

lessingham wa glower at him with knit brows. 

'I have to thank you for this.' 

sydney wa unwontedli meek. 

'you are hard on me, lessingham, harder than I deserve,--i had rather 
have thrown away my own life than have suffer misadventur to have 
come to her.' 

'your are idl words. had you not meddl thi would not have 
happened. A fool work more mischief with hi folli than of malic 
prepense. If hurt ha befallen marjori lindon you shall account for it 
to me with your life' blood.' 

'let it be so,' said sydney. 'I am content. If hurt ha come to 
marjorie, god know that I am will enough that death should come to 
me.' 

while they wrangled, I continu to search. A littl to one side, under 
the floor which wa still intact, I saw someth gleam. By 
stretch out my hand, I could just manag to reach it,--it wa a long 
plait of woman' hair. It had been cut off at the roots,--so close to 
the head in one place that the scalp itself had been cut, so that the 
hair wa clot with blood. 

they were so occupi with each other that they took no notic of me. I 
had to call their attent to my discovery. 

'gentlemen, I fear that I have here someth which will distress 
you,--i not thi miss lindon' hair?' 

they recognis it on the instant. lessingham, snatch it from my 
hands, press it to hi lips. 

'thi is mine,--i shall at least have something.' He spoke with a 
grim which wa a littl startling. He held the silken tress at 
arm' length. 'thi point to murder,--foul, cruel, causeless murder. 
As I live, I will devot my all,--money, time, reputation!--to gain 
vengeanc on the wretch who did thi deed.' 

atherton chime in. 

'to that I say, amen!' He lift hi hand. 'god is my witness!' 

'it seem to me, gentlemen, that we move too fast,--to my mind it doe 
not by ani mean of necess point to murder. On the contrary, I doubt 
if murder ha been done. indeed, I don't mind own that I have a 
theori of my own which point all the other way.' 

lessingham caught me by the sleeve. 

'mr champnell, tell me your theory.' 

'I will, a littl later. Of cours it may be altogeth wrong;--though 
I fanci it is not; I will explain my reason when we come to talk of 
it. but, at present, there are thing which must be done.' 

'I vote for tear up everi board in the house!' cri sydney. 'and 
for pull the whole infern place to pieces. it' a conjurer' 
den.--i shouldn't be surpris if cabby' old gent is stare at us all 
the while from some peephol of hi own.' 

We examin the entir house, methodically, so far as we were able, 
inch by inch. not anoth board prove loose,--to lift those which were 
nail down requir tools, and those we were without. We sound all 
the walls,--with the except of the parti wall they were the usual 
lath and plaster constructions, and show no sign of have been 
tamper with. the ceil were intact; if anyth wa conceal in 
them it must have been there some time,--th cement wa old and dirty. 
We took the closet to pieces; examin the chimneys; peer into the 
kitchen oven and the copper;--in short, we pri into everyth which, 
with the limit mean at our disposal, could be pri into,--without 
result. At the end we found ourselv dusty, dirty, and discomfited. 
the cabman' 'old gent' remain as much a mysteri as ever, and no 
further trace had been discov of miss lindon. 

atherton made no effort to disguis hi chagrin. 

'now what' to be done? there seem to be just noth in the place at 
all, and yet that there is, and that it' the key to the whole 
confound busi I should be dispos to swear.' 

'in that case I would suggest that you should stay and look for it. the 
cabman can go and look for the requisit tools, or a workman to assist 
you, if you like. for my part it appear to me that evid of anoth 
sort is, for the moment, of paramount importance; and I propos to 
commenc my search for it by make a call at the hous which is over 
the way.' 

I had observed, on our arrival, that the road onli contain two hous 
which were in anyth like a finish state,--that which we were in, 
and another, some fifti or sixti yard further down, on the opposit 
side. It wa to thi I referred. the twain immedi proffer their 
companionship. 

'I will come with you,' said Mr lessingham. 

'and i,' echo sydney. 'we'll leav thi sweet homestead in charg of 
the cabman,--i'l pull it to piec afterwards.' He went out and spoke 
to the driver. 'cabby, we'r go to pay a visit to the littl crib 
over there,--y keep an eye on thi one. and if you see a sign of 
anyon be about the place,--living, or dead, or anyhow--y give me 
a yell. I shall be on the lookout, and i'll be with you befor you can 
say jack robinson.' 

'you bet i'll yell,--i'l rais the hair right off you.' the fellow 
grinned. 'but I don't know if you gent are hire me by the day,--i 
want to chang my horse; he ought to have been in hi stabl a coupl 
of hour ago.' 

'never mind your horse,--let him rest a coupl of hour extra to-morrow 
to make up for those he ha lost to-day. i'll take care you don't lose 
anyth by thi littl job,--or your hors either.--bi the way, look 
here,--thi will be better than yelling.' 

take a revolv out of hi trousers' pocket he hand it up to the 
grin driver. 

'if that old gent of your doe appear, you have a pop at him,--i shall 
hear that easier than a yell. you can put a bullet through him if you 
like,--i give you my word it won't be murder.' 

'I don't care if it is,' declar the cabman, handl the weapon like 
one who wa familiar with arm of precision. 'I use to fanci my 
revolv shoot when I wa with the colours, and if I do get a chanc 
i'll put a shot through the old hunks, if onli to prove to you that i'm 
no liar.' 

whether the man wa in earnest or not I could not tell,--nor whether 
atherton meant what he said in answer. 

'if you shoot him i'll give you fifti pounds.' 

'all right!' the driver laughed. 'i'll do my best to earn that fifty!' 




chapter xxxix 

miss louisa coleman 


that the hous over the way wa tenant wa plain to all the 
world,--at least one occup sat gaze through the window of the 
first floor front room. An old woman in a cap,--on of those larg 
old-fashion cap which our grandmoth use to wear, tie with 
string under the chin. It wa a bow window, and as she wa seat in 
the bay look right in our direct she could hardli have fail to 
see us as we advanced,--inde she continu to stare at us all the 
while with placid calmness. yet I knock once, twice, and yet again 
without the slightest notic be taken of my summons. 

sydney gave express to hi impati in hi own peculiar vein. 

'knocker in thi part of the world seem intend for ornament 
only,--nobodi seem to pay ani attent to them when they'r used. the 
old ladi upstair must be either deaf or dotty.' He went out into the 
road to see if she still wa there. 'she' look at me as calmli as 
you please,--what doe she think we'r do here, I wonder; play a 
tune on her front door by way of a littl amusement?--madam!' He took 
off hi hat and wave it to her. 'madam! might I observ that if you 
won't condescend to notic that we'r here your front door will run the 
risk of be sever injured!--sh don't care for me ani more than if 
I wa noth at all,--sound anoth tattoo upon that knocker. perhap 
she' so deaf that noth short of a cataclysm uproar will reach her 
auditori nerves.' 

she immedi proved, however, that she wa noth of the sort. 
hardli had the sound of my further knock die away than, throw 
up the window, she thrust out her head and address me in a fashion 
which, under the circumstances, wa as unexpect as it wa uncal 
for. 

'now, young man, you needn't be in such a hurry!' 

sydney explained. 

'pardon me, madam, it' not so much a hurri we'r in as press for 
time,--thi is a matter of life and death.' 

she turn her attent to sydney,--speak with a frank for 
which, I imagine, he wa unprepared. 

'I don't want none of your imperence, young man. i'v seen you 
before,--you'v been hang about here the whole day long!--and I 
don't like the look of you, and so i'll let you know. that' my front 
door, and that' my knocker,--i'l come down and open when I like, but 
i'm not go to be hurried, and if the knocker' so much as touch 
again, I won't come down at all.' 

she close the window with a bang. sydney seem divid between mirth 
and indignation. 

'that' a nice old lady, on my honour,--on of the good old crusti 
sort. agreeabl charact thi neighbourhood seem to grow,--a sojourn 
hereabout should do one good. unfortun I don't feel dispos just 
now to stand and kick my heel in the road.' again salut the old 
dame by rais hi hat he shout to her at the top of hi voice. 
'madam, I beg ten thousand pardon for troubl you, but thi is a 
matter in which everi second is of vital importance,--would you allow 
me to ask you one or two questions?' 

Up went the window; out came the old lady' head. 

'now, young man, you needn't put yourself out to holler at me,--i won't 
be holler at! i'll come down and open that door in five minut by 
the clock on my mantelpiece, and not a moment before.' 

the fiat delivered, down came the window. sydney look rueful,--h 
consult hi watch. 

'I don't know what you think, champnell, but I realli doubt if thi 
comfort creatur can tell us anyth worth wait anoth five 
minut to hear. We mustn't let the grass grow under our feet, and time 
is get on.' 

I wa of a differ opinion,--and said so. 

'i'm afraid, atherton, that I can't agre with you. she seem to have 
notic you hang about all day; and it is at least possibl that she 
ha notic a good deal which would be well worth our hearing. what 
more promis wit are we like to find?--her hous is the onli 
one which overlook the one we have just quitted. I am of opinion that 
it may not onli prove well worth our while to wait five minutes, but 
also that it would be as well, if possible, not to offend her by the 
way. she' not like to afford us the inform we requir if you 
do.' 

'good. If that' what you think i'm sure i'm will to wait,--onli 
it' to be hope that that clock upon her mantelpiec move quicker 
than it mistress.' 

presently, when about a minut had gone, he call to the cabman. 

'seen a sign of anything?' 

the cabman shout back. 

'ne'er a sign,--you'l hear a sound of popgun when I do.' 

those five minut did seem long ones. but at last sydney, from hi 
post of vantag in the road, inform us that the old ladi wa moving. 

'she' get up;--she' leav the window;--let' hope to good 
she' come down to open the door. that' been the longest five 
minut i'v known.' 

I could hear uncertain footstep descend the stairs. they came along 
the passage. the door wa opened--'on the chain.' the old ladi peer 
at us through an apertur of about six inches. 

'I don't know what you young men think you'r after, but have all three 
of you in my hous I won't. i'll have him and you'--a skinni finger wa 
point to lessingham and me; then it wa direct toward 
atherton--'but have him I won't. So if it' anyth particular you 
want to say to me, you'll just tell him to go away.' 

On hear thi sydney' humil wa abject. hi hat wa in hi 
hand,--h bent himself double. 

'suffer me to make you a million apologies, madam, if I have in ani way 
offend you; nothing, I assur you, could have been farther from my 
intention, or from my thoughts.' 

'I don't want none of your apologies, and I don't want none of you 
neither; I don't like the look of you, and so I tell you. befor I let 
anybodi into my hous you'll have to sling your hook.' 

the door wa bang in our faces. I turn to sydney. 

'the sooner you go the better it will be for us. you can wait for us 
over the way.' 

He shrug hi shoulders, and groaned,--half in jest, half in earnest. 

'if I must I suppos I must,--it' the first time i'v been refus 
admitt to a lady' hous in all my life! what have I done to 
deserv thi thing?--if you keep me wait long i'll tear that 
infern den to pieces!' 

He saunter across the road, vicious kick the stone as he went. 
the door reopened. 

'ha that other young man gone?' 

'he has.' 

'then now i'll let you in. have him insid my hous I won't.' 

the chain wa removed. lessingham and I entered. then the door wa 
refasten and the chain replaced. our hostess show us into the front 
room on the ground floor; it wa spars furnish and not too 
clean,--but there were chair enough for us to sit upon; which she 
insist on our occupying. 

'sit down, do,--i can't abid to see folk standing; it give me the 
fidgets.' 

So soon as we were seated, without ani overtur on our part she 
plung in media res. 

'I know what it is you'v come about,--i know! you want me to tell you 
who it is as live in the hous over the road. well, I can tell 
you,--and I dare bet a shill that i'm about the onli one who can.' 

I inclin my head. 

'indeed. Is that so, madam?' 

she wa huf at once. 

'don't madam me,--i can't bear none of your lip service. i'm a 
plain-spoken woman, that' what I am, and I like other people' tongu 
to be as plain as mine. My name' miss louisa coleman; but i'm 
gener call miss coleman,--i'm onli call louisa by my relatives.' 

sinc she wa appar between seventi and eighty--and look everi 
year of her appar age--i deem that possible. miss coleman wa 
evid a character. If one wa desir of get inform out 
of her it would be necessari to allow her to impart it in her own 
manner,--to endeavour to induc her to impart it in anybodi else' 
would be time clean wasted. We had sydney' fate befor our eyes. 

she start with a sort of roundabout preamble. 

'thi properti is mine; it wa left me by my uncle, the late georg 
henri jobson,--he' buri in hammersmith cemeteri just over the 
way,--h left me the whole of it. it' one of the finest build site 
near london, and it increas in valu everi year, and i'm not go to 
let it for anoth twenty, by which time the valu will have more than 
trebled,--so if that is what you'v come about, as heap of peopl do, 
you might have save yourselv the trouble. I keep the board 
standing, just to let peopl know that the ground is to let,--though, 
as I say, it won't be for anoth twenti years, when it'll be for the 
erect of high-class mansion only, same as there is in grosvenor 
square,--no shop or public houses, and none of your shanties. I live 
in thi place just to keep an eye upon the property,--and as for the 
hous over the way, i'v never tri to let it, and it never ha been 
let, not until a month ago, when, one morning, I had thi letter. you 
can see it if you like.' 

she hand me a greasi envelop which she ferret out of a capaci 
pocket which wa suspend from her waist, and which she had to lift up 
her skirt to reach. the envelop wa addressed, in unform characters, 
'miss louisa coleman, the rhododendrons, convolvulu avenue, high oak 
park, west kensington.'--i felt, if the writer had not been of a 
humor turn of mind, and drawn on hi imagination, and thi realli 
wa the lady' correct address, then there must be someth in a name. 

the letter within wa written in the same straggling, characterless 
caligraphy,--i should have said, had I been ask offhand, that the 
whole thing wa the composit of a servant girl. the composit wa 
about on a par with the writing. 

'the undersign would be oblidg if miss coleman would let her emptey 
house. I do not know the rent but send fifti pounds. If more will send. 
pleas address, moham el kheir, post office, sligo street, london.' 

It struck me as be as singular an applic for a tenanc as I 
rememb to have encountered. when I pass it on to lessingham, he 
seem to think so too. 

'thi is a curiou letter, miss coleman.' 

'so I thought,--and still more so when I found the fifti pound inside. 
there were five ten-pound notes, all loose, and the letter not even 
registered. If I had been ask what wa the rent of the house, I 
should have said, at the most, not more than twenti pounds,--because, 
between you and me, it want a good bit of do up, and is hardli fit 
to live in as it stands.' 

I had had suffici evid of the truth of thi altogeth apart 
from the landlady' frank admission. 

'why, for all he could have done to help himself I might have kept the 
money, and onli sent him a receipt for a quarter. and some folk would 
have done,--but i'm not one of that sort myself, and shouldn't care to 
be. So I sent thi here party,--i never could pronounc hi name, and 
never shall--a receipt for a year.' 

miss coleman paus to smooth her apron, and consider. 

'well, the receipt should have reach thi here parti on the thursday 
morning, as it were,--i post it on the wednesday night, and on the 
thursday, after breakfast, I thought i'd go over the way to see if 
there wa ani littl thing I could do,--becaus there wasn't hardli a 
whole pane of glass in the place,--when I all but went all of a heap. 
when I look across the road, bless it the parti wasn't in 
already,--at least as much as he ever wa in, which, so far as I can 
make out, never ha been anyth particular,--though how he had got 
in, unless it wa through a window in the middl of the night, is more 
than I should care to say,--ther wa nobodi in the hous when I went 
to bed, that I could pretti nearli take my bibl oath,--yet there wa 
the blind up at the parlour, and, what' more, it wa down, and it' 
been down pretti nearli ever since. 

'"well," I say to myself, "for right down imper thi beat 
anything,--whi he' in the place befor he know if i'll let him have 
it. perhap he think I haven't got a word to say in the matter,--fifti 
pound or no fifti pounds, i'll soon show him." So I slip on my 
bonnet, and I walk over the road, and I hammer at the door. 

'well, I have seen peopl hammer sinc then, mani a one, and how 
they'v kept it up ha puzzl me,--for an hour, some of them,--but I 
wa the first one as begun it. I hammers, and I hammers, and I kept on 
hammering, but it wasn't no more use than if i'd been hammer at a 
tombstone. So I start rap at the window, but that wasn't no use 
neither. So I goe round behind, and I hammer at the back door,--but 
there, I couldn't make anyon hear nohow. So I say to myself, "perhap 
the parti as is in, ain't in, in a manner of speaking; but i'll keep an 
eye on the house, and when he is in i'll take care that he ain't out 
again befor i'v had a word to say." 

'so I come back home, and as I said I would, I kept an eye on the hous 
the whole of that livelong day, but never a soul went either out or in. 
but the next day, which it wa a friday, I got out of bed about five 
o'clock, to see if it wa raining, through my have an idea of take 
a littl excurs if the weather wa fine, when I see a parti come 
down the road. He had on one of them dirty-colour bed-cov sort of 
things, and it wa wrap all over hi head and round hi body, like, 
as I have been told, them there arab wear,--and, indeed, i'v seen 
them in them myself at west brompton, when they wa in the exhibit 
there. It wa quit fine, and broad day, and I see him as plainli as I 
see you,--h come skim along at a tear of a pace, pull up at the 
hous over the way, open the front door, and let himself in. 

'"so," I say to myself, "there you are. well, Mr arab, or whatever, or 
whoever, you may be, i'll take good care that you don't go out again 
befor you'v had a word from me. i'll show you that landladi have 
their rights, like other christians, in thi country, howev it may be 
in yours." So I kept an eye on the house, to see that he didn't go out 
again, and nobodi never didn't, and between seven and eight I goe and 
I knock at the door,--becaus I thought to myself that the earlier I 
wa the better it might be. 

'if you'll believ me, no more notic wa taken of me than if I wa one 
of the dead. I hammers, and I hammers, till my wrist wa aching, I 
daresay I hammer twenti times,--and then I went round to the back 
door, and I hammer at that,--but it wasn't the least good in the 
world. I wa that provok to think I should be treat as if I wa 
noth and nobody, by a dirti foreigner, who went about in a bed-gown 
through the public streets, that it wa all I could do to hold myself. 

'I come round to the front again, and I start hammer at the 
window, with everi knuckl on my hands, and I call out, "i'm miss 
louisa coleman, and i'm the owner of thi house, and you can't deceiv 
me,--i saw you come in, and you'r in now, and if you don't come and 
speak to me thi moment i'll have the police." 

'all of a sudden, when I wa least expect it, and wa hammer my 
veri hardest at the pane, up goe the blind, and up goe the window 
too, and the most awful-look creatur ever I heard of, not to 
mention seeing, put hi head right into my face,--h wa more like a 
hideou baboon than anyth else, let alon a man. I wa struck all of 
a heap, and plump down on the littl wall, and all but tumbl head 
over heel backwards, and he start shrieking, in a sort of a kind of 
english, and in such a voic as i'd never heard the like,--it wa like 
a rusti steam engine. 

'"go away! go away! I don't want you! I will not have you,--never! you 
have your fifti pounds,--you have your money,--that is the whole of 
you,--that is all you want! you come to me no more!--never!--nev no 
more!--or you be sorry!--go away!" 

'I did go away, and that as fast as ever my leg would carri me,--what 
with hi looks, and what with hi voice, and what with the way that he 
went on, I wa noth but a mass of trembling. As for answer him 
back, or give him a piec of my mind, as I had meant to, I wouldn't 
have done it not for a thousand pounds. I don't mind confessing, 
between you and me, that I had to swallow four cup of tea, right 
straight away, befor my nerv wa steady. 

'"well," I say to myself, when I did feel, as it might be, a littl 
more easy, "you never have let that hous before, and now you'v let it 
with a vengeance,--so you have. If that there new tenant of your isn't 
the greatest villain that ever went unhung it must be becaus he' got 
near relat what' as bad as himself,--becaus two famili like hi 
i'm sure there can't be. A nice sort of arab parti to have sleep 
over the road he is!" 

'but after a time I cool down, as it were,--becaus i'm one of them 
sort as like to see on both side of a question. "after all," I say 
to myself, "he ha paid hi rent, and fifti pound is fifti pounds,--i 
doubt if the whole hous is worth much more, and he can't do much 
damag to it whatev he does." 

'I shouldn't have minded, so far as that went, if he'd set fire to the 
place, for, between ourselves, it' insur for a good bit over it 
value. So I decid that i'd let thing be as they were, and see how 
they went on. but from that hour to thi i'v never spoken to the man, 
and never want to, and wouldn't, not of my own free will, not for a 
shill a time,--that face of hi will haunt me if I live till noah, 
as the say is. i'v seen him go in and out at all hour of the 
day and night,--that arab party' a mysteri if ever there wa one,--h 
alway goe tear along as if he' fli for hi life. lot of 
peopl have come to the house, all sort and kinds, men and 
women--they'v been mostli women, and even littl children. i'v seen 
them hammer and hammer at that front door, but never a one have I seen 
let in,--or yet seen taken ani notic of, and I think I may say, and 
yet tell no lie, that i'v scarc took my eye off the hous sinc 
he' been insid it, over and over again in the middl of the night 
have I got up to have a look, so that i'v not miss much that ha 
took place. 

'what' puzzl me is the nois that' come from the house. sometim 
for day togeth there' not been a sound, it might have been a hous 
of the dead; and then, all through the night, there'v been yell and 
screeches, squawk and screams,--i never heard noth like it. I have 
thought, and more than once, that the devil himself must be in that 
front room, let alon all the rest of hi demons. and as for 
cats!--wher they'v come from I can't think. I didn't use to notic 
hardli a cat in the neighbourhood till that there arab parti 
came,--ther isn't much to attract them; but sinc he came there' been 
regiments. sometim at night there' been troop about the place, 
screech like mad,--i'v wish them farther, I can tell you. that 
arab parti must be fond of 'em. i'v seen them insid the house, at the 
windows, upstair and downstairs, as it seem to me, a dozen at a time. 




chapter XL 

what miss coleman saw through the window 


As miss coleman had paused, as if her narr wa approach a 
conclusion, I judg it expedi to make an attempt to bring the 
record as quickli as possibl up to date. 

'I take it, miss coleman, that you have observ what ha occur in 
the hous to-day.' 

she tighten her nut-crack jaw and glare at me disdainfully,--h 
digniti wa ruffled. 

'i'm come to it, aren't i?--if you'll let me. If you'v got no 
manner i'll learn you some. one doesn't like to be hurri at my time 
of life, young man.' 

I wa meekli silent;--plainly, if she wa to talk, everi one els must 
listen. 

'dure the last few day there have been some queer go on over the 
road,--out of the common queer, I mean, for good know that they 
alway have been queer enough. that arab parti ha been flit about 
like a creatur possessed,--i'v seen him go in and out twenti time 
a day. thi morning--' 

she paused,--to fix her eye on lessingham. she appar observ hi 
grow interest as she approach the subject which had brought us 
there,--and resent it. 

'don't look at me like that, young man, becaus I won't have it. and as 
for questions, I may answer question when i'm done, but don't you dare 
to ask me one before, becaus I won't be interrupted.' 

Up to then lessingham had not spoken a word,--but it seem as if she 
wa endow with the faculti of perceiv the huge volum of the word 
which he had left unuttered. 

'thi morning--a i'v said already,--' she glanc at lessingham as if 
she defi hi contradiction--'when that arab parti came home it wa 
just on the stroke of seven. I know what wa the exact time because, 
when I went to the door to the milkman, my clock wa strike the half 
hour, and I alway keep it thirti minut fast. As I wa take the 
milk, the man said to me, "hollo, miss coleman, here' your friend 
come along." "what friend?" I says,--for I ain't got no friends, as I 
know, round here, nor yet, I hope no enemi neither. 

'and I look round, and there wa the arab parti come tear down 
the road, hi bedcov thing all fli in the wind, and hi arm 
straight out in front of him,--i never did see anyon go at such a 
pace. "mi goodness," I says, "I wonder he don't do himself an injury." 
"I wonder someon els don't do him an injury," say the milkman. "the 
veri sight of him is enough to make my milk go sour." and he pick up 
hi pail and went away quit grumpy,--though what that arab party' 
done to him is more than I can say.--i have alway notic that 
milkman' temper' short like hi measure. I wasn't best pleas with 
him for speak of that arab parti as my friend, which he never ha 
been, and never won't be, and never could be neither. 

'five person went to the hous after the milkman wa gone, and that 
there arab parti wa safe inside,--thre of them wa commercials, that 
I know, becaus afterward they came to me. but of cours they none of 
them got no chanc with that there arab parti except of hammer at 
hi front door, which ain't what you might call a pay game, nor nice 
for the temper but for that I don't blame him, for if onc those 
commerci do begin talk they'll talk for ever. 

'now i'm come to thi afternoon.' 

I thought it wa about time,--though for the life of me, I did not dare 
to hint as much. 

'well, it might have been three, or it might have been half past, 
anyhow it wa thereabouts, when up there come two men and a woman, 
which one of the men wa that young man what' a friend of yours. "oh," 
I say to myself, "here' someth new in callers, I wonder what it is 
they'r wanting." that young man what wa a friend of yours, he start 
hammering, and hammering, as the custom wa with everi one who came, 
and, as usual, no more notic wa taken of him than nothing,--though I 
knew that all the time the arab parti wa indoors.' 

At thi point I felt that at all hazard I must interpos a question. 

'you are sure he wa indoors?' 

she took it better than I fear she might. 

'of cours i'm sure,--hadn't I seen him come in at seven, and he never 
hadn't gone out since, for I don't believ that i'd taken my eye off 
the place not for two minut together, and i'd never had a sight of 
him. If he wasn't indoors, where wa he then?' 

for the moment, so far as I wa concerned, the queri wa unanswerable. 
she triumphantli continued: 

'instead of do what most did, when they'd had enough of hammering, 
and go away, these three they went round to the back, and i'm 
bless if they mustn't have got through the kitchen window, woman and 
all, for all of a sudden the blind in the front room wa pull not up, 
but down--drag down it was, and there wa that young man what' a 
friend of your stand with it in hi hand. 

'"well," I say to myself, "if that ain't cool I should like to know 
what is. if, when you ain't let in, you can let yourself in, and that 
without so much as say by your leave, or with your leave, thing is 
come to a pretti pass. wherev can that arab parti be, and whatev 
can he be think of, to let them go on like that becaus that he' 
the sort to allow a liberti to be took with him, and say nothing, I 
don't believe." 

'everi moment I expect to hear a nois and see a row begin, but, so 
far as I could make out, all wa quiet and there wasn't noth of the 
kind. So I say to myself, "there' more in thi than meet the eye, 
and them three parti must have right upon their side, or they 
wouldn't be do what they are do in the way they are, there'd be a 
shindy." 

'presently, in about five minutes, the front door opens, and a young 
man--not the one what' your friend, but the other--com sail out, 
and through the gate, and down the road, as stiff and upright as a 
grenadier,--i never see anyon walk more upright, and few as fast. At 
hi heel come the young man what is your friend, and it seem to me 
that he couldn't make out what thi other wa a-do of. I say to 
myself, "there' been a quarrel between them two, and him as ha gone 
ha hook it." thi young man what is your friend he stood at the 
gate, all of a fidget, stare after the other with all hi eyes, as if 
he couldn't think what to make of him, and the young woman, she stood 
on the doorstep, stare after him too. 

'a the young man what had hook it turn the corner, and wa out of 
sight, all at onc your friend he seem to make up hi mind, and he 
start off run as hard as he could pelt,--and the young woman wa 
left alone. I expected, everi minute, to see him come back with the 
other young man, and the young woman, by the way she hung about the 
gate, she seem to expect it too. but no, noth of the kind. So 
when, as I expect, she'd had enough of waiting, she went into the hous 
again, and I see her pass the front room window. after a while, back 
she come to the gate, and stand look and looking, but noth wa 
to be seen of either of them young men. when she'd been at the gate, I 
daresay five minutes, back she goe into the house,--and I never saw 
noth of her again.' 

'you never saw anyth of her again?--ar you sure she went back into 
the house?' 

'a sure as I am that I see you.' 

'I suppos that you didn't keep a constant watch upon the premises?' 

'but that' just what I did do. I felt someth queer wa go on, 
and I made up my mind to see it through. and when I make up my mind to 
a thing like that i'm not easi to turn aside. I never move off the 
chair at my bedroom window, and I never took my eye off the house, not 
till you come knock at my front door.' 

'but, sinc the young ladi is certainli not in the hous at present, 
she must have elud your observation, and, in some manner, have left 
it without your see her.' 

'I don't believ she did, I don't see how she could have done,--there' 
someth queer about that house, sinc that arab party' been insid 
it. but though I didn't see her, I did see someon else.' 

'who wa that?' 

'A young man.' 

'A young man?' 

'yes, a young man, and that' what puzzl me, and what' been puzzl 
me ever since, for see him go in I never did do.' 

'can you describ him?' 

'not as to the face, for he wore a dirti cloth cap pull down right 
over it, and he walk so quickli that I never had a proper look. but I 
should know him anywher if I saw him, if onli becaus of hi cloth 
and hi walk.' 

'what wa there peculiar about hi cloth and hi walk?' 

'why, hi cloth were that old, and torn, and dirty, that a ragman 
wouldn't have given a thank you for them,--and as for fit,--ther 
wasn't none, they hung upon him like a scarecrow--h wa a regular 
figur of fun; I should think the boy would call after him if they saw 
him in the street. As for hi walk, he walk off just like the first 
young man had done, he strut along with hi shoulder back, and hi 
head in the air, and that stiff and straight that my kitchen poker 
would have look crook besid of him.' 

'did noth happen to attract your attent between the young lady' 
go back into the hous and the come out of thi young man?' 

miss coleman cogitated. 

'now you mention it there did,--though I should have forgotten all 
about it if you hadn't ask me,--that come of your not let me 
tell the tale in my own way. about twenti minut after the young woman 
had gone in someon put up the blind in the front room, which that 
young man had drag right down, I couldn't see who it wa for the 
blind wa between us, and it wa about ten minut after that that 
young man came march out.' 

'and then what followed?' 

'why, in about anoth ten minut that arab parti himself come 
scoot through the door.' 

'the arab party?' 

'yes, the arab party! the sight of him took me clean aback. where he'd 
been, and what he'd been do with himself while them there peopl 
play hi-spy-hi about hi premis i'd have given a shill out of my 
pocket to have known, but there he was, as larg as life, and carri 
a bundle.' 

'A bundle?' 

'A bundle, on hi head, like a muffin-man carri hi tray. It wa a 
great thing, you never would have thought he could have carri it, and 
it wa easi to see that it wa as much as he could manage; it bent him 
nearli double, and he went crawl along like a snail,--it took him 
quit a time to get to the end of the road.' 

Mr lessingham leap up from hi seat, crying, 'marjori wa in that 
bundle!' 

'I doubt it,' I said. 

He move about the room distractedly, wring hi hands. 

'she was! she must have been! god help us all!' 

'I repeat that I doubt it. If you will be advis by me you will wait 
awhil befor you arriv at ani such conclusion.' 

all at onc there wa a tap at the window pane. atherton wa 
stare at us from without. 

He shout through the glass, 'come out of that, you fossils!--i'v 
news for you!' 




chapter xli 

the constable,--hi clue,--and the cab 


miss coleman, get up in a fluster, went hurri to the door. 

'I won't have that young man in my house. I won't have him! don't let 
him dare to put hi nose across my doorstep.' 

I endeavour to appeas her perturbation. 

'I promis you that he shall not come in, miss coleman. My friend here, 
and I, will go and speak to him outside.' 

she held the front door open just wide enough to enabl lessingham and 
me to slip through, then she shut it after us with a bang. she 
evid had a strong object to ani intrus on sydney' part. 

stand just without the gate he salut us with a characterist 
vigour which wa scarc flatter to our late hostess. behind him 
wa a constable. 

'I hope you two have been mew in with that old pussi long enough. 
while you'v been tittle-tattl i'v been doing,--listen to what thi 
bobby' got to say.' 

the constable, hi thumb thrust insid hi belt, wore an indulg 
smile upon hi countenance. He seem to find sydney amusing. He spoke 
in a deep bass voice,--a if it issu from hi boots. 

'I don't know that i'v got anyth to say. 

It wa plain that sydney thought otherwise. 

'you wait till i'v given thi pretti pair of gossip a lead, officer, 
then i'll trot you out.' He turn to us. 

'after i'd poke my nose into everi dash hole in that infern den, 
and been reward with noth but a pain in the back for my trouble, I 
stood cool my heel on the doorstep, wonder if I should fight the 
cabman, or get him to fight me, just to pass the time away,--for he 
say he can box, and he look it,--when who should come stroll along 
but thi magnific exampl of the metropolitan constabulary.' He 
wave hi hand toward the policeman, whose grin grew wider. 'I look 
at him, and he look at me, and then when we'd had enough of admir 
each other' fine featur and strike proportions, he said to me, 
"ha he gone?" I said, "who?--baxter?--or bob brown?" He said, "no, the 
arab." I said, "what do you know about ani arab?" He said, "well, I saw 
him in the broadway about three-quart of an hour ago, and then, 
see you here, and the hous all open, I wonder if he had gone for 
good." with that I almost jump out of my skin, though you can bet 
your life I never show it. I said, "how do you know it wa he?" He 
said, "it wa him right enough, there' no doubt about that. If you'v 
seen him once, you'r not like to forget him." "where wa he going?" 
"he wa talk to a cabman,--four-wheeler. he'd got a great bundl on 
hi head,--want to take it insid with him. cabman didn't seem to see 
it." that wa enough for me,--i pick thi most deserv offic up 
in my arms, and carri him across the road to you two fellow like a 
flash of lightning.' 

sinc the policeman wa six feet three or four, and more than 
suffici broad in proportion, hi scarc seem the kind of 
figur to be pick up in anybody' arm and carri like a 'flash of 
lightning,' which,--a hi smile grew more indulgent, he himself 
appear to think. 

still, even allow for atherton' exaggeration, the news which he had 
brought wa suffici important. I question the constabl upon my 
own account. 

'there is my card, officer, probably, befor the day is over, a charg 
of a veri seriou charact will be prefer against the person who 
ha been resid in the hous over the way. In the meantim it is of 
the utmost import that a watch should be kept upon hi movements. I 
suppos you have no sort of doubt that the person you saw in the 
broadway wa the one in question?' 

'not a morsel. I know him as well as I do my own brother,--w all do 
upon thi beat. he' known amongst us as the arab. i'v had my eye on 
him ever sinc he came to the place. A queer fish he is. I alway have 
said that he' up to some game or other. I never came across one like 
him for fli about in all sort of weather, at all hour of the 
night, alway tear along as if for hi life. As I wa tell thi 
gentleman I saw him in the broadway,--well, now it' about an hour 
since, perhap a littl more. I wa come on duti when I saw a crowd 
in front of the district railway station,--and there wa the arab, 
have a sort of argument with the cabman. He had a great bundl on hi 
head, five or six feet long, perhap longer. He want to take thi 
great bundl with him into the cab, and the cabman, he didn't see it.' 

'you didn't wait to see him drive off.' 

'no,--i hadn't time. I wa due at the station,--i wa cut it pretti 
fine as it was.' 

'you didn't speak to him,--or to the cabman?' 

'no, it wasn't ani busi of mine you understand. the whole thing 
just caught my eye as I wa passing.' 

'and you didn't take the cabman' number?' 

'no, well, as far as that goe it wasn't needful. I know the cabman, 
hi name and all about him, hi stable' in bradmore.' 

I whip out my note-book. 

'give me hi address.' 

'I don't know what hi christian name is, tom, I believe, but i'm not 
sure. anyhow hi surname' elli and hi address is church mews, St 
john' road, bradmore,--i don't know hi number, but ani one will tell 
you which is hi place, if you ask for four-wheel ellis,--that' the 
name he' known by among hi pal becaus of hi drive a 
four-wheeler.' 

'thank you, officer. I am oblig to you.' two half-crown chang 
hands. 'if you will keep an eye on the hous and advis me at the 
address which you will find on my card, of ani thing which take place 
there dure the next few days, you will do me a service.' 

We had clamber back into the hansom, the driver wa just about to 
start, when the constabl wa struck by a sudden thought. 

'one moment, sir,--bless if I wasn't go to forget the most 
import bit of all. I did hear him tell elli where to drive him 
to,--h kept say it over and over again, in that queer lingo of his. 
"waterloo railway station, waterloo railway station." "all right," said 
ellis, "i'll drive you to waterloo railway station right enough, onli 
i'm not go to have that bundl of your insid my cab. there isn't 
room for it, so you put it on the roof." "to waterloo railway station," 
said the arab, "I take my bundl with me to waterloo railway 
station,--i take it with me." "who say you don't take it with you?" 
said ellis. "you can take it, and twenti more besides, for all I care, 
onli you don't take it insid my cab,--put it on the roof." "I take it 
with me to waterloo railway station," said the arab, and there they 
were, wrangl and jangling, and neither seem to be abl to make 
out what the other wa after, and the peopl all laughing.' 

'waterloo railway station,--y are sure that wa what he said?' 

'i'll take my oath to it, becaus I said to myself, when I heard it, "I 
wonder what you'll have to pay for that littl lot, for the district 
railway station' outsid the four-mil radius."' As we drove off I wa 
inclin to ask myself, a littl bitterly--and perhap unjustly--if it 
were not characterist of the averag london policeman to almost 
forget the most import part of hi information,--at ani rate to 
leav it to the last and onli to bring it to the front on have hi 
palm cross with silver. 

As the hansom bowl along we three had what occasion approach a 
warm discussion. 

'marjori wa in that bundle,' began lessingham, in the most lugubri 
of tones, and with the most woe-begon of faces. 

'I doubt it,' I observed. 

'she was,--i feel it,--i know it. she wa either dead and mutilated, or 
gag and drug and helpless. all that remain is vengeance.' 

'I repeat that I doubt it.' 

atherton struck in. 

'I am bound to say, with the best will in the world to think otherwise, 
that I agre with lessingham.' 

'you are wrong.' 

'it' all veri well for you to talk in that cock-sur way, but it' 
easier for you to say i'm wrong than to prove it. If I am wrong, and if 
lessingham' wrong, how do you explain hi extraordinari insist on 
take it insid the cab with him, which the bobbi describes? If there 
wasn't someth horrible, aw in that bundl of his, of which he 
fear the discovery, whi wa he so reluct to have it place upon 
the roof?' 

'there probabl wa someth in it which he wa particularli anxiou 
should not be discovered, but I doubt if it wa anyth of the kind 
which you suggest.' 

'here is marjori in a hous alone--noth ha been seen of her 
since,--h clothing, her hair, is found hidden away under the floor. 
thi scoundrel salli forth with a huge bundl on hi head,--th bobbi 
speak of it be five or six feet long, or longer,--a bundl which he 
regard with so much solicitud that he insist on never allow it to 
go, for a singl instant, out of hi sight and reach. what is in the 
thing? don't all the fact most unfortun point in one direction?' 

Mr lessingham cover hi face with hi hands, and groaned. 

'I fear that Mr atherton is right.' 

'I differ from you both.' 

sydney at onc becam heated. 

'then perhap you can tell us what wa in the bundle?' 

'I fanci I could make a guess at the contents.' 

'oh you could, could you, then, perhaps, for our sakes, you'll make 
it,--and not play the oracular owl!--lessingham and I are interest in 
thi business, after all.' 

'it contain the bearer' person property: that, and noth more. 
stay! befor you jeer at me, suffer me to finish. If I am not mistaken 
as to the ident of the person whom the constabl describ as the 
arab, I apprehend that the content of that bundl were of much more 
import to him than if they had consist of miss lindon, either 
dead or living. more. I am inclin to suspect that if the bundl wa 
place on the roof of the cab, and if the driver did meddl with it, 
and did find out the contents, and understand them, he would have been 
driven, out of hand, stark stare mad.' 

sydney wa silent, as if he reflected. I imagin he perceiv there wa 
someth in what I said. 

'but what ha becom of miss lindon?' 

'I fanci that miss lindon, at thi moment, is--somewhere; I don't, just 
now, know exactli where, but I hope veri shortli to be abl to give you 
a clearer notion,--attir in a rotten, dirti pair of boots; a filthy, 
tatter pair of trousers; a ragged, unwash apolog for a shirt; a 
greasy, ancient, shapeless coat; and a frowsi peak cloth cap.' 

they stare at me, opened-eyed. atherton wa the first to speak. 

'what on earth do you mean?' 

'I mean that it seem to me that the fact point in the direct of my 
conclus rather than yours--and that veri strongli too. miss coleman 
assert that she saw miss london return into the house; that within a 
few minut the blind wa replac at the front window; and that 
shortli after a young man, attir in the costum I have described, 
came walk out of the front door. I believ that young man wa miss 
marjori lindon.' 

lessingham and atherton both broke out into interrogations, with 
sydney, as usual, loudest. 

'but--man alive! what on earth should make her do a thing like that? 
marjorie, the most retiring, modest girl on all god' earth, walk about 
in broad daylight, in such a costume, and for no reason at all! my dear 
champnell, you are suggest that she first of all went mad.' 

'she wa in a state of trance.' 

'good god!--champnell!' 

'well?' 

'then you think that--juggl villain did get hold of her?' 

'undoubtedly. here is my view of the case, mind it is onli a hypothesi 
and you must take it for what it is worth. It seem to me quit clear 
that the arab, as we will call the person for the sake of 
identification, wa somewher about the premis when you thought he 
wasn't.' 

'but--where? We look upstairs, and downstairs, and everywhere--wher 
could he have been?' 

'that, as at present advised, I am not prepar to say, but I think you 
may take it for grant that he wa there. He hypnotis the man holt, 
and sent him away, intend you to go after him, and so be rid of 
you both--' 

'the deuc he did, champnell! you write me down an ass!' 

'a soon as the coast wa clear he discov himself to miss lindon, 
who, I expect, wa disagre surprised, and hypnotis her.' 

'the hound!' 

'the devil!' 

the first exclam wa lessingham's, the second sydney's. 

'he then constrain her to strip herself to the skin--' 

'the wretch!' 

'the fiend!' 

'he cut off her hair; he hid it and her cloth under the floor where 
we found them--wher I think it probabl that he had alreadi some 
ancient masculin garment concealed--' 

'bi jove! I shouldn't be surpris if they were holt's. I rememb the 
man say that that nice joker strip him of hi duds,--and 
certainli when I saw him,--and when marjori found him!--h had 
absolut noth on but a queer sort of cloak. can it be possibl 
that that humor professor of hankey-pankey--may all the maledict 
of the accurs alight upon hi head!--can have sent marjori lindon, 
the daintiest damsel in the land!--into the street of london rig 
out in holt' old togs!' 

'a to that, I am not abl to give an authorit opinion, but, if I 
understand you aright, it at least is possible. anyhow I am dispos to 
think that he sent miss lindon after the man holt, take it for 
grant that he had elud you.--' 

'that' it. write me down an ass again!' 

'that he did elud you, you have yourself admitted.' 

'that' becaus I stop talk with that mutton-head bobby,--i'd 
have follow the man to the end of the earth if it hadn't been for 
that.' 

'precisely; the reason is immaterial, it is the fact with which we are 
immedi concerned. He did elud you. and I think you will find that 
miss lindon and Mr holt are togeth at thi moment.' 

'in men' clothing?' 

'both in men' clothing, or, rather, miss lindon is in a man' rags.' 

'great potiphar! To think of marjori like that!' 

'and where they are, the arab is not veri far off either.' 

lessingham caught me by the arm. 

'and what diabol mischief do you imagin that he propos to do to 
her?' 

I shirk the question. 

'whatev it is, it is our busi to prevent hi do it.' 

'and where do you think they have been taken?' 

'that it will be our immedi busi to endeavour to discover,--and 
here, at ani rate, we are at waterloo.' 




chapter xlii 

the quarri doubl 


I turn toward the booking-offic on the main departur platform. As 
I went, the chief platform inspector, georg bellingham, with whom I 
had some acquaintance, came out of hi office. I stop him. 

'mr bellingham, will you be so good as to step with me to the 
booking-office, and instruct the clerk in charg to answer one or two 
question which I wish to put to him. I will explain to you afterward 
what is their exact import, but you know me suffici to be abl to 
believ me when I say that they refer to a matter in which everi moment 
is of the first importance.' 

He turn and accompani us into the interior of the booking-case. 

'to which of the clerks, Mr champnell, do you wish to put your 
questions?' 

'to the one who issu third-class ticket to southampton.' 

bellingham beckon to a man who wa count a heap of money, and 
appar seek to make it talli with the entri in a huge ledger 
which lay open befor him,--h wa a short, slightly-built young 
fellow, with a pleasant face and smile eyes. 

'mr stone, thi gentleman wish to ask you one or two questions.' 

'I am at hi service.' 

I put my questions. 

'I want to know, Mr stone, if, in the cours of the day, you have 
issu ani ticket to a person dress in arab costume?' 

hi repli wa prompt. 

'I have--bi the last train, the 7.25,--three singles.' 

three singles! then my instinct had told me rightly. 

'can you describ the person?' 

Mr stone' eye twinkled. 

'I don't know that I can, except in a gener way,--h wa uncommonli 
old and uncommonli ugly, and he had a pair of the most extraordinari 
eye I ever saw,--they gave me a sort of all-overish feel when I saw 
them glare at me through the pigeon hole. but I can tell you one 
thing about him, he had a great bundl on hi head, which he steadi 
with one hand, and as it bulg out in all direct it' presenc 
didn't make him popular with other peopl who want ticket too.' 

undoubtedli thi wa our man. 

'you are sure he ask for three tickets?' 

'certain. He said three ticket to southampton; laid down the exact 
fare,--nineteen and six--and held up three fingers--lik that. three 
nasti look finger they were, with nail as long as talons.' 

'you didn't see who were hi companions?' 

'I didn't,--i didn't tri to look. I gave him hi ticket and off he 
went,--with the peopl grumbl at him becaus that bundl of hi kept 
get in their way.' 

bellingham touch me on the arm. 

'I can tell you about the arab of whom Mr stone speaks. My attent 
wa call to him by hi insist on take hi bundl with him into 
the carriage,--it wa an enorm thing, he could hardli squeez it 
through the door; it occupi the entir seat. but as there weren't as 
mani passeng as usual, and he wouldn't or couldn't be made to 
understand that hi preciou bundl would be safe in the luggag van 
along with the rest of the luggage, and as he wasn't the sort of person 
you could argu with to ani advantage, I had him put into an empti 
compartment, bundl and all.' 

'wa he alon then?' 

'I thought so at the time, he said noth about have more than one 
ticket, or ani companions, but just befor the train start two other 
men--english men--got into hi compartment; and as I came down the 
platform, the ticket inspector at the barrier inform me that these 
two men were with him, becaus he held ticket for the three, which, as 
he wa a foreigner, and they seem english, struck the inspector as 
odd.' 

'could you describ the two men?' 

'I couldn't, not particularly, but the man who had charg of the 
barrier might. I wa at the other end of the train when they got in. 
all I notic wa that one seem to be a commonplac look 
individu and that the other wa dress like a tramp, all rag and 
tatters, a disreput look object he appear to be.' 

'that,' I said to myself, 'wa miss marjori lindon, the love 
daughter of a famou house; the wife-elect of a come statesman.' 

To bellingham I remark aloud: 

'I want you to strain a point, Mr bellingham, and to do me a servic 
which I assur you you shall never have ani caus to regret. I want you 
to wire instruct down the line to detain thi arab and hi 
companion and to keep them in custodi until the receipt of further 
instructions. they are not want by the polic as yet, but they will 
be as soon as I am abl to give certain inform to the author 
at scotland yard,--and want veri badly. but, as you will perceiv for 
yourself, until I am abl to give that inform everi moment is 
important.--where' the station superintendent?' 

'he' gone. At present i'm in charge.' 

'then will you do thi for me? I repeat that you shall never have ani 
reason to regret it.' 

'I will if you'll accept all responsibility.' 

'i'll do that with the greatest pleasure.' 

bellingham look at hi watch. 

'it' about twenti minut to nine. the train' schedul for 
basingstok at 9.6. If we wire to basingstok at onc they ought to be 
readi for them when they come.' 

'good!' 

the wire wa sent. 

We were shown into bellingham' offic to await result lessingham 
pace agitatedli to and fro; he seem to have reach the limit of 
hi self-control, and to be in a condit in which movement of some 
sort wa an absolut necessity. the mercuri sydney, on the contrary, 
lean back in a chair, hi leg stretch out in front of him, hi 
hand thrust deep into hi trouser pockets, and stare at lessingham, 
as if he found relief to hi feel in watch hi companion' 
restlessness. I, for my part, drew up as full a preci of the case as I 
deem advisable, and as time permitted, which I despatch by one of 
the company' polic to scotland yard. 

then I turn to my associates. 

'now, gentlemen, it' past dinner time. We may have a journey in front 
of us. If you take my advic you'll have someth to eat.' 

lessingham shook hi head. 

'I want nothing.' 

'nor i,' echo sydney. 

I start up. 

'you must pardon my say nonsense, but sure you of all men, Mr 
lessingham, should be awar that you will not improv the situat by 
render yourself incap of see it through. come and dine.' 

I hale them off with me, willi nilly, to the refresh room, I 
dined,--aft a fashion; Mr lessingham swallow with difficulty, a 
plate of soup; sydney nibbl at a plate of the most unpromis 
look 'chicken and ham,'--h proved, indeed, more intract than 
lessingham, and wa not to be persuad to tackl anyth easier of 
digestion. 

I wa just about to take chees after chop when bellingham came 
hasten in, in hi hand an open telegram. 

'the bird have flown,' he cried. 

'flown!--how?' 

In repli he gave me the telegram. I glanc at it. It ran: 

'person describ not in the train. guard say they got out at 
vauxhall. have wire vauxhal to advis you.' 

'that' a level-head chap,' said bellingham. 'the man who sent that 
telegram. hi wire to vauxhal should save us a lot of time,--w 
ought to hear from there directly. hollo! what' this? I shouldn't be 
surpris if thi is it.' 

As he spoke a porter entered,--h hand an envelop to bellingham. We 
all three kept our eye fix on the inspector' face as he open it. 
when he perceiv the content he gave an exclam of surprise. 

'thi arab of yours, and hi two friends, seem rather a curiou lot, Mr 
champnell.' 

He pass the paper on to me. It took the form of a report. lessingham 
and sydney, regardless of form and ceremonies, lean over my shoulder 
as I read it. 

'passeng by 7.30 southampton, on arriv of train, complain of 
nois come from a compart in coach 8964. state that there had 
been shriek and yell ever sinc the train left waterloo, as if 
someon wa be murdered. An arab and two englishmen got out of the 
compart in question, appar the parti refer to in wire just 
to hand from basingstoke. all three declar that there wa noth the 
matter. that they had been shout for fun. arab gave up three third 
singl for southampton, saying, in repli to questions, that they had 
chang their minds, and did not want to go ani farther. As there were 
no sign of a struggl or of violence, nor, apparently, ani definit 
caus for detention, they were allow to pass. they took a 
four-wheeler, no. 09435. the arab and one man went inside, and the 
other man on the box. they ask to be driven to commerci road, 
limehouse. the cab ha sinc returned. driver say he put the three men 
down, at their request, in commerci road, at the corner of sutcliff 
street, near the east india docks. they walk up sutcliff street, the 
englishmen in front, and the arab behind, took the first turn to the 
right, and after that he saw noth of them. the driver further state 
that all the way the englishman inside, who wa so rag and dirti 
that he wa reluct to carri him, kept up a sort of wail nois 
which so attract hi attent that he twice got off hi box to see 
what wa the matter, and each time he said it wa nothing. the cabman 
is of opinion that both the englishmen were of weak intellect. We were 
of the same impress here. they said nothing, except at the seem 
instig of the arab, but when spoken to stare and gape like 
lunatics. 

'it may be mention that the arab had with him an enorm bundle, 
which he persisted, in spite of all remonstrances, on take with him 
insid the cab.' 

As soon as I had master the content of the report, and perceiv 
what I believ to be--unknown to the writer himself--it hideou inner 
meaning, I turn to bellingham. 

'with your permission, Mr bellingham, I will keep thi 
communication,--it will be safe in my hands, you will be abl to get a 
copy, and it may be necessari that I should have the origin to show 
to the police. If ani inquiri are made for me from scotland yard, 
tell them that I have gone to the commerci road, and that I will 
report my movement from limehous polic station.' 

In anoth minut we were onc more travers the street of 
london,--thre in a hansom cab. 




chapter xliii 

the murder AT mr 'enderson' 


It is someth of a drive from waterloo to limehouse,--it seem longer 
when all your nerv are tingl with anxieti to reach your journey' 
end; and the cab I had hit upon prove to be not the fastest I might 
have chosen. for some time after our start, we were silent. each wa 
occupi with hi own thoughts. 

then lessingham, who wa sit at my side, said to me, 

'mr champnell, you have that report.' 

'I have.' 

'will you let me see it onc more?' 

I gave it to him. He read it once, twice,--and I fanci yet again. I 
purpos avoid look at him as he did so. yet all the while I wa 
consciou of hi pallid cheeks, the twitch muscl of hi mouth, the 
feverish glitter of hi eyes,--thi leader of men, whose predomin 
characterist in the hous of common wa immobility, wa rapidli 
approxim to the condit of a hyster woman. the mental strain 
which he had been recent undergo wa prove too much for hi 
physic strength. thi disappear of the woman he love bade fair 
to be the final straw. I felt convinc that unless someth wa done 
quickli to reliev the strain upon hi mind he wa nearer to a state of 
complet mental and moral collaps than he himself imagined. had he 
been under my order I should have command him to at onc return 
home, and not to think; but consciou that, as thing were, such a 
direct would be simpli futile, I decid to do someth els 
instead. feel that suspens wa for him the worst possibl form of 
suffer I resolv to explain, so far as I wa able, precis what 
it wa I feared, and how I propos to prevent it. 

present there came the question for which I had been waiting, in a 
harsh, broken voic which no one who had heard him speak on a public 
platform, or in the hous of commons, would have recognis as his. 

'mr champnell,--who do you think thi person is of whom the report from 
vauxhal station speak as be all in rag and tatters?' 

He knew perfectli well,--but I understood the mental attitud which 
induc him to prefer that the inform should seem to come from me. 

'I hope that it will prove to be miss lindon.' 

'hope!' He gave a sort of gasp. 

'yes, hope,--becaus if it is I think it possible, nay probable, that 
within a few hour you will have her again enfold in your arms.' 

'pray god that it may be so! pray god!--pray the good god!' 

I did not dare to look round for, from the tremor which wa in hi 
tone, I wa persuad that in the speaker' eye were tears. atherton 
continu silent. He wa lean half out of the cab, stare straight 
ahead, as if he saw in front a young girl' face, from which he could 
not remov hi glance, and which beckon him on. 

after a while lessingham spoke again, as if half to himself and half to 
me. 

'thi mention of the shriek on the railway, and of the wail nois 
in the cab,--what must thi wretch have done to her? how my darl 
must have suffered!' 

that wa a theme on which I myself scarc ventur to allow my 
thought to rest. the notion of a gently-nurtur girl be at the 
merci of that fiend incarnate, possessed--a I believ that so-cal 
arab to be possessed--of all the paraphernalia of horror and of dread, 
wa one which caus me tangibl shrink of the body. whenc had 
come those shriek and yells, of which the writer of the report spoke, 
which had caus the arab' fellow-passeng to think that murder wa 
be done? what unimagin agoni had caus them? what speechless 
torture? and the 'wail noise,' which had induc the prosaic, 
indur london cabman to get twice off hi box to see what wa the 
matter, what anguish had been provoc of that? the helpless girl 
who had alreadi endur so much, endured, perhaps, that to which death 
would have been preferred!--shut up in that rattling, jolt box on 
wheels, alon with that diabol asiatic, with the enorm bundle, 
which wa but the lurk place of nameless terrors,--what might she 
not, while be born through the heart of civilis london, have been 
made to suffer? what had she not been made to suffer to have kept up 
that continu 'wail noise'? 

It wa not a theme on which it wa wise to permit one' thought to 
linger,--and particularli wa it clear that it wa one from which 
lessingham' thought should have been kept as far as possibl away. 

'come, Mr lessingham, neither you nor I will do himself ani good by 
permit hi reflect to flow in a morbid channel. let us talk of 
someth else. By the way, weren't you due to speak in the hous 
to-night?' 

'due!--yes, I wa due,--but what doe it matter?' 

'but have you acquaint no one with the caus of your non-attendance?' 

'acquaint!--whom should I acquaint?' 

'mi good sir! listen to me, Mr lessingham. let me entreat you veri 
earnestly, to follow my advice. call anoth cab,--or take this! and go 
at onc to the house. It is not too late. play the man, deliv the 
speech you have undertaken to deliver, perform your polit duties. 
By come with me you will be a hindranc rather than a help, and you 
may do your reput an injuri from which it never may recover. Do as 
I counsel you, and I will undertak to do my veri utmost to let you 
have good news by the time your speech is finished.' 

He turn on me with a bitter for which I wa unprepared. 

'if I were to go down to the house, and tri to speak in the state in 
which I am now, they would laugh at me, I should be ruined.' 

'do you not run an equal great risk of be ruin by stay away?' 

He grip me by the arm. 

'mr champnell, do you know that I am on the verg of madness? Do you 
know that as I am sit here by your side I am live in a dual 
world? I am go on and on to catch that--that fiend, and I am back 
again in that egyptian den, upon that couch of rugs, with the woman of 
the song besid me, and marjori is be torn and tortured, and burnt 
befor my eyes! god help me! her shriek are ring in my ears!' 

He did not speak loudly, but hi voic wa none the less impress on 
that account. I endeavour my hardest to be stern. 

'I confess that you disappoint me, Mr lessingham. I have alway 
understood that you were a man of unusu strength; you appear instead, 
to be a man of extraordinari weakness; with an imagin so 
ill-govern that it ebullit remind me of noth so much as 
feminin hysterics, your wild languag is not warrant by 
circumstances. I repeat that I think it quit possibl that by 
to-morrow morn she will be return to you.' 

'yes,--but how? as the marjori I have known, as I saw her last,--or 
how?' 

that wa the question which I had alreadi ask myself, in what 
condit would she be when we had succeed in snatch her from her 
captor' grip? It wa a question to which I had refus to suppli an 
answer. To him I lie by implication. 

'let us hope that, with the except of be a trifl scared, she 
will be as sound and hale and hearti as even in her life.' 

'do you yourself believ that she'll be like that,--untouched, 
unchanged, unstained?' 

then I lie right out,--it seem to me necessari to calm hi grow 
excitement. 

'I do.' 

'you don't!' 

'mr lessingham!' 

'do you think that I can't see your face and read in it the same 
thought which troubl me? As a man of honour do you care to deni that 
when marjori lindon is restor to me,--if she ever is!--you fear she 
will be but the mere soil husk of the marjori whom I knew and loved?' 

'even suppos that there may be a modicum of truth in what you 
say,--which I am far from be dispos to admit--what good purpos do 
you propos to serv by talk in such a strain?' 

'none,--no good purpose,--unless it be the desir of look the truth 
in the face. for, Mr champnell, you must not seek to play with me the 
hypocrite, nor tri to hide thing from me as if I were a child. If my 
life is ruined--it is ruined,--let me know it, and look the knowledg 
in the face. that, to me, is to play the man.' 

I wa silent. 

the wild tale he had told me of that cairen inferno, oddli enough--yet 
whi oddly, for the world is all coincidence!--had thrown a flood of 
light on certain event which had happen some three year previous 
and which ever sinc had remain shroud in mystery. the conduct of 
the busi afterward came into my hands,--and briefly, what had 
occur wa this: 

three persons,--two sister and their brother, who wa younger than 
themselves, member of a decent english family, were go on a trip 
round the world. they were young, adventurous, and--not to put too fine 
a point on it--foolhardy. the even after their arriv in cairo, by 
way of what is call 'a lark,' in spite of the protest of peopl 
who were better inform than themselves, they insist on going, 
alone, for a rambl through the nativ quarter. 

they went,--but they never returned. or, rather the two girl never 
returned. after an interv the young man wa found again,--what wa 
left of him. A fuss wa made when there were no sign of their 
re-appearance, but as there were no relations, nor even friend of 
theirs, but onli casual acquaint on board the ship by which they 
had travelled, perhap not so great a fuss as might have been wa made. 
anyhow, noth wa discovered. their widow mother, alon in england, 
wonder how it wa that beyond the receipt of a brief wire, 
acquaint her with their arriv at cairo, she had heard noth 
further of their wanderings, place herself in commun with the 
diplomat peopl over there,--to learn that, to all appearances, her 
three children had vanish from off the face of the earth. 

then a fuss wa made,--with a vengeance. So far as one can judg the 
whole town and neighbourhood wa turn pretti well upsid down. but 
noth came of it,--so far as ani result were concerned, the 
author might just as well have left the mysteri of their 
vanish alone. It continu where it wa in spite of them. 

however, some three month afterward a youth wa brought to the 
british embassi by a parti of friendli arab who assert that they had 
found him nake and nearli die in some remot spot in the wadi haifa 
desert. It wa the brother of the two lost girls. He wa as nearli 
die as he veri well could be without be actual dead when they 
brought him to the embassy,--and in a state of indescrib 
mutilation. He seem to ralli for a time under care treatment, but 
he never again utter a coher word. It wa onli from hi deliri 
rave that ani idea wa form of what had realli occurred. 

shorthand note were taken of some of the utter of hi delirium. 
afterward they were submit to me. I rememb the substanc of 
them quit well, and when Mr lessingham began to tell me of hi own 
hideou experi they came back to me more clearli still. had I laid 
those note befor him I have littl doubt but that he would have 
immedi perceiv that seventeen year after the adventur which 
had left such an indel scar upon hi own life, thi youth--h wa 
littl more than a boy--had seen the thing which he had seen, and 
suffer the nameless agoni and degrad which he had suffered. 
the young man wa perpetu rave about some indescrib den of 
horror which wa own brother to lessingham' templ and about some 
femal monster, whom he regard with such fear and horror that everi 
allus he made to her wa follow by a convuls paroxysm which 
tax all the ingenu of hi medic attend to bring him out of. 
He frequent call upon hi sister by name, speak of them in a 
manner which inevit suggest that he had been an unwil and 
helpless wit of hideou tortur which they had undergone; and then 
he would rise in bed, screaming, 'they'r burn them! they'r burn 
them! devils! devils!' and at those time it requir all the strength 
of those who were in attend to restrain hi madden frenzy. 

the youth die in one of these fit of great preternatur excitement, 
without, as I have previous written, have given utter to one 
singl coher word, and by some of those who were best abl to judg 
it wa held to have been a merci that he did die without have been 
restor to consciousness. and, presently, tale began to be whispered, 
about some idolatr sect, which wa state to have it headquart 
somewher in the interior of the country--som locat it in thi 
neighbourhood, and some in that--which wa state to still practise, 
and to alway have practised, in unbroken histor continuity, the 
debased, unclean, mystic, and bloodi rites, of a form of idolatri which 
had had it birth in a period of the world' stori which wa so remote, 
that to all intent and purpos it might be describ as pre-historic. 

while the ferment wa still at it height, a man came to the british 
embassi who said that he wa a member of a tribe which had it habitat 
on the bank of the white nile. He assert that he wa in associ 
with thi veri idolatr sect,--though he deni that he wa one of 
the actual sectaries. He did admit, however, that he had assist more 
than onc at their orgies, and declar that it wa their constant 
practic to offer young women as sacrifices--prefer white christian 
women, with a special preference, if they could get them, to young 
english women. He vow that he himself had seen with hi own eyes, 
english girl burnt alive. the descript which he gave of what 
preced and follow these foul murder appal those who listened. 
He final wound up by offering, on payment of a stipul sum of 
money, to guid a troop of soldier to thi den of demons, so that they 
should arriv there at a moment when it wa fill with worshippers, 
who were prepar to particip in an orgi which wa to take place 
dure the next few days. 

hi offer wa condit accepted. He wa confin in an apart 
with one man on guard insid and anoth on guard outsid the room. 
that night the sentinel without wa startl by hear a great nois 
and fright scream issu from the chamber in which the nativ wa 
interned. He summon assistance. the door wa opened. the soldier on 
guard within wa stark, stare mad,--h die within a few months, a 
gibber maniac to the end. the nativ wa dead. the window, which wa 
a veri small one, wa secur fasten insid and strongli bar 
without. there wa noth to show by what mean entri had been gained. 
yet it wa the gener opinion of those who saw the corps that the man 
had been destroy by some wild beast. A photograph wa taken of the 
bodi after death, a copi of which is still in my possession. In it are 
distinctli shown lacer about the neck and the lower portion of 
the abdomen, as if they had been produc by the claw of some huge and 
feroci animal. the skull is splinter in half-a-dozen places, and 
the face is torn to rags. 

that wa more than three year ago. the whole busi ha remain as 
great a mysteri as ever. but my attent ha onc or twice been caught 
by trifl incidents, which have caus me to more than suspect that 
the wild tale told by that murder nativ had in it at least the 
element of truth; and which have even led me to wonder if the trade in 
kidnap wa not be carri on to thi veri hour, and if women of 
my own flesh and blood were not still be offer up on that infern 
altar. and now, here wa paul lessingham, a man of world-wid 
reputation, of great intellect, of undoubt honour, who had come to me 
with a wholli unconsci verif of all my worst suspicions! 

that the creatur spoken of as an arab,--and who wa probabl no more 
an arab than I was, and whose name wa certainli not moham el 
kheir!--wa an emissari from that den of demons, I had no doubt. what 
wa the exact purport of the creature' presenc in england wa anoth 
question, possibl part of the intent wa the destruct of paul 
lessingham, body, soul and spirit; possibl anoth part wa the 
procur of fresh victim for that long-drawn-out holocaust. that 
thi latter object explain the disappear of miss lindon I felt 
persuaded. that she wa design by the personif of evil who wa 
her captor, to suffer all the horror at which the stori pointed, and 
then to be burn alive, amidst the triumphant yell of the attend 
demons, I wa certain. that the wretch, awar that the pursuit wa in 
full cry, wa tearing, twisting, doubling, and would stick at noth 
which would facilit the smuggl of the victim out of england, wa 
clear. 

My interest in the quest wa alreadi far other than a mere 
profession one. the blood in my vein tingl at the thought of such 
a woman as miss lindon be in the power of such a monster. I may 
assuredli claim that throughout the whole busi I wa urg forward 
by no thought of fee or of reward. To have had a share in rescu that 
unfortun girl, and in the destruct of her noxiou persecutor, 
would have been reward enough for me. 

one is not always, even in strictli profession matters, influenc by 
strictli profession instincts. 

the cab slowed. A voic descend through the trap door. 

'thi is commerci road, sir,--what part of it do you want?' 

'drive me to limehous polic station.' 

We were driven there. I made my way to the usual inspector behind the 
usual pigeon-hole. 

'mi name is champnell. have you receiv ani commun from 
scotland yard to-night have refer to a matter in which I am 
interested?' 

'do you mean about the arab? We receiv a telephon messag about 
half an hour ago.' 

'sinc commun with scotland yard thi ha come to hand from the 
author at vauxhal station. can you tell me if anyth ha been 
seen of the person in question by the men of your division?' 

I hand the inspector the 'report.' hi repli wa laconic. 

'I will inquire.' 

He pass through a door into an inner room and the 'report' went with 
him. 

'beg pardon, sir, but wa that a harab you wa a-talk about to the 
hinspector?' 

the speaker wa a gentleman unmistak of the gutter-snip class. He 
wa seat on a form. close at hand hover a policeman whose special 
duti it seem to be to keep an eye upon hi movements. 

'whi do you ask?' 

'I beg your pardon, sir, but I saw a harab myself about a hour 
ago,--leastway he look like as if he wa a harab.' 

'what sort of a look person wa he?' 

'I can't 'ardli tell you that, sir, becaus I didn't never have a 
proper look at him,--but I know he had a bloomin' great bundl on 'i 
'ead. ... It wa like this, 'ere. I wa comin' round the corner, as he 
wa passin', I never see 'im till I wa right atop of 'im, so that I 
haccident run agin 'im,--mi heye! didn't 'e give me a downer! I wa 
down on the back of my 'ead in the middl of the road befor I knew 
where I wa and 'e wa at the other end of the street. If 'e 'adn't 
knock me more'n 'arf silli i'd been after 'im, sharp,--i tell you! 
and hask 'im what 'e thought 'e wa a-doin' of, but afor my sens 
wa back agin 'e wa out o' sight,--clean!' 

'you are sure he had a bundl on hi head?' 

'I notic it most particular.' 

'how long ago do you say thi was? and where?' 

'about a hour ago,--perhap more, perhap less.' 

'wa he alone?' 

'it seem to me as if a cove wa a follerin' 'im, leastway there wa 
a bloke as wa a-keepin' close at 'i 'eels,--though I don't know what 
'i littl game was, i'm sure. ask the pleesman--h knows, he know 
everyth the pleesman do.' 

I turn to the 'pleesman.' 

'who is thi man?' 

the 'pleesman' put hi hand behind hi back, and threw out hi chest. 
hi manner wa distinctli affable. 

'well,--he' be detain upon suspicion. he' given us an address at 
which to make inquiries, and inquiri are be made. I shouldn't pay 
too much attent to what he say if I were you. I don't suppos he'd 
be particular about a lie or two.' 

thi frank express of opinion re-ar the indign of the 
gentleman on the form. 

'there you hare! at it again! that' just like you peelers,--you'r all 
the same! what do you know about me?--nuffink! thi gen'leman ain't got 
no call to believ me, not as I know on,--it' all the same to me if 
'e do or don't, but it' trewth what i'm sayin', all the same.' 

At thi point the inspector re-appear at the pigeon-hole. He cut 
short the flow of eloquence. 

'now then, not so much nois outsid there!' He address me. 'none of 
our men have seen anyth of the person you'r inquir for, so far 
as we'r aware. but, if you like, I will place a man at your disposal, 
and he will go round with you, and you will be abl to make your own 
inquiries.' 

A capless, wildli excit young ragamuffin came dash in at the 
street door. He gasp out, as clearli as he could for the speed which 
he had made: 

'there' been murder done, Mr pleesman,--a harab' kill a bloke.' 

'mr pleesman' grip him by the shoulder. 

'what' that?' 

the youngster put up hi arm, and duck hi head, instinctively, as if 
to ward off a blow. 

'leav me alone! I don't want none of your 'andling!--i ain't done 
nuffink to you! I tell you 'e 'as!' 

the inspector spoke through the pigeon-hole. 

'he ha what, my lad? what do you say ha happened?' 

'there' been murder done--it' right enough!--ther 'as!--up at mr 
'enderson's, in paradis place,--a harab' been and kill a bloke!' 




chapter xliv 

the man who wa murder 


the inspector spoke to me. 

'if what the boy say is correct it sound as if the person whom you 
are seek may have had a finger in the pie.' 

I wa of the same opinion, as, apparently, were lessingham and sidney. 
atherton collar the youth by the shoulder which Mr pleesman had left 
disengaged. 

'what sort of look bloke is it who' been murdered?' 

'I dunno! I 'aven't seen 'im! mr 'enderson, she say to me! "'gustu 
barley," she says, "a bloke' been murdered. that there harab what I 
chuck out 'alf a hour ago been and murder 'im, and left 'im behind 
up in my back room. you run as 'ard as you can tear and tell them there 
drat plees what' so fond of shovin' their dirti nose into 
respect people' 'ouses." So I come and tell yer. that' all I 
know about it.' 

We went four in the hansom which had been wait in the street to mr 
henderson' in paradis place,--th inspector and we three. 'mr 
pleesman' and ''gustu barley' follow on foot. the inspector wa 
explanatory. 

'mr henderson keep a sort of lodging-house,--a "sailors' home" she 
call it, but no one could call it sweet. It doesn't bear the best of 
characters, and if you ask me what I thought of it, I should say in 
plain english that it wa a disorderli house.' 

paradis place prove to be within three or four hundr yard of the 
station house. So far as could be seen in the dark it consist of a 
row of hous of consider dimensions,--and also of consider 
antiquity. they open on to two or three stone step which led 
directli into the street. At one of the door stood an old ladi with a 
shawl drawn over her head. thi wa mr henderson. she greet us with 
garrul volubility. 

'so you 'ave come, 'ave you? I thought you never wa a-comin' that I 
did.' she recognis the inspector. 'it' you, Mr phillips, is it?' 
perceiv us, she drew a littl back 'who' them 'ere parties? they 
ain't coppers?' 

Mr phillip dismiss her inquiry, curtly. 

'never you mind who they are. what' thi about someon be murdered.' 

'ssh!' the old ladi glanc round. 'don't you speak so loud, Mr 
phillips. No one don't know noth about it as yet. the parti what' 
in my 'ous is most respectable,--most! and they couldn't abid the 
notion of there be polic about the place.' 

'we quit believ that, mr henderson.' 

the inspector' tone wa grim. 

mr henderson led the way up a staircas which would have been 
distinctli the better for repairs. It wa necessari to pick one' way 
as one went, and as the light wa defect stumbl were not 
infrequent. 

our guid paus outsid a door on the topmost landing. from some 
mysteri recess in her apparel she produc a key. 

'it' in 'ere. I lock the door so that noth mightn't be disturbed. 
I know 'ow particular you pleesmen is.' 

she turn the key. We all went in--we, thi time, in front, and she 
behind. 

A candl wa gutter on a broken and dilapid singl washhand 
stand. A small iron bedstead stood by it side, the cloth on which 
were all tumbl and tossed. there wa a rush-seat chair with a hole 
in the seat,--and that, with the except of one or two chip piec 
of stoneware, and a small round mirror which wa hung on a nail against 
the wall, seem to be all that the room contained. I could see noth 
in the shape of a murder man. nor, it appeared, could the inspector 
either. 

'what' the mean of this, mr henderson? I don't see anyth here.' 

'it' be'ind the bed, Mr phillips. I left 'im just where I found 'im, I 
wouldn't 'ave touch 'im not for nothing, nor yet 'ave let nobodi els 
'ave touch 'im neither, because, as I say, I know 'ow particular you 
pleesmen is.' 

We all four went hastili forward. atherton and I went to the head of 
the bed, lessingham and the inspector, lean right across the bed, 
peep over the side. there, on the floor in the space which wa 
between the bed and the wall, lay the murder man. 

At sight of him an exclam burst from sydney' lips. 

'it' holt!' 

'thank god!' cri lessingham. 'it isn't marjorie!' 

the relief in hi tone wa unmistakable. that the one wa gone wa 
plainli noth to him in comparison with the fact that the other wa 
left. 

thrust the bed more into the centr of the room I knelt down besid 
the man on the floor. A more deplor spectacl than he present I 
have seldom witnessed. He wa decent clad in a grey tweed suit, white 
hat, collar and necktie, and it wa perhap that fact which made hi 
extrem attenu the more conspicuous. I doubt if there wa an ounc 
of flesh on the whole of hi body. hi cheek and the socket of hi 
eye were hollow. the skin wa drawn tightli over hi cheek bones,--th 
bone themselv were stare through. even hi nose wa wasted, so 
that noth but a ridg of cartilag remained. I put my arm beneath 
hi shoulder and rais him from the floor; no resist wa offer 
by the body' gravity,--h wa as light as a littl child. 

'I doubt,' I said, 'if thi man ha been murdered. It look to me like 
a case of starvation, or exhaustion,--poss a combin of both.' 

'what' that on hi neck?' ask the inspector,--h wa kneel at my 
side. 

He refer to two abras of the skin,--on on either side of the 
man' neck. 

'they look to me like scratches. they seem pretti deep, but I don't 
think they'r suffici in themselv to caus death.' 

'they might be, join to an alreadi weaken constitution. Is there 
anyth in hi pockets?--let' lift him on to the bed.' 

We lift him on to the bed,--a featherweight he wa to lift. while the 
inspector wa examin hi pockets--to find them empty--a tall man 
with a big black beard came bustl in. He prove to be Dr glossop, 
the local polic surgeon, who had been sent for befor our quit the 
station house. 

hi first pronouncement, made as soon as he commenc hi examination, 
was, under the circumstances, suffici startling. 

'I don't believ the man' dead. whi didn't you send for me directli 
you found him?' 

the question wa put to mr henderson. 

'well, Dr glossop, I wouldn't touch 'im myself, and I wouldn't 'ave 'im 
touch by no one else, because, as i'v said afore, I know 'ow 
particular them pleesmen is.' 

'then in that case, if he doe die you'll have had a hand in murder 
him,--that' all' 

the ladi sniggered. 'of cours Dr glossop, we all know that you'll 
alway 'ave your joke.' 

'you'll find it a joke if you have to hang, as you ought to, you--' the 
doctor said what he did say to himself, under hi breath. I doubt if it 
wa flatter to mr henderson. 'have you got ani brandi in the house?' 

'we'v got everythink in the 'ous for them as like to pay for 
it,--everythink.' then, suddenli rememb that the polic were 
present, and that her were not exactli licens premises, 'leastway 
we can send out for it for them parti as give us the money, being, 
as is well known, alway will to oblige.' 

'then send for some,--to the tap downstairs, if that' the nearest! If 
thi man die befor you'v brought it i'll have you lock up as sure 
as you'r a live woman.' 

the arriv of the brandi wa not long delayed,--but the man on the bed 
had regain conscious befor it came. open hi eye he look 
up at the doctor bend over him. 

'hollo, my man! that' more like the time of day! how are you feeling?' 

the patient stare hazili up at the doctor, as if hi sens of 
percept wa not yet complet restored,--a if thi big beard man 
wa someth altogeth strange. atherton bent down besid the doctor. 

'i'm glad to see you look better, Mr holt. you know me don't you? 
i'v been run about after you all day long.' 

'you are--y are--' the man' eye closed, as if the effort at 
recollect exhaust him. He kept them close as he continu to 
speak. 

'I know who you are. you are--th gentleman.' 

'yes, that' it, i'm the gentleman,--nam of atherton.--miss lindon' 
friend. and I daresay you'r feel pretti well done up, and in want 
of someth to eat and drink,--here' some brandi for you.' 

the doctor had some in a tumbler. He rais the patient' head, 
allow it to trickl down hi throat. the man swallow it 
mechanically, motionless, as if unconsci what it wa that he wa 
doing. hi cheek flushed, the pass glow of colour caus their 
condit of extraordinary, and, indeed, extravag attentuation, to 
be more promin than ever. the doctor laid him back upon the bed, 
feel hi puls with one hand, while he stood and regard him in 
silence. 

then, turn to the inspector, he said to him in an undertone; 

'if you want him to make a statement he'll have to make it now, he' 
go fast. you won't be abl to get much out of him,--he' too far 
gone, and I shouldn't bustl him, but get what you can.' 

the inspector came to the front, a notebook in hi hand. 

'I understand from thi gentleman--' signifi atherton--'that your 
name' robert holt. i'm an inspector of police, and I want you to tell 
me what ha brought you into thi condition. ha anyon been assault 
you?' 

holt, open hi eyes, glanc up at the speaker mistily, as if he 
could not see him clearly,--stil less understand what it wa that he 
wa saying. sydney, stoop over him, endeavour to explain. 

'the inspector want to know how you got here, ha anyon been do 
anyth to you? ha anyon been hurt you?' 

the man' eyelid were partial closed. then they open wider and 
wider. hi mouth open too. On hi skeleton featur there came a look 
of panic fear. He wa evid struggl to speak. At last word came. 

'the beetle!' He stopped. then, after an effort, spoke again. 'the 
beetle!' 

'what' he mean?' ask the inspector. 

'I think I understand,' sydney answered; then turn again to the man 
in the bed. 'yes, I hear what you say,--th beetle. well, ha the 
beetl done anyth to you?' 

'it took me by the throat!' 

'i that the mean of the mark upon your neck?' 

'the beetl kill me.' 

the lid closed. the man relaps into a state of lethargy. the 
inspector wa puzzled;--and said so. 

'what' he mean about a beetle?' 

atherton replied. 

'I think I understand what he means,--and my friend do too. we'll 
explain afterwards. In the meantim I think i'd better get as much out 
of him as I can,--whil there' time.' 

'yes,' said the doctor, hi hand upon the patient' pulse, 'while 
there' time. there isn't much--onli seconds.' 

sydney endeavour to rous the man from hi stupor. 

'you'v been with miss lindon all the afternoon and evening, haven't 
you, Mr holt?' 

atherton had reach a chord in the man' consciousness. hi lip 
moved,--in pain articulation. 

'yes--al the afternoon--and evening--god help me!' 

'I hope god will help you my poor fellow; you'v been in need of hi 
help if ever man was. miss lindon is disguis in your old clothes, 
isn't she?' 

'yes,--in my old clothes. My god!' 

'and where is miss lindon now?' 

the man had been speak with hi eye closed. now he open them, 
wide; there came into them the former stare horror. He becam 
possess by uncontrol agitation,--half rais himself in bed. 
word came from hi quiver lip as if they were onli drawn from him 
by the forc of hi anguish. 

'the beetle' go to kill miss lindon.' 

A momentari paroxysm seem to shake the veri foundat of hi being. 
hi whole frame quivered. He fell back on to the bed,--ominously. the 
doctor examin him in silence--whil we too were still. 

'thi time he' gone for good, there'l be no conjur him back again.' 

I felt a sudden pressur on my arm, and found that lessingham wa 
clutch me with probabl unconsci violence. the muscl of hi 
face were twitching. He trembled. I turn to the doctor. 

'doctor, if there is ani of that brandi left will you let me have it 
for my friend?' 

lessingham dispos of the remaind of the 'shill worth.' I rather 
fanci it save us from a scene. 

the inspector wa speak to the woman of the house. 

'now, mr henderson, perhap you'll tell us what all thi means. who is 
thi man, and how did he come in here, and who came in with him, and 
what do you know about it altogether? If you'v got anyth to say, 
say it, onli you'd better be careful, becaus it' my duti to warn you 
that anyth you do say may be use against you.' 




chapter xlv 

all that mr 'enderson knew 


mr henderson put her hand under her apron and smirked. 

'well, Mr phillips, it do sound strang to 'ear you talkin' to me like 
that. anybody'd think i'd done someth as I didn't ought to 'a' done 
to 'ear you go on. As for what' 'appened, i'll tell you all I know 
with the greatest willing on earth. and as for bein' careful, there 
ain't no call for you to tell me to be that, for that I alway am, as 
by now you ought to know.' 

'yes,--i do know. Is that all you have to say?' 

'rilly, Mr phillips, what a man you are for catch peopl up, you 
rilli are. O' cours that ain't all i'v got to say,--ain't I just 
a-comin' to it?' 

'then come.' 

'if you press me so you'll muddl of me up, and then if I do 'appen 
to make a herror, you'll say i'm a liar, when good know there 
ain't no more truth woman not in limehouse.' 

word plainli trembl on the inspector' lips,--which he refrain 
from uttering. mr henderson cast her eye upwards, as if she sought 
for inspir from the filthi ceiling. 

'so far as I can swear it might 'ave been a hour ago, or it might 'ave 
been a hour and a quarter, or it might 'ave been a hour and twenti 
minutes--' 

'we'r not particular as to the seconds.' 

'when I 'ear a knockin' at my front door, and when I come to open it, 
there wa a harab party, with a great bundl on 'i 'ead, bigger nor 
'isself, and two other parti along with him. thi harab parti says, 
in that queer foreign way them harab parti 'a of talkin', "A room 
for the night, a room." now I don't much care for foreigners, and never 
did, especi them harabs, which their 'abit ain't my own,--so I as 
much 'int the same. but thi 'ere harab party, he didn't seem to quit 
foller of my meaning, for all he done wa to say as he said afore, "A 
room for the night, a room." and he shove a coupl of 'arf crown into 
my 'and. now it' alway been a motter o' mine, that money is money, 
and one man' money is as good as anoth man's. so, not wish to be 
disagreeable--which other peopl would have taken 'em if I 'adn't, I 
show 'em up 'ere. i'd been downstair it might 'ave been 'arf a hour, 
when I 'ear a shindi a-com from thi room--' 

'what sort of a shindy?' 

'yell and shrieking--oh my gracious, it wa enough to set your blood 
all curdled,--for ear-piercing I never did 'ear noth like it. We 
do 'ave troublesom parti in 'ere, like they do elsewhere, but I 
never did 'ear noth like that before. I stood it for about a minute, 
but it kep' on, and kep' on, and everi moment I expect as the other 
parti as wa in the 'ous would be complainin', so up I come and I 
thump at the door, and it seem that thump I might for all the notic 
that wa took of me.' 

'did the nois keep on?' 

'keep on! I should think it did keep on! lord love you! shriek after 
shriek, I expect to see the roof took off.' 

'were there ani other noises? for instance, were there ani sound of 
struggling, or of blows?' 

'there weren't no sound except of the parti hollering.' 

'one parti only?' 

'one parti only. As I say afore, shriek after shriek,--when you put 
your ear to the panel there wa a nois like some other parti 
blubbering, but that weren't nothing, as for the holler you wouldn't 
have thought that noth what you might call 'umin could 'ave kep' up 
such a screechin'. I thump and thump and at last when I did think 
that I should 'ave to 'ave the door broke down, the harab say to me 
from inside, "go away! I pay for the room! go away!" I did think that 
pretti good, I tell you that. So I says, "pay for the room or not pay 
for the room, you didn't pay to make that shindy!" and what' more I 
says, "if I 'ear it again," I says, "out you goes! and if you don't go 
quiet i'll 'ave somebodi in as'll pretti quickli make you!"' 

'then wa there silence?' 

'so to speak there was,--onli there wa thi sound as if some parti wa 
a-blubbering, and anoth sound as if a parti wa a-pant for hi 
breath.' 

'then what happened?' 

'see that, so to speak, all wa quiet, down I went again. and in 
anoth quarter of a hour, or it might 'ave been twenti minutes, I went 
to the front door to get a mouth of hair. and mr barker, what live 
over the road, at no. 24, she come to me and says, "that there arab 
parti of your didn't stop long." I look at 'er, "I don't quit foller 
you," I says,--which I didn't. "I saw him come in," she says, "and 
then, a few minut back, I see 'im go again, with a great bundl on 
'i 'ead he couldn't 'ardli stagger under!" "oh," I says, "that' news 
to me, I didn't know 'e'd gone, nor see him neither---" which I didn't. 
so, up I come again, and, sure enough, the door wa open, and it seem 
to me that the room wa empty, till I come upon thi pore young man 
what wa lie be'ind the bed,' 

there wa a growl from the doctor. 

'if you'd had ani sense, and sent for me at once, he might have been 
aliv at thi moment.' 

''ow wa I to know that, Dr glossop? I couldn't tell. My find 'im 
there murder wa quit enough for me. So I run downstairs, and I 
nip 'old of 'gustu barley, what wa lean against the wall, and I 
say to him, "'gustu barley, run to the station as fast as you can and 
tell 'em that a man' been murdered,--that harab' been and kill a 
bloke." and that' all I know about it, and I couldn't tell you no 
more, Mr phillips, not if you wa to keep on ask me question not 
for hour and hours' 

'then you think it wa thi man'--with a motion toward the bed--'who 
wa shrieking?' 

'to tell you the truth, Mr phillips, about that I don't 'ardli know 
what to think. If you 'ad ask me I should 'ave said it wa a woman. I 
ought to know a woman' holler when I 'ear it, if ani one does, i'v 
'eard enough of 'em in my time, good knows. and I should 'ave said 
that onli a woman could 'ave holler like that and onli 'er when she 
wa rave mad. but there weren't no woman with him. there wa onli 
thi man what' murdered, and the other man,--and as for the other man 
I will say this, that 'e 'adn't got twopennyworth of cloth to cover 
'im. but, Mr phillips, howsomev that may be, that' the last harab 
i'll 'ave under my roof, no matter what they pays, and you may mark my 
word i'll 'ave no more.' 

mr henderson, onc more glanc upward, as if she imagin herself to 
have made some declar of a religi nature, shook her head with 
much solemnity. 




chapter xlvi 

the sudden stop 


As we were leav the hous a constabl gave the inspector a note. 
have read it he pass it to me. It wa from the local office. 

'messag receiv that an arab with a big bundl on hi head ha been 
notic loiter about the neighbourhood of St pancra station. He 
seem to be accompani by a young man who had the appear of a 
tramp. young man seem ill. they appear to be wait for a train, 
probabl to the north. shall I advis detention?' 

I scribbl on the flyleaf of the note. 

'have them detained. If they have gone by train have a special in 
readiness.' 

In a minut we were again in the cab. I endeavour to persuad 
lessingham and atherton to allow me to conduct the pursuit alone,--in 
vain. I had no fear of atherton' succumbing, but I wa afraid for 
lessingham. what wa more almost than the expect of hi collaps 
wa the fact that hi look and manner, hi whole bearing, so eloqu 
of the agoni and agit of hi mind, wa begin to tell upon my 
nerves. A catastroph of some sort I foresaw. Of the curtain' fall 
upon one tragedi we had just been witnesses. that there wa worse--much 
worse, to follow I did not doubt. optimist anticip were out of 
the question,--that the creatur we were chase would relinquish the 
prey uninjured, no one, after what we had seen and heard, could by ani 
possibl suppose. should a necess suddenli aris for prompt and 
immedi action, that lessingham would prove a hindranc rather than a 
help I felt persuaded. 

but sinc moment were precious, and lessingham wa not to be persuad 
to allow the matter to proceed without him, all that remain wa to 
make the best of hi presence. 

the great arch of St pancra wa in darkness. An occasion light 
seem to make the dark still more visible. the station seem 
deserted. I thought, at first, that there wa not a soul about the 
place, that our errand wa in vain, that the onli thing for us to do 
wa to drive to the polic station and to pursu our inquiri there. 
but as we turn toward the booking-office, our footstep ring out 
clearli through the silenc and the night, a door opened, a light shone 
out from the room within, and a voic inquired: 

'who' that?' 

'mi name' champnell. ha a messag been receiv from me from the 
limehous polic station?' 

'step thi way.' 

We step that way,--into a snug enough office, of which one of the 
railway inspector wa appar in charge. He wa a big man, with a 
fair beard. He look me up and down, as if doubtfully. lessingham he 
recognis at once. He took off hi cap to him. 

'mr lessingham, I believe?' 

'I am Mr lessingham. have you ani news for me? 

I fancy, by hi looks,--that the offici wa struck by the pallor of 
the speaker' face,--and by hi tremul voice. 

'I am instruct to give certain inform to a Mr augustu 
champnell.' 

'I am Mr champnell. what' your information?' 

'with refer to the arab about whom you have been make inquiries. 
A foreigner, dress like an arab, with a great bundl on hi head, 
took two singl third for hull by the midnight express.' 

'wa he alone?' 

'it is believ that he wa accompani by a young man of veri 
disreput appearance. they were not togeth at the booking-office, 
but they had been seen togeth previously. A minut or so after the 
arab had enter the train thi young man got into the same 
compartment--they were in the front waggon.' 

'whi were they not detained?' 

'we had no author to detain them, nor ani reason, until your messag 
wa receiv a few minut ago we at thi station were not awar that 
inquiri were be made for them.' 

'you say he book to hull,--do the train run through to hull?' 

'no--it doesn't go to hull at all. part of it' the liverpool and 
manchest express, and part of it' for carlisle. It divid at derby. 
the man you'r look for will chang either at sheffield or at 
cudworth junction and go on to hull by the first train in the morning. 
there' a local service.' 

I look at my watch. 

'you say the train left at midnight. it' now nearli five-and-twenti 
past. where' it now?' 

'near St albans, it' due there 12.35.' 

'would there be time for a wire to reach St albans?' 

'hardly,--and anyhow there'l onli be enough railway offici about 
the place to receiv and despatch the train. they'll be fulli occupi 
with their ordinari duties. there won't be time to get the polic 
there.' 

'you could wire to St alban to inquir if they were still in the 
train?' 

'that could be done,--certainly. i'll have it done at onc if you like. 

'then where' the next stoppage?' 

'well, they'r at luton at 12.51. but that' anoth case of St albans. 
you see there won't be much more than twenti minut by the time you'v 
got your wire off, and I don't expect there'l be mani peopl awak at 
luton. At these countri place sometim there' a policeman hang 
about the station to see the express go through, but, on the other 
hand, veri often there isn't, and if there isn't, probabl at thi time 
of night it'll take a good bit of time to get the polic on the 
premises. I tell you what I should advise.' 

'what' that?' 

'the train is due at bedford at 1.29--send your wire there. there ought 
to be plenti of peopl about at bedford, and anyhow there'l be time to 
get the polic to the station.' 

'veri good. I instruct them to tell you to have a special 
ready,--hav you got one?' 

'there' an engin with steam up in the shed,--we'l have all readi for 
you in less than ten minutes. and I tell you what,--you'l have about 
fifti minut befor the train is due at bedford. it' a fifti mile 
run. with luck you ought to get there pretti nearli as soon as the 
express does.--shal I tell them to get ready?' 

'at once.' 

while he issu direct through a telephon to what, I presume, wa 
the engin shed, I drew up a coupl of telegrams. have complet hi 
order he turn to me. 

'they'r come out of the side now--they'l be readi in less than 
ten minutes. i'll see that the line' kept clear. have you got those 
wires?' 

'here is one,--thi is for bedford.' 

It ran: 

'arrest the arab who is in train due at 1.29. when leav St pancra 
he wa in a third-class compart in front waggon. He ha a larg 
bundle, which detain. He took two third singl for hull. also detain 
hi companion, who is dress like a tramp. thi is a young ladi whom 
the arab ha disguis and kidnap while in a condit of hypnot 
trance. let her have medic assist and be taken to a hotel. all 
expens will be paid on the arriv of the undersign who is 
follow by special train. As the arab will probabl be veri violent a 
suffici forc of polic should be in waiting. 

'augustu champnell.' 

'and thi is the other. It is probabl too late to be of ani use at St 
albans,--but send it there, and also to luton.' 'i arab with companion 
in train which left St pancra at 13.0? If so, do not let them get out 
till train reach bedford, where instruct are be wire for 
arrest.' 

the inspector rapidli scan them both. 

'they ought to do your business, I should think. come along with 
me--i'l have them sent at once, and we'll see if your train' ready.' 

the train wa not ready,--nor wa it readi within the prescrib ten 
minutes. there wa some hitch, I fancy, about a saloon. final we had 
to be content with an ordinari old-fashion first-class carriage. the 
delay, however, wa not altogeth time lost. just as the engin with 
it solitari coach wa approach the platform someon came run up 
with an envelop in hi hand. 

'telegram from St albans.' 

I tore it open. It wa brief and to the point. 

'arab with companion wa in train when it left here. Am wire luton.' 

'that' all right. now unless someth wholli unforeseen take place, 
we ought to have them.' 

that unforeseen! 

I went forward with the inspector and the guard of our train to 
exchang a few final word with the driver. the inspector explain 
what instruct he had given. 

'i'v told the driver not to spare hi coal but to take you into 
bedford within five minut after the arriv of the express. He say 
he think that he can do it.' 

the driver lean over hi engine, rub hi hand with the usual 
oili rag. He wa a short, wiri man with grey hair and a grizzl 
moustache, with about him that bear of semi-humorous, frank-fac 
resolut which one note about engine-driv as a class. 

'we ought to do it, the gradient are against us, but it' a clear 
night and there' no wind. the onli thing that will stop us will be if 
there' ani shunt on the road, or ani luggag trains; of course, if 
we are blocked, we are blocked, but the inspector say he'll clear the 
way for us.' 

'yes,' said the inspector, 'i'll clear the way. i'v wire down the 
road already.' 

atherton broke in. 

'driver, if you get us into bedford within five minut of the arriv 
of the mail there'l be a five-pound note to divid between your mate 
and you.' 

the driver grinned. 

'we'll get you there in time, sir, if we have to go clear through the 
shunters. It isn't often we get a chanc of a five-pound note for a run 
to bedford, and we'll do our best to earn it.' 

the fireman wave hi hand in the rear. 

'that' right, sir!' he cried. 'we'll have to troubl you for that 
five-pound note.' 

So soon as we were clear of the station it began to seem probabl that, 
as the fireman put it, atherton would be 'troubled.' journey in a 
train which consist of a singl carriag attach to an engin which 
is fli at topmost speed is a veri differ busi from be an 
occup of an ordinari train which is travel at ordinari express 
rates. I had discov that for myself before. that night it wa 
impress on me more than ever. A tyro--or even a nervou 
'season'--might have been excus for expect at everi moment we were 
go to be derailed. It wa hard to believ that the carriag had ani 
springs,--it rock and swung, and jog and jolted. Of smooth 
travel had we none. talk wa out of the question;--and for that, 
I, personally, wa grateful. quit apart from the difficulti we 
experienc in keep our seats--and when everi moment our posit 
wa be alter and we were jerk backward and forward up and 
down, thi way and that, that wa a busi which requir care,--th 
nois wa deafening. It wa as though we were be pursu by a legion 
of shrieking, bellowing, rage demons. 

'george!' shriek atherton, 'he doe mean to earn that fiver. I hope 
i'll be aliv to pay it him!' 

He wa onli at the other end of the carriage, but though I could see by 
the distort of hi visag that he wa shout at the top of hi 
voice,--and he ha a voice,--i onli caught here and there a word or two 
of what he wa saying. I had to make sens of the whole. 

lessingham' contort were a study. few of that larg multitud of 
person who are acquaint with him onli by mean of the portrait 
which have appear in the illustr papers, would then have 
recognis the rise statesman. yet I believ that few thing could 
have better fallen in with hi mood than that wild travelling. He might 
have been almost shaken to pieces,--but the veri sever of the 
shake serv to divert hi thought from the one dread topic which 
threaten to absorb them to the exclus of all els beside. then 
there wa the tonic influenc of the element of risk. the pick-me-up 
effect of a spice of peril. actual danger there quit probabl wa 
none; but there veri realli seem to be. and one thing wa absolut 
certain, that if we did come to smash while go at that speed we 
should come to as everlast smash as the heart of man could by ani 
possibl desire. It is probabl that the knowledg that thi wa so 
warm the blood in lessingham' veins. At ani rate as--to use what in 
thi case, wa simpli a form of speech--i sat and watch him, it 
seem to me that he wa get a firmer hold of the strength which 
had all but escap him, and that with everi jog and jolt he wa 
becom more and more of a man. 

On and on we went dashing, clashing, smashing, roaring, rumbling. 
atherton, who had been endeavour to peer through the window, 
strain hi lung again in the effort to make himself audible. 

'where the devil are we?' 

look at my watch I scream back at him. 

'it' nearli one, so I suppos we'r somewher in the neighbourhood of 
luton.--hollo! what' the matter?' 

that someth wa the matter seem certain. there wa a shrill 
whistl from the engine. In a second we were conscious--almost too 
conscious--of the applic of the westinghous brake. Of all the 
jolt that wa ever jolted! the mere reverber of the carriag 
threaten to resolv our bodi into their compon parts. feel 
what we felt then help us to realis the retardatori forc which that 
vacuum brake must be exerting,--it did not seem at all surpris that 
the train should have been brought to an almost instant stand-still. 

simultan all three of us were on our feet. I let down my window 
and atherton let down his,--h shout out, 

'I should think that inspector' wire hasn't had it' proper effect, 
look as if we'r blocked--or els we'v stop at luton. It can't be 
bedford.' 

It wasn't bedford--so much seem clear. though at first from my window 
I could make out nothing. I wa feel more than a trifl 
dazed,--ther wa a sing in my ears,--th sudden dark wa 
impenetrable. then I becam consciou that the guard wa open the 
door of hi compartment. He stood on the step for a moment, seem to 
hesitate. then, with a lamp in hi hand, he descend on to the line. 

'what' the matter?' I asked. 

'don't know, sir. seem as if there wa someth on the road. what' 
up there?' 

thi wa to the man on the engine. the fireman replied: 

'someon in front there' wave a red light like mad,--lucki I caught 
sight of him, we should have been clean on top of him in anoth 
moment. look as if there wa someth wrong. here he comes.' 

As my eye grew more accustom to the dark I becam awar that 
someon wa make what hast he could along the six-foot way, swing 
a red light as he came. our guard advanc to meet him, shout as he 
went: 

'what' the matter! who' that?' 

A voic replied, 

'mi god! Is that georg hewett. I thought you were come right on top 
of us!' 

our guard again. 

'what! jim branson! what the devil are you do here, what' wrong? I 
thought you were on the twelv out, we'r chase you.' 

'are you? then you'v caught us. thank god for it!--we'r a wreck.' 

I had alreadi open the carriag door. with that we all three 
clamber out on to the line. 




chapter xlvii 

the content OF the third-class carriag 


I move to the stranger who wa hold the lamp. He wa in offici 
uniform. 

'are you the guard of the 12.0 out from St pancras?' 

'I am.' 

'where' your train? what' happened?' 

'a for where it is, there it is, right in front of you, what' left of 
it. As to what' happened, why, we'r wrecked.' 

'what do you mean by you'r wrecked?' 

'some heavi load truck broke loos from a good in front and came 
run down the hill on top of us.' 

'how long ago wa it?' 

'not ten minutes. I wa just start off down the road to the signal 
box, it' a good two mile away, when I saw you coming. My god! I 
thought there wa go to be anoth smash.' 

'much damag done?' 

'seem to me as if we'r all smash up. As far as I can make out 
they'r matchbox up in front. I feel as if I wa all broken up insid 
of me. i'v been in the servic go on for thirti years, and thi is 
the first accid i'v been in.' 

It wa too dark to see the man' face, but judg from hi tone he wa 
either cri or veri near to it. 

our guard turn and shout back to our engine, 

'you'd better go back to the box and let 'em know!' 

'all right!' came echo back. 

the special immedi commenc retreating, whistl continu as 
it went. all the countri side must have heard the engin shrieking, and 
all who did hear must have understood that on the line someth wa 
serious wrong. 

the smash train wa all in darkness, the forc of the collis had 
put out all the carriag lamps. here wa a flicker candle, there the 
glimmer of a match, these were all the light which shone upon the 
scene. peopl were pile up debri by the side of the line, for the 
purpos of make a fire,--mor for illumin than for warmth. 

mani of the passeng had succeed in free themselves, and were 
move hither and thither about the line. but the major appear to 
be still imprisoned. the carriag door were jammed. without the 
necessari tool it wa imposs to open them. everi step we took our 
ear were salut by piteou cries. men, women, children, appeal to 
us for help. 

'open the door, sir!' 'in the name of god, sir, open the door!' 

over and over again, in all sort of tones, with all degre of 
violence, the supplic wa repeated. 

the guard vainli endeavour to appeas the, in mani cases, 
half-frenzi creatures. 

'all right, sir! If you'll onli wait a minut or two, madam! We can't 
get the door open without tools, a special train' just start off to 
get them. If you'll onli have patienc there'l be plenti of help for 
everyon of you directly. you'll be quit safe in there, if you'll onli 
keep still.' 

but that wa just what they found it most difficult to do--keep still! 

In the front of the train all wa chaos. the truck which had done the 
mischief--ther were afterward shown to be six of them, togeth with 
two guards' vans--appear to have been laden with bag of portland 
cement. the bag had burst, and everyth wa cover with what seem 
gritti dust. the air wa full of the stuff, it got into our eyes, half 
blind us. the engin of the express had turn a complet 
somersault. It vomit forth smoke, and steam, and flames,--everi 
moment it seem as if the woodwork of the carriag immedi behind 
and beneath would catch fire. 

the front coach were, as the guard had put it, 'match-boxed.' they 
were noth but a heap of debris,--telescop into one anoth in a 
state of appar inextric confusion. It wa broad daylight 
befor access wa gain to what had onc been the interiors. the 
condit of the first third-class compart reveal an 
extraordinari state of things. 

scatter all over it were piec of what look like partial burnt 
rags, and fragment of silk and linen. I have those fragment now. 
expert have assur me that they are actual neither of silk nor 
linen! but of some material--anim rather than vegetable--with which 
they are wholli unacquainted. On the cushion and woodwork--especi 
on the woodwork of the floor--wer huge blotches,--stain of some sort. 
when first notic they were damp, and gave out a most unpleas 
smell. one of the piec of woodwork is yet in my possession,--with the 
stain still on it. expert have pronounc upon it too,--with the 
result that opinion are divided. some maintain that the stain wa 
produc by human blood, which had been subject to a great heat, and, 
so to speak, parboiled. other declar that it is the blood of some 
wild animal,--poss of some creatur of the cat species. yet other 
affirm that it is not blood at all, but mere paint. while a fourth 
describ it as--i quot the written opinion which lie in front of 
me--'caus appar by a deposit of some sort of viscid matter, 
probabl the excret of some varieti of lizard.' 

In a corner of the carriag wa the bodi of what seem a young man 
costum like a tramp. It wa marjori lindon. 

So far as a most care search revealed, that wa all the compart 
contained. 




chapter xlviii 

the conclus OF the matter 


It is sever year sinc I bore my part in the event which I have 
rapidli sketched,--or I should not have felt justifi in give them 
publicity. exactli how mani years, for reason which should be 
suffici obvious, I must declin to say. 

marjori lindon still lives. the spark of life which wa left in her, 
when she wa extric from among the debri of the wreck express, 
wa fan again into flame. her restor was, however, not mere 
an affair of week or months, it wa a matter of years. I believ that, 
even after her physic power were complet restored--in itself a 
tediou task--sh wa for someth like three year under medic 
supervis as a lunatic. but all that skill and money could do wa 
done, and in cours of time--th great healer--th result were 
entir satisfactory. 

her father is dead,--and ha left her in possess of the famili 
estates. she is marri to the individu who, in these pages, ha been 
known as paul lessingham. were hi real name divulg she would be 
recognis as the popular and univers reverenc wife of one of the 
greatest statesmen the age ha seen. 

noth ha been said to her about the fate day on which she 
was--consci or unconsciously--parad through london in the 
tatter masculin habili of a vagabond. she herself ha never 
onc allud to it. with the return of reason the affair seem to have 
pass from her memori as wholli as if it had never been, which, 
although she may not know it, is not the least caus she ha for 
thankfulness. therefor what actual transpir will never, in all 
human probability, be certainli known and particularli what precis 
occur in the railway carriag dure that dread moment of sudden 
pass from life unto death. what becam of the creatur who all but 
did her to death; who he was--if it wa a 'he,' which is extrem 
doubtful; whenc he came; whither he went; what wa the purport of hi 
presenc here,--to thi hour these thing are puzzles. 

paul lessingham ha not sinc been troubl by hi old tormentor. He 
ha ceas to be a haunt man. none the less he continu to have what 
seem to be a constitut disrelish for the subject of beetles, nor 
can he himself be induc to speak of them. should they be mention in 
a gener conversation, should he be unabl to immedi bring about 
a chang of theme, he will, if possible, get up and leav the room. 
more, on thi point he and hi wife are one. 

the fact may not be gener known, but it is so. also I have reason 
to believ that there still are moment in which he hark back, with 
someth like physic shrinking, to that aw nightmar of the past, 
and in which he pray god, that as it is distant from him now so may it 
be kept far off from him for ever. 

befor closing, one matter may be casual mentioned. the tale ha 
never been told, but I have unimpeach author for it 
authenticity. 

dure the recent expeditionari advanc toward dongola, a bodi of 
nativ troop which wa encamp at a remot spot in the desert wa 
arous one night by what seem to be the sound of a loud explosion. 
the next morning, at a distanc of about a coupl of mile from the 
camp, a huge hole wa discov in the ground,--a if blast 
operations, on an enorm scale, had recent been carri on. In the 
hole itself, and round about it, were found fragment of what seem 
bodies; credibl wit have assur me that they were bodi 
neither of men nor women, but of creatur of some monstrou growth. I 
prefer to believe, sinc no scientif examin of the remain took 
place, that these wit ignorantly, though innocently, erred. 

one thing is sure. numer pieces, both of stone and of metal, were 
seen, which went far to suggest that some curiou subterranean build 
had been blown up by the forc of the explosion. especi were there 
portion of mould metal which seem to belong to what must have been 
an immens bronz statue. there were pick up also, more than a dozen 
replica in bronz of the whilom sacr scarabaeus. 

that the den of demon describ by paul lessingham, had, that night, 
at last come to an end, and that these thing which lay scattered, here 
and there, on that treeless plain, were the evid of it final 
destruction, is not a hypothesi which I should care to advanc with 
ani degre of certainty. but, put thi and that together, the fact 
seem to point that way,--and it is a consumm devoutli to be 
desired. 

by-the-bye, sydney atherton ha marri miss dora grayling. her wealth 
ha made him one of the richest men in england. she began, the stori 
goes, by love him immensely; I can answer for the fact that he ha 
end by love her as much. their devot to each other contradict 
the pessimist nonsens which suppos that everi marriag must be of 
necess a failure. He continu hi career of an inventor. hi 
investig into the subject of aerial flight, which have brought 
the fli machin within the rang of practic politics, are on 
everybody' tongue. 

the best man at atherton' wed wa perci woodville, now the earl of 
barnes. within six month afterward he marri one of mr atherton' 
bridesmaids. 

It wa never certainli shown how robert holt came to hi end. At the 
inquest the coroner' juri wa content to return a verdict of 'di of 
exhaustion.' He lie buri in kensal green cemetery, under a handsom 
tombstone, the cost of which, had he had it in hi pockets, might have 
indefinit prolong hi days. 

It should be mention that that portion of thi strang histori which 
purport to be the surpris narrat of robert holt wa compil 
from the statement which holt made to atherton, and to miss lindon, as 
she then was, when, a mud-stained, shatter derelict he lay at the 
lady' father' house. 

miss linden' contribut toward the elucid of the mysteri wa 
written with her own hand. after her physic strength had come back to 
her, and, while mentally, she still hover between the dark and 
the light, her one relax wa writing. although she would never 
speak of what she had written, it wa found that her theme wa alway 
the same. she confid to pen and paper what she would not speak of 
with her lips. she told, and re-told, and re-told again, the stori of 
her love, and of her tribul so far as it is contain in the 
present volume. her mss. invari began and end at the same point. 
they have all of them been destroyed, with one exception. that 
except is herein place befor the reader. 

On the subject of the mysteri of the beetl I do not propos to 
pronounc a confid opinion. atherton and I have talk it over mani 
and mani a time, and at the end we have got no 'forrarder.' So far as I 
am person concerned, experi ha taught me that there are inde 
more thing in heaven and earth than are dream of in our philosophy, 
and I am quit prepar to believ that the so-cal beetle, which 
other saw, but I never, was--or is, for it cannot be certainli shown 
that the thing is not still existing--a creatur born neither of god 
nor man. 










end of the project gutenberg ebook of the beetle, by richard marsh 

*** end OF thi project gutenberg ebook the beetl *** 

***** thi file should be name 5164.txt or 5164.zip ***** 
thi and all associ file of variou format will be found in: 
http://www.gutenberg.org/5/1/6/5164/ 

produc by charl frank and the onlin distribut proofread team. 
updat edit will replac the previou one--th old edit will 
be renamed. 

creat the work from print edit not protect by u.s. copyright 
law mean that no one own a unit state copyright in these works, 
so the foundat (and you!) can copi and distribut it in the unit 
state without permiss and without pay copyright 
royalties. special rules, set forth in the gener term of use part 
of thi license, appli to copi and distribut project 
gutenberg-tm electron work to protect the project gutenberg-tm 
concept and trademark. project gutenberg is a regist trademark, 
and may not be use if you charg for the ebooks, unless you receiv 
specif permission. If you do not charg anyth for copi of thi 
ebook, compli with the rule is veri easy. you may use thi ebook 
for nearli ani purpos such as creation of deriv works, reports, 
perform and research. they may be modifi and print and given 
away--y may do practic anyth in the unit state with ebook 
not protect by u.s. copyright law. redistribut is subject to the 
trademark license, especi commerci redistribution. 

start: full licens 

the full project gutenberg licens 
pleas read thi befor you distribut OR use thi work 

To protect the project gutenberg-tm mission of promot the free 
distribut of electron works, by use or distribut thi work 
(or ani other work associ in ani way with the phrase "project 
gutenberg"), you agre to compli with all the term of the full 
project gutenberg-tm licens avail with thi file or onlin at 
www.gutenberg.org/license. 

section 1. gener term of use and redistribut project 
gutenberg-tm electron work 

1.a. By read or use ani part of thi project gutenberg-tm 
electron work, you indic that you have read, understand, agre to 
and accept all the term of thi licens and intellectu properti 
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agre to abid by all 
the term of thi agreement, you must ceas use and return or 
destroy all copi of project gutenberg-tm electron work in your 
possession. If you paid a fee for obtain a copi of or access to a 
project gutenberg-tm electron work and you do not agre to be bound 
by the term of thi agreement, you may obtain a refund from the 
person or entiti to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 
1.e.8. 

1.b. "project gutenberg" is a regist trademark. It may onli be 
use on or associ in ani way with an electron work by peopl who 
agre to be bound by the term of thi agreement. there are a few 
thing that you can do with most project gutenberg-tm electron work 
even without compli with the full term of thi agreement. see 
paragraph 1.c below. there are a lot of thing you can do with project 
gutenberg-tm electron work if you follow the term of thi 
agreement and help preserv free futur access to project gutenberg-tm 
electron works. see paragraph 1.e below. 

1.c. the project gutenberg literari archiv foundat ("the 
foundation" or pglaf), own a compil copyright in the collect 
of project gutenberg-tm electron works. nearli all the individu 
work in the collect are in the public domain in the unit 
states. If an individu work is unprotect by copyright law in the 
unit state and you are locat in the unit states, we do not 
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing, 
display or creat deriv work base on the work as long as 
all refer to project gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope 
that you will support the project gutenberg-tm mission of promot 
free access to electron work by freeli share project gutenberg-tm 
work in complianc with the term of thi agreement for keep the 
project gutenberg-tm name associ with the work. you can easili 
compli with the term of thi agreement by keep thi work in the 
same format with it attach full project gutenberg-tm licens when 
you share it without charg with others. 

1.d. the copyright law of the place where you are locat also govern 
what you can do with thi work. copyright law in most countri are 
in a constant state of change. If you are outsid the unit states, 
check the law of your countri in addit to the term of thi 
agreement befor downloading, copying, displaying, performing, 
distribut or creat deriv work base on thi work or ani 
other project gutenberg-tm work. the foundat make no 
represent concern the copyright statu of ani work in ani 
countri outsid the unit states. 

1.e. unless you have remov all refer to project gutenberg: 

1.e.1. the follow sentence, with activ link to, or other 
immedi access to, the full project gutenberg-tm licens must appear 
promin whenev ani copi of a project gutenberg-tm work (ani work 
on which the phrase "project gutenberg" appears, or with which the 
phrase "project gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, 
performed, viewed, copi or distributed: 

thi ebook is for the use of anyon anywher in the unit state and 
most other part of the world at no cost and with almost no 
restrict whatsoever. you may copi it, give it away or re-us it 
under the term of the project gutenberg licens includ with thi 
ebook or onlin at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not locat in the 
unit states, you'll have to check the law of the countri where you 
are locat befor use thi ebook. 

1.e.2. If an individu project gutenberg-tm electron work is 
deriv from text not protect by u.s. copyright law (doe not 
contain a notic indic that it is post with permiss of the 
copyright holder), the work can be copi and distribut to anyon in 
the unit state without pay ani fee or charges. If you are 
redistribut or provid access to a work with the phrase "project 
gutenberg" associ with or appear on the work, you must compli 
either with the requir of paragraph 1.e.1 through 1.e.7 or 
obtain permiss for the use of the work and the project gutenberg-tm 
trademark as set forth in paragraph 1.e.8 or 1.e.9. 

1.e.3. If an individu project gutenberg-tm electron work is post 
with the permiss of the copyright holder, your use and distribut 
must compli with both paragraph 1.e.1 through 1.e.7 and ani 
addit term impos by the copyright holder. addit term 
will be link to the project gutenberg-tm licens for all work 
post with the permiss of the copyright holder found at the 
begin of thi work. 

1.e.4. Do not unlink or detach or remov the full project gutenberg-tm 
licens term from thi work, or ani file contain a part of thi 
work or ani other work associ with project gutenberg-tm. 

1.e.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribut or redistribut thi 
electron work, or ani part of thi electron work, without 
promin display the sentenc set forth in paragraph 1.e.1 with 
activ link or immedi access to the full term of the project 
gutenberg-tm license. 

1.e.6. you may convert to and distribut thi work in ani binary, 
compressed, mark up, nonproprietari or proprietari form, includ 
ani word process or hypertext form. however, if you provid access 
to or distribut copi of a project gutenberg-tm work in a format 
other than "plain vanilla ascii" or other format use in the offici 
version post on the offici project gutenberg-tm web site 
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no addit cost, fee or expens 
to the user, provid a copy, a mean of export a copy, or a mean 
of obtain a copi upon request, of the work in it origin "plain 
vanilla ascii" or other form. ani altern format must includ the 
full project gutenberg-tm licens as specifi in paragraph 1.e.1. 

1.e.7. Do not charg a fee for access to, viewing, displaying, 
performing, copi or distribut ani project gutenberg-tm work 
unless you compli with paragraph 1.e.8 or 1.e.9. 

1.e.8. you may charg a reason fee for copi of or provid 
access to or distribut project gutenberg-tm electron work 
provid that 

* you pay a royalti fee of 20% of the gross profit you deriv from 
the use of project gutenberg-tm work calcul use the method 
you alreadi use to calcul your applic taxes. the fee is owe 
to the owner of the project gutenberg-tm trademark, but he ha 
agre to donat royalti under thi paragraph to the project 
gutenberg literari archiv foundation. royalti payment must be paid 
within 60 day follow each date on which you prepar (or are 
legal requir to prepare) your period tax returns. royalti 
payment should be clearli mark as such and sent to the project 
gutenberg literari archiv foundat at the address specifi in 
section 4, "inform about donat to the project gutenberg 
literari archiv foundation." 

* you provid a full refund of ani money paid by a user who notifi 
you in write (or by e-mail) within 30 day of receipt that s/he 
doe not agre to the term of the full project gutenberg-tm 
license. you must requir such a user to return or destroy all 
copi of the work possess in a physic medium and discontinu 
all use of and all access to other copi of project gutenberg-tm 
works. 

* you provide, in accord with paragraph 1.f.3, a full refund of 
ani money paid for a work or a replac copy, if a defect in the 
electron work is discov and report to you within 90 day of 
receipt of the work. 

* you compli with all other term of thi agreement for free 
distribut of project gutenberg-tm works. 

1.e.9. If you wish to charg a fee or distribut a project 
gutenberg-tm electron work or group of work on differ term than 
are set forth in thi agreement, you must obtain permiss in write 
from both the project gutenberg literari archiv foundat and the 
project gutenberg trademark llc, the owner of the project gutenberg-tm 
trademark. contact the foundat as set forth in section 3 below. 

1.f. 

1.f.1. project gutenberg volunt and employe expend consider 
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcrib and proofread 
work not protect by u.s. copyright law in creat the project 
gutenberg-tm collection. despit these efforts, project gutenberg-tm 
electron works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may 
contain "defects," such as, but not limit to, incomplete, inaccur 
or corrupt data, transcript errors, a copyright or other 
intellectu properti infringement, a defect or damag disk or 
other medium, a comput virus, or comput code that damag or 
cannot be read by your equipment. 

1.f.2. limit warranty, disclaim OF damag - except for the "right 
of replac or refund" describ in paragraph 1.f.3, the project 
gutenberg literari archiv foundation, the owner of the project 
gutenberg-tm trademark, and ani other parti distribut a project 
gutenberg-tm electron work under thi agreement, disclaim all 
liabil to you for damages, cost and expenses, includ legal 
fees. you agre that you have NO remedi for negligence, strict 
liability, breach OF warranti OR breach OF contract except those 
provid IN paragraph 1.f.3. you agre that the foundation, the 
trademark owner, and ani distributor under thi agreement will not BE 
liabl TO you for actual, direct, indirect, consequential, punit OR 
incident damag even IF you give notic OF the possibl OF such 
damage. 

1.f.3. limit right OF replac OR refund - If you discov a 
defect in thi electron work within 90 day of receiv it, you can 
receiv a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by send a 
written explan to the person you receiv the work from. If you 
receiv the work on a physic medium, you must return the medium 
with your written explanation. the person or entiti that provid you 
with the defect work may elect to provid a replac copi in 
lieu of a refund. If you receiv the work electronically, the person 
or entiti provid it to you may choos to give you a second 
opportun to receiv the work electron in lieu of a refund. If 
the second copi is also defective, you may demand a refund in write 
without further opportun to fix the problem. 

1.f.4. except for the limit right of replac or refund set forth 
in paragraph 1.f.3, thi work is provid to you 'as-is', with NO 
other warranti OF ani kind, express OR implied, includ but not 
limit TO warranti OF merchant OR fit for ani purpose. 

1.f.5. some state do not allow disclaim of certain impli 
warranti or the exclus or limit of certain type of 
damages. If ani disclaim or limit set forth in thi agreement 
violat the law of the state applic to thi agreement, the 
agreement shall be interpret to make the maximum disclaim or 
limit permit by the applic state law. the invalid or 
unenforc of ani provis of thi agreement shall not void the 
remain provisions. 

1.f.6. indemn - you agre to indemnifi and hold the foundation, the 
trademark owner, ani agent or employe of the foundation, anyon 
provid copi of project gutenberg-tm electron work in 
accord with thi agreement, and ani volunt associ with the 
production, promot and distribut of project gutenberg-tm 
electron works, harmless from all liability, cost and expenses, 
includ legal fees, that aris directli or indirectli from ani of 
the follow which you do or caus to occur: (a) distribut of thi 
or ani project gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or 
addit or delet to ani project gutenberg-tm work, and (c) ani 
defect you cause. 

section 2. inform about the mission of project gutenberg-tm 

project gutenberg-tm is synonym with the free distribut of 
electron work in format readabl by the widest varieti of 
comput includ obsolete, old, middle-ag and new computers. It 
exist becaus of the effort of hundr of volunt and donat 
from peopl in all walk of life. 

volunt and financi support to provid volunt with the 
assist they need are critic to reach project gutenberg-tm' 
goal and ensur that the project gutenberg-tm collect will 
remain freeli avail for gener to come. In 2001, the project 
gutenberg literari archiv foundat wa creat to provid a secur 
and perman futur for project gutenberg-tm and futur 
generations. To learn more about the project gutenberg literari 
archiv foundat and how your effort and donat can help, see 
section 3 and 4 and the foundat inform page at 
www.gutenberg.org section 3. inform about the project gutenberg 
literari archiv foundat 

the project gutenberg literari archiv foundat is a non profit 
501(c)(3) educ corpor organ under the law of the 
state of mississippi and grant tax exempt statu by the intern 
revenu service. the foundation' ein or feder tax identif 
number is 64-6221541. contribut to the project gutenberg literari 
archiv foundat are tax deduct to the full extent permit by 
u.s. feder law and your state' laws. 

the foundation' princip offic is in fairbanks, alaska, with the 
mail address: PO box 750175, fairbanks, AK 99775, but it 
volunt and employe are scatter throughout numer 
locations. it busi offic is locat at 809 north 1500 west, salt 
lake city, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. email contact link and up to 
date contact inform can be found at the foundation' web site and 
offici page at www.gutenberg.org/contact 

for addit contact information: 

dr. gregori B. newbi 
chief execut and director 
gbnewby@pglaf.org 

section 4. inform about donat to the project gutenberg 
literari archiv foundat 

project gutenberg-tm depend upon and cannot surviv without wide 
spread public support and donat to carri out it mission of 
increas the number of public domain and licens work that can be 
freeli distribut in machin readabl form access by the widest 
array of equip includ outdat equipment. mani small donat 
($1 to $5,000) are particularli import to maintain tax exempt 
statu with the irs. 

the foundat is commit to compli with the law regul 
chariti and charit donat in all 50 state of the unit 
states. complianc requir are not uniform and it take a 
consider effort, much paperwork and mani fee to meet and keep up 
with these requirements. We do not solicit donat in locat 
where we have not receiv written confirm of compliance. To send 
donat or determin the statu of complianc for ani particular 
state visit www.gutenberg.org/don 

while we cannot and do not solicit contribut from state where we 
have not met the solicit requirements, we know of no prohibit 
against accept unsolicit donat from donor in such state who 
approach us with offer to donate. 

intern donat are grate accepted, but we cannot make 
ani statement concern tax treatment of donat receiv from 
outsid the unit states. u.s. law alon swamp our small staff. 

pleas check the project gutenberg web page for current donat 
method and addresses. donat are accept in a number of other 
way includ checks, onlin payment and credit card donations. To 
donate, pleas visit: www.gutenberg.org/don 

section 5. gener inform about project gutenberg-tm electron works. 

professor michael S. hart wa the origin of the project 
gutenberg-tm concept of a librari of electron work that could be 
freeli share with anyone. for forti years, he produc and 
distribut project gutenberg-tm ebook with onli a loos network of 
volunt support. 

project gutenberg-tm ebook are often creat from sever print 
editions, all of which are confirm as not protect by copyright in 
the u.s. unless a copyright notic is included. thus, we do not 
necessarili keep ebook in complianc with ani particular paper 
edition. 

most peopl start at our web site which ha the main PG search 
facility: www.gutenberg.org 

thi web site includ inform about project gutenberg-tm, 
includ how to make donat to the project gutenberg literari 
archiv foundation, how to help produc our new ebooks, and how to 
subscrib to our email newslett to hear about new ebooks. 
