the project gutenberg ebook of the three impostors, by arthur machen 

thi ebook is for the use of anyon anywher at no cost and with 
almost no restrict whatsoever. you may copi it, give it away or 
re-us it under the term of the project gutenberg licens includ 
with thi ebook or onlin at www.gutenberg.net 


title: the three impostor 
or the transmut 

author: arthur machen 

releas date: march 8, 2011 [ebook #35517] 
[last updated: juli 16, 2011] 

language: english 


*** start OF thi project gutenberg ebook the three impostor *** 




produc by marc d'hoogh at http://www.freeliterature.org 




the three impostor 

or the transmut 

by 

arthur machen 



translat OF 'l'heptameron' and 'le moyen DE parvenir'; 

author OF 'the chronicl OF clemendy' and 'the great god pan' 



boston: robert bros, 1895 

london: john lane, vigo st. 




content 

prologu 
adventur OF the gold tiberiu 
the encount OF the pavement 
novel OF the dark valley 
adventur OF the miss brother 
novel OF the black seal 
incid OF the privat bar 
the decor imagin 
novel OF the iron maid 
the reclus OF bayswat 
novel OF the white powder 
strang occurr IN clerkenwel 
histori OF the young man with spectacl 
adventur OF the desert resid 




the three impostors. 




prologue. 


"and mr. joseph walter is go to stay the night?" said the smooth 
clean-shaven man to hi companion, an individu not of the most 
charm appearance, who had chosen to make hi ginger-color mustach 
merg into a pair of short chin-whiskers. 

the two stood at the hall door, grin evilli at each other; and 
present a girl ran quickli down, the stairs, and join them. she wa 
quit young, with a quaint and piquant rather than a beauti face, and 
her eye were of a shine hazel. she held a neat paper parcel in one 
hand, and laugh with her friends. 

"leav the door open," said the smooth man to the other, as they were 
go out. "yes, by----," he went on with an ugli oath. "we'll leav the 
front door on the jar. He may like to see company, you know." 

the other man look doubt about him. "i it quit prudent do you 
think, davies?" he said, paus with hi hand on the moulder 
knocker. "I don't think lipsiu would like it. what do you say, helen?" 

"I agre with davies. davi is an artist, and you are commonplace, 
richmond, and a bit of a coward. let the door stand open, of course. but 
what a piti lipsiu had to go away! He would have enjoy himself." 

"yes," repli the smooth mr. davies, "that summon to the west wa veri 
hard on the doctor." 

the three pass out, leav the hall door, crack and riven with 
frost and wet, half open, and they stood silent for a moment under the 
ruinou shelter of the porch. 

"well," said the girl, "it is done at last. I shall hurri no more on the 
track of the young man with spectacles." 

"we owe a great deal to you," said mr. davi politely; "the doctor said 
so befor he left. but have we not all three some farewel to make? I, 
for my part, propos to say good-by, here, befor thi picturesqu but 
mouldi residence, to my friend mr. burton, dealer in the antiqu and 
curious," and the man lift hi hat with an exagger bow. 

"and i," said richmond, "bid adieu to mr. wilkins, the privat 
secretary, whose compani has, I confess, becom a littl tedious." 

"farewel to miss lally, and to miss leicest also," said the girl, 
make as she spoke a delici courtesy. "farewel to all occult 
adventure; the farc is played." 

mr. davi and the ladi seem full of grim enjoyment, but richmond 
tug at hi whisker nervously. 

"I feel a bit shaken up," he said. "i'v seen rougher thing in the 
states, but that cri nois he made gave me a sickish feeling. and 
then the smell--but my stomach wa never veri strong." 

the three friend move away from the door, and began to walk slowli up 
and down what had been a gravel path, but now lay green and pulpi with 
damp mosses. It wa a fine autumn evening, and a faint sunlight shone on 
the yellow wall of the old desert house, and show the patch of 
gangren decay, and all the stains, the black drift of rain from the 
broken pipes, the scabrou blot where the bare brick were exposed, the 
green weep of a gaunt laburnum that stood besid the porch, and 
rag mark near the ground where the reek clay wa gain on the 
worn foundations. It wa a queer rambl old place, the centr perhap 
two hundr year old, with dormer window slope from the tile roof, 
and on each side there were georgian wings; bow window had been carri 
up to the first floor, and two dome-lik cupola that had onc been 
paint a bright green were now gray and neutral. broken urn lay upon 
the path, and a heavi mist seem to rise from the unctuou clay; the 
neglect shrubberies, grown all tangl and unshapen, smelt dank and 
evil, and there wa an atmospher all about the desert mansion that 
propos thought of an open grave. the three friend look dismal 
at the rough grass and the nettl that grew thick over lawn and 
flower-beds; and at the sad water-pool in the midst of the weeds. there, 
abov green and oili scum instead of lilies, stood a rust triton on 
the rocks, sound a dirg through a shatter horn; and beyond, beyond 
the sunk fenc and the far meadows; the sun slid down and shone red 
through the bar of the elm trees. 

richmond shiver and stamp hi foot. "we had better be go soon," 
he said; "there is noth els to be done here." 

"no," said davies, "it is finish at last. I thought for some time we 
should never get hold of the gentleman with the spectacles. He wa a 
clever fellow, but, lord! he broke up badli at last. I can tell you he 
look white at me when I touch him on the arm in the bar. but where 
could he have hidden the thing? We can all swear it wa not on him." 

the girl laughed, and they turn away, when richmond gave a violent 
start. "ah!" he cried, turn to the girl, "what have you got there? 
look, davies, look! it' all ooz and dripping." 

the young woman glanc down at the littl parcel she wa carrying, and 
partial unfold the paper. 

"yes, look both of you," she said; "it' my own idea. don't you think it 
will do nice for the doctor' museum? It come from the right hand, 
the hand that took the gold tiberius." 

mr. davi nod with a good deal of approbation, and richmond lift 
hi ugli high-crown bowler, and wipe hi forehead with a dingi 
handkerchief. 

"i'm going," he said; "you two can stay if you like." 

the three went round by the stabl path, past the wither wilder of 
the old kitchen garden, and struck off by a hedg at the back, make 
for a particular point in the road. about five minut later two 
gentlemen, whom idl had led to explor these forgotten outskirt of 
london, came saunter up the shadowi carriag drive. they had spi 
the desert hous from the road, and as they observ all the heavi 
desol of the place they began to moral in the great style, with 
consider debt to jeremi taylor. 

"look, dyson," said the one as they drew nearer, "look at those upper 
windows; the sun is setting, and though the pane are dusty, yet 

"the grimi sash an oriel burns." 

"phillipps," repli the elder and (it must be said) the more pompou of 
the two, "I yield to fantasy, I cannot withstand the influenc of the 
grotesque. here, where all is fall into dim and dissolution, and 
we walk in cedarn gloom, and the veri air of heaven goe moulder to 
the lungs, I cannot remain commonplace. I look at that deep glow on the 
panes, and the hous lie all enchanted; that veri room, I tell you, is 
within all blood and fire." 




adventur OF the gold tiberius. 


the acquaint between mr. dyson and mr. charl phillipp aros from 
one of those myriad chanc which are everi day do their work in the 
street of london. mr. dyson wa a man of letters, and an unhappi 
instanc of talent misapplied. with gift that might have place him in 
the flower of hi youth among the most favor of bentley' favorit 
novelists, he had chosen to be perverse; he was, it is true, familiar 
with scholast logic, but he knew noth of the logic of life, and he 
flatter himself with the titl of artist, when he wa in fact but an 
idl and curiou spectat of other men' endeavors. amongst mani 
delusions, he cherish one most fondly, that he wa a strenuou worker; 
and it wa with a gestur of suprem weari that he would enter hi 
favorit resort, a small tobacco shop in great queen street, and 
proclaim to ani one who care to listen that he had seen the rise and 
set of two success suns. the proprietor of the shop, a 
middle-ag man of singular civility, toler dyson partli out of good 
nature, and partli becaus he wa a regular customer; he wa allow to 
sit on an empti cask, and to express hi sentiment on literari and 
artist matter till he wa tire or the time for close came; and if 
no fresh custom were attracted, it is believ that none were turn 
away by hi eloquence. dyson, wa addict to wild experi in 
tobacco; he never weari of tri new combinations, and one even he 
had just enter the shop and given utter to hi last preposter 
formula, when a young fellow, of about hi own age, who had come in a 
moment later, ask the shopman to duplic the order on hi account, 
smile politely, as he spoke, to mr. dyson' address. dyson felt 
profoundli flattered, and after a few phrase the two enter into 
conversation, and in an hour' time the tobacconist saw the new friend 
sit side by side on a coupl of casks, deep in talk. 

"mi dear sir," said dyson, "I will give you the task of the literari man 
in a phrase. He ha got to do simpli this: to invent a wonder story, 
and to tell it in a wonder manner." 

"I will grant you that," said mr. phillipps, "but you will allow me to 
insist that in the hand of the true artist in word all stori are 
marvellous, and everi circumst ha it peculiar wonder. the matter 
is of littl consequence, the manner is everything. indeed, the highest 
skill is shown in take matter appar commonplac and transmut 
it by the high alchemi of style into the pure gold of art." 

"that is inde a proof of great skill, but it is great skill exert 
foolishly, or at least unadvisedly. It is as if a great violinist were 
to show us what marvel harmoni he could draw from a child' 
banjo." 

"no, no, you are realli wrong. I see you take a radic mistaken view 
of life. but we must thresh thi out. come to my rooms; I live not far 
from here." 

It wa thu that mr. dyson becam the associ of mr. charl 
phillipps, who live in a quiet squar not far from holborn. thenceforth 
they haunt each other' room at intervals, sometim regular, and 
occasion the reverse, and made appoint to meet at the shop in 
queen street, where their talk rob the tobacconist' profit of half 
it charm. there wa a constant jar of literari formulas, dyson 
exalt the claim of the pure imagination, while phillipps, who wa a 
student of physic scienc and someth of an ethnologist, insist 
that all literatur ought to have a scientif basis. By the mistaken 
benevol of deceas rel both young men were place out of 
reach of hunger, and so, medit high achievements, idl their time 
pleasantli away, and revel in the careless joy of a bohemian 
devoid of the sharp season of adversity. 

one night in june mr. phillipp wa sit in hi room in the calm 
retir of red lion square. He had open the window, and wa smoke 
placidly, while he watch the movement of life below. the sky wa 
clear, and the afterglow of sunset had linger long about it; and the 
flush twilight of a summer evening, vy with the gas-lamp in the 
square, had fashion a chiaroscuro that had in it someth unearthly; 
and the children, race to and fro upon the pavement, the loung 
idler by the public, and the casual passers-bi rather flickered, and 
hover in the play of light than stood out substanti things. By 
degre in the hous opposit one window after anoth leap out a 
squar of light, now and again a figur would shape itself against a 
blind and vanish, and to all thi semi-theatr magic the run and 
flourish of brave italian opera play a littl distanc off on a 
piano-organ seem an appropri accompaniment, while the deep-mutt 
bass of the traffic of holborn never ceased. phillipp enjoy the scene 
and it effects; the light in the sky fade and turn to darkness, and 
the squar gradual grew silent, and still he sat dream at the 
window, till the sharp peal of the hous bell rous him, and look at 
hi watch he found that it wa past ten o'clock. there wa a knock at 
the door, and hi friend mr. dyson entered, and, accord to hi 
custom, sat down in an armchair and began to smoke in silence. 

"you know, phillipps," he said at length, "that I have alway battl 
for the marvellous. I rememb your maintain in that chair that one 
ha no busi to make use of the wonderful, the improbable, the odd 
coincid in literature, and you took the ground that it wa wrong to 
do so, because, as a matter of fact, the wonder and the improb 
don't happen, and men' live are not realli shape by odd coincidence. 
now, mind you, if that were so, I would not grant your conclusion, 
becaus I think the "criticism-of-life" theori is all nonsense; but I 
deni your premise. A most singular thing ha happen to me to-night." 

"really, dyson, I am veri glad to hear it. Of cours I oppos your 
argument, whatev it may be; but if you would be good enough to tell me 
of your adventur I should be delighted." 

"well, it came about like this. I have had a veri hard day' work; 
indeed, I have scarc move from my old bureau sinc seven o'clock 
last night. I want to work out that idea we discuss last tuesday, 
you know, the notion of the fetish-worshipper." 

"yes, I remember. have you been abl to do anyth with it?" 

"yes; it came out better than I expected; but there were great 
difficulties, the usual agoni between the concept and the execution. 
anyhow I got it done at about seven o'clock to-night, and I thought I 
should like a littl of the fresh air. I went out and wander rather 
aimlessli about the streets; my head wa full of my tale, and I didn't 
much notic where I wa going. I got into those quiet place to the 
north of oxford street as you go west, the genteel residenti 
neighborhood of stucco and prosperity. I turn east again without 
know it, and it wa quit dark when I pass along a sombr littl 
by-street, ill light and empty. I did not know at the time in the 
least where I was, but I found out afterward that it wa not veri far 
from tottenham court road. I stroll idli along, enjoy the 
stillness; on one side there seem to be the back premis of some 
great shop; tier after tier of dusti window lift up into the night, 
with gibbet-lik contriv for rais heavi goods, and below larg 
doors, fast close and bolted, all dark and desolate. then there came a 
huge pantechnicon warehouse; and over the way a grim blank wall, as 
forbid as the wall of a jail, and then the headquart of some 
volunt regiment, and afterward a passag lead to a court where 
wagon were stand to be hired. It was, one might almost say, a street 
devoid of inhabitants, and scarc a window show the glimmer of a 
light. I wa wonder at the strang peac and dim there, where it 
must be close to some roar main arteri of london life, when suddenli 
I heard the nois of dash feet tear along the pavement at full 
speed, and from a narrow passage, a mew or someth of that kind, a 
man wa discharg as from a catapult under my veri nose and rush past 
me, fling someth from him as he ran. He wa gone and down anoth 
street in an instant, almost befor I knew what had happened, but I 
didn't much bother about him, I wa watch someth else. I told you 
he had thrown someth away; well, I watch what seem a line of 
flame flash through the air and fli quiver over the pavement, and in 
spite of myself I could not help tear after it. the impetu lessened, 
and I saw someth like a bright half-penni roll slower and slower, and 
then deflect toward the gutter, hover for a moment on the edge, and 
danc down into a drain. I believ I cri out in posit despair, 
though I hadn't the least notion what I wa hunting; and then to my joy 
I saw that, instead of drop into the sewer, it had fallen flat 
across two bars. I stoop down and pick it up and whip it into my 
pocket, and I wa just about to walk on when I heard again that sound of 
dash footsteps. I don't know whi I did it, but as a matter of fact I 
dive down into the mews, or whatev it was, and stood as much in the 
shadow as possible. A man went by with a rush a few pace from where I 
wa standing, and I felt uncommonli pleas that I wa in hiding. I 
couldn't make out much feature, but I saw hi eye gleam and hi 
teeth showing, and he had an ugly-look knife in one hand, and I 
thought thing would be veri unpleas for gentleman number one if the 
second robber, or robbed, or what you like, caught him up. I can tell 
you, phillipps, a fox hunt is excit enough, when the horn blow clear 
on a winter morning, and the hound give tongue, and the red-coat 
charg away, but it' noth to a man hunt, and that' what I had a 
slight glimps of to-night. there wa murder in the fellow' eye as he 
went by, and I don't think there wa much more than fifti second 
between the two. I onli hope it wa enough." 

dyson leant back in hi armchair and relit hi pipe, and puf 
thoughtfully. phillipp began to walk up and down the room, muse over 
the stori of violent death fleet in chase along the pavement, the 
knife shine in the lamplight, the furi of the pursuer, and the terror 
of the pursued. 

"well," he said at last, "and what wa it, after all, that you rescu 
from the gutter?" 

dyson jump up, evid quit startled. "I realli haven't a notion. I 
didn't think of looking. but we shall see." 

He fumbl in hi waistcoat pocket and drew out a small and shine 
object, and laid it on the table. It glow there beneath the lamp with 
the radiant glori of rare old gold; and the imag and the letter stood 
out in high relief, clear and sharp, as if it had but left the mint a 
month before. the two men bent over it, and phillipp took it up and 
examin it closely. 

"imp. tiberiu cæsar augustus," he read the legend, and then, look at 
the revers of the coin, he stare in amazement, and at last turn to 
dyson with a look of exultation. 

"do you know what you have found?" he said. 

"appar a gold coin of some antiquity," said dyson, coolly. 

"quit so, a gold tiberius. no, that is wrong. you have found _the_ gold 
tiberius. look at the reverse." 

dyson look and saw the coin wa stamp with the figur of a faun 
stand amidst reed and flow water. the features, minut as they 
were, stood out in delic outline; it wa a face love and yet 
terrible, and dyson thought of the well-known passag of the lad' 
playmate, gradual grow with hi growth and increas with hi 
stature, till the air wa fill with the rank fume of the goat. 

"yes," he said, "it is a curiou coin. Do you know it?" 

"I know about it. It is one of the compar few histor object 
in existence; it is all stori like those jewel we have read of. A 
whole cycl of legend ha gather round the thing; the tale goe that 
it form part of an issu struck by tiberiu to commemor an infam 
excess. you see the legend on the reverse: 'victoria.' It is said that 
by an extraordinari accid the whole issu wa thrown into the melt 
pot, and that onli thi one coin escaped. It glint through histori and 
legend, appear and disappearing, with interv of a hundr year in 
time and contin in place. It wa discov by an italian humanist, 
and lost and rediscovered. It ha not been heard of sinc 1727, when sir 
joshua byrde, a turkey merchant, brought it home from aleppo, and 
vanish with it a month after he had shown it to the virtuosi, no man 
knew or know where. and here it is!" 

"put it into your pocket, dyson," he said, after a pause. "I would not 
let ani one have a glimps of the thing, if I were you. I would not talk 
about it. did either of the men you saw see you?" 

"well, I think not. I don't think the first man, the man who wa vomit 
out of the dark passage, saw anyth at all; and I am sure that the 
second could not have seen me." 

"and you didn't realli see them. you couldn't recogn either the one 
or the other if you met him in the street to-morrow?" 

"no, I don't think I could. the street, as I said, wa dimli lighted, 
and they ran like mad-men." 

the two men sat silent for some time, each weav hi own fanci of 
the story; but lust of the marvel wa slowli overpow dyson' 
more sober thoughts. 

"it is all more strang than I fancied," he said at last. "it wa queer 
enough what I saw; a man is saunter along a quiet, sober, every-day 
london street, a street of gray hous and blank walls, and there, for a 
moment, a veil seem drawn aside, and the veri fume of the pit steam up 
through the flagstones, the ground glows, red hot, beneath hi feet, and 
he seem to hear the hiss of the infern caldron. A man fli in mad 
terror for hi life, and furiou hate press hot on hi step with 
knife drawn ready; here inde is horror. but what is all that to what 
you have told me? I tell you, phillipps, I see the plot thicken, our 
step will henceforth be dog with mystery, and the most ordinari 
incid will teem with significance. you may stand out against it, and 
shut your eyes, but they will be forc open; mark my words, you will 
have to yield to the inevitable. A clue, tangl if you like, ha been 
place by chanc in our hands; it will be our busi to follow it up. 
As for the guilti person or person in thi strang case, they will be 
unabl to escap us, our net will be spread far and wide over thi 
great city, and suddenly, in the street and place of public resort, we 
shall in some way or other be made awar that we are in touch with the 
unknown criminal. indeed, I almost fanci I see him slowli approach 
thi quiet squar of yours; he is loiter at street corners, 
wandering, appar without aim, down far-reach thoroughfares, but 
all the while come nearer and nearer, drawn by an irresist 
magnetism, as ship were drawn to the loadston rock in the eastern 
tale." 

"I certainli think," repli phillipps, "that, if you pull out that coin 
and flourish it under people' nose as you are do at the present 
moment, you will veri probabl find yourself in touch with the criminal, 
or a criminal. you will undoubtedli be rob with violence. otherwise, 
I see no reason whi either of us should be troubled. No one saw you 
secur the coin, and no one know you have it. I, for my part, shall 
sleep peacefully, and go about my busi with a sens of secur and 
a firm depend on the natur order of things. the event of the 
evening, the adventur in the street, have been odd, I grant you, but I 
resolut declin to have ani more to do with the matter, and, if 
necessary, I shall consult the police. I will not be enslav by a gold 
tiberius, even though it swim into my ken in a manner which is somewhat 
melodramatic." 

"and I for my part," said dyson, "go forth like a knight-err in 
search of adventure. not that I shall need to seek; rather adventur 
will seek me; I shall be like a spider in the midst of hi web, 
respons to everi movement, and ever on the alert." 

shortli afterward dyson took hi leave, and mr. phillipp spent the 
rest of the night in examin some flint arrow-head which he had 
purchased. He had everi reason to believ that they were the work of a 
modern and not a palæolith man, still he wa far from gratifi when a 
close scrutini show him that hi suspicion were well founded. In hi 
anger at the turpitud which would impos on an ethnologist, he 
complet forgot dyson and the gold tiberius; and when he went to bed 
at first sunlight, the whole tale had fade utterli from hi thoughts. 




the encount OF the pavement. 


mr. dyson, walk leisur along oxford. street, and stare with 
bland inquiri at whatev caught hi attention, enjoy in all it rare 
flavor the sensat that he wa realli veri hard at work. hi 
observ of mankind, the traffic, and the shop-window tickl hi 
faculti with an exquisit bouquet; he look serious, as one look on 
whom charg of weight and moment are laid, and he wa attent in hi 
glanc to right and left, for fear lest he should miss some 
circumst of more acut significance. He had narrowli escap be 
run over at a cross by a charg van, for he hate to hurri hi 
steps, and inde the afternoon wa warm; and he had just halt by a 
place of popular refreshment, when the astound gestur of a well 
dress individu on the opposit pavement held him enchant and 
gasp like a fish. A trebl line of hansoms, carriages, vans, cabs, 
and omnibuses, wa tear east and west, and not the most dare 
adventur of the cross would have care to tri hi fortune; but the 
person who had attract dyson' attent seem to rage on the veri 
edg of the pavement, now and then dart forward at the hazard of 
instant death, and at each repuls absolut danc with excitement, 
to the rich amus of the passers-by. At last, a gap that would, have 
tri the courag of a street-boy appear between the serri line of 
vehicles, and the man rush across in a frenzy, and escap by a 
hair' breadth pounc upon dyson as a tiger pounc on her prey. "I saw 
you look about you," he said, sputter out hi word in hi intens 
eagerness; "would you mind tell me this? wa the man who came out of 
the aerat bread shop and jumped, into the hansom three minut ago a 
youngish look man with dark whisker and spectacles? can't you speak, 
man? for heaven' sake can't you speak? answer me; it' a matter of life 
and death." 

the word bubbl and boil out of the man' mouth in the furi of hi 
emotion, hi face went from red to white, and the bead of sweat stood 
out on hi forehead, and he stamp hi feet as he spoke and tore with 
hi hand at hi coat, as if someth swell and choke him, stop 
the passag of hi breath. 

"mi dear sir," said dyson, "I alway like to be accurate. your 
observ wa perfectli correct. As you say, a youngish man, a man, I 
should say, of somewhat timid bearing, ran rapidli out of the shop here, 
and bounc into a hansom that must have been wait for him, as it 
went eastward at once. your friend also wore spectacles, as you say. 
perhap you would like me to call a hansom for you to follow the 
gentleman?" 

"no, thank you; it would be wast of time." the man gulp down 
someth which appear to rise in hi throat, and dyson wa alarm to 
see him shake with hyster laughter, and he clung hard to a 
lamp-post and sway and stagger like a ship in a heavi gale. 

"how shall I face the doctor?" he murmur to himself. "it is too hard 
to fail at the last moment." then he seem to recollect himself, and 
stood straight again, and look quietli at dyson. I owe you an apolog 
for my violence, he said at last. "mani men would not be so patient as 
you have been. would you mind ad to your kind by walk with me 
a littl way? I feel a littl sick; I think it' the sun." 

dyson nod assent, and devot himself to a quiet scrutini of thi 
strang personag as they move on together. the man wa dress in 
quiet taste, and the most scrupul observ could find noth amiss 
with the fashion or make of hi clothes, yet, from hi hat to hi boots, 
everyth seem inappropriate. hi silk hat, dyson thought, should 
have been a high bowler of odiou pattern worn with a baggi 
morning-coat, and an instinct told him that the fellow did not commonli 
carri a clean pocket-handkerchief. the face wa not of the most 
agreeabl pattern, and wa in no way improv by a pair of bulbou 
chin-whisk of a ginger hue, into which mustach of light color 
merg imperceptibly. yet in spite of these signal hung out by nature, 
dyson felt that the individu besid him wa someth more than 
compact of vulgarity. He wa struggl with himself, hold hi 
feel in check, but now and again passion would mount black to hi 
face, and it wa evid by a suprem effort that he kept himself 
from rage like a madman. dyson found someth curiou and a littl 
terribl in the spectacl of an occult emot thu strive for the 
mastery, and threaten to break out at everi instant with violence, 
and they had gone some distanc befor the person whom he had met by so 
odd a hazard wa abl to speak quietly. 

"you are realli veri good," he said. "I apolog again; my rude wa 
realli most unjustifiable. I feel my conduct demand an explanation, and 
I shall be happi to give it you. Do you happen to know of ani place near 
here where one could sit down? I should realli be veri glad." 

"mi dear sir," said dyson, solemnly, "the onli café in london is close 
by. pray do not consid yourself as bound to offer me ani explanation, 
but at the same time I should be most happi to listen to you. let us 
turn down here." 

they walk down a sober street and turn into what seem a narrow 
passag past an iron-bar gate thrown back. the passag wa pave with 
flagstones, and decor with handsom shrub in pot on either side, 
and the shadow of the high wall made a cool which wa veri 
agreeabl after the hot breath of the sunni street. present the 
passag open out into a tini square, a charm place, a morsel of 
franc transplant into the heart of london. high wall rose on either 
side, cover with glossi creepers, flower-b beneath were gay with 
nasturtiums, geraniums, and marigolds, and odor with mignonette, and 
in the centr of the squar a fountain hidden by greeneri sent a cool 
shower continu plash into the basin beneath, and the veri nois 
made thi retreat delightful. chair and tabl were dispos at 
conveni intervals, and at the other end of the court broad door had 
been thrown back; beyond wa a long, dark room, and the turmoil of 
traffic had becom a distant murmur. within the room one or two men were 
sit at the tables, write and sipping, but the courtyard wa empty. 

"you see, we shall be quiet," said dyson. "pray sit down here, mr.--?" 

"wilkins. My name is henri wilkins." 

"sit here, mr. wilkins. I think you will find that a comfort seat. I 
suppos you have not been here before? thi is the quiet time; the place 
will be like a hive at six o'clock, and the chair and tabl will 
overflow into that littl alley there." 

A waiter came in respons to the bell; and after dyson had polit 
inquir after the health of M. annibault, the proprietor, he order a 
bottl of the wine of champigny. 

"the wine of champigny," he observ to mr. wilkins, who wa evid a 
good deal compos by the influenc of the place, "i a tourainian wine 
of great merit. ah, here it is; let me fill your glass. how do you find 
it?" 

"indeed," said mr. wilkins, "I should have pronounc it a fine 
burgundy. the bouquet is veri exquisite. I am fortun in light upon 
such a good samaritan as yourself. I wonder you did not think me mad. 
but if you knew the terror that assail me, I am sure you would no 
longer be surpris at conduct which wa certainli most unjustifiable." 

He sip hi wine, and leant back in hi chair, relish the drip and 
trickl of the fountain, and the cool green that hedg in thi 
littl port of refuge. 

"yes," he said at last, "that is inde an admir wine. thank you; 
you will allow me to offer you anoth bottle?" 

the waiter wa summoned, and descend through a trap-door in the floor 
of the dark apartment, and brought up the wine. mr. wilkin lit a 
cigarette, and dyson pull out hi pipe. 

"now," said mr. wilkins, "I promis to give you an explan of my 
strang behavior. It is rather a long story, but I see, sir, that you 
are no mere cold observ of the ebb and flow of life. you take, I 
think, a warm and an intellig interest in the chanc of your 
fellow-creatures, and I believ you will find what I have to tell not 
devoid of interest." 

mr. dyson signifi hi assent to these propositions, and though he 
thought mr. wilkins' diction a littl pompous, prepar to interest 
himself in hi tale. the other, who had so rage with passion half an 
hour before, wa now perfectli cool, and when he had smoke out hi 
cigarette, he began in an even voic to relat the 




novel OF the dark valley. 


I am the son of a poor but learn clergyman in the west of 
england,--but I am forgetting, these detail are not of special 
interest. I will briefli state, then, that my father, who was, as I 
have said, a learn man, had never learnt the speciou art by which 
the great are flattered, and would never condescend to the despic 
pursuit of self-advertisement. though hi fond for ancient 
ceremoni and quaint customs, combin with a kind of heart that 
wa unequal and a primit and fervent piety, endear him to hi 
moor-land parishioners, such were not the step by which clergi then 
rose in the church, and at sixti my father wa still incumb of the 
littl benefic he had accept in hi thirtieth year. the incom of the 
live wa bare suffici to support life in the decenc which are 
expect of the anglican parson; and when my father die a few year 
ago, I, hi onli child, found myself thrown upon the world with a 
slender capit of less than a hundr pounds, and all the problem of 
exist befor me. I felt that there wa noth for me to do in the 
country, and as usual happen in such eases, london drew me like a 
magnet. one day in august, in the earli morning, while the dew still 
glitter on the turf, and on the high green bank of the lane, a 
neighbor drove me to the railway station, and I bade good-by to the 
land of the broad moor and unearthli battlement of the wild tors. It 
wa six o'clock as we near london; the faint sickli fume of the 
brickfield about acton came in puff through the open window, and a 
mist wa rise from the ground. present the brief view of success 
streets, prim and uniform, struck me with a sens of monotony; the hot 
air seem to grow hotter; and when we had roll beneath the dismal and 
squalid houses, whose dirti and neglect back yard border the line 
near paddington, I felt as if I should be stifl in thi faint 
breath of london. I got a hansom and drove off, and everi street 
increas my gloom; gray hous with blind drawn down, whole 
thoroughfar almost desolate, and the foot-passeng who seem to 
stagger wearili along rather than walk, all made me feel a sink at 
heart. I put up for the night at a small hotel in a street lead from 
the strand, where my father had stay on hi few brief visit to town; 
and when I went out after dinner, the real gayeti and bustl of the 
strand and fleet street could cheer me but little, for in all thi great 
citi there wa no singl human be whom I could claim even as an 
acquaintance. I will not weari you with the histori of the next year, 
for the adventur of a man who sink are too trite to be worth 
recalling. My money did not last me long; I found that I must be neatli 
dressed, or no one to whom I appli would so much as listen to me; and 
I must live in a street of decent reput if I wish to be treat 
with common civility. I appli for variou posts, for which, as I now 
see, I wa complet devoid of qualification; I tri to becom a clerk 
without have the smallest notion of busi habits, and I found, to 
my cost, that a gener knowledg of literatur and an execr style 
of penmanship are far from be look upon with favor in commerci 
circles. I had read one of the most charm of the work of a famou 
novelist of the present day, and I frequent the fleet street tavern 
in the hope of make literari friends, and so get the 
introduct which I understood were indispens in the career of 
letters. I wa disappointed; I onc or twice ventur to address 
gentlemen who were sit in adjoin boxes, and I wa answered, 
polit indeed, but in a manner that told me my advanc were unusual. 
pound by pound, my small resourc melted; I could no longer think of 
appearances; I migrat to a shi quarter, and my meal becam mere 
observances. I went out at one and return to my room at two, but 
noth but a milk-cak had occur in the interval. In short, I becam 
acquaint with misfortune; and as I sat amidst slush and ice on a seat 
in hyde park, munch a piec of bread, I realiz the bitter of 
poverty, and the feel of a gentleman reduc to someth far below 
the condit of a vagrant. In spite of all discourag I did not 
desist in my effort to earn a living. I consult advertis 
columns, I kept my eye open for a chance, I look in at the window of 
stationers' shops, but all in vain. one even I wa sit in a free 
library, and I saw an advertis in one of the papers. It wa 
someth like this: "wanted, by a gentleman a person of literari tast 
and abil as secretari and amanuensis. must not object to travel." 
Of cours I knew that such an advertis would have answer by the 
hundred, and I thought my own chanc of secur the post extrem 
small; however, I appli at the address given, and wrote to mr. smith, 
who wa stay at a larg hotel at the west end. I must confess that my 
heart gave a jump when I receiv a note a coupl of day later, ask 
me to call at the cosmopol at my earliest convenience. I do not know, 
sir, what your experi of life may have been, and so I cannot tell 
whether you have known such moments. A slight sickness, my heart beat 
rather more rapidli than usual, a choke in the throat, and a 
difficulti of utterance; such were my sensat as I walk to the 
cosmopole. I had to mention the name twice befor the hall porter could 
understand me, and as I went upstair my hand were wet. I wa a good 
deal struck by mr. smith' appearance; he look younger than I did, and 
there wa someth mild and hesit about hi expression. He wa 
read when I came in, and he look up when I gave my name. "mi dear 
sir," he said, "I am realli delight to see you. I have read veri 
care the letter you were good enough to send me. Am I to understand 
that thi document is in your own handwriting?" He show me the letter 
I had written, and I told him I wa not so fortun as to be abl to 
keep a secretari myself. "then, sir," he went on, "the post I advertis 
is at your service. you have no object to travel, I presume?" As you 
may imagine, I close pretti eagerli with the offer he made, and thu I 
enter the servic of mr. smith. for the first few week I had no 
special duties; I had receiv a quarter' salary, and a handsom 
allow wa made me in lieu of board and lodging. one morning, 
however, when I call at the hotel accord to instructions, my master 
inform me that I must hold myself in readi for a sea-voyage, and, 
to spare unnecessari detail, in the cours of a fortnight we had land 
at new york. mr. smith told me that he wa engag on a work of a 
special nature, in the compil of which some peculiar research had 
to be made; in short, I wa given to understand that we were to travel 
to the far west. 

after about a week had been spent in new york we took our seat in the 
cars, and began a journey tediou beyond all conception. day after day, 
and night after night, the great train roll on, thread it way 
through citi the veri name of which were strang to me, pass at 
slow speed over peril viaducts, skirt mountain rang and pine 
forests, and plung into dens tract of wood, where mile after mile 
and hour after hour the same monoton growth of brushwood met the eye, 
and all along the continu clatter and rattl of the wheel upon the 
ill-laid line made it difficult to hear the voic of our 
fellow-passengers. We were a heterogen and ever-chang company; 
often I woke up in the dead of night with the sudden grind jar of the 
brakes, and look out found that we had stop in the shabbi street 
of some frame-built town, light chiefli by the flare window of the 
saloon. A few rough-look fellow would often come out to stare at the 
cars, and sometim passeng got down, and sometim there wa a parti 
of two or three wait on the wooden sidewalk to get on board. mani of 
the passeng were english; humbl household torn up from the moor 
of a thousand years, and bound for some problemat paradis in the 
alkali desert or the rockies. I heard the men talk to one anoth of 
the great profit to be made on the virgin soil of america, and two or 
three, who were mechanics, expati on the wonder wage given to 
skill labor on the railway and in the factori of the states. thi 
talk usual fell dead after a few minutes, and I could see a sick 
and dismay in the face of these men as they look at the ugli brush or 
at the desol expans of the prairie, dot here and there with 
frame-houses, devoid of garden, or flower or trees, stand all alon 
in what might have been a great gray sea frozen into stillness. day 
after day the wave sky line, and the desol of a land without form 
or color or variety, appal the heart of such of us as were 
englishmen, and onc in the night as I lay awak I heard a woman weep 
and sobbing, and ask what she had done to come to such a place. her 
husband tri to comfort her in the broad speech of gloucestershire, 
tell her the ground wa so rich that one had onli to plough it up and 
it would grow sunflow of itself, but she cri for her mother and 
their old cottag and the beehives, like a littl child. the sad of 
it all overwhelm me, and I had no heart to think of other matters; the 
question of what mr. smith could have to do in such a country, and of 
what manner of literari research could be carri on in the wilderness, 
hardli troubl me. now and again my situat struck me as peculiar; I 
had been engag as a literari assist at a handsom salary, and yet 
my master wa still almost a stranger to me; sometim he would come to 
where I wa sit in the car and make a few banal remark about the 
country, but for the most part of the journey he sat by himself, not 
speak to ani one, and so far as I could judge, deep in hi thoughts. 
It wa I think on the fifth day from new york when I received, the 
intim that we should shortli leav the cars; I had been watch 
some distant mountain which rose wild and savag befor us, and I wa 
wonder if there were human be so unhappi as to speak of home in 
connect with those pile of lumber rock, when mr. smith touch me 
lightli on the shoulder. "you will be glad to be done with, the cars, I 
have no doubt, mr. wilkins," he said. "you were look at the 
mountains, I think? well, I hope we shall be there to-night. the train 
stop at reading, and I dare say we shall manag to find our way." 

A few hour later the brakeman brought the tram to a standstil at the 
read depot and we got out. I notic that the town, though of cours 
built almost entir of frame-houses, wa larger and busier than ani we 
had pass for the last two days. the depot wa crowded, and as the bell 
and whistl sounded, I saw that a number of person were prepar to 
leav the cars, while an even greater number were wait to get on 
board. besid the passengers, there wa a pretti dens crowd of people, 
some of whom had come to meet or to see off their friend and relatives, 
while other were mere loafers. sever of our english fellow passeng 
got down at reading, but the confus wa so great that they were lost 
to my sight almost immediately. mr. smith beckon to me to follow him, 
and we were soon in the thick of the mass; and the continu ring of 
bells, the hubbub of voices, the shriek of whistles, and the hiss of 
escap steam, confus my senses, and I wonder dimli as I struggl 
after my employer, where we were going, and how we should be abl to 
find our way through an unknown country. mr. smith had put on a 
wide-brim hat, which he had slope over hi eyes, and as all the men 
wore hat of the same pattern, it wa with some difficulti that I 
distinguish him in the crowd. We got free at last, and he struck down 
a side street, and made one or two sharp turn to right and left. It wa 
get dusk, and we seem to be pass through a shi portion of the 
town, there were few peopl about in the ill-light streets, and these 
few were men of the most unprepossess pattern. suddenli we stop 
befor a corner house, a man wa stand at the door, appar on the 
look-out for some one, and I notic that he and smith gave sharp 
glanc one to the other. 

"from new york city, I expect, mister?" 

"from new york!" 

"all right; they 're ready, and you can have 'em when you choose. I know 
my orders, you see, and I mean to run thi busi through." 

"veri well, mr. evans, that is what we want. our money is good, you 
know. bring them round." 

I had stood silent, listen to thi dialogue, and wonder what it 
meant. smith began to walk impati up and down the street, and the 
man evan wa still stand at hi door. He had given a sharp whistle, 
and I saw him look me over in a quiet leisur way, as if to make 
sure of my face for anoth time. I wa think what all thi could 
mean, when an ugly, slouch lad came up a side passage, lead two 
raw-bon horses. 

"get up, mr. wilkins, and be quick about it," said smith. "we ought to 
be on our way." 

We rode off togeth into the gather darkness, and befor long I 
look back and saw the far plain behind us, with the light of the town 
glimmer faintly; and in front rose the mountains. smith guid hi 
hors on the rough track as sure as if he had been ride along 
piccadilly, and I follow him as well as I could. I wa weari and 
exhausted, and scarc took note of anything; I felt that the track wa 
a gradual ascent, and here and there I saw great boulder by the road. 
the ride made but littl impress on me; I have a faint recollect 
of pass through a dens black pine forest, where our hors had to 
pick their way among the rocks, and I rememb the peculiar effect of 
the rarefi air as we kept still mount higher and higher. I think I 
must have been half asleep for the latter half of the ride, and it wa 
with a shock that I heard smith saying-- 

"here we are, wilkins. thi is blue-rock park. you will enjoy the view 
to-morrow. to-night we will have someth to eat, and then go to bed." 

A man came out of a rough-look hous and took the horses, and we 
found some fri steak and coars whiskey await us inside. I had come 
to a strang place. there were three rooms,--th room in which we had 
supper, smith' room and my own. the deaf old man who did the work slept 
in a sort of shed, and when I woke up the next morn and walk out I 
found that the hous stood in a sort of hollow amongst the mountains; 
the clump of pine and some enorm bluish-gray rock that stood here 
and there between the tree had given the place the name of blue-rock 
park. On everi side the snow-cov mountain surround us, the breath 
of the air wa as wine, and when I climb the slope and look down, I 
could see that, so far as ani human fellowship wa concern I might as 
well have been wreck on some small island in mid-pacific. the onli 
trace of man I could see wa the rough log-hous where I had slept, and 
in my ignor I did not know that there were similar hous within 
compar easi distance, as distanc is reckon in the rockies. but 
at the moment, the utter, dread loneli rush upon me, and the 
thought of the great plain and the great sea that part me from the 
world I knew, caught me by the throat, and I wonder if I should die 
there in that mountain hollow. It wa a terribl instant, and I have not 
yet forgotten it. Of cours I manag to conquer my horror; I said I 
should be all the stronger for the experience, and I made up my mind to 
make the best of everything. It wa a rough life enough, and rough 
enough board and lodging. I wa left entir to myself. smith I 
scarc ever saw, nor did I know when he wa in the house. I have often 
thought he wa far away, and have been surpris to see him walk out 
of hi room, lock the door behind him and put the key in hi 
pocket; and on sever occas when I fanci he wa busi in hi room, 
I have seen him come in with hi boot cover with dust and dirt. So 
far as work went I enjoy a complet sinecure; I had noth to do but 
to walk about the valley, to eat, and to sleep. with one thing and 
anoth I grew accustomed, to the life, and manag to make myself 
pretti comfortable, and by degre I began to ventur farther away from 
the house, and to explor the country. one day I had contriv to get 
into a neighbor valley, and suddenli I came upon a group of men 
saw timber. I went up to them, hope that perhap some of them might 
be englishmen; at all event they were human beings, and I should hear 
articul speech, for the old man I have mentioned, besid be half 
blind and stone deaf, wa wholli dumb so far as I wa concerned. I wa 
prepar to be welcom in a rough and readi fashion, without much, of 
the form of politeness, but the grim glanc and the short gruff 
answer I receiv astonish me. I saw the men glanc oddli at each 
other, and one of them who had stop work began finger a gun, and I 
wa oblig to return on my path utter curs on the fate which had 
brought me into a land where men were more brutish than the veri brutes. 
the solitud of the life began to oppress me as with a nightmare, and a 
few day later I determin to walk to a kind of station some mile 
distant, where a rough inn wa kept for the accommod of hunter and 
tourists. english gentlemen occasion stop there for the night, 
and I thought I might perhap fall in with some one of better manner 
than the inhabit of the country. I found as I had expect a group 
of men loung about the door of the log-hous that serv as a hotel, 
and as I came nearer I could see that head were put togeth and look 
interchanged, and when I walk up the six or seven trapper stare at 
me in stoni ferocity, and with someth of the disgust that one eye a 
loathsom and venom snake. I felt that I could bear it no longer, and 
I call out:-- 

"i there such a thing as an englishman here, or ani one with a littl 
civilization?" 

one of the men put hi hand to hi belt, but hi neighbor check him 
and answer me. 

"you'll find we'v got some of the resourc of civil befor veri 
long, mister, and I expect you'll not fanci them extremely. but anyway, 
there' an englishman tarri here, and i'v no doubt he'll be glad to 
see you. there you are, that' mr. d'aubernoun." 

A young man, dress like an english countri squire, came and stood at 
the door, and look at me. one of the men point to me and said:-- 

"that' the individu we were talk about last night. thought you 
might like to have a look at him, squire, and here he is." 

the young fellow' good-natur english face cloud over, and he 
glanc sternli at me, and turn away with a gestur of contempt and 
aversion. 

"sir," I cried, "I do not know what I have done to be treat in thi 
manner. you are my fellow-countryman, and I expect some courtesy." 

He gave me a black look and made as if he would go in, but he chang 
hi mind, and face me. 

"you are rather imprudent, I think, to behav in thi manner. you must 
be count on a forbear which cannot last veri long; which may last 
a veri short time, indeed. and let me tell you this, sir, you may call 
yourself an englishman and drag the name of england through the dirt, 
but you need not count on ani english influenc to help you. If I were 
you, I would not stay here much longer." 

He went into the inn, and the men quietli watch my face, as I stood 
there, wonder whether I wa go mad. the woman of the hous came 
out and stare at me as if I were a wild beast or a savage, and I turn 
to her, and spoke quietly. 

"I am veri hungri and thirsty, I have walk a long way. I have plenti 
of money. will you give me someth to eat and drink?" 

"no, I won't," she said. "you had better quit this." 

I crawl home like a wound beast, and lay down on my bed. It wa all 
a hopeless puzzl to me. I knew noth but rage and shame and terror, 
and I suffer littl more when I pass by a hous in an adjac 
valley, and some children who were play outsid ran from me 
shrieking. I wa forc to walk to find some occupation. I should have 
die if I had sat down quietli in blue rock park and look all day at 
the mountains; but wherev I saw a human be I saw the same glanc of 
hatr and aversion, and onc as I wa cross a thick brake I heard a 
shot, and the venom hiss of a bullet close to my ear. 

one day I heard a convers which astound me; I wa sit behind 
a rock resting, and two men came along the track and halted. one of them 
had got hi feet entangl in some wild vines, and swore fiercely, but 
the other laughed, and said they were use thing sometimes. 

"what the hell do you mean?" 

"oh, noth much. but they 're uncommon tough, these here vines, and 
sometim rope is skers and dear." 

the man who had sworn chuckl at this, and I heard them sit down and 
light their pipes. 

"have you seen him lately?" ask the humorist. 

"I sight him the other day, but the darn bullet went high. he' got 
hi master' luck, I expect, sir, but it can't last much longer. you 
heard about him go to jinks' and tri hi brass, but the young 
british down him pretti considerable, I can tell you." 

"what the devil is the mean of it?" 

"I don't know, but I believ it'll have to be finished, and done in the 
old style, too. you know how they fix the niggers?" 

"yes, sir, i'v seen a littl of that. A coupl of gallon of 
kerosene'l cost a dollar at brown' store, but I should say it' cheap 
anyway." 

they move off after this, and I lay still behind the rock, the sweat 
pour down my face. I wa so sick that I could bare stand, and I 
walk home as slowli as an old man, lean on my stick. I knew that 
the two men had been talk about me, and I knew that some terribl 
death wa in store for me. that night I could not sleep. I toss on the 
rough bed and tortur myself to find out the mean of it all. At last 
in the veri dead of night I rose from the bed, and put on my clothes, 
and went out. I did not care where I went, but I felt that I must walk 
till I had tire myself out. It wa a clear moonlight night, and in a 
coupl of hour I found I wa approach a place of dismal reput 
in the mountains, a deep cleft in the rocks, known as black gulf cañon. 
mani year before, an unfortun parti of englishmen and englishwomen 
had camp here and had been surround by indians. they were captured, 
outraged, and put to death with almost inconceiv tortures, and the 
roughest of the trapper or woodsmen gave the cañon a wide berth even in 
the day-time. As I crush through the dens brushwood which grew abov 
the cañon, I heard voices, and wonder who could be in such a place at 
such a time, I went on, walk more care and make as littl 
nois as possible. there wa a great tree grow on the veri edg of 
the rocks, and I lay down and look out from behind the trunk. black 
gulf cañon wa below me, the moonlight shine bright into it veri 
depth from midheaven, and cast shadow as black as death from the 
point rock, and all the sheer rock on the other side, overhang the 
cañon, wa in darkness. At interv a light veil obscur the 
moonlight, as a filmi cloud fleet across the moon; and a bitter wind 
blew shrill across the gulf. I look down as I have said, and saw 
twenti men stand in a semicircl round a rock; I count them one by 
one, and knew most of them. they were the veri vilest of the vile, more 
vile than ani den in london could show, and there wa murder and wors 
than murder on the head of not a few. face them and me stood mr. 
smith with the rock befor him, and on the rock wa a great pair of 
scales, such, as are use in the stores. I heard hi voic ring down 
the cañon as I lay besid the tree, and my heart turn cold as I heard 
it. 

"life for gold," he cried, "a life for gold. the blood and the life of 
an enemi for everi pound of gold." 

A man step out and rais one hand, and with the other flung a bright 
lump of someth into the pan of the scales, which clang down, and 
smith mutter someth in hi ear. then he cri again:-- 

"blood for gold; for a pound of gold, the life of an enemy. for everi 
pound of gold upon the scales, a life." 

one by one the men came forward, each lift up hi right hand; and the 
gold wa weigh in the scales, and each time smith lean forward and 
spoke to each man in hi ear. then he cri again:-- 

"desir and lust, for gold on the scales. for everi pound of gold, 
enjoy of desire." 

I saw the same thing happen as before; the uplift hand, and the metal 
weighed, and the mouth whispering, and black passion on everi face. 

then, one by one, I saw the men again step up to smith. A mutter 
convers seem to take place; I could see that smith wa explain 
and directing, and I notic that he gesticul a littl as one who 
point out the way, and onc or twice he move hi hand quickli as if 
he would show that the path wa clear and could not be missed. I kept my 
eye so intent on hi figur that I note littl else, and at last it 
wa with a start that I realiz that the cañon wa empty. A moment 
befor I thought I had seen the group of villain faces, and the two 
standing, a littl apart by the rock; I had look down a moment, and 
when I glanc again into the cañon there wa no one there. In dumb 
terror I made my way home, and I fell asleep in an instant from 
exhaustion. No doubt I should have slept on for mani hours, but when I 
woke up, the sun wa onli rising, and the light shone in on my bed. I 
had start up from sleep with the sensat of have receiv a 
violent shock, and as I look in confus about me I saw to my 
amaz that there were three men in the room. one of them had hi 
hand on my shoulder and spoke to me. 

"come, mister, wake up. your time' up now, I reckon, and the boy are 
wait for you outside, and they 're in a big hurry. come on; you can 
put on your clothes, it' kind of chilli thi morning." 

I saw the other two men smile sourli at each other, but I understood 
nothing. I simpli pull on my clothes, and said I wa ready. 

"all right, come on then. you go first, nichols, and jim and I will give 
the gentleman an arm." 

they took me out into the sunlight, and then I understood the mean of 
a dull murmur that had vagu perplex me while I wa dressing. there 
were about two hundr men wait outside, and some women too, and when 
they saw me there wa a low mutter growl. I did not know what I had 
done, but that nois made my heart beat and the sweat come out on my 
face. I saw confusedly, as through a veil, the tumult and toss of the 
crowd, discord voic were speaking, and amongst all those face 
there wa not one glanc of mercy, but a furi of lust that I did not 
understand. I found myself present walk in a sort of process up 
the slope of the valley, and on everi side of me there were men with 
revolv in their hands. now and then a voic struck me, and I heard 
word and sentenc of which I could form no connect story. but I 
understood that there wa one sentenc of execration; I heard scrap of 
stori that seem strang and improbable. some one wa talk of men, 
lure by cun devic from their home and murder with hideou 
tortures, found writh like wound snake in dark and lone places, 
onli cri for some one to stab them to the heart, and so end their 
torments; and I heard anoth voic speak of innoc girl who had 
vanish for a day or two, and then had come back and died, blush red 
with shame even in the agoni of death. I wonder what it all meant, 
and what wa to happen, but I wa so weari that I walk on in a dream, 
scarc long for anyth but sleep. At last we stopped. We had 
reach the summit of the hill, overlook blue rock valley, and I saw 
that I wa stand beneath a clump of tree where I had often sat. I 
wa in the midst of a ring of arm men, and I saw that two or three men 
were veri busi with pile of wood, while other were finger a rope. 
then there wa a stir in the crowd, and a man wa push forward. hi 
hand and feet were tightli bound with cord, and though hi face wa 
unutter villain I piti him for the agoni that work hi 
featur and twist hi lips. I knew him; he wa amongst those that had 
gather round smith in black gulf cañon. In an instant he wa unbound, 
and strip naked; and born beneath one of the trees, and hi neck 
encircl by a noos that went around the trunk. A hoars voic gave 
some kind of order; there wa a rush of feet, and the rope tightened; 
and there befor me I saw the blacken face and the writh limb and 
the shame agoni of death. one after another, half a dozen men, all of 
whom I had seen in the cañon the night before, were strangl befor me, 
and their bodi were flung forth on the ground. then there wa a pause, 
and the man who had rous me a short while before, came up to me and 
said:-- 

"now, mister, it' your turn. We give you five minut to cast up your 
accounts, and when that' clocked, by the live god we will burn you 
aliv at that tree." 

It wa then I awok and understood. I cri out:-- 

"why, what have I done? whi should you hurt me? I am a harmless man, I 
never did you ani wrong." I cover my face with my hands; it seem so 
pitiful, and it wa such a terribl death. 

"what have I done?" I cri again. "you must take me for some other man. 
you cannot know me." 

"you black-heart devil," said the man at my side, "we know you well 
enough. there' not a man within thirti mile of thi that won't curs 
jack smith when you are burn in hell." 

"mi name is not smith," I said, with some hope left in me. "mi name is 
wilkins. I wa mr. smith' secretary, but I knew noth of him." 

"hark at the black liar," said the man. "secretari be damned! you were 
clever enough, I dare say, to slink out at night, and keep your face in 
the dark, but we'v track you out at last. but your time' up. come 
along." 

I wa drag to the tree and bound to it with chains, and I saw the 
pile of wood heap all about me, and shut my eyes. then I felt myself 
drench all over with some liquid, and look again, and a woman 
grin at me. she had just empti a great can of petroleum over me and 
over the wood. A voic shouted, "fire away," and I faint and knew 
noth more. 

when I open my eye I wa lie on a bed in a bare comfortless room. A 
doctor wa hold some strong salt to my nostrils, and a gentleman 
stand by the bed, whom I afterward found to be the sheriff, 
address me:-- 

"say, mister," he began, "you'v had an uncommon narrow squeak for it. 
the boy were just about light up when I came along with the posse, 
and I had as much as I could do to bring you off, I can tell you. and, 
mind you, I don't blame, them; they had made up their minds, you see, 
that you were the head of the black gulf gang, and at first noth I 
could say would persuad them you weren't jack smith. luckily, a man 
from here name evans, that came along with us, allow he had seen you 
with jack smith, and that you were yourself. So we brought you along and 
jail you, but you can go if you like, when you'r through with thi 
faint turn." 

I got on the car the next day, and in three week I wa in london; 
again almost penniless. but from that time my fortun seem to change. 
I made influenti friend in all directions; bank director court my 
company, and editor posit flung themselv into my arms. I had 
onli to choos my career, and after a while I determin that I wa 
meant by natur for a life of compar leisure. with an eas that 
seem almost ridicul I obtain a well-paid posit in connect 
with a prosper polit club. I have charm chamber in a central 
neighborhood close to the parks; the club _chef_ exert himself when I 
lunch or dine, and the rarest vintag in the cellar are alway at my 
disposal. yet, sinc my return to london, I have never known a day' 
secur or peace; I trembl when I awak lest smith should be stand 
at my bed, and everi step I take seem to bring me nearer to the edg of 
the precipice. smith, I knew, had escap free from the raid of the 
vigilantes, and I grew faint at the thought that he would in all 
probabl return to london, and that suddenli and unprepar I should 
meet him face to face. everi morn as I left my house, I would peer up 
and down the street, expect to see that dread figur await me; I 
have delay at street corners, my heart in my mouth, sicken at the 
thought that a few quick step might bring us together; I could not bear 
to frequent the theatr or music halls, lest by some bizarr chanc he 
should prove to be my neighbor. sometimes, I have been forced, against 
my will, to walk out at night, and then in silent squar the shadow 
have made me shudder, and in the medley of meet in the crowd 
thoroughfares, I have said to myself, "it must come sooner or later; he 
will sure return to town, and I shall see him when I feel most 
secure." I scan the newspap for hint or intim of approach 
danger, and no small type nor report of trivial interest wa allow to 
pass unread. especi I read and re-read the advertis columns, 
but without result. month pass by and I wa undisturb till, though 
I felt far from safe, I no longer suffer from the intoler 
oppress of instant and ever present terror. thi afternoon as I wa 
walk quietli along oxford street, I rais my eyes, and look across 
the road, and then at last I saw the man who had so long haunt my 
thoughts. 

* * * * * 

mr. wilkin finish hi wine, and lean back in hi chair, look 
sadli at dyson; and then, as if a thought struck him, fish out of an 
inner pocket a leather letter case, and hand a newspap cut 
across the table. 

dyson glanc close at the slip, and saw that it had been extract 
from the column of an even paper. It ran as follows:-- 

wholesal lynching. 

shock story. 

A dalziel telegram from read (colorado) state that advic receiv 
there from blue bock park report a fright instanc of popular 
vengeance. for some time the neighborhood ha been terror by the 
crime of a gang of desperadoes, who, under the cover of a care 
plan organization, have perpetr the most infam cruelti on 
men and women. A vigil committe wa formed, and it wa found that 
the leader of the gang wa a person name smith, live in blue rock 
park. action wa taken, and six of the worst in the band were summarili 
strangl in the presenc of two or three hundr men and women. smith 
is said to have escaped. 

* * * * * 

"thi is a terribl story," said dyson; "I can well believ that your 
day and night are haunt by such fear scene as you have 
described. but sure you have no need to fear smith? He ha much, more 
caus to fear you. consider, you have onli to lay your inform 
befor the police, and a warrant would be immedi issu for hi 
arrest. besides, you will, I am sure, excus me for what I am go to 
say." 

"mi dear sir," said mr. wilkins, "I hope you will speak to me with 
perfect freedom." 

"well, then, I must confess that my impress wa that you were rather 
disappoint at not be abl to stop the man befor he drove off. I 
thought you seem annoy that you could not get across the street." 

"sir, I did not know what I wa about. I caught sight of the man, but it 
wa onli for a moment, and the agoni you wit wa the agoni of 
suspense. I wa not perfectli certain of the face; and the horribl 
thought that smith wa again in london overwhelm me. I shudder at 
the idea of thi incarn fiend, whose soul is black with shock 
crimes, mingl free and unobserv amongst the harmless crowds, 
medit perhap a new and more fear cycl of infamies. I tell 
you, sir, that an aw be stalk through the streets, a be befor 
whom the sunlight itself should blacken, and the summer air grow chill 
and dank. such thought as these rush upon me with the forc of a 
whirlwind; I lost my senses." 

"I see. I partli understand your feelings, but I would impress on you 
that you have noth realli to fear. depend upon it, smith will not 
molest you in ani way. you must rememb he himself ha had a warning; 
and inde from the brief glanc I had of him, he seem to me to be a 
frightened-look man. however, I see it is get late, and if you 
will excus me, mr. wilkins, I think I will be going. I dare say we 
shall often meet here." 

dyson walk off smartly, ponder the strang stori chanc had brought 
him, and find on cool reflect that there wa someth a littl 
strang in mr. wilkins' manner, for which not even so weird a catalogu 
of experi could altogeth account. 




adventur OF the miss brother. 


mr. charl phillipp was, as ha been hinted, a gentleman of pronounc 
scientif tastes. In hi earli day he had devot himself with fond 
enthusiasm to the agreeabl studi of biology, and a brief monograph on 
the embryolog of the microscop holothuria had form hi first 
contribut to the bell lettres. later, he had somewhat relax the 
sever of hi pursuits, and had dabbl in the more frivol subject 
of palæontolog and ethnology; he had a cabinet in hi sitting-room 
whose drawer were stuf with rude flint implements, and a charm 
fetish from the south sea wa the domin note in the decor 
scheme of the apartment. flatter himself with the titl of 
materialist, he wa in truth one of the most credul of men, but he 
requir a marvel to be neatli drape in the robe of scienc befor he 
would give it ani credit, and the wildest dream took solid shape to him 
if onli the nomenclatur were sever and irreproachable; he laugh at 
the witch, but quail befor the power of the hypnotist, lift hi 
eyebrow when christian wa mentioned, but ador protyl and the 
ether. for the rest, he pride himself on a boundless scepticism; the 
averag tale of wonder he heard with noth but contempt, and he would 
certainli not have credit a word or syllabl of dyson' stori of the 
pursuer and pursu unless the gold coin had been produc as visibl 
and tangibl evidence. As it wa he half suspect that dyson had 
impos on him; he knew hi friend' disord fancies, and hi habit 
of conjur up the marvel to account for the entir commonplace; 
and on the whole he wa inclin to think that the so-cal fact in 
the odd adventur had been grave distort in the telling. sinc the 
even on which he had listen to the tale, he had paid dyson a visit, 
and had deliv himself of some seriou talk on the necess of 
accur observation, and the folly, as he put it, of use a 
kaleidoscop instead of a telescop in the view of things, to which 
remark hi friend had listen with a smile that wa extrem sardon 
"mi dear fellow," dyson had remark at last, "you will allow me to tell 
you that I see your drift perfectly. however, you will be astonish to 
hear that I consid you to be the visionary, while I am a sober and 
seriou spectat of human life. you have gone round the circle, and 
while you fanci yourself far in the golden land of new philosophies, you 
are in realiti a dweller in a metaphor clapham; your sceptic ha 
defeat itself and becom a monstrou credulity; you are in fact in the 
posit of the bat or owl, I forget which it was, who deni the 
exist of the sun at noonday, and I shall be astonish if you do not 
one day come to me full of contrit for your manifold intellectu 
errors, with a humbl resolut to see thing in their true light for 
the future." thi tirad had left mr. phillipp unimpressed; he 
consid dyson as hopeless, and he went home to gloat over some 
primit stone implement that a friend had sent him from india. He 
found that hi landlady, see them display in all their rude 
formless upon the table, had remov the collect to the dustbin, 
and had replac it by lunch; and the afternoon wa spent in malodor 
research. mrs. brown, hear these stone spoken of as veri valuabl 
knives, had call him in hi hear "poor mr. phillipps," and between 
rage and evil odor he spent a sorri afternoon. It wa four o'clock 
befor he had complet hi work of rescue; and, overpow with the 
flavor of decay cabbage-leaves, phillipp felt that he must have a 
walk to gain an appetit for the even meal. unlik dyson, he walk 
fast, with hi eye on the pavement, absorb in hi thought and 
oblivi of the life around him; and he could not have told by what 
street he had passed, when he suddenli lift up hi eye and found 
himself in leicest square. the grass and flower pleas him, and he 
welcom the opportun of rest for a few minutes, and glanc 
round, he saw a bench which had onli one occupant, a lady, and as she 
wa seat at one end, phillipp took up a posit at the other 
extremity, and began to pass in angri review the event of the 
afternoon. He had notic as he came up to the bench that the person 
alreadi there wa neatli dressed, and to all appear young; her face 
he could not see, as it wa turn away in appar contempl of the 
shrubs, and moreov shield with her hand; but it would be do 
wrong to mr. phillipp to imagin that hi choic of a seat wa dictat 
by ani hope of an affair of the heart; he had simpli prefer the 
compani of one ladi to that of five dirti children, and have seat 
himself wa immers directli in thought of hi misfortunes. He had 
medit chang hi lodgings; but now, on a judici review of the 
case in all it bearings, hi calmer judgment told him that the race of 
landladi is like to the race of the leaves, and that there wa but 
littl to choos between them. He resolved, however, to talk to mrs. 
brown, the offender, veri coolli and yet severely, to point out the 
extrem indiscret of her conduct, and to express a hope for better 
thing in the future. with thi decis regist in hi mind, 
phillipp wa about to get up from the seat and move off, when he wa 
intens annoy to hear a stifl sob, evid from the lady, who 
still continu her contempl of the shrub and flower-beds. He 
clutch hi stick desperately, and in a moment would have been in full 
retreat, when the ladi turn her face toward him, and with a mute 
entreati bespok hi attention. she wa a young girl with a quaint and 
piquant rather than a beauti face, and she wa evid in the 
bitterest distress, and mr. phillipp sat down again, and curs hi 
chanc heartily. the young ladi look at him with a pair of charm 
eye of a shine hazel, which show no trace of tears, though a 
handkerchief wa in her hand; she bit her lip, and seem to struggl 
with some overpow grief, and her whole attitud wa all beseech 
and imploring. phillipp sat on the edg of the bench gaze awkwardli 
at her, and wonder what wa to come next, and she look at him still 
without speaking. 

"well, madam," he said at last, "I understood from your gestur that you 
wish to speak to me. Is there anyth I can do for you? though, if 
you will pardon me, I cannot help say that that seem highli 
improbable." 

"ah, sir," she said in a low murmur voice, "do not speak harshli to 
me. I am in sore straits, and I thought from your face that I could 
safe ask your sympathy, if not your help." 

"would you kindli tell me what is the matter?" said phillipps. "perhap 
you would like some tea?" 

"I knew I could not be mistaken," the ladi replied. "that offer of 
refresh bespeak a gener mind. but tea, alas! is powerless to 
consol me. If you will let me, I will endeavor to explain my trouble." 

"I should be glad if you would." 

"I will do so, and I will tri and be brief, in spite of the numer 
complic which have made me, young as I am, trembl befor what 
seem the profound and terribl mysteri of existence. yet the grief 
which now rack my veri soul is but too simple; I have lost my brother." 

"lost your brother! how on earth can that be?" 

"I see I must troubl you with a few particulars. My brother, then, who 
is by some year my elder, is a tutor in a privat school in the extrem 
north of london. the want of mean depriv him of the advantag of a 
univers education; and lack the stamp of a degree, he could not 
hope for that posit which hi scholarship and hi talent entitl 
him to claim. He wa thu forc to accept the post of classic master 
at dr. saunderson' highgat academi for the son of gentlemen, and he 
ha perform hi duti with perfect satisfact to hi princip for 
some years. My person histori need not troubl you; if will be enough 
if I tell you that for the last month I have been gover in a famili 
resid at tooting. My brother and I have alway cherish the warmest 
mutual affection; and though circumst into which I need not enter 
have kept us apart for some time, yet we have never lost sight of one 
another. We made up our mind that unless one of us wa absolut 
unabl to rise from a bed of sickness, we would never let a week pass by 
without meeting, and some time ago we chose thi squar as our 
rendezv on account of it central posit and it conveni of 
access. and indeed, after a week of distast toil, my brother felt 
littl inclin for much walking, and we have often spent two or 
three hour on thi bench, speak of our prospect and of happier 
days, when we were children. In the earli spring it wa cold and chilly; 
still we enjoy the short respite, and I think that we were often taken 
for a pair of lovers, as we sat close together, eagerli talking. 
saturday after saturday we have met each other here, and though the 
doctor told him it wa madness, my brother would not allow the influenza 
to break the appointment. that wa some time ago; last saturday we had 
a long and happi afternoon, and separ more cheer than usual, 
feel that the come week would be bearable, and resolv that our 
next meet should be if possibl still more pleasant. I arriv here 
at the time agre upon, four o'clock, and sat down and watch for my 
brother, expect everi moment to see him advanc toward me from 
that gate at the north side of the square. five minut pass by, and 
he had not arrived; I thought he must have miss hi train, and the 
idea that our interview would be cut short by twenti minutes, or perhap 
half an hour, sadden me; I had hope we should be so happi togeth 
to-day. suddenly, move by I know not what impulse, I turn abruptli 
round, and how can I describ to you my astonish when I saw my 
brother advanc slowli toward me from the southern side of the 
square, accompani by anoth person. My first thought, I remember, had 
in it someth of resent that thi man, whoever he was, should 
intrud himself into our meeting; I wonder who it could possibl be, 
for my brother had, I may say, no intim friends. then as I look 
still at the advanc figures, anoth feel took possess of me; 
it wa a sensat of bristl fear, the fear of the child in the dark, 
unreason and unreasoning, but terrible, clutch at my heart as 
with the cold grip of a dead man' hands. yet I overcam the feeling, 
and look steadili at my brother, wait for him to speak, and more 
close at hi companion. then I notic that thi man wa lead my 
brother rather than walk arm-in-arm with him; he wa a tall man, 
dress in quit ordinari fashion. He wore a high bowler hat, and, in 
spite of the warmth of the day, a plain black overcoat, tightli 
buttoned, and I notic hi trousers, of a quiet black and gray stripe. 
the face wa commonplac too, and inde I cannot recal ani special 
features, or ani trick of expression; for though I look at him as he 
came near, curious enough hi face made no impress on me, it wa as 
though I had seen a well-mad mask. they pass in front of me, and to 
my unutter astonish I heard my brother' voic speak to me, 
though hi lip did not move, nor hi eye look into mine. It wa a 
voic I cannot describe, though I knew it, but the word came to my ear 
as if mingl with plash water and the sound of a shallow brook 
flow amidst stones. I heard, then, the words, 'I cannot stay,' and 
for a moment the heaven and the earth seem to rush togeth with the 
sound of thunder, and I wa thrust forth from the world into a black 
void without begin and without end. for, as my brother pass me, I 
saw the hand that held him by the arm, and seem to guid him, and in 
one moment of horror I realiz that it wa as a formless thing that ha 
moulder for mani year in the grave. the flesh wa peel in strip 
from the bones, and hung apart dri and granulated, and the finger that 
encircl my brother' arm were all unshapen, claw-lik things, and one 
wa but a stump from which the end had rot off. when I recov my 
sens I saw the two pass out by that gate. I paus for a moment, 
and then with a rush as of fire to my heart I knew that no horror 
could, stay me, but that I must follow my brother and save him, even 
though all hell rose up against me. I ran out and look up the 
pavement, and saw the two figur walk amidst the crowd. I ran across 
the road, and saw them turn up that side street, and I reach the 
corner a moment later. In vain I look to right and left, for neither 
my brother nor hi strang guardian wa in sight; two elderli men were 
come down arm-in-arm, and a telegraph boy wa walk lustili along 
whistling. I remain there a moment horror-struck, and then I bow my 
head and return to thi seat, where you found me. now, sir, do you 
wonder at my grief? oh, tell me what ha happen to my brother, or I 
feel I shall go mad." 

mr. phillipps, who had listen with exemplari patienc to thi tale, 
hesit a moment befor he spoke. 

"mi dear madam," he said at length, "you have known how to engag me in 
your service, not onli as a man, but as a student of science. As a 
fellow-creatur I piti you most profoundly; you must have suffer 
extrem from what you saw, or rather from what you fanci you saw. 
for, as a scientif observer, it is my duti to tell you the plain 
truth, which, indeed, besid be true, must also consol you. allow 
me to ask you then to describ your brother." 

"certainly," said the lady, eagerly; "I can describ him accurately. My 
brother is a somewhat young-look man; he is pale, ha small black 
whiskers, and wear spectacles. He ha rather a timid, almost a 
frighten expression, and look about him nervous from side to side. 
think, think! sure you must have seen him. perhap you are an 
_habitué_ of thi engag quarter; you may have met him on some 
previou saturday. I may have been mistaken in suppos that he turn 
up that side street; he may have gone on, and you may have pass each 
other. oh, tell me, sir, whether you have not seen him?" 

"I am afraid I do not keep a veri sharp lookout when I am walking," said 
phillipps, who would have pass hi mother unnoticed; "but I am sure 
your descript is admirable. and now will you describ the person, 
who, you say, held your brother by the arm?" 

"I cannot do so. I told you, hi face seem devoid of express or 
salient feature. It wa like a mask." 

"exactly; you cannot describ what you have never seen. I need hardli 
point out to you the conclus to be drawn; you have been the victim of 
an hallucination. you expect to see your brother, you were alarm 
becaus you did not see him, and unconsciously, no doubt, your brain 
went to work, and final you saw a mere project of your own morbid 
thoughts; a vision of your absent brother, and a mere confus of 
terror incorpor in a figur which you can't describe. Of cours 
your brother ha been in some way prevent from come to meet you as 
usual. I expect you will hear from him in a day or two." 

the ladi look serious at mr. phillipps, and then for a second there 
seem almost a twinkl as of mirth about her eyes, but her face 
cloud sadli at the dogmat conclus to which the scientist wa 
led so irresistibly. 

"ah," she said, "you do not know. I cannot doubt the evid of my 
wake senses. besides, perhap I have had experi even more 
terrible. I acknowledg the forc of your arguments, but a woman ha 
intuit which never deceiv her. believ me, I am not hysterical; 
feel my pulse, it is quit regular." 

she stretch out her hand with a dainti gesture, and a glanc that 
enraptur phillipp in spite of himself. the hand held out to him wa 
soft and white and warm, and as, in some confusion, he place hi 
finger on the purpl vein, he felt profoundli touch by the spectacl 
of love and grief befor him. 

"no," he said, as he releas her wrist, "a you say, you are evid 
quit yourself. still, you must be awar that live men do not possess 
dead hands. that sort of thing doesn't happen. It is, of course, bare 
possibl that you did see your brother with anoth gentleman, and that 
import busi prevent him from stopping. As for the wonder 
hand, there may have been some deformity, a finger shot off by accident, 
or someth of that sort." 

the ladi shook her head mournfully. 

"I see you are a determin rationalist," she said. "did you not hear me 
say that I have had experi even more terrible? I too wa onc a 
sceptic, but after what I have known I can no longer affect to doubt." 

"madam," repli mr. phillipps, "no one shall make me deni my faith. I 
will never believe, nor will I pretend to believe, that two and two make 
five, nor will I on ani pretenc admit the exist of two-sid 
triangles." 

"you are a littl hasty," rejoin the lady. "but may I ask you if you 
ever heard the name of professor gregg, the author on ethnolog and 
kindr subjects?" 

"I have done much more than mere hear of professor gregg," said 
phillipps. "I alway regard him as one of our most acut and 
clear-head observers; and hi last publication, the 'text-book of 
ethnology,' struck me as be quit admir in it kind. indeed, the 
book had but come into my hand when I heard of the terribl accid 
which cut short gregg' career. He had, I think, taken a countri hous 
in the west of england for the summer, and is suppos to have fallen 
into a river. So far as I remember, hi bodi wa never recovered." 

"sir, I am sure that you are discreet. your convers seem to 
declar as much, and the veri titl of that littl work of your which 
you mentioned, assur me that you are no empti trifler. In a word, I 
feel that I may depend on you. you appear to be under the impress 
that professor gregg is dead; I have no reason to believ that that is 
the case." 

"what?" cri phillipps, astonish and perturbed. "you do not hint that 
there wa anyth disgraceful? I cannot believ it. gregg wa a man of 
clearest character; hi privat life wa one of great benevolence; and 
though I myself am free from delusions, I believ him to have been a 
sincer and devout christian. sure you cannot mean to insinu that 
some disreput histori forc him to flee the country?" 

"again you are in a hurry," repli the lady. "I said noth of all 
this. briefly, then, I must tell you that professor gregg left hi hous 
one morn in full health both of mind and body. He never returned, but 
hi watch and chain, a purs contain three sovereign in gold and 
some loos silver, with a ring that he wore habitually, were found three 
day later on a wild and savag hillside, mani mile from the river. 
these articl were place besid a limeston rock of fantast form; 
they had been wrap into a parcel with a kind of rough parchment which 
wa secur with gut. the parcel wa opened, and the inner side of the 
parchment bore an inscript done with some red substance; the 
charact were undecipherable, but seem to be a corrupt cuneiform." 

"you interest me intensely," said phillips. "would you mind continu 
your story? the circumst you have mention seem to me of the most 
inexplic character, and I thirst for an elucidation." 

the young ladi seem to medit for a moment, and she then proceed 
to relat the 




novel OF the black seal. 


I must now give you some fuller particular of my history. I am the 
daughter of a civil engineer, steven lalli by name, who wa so 
unfortun as to die suddenli at the outset of hi career, and befor 
he had accumul suffici mean to support hi wife and her two 
children. My mother contriv to keep the small household go on 
resourc which must have been incred small; we live in a remot 
countri village, becaus most of the necessari of life were cheaper 
than in a town, but even so we were brought up with the severest 
economy. My father wa a clever and well-read man, and left behind him a 
small but select collect of books, contain the best greek, latin, 
and english classics, and these book were the onli amus we 
possessed. My brother, I remember, learn latin out of descartes' 
"meditationes," and I, in place of the littl tale which children are 
usual told to read, had noth more charm than a translat of 
the "gesta romanorum." We grew up thus, quiet and studiou children, and 
in cours of time my brother provid for himself in the manner I have 
mentioned. I continu to live at home; my poor mother had becom an 
invalid, and demand my continu care, and about two year ago she 
die after mani month of pain illness. My situat wa a terribl 
one; the shabbi furnitur bare suffic to pay the debt I had been 
forc to contract, and the book I despatch to my brother, know 
how he would valu them. I wa absolut alone. I wa awar how poorli 
my brother wa paid; and though I came up to london in the hope of 
find employment, with the understand that he would defray my 
expenses, I swore it should onli be for a month, and that if I could not 
in that time find some work, I would starv rather than depriv him of 
the few miser pound he had laid by for hi day of trouble. I took a 
littl room in a distant suburb, the cheapest that I could find. I live 
on bread and tea, and I spent my time in vain answer of 
advertisements, and vainer walk to address I had noted. day follow 
on day, and week on week, and still I wa unsuccessful, till at last the 
term I had appoint drew to a close, and I saw befor me the grim 
prospect of slowli die of starvation. My landladi wa good-natur in 
her way; she knew the slender of my means, and I am sure that she 
would not have turn me out of doors. It remain for me then to go 
away, and to tri and die in some quiet place. It wa winter then, and a 
thick white fog gather in the earli part of the afternoon, becom 
more dens as the day wore on; it wa a sunday, I remember, and the 
peopl of the hous were at chapel. At about three o'clock I crept out 
and walk away as quickli as I could, for I wa weak from abstinence. 
the white mist wrap all the street in silence, and a hard frost had 
gather thick upon the bare branch of the trees, and frost crystal 
glitter on the wooden fences, and on the cold cruel ground beneath my 
feet. I walk on, turn to right and left in utter haphazard, without 
care to look up at the name of the streets, and all that I rememb 
of my walk on that sunday afternoon seem but the broken fragment of an 
evil dream. In a confus vision I stumbl on, through road half town 
and half country; gray field melt into the cloudi world of mist on 
one side of me, and on the other comfort villa with a glow of 
firelight flicker on the walls; but all unreal, red brick walls, and 
light windows, vagu trees, and glimmer country, gas-lamp 
begin to star the white shadows, the vanish perspect of the 
railway line beneath high embankments, the green and red of the signal 
lamps,--al these were but momentari pictur flash on my tire brain 
and sens numb by hunger. now and then I would hear a quick step 
ring on the iron road, and men would pass me well wrap up, walk 
fast for the sake of warmth, and no doubt eagerli foretast the 
pleasur of a glow hearth, with curtain tightli drawn about the 
frost panes, and the welcom of their friends; but as the earli 
even darken and night approached, foot-passeng got fewer and 
fewer, and I pass through street after street alone. In the white 
silenc I stumbl on, as desol as if I trod the street of a buri 
city; and as I grew more weak and exhausted, someth of the horror of 
death wa fold thickli round my heart. suddenly, as I turn a 
corner, some one accost me courteous beneath the lamp-post, and I 
heard a voic ask if I could kindli point the way to avon road. At 
the sudden shock of human accent I wa prostrat and my strength gave 
way, and I fell all huddl on the side-walk and wept and sob and 
laugh in violent hysteria. I had gone out prepar to die, and as I 
step across the threshold that had shelter me, I conscious bade 
adieu to all hope and all remembrances; the door clang behind me with 
the nois of thunder, and I felt that an iron curtain had fallen on the 
brief passag of my life, and that henceforth I wa to walk a littl 
way in a world, of gloom and shadow; I enter on the stage of the first 
act of death. then came my wander in the mist, the white wrap 
all things, the void streets, and muffl silence, till when that voic 
spoke to me, it wa as if I had die and life return to me. In a few 
minut I wa abl to compos my feelings, and as I rose I saw that I 
wa confront by a middle-ag gentleman of speciou appearance, neatli 
and correctli dressed. He look at me with an express of great pity, 
but befor I could stammer out my ignor of the neighborhood, for 
inde I had not the slightest notion of where I had wandered, he spoke. 

"mi dear madam," he said, "you seem in some terribl distress. you 
cannot think how you alarm me. but may I inquir the natur of your 
trouble? I assur you that you can safe confid in me." 

"you are veri kind," I replied; "but, I fear there is noth to be 
done. My condit seem a hopeless one." 

"oh, nonsense, nonsense! you are too young to talk like that. come, let 
us walk down here, and you must tell me your difficulty. perhap I may 
be abl to help you." 

there wa someth veri sooth and persuas in hi manner, and as 
we walk together, I gave him an outlin of my story, and told of the 
despair that had oppress me almost to death. 

"you were wrong to give in so completely," he said, when I wa silent. 
"A month is too short a time in which to feel one' way in london. 
london, let me tell you, miss lally, doe not lie open and undefended; 
it is a fortifi place, foss and double-mo with curiou 
intricacies. As must alway happen in larg towns, the condit of 
life have becom huge artificial; no mere simpl palisad is run up to 
oppos the man or woman who would take the place by storm, but serri 
line of subtl contrivances, mines, and pitfal which it need a 
strang skill to overcome. you, in your simplicity, fanci you had onli 
to shout for these wall to sink into nothingness, but the time is gone 
for such startl victori as these. take courage; you will learn the 
secret of success befor veri long." 

"alas, sir," I replied, "I have no doubt your conclus are correct, 
but at the present moment I seem to be in a fair way to die of 
starvation. you spoke of a secret; for heaven' sake, tell it me, if you 
have ani piti for my distress." 

He laugh genially. "there lie the strang of it all. those who 
know the secret cannot tell it if they would; it is posit as 
ineff as the central doctrin of freemasonry. but I may say this, 
that you yourself have penetr at least the outer husk of the 
mystery," and he laugh again. 

"pray do not jest with me," I said. "what have I done, _que sais-je_? I 
am so far ignor that I have not the slightest idea of how my next 
meal is to be provided." 

"excus me. you ask what you have done? you have met me. come, we will 
fenc no longer. I see you have self-education, the onli educ 
which is not infinit pernicious, and I am in want of a gover for 
my two children. I have been a widow for some years; my name is gregg. 
I offer you the post I have named, and shall we say a salari of a 
hundr a year?" 

I could onli stutter out my thanks, and slip a card with hi address 
and a bank-not by way of earnest into my hand, mr. gregg bade me 
good-bye, ask me to call in a day or two. 

such wa my introduct to professor gregg, and can you wonder that the 
remembr of despair and the cold blast that had blown from the gate 
of death upon me, made me regard him as a second father? befor the 
close of the week. I wa instal in my new duties; the professor had 
leas an old brick manor hous in a western suburb of london, and here, 
surround by pleasant lawn and orchards, and sooth with the murmur 
of the ancient elm that rock their bough abov the roof, the new 
chapter of my life began. know as you do the natur of the 
professor' occupations, you will not be surpris to hear that the 
hous teem with books; and cabinet full of strang and even hideou 
object fill everi avail nook in the vast low rooms. gregg wa a 
man whose one thought wa for knowledge, and I too befor long caught 
someth of hi enthusiasm, and strove to enter into hi passion for 
research. In a few month I wa perhap more hi secretari than the 
gover of the two children, and mani a night I have sat at the desk 
in the glow of the shade lamp while he, pace up and down in the rich, 
gloom of the firelight, dictat to me the substanc of hi "text-book 
of ethnology." but amidst these more sober and accur studi I alway 
detect a someth hidden, a long and desir for some object to 
which he did not allude, and now and then he would break short in what 
he wa say and laps into revery, entranced, as it seem to me, by 
some distant prospect of adventur discovery. the text-book wa at 
last finished, and we began to receiv proof from the printers, which 
were intrust to me for a first reading, and then underw the final 
revis of the professor. all the while hi weari of the actual 
busi he wa engag on increased, and it wa with the joyou laugh 
of a schoolboy when term is over that he one day hand me a copi of the 
book. "there," he said, "I have kept my word; I promis to write it, 
and it is done with. now I shall be free to live for stranger things; I 
confess it, miss lally, I covet the renown of columbus. you will, I 
hope, see me play the part of an explorer." 

"surely," I said, "there is littl left to explore. you have been born a 
few hundr year too late for that." 

"I think you are wrong," he replied; "there are still, depend upon it, 
quaint undiscov countri and contin of strang extent. ah, miss 
lally, believ me, we stand amidst sacrament and mysteri full of awe, 
and it doth not yet appear what we shall be. life, believ me, is no 
simpl thing, no mass of gray matter and congeri of vein and muscl 
to be laid nake by the surgeon' knife; man is the secret which I am 
about to explore, and befor I can discov him I must cross over 
welter sea indeed, and ocean and the mist of mani thousand years. 
you know the myth of the lost atlantis; what if it be true, and I am 
destin to be call the discover of that wonder land?" 

I could see excit boil beneath hi words, and in hi face wa 
the heat of the hunter; befor me stood a man who believ himself 
summon to tourney with the unknown. A pang of joy possess me when I 
reflect that I wa to be in a way associ with him in the 
adventure, and I too burn with the lust of the chase, not paus to 
consid that I knew not what we were to unshadow. 

the next morn professor gregg took me into hi inner study, where 
rang against the wall stood a nest of pigeon-holes, everi drawer 
neatli labelled, and the result of year of toil classifi in a few 
feet of space. 

"here," he said, "i my life; here are all the fact which I have 
gather togeth with so much pains, and yet it is all nothing. no, 
noth to what I am about to attempt. look at this;" and he took me to 
an old bureau, a piec fantast and faded, which stood in a corner of 
the room. He unlock the front and open one of the drawers. 

"A few scrap of paper," he went on, point to the drawer, "and a lump 
of black stone, rude annot with queer mark and scratches,--that 
is all that drawer holds. here you see is an old envelop with the dark 
red stamp of twenti year ago, but I have pencil a few line at the 
back; here is a sheet of manuscript, and here some cut from 
obscur local journals. and if you ask me the subject matter of the 
collection, it will not seem extraordinary. A servant girl at a 
farmhouse, who disappear from her place and ha never been heard of, a 
child suppos to have slip down some old work on the mountains, 
some queer scribbl on a limeston rock, a man murder with a blow 
from a strang weapon; such is the scent I have to go upon. yes, as you 
say, there is a readi explan for all this; the girl may have run 
away to london, or liverpool, or new york; the child may be at the 
bottom of the disus shaft; and the letter on the rock may be the idl 
whim of some vagrant. yes, yes, I admit all that; but I know I hold the 
true key. look!" and he held me out a slip of yellow paper. 

"charact found inscrib on a limeston rock on the gray hills," I 
read, and then there wa a word erased, presum the name of a county, 
and a date some fifteen year back. beneath wa trace a number of 
uncouth characters, shape somewhat like wedg or daggers, as strang 
and outlandish as the hebrew alphabet. 

"now the seal," said professor gregg, and he hand me the black stone, 
a thing about two inch long, and someth like an old-fashion 
tobacco stopper, much enlarged. 

I held it up to the light, and saw to my surpris the charact on the 
paper repeat on the seal. 

"yes," said the professor, "they are the same. and the mark on the 
limeston rock were made fifteen year ago, with some red substance. and 
the charact on the seal are four thousand year old at least. perhap 
much more." 

"i it a hoax?" I said. 

"no, I anticip that. I wa not to be led to give my life to a 
practic joke. I have test the matter veri carefully. onli one person 
besid myself know of the mere exist of that black seal. besides, 
there are other reason which I cannot enter into now." 

"but what doe it all mean?" I said. "I cannot understand to what 
conclus all thi leads." 

"mi dear miss lally, that is a question I would rather leav unansw 
for some littl time. perhap I shall never be abl to say what secret 
are held here in solution; a few vagu hints, the outlin of villag 
tragedies, a few mark done with red earth upon a rock, and an ancient 
seal. A queer set of data to go upon? half-a-dozen piec of evidence, 
and twenti year befor even so much could be got together; and who 
know what mirag or terra incognita may be beyond all this? I look 
across deep waters, miss lally, and the land beyond may be but a haze 
after all. but still I believ it is not so, and a few month will show 
whether I am right or wrong." 

He left me, and alon I endeavor to fathom the mystery, wonder to 
what goal such eccentr odd and end of evid could lead. I myself 
am not wholli devoid of imagination, and I had reason to respect the 
professor' solid of intellect; yet I saw in the content of the 
drawer but the materi of fantasy, and vainli tri to conceiv what 
theori could be found on the fragment that had been place befor me. 
indeed, I could discov in what I had heard and seen but the first 
chapter of an extravag romance; and yet deep in my heart I burn 
with curiosity, and day after day I look eagerli in professor gregg' 
face for some hint of what wa to happen. 

It wa one even after dinner that the word came. 

"I hope you can make your prepar without much trouble," he said 
suddenli to me. "we shall be leav here in a week' time." 

"really!" I said in astonishment. "where are we going?" 

"I have taken a countri hous in the west of england, not far from 
caermaen, a quiet littl town, onc a city, and the headquart of a 
roman legion. It is veri dull there, but the countri is pretty, and the 
air is wholesome." 

I detect a glint in hi eyes, and guess that thi sudden move had 
some relat to our convers of a few day before. 

"I shall just take a few book with me," said professor gregg, "that is 
all. everyth els will remain here for our return. I have got a 
holiday," he went on, smile at me, "and I shan't be sorri to be quit 
for a time of my old bone and stone and rubbish. Do you know," he went 
on, "I have been grind away at fact for thirti years; it is time for 
fancies." 

the day pass quickly; I could see that the professor wa all 
quiver with suppress excitement, and I could scarc credit the 
eager appet of hi glanc as we left the old manor hous behind us, 
and began our journey. We set out at mid-day, and it wa in the dusk of 
the even that we arriv at a littl countri station. I wa tired, 
and excited, and the drive through, the lane seem all a dream. first 
the desert street of a forgotten village, while I heard professor 
gregg' voic talk of the augustan legion and the clash of arms, and 
all the tremend pomp that follow the eagles; then the broad river 
swim to full tide with the last afterglow glimmer duskili in the 
yellow water, the wide meadows, and the cornfield whitening, and the 
deep lane wind on the slope between the hill and the water. At last 
we began to ascend, and the air grew rarer; I look down and saw the 
pure white mist track the outlin of the river like a shroud, and a 
vagu and shadowi country, imagin and fantasi of swell hill 
and hang woods, and half-shap outlin of hill beyond, stand in 
the distanc the glare of the furnac fire on the mountain, grow by 
turn a pillar of shine flame, and fade to a dull point of red. We 
were slowli mount a carriag drive, and then there came to me the 
cool breath and the scent of the great wood that wa abov us; I seem 
to wander in it deepest depths, and there wa the sound of trickl 
water, the scent of the green leaves, and the breath of the summer 
night. the carriag stop at last, and I could scarc distinguish 
the form of the hous as I wait a moment at the pillar porch; and 
the rest of the even seem a dream of strang thing bound by the 
great silenc of the wood and the valley and the river. 

the next morn when I awok and look out of the bow window of the 
big old-fashion bedroom, I saw under a gray sky a countri that wa 
still all mystery. the long, love valley, with the river wind in 
and out below, crossed, in mid vision by a mediæv bridg of vault 
and buttress stone, the clear presenc of the rise ground beyond, 
and the wood that I had onli seen in shadow the night before, seem 
ting with enchantment, and the soft breath, of air that sigh in at 
the open pane wa like no other wind. I look across the valley, and 
beyond, hill follow on hill as wave on wave, and here a faint blue 
pillar of smoke rose still in the morn air from the chimney of an 
ancient gray farmhouse, there wa a rug height crown with dark 
firs, and in the distanc I saw the white streak of a road that climb 
and vanish into some unimagin country. but the boundari of all wa a 
great wall of mountain, vast in the west, and end like a fortress 
with a steep ascent and a dome tumulu clear against the sky. 

I saw professor gregg walk up and down the terrac path below the 
windows, and it wa evid that he wa revel in the sens of 
liberty, and the thought that he had, for a while, bidden good-by to 
task-work. when I join him there wa exult in hi voic as he 
point out the sweep of valley and the river that wound beneath the 
love hills. 

"yes," he said, "it is a strang beauti country; and to me, at 
least, it seem full of mystery. you have not forgotten the drawer I 
show you, miss lally? no; and you have guess that I have come here 
not mere for the sake of the children and the fresh air?" 

"I think I have guess as much as that," I replied; "but you must 
rememb I do not know the mere natur of your investigations; and as 
for the connect between the search and thi wonder valley, it is 
past my guessing." 

He smile queerli at me. "you must not think I am make a mysteri for 
the sake of mystery," he said. "I do not speak out because, so far, 
there is noth to be spoken, noth definit I mean, noth that can 
be set down in hard black and white, as dull and sure and irreproach 
as ani blue book. and then I have anoth reason: mani year ago a 
chanc paragraph in a newspap caught my attention, and focuss in an 
instant the vagrant thought and half-form fanci of mani idl and 
specul hour into a certain hypothesis. I saw at onc that I wa 
tread on a thin crust; my theori wa wild and fantast in the 
extreme, and I would not for ani consider have written a hint of it 
for publication. but I thought that in the compani of scientif men 
like myself, men who knew the cours of discovery, and were awar that 
the ga that blaze and flare in the gin-palac wa onc a wild 
hypothesis; I thought that with such men as these I might hazard my 
dream--let us say atlantis, or the philosopher' stone, or what you 
like--without danger of ridicule. I found I wa grossli mistaken; my 
friend look blankli at me and at one another, and I could see 
someth of pity, and someth also of insol contempt, in the 
glanc they exchanged. one of them call on me next day, and hint 
that I must be suffer from overwork and brain exhaustion. 'in plain 
terms,' I said, 'you think I am go mad. I think not;' and I show 
him out with some littl appear of heat. sinc that day I vow that 
I would never whisper the natur of my theori to ani live soul; to no 
one but yourself have I ever shown the content of that drawer. after 
all, I may be follow a rainbow; I may have been misl by the play of 
coincidence; but as I stand here in thi mystic hush and silenc amidst 
the wood and wild hills, I am more than ever sure that I am hot on the 
scent. come, it is time we went in." 

To me in all thi there wa someth both of wonder and excitement; I 
knew how in hi ordinari work professor gregg move step by step, 
test everi inch of the way, and never ventur on assert without 
proof that wa impregnable. yet I divin more from hi glanc and the 
vehem of hi tone than from the spoken word that he had in hi everi 
thought the vision of the almost incred continu with him; and I, 
who wa with some share of imagin no littl of a sceptic, offend 
at a hint of the marvellous, could not help ask myself whether he wa 
cherish a monomania, and bar out from thi one subject all the 
scientif method of hi other life. 

yet, with, thi imag of mysteri haunt my thoughts, I surrend 
wholli to the charm of the country. abov the fade hous on the 
hillsid began the great forest; a long dark line seen from the oppos 
hills, stretch abov the river for mani a mile from north to south, 
and yield in the north to even wilder country, barren and savag 
hills, and rag common land, a territori all strang and unvisited, 
and more unknown to englishmen than the veri heart of africa. the space 
of a coupl of steep field alon separ the hous from the wood, and 
the children were delight to follow me up the long alley of 
undergrowth, between smooth pleach wall of shine beech, to the 
highest point in the wood, whenc one look on one side across the 
river and the rise and fall of the countri to the great western mountain 
wall, and on the other, over the surg and dip of the myriad tree of 
the forest, over level meadow and the shine yellow sea to the faint 
coast beyond. I use to sit at thi point on the warm sunlit turf which 
mark the track of the roman road, while the two children race about 
hunt for the whinberri that grew here and there on the banks. here 
beneath the deep blue sky and the great cloud rolling, like olden 
galleon with sail full-bellied, from the sea to the hills, as I 
listen to the whisper charm of the great and ancient wood, I live 
sole for delight, and onli rememb strang thing when we would 
return to the house, and find professor gregg either shut up in the 
littl room he had made hi study, or els pace the terrac with the 
look, patient and enthusiastic, of the determin seeker. 

one morning, some eight or nine day after our arrival, I look out of 
my window and saw the whole landscap transmut befor me. the cloud 
had dip low and hidden the mountain in the west, and a southern wind 
wa drive the rain in shift pillar up the valley, and the littl 
brooklet that burst the hill below the hous now raged, a red torrent, 
down to the river. We were perforc oblig to keep snug within doors, 
and when I had attend to my pupils, I sat down in the morning-room 
where the ruin of a librari still encumb an old-fashion bookcase. 
I had inspect the shelv onc or twice, but their content had fail 
to attract me; volum of eighteenth centuri sermons, an old book on 
farriery, a collect of "poems" by "person of quality," prideaux' 
"connection," and an odd volum of pope were the boundari of the 
library, and there seem littl doubt that everyth of interest or 
valu had been removed. now, however, in desperation, I began to 
re-examin the musti sheepskin and calf bindings, and found, much to my 
delight, a fine old quarto print by the stephani, contain the three 
book of pomponiu mela, "de situ orbis," and other of the ancient 
geographers. I knew enough of latin to steer my way through an ordinari 
sentence, and I soon becam absorb in the odd mixtur of fact and 
fancy; light shine on a littl of the space of the world, and beyond 
mist and shadow and aw forms. glanc over the clear-print pages, 
my attent wa caught by the head of a chapter in solinus, and I 
read the words:-- 

mira DE intimi gentibu libyae, DE lapid 
hexecontalitho. 

"the wonder of the peopl that inhabit the inner part of libya, and of 
the stone call sixtystone." 

the odd titl attract me and I read on:-- 

"gen ista avia et secreta habitat, in montibu horrendi foeda 
mysteria celebrat. De hominibu nihil aliud illi præferunt quam 
figuram, ab humano ritu prorsu exulant, oderunt deum lucis. stridunt 
potiu quam loquuntur; vox absona nec sine horror auditur. lapid 
quodam gloriantur, quem hexecontalithon vocant, dicunt enim hunc lapidem 
sexaginta nota ostendere. cuju lapidi nomen secretum ineffabil 
colunt: quod ixaxar." 

"thi folk," I translat to myself, "dwell in remot and secret 
places, and celebr foul mysteri on savag hills. noth have they 
in common with men save the face, and the custom of human are wholli 
strang to them; and they hate the sun. they hiss rather than speak; 
their voic are harsh, and not to be heard without fear. they boast of 
a certain stone, which they call sixtystone; for they say that it 
display sixti characters. and thi stone ha a secret unspeak name; 
which is ixaxar." 

I laugh at the queer inconsequ of all this, and thought it fit for 
sinbad the sailor or other of the supplementari nights. when I saw 
professor gregg in the cours of the day, I told him of my find in the 
bookcase, and the fantast rubbish I had been reading. To my surprise, 
he look up at me with an express of great interest. 

"that is realli veri curious," he said. "I have never thought it worth 
while to look into the old geographers, and I daresay I have miss a 
good deal. ah, that is the passage, is it. It seem a shame to rob you 
of your entertainment, but I realli think I must carri off the book." 

the next day the professor call to me to come to the study. I found 
him sit at a tabl in the full light of the window, scrutin 
someth veri attent with a magnifying-glass. 

"ah, miss lally," he began, "I want to use your eyes. thi glass is 
pretti good, but not like my old one that I left in town. would you 
mind examin the thing yourself, and tell me how mani charact 
are cut on it?" 

He hand me the object in hi hand, and I saw that it wa the black 
seal he had shown me in london, and my heart began to beat with the 
thought that I wa present to know something. I took the seal, and 
hold it up to the light check off the grotesqu dagger-shap 
charact one by one. 

"I make sixty-two," I said at last. 

"sixty-two? nonsense; it' impossible. ah, I see what you have done, you 
have count that and that," and he point to two mark which I had 
certainli taken as letter with the rest. 

"yes, yes," professor gregg went on; "but those are obviou scratches, 
done accidentally; I saw that at once. yes, then that' quit right. 
thank you veri much, miss lally." 

I wa go away, rather disappoint at my have been call in mere 
to count a number of mark on the black seal, when suddenli there 
flash into my mind what I had read in the morning. 

"but, professor gregg, I cried, breathless, the seal, the seal. why, it 
is the stone hexecontalitho that solinu write of; it is ixaxar." 

"yes," he said, "I suppos it is. Or it mayb a mere coincidence. It 
never doe to be too sure, you know, in these matters. coincid 
kill the professor." 

I went away puzzl by what I had heard, and as much as ever at a loss 
to find the rule clew in thi maze of strang evidence. for three day 
the bad weather lasted, chang from drive rain to a dens mist, fine 
and dripping, and we seem to be shut up in a white cloud that veil 
all the world away from us. all the while professor gregg wa darkl 
in hi room, unwilling, it appeared, to dispens confid or talk of 
ani kind, and I heard him walk to and fro with a quick, impati 
step, as if he were in some way weari of inaction. the fourth morn 
wa fine, and at breakfast the professor said briskly:-- 

"we want some extra help about the house; a boy of fifteen or sixteen, 
you know. there are a lot of littl odd job that take up the maids' 
time, which a boy could do much better." 

"the girl have not complain to me in ani way," I replied. "indeed, 
ann said there wa much less work than in london, owe to there be 
so littl dust." 

"ah, yes, they are veri good girls. but I think we shall do much better 
with a boy. In fact, that is what ha been bother me for the last two 
days." 

"bother you?" I said in astonishment, for as a matter of fact the 
professor never took the slightest interest in the affair of the house. 

"yes," he said, "the weather, you know. I realli couldn't go out in that 
scotch mist; I don't know the countri veri well, and I should have lost 
my way. but I am go to get the boy thi morning." 

"but how do you know there is such a boy as you want anywher about?" 

"oh, I have no doubt as to that. I may have to walk a mile or two at the 
most, but I am sure to find just the boy I require." 

I thought the professor wa poking, but though hi tone wa airi enough 
there wa someth grim and set about hi featur that puzzl me. He 
got hi stick, and stood at the door look medit befor him, 
and as I pass through the hall he call to me. 

"bi the way, miss lally, there wa one thing I want to say to you. I 
daresay you may have heard that some of these countri lad are not over 
bright; idiot would be a harsh word to use, and they are usual 
call 'naturals,' or someth of the kind, I hope you won't mind if 
the boy I am after should turn out not too keen-witted; he will be 
perfectli harmless, of course, and black boot doesn't need much 
mental effort." 

with that he wa gone, stride up the road that led to the wood; and I 
remain stupefied, and then for the first time my astonish wa 
mingl with a sudden note of terror, aris I knew not whence, and all 
unexplain even to myself, and yet I felt about my heart for an instant 
someth of the chill of death, and that shapeless, formless dread of 
the unknown that is wors than death itself. I tri to find courag in 
the sweet air that blew up from the sea, and in the sunlight after rain, 
but the mystic wood seem to darken around me; and the vision of the 
river coil between the reeds, and the silver gray of the ancient 
bridge, fashion in my mind symbol of vagu dread, as the mind of a 
child fashion terror from thing harmless and familiar. 

two hour later professor gregg returned. I met him as he came down the 
road, and ask quietli if he had been abl to find a boy. 

"oh, yes," he answered; "I found one easili enough. hi name is jervas 
cradock, and I expect he will make himself veri useful. hi father ha 
been dead for mani years, and the mother, whom I saw, seem veri glad 
at the prospect of a few shill extra come in on saturday nights. 
As I expected, he is not too sharp, ha fit at times, the mother said; 
but as he will not be trust with the china, that doesn't much matter, 
doe it? and he is not in ani way dangerous, you know, mere a littl 
weak." 

"when is he coming?" 

"to-morrow morn at eight o'clock. ann will show him what he ha to 
do, and how to do it. At first he will go home everi night, but perhap 
it may ultim turn out more conveni for him to sleep here, and 
onli go home for sundays." 

I found noth to say to all this. professor gregg spoke in a quiet 
tone of matter-of-fact, as inde wa warrant by the circumstance; and 
yet I could not quell my sensat of astonish at the whole affair. 
I knew that in realiti no assist wa want in the housework, and 
the professor' predict that the boy he wa to engag might prove a 
littl "simple," follow by so exact a fulfilment, struck me as bizarr 
in the extreme. the next morn I heard from, the housemaid that the 
boy cradock had come at eight, and that she had been tri to make him 
useful. "he doesn't seem quit all there, I don't think, miss," wa her 
comment; and later in the day I saw him help the old man who work 
in the garden. He wa a youth of about fourteen, with black hair and 
black eyes, and an oliv skin, and I saw at onc from the curiou 
vacanc of hi express that he wa mental weak. He touch hi 
forehead awkwardli as I went by, and I heard him answer the garden 
in a queer, harsh voic that caught my attention; it gave me the 
impress of some one speak deep below under the earth, and there 
wa a strang sibilance, like the hiss of the phonograph as the 
pointer travel over the cylinder. I heard that he seem anxiou to do 
what he could, and wa quit docil and obedient, and morgan the 
gardener, who knew hi mother, assur me he wa perfectli harmless. 
"he' alway been a bit queer," he said, "and no wonder, after what hi 
mother went through befor he wa born. I did know hi father, thoma 
cradock, well, and a veri fine workman he wa too, indeed. He got 
someth wrong with hi lung owe to work in the wet woods, and 
never got over it, and went off quit sudden like. and they do say as 
how mrs. cradock wa quit off her head; anyhow, she wa found by mr. 
hillyer, Ty coch, all crouch up on the gray hills, over there, cri 
and weep like a lost soul. and jervas he wa born about eight month 
afterwards, and as I wa saying, he wa a bit queer always; and they do 
say when he could scarc walk he would frighten the other children 
into fit with the nois he would make." 

A word in the stori had stir up some remembr within me, and 
vagu curious, I ask the old man where the gray hill were. 

"up there," he said, with the same gestur he had use before; "you go 
past the fox and hounds, and through the forest, by the old ruins. it' 
a good five mile from here, and a strang sort of a place. the poorest 
soil between thi and monmouth, they do say, though it' good feed for 
sheep. yes, it wa a sad thing for poor mrs. cradock." 

the old man turn to hi work, and I stroll on down the path between 
the espaliers, gnarl and gouti with age, think of the stori I had 
heard, and grope for the point in it that had some key to my memory. 
In an instant it came befor me; I had seen the phrase "gray hills" on 
the slip of yellow paper that professor gregg had taken from the 
drawer in hi cabinet. again I wa seiz with pang of mingl 
curios and fear; I rememb the strang charact copi from the 
limeston rock, and then again their ident with the inscript on 
the age-old seal, and the fantast fabl of the latin geographer. I 
saw beyond doubt that, unless coincid had set all the scene and 
dispos all these bizarr event with curiou art, I wa to be a 
spectat of thing far remov from the usual and customari traffic and 
jostl of life. professor gregg I note day by day. He wa hot on hi 
trail, grow lean with eagerness; and in the evenings, when the sun 
wa swim on the verg of the mountain, he would pace the terrac to 
and fro with hi eye on the ground, while the mist grew white in the 
valley, and the still of the even brought far voic near, and 
the blue smoke rose a straight column from the diamond-shap chimney of 
the gray farmhouse, just as I had seen it on the first morning. I have 
told you I wa of sceptic habit; but though I understood littl or 
nothing, I began to dread, vainli propos to myself the iter 
dogma of scienc that all life is material, and that in the system of 
thing there is no undiscov land even beyond the remotest stars, 
where the supernatur can find a footing. yet there struck in on thi 
the thought that matter is as realli aw and unknown as spirit, that 
scienc itself but dalli on the threshold, scarc gain more than 
a glimps of the wonder of the inner place. 

there is one day that stand up from amidst the other as a grim red 
beacon, betoken evil to come. I wa sit on a bench in the garden, 
watch the boy cradock weeding, when I wa suddenli alarm by a harsh 
and choke sound, like the cri of a wild beast in anguish, and I wa 
unspeak shock to see the unfortun lad stand in full view 
befor me, hi whole bodi quiver and shake at short interv as 
though shock of electr were pass through him, and hi teeth 
grinding, and foam gather on hi lips, and hi face all swollen and 
blacken to a hideou mask of humanity. I shriek with terror, and 
professor gregg came running; and as I point to cradock, the boy with 
one convuls shudder fell face forward, and lay on the wet earth, hi 
bodi writh like a wound blind-worm, and an inconceiv babbl of 
sound burst and rattl and hiss from hi lips; he seem to 
pour forth an infam jargon, with words, or what seem words, that 
might have belong to a tongu dead sinc untold ages, and buri deep 
beneath nilot mud, or in the inmost recess of the mexican forest. 
for a moment the thought pass through my mind, as my ear were still 
revolt with that infern clamor, "sure thi is the veri speech of 
hell," and then I cri out again and again, and ran away shudder to 
my inmost soul. I had seen professor gregg' face as he stoop over the 
wretch boy and rais him, and I wa appal by the glow of 
exult that shone on everi lineament and feature. As I sat in my 
room with drawn blinds, and my eye hidden in my hands, I heard heavi 
step beneath, and I wa told afterward that professor gregg had 
carri cradock to hi study, and had lock the door. I heard voic 
murmur indistinctly, and I trembl to think of what might be pass 
within a few feet of where I sat; I long to escap to the wood and 
sunshine, and yet I dread the sight that might confront me on the 
way. and at last, as I held the handl of the door nervously, I heard 
professor gregg' voic call to me with a cheer ring: "it' all 
right now, miss lally," he said. "the poor fellow ha got over it, and I 
have been arrang for him to sleep here after to-morrow. perhap I may 
be abl to do someth for him." 

"yes," he said later, "it wa a veri pain sight, and I don't wonder 
you were alarmed. We may hope that good food will build him up a little, 
but I am afraid he will never be realli cured;" and he affect the 
dismal and convent air with which one speak of hopeless illness, 
and yet beneath it I detect the delight that leapt up rampant within 
him, and fought and struggl to find utterance. It wa as if one 
glanc down on the even surfac of the sea, clear and immobile, and saw 
beneath rage depths, and a storm of contend billows. It wa inde 
to me a tortur and offens problem that thi man, who had so 
bounteous rescu me from the sharp of death, and show himself 
in all the relat of life full of benevol and piti and kindli 
forethought, should so manifestli be for onc on the side of the demons, 
and take a ghastli pleasur in the torment of an afflict 
fellow-creature. apart, I struggl with the horn difficulty, and 
strove to find the solution, but without the hint of a clue; beset by 
mysteri and contradiction, I saw noth that might help me, and began 
to wonder whether, after all, I had not escap from the white mist of 
the suburb at too dear a rate. I hint someth of my thought to the 
professor; I said enough to let him know that I wa in the most acut 
perplexity, but the moment after regret what I had done, when I saw 
hi face contort with a spasm of pain. 

"mi dear miss lally," he said, "you sure do not wish to leav us? no, 
no, you would not do it. you do not know how I reli on you; how 
confid I go forward, assur that you are here to watch over my 
children. you, miss lally, are my rear-guard; for, let me tell you, that 
the busi in which I am engag is not wholli devoid of peril. you 
have not forgotten what I said the first morn here; my lip are shut 
by an old and firm resolve, till they can open to utter no ingeni 
hypothesi or vagu surmis but irrefrag fact, as certain as a 
demonstr in mathematics. think over it, miss lally, not for a 
moment would I endeavor to keep you here against your own instincts, and 
yet I tell you frankli that I am persuad that it is here, here amidst 
the woods, that your duti lies." 

I wa touch by the eloqu of hi tone, and by the remembr that 
the man, after all, had been my salvation, and I gave him my hand on a 
promis to serv him loyal and without question. A few day later the 
rector of our church, a littl church, gray and sever and quaint, that 
hover on the veri bank of the river and watch the tide swim and 
return, came to see us, and professor gregg easili persuad him to stay 
and share our dinner. mr. meyrick wa a member of an antiqu famili of 
squires, whose old manor hous stood amongst the hill some seven mile 
away, and thu root in the soil, the rector wa a live store of all 
the old fade custom and lore of the country. hi manner, genial with 
a deal of retir oddity, won on professor gregg; and toward the 
cheese, when a curiou burgundi had begun it incantations, the two men 
glow like the wine, and talk of philolog with the enthusiasm of a 
burgess over the peerage. the parson wa expound the pronunci of 
the welsh _ll_, and produc sound like the gurgl of hi nativ 
brooks, when professor gregg struck in. 

"bi the way," he said, "that wa a veri odd word I met with the other 
day. you know my boy, poor jervas cradock. well, he ha got the bad 
habit of talk to himself, and the day befor yesterday I wa walk 
in the garden here and heard him; he wa evid quit unconsci of 
my presence. A lot of what he said I couldn't make out, but one word, 
struck me distinctly. It wa such an odd sound; half-sibilant, 
half-guttural, and as quaint as those doubl _ll_' you have been 
demonstrating. I do not know whether I can give you an idea of the 
sound. "ishakshar" is perhap as near as I can get; but the _k_ ought to 
be a greek _chi_ or a spanish _j_. now what doe it mean in welsh?" 

"in welsh?" said the parson. "there is no such word in welsh, nor ani 
word remot resembl it. I know the book-welsh, as they call it, and 
the colloqui dialect as well as ani man, but there' no word like 
that from anglesea to usk. besides, none of the cradock speak a word of 
welsh; it' die out about here." 

"really. you interest me extremely, mr. meyrick. I confess the word 
didn't strike me as have the welsh ring. but I thought it might be 
some local corruption." 

"no, I never heard such a word, or anyth like it. indeed," he added, 
smile whimsically, "if it belong to ani language, I should say it 
must be that of the fairies,--th tylwydd têg, as we call them." 

the talk went on to the discoveri of a roman villa in the neighborhood; 
and soon after I left the room, and sat down apart to wonder at the 
draw togeth of such strang clue of evidence. As the professor had 
spoken of the curiou word, I had caught the glint of hi eye upon me; 
and though the pronunci he gave wa grotesqu in the extreme, I 
recogn the name of the stone of sixti charact mention by 
solinus, the black seal shut up in some secret drawer of the study, 
stamp forev by a vanish race with sign that no man could read, 
sign that might, for all I knew, be the veil of aw thing done long 
ago, and forgotten befor the hill were mould into form. 

when, the next morning, I came down, I found professor gregg pace the 
terrac in hi etern walk. 

"look at that bridge," he said when he saw me, "observ the quaint and 
gothic design, the angl between the arches, and the silveri gray of 
the stone in the awe of the morn light. I confess it seem to me 
symbolic; it should illustr a mystic allegori of the passag from 
one world to another." 

"professor gregg," I said quietly, "it is time that I knew someth of 
what ha happened, and of what is to happen." 

for the moment he put me off, but I return again with the same 
question in the evening, and then professor gregg flame with 
excitement. "don't you understand yet?" he cried. "but I have told you a 
good deal; yes, and shown you a good deal. you have heard pretti nearli 
all that I have heard, and seen what I have seen; or at least," and hi 
voic chill as he spoke, "enough to make a good deal clear as noonday. 
the servant told you, I have no doubt, that the wretch boy cradock 
had anoth seizur the night befor last; he awok me with cri in 
that voic you heard in the garden, and I went to him, and god forbid 
you should see what I saw that night. but all thi is useless; my time 
here is draw to a close; I must be back in town in three weeks, as I 
have a cours of lectur to prepare, and need all my book about me. In 
a veri few day it will be all over, and I shall no longer hint, and no 
longer be liabl to ridicul as a madman and a quack. no, I shall speak 
plainly, and I shall be heard with such emot as perhap no other man 
ha ever drawn from the breast of hi fellows." 

He paused, and seem to grow radiant with the joy of great and 
wonder discovery. 

"but all that is for the future, the near futur certainly, but still 
the future," he went on at length. "there is someth to be done yet; 
you will rememb my tell you that my research were not altogeth 
devoid of peril? yes, there is a certain amount of danger to be faced; I 
did not know how much when I spoke on the subject before, and to a 
certain extent I am still in the dark. but it will be a strang 
adventure, the last of all, the last demonstr in the chain." 

He wa walk up and down the room as he spoke, and I could hear in hi 
voic the contend tone of exult and despondence, or perhap I 
should say awe, the awe of a man who goe forth on unknown waters, and I 
thought of hi allus to columbu on the night he had laid hi book 
befor me. the even wa a littl chilly, and a fire of log had been 
light in the studi where we were, and the remitt flame and the glow 
on the wall remind me of the old days. I wa sit silent in an 
armchair by the fire, wonder over all I had heard, and still vainli 
specul as to the secret spring conceal from me under all the 
phantasmagoria I had witnessed, when I becam suddenli awar of a 
sensat that chang of some sort had been at work in the room, and 
that there wa someth unfamiliar in it aspect. for some time I 
look about me, tri in vain to local the alter that I knew 
had been made; the tabl by the window, the chairs, the fade sette 
were all as I had known them. suddenly, as a sought-for recollect 
flash into the mind, I knew what wa amiss. I wa face the 
professor' desk, which stood on the other side of the fire, and abov 
the desk wa a grimi look bust of pitt, that I had never seen there 
before. and then I rememb the true posit of thi work of art; in 
the furthest corner by the door wa an old cupboard, project into the 
room, and on the top of the cupboard, fifteen feet from the floor, the 
bust had been, and there no doubt it had delayed, accumul dirt 
sinc the earli year of the century. 

I wa utterli amazed, and sat silent still, in a confus of thought. 
there was, so far as I knew, no such thing as a step-ladd in the 
house, for I had ask for one to make some alter in the curtain 
of my room; and a tall man stand on a chair would have found it 
imposs to take down the bust. It had been place not on the edg of 
the cupboard, but far back against the wall; and professor gregg was, if 
anything, under the averag height. 

"how on earth did you manag to get down pitt?" I said at last. 

the professor look curious at me, and seem to hesit a little. 

"they must have found you a step-ladder, or perhap the garden brought 
in a short ladder from outside." 

"no, I have had no ladder of ani kind. now, miss lally," he went on with 
an awkward simul of jest, "there is a littl puzzl for you; a 
problem in the manner of the inimit holmes; there are the facts, 
plain and patent; summon your acut to the solut of the puzzle. 
for heaven' sake," he cri with a break voice, "say no more about 
it. I tell you, I never touch the thing," and he went out of the room 
with horror manifest on hi face, and hi hand shook and jar the door 
behind him. 

I look round the room in vagu surprise, not at all realiz what had 
happened, make vain and idl surmis by way of explanation, and 
wonder at the stir of black water by an idl word, and the 
trivial chang of an ornament. "thi is some petti business, some whim 
on which I have jarred," I reflected; "the professor is perhap 
scrupul and superstiti over trifles, and my question may have 
outrag unacknowledg fears, as though one kill a spider or spill 
the salt befor the veri eye of a practic scotchwoman." I wa 
immers in these fond suspicions, and began to plume myself a littl on 
my immun from such empti fears, when the truth fell heavili as lead 
upon my heart, and I recogn with cold terror that some aw 
influenc had been at work. the bust wa simpli inaccessible; without a 
ladder no one could have touch it. 

I went out to the kitchen and spoke as quietli as I could to the 
housemaid. 

"who move that bust from the top of the cupboard, anne?" I said to her. 
"professor gregg say he ha not touch it. did you find an old 
step-ladd in one of the outhouses?" 

the girl look at me blankly. 

"I never touch it," she said. "I found it where it is now the other 
morn when I dust the room. I rememb now, it, wa wednesday 
morning, becaus it wa the morn after cradock wa taken bad in the 
night. My room is next to his, you know, miss," the girl went on 
piteously; "and it wa aw to hear how he cri and call out name 
that I couldn't understand. It made me feel all afraid, and then master 
came, and I heard him speak, and he took down cradock to the studi and 
gave him something." 

"and you found that bust move the next morning?" 

"yes, miss, there wa a queer sort of a smell in the studi when I came 
down and open the windows; a bad smell it was, and I wonder what it 
could be. Do you know, miss, I went a long time ago to the zoo in london 
with my cousin thoma barker, one afternoon that I had off, when I wa 
at mrs. prince' in stanhop gate, and we went into the snake-hous to 
see the snakes, and it wa just the same sort of a smell, veri sick it 
made me feel, I remember, and I got barker to take me out. and it wa 
just the same kind of a smell in the study, as I wa saying, and I wa 
wonder what it could be from, when I see that bust with pitt cut in 
it stand on the master' desk, and I thought to myself, now who ha 
done that, and how have they done it? and when I came to dust the 
things, I look at the bust, and I saw a great mark on it where the 
dust wa gone, for I don't think it can have been touch with a duster 
for year and years, and it wasn't like finger-marks, but a larg patch 
like, broad and spread out. So I pass my hand over it, without 
think what I wa doing, and where that patch wa it wa all sticki 
and slimy, as if a snail had crawl over it. veri strange, isn't it, 
miss? and I wonder who can have done it, and how that mess wa made." 

the well-meant gabbl of the servant touch me to the quick. I lay down 
upon my bed, and bit my lip that I should not cri out loud in the sharp 
anguish of my terror and bewilderment. indeed, I wa almost mad with 
dread; I believ that if it had been daylight I should have fled hot 
foot, forget all courag and all the debt of gratitud that wa due 
to professor gregg, not care whether my fate were that I must starv 
slowli so long as I might escap from the net of blind and panic fear 
that everi day seem to draw a littl closer round me. If I knew, I 
thought, if I knew what there were to dread, I could guard against it; 
but here, in thi lone house, shut in on all side by the olden wood 
and the vault hills, terror seem to spring inconsequ from everi 
covert, and the flesh is aghast at the half-heard murmur of horribl 
things. all in vain I strove to summon sceptic to my aid, and 
endeavor by cool common-sens to buttress my belief in a world of 
natur order, for the air that blew in at the open window wa a mystic 
breath, and in the dark I felt the silenc go heavi and sorrow 
as a mass of requiem, and I conjur imag of strang shape gather 
fast amidst the reeds, besid the wash of the river. 

In the morning, from the moment that I set foot in the breakfast-room I 
felt that the unknown plot wa draw to a crisis; the professor' face 
wa firm and set, and he seem hardli to hear our voic when we spoke. 

"I am go out for rather a long walk," he said, when the meal wa 
over. "you mustn't be expect me, now, or think anyth ha 
happen if I don't turn up to dinner. I have been get stupid 
lately, and I dare say a miniatur walk tour will do me good. perhap 
I may even spend the night in some littl inn, if I find ani place that 
look clean and comfortable." 

I heard this, and knew by my experi of professor gregg' manner that 
it wa no ordinari busi or pleasur that impel him. I knew not, 
nor even remot guessed, where he wa bound, nor had I the vaguest 
notion of hi errand, but all the fear of the night befor returned; and 
as he stood, smiling, on the terrace, readi to set out, I implor him 
to stay, and to forget all hi dream of the undiscov continent. 

"no, no, miss lally," he replied, still smiling, "it' too late now. 
_vestigia nulla retrorsum_, you know, is the devic of all true 
explorers, though I hope it won't be liter true in my ease. but, 
indeed, you are wrong to alarm yourself so; I look upon my littl 
expedit as quit commonplace; no more excit than a day with the 
geolog hammers. there is a risk, of course, but so there is on the 
commonest excursion. I can afford to be jaunty; I am do noth so 
hazard as 'arri doe a hundr time over in the cours of everi bank 
holiday. well, then, you must look more cheerfully; and so good-bi till 
to-morrow at latest." 

He walk briskli up the road, and I saw him open the gate that mark 
the entranc of the wood, and then he vanish in the gloom of the 
trees. 

all the day pass heavili with a strang dark in the air, and again 
I felt as if imprison amidst the ancient woods, shut in an olden land 
of mysteri and dread, and as if all wa long ago and forgotten by the 
live outside. I hope and dreaded, and when the dinner-hour came, I 
wait expect to hear the professor' step in the hall, and hi voic 
exult at I knew not what triumph. I compos my face to welcom him 
gladly, but the night descend dark, and he did not come. 

In the morn when the maid knock at my door, I call out to her, 
and ask if her master had returned; and when she repli that hi 
bedroom stood open and empty, I felt the cold clasp of despair. still, I 
fanci he might have discov genial company, and would return for 
luncheon, or perhap in the afternoon, and I took the children for a 
walk in the forest, and tri my best to play and laugh with them, and 
to shut out the thought of mysteri and veil terror. hour after hour I 
waited, and my thought grew darker; again the night came and found me 
watching, and at last, as I wa make much ado to finish my dinner, I 
heard step outsid and the sound of a man' voice. 

the maid came in and look oddli at me. 

"please, miss," she began, "mr. morgan the garden want to speak to 
you for a minute, if you didn't mind." 

"show him in, please," I answered, and I set my lip tight. 

the old man came slowli into the room, and the servant shut the door 
behind him. 

"sit down, mr. morgan," I said; "what is it that you want to say to me?" 

"well, miss, mr. gregg he gave me someth for you yesterday morning, 
just befor he went off; and he told me particular not to hand it up 
befor eight o'clock thi even exactly, if so be as he wasn't back 
again home before, and if he should come home befor I wa just to 
return it to him in hi own hands. so, you see, as mr. gregg isn't here 
yet, I suppos i'd better give you the parcel directly." 

He pull out someth from hi pocket, and gave it to me, half rising. 
I took it silently, and see that morgan seem doubt as to what he 
wa to do next, I thank him and bade him good-night, and he went out. 
I wa left alon in the room with the parcel in my hand,--a paper parcel 
neatli seal and direct to me, with the instruct morgan had 
quot all written in the professor' larg loos hand. I broke the 
seal with a choke at my heart, and found an envelop inside, 
address also, but open, and I took the letter out. 

* * * * * 

"mi dear miss lally," it began, "to quot the old logic manual, the case 
of your read thi note is a case of my have made a blunder of some 
sort, and, I am afraid, a blunder that turn these line into a 
farewell. It is practic certain that neither you nor anyon els 
will ever see me again. I have made my will with provis for thi 
eventuality, and I hope you will consent to accept the small remembr 
address to you, and my sincer thank for the way in which you join 
your fortun to mine. the fate which ha come upon me is desper and 
terribl beyond the remotest dream of man; but thi fate you have a 
right to know--if you please. If you look in the left-hand drawer of my 
dressing-table, you will find the key of the escritoire, properli 
labelled. In the well of the escritoir is a larg envelop seal and 
address to your name. I advis you to throw it forthwith into the 
fire; you will sleep better of night if you do so. but if you must know 
the histori of what ha happened, it is all written down for you to 
read." 

* * * * * 

the signatur wa firmli written below, and again I turn the page and 
read out the word one by one, aghast and white to the lips, my hand 
cold as ice, and sick choke me. the dead silenc of the room, and 
the thought of the dark wood and hill close me in on everi side, 
oppress me, helpless and without capacity, and not know where to 
turn for counsel. At last I resolv that though knowledg should haunt 
my whole life and all the day to come, I must know the mean of the 
strang terror that had so long torment me, rise gray, dim, and 
awful, like the shadow in the wood at dusk. I care carri out 
professor gregg' directions, and not without reluct broke the seal 
of the envelope, and spread out hi manuscript befor me. that 
manuscript I alway carri with me, and I see that I cannot deni your 
unspoken request to read it. this, then, wa what I read that night, 
sit at the desk, with a shade lamp besid me. 

the young ladi who call herself miss lalli then proceed to recite:-- 

* * * * * 

_the statement of william gregg, f.r.s., etc._ 

It is mani year sinc the first glimmer of the theori which is now 
almost, if not quite, reduc to fact dawn first on my mind. A 
somewhat extens cours of miscellan and obsolet read had done 
a good deal to prepar the way, and, later, when I becam somewhat of a 
specialist and immers myself in the studi known as ethnological, I 
wa now and then startl by fact that would not squar with orthodox 
scientif opinion, and by discoveri that seem to hint at someth 
still hidden for all our research. more particularli I becam convinc 
that much of the folk-lor of the world is but an exagger account of 
event that realli happened, and I wa especi drawn to consid the 
stori of the fairies, the good folk of the celtic races. here I 
thought I could detect the fring of embroideri and exaggeration, the 
fantast guise, the littl peopl dress in green and gold sport in 
the flowers, and I thought I saw a distinct analog between the name 
given to thi race (suppos to be imaginary) and the descript of 
their appear and manners. just as our remot ancestor call the 
dread be "fair" and "good" precis becaus they dread them, so 
they had dress them up in charm forms, know the truth to be the 
veri reverse. literature, too, had gone earli to work, and had lent a 
power hand in the transformation, so that the play elv of 
shakespear are alreadi far remov from the true original, and the real 
horror is disguis in a form of prankish mischief. but in the older 
tales, the stori that use to make men cross themselv as they sat 
round the burn logs, we tread a differ stage; I saw a wide 
oppos spirit in certain histori of children and of men and women who 
vanish strang from the earth. they would be seen by a peasant in 
the field walk toward some green and round hillock, and seen no 
more on earth; and there are stori of mother who have left a child 
quietli sleep with the cottag door rude bar with a piec of 
wood, and have returned, not to find the plump and rosi littl saxon, 
but a thin and wizen creature, with sallow skin and black pierc 
eyes, the child of anoth race. then, again, there were myth darker 
still; the dread of witch and wizard, the lurid evil of the sabbath, and 
the hint of demon who mingl with the daughter of men. and just as we 
have turn the terribl "fair folk" into a compani of benignant, if 
freakish, elves, so we have hidden from us the black foul of the 
witch and her companion under a popular _diablerie_ of old women and 
broomstick and a comic cat with tail on end. So the greek call the 
hideou furi benevol ladies, and thu the northern nation have 
follow their example. I pursu my investigations, steal odd hour 
from other and more imper labors, and I ask myself the question: 
suppos these tradit to be true, who were the demon who are 
report to have attend the sabbaths? I need not say that I laid asid 
what I may call the supernatur hypothesi of the middl ages, and came 
to the conclus that fairi and devil were of one and the same race 
and origin; invention, no doubt, and the gothic fanci of old day had 
done much in the way of exagger and distortion; yet I firmli 
believ that beneath all thi imageri there wa a black background of 
truth. As for some of the alleg wonders, I hesitated. while I should 
be veri loth to receiv ani one specif instanc of modern spiritu 
as contain even a grain of the genuine, yet I wa not wholli prepar 
to deni that human flesh may now and then, onc perhap in ten million 
cases, be the veil of power which seem magic to us; power which, so 
far from proceed from the height and lead men thither, are in 
realiti surviv from the depth of being. the amoeba and the snail 
have power which we do not possess; and I thought it possibl that the 
theori of revers might explain mani thing which seem wholli 
inexplicable. thu stood my position; I saw good reason to believ that 
much of the tradition, a vast deal of the earliest and uncorrupt 
tradit of the so-cal fairies, repres solid fact, and I 
thought that the pure supernatur element in these traditions, wa to 
be account for on the hypothesi that a race which had fallen out of 
the grand march of evolut might have retained, as a survival, certain 
power which would be to us wholli miraculous. such wa my theori as it 
stood conceiv in my mind; and work with, thi in view, I seem to 
gather confirm from everi side, from the spoil of a tumulu or a 
barrow, from a local paper report an antiquarian meet in the 
country, and from gener literatur of all kinds. amongst other 
instances, I rememb be struck by the phrase "articulate-speak 
men" in homer, as if the writer knew or had heard of men whose speech 
wa so rude that it could hardli be term articulate; and on my 
hypothesi of a race who had lag far behind the rest, I could easili 
conceiv that such a folk would speak a jargon but littl remov from 
the inarticul nois of brute-beasts. 

thu I stood, satisfi that my conjectur wa at all event not far 
remov from fact, when a chanc paragraph in a small countri print one 
day arrest my attention. It wa a short account of what wa to all 
appear the usual sordid tragedi of the village; a young girl 
unaccount missing, and evil rumor blatant and busi with her 
reputation. yet I could read between the line that all thi scandal wa 
pure hypothetical, and in all probabl invent to account for what 
wa in ani other manner unaccountable. A flight to london or liverpool, 
or an undiscov bodi lie with a weight about it neck in the foul 
depth of a woodland pool, of perhap murder,--such were the theori of 
the wretch girl' neighbors. but as I idli scan the paragraph, a 
flash of thought pass through me with the violenc of an electr 
shock: what if the obscur and horribl race of the hill still 
survived, still remain haunt wild places, and barren hills, and now 
and then repeat the evil of gothic legend, unchang and 
unchang as the turanian shelta, or the basqu of spain. I have 
said that the thought came with violence; and inde I drew in my breath 
sharply, and clung with both hand to my elbow-chair, in a strang 
confus of horror and elation. It wa as if one of my _confrères_ of 
physic science, roam in a quiet english wood, had been suddenli 
stricken aghast by the presenc of the slimi and loathsom terror of the 
ichthyosaurus, the origin of the stori of the aw worm kill by 
valor knights, or had seen the sun darken by the pterodactyl, the 
dragon of tradition. yet as a resolut explor of knowledge, the 
thought of such a discoveri threw me into a passion of joy, and I cut 
out the slip from the paper, and put it in a drawer in my old bureau, 
resolv that it should be but the first piec in a collect of the 
strangest significance. I sat long that even dream of the 
conclus I should establish, nor did cooler reflect at first dash 
my confidence. yet as I began to put the case fairly, I saw that I might 
be build on an unstabl foundation; the fact might possibl be in 
accord with local opinion; and I regard the affair with a mood of 
some reserve. yet I resolv to remain perch on the look-out, and I 
hug to myself the thought that I alon wa watch and wakeful, 
while the great crowd of thinker and searcher stood heedless and 
indifferent, perhap let the most prerog fact pass by 
unnoticed. 

sever year elaps befor I wa enabl to add to the content of the 
drawer; and the second find wa in realiti not a valuabl one, for it 
wa a mere repetit of the first, with onli the variat of anoth 
and distant locality. yet I gain something; for in the second case, as 
in the first, the tragedi took place in a desol and lone country, 
and so far my theori seem justified. but the third piec wa to me far 
more decisive. again, amongst outland hills, far even from a main road 
of traffic, an old man wa found done to death, and the instrument of 
execut wa left besid him. here, indeed, there wa rumor and 
conjecture, for the deadli tool wa a primit stone axe, bound by gut 
to the wooden handle, and surmis the most extravag and improb 
were indulg in. yet, as I thought with a kind of glee, the wildest 
conjectur went far astray; and I took the pain to enter into 
correspond with the local doctor, who wa call at the inquest. he, 
a man of some acuteness, wa dumfoundered. "it will not do to speak of 
these thing in countri places, he wrote to me; but, frankly, professor 
gregg, there is some hideou mysteri here. I have obtain possess of 
the stone axe, and have been so curiou as to test it powers. I took it 
into the back-garden of my hous one sunday afternoon when my famili and 
the servant were all out, and there, shelter by the poplar hedges, I 
made my experiments. I found the thing utterli unmanageable. whether 
there is some peculiar balance, some nice adjust of weights, which 
requir incess practice, or whether an effectu blow can be struck 
onli by a certain trick of the muscles, I do not know; but I assur you 
that I went into the hous with but a sorri opinion of my athlet 
capacities. It wa like an inexperienc man tri 'put the 
hammer;' the forc exert seem to return on oneself, and I found 
myself hurl backward with violence, while the axe fell harmless to 
the ground. On anoth occas I tri the experi with a clever 
woodman of the place; but thi man, who had handl hi axe for forti 
years, could do noth with the stone implement, and miss everi 
stroke most ludicrously. In short, if it were not so suprem absurd, I 
should say that for four thousand year no one on earth could have 
struck an effect blow with the tool that undoubtedli wa use to 
murder the old man." this, as may be imagined, wa to me rare news; and 
afterwards, when I heard the whole story, and learn that the 
unfortun old man had babbl tale of what might be seen at night on 
a certain wild hillside, hint at unheard-of wonders, and that he had 
been found cold one morn on the veri hill in question, my exult 
wa extreme, for I felt I wa leav conjectur far behind me. but the 
next step wa of still greater importance. I had possess for mani 
year an extraordinari stone seal,--a piec of dull black stone, two 
inch long from the handl to the stamp, and the stamp end a rough 
hexagon an inch and a quarter in diameter. altogether, it present the 
appear of an enlarg tobacco-stopp of an old-fashion make. It 
had been sent to me by an agent in the east, who inform me that it had 
been found near the site of the ancient babylon. but the charact 
engrav on the seal were to me an intoler puzzle. somewhat of the 
cuneiform pattern, there were yet strike differences, which I 
detect at the first glance, and all effort to read the inscript on 
the hypothesi that the rule for deciph the arrow-head write 
would appli prove futile. A riddl such as thi stung my pride, and at 
odd moment I would take the black seal out of the cabinet, and 
scrutin it with so much idl persever that everi letter wa 
familiar to my mind, and I could have drawn the inscript from memori 
without the slightest error. judg then of my surprise, when I one day 
receiv from a correspond in the west of england a letter and an 
enclosur that posit left me thunderstruck. I saw care trace 
on a larg piec of paper the veri charact of the black seal, without 
alter of ani kind, and abov the inscript my friend had written: 
_inscript found on a limeston rock on the grey hills, monmouthshire. 
done in some red earth and quit recent_. I turn to the letter. My 
friend wrote: "I send you the enclos inscript with all due reserve. 
A shepherd who pass by the stone a week ago swear that there wa then 
no mark of ani kind. the characters, as I have noted, are form by 
draw some red earth over the stone, and are of an averag height of 
one inch. they look to me like a kind of cuneiform character, a good 
deal altered, but thi of cours is impossible. It may be either a hoax 
or more probabl some scribbl of the gypsies, who are plenti enough 
in thi wild country. they have, as you are aware, mani hieroglyph 
which they use in commun with one another. I happen to visit 
the stone in question two day ago in connect with a rather pain 
incid which ha occur here." 

As may be supposed, I wrote immedi to my friend, thank him for 
the copi of the inscription, and ask him in a casual manner, the 
histori of the incid he mentioned. To be brief, I heard that a woman 
name cradock, who had lost her husband a day before, had set out to 
commun the sad news to a cousin who live some five mile away. she 
took a short cut which led by the gray hills. mrs. cradock, who wa then 
quit a young woman, never arriv at her relative' house. late that 
night a farmer who had lost a coupl of sheep, suppos to have wander 
from the flock, wa walk over the gray hills, with a lantern and hi 
dog. hi attent wa attract by a noise, which he describ as a 
kind of wailing, mourn and pitiabl to hear; and, guid by the 
sound, he found the unfortun mrs. cradock crouch on the ground by 
the limeston rock, sway her bodi to and fro, and lament and 
cri in so heart-rend a manner that the farmer was, as he says, at 
first oblig to stop hi ears, or he would have run away. the woman 
allow herself to be taken home, and a neighbor came to see to her 
necessities. all the night she never ceas her crying, mix her 
lament with word of some unintellig jargon, and when the doctor 
arriv he pronounc her insane. she lay on her bed for a week, now 
wailing, as peopl said, like one lost and damn for eternity, and now 
sunk in a heavi coma; it wa thought that grief at the loss of her 
husband had unsettl her mind, and the medic man did not at one time 
expect her to live. I need not say that I wa deepli interest in thi 
story, and I made my friend write to me at interv with all the 
particular of the case. I heard then that in the cours of six week 
the woman gradual recov the use of her faculti and some month 
later she gave birth to a son, christen jervase, who unhappili prove 
to be of weak intellect. such were the fact known to the village; but 
to me while I whiten at the suggest thought of the hideou 
enorm that had doubtless been committed, all thi wa noth short 
of conviction, and I incauti hazard a hint of someth like the 
truth to some scientif friends. the moment the word had left my lip 
I bitterli regret have spoken, and thu given away the great secret 
of my life, but with a good deal of relief mix with indignation, I 
found my fear altogeth misplaced, for my friend ridicul me to my 
face, and I wa regard as a madman; and beneath a natur anger I 
chuckl to myself, feel as secur amidst these blockheads, as if I 
had confid what I knew to the desert sands. 

but now, know so much, I resolv I would know all, and I 
concentr my effort on the task of deciph the inscript on 
the black seal. for mani year I made thi puzzl the sole object of my 
leisur moments; for the greater portion of my time was, of course, 
devot to other duties, and it wa onli now and then that I could 
snatch a week of clear research. If I were to tell the full histori of 
thi curiou investigation, thi statement would be wearisom in the 
extreme, for it would contain simpli the account of long and tediou 
failure. By what I knew alreadi of ancient script I wa well-equip 
for the chase, as I alway term it to myself. I had correspond 
amongst all the scientif men in europe, and, indeed, in the world, and 
I could not believ that in these day ani character, howev ancient 
and howev perplexed, could long resist the search-light I should bring 
to bear upon it. yet, in point of fact, it wa fulli fourteen year 
befor I succeeded. with everi year my profession duti increased, 
and my leisur becam smaller. thi no doubt retard me a good deal; 
and yet, when I look back on those year I am astonish at the vast 
scope of my investig of the black seal. I made my bureau a centre, 
and from all the world and from all the age I gather transcript of 
ancient writing. nothing, I resolved, should pass me unawares, and the 
faintest hint should be welcom and follow up. but as one covert 
after anoth wa tri and prove empti of result, I began in the 
cours of year to despair, and to wonder whether the black seal were 
the sole relic of some race that had vanish from the world and left no 
other trace of it existence,--had perished, in fine, as atlanti is 
said to have done, in some great cataclysm, it secret perhap drown 
beneath the ocean or mould into the heart of the hills. the thought 
chill my warmth a little, and though I still persevered, it wa no 
longer with the same certainti of faith. A chanc came to the rescue. I 
wa stay in a consider town in the north of england, and took the 
opportun of go over the veri credit museum that had for some 
time been establish in the place. the curat wa one of my 
correspondents; and, as we were look through one of the miner 
cases, my attent wa struck by a specimen, a piec of black stone 
some four inch square, the appear of which remind me in a 
measur of the black seal. I took it up carelessly, and wa turn it 
over in my hand, when I saw, to my astonishment, that the under side wa 
inscribed. I said, quietli enough, to my friend the curat that the 
specimen interest me, and that I should be much oblig if he would 
allow me to take it with me to my hotel for a coupl of days. he, of 
course, made no objection, and I hurri to my rooms, and found that my 
first glanc had not deceiv me. there were two inscriptions; one in 
the regular cuneiform character, anoth in the charact of the black 
seal, and I realiz that my task wa accomplished. I made an exact copi 
of the two inscriptions; and when I got to my london study, and had the 
seal befor me, I wa abl serious to grappl with the great problem. 
the interpret inscript on the museum specimen, though in itself 
curiou enough, did not bear on my quest, but the transliter made 
me master of the secret of the black seal. conjecture, of course, had to 
enter into my calculations; there wa here and there uncertainti about a 
particular ideograph, and one sign recur again and again on the seal 
baffl me for mani success nights. but at last the secret stood open 
befor me in plain english, and I read the key of the aw 
transmut of the hills. the last word wa hardli written, when with 
finger all trembl and unsteadi I tore the scrap of paper into the 
minutest fragments, and saw them flame and blacken in the red hollow of 
the fire, and then I crush the gray film that remain into finest 
powder. never sinc then have I written those words; never will I write 
the phrase which tell me how man can be reduc to the slime from which 
he came, and be forc to put on the flesh of the reptil and the snake. 
there wa now but one thing remaining. I knew; but I desir to see, and 
I wa after some time abl to take a hous in the neighborhood of the 
gray hills, and not far from the cottag where mrs. cradock and her son 
jervas resided. I need not go into a full and detail account of the 
appar inexplic event which have occur here, where I am 
write this. I knew that I should find in jervas cradock someth of 
the blood of the "littl people," and I found later that he had more 
than onc encount hi kinsmen in lone place in that lone land. 
when I wa summon one day to the garden, and found him in a seizur 
speak or hiss the ghastli jargon of the black seal, I am afraid 
that exult prevail over pity. I heard burst from hi lip the 
secret of the underworld, and the word of dread, "ishakshar," the 
signif of which I must be excus from giving. 

but there is one incid I cannot pass over unnoticed. In the wast 
hollow of the night I awok at the sound of those hiss syllabl I 
knew so well; and on go to the wretch boy' room, I found him 
convuls and foam at the mouth, struggl on the bed as if he 
strove to escap the grasp of writh demons. I took him down to my 
room and lit the lamp, while he lay twist on the floor, call on 
the power within hi flesh to leav him. I saw hi bodi swell and becom 
distend as a bladder, while the face blacken befor my eyes; and 
then at the crisi I did what wa necessari accord to the direct 
on the seal, and put all scrupl on one side, I becam a man of 
science, observ of what wa passing. yet the sight I had to wit 
wa horrible, almost beyond the power of human concept and the most 
fear fantasy; someth push out from the bodi there on the floor, 
and stretch forth, a slimi waver tentacle, across the room, and 
grasp the bust upon the cupboard, and laid it down on my desk. 

when it wa over, and I wa left to walk up and down all the rest of the 
night, white and shuddering, with sweat pour from my flesh, I vainli 
tri to reason with myself; I said, truli enough, that I had seen 
noth realli supernatural, that a snail push out hi horn and 
draw them in wa but an instanc on a smaller scale of what I had 
witnessed; and yet horror broke through all such reason and left me 
shatter and loath myself for the share I had taken in the night' 
work. 

there is littl more to be said. I am go now to the final trial and 
encounter; for I have determin that there shall be noth wanting, 
and I shall meet the "littl people" face to face. I shall have the 
black seal and the knowledg of it secret to help me, and if I 
unhappili do not return from my journey, there is no need to conjur up 
here a pictur of the aw of my fate. 

paus a littl at the end of professor gregg' statement, miss lalli 
continu her tale in the follow words:-- 

such wa the almost incred stori that the professor had left behind 
him. when I had finish read it, it wa late at night, but the next 
morn I took morgan with me, and we proceed to search the gray hill 
for some trace of the lost professor. I will not weari you with a 
descript of the savag desol of that tract of country, a tract 
of utterest loneliness, of bare green hill dot over with gray 
limeston boulders, worn by the ravag of time into fantast semblanc 
of men and beasts. finally, after mani hour of weari searching, we 
found what I told you--th watch and chain, the purse, and the 
ring--wrap in a piec of coars parchment. when morgan cut the gut 
that bound the parcel together, and I saw the professor' property, I 
burst into tears, but the sight of the dread charact of the black 
seal repeat on the parchment froze me to silent horror, and I think I 
understood for the first time the aw fate that had come upon my late 
employer. 

I have onli to add that professor gregg' lawyer treat my account of 
what had happen as a fairi tale, and refus even to glanc at the 
document I laid befor him. It wa he who wa respons for the 
statement that appear in the public press, to the effect that 
professor gregg had been drowned, and that hi bodi must have been swept 
into the open sea. 

miss lalli stop speak and look at mr. phillipps, with a glanc 
of some enquiry. he, for hi part, wa sunken in a deep reveri of 
thought; and when he look up and saw the bustl of the even 
gather in the square, men and women hurri to partak of dinner, 
and crowd alreadi beset the music-halls, all the hum and press of 
actual life seem unreal and visionary, a dream in the morn after an 
awakening. 

"I thank you," he said at last, "for your most interest story, 
interest to me, becaus I feel fulli convinc of it exact truth." 

"sir," said the lady, with some energi of indignation, "you griev and 
offend me. Do you think I should wast my time and your by concoct 
fiction on a bench in leicest square?" 

"pardon me, miss lally, you have a littl misunderstood me. befor you 
began I knew that whatev you told would be told in good faith, but 
your experi have a far higher valu than that of _bona fides_. the 
most extraordinari circumst in your account are in perfect harmoni 
with the veri latest scientif theories. professor lodg would, I am 
sure, valu a commun from you extremely; I wa charm from the 
first by hi dare hypothesi in explan of the wonder of 
spiritu (so called), but your narr put the whole matter out 
of the rang of mere hypothesis." 

"alas, sir, all thi will not help me. you forget, I have lost my 
brother under the most startl and dread circumstances. again, I 
ask you, did you not see him as you came here? hi black whiskers, hi 
spectacles, hi timid glanc to right and left; think, do not these 
particular recal hi face to your memory?" 

"I am sorri to say I have never seen ani one of the kind," said 
phillipps, who had forgotten all about the miss brother. "but let me 
ask you a few questions. did you notic whether professor gregg--" 

"pardon me, sir, I have stay too long. My employ will be expect 
me. I thank you for your sympathy. good bye." 

befor mr. phillipp had recov from hi amaz at thi abrupt 
departure, miss lalli had disappear from hi gaze, pass into the 
crowd that now throng the approach to the empire. He walk home in 
a pensiv frame of mind, and drank too much tea. At ten o'clock he had 
made hi third brew, and had sketch out the outlin of a littl work 
to be call _protoplasm reversion_. 




incid OF the privat bar. 


mr. dyson often medit at odd moment over the singular tale he had 
listen to at the café de la touraine. In the first place he cherish 
a profound convict that the word of truth were scatter with a too 
niggardli and spare hand over the agreeabl histori of mr. smith and 
the black gulf cañon; and, secondly, there wa the undeni fact of 
the profound agit of the narrator, and hi gestur on the 
pavement, too violent to be simulated. the idea of a man go about 
london haunt by the fear of meet a young man with spectacl struck 
dyson as suprem ridiculous; he search hi memori for some preced 
in romance, but without success; he paid visit at odd time to the 
littl café, hope to find mr. wilkin there; and he kept a sharp watch 
on the great gener of the spectacl men without much doubt that he 
would rememb the face of the individu whom he had seen dart out of 
the aerat bread shop. all hi peregrin and researches, however, 
seem to lead to noth of value, and dyson need all hi warm 
convict of hi innat detect power and hi strong scent for 
mysteri to sustain him in hi endeavors. In fact, he had two affair on 
hand; and everi day, as he pass through street crowd or deserted, 
and lurk in the obscur districts, and watch at corners, he wa more 
than surpris to find that the affair of the gold coin persist 
avoid him; while the ingeni wilkins, and the young man with 
spectacl whom he dreaded, seem to have vanish from the pavements. 

He wa ponder these problem one even in a hous of call in the 
strand, and the obstinaci with which the person he so ardent desir 
to meet hung back gave the modest tankard befor him an addit touch 
of bitter. As it happened, he wa alon in hi compartment, and, without 
thinking, he utter aloud the burden of hi meditations. "how bizarr 
it all is!" he said, "a man walk the pavement with the dread of a 
timid-look young man with spectacl continu hover befor hi 
eyes. and there wa some tremend feel at work, I could swear to 
that." quick as thought, befor he had finish the sentence, a head 
pop round the barrier, and wa withdrawn again; and while dyson wa 
wonder what thi could mean, the door of the compart wa swung 
open, and a smooth, clean-shaven, and smile gentleman entered. 

"you will excus me, sir," he said politely, "for intrud on your 
thoughts, but you made a remark a minut ago." 

"I did," said dyson; "I have been puzzl over a foolish matter, and I 
thought aloud. As you heard what I said, and seem interested, perhap 
you may be abl to reliev my perplexity?" 

"indeed. I scarc know; it is an odd coincidence. one ha to be 
cautions. I suppose, sir, that you would have no repuls in assist 
the end of justice." 

"justice," repli dyson, "i a term of such wide meaning, that I too 
feel doubt about give an answer. but thi place is not altogeth 
fit for such a discussion; perhap you would come to my rooms?" 

"you are veri kind; my name is burton, but I am sorri to say I have not 
a card with me. Do you live near here?" 

"within ten minutes' walk." 

mr. burton took out hi watch and seem to be make a rapid 
calculation. 

"I have a train to catch," he said; "but after all, it is a late one. 
so, if you don't mind, I think I will come with you. I am sure we should 
have a littl talk together. We turn up here?" 

the theatr were fill as they cross the strand, the street seem 
aliv with voices, and dyson look fondli about him. the glitter 
line of gas-lamps, with here and there the blind radianc of an 
electr light, the hansom that flash to and fro with ring bells, 
the laden buses, and the eager hurri east and west of the foot 
passengers, made hi most enchant picture; and the grace spire of 
st. mari le strand, on the one hand, and the last flush of sunset on the 
other, were to him a caus of thanksgiving, as the gors blossom to 
linnæus. mr. burton caught hi look of fond as they cross the 
street. 

"I see you can find the picturesqu in london," he said. "to me thi 
great town is as I see it is to you, the studi and the love of life. yet 
how few there are that can pierc the veil of appar monotoni and 
meanness! I have read in a paper which is said to have the largest 
circul in the world, a comparison between the aspect of london and 
paris, a comparison which should be posit laureat, as the great 
masterpiec of fatuou stupidity. conceiv if you can a human be of 
ordinari intellig prefer the boulevard to our london streets; 
imagin a man call for the wholesal destruct of our most charm 
city, in order that the dull uniform of that white sepulchr call 
pari should be reproduc here in london. Is it not posit 
incredible?" 

"mi dear sir," said dyson, regard burton with a good deal of 
interest. "I agre most heartili with your opinions, but I realli cannot 
share your wonder. have you heard how much georg eliot receiv for 
'romola'? Do you know what the circul of 'robert elsmere' was? Do 
you read 'tit bits' regularly? To me, on the contrary, it is constant 
matter both for wonder and thanksgiv that london wa not 
boulevard twenti year ago. I prais that exquisit jag sky line 
that stand up against the pale green and fade blue and flush 
cloud of sunset, but I wonder even more than I praise. As for st. mari 
le strand, it preserv is a miracle, noth more or less. A thing 
of exquisit beauti _versus_ four buse abreast! really, the conclus 
is too obvious. didn't you read the letter of the man who propos that 
the whole mysteri system, the immemori plan of comput easter, 
should, be abolish off-hand becaus he doesn't like hi son have hi 
holiday as earli as march 20th? but shall we be go on?" 

they had linger at the corner of a street on the north side of the 
strand, enjoy the contrast and the glamour of the scene. dyson 
point the way with a gesture, and they stroll up the compar 
desert streets, slant a littl to the right, and thu arriv at 
dyson' lodg on the verg of bloomsbury. mr. burton took a 
comfort armchair by the open window, while dyson lit the candl and 
produc the whiskey and soda and cigarettes. 

"they tell me these cigarett are veri good," he said, "but I know 
noth about it myself. I hold at last that there is onli one tobacco, 
and that is shag. I suppos I could not tempt you to tri a pipeful?" 

mr. burton smilingli refus the offer, and pick out a cigarett from 
the box. when he had smoke it half through, he said with some 
hesitation:-- 

"it is realli kind of you to have me here, mr. dyson; the fact is that 
the interest at issu are far too seriou to be discuss in a bar, 
where, as you found for yourself, there may be listeners, voluntari or 
involuntary, on each side. I think the remark I heard you make wa 
someth about the odditi of an individu go about london in deadli 
fear of a young man with spectacles." 

"yes, that wa it." 

"well, would you mind confid to me the circumst that gave rise 
to the reflection?" 

"not in the least; it wa like this." and he ran over in brief outlin 
the adventur in oxford street, dwell on the violenc of mr. 
wilkins' gestures, but wholli suppress the tale told in the café. 
"he told me he live in constant terror of meet thi man; and I left 
him when I thought he wa cool enough to look after himself," said 
dyson, end hi narrative. 

"really," said mr. burton. "and you actual saw thi mysteri 
person." 

"yes." 

"and could you describ him?" 

"well, he look to me a youngish man, pale and nervous. He had small 
black side whiskers, and wore rather larg spectacles." 

"but thi is simpli marvellous! you astonish me. for I must tell you 
that my interest in the matter is this. I am not in the least in terror 
of meet a dark young man with spectacles, but I shrewdli suspect a 
person of that descript would much rather not meet me. and yet the 
account you give of the man talli exactly. A nervou glanc to right 
and left--i it not so? and, as you observed, he wear promin 
spectacles, and ha small black whiskers. there cannot be sure two 
peopl exactli identical--on a caus of terror, and the other, I should 
imagine, extrem anxiou to get out of the way. but have you seen thi 
man since?" 

"no, I have not; and I have been look out for him pretti keenly. but, 
of course, he may have left london, and england too for the matter of 
that." 

hardly, I think. well, mr. dyson, it is onli fair that I should explain 
my story, now that I have listened, to yours. I must tell you, then, 
that I am an agent for curios and preciou thing of all kinds. An 
odd employment, isn't it? Of cours I wasn't brought up to the business; 
I gradual fell into it. I have alway been fond of thing queer and 
rare, and by the time I wa twenti I had made half a dozen collections. 
It is not gener known how often farm labor come upon rarities; 
you would be astonish if I told you what I have seen turn up by the 
plough. I live in the countri in those days, and I use to buy anyth 
the men on the farm brought me; and I had the queerest set of rubbish, 
as my friend call my collection. but that' how I got the scent of 
the business, which mean everything; and, later on, it struck me that I 
might veri well turn my knowledg to account and add to my income. sinc 
those earli day I have been in most quarter of the world, and some 
veri valuabl thing have pass through my hands, and I have had to 
engag in difficult and delic negotiations. you have possibl heard 
of the khan opal--cal in the east 'the stone of a thousand and one 
colors'? well, perhap the conquest of that stone wa my greatest 
achievement. I call it myself the stone of the thousand and one lies, 
for I assur you that I had to invent a cycl of folk-lor befor the 
rajah who own it would consent to sell the thing. I subsid 
wander story-tellers, who told tale in which the opal play a 
fright part; I hire a holi man, a great ascetic, to prophesi against 
the thing in the languag of eastern symbolism; in short, I frighten 
the rajah out of hi wits. So you see there is room for diplomaci in 
the traffic I am engag in. I have to be ever on my guard, and I have 
often been sensibl that unless I watch everi step and weigh everi 
word my life would not last me much longer. last april I becam awar of 
the exist of a highli valuabl antiqu gem. It wa in southern 
italy, and in the possess of person who were ignor of it real 
value. It ha alway been my experi that it is precis the 
ignor who are most difficult to deal with. I have met farmer who 
were under the impress that a shill of georg I. wa a find of 
almost incalcul value; and all the defeat I have sustain have 
been at the hand of peopl of thi description. reflect on these 
facts, I saw that the acquisit of the gem I have mention would be 
an affair demand the nicest diplomacy; I might possibl have got it 
by offer a sum approach it real value, but I need not point out 
to you that such a proceed would be most unbusinesslike. indeed, I 
doubt whether it would have been successful, for the cupid of such 
person is arous by a sum which seem enormous, and the low cun 
which serv them in place of intellig immedi suggest that the 
object for which such an amount is offer must be worth at least 
double. Of course, when it is a matter of an ordinari curiosity--an old 
jug, a carv chest, or a queer brass lantern--on doe not much care; 
the cupid of the owner defeat it object, the collector laughs, and 
goe away, for he is awar that such thing are by no mean unique. but 
thi gem I fervent desir to possess; and as I did not see my way to 
give more than a hundredth part of it value, I wa consciou that 
all my, let us say, imagin and diplomat power would have to be 
exerted. I am sorri to say that I came to the conclus that I could 
not undertak to carri the matter through single-handed, and I 
determin to confid in my assistant, a young man name william 
robbins, whom I judg to be by no mean devoid of capacity. My idea wa 
that robbin should get himself up as a low-class dealer in preciou 
stones; he could patter a littl italian, and would go to the town in 
question and manag to see the gem we were after, possibl by offer 
some trifl articl of jewelri for sale, but that I left to be 
decided, then my work wa to begin, but I will not troubl you with a 
tale told twice over. In due course, then, robbin went off to itali 
with an assort of uncut stone and a few rings, and some jewelri I 
bought in birmingham, on purpos for hi expedition. A week later I 
follow him, travel leisurely, so that I wa a fortnight later in 
arriv at our common destination. there wa a decent hotel in the 
town, and on my inquir of the landlord whether there were mani 
stranger in the place, he told me veri few; he had heard there wa an 
englishman stay in a small tavern, a pedlar he said, who sold 
beauti trinket veri cheaply, and want to buy old rubbish. for five 
or six day I took life leisurely, and I must say I enjoy myself. It 
wa part of my plan to make the peopl think I wa an enorm rich 
man; and I knew that such item as the extravag of my meals, and the 
price of everi bottl of wine I drank, would not be suffered, as sancho 
panza put it, to rot in the landlord' breast. At the end of the week I 
wa fortun enough to make the acquaint of signor melini, the 
owner of the gem I coveted, at the café, and with hi readi hospit 
and my genial I wa soon establish as a friend of the house. On my 
third or fourth visit I manag to make the italian talk about the 
english pedlar, who, they said, spoke a most detest italian. 'but 
that doe not matter,' said the signora melini, 'for he ha beauti 
things, which he sell veri veri cheap.' 'I hope you may not find he ha 
cheat you,' I said, 'for I must tell you that english peopl give 
these fellow a veri wide berth. they usual make a great parad of the 
cheap of their goods, which often turn out to be doubl the price of 
better articl in the shops,' they would not hear of this, and signora 
melini insist on show me the three ring and the bracelet she had 
bought of the pedlar. she told me the price she had paid; and after 
scrutin the articl carefully, I had to confess that she had made 
a bargain, and inde robbin had sold her the thing at about fifti per 
cent below market value. I admir the trinket as I gave them back to 
the lady, and I hint that the pedlar must be a somewhat foolish 
specimen of hi class. two day later, as I wa take my vermouth at 
the café with signor melini, he led the convers back to the pedlar, 
and mention casual that he had shown the man a littl curiosity, for 
which he had made rather a handsom offer. 'mi dear sir,' I said, 'I 
hope you will be careful. I told you that the travel tradesman doe 
not bear a veri high reput in england; and notwithstand hi 
appar simplicity, thi fellow may turn out to be an arrant cheat. may 
I ask you what is the natur of the curios you have shown him?' He 
told me it wa a littl thing, a pretti littl stone with some figur 
cut on it: peopl said it wa old. 'I should like to examin it,' I 
replied; 'a it happen I have, seen a good deal of these gems. We have 
a fine collect of them in our museum at london.' In due cours I wa 
shown the article, and I held the gem I so covet between my fingers. I 
look at it coolly, and put it down carelessli on the table. 'would you 
mind tell me, signor,' I said, 'how much my fellow-countryman offer 
you for this?' 'well,' he said, 'mi wife say the man must be mad; he 
said he would give me twenti lire for it.' 

"I look at him quietly, and took up the gem and pretend to examin 
it in the light more carefully; I turn it over and over, and final 
pull out a magnifi glass from my pocket, and seem to search everi 
line in the cut with minutest scrutiny. 'mi dear sir,' I said at 
last, 'I am inclin to agre with signora melini. If thi gem were 
genuine, it would be worth some money; but as it happen to be a rather 
bad forgery, it is not worth twenti centesimi. It wa sophisticated, I 
should imagine, some time in the last century, and by a veri unskil 
hand.' 'then we had better get rid of it,' said melini. 'I never thought 
it wa worth anyth myself. Of cours I am sorri for the pedlar, but 
one must let a man know hi own trade. I shall tell him we will take the 
twenti lire.' 'excus me,' I said, 'the man want a lesson. It would be 
a chariti to give him one. tell him that you will not take anyth 
under eighti lire, and I shall be much surpris if he doe not close 
with you at once. 

"A day or two later I heard that the english pedlar had gone away, after 
debas the mind of the countri peopl with birmingham art jewelry; 
for I admit that the gold sleev link like kidney beans, the silver 
chain made appar after the pattern of a dog-chain, and the initi 
brooches, have alway been heavi on my conscience. I cannot acquit 
myself of have indirectli contribut to debauch the tast of a simpl 
folk; but I hope that the end I had in view may final outbal thi 
heavi charge. soon afterwards, I paid a farewel visit at the melinis, 
and the signor inform me with an oili chuckl that the plan I had 
suggest had been complet successful. I congratul him on hi 
bargain, and went away after express a wish that heaven might send 
mani such pedlar in hi path. 

"noth of interest occur on my return journey. I had arrang that 
robbin wa to meet me at a certain place on a certain day, and I went 
to the appoint full of the coolest confidence; the gem had been 
conquered, and I had onli to reap the fruit of victory. I am sorri to 
shake that trust in our common human natur which I am sure you possess, 
but I am compel to tell you that up to the present date I have never 
set eye on my man robbins, or on the antiqu gem in hi custody. I have 
found out that he actual arriv in london, for he wa seen three 
day befor my arriv in england by a pawnbrok of my acquaint 
consum hi favorit beverage, four ale, in the tavern where we met 
to-night. sinc then he ha not been heard of. I hope you will now 
pardon my curios as to the histori and adventur of dark young men 
with spectacles. you will, I am sure, feel for me in my position; the 
savor of life ha disappear for me; it is a bitter thought that I have 
rescu one of the most perfect and exquisit specimen of antiqu art 
from the hand of ignorant, and inde unscrupul persons, onli to 
deliv it into the keep of a man who is evid utterli devoid of 
the veri element of commerci morality." 

"mi dear sir," said dyson, "you will allow me to compliment you on your 
style; your adventur have interest me exceedingly. but, forgiv me, 
you just now use the word morality; would not some person take 
except to your own method of business? I can conceive, myself, flaw 
of a moral kind be found in the veri origin concept you have 
describ to me. I can imagin the puritan shrink in dismay from your 
scheme, pronounc it unscrupulous, nay, dishonest." 

mr. burton help himself, veri frankly, to some more whiskey. 

"your scrupl entertain me," he said. "perhap you have not gone veri 
deepli into these question of ethics. I have been compel to do so 
myself, just as I wa forc to master a simpl system of book-keeping. 
without book-keeping, and still more without a system of ethics, it is 
imposs to conduct a busi such as mine. but I assur you that I 
am often profoundli sadden as I pass through the crowd street and 
watch the world at work by the thought of how few amongst all these 
hurri individuals, black hatted, well dressed, educ we may 
presum sufficiently,--how few amongst them have ani reason system of 
morality. even you have not weigh the question; although you studi 
life and affairs, and to a certain extent penetr the veil and mask 
of the comedi of man, even you judg by empti conventions, and the fals 
money which is allow to pass current as sterl coin. allow me to 
play the part of socrates; I shall teach you noth that you do not 
know. I shall mere lay asid the wrap of prejudic and bad logic, 
and show you the real imag which you possess in your soul. come then. 
Do you allow that happi is anything?" 

"certainly," said dyson. 

"and happi is desir or undesirable?" 

"desir of course." 

"and what shall we call the man who give happiness? Is he not a 
philanthropist?" 

"I think so." 

"and such a person is praiseworthy, and the more praiseworthi in the 
proport of the person whom he make happy?" 

"bi all means." 

"so that he who make a whole nation happy, is praiseworthi in the 
extreme, and the action by which he give happi is the highest 
virtue?" 

"it appear so, O burton," said dyson, who found someth veri 
exquisit in the charact of hi visitor. 

"quit so; you find the sever conclus inevitable. well, appli them 
to the stori I have told, you. I confer happi on myself by 
obtain (a I thought) possess of the gem; I confer happi on 
the melini by get them eighti lire instead of an object for which 
they had not the slightest value, and I intend to confer happi on 
the whole british nation by sell the thing to the british museum, to 
say noth of the happi a profit of about nine thousand per cent 
would have confer on me. I assur you I regard robbin as an 
interfer with the cosmo and fair order of things. but that is 
nothing; you perceiv that I am an apostl of the veri highest morality; 
you have been forc to yield to argument." 

"there certainli seem a great deal in what you advance," said dyson. "I 
admit that I am a mere amateur of ethics, while you, as you say, have 
brought the most acut scrutini to bear on these perplex and doubt 
questions. I can well understand your anxieti to meet the fallaci 
robbins, and I congratul myself on the chanc which ha made us 
acquainted. but you will pardon my seem inhospitality, I see it is 
half past eleven, and I think you mention a train." 

"A thousand thanks, mr. dyson, I have just time, I see. I will look you 
up some even if I may. good-night." 




the decor imagination. 


In the cours of a few week dyson becam accustomed, to the constant 
incurs of the ingeni mr. burton, who show himself readi to drop 
in at all hours, not avers to refreshment, and a profound guid in the 
complic question of life. hi visit at onc terrifi and 
delight dyson, who could no longer seat himself at hi bureau secur 
from interrupt while he embark on literari undertakings, each one 
of which wa to be a masterpiece. On the other hand, it wa a vivid 
pleasur to be confront with view so highli original; and if here and 
there mr. burton' reason seem ting with fallacy, yet dyson 
freeli yield to the joy of strangeness, and never fail to give hi 
visitor a frank and hearti welcome. mr. burton' first inquiri wa 
alway after the unprincipl robbins, and he seem to feel the sting 
of disappoint when dyson told him that he had fail to meet thi 
outrag on all morality, as burton style him, vow that sooner or 
later he would take vengeanc on such a shameless betray of trust. 

one even they had sat togeth for some time discuss the 
possibl of lay down for thi present gener and our modern 
and intens complic order of society, some rule of social 
diplomacy, such as lord bacon gave to the courtier of king jame I. "it 
is a book to make," said mr. burton, "but who is there capabl of make 
it? I tell you peopl are long for such a book; it would bring 
fortun to it publisher. bacon' essay are exquisite, but they have 
now no practic application; the modern strategist can find but littl 
use in a treatis 'de Re militari,' written by a florentin in the 
fifteenth century. scarc more dissimilar are the social condit of 
bacon' time and our own; the rule that he lay down so exquisit for 
the courtier and diplomatist of jame the first' age will avail us 
littl in the rough-and-tumbl struggl of to-day. life, I am afraid, 
ha deteriorated; it give littl play for fine stroke such as formerli 
advanc men in the state. except in such busi as mine, where a 
chanc doe occur now and then, it ha all become, as I said, an affair 
of rough and tumble; men still desir to attain, it is true, but what is 
their _moyen de parvenir_? A mere imitation, and not a graciou one, of 
the art of the soap-vend and the proprietor of bake powder. when I 
think of these things, my dear dyson, I confess that I am tempt to 
despair of my century." 

"you are too pessimistic, my dear fellow; you set up too high a 
standard. certainly, I agre with you that the time are decad in 
mani ways. I admit a gener appear of squalor; it need much 
philosophi to extract the wonder and the beauti from the cromwel 
road or the nonconformist conscience. australian wine of fine burgundi 
character, the novel alik of the old women and the new women, popular 
journalism,--thes thing inde make for depression. yet we have our 
advantages. befor us is unfold the greatest spectacl the world ha 
ever seen,--th mysteri of the innumer unend streets, the strang 
adventur that must infal aris from so complic a press of 
interests. nay, I will say that he who ha stood in the way of a suburb 
and ha seen them stretch befor him all shining, void, and desol at 
noonday, ha not live in vain. such a sight is in realiti more 
wonder than ani perspect of bagdad or grand cairo. and, to set on 
one side the entertain histori of the gem which you told me, sure 
you must have had mani singular adventur in your own career?" 

"perhap not so mani as you would think; a good deal--th larger 
part--of my busi ha been as commonplac as linen-drapery. but of 
cours thing happen now and then. It is ten year sinc I have 
establish my agency, and I suppos that a hous and estat agent who 
had been in trade for an equal time could tell you some queer stories. 
but I must give you a sampl of my experi some night. 

"whi not to-night?" said dyson. "thi even seem to me admir 
adapt for an odd chapter. look out into the street; you can catch a 
view of it, if you crane your neck from that chair of yours. Is it not 
charming? the doubl row of lamp grow closer in the distance, the 
hazi outlin of the plane-tre in the square, and the light of the 
hansom swim to and fro, glide and vanishing; and above, the sky 
all clear and blue and shining. come, let us have one of your _cent 
nouvel nouvelles_." 

"mi dear dyson, I am delight to amus you." with these word mr. 
burton prefac the 




novel OF the iron maid. 


I think the most extraordinari event which I can recal took place about 
five year ago. I wa then still feel my way; I had declar for 
business, and attend regularli at my office, but I had not succeed 
in establish a realli profit connection, and consequ I had a 
good deal of leisur time on my hands. I have never thought fit to 
troubl you with the detail of my privat life; they would be entir 
devoid of interest. I must briefli say, however, that I had a numer 
circl of acquaintance, and wa never at a loss as to how to spend my 
evenings. I wa so fortun as to have friend in most of the rank of 
the social order; there is noth so unfortunate, to my mind, as a 
special circle, wherein a certain round of idea is continu 
travers and retraversed. I have alway tri to find out new type and 
person whose brain contain someth fresh to me; one may chanc to 
gain inform even from the convers of citi men on an omnibus. 
amongst my acquaint I knew a young doctor who live in a far 
outli suburb, and I use often to brave the intoler slow railway 
journey, to have the pleasur of listen to hi talk. one night we 
convers so eagerli togeth over our pipe and whiskey that the clock 
pass unnoticed, and when I glanc up I realiz with a shock that I 
had just five minut in which to catch the last tram. I made a dash for 
my hat and stick, and jump out of the hous and down the steps, and 
tore at full speed up the street. It wa no good, however; there wa a 
shriek of the engin whistle, and I stood there at the station door and 
saw far on the long dark line of the embank a red light shine and 
vanish, and a porter came down and shut the door with a bang. 

"how far to london?" I ask him. 

"A good nine mile to waterloo bridge;" and with that he went off. 

befor me wa the long suburban street, it dreari distanc mark by 
row of twinkl lamps, and the air wa poison by the faint sickli 
smell of burn bricks; it wa not a cheer prospect by ani means, 
and I had to walk through nine mile of such streets, desert as those 
of pompeii. I knew pretti well what direct to take; so I set out 
wearily, look at the stretch of lamp vanish in perspective; and 
as I walked, street after street branch off to right and left,--som 
far reach to distanc that seem endless, commun with, other 
system of thoroughfare; and some mere protoplasm streets, begin 
in orderli fashion with serri two-stori houses, and end suddenli 
in waste, and pits, and rubbish heaps, and field whenc the magic had 
departed. I have spoken of system of thoroughfare, and I assur you 
that, walk alon through these silent places, I felt phantasi grow 
on me, and some glamour of the infinite. there wa here. I felt, an 
immens as in the outer void, of the universe. I pass from unknown 
to unknown, my way mark by lamp like stars, and on either band wa an 
unknown world where myriad of men dwelt and slept, street lead into 
street, as it seem to world' end. At first the road by which I wa 
travel wa line with hous of unutter monotony,--a wall of 
gray brick pierc by two stori of windows, drawn close to the veri 
pavement. but by degre I notic an improvement: there were gardens, 
and these grew larger. the suburban builder began to allow himself a 
wider scope; and for a certain distanc each flight of step wa guard 
by twin lion of plaster, and scent of flower prevail over the fume 
of heat bricks. the road began to climb a hill, and, look up a side 
street, I saw the half moon rise over plane-trees, and there on the 
other side wa as if a white cloud had fallen, and the air around it wa 
sweeten as with incense; it wa a may-tre in full bloom. I press on 
stubbornly, listen for the wheel and the clatter of some belat 
hansom; but into that land of men who go to the citi in the morn and 
return in the evening, the hansom rare enters, and I had resign 
myself onc more to the walk, when I suddenli becam awar that some one 
wa advanc to meet me along the sidewalk. the man wa stroll 
rather aimlessly; and though the time and the place would have allow 
an unconvent style of dress, he wa vest in the ordinari frock 
coat, black tie, and silk hat of civilization. We met each other under 
the lamp, and, as often happen in thi great town, two casual 
passeng brought face to face found, each in the other an 
acquaintance. 

"mr. mathias, I think?" I said. 

"quit so. and you are frank burton. you know you are a man with a 
christian name, so I won't apolog for my familiarity. but may I ask 
where you are going?" 

I explain the situat to him, say I had travers a region as 
unknown to me as the darkest recess of africa. "I think I have onli 
about five mile farther," I concluded. 

"nonsense; you must come home with me. My hous is close by; in fact, I 
wa just take my even walk when we met. come along; I dare say you 
will find a makeshift bed easier than a five-mil walk." 

I let him take my arm and lead me along, though I wa a good deal 
surpris at so much genial from a man who was, after all, a mere 
casual club acquaintance. I suppos I had not spoken to mr. mathia 
half-a-dozen times; he wa a man who would sit silent in an armchair 
for hours, neither read nor smoking, but now and again moisten hi 
lip with hi tongu and smile queerli to himself. I confess he had 
never attract me, and on the whole I should have prefer to continu 
my walk. but he took my arm and led me up a side street, and stop at 
a door in a high wall. We pass through the still moonlit garden, 
beneath the black shadow of an old cedar, and into an old red brick 
hous with mani gables. I wa tire enough, and I sigh with relief as 
I let myself fall into a great leather armchair. you know the infern 
grit with which they strew the sidewalk in those suburban districts; it 
make walk a penance, and I felt my four-mil tramp had made me more 
weari than ten mile on an honest countri road. I look about the room 
with some curiosity. there wa a shade lamp which threw a circl of 
brilliant light on a heap of paper lie on an old brass-bound 
secretair of the last century; but the room wa all vagu and shadowy, 
and I could onli see that it wa long and low, and that it wa fill 
with indistinct object which might be furniture. mr. mathia sat down 
in a second armchair, and look about him with that odd smile of his. 
He wa a queer-look man, clean-shaven, and white to the lips. I 
should think hi age wa someth between fifti and sixty. 

"now I have got you here," he began, "I must inflict my hobbi on you. 
you knew I wa a collector? oh, yes, I have devot mani year to 
collect curiosities, which I think are realli curious. but we must 
have a better light." 

He advanc into the middl of the room, and lit a lamp which hung from 
the ceiling; and as the bright light flash round the wick, from everi 
corner and space there seem to start a horror. great wooden frame 
with complic apparatu of rope and pulley stood against the wall; 
a wheel of strang shape had a place besid a thing that look like a 
gigant gridiron. littl tabl glitter with bright steel instrument 
carelessli put down as if readi for use; a screw and vice loom out, 
cast ugli shadows; and in anoth nook wa a saw with cruel jag 
teeth. 

"yes," said mr. mathias; "they are, as you suggest, instrument of 
torture,--of tortur and death. some--many, I may say--hav been used; a 
few are reproduct after ancient examples. those knive were use for 
flaying; that frame is a rack, and a veri fine specimen. look at this; 
it come from venice. you see that sort of collar, someth like a big 
horse-shoe? well, the patient, let us call him, sat down quit 
comfortably, and the horse-sho wa neatli fit round hi neck. then 
the two end were join with a silken band, and the execution began 
to turn a handl connect with the band. the horse-sho contract veri 
gradual as the band tightened, and the turn continu till the man 
wa strangled. It all took place quietly, in one of those queer garret 
under the leads. but these thing are all european; the orient are, 
of course, much more ingenious. these are the chines contrivances. you 
have heard of the 'heavi death'? It is my hobby, thi sort of thing. Do 
you know, I often sit here, hour after hour, and medit over the 
collection. I fanci I see the face of the men who have suffered--fac 
lean with agoni and wet with sweat of death--grow distinct out of 
the gloom, and I hear the echo of their cri for mercy. but I must 
show you my latest acquisition. come into the next room." 

I follow mr. mathia out. the weari of the walk, the late hour, 
and the strang of it all, made me feel like a man in a dream; 
noth would have surpris me veri much. the second room wa as the 
first, crowd with ghastli instruments; but beneath the lamp wa a 
wooden platform, and a figur stood on it. It wa a larg statu of a 
nake woman, fashion in green bronze; the arm were stretch out, and 
there wa a smile on the lips; it might well have been intend for a 
venus, and yet there wa about the thing an evil and a deadli look. 

mr. mathia look at it complacently. "quit a work of art, isn't it?" 
he said. "it' made of bronze, as you see, but it ha long had the name 
of the iron maid. I got it from germany, and it wa onli unpack thi 
afternoon; indeed, I have not yet had time to open the letter of advice. 
you see that veri small knob between the breasts? well, the victim wa 
bound to the maid, the knob wa pressed, and the arm slowli tighten 
round the neck. you can imagin the result." 

As mr. mathia talked, he pat the figur affectionately. I had turn 
away, for I sicken at the sight of the man and hi loathsom treasure. 
there wa a slight click, of which I took no notice,--it wa not much 
louder than the tick of a clock; and then I heard a sudden whir, the 
nois of machineri in motion, and I face round. I have never forgotten 
the hideou agoni on mathias' face as those relentless arm tighten 
about hi neck; there wa a wild struggl as of a beast in the toils, 
and then a shriek that end in a choke groan. the whir nois had 
suddenli chang into a heavi droning. I tore with all my might at the 
bronz arms, and strove to wrench them apart, but I could do nothing. 
the head had slowli bent down, and the green lip were on the lip of 
mathias. 

Of cours I had to attend at the inquest. the letter which had 
accompani the figur wa found unopen on the studi table. the german 
firm of dealer caution their client to be most care in touch 
the iron maid, as the machineri had been put in thorough work order. 

for mani revolv week mr. burton delight dyson by hi agreeabl 
conversation, diversifi by anecdote, and interspers with the 
narrat of singular adventures. finally, however, he vanish as 
suddenli as he had appeared, and on the occas of hi last visit he 
contriv to loot a copi of hi namesake' anatomy. dyson, consid 
thi violent attack on the right of property, and certain glare 
inconsist in the talk of hi late friend, arriv at the 
conclus that hi stori were fabulous, and that the iron maid onli 
exist in the sphere of a decor imagination. 




the reclus OF bayswater. 


amongst the mani friend who were favor with the occasion pleasur 
of mr. dyson' societi wa mr. edgar russell, realist and obscur 
struggler, who occupi a small back room on the second floor of a hous 
in abingdon grove, not hill. turn off from the main street and 
walk a few pace onward, one wa consciou of a certain calm, a 
drowsi peace, which made the feet inclin to loiter; and thi wa ever 
the atmospher of abingdon grove. the hous stood a littl back, with 
garden where the lilac and laburnum and blood-r may blossom gayli 
in their seasons, and there wa a corner where an older hous in anoth 
street had manag to keep a back garden of real extent; a walled-in 
garden whenc there came a pleasant scent of green after the rain 
of earli summer, where old elm held memori of the open fields, where 
there wa yet sweet grass to walk on. the hous in abingdon grove 
belong chiefli to the nondescript stucco period of thirty-f year 
ago, toler built with passabl accommod for moder incomes; 
they had larg pass into the state of lodgings, and card bear 
the inscript "furnish apartments" were not infrequ over the 
doors. here, then, in a hous of suffici good appearance, mr. 
russel had establish himself; for he look upon the tradit 
dirt and squalor of grub street as a fals and obsolet convention, and 
preferred, as he said, to live within sight of green leaves. indeed, 
from hi room one had a magnific view of a long line of gardens, and 
a screen of poplar shut out the melancholi back premis of wilton 
street dure the summer months. mr. russel live chiefli on bread and 
tea, for hi mean were of the smallest; but when dyson came to see him, 
he would send out the slavey for six-ale, and dyson wa alway at 
liberti to smoke as much of hi own tobacco as he pleased. the landladi 
had been so unfortun as to have her drawing-room floor vacant for 
mani months; a card had long proclaim the void within; and dyson, when 
he walk up the step one even in earli autumn, had a sens that 
someth wa missing, and, look at the fanlight, saw the appeal 
card had disappeared. 

"you have let your first floor, have you?" he said, as he greet mr. 
russell. 

"yes; it wa taken about a fortnight ago by a lady." 

"indeed," said dyson, alway curious; "a young lady?" 

"yes, I believ so. she is a widow, and wear a thick crape veil. I have 
met her onc or twice on the stair and in the street, but I should not 
know her face." 

"well," said dyson, when the beer had arrived, and the pipe were in 
full blast, "and what have you been doing? Do you find the work get 
ani easier?" 

"alas!" said the young man, with an express of great gloom, "the life 
is a purgatory, and all but a hell. I write, pick out my words, 
weigh and balanc the forc of everi syllable, calcul the 
minutest effect that languag can produce, eras and rewriting, and 
spend a whole even over a page of manuscript. and then in the 
morn when I read what I have written--well, there is noth to be 
done but to throw it in the waste-pap basket if the verso ha been 
alreadi written on, or to put it in the drawer if the other side happen 
to be clean. when I have written a phrase which undoubtedli embodi a 
happi turn of thought, I find it dress up in feebl commonplace; and 
when the style is good, it serv onli to conceal the bald of 
superannu fancies. I sweat over my work, dyson,--everi finish line 
mean so much agony. I envi the lot of the carpent in the side street 
who ha a craft which he understands. when he get an order for a table, 
he doe not writh with anguish; but if I were so unlucki as to get an 
order for a book, I think I should go mad." 

"mi dear fellow, you take it all too seriously. you should let the ink 
flow more readily. abov all, firmli believe, when you sit down to 
write, that you are an artist, and that whatev you are about is a 
masterpiece. suppos idea fail you, say; as I heard one of our most 
exquisit artist say, "it' of no consequence; the idea are all there, 
at the bottom of that box of cigarettes." you, indeed, smoke tobacco, 
but the applic is the same. besides, you must have some happi 
moments, and these should be ampl consolation." 

"perhap you are right. but such moment are so few; and then there is 
the tortur of a gloriou concept matched, with execut beneath the 
standard of the famili stori paper. for instance, I wa happi for two 
hour a night or two ago; I lay awak and saw visions. but then the 
morning!" 

"what wa your idea?" 

"it seem to me a splendid one; I thought of balzac and the 'comédi 
humaine,' of zola and the rougon-macquart family. It dawn upon me that 
I would write the histori of a street. everi hous should form a volume. 
I fix upon the street, I saw each house, and read, as clearli as in 
letters, the physiolog and psycholog of each. the littl by-way 
stretch befor me in it actual shape,--a street that I know and have 
pass down a hundr times; with some twenti houses, prosper and 
mean, and lilac bush in purpl blossom; and yet it wa at the same 
time a symbol, a _via dolorosa_ of hope cherish and disappointed, of 
year of monoton exist without content or discontent, of 
tragedi and obscur sorrows; and on the door of one of those hous I 
saw the red stain of blood, and behind a window two shadows, blacken 
and faded, on the blind, as they sway on tighten cords,--th shadow 
of a man and a woman hang in a vulgar, gas-lit parlor. these were my 
fancies; but when pen touch paper, they shrivel and vanish away," 

"yes," said. dyson, "there is a lot in that. I envi you the pain of 
transmut vision into reality, and still more I envi you the day when 
you will look at your bookshelf and see twenti goodli book upon the 
shelves,--th seri complet and done forever. let me entreat you to 
have them bound in solid parchment, with gold lettering. It is the onli 
real cover for a valiant book. when I look in at the window of some 
choic shop, and see the bind of levant morocco, with pretti tool 
and panellings, and your sweet contrast of red and green, I say to 
myself, 'these are not books, but bibelots.' A book bound so--a true 
book, mind you--i like a gothic statu drape in brocad of lyons." 

"alas!" said russell, "we need not discuss the binding,--th book are 
not begun." 

the talk went on as usual till eleven o'clock, when dyson bade hi 
friend good-night. He knew the way downstairs, and walk down by 
himself; but greatli to hi surprise, as he cross the first-floor 
landing, the door open slightly, and a hand wa stretch out, 
beckoning. 

dyson wa not the man to hesit under such circumstances. In a moment 
he saw himself involv in adventure; and, as he told himself, the 
dyson had never disobey a lady' summons. softly, then, with due 
regard for the lady' honor, he would have enter the room, when a low 
but clear voic spoke to him,-- 

"go downstair and open the door, and shut it again rather loudly. then 
come up to me; and for heaven' sake, walk softly." 

dyson obey her commands,--not without some hesitation, for he wa 
afraid of meet the landladi or the maid on hi return journey. but 
walk like a cat, and make each step he trod on crack loudly, he 
flatter himself that he had escap observation; and as he gain the 
top of the stairs, the door open wide befor him, and he found himself 
in the lady' drawing-room, bow awkwardly. 

"pray be seated, sir. perhap thi chair will be the best; it wa the 
favor chair of my landlady' deceas husband. I would ask you to 
smoke, but the odor would betray me. I know my proceed must seem to 
you unconventional; but I saw you arriv thi evening, and I do not 
think you would refus to help a woman who is so unfortun as I am." 

mr. dyson look shyli at the young ladi befor him. she wa dress in 
deep mourning; but the piquant smile face and charm hazel eye ill 
accord with the heavi garments, and the moulder surfac of the 
crape. 

"madam," he said gallantly, "your instinct ha serv you well. We will 
not trouble, if you please, about the question of social conventions; 
the chivalr gentleman know noth of such matters. I hope I may be 
privileg to serv you." 

"you are veri kind to me, but I knew it would be so. alas, sir, I have 
had experi of life, and I am rare mistaken. yet man is too often 
so vile and so misjudg that I trembl even as I resolv to take 
thi step, which, for all I knew, might prove to be both desper and 
ruinous." 

"with me you have noth to fear," said dyson. "I wa nurtur in the 
faith of chivalry, and I have alway endeavor to rememb the proud 
tradit of my race. confid in me then, and count upon my secrecy, 
and, if it prove possible, you may reli on my help." 

"sir, I will not wast your time, which I am sure is valuable, by idl 
parleyings. learn, then, that I am a fugitive, and in hide here. I 
place myself in your power; you have but to describ my features, and I 
fall into the hand of my relentless enemy." 

mr. dyson wonder for a pass instant how thi could be; but he onli 
renew hi promis of silence, repeat that he would be the embodi 
spirit of dark concealment. 

"good," said the lady; "the orient fervor of your style is delightful. 
In the first place, I must disabus your mind of the convict that I 
am a widow. these gloomi vestment have been forc on me by strang 
circumstance; in plain language, I have deem it expedi to go 
disguised. you have a friend, I think, in the house,--mr. russell? He 
seem of a coy and retir nature." 

"excus me, madam," said dyson, "he is not coy, but he is a realist; and 
perhap you are awar that no carthusian monk can emul the cloistral 
seclus in which a realist novelist love to shroud himself. It is 
hi way of observ human, nature." 

"well, well," said the lady; "all this, though deepli interest is not 
german to our affair. I must tell you my history." 

with these word the young ladi proceed to relat the 




novel OF the white powder. 


My name is leicester; my father. major gener wyn leicester, a 
distinguish offic of artillery, succumb five year ago to a 
complic liver complaint acquir in the deadli climat of india. A 
year later my onli brother, francis, came home after an except 
brilliant career at the university, and settl down with the resolut 
of a hermit to master what ha been well call the great legend of the 
law. He wa a man who seem to live in utter indiffer to everyth 
that is call pleasure; and though he wa handsom than most men, and 
could talk as merrili and wittili as if he were a mere vagabond, he 
avoid society, and shut himself up in a larg room at the top of the 
hous to make himself a lawyer. ten hour a day of hard read wa at 
first hi allot portion; from the first light in the east to the late 
afternoon he remain shut up with hi books, take a hasti half-hour' 
lunch with me as if he grudg the wast of the moments, and go out 
for a short walk when it began to grow dusk. I thought that such 
relentless applic must be injurious, and tri to cajol him from 
the crab text-books; but hi ardor seem to grow rather than 
diminish, and hi daili tale of hour increased. I spoke to him 
seriously, suggest some occasion relaxation, if it were but an idl 
afternoon with a harmless novel; but he laughed, and said that he read 
about feudal tenur when he felt in need of amusement, and scof at 
the notion of theatres, or a month' fresh confess that he look 
well, and seem not to suffer from hi labors; but I knew that such 
unnatur toil would take reveng at last, and I wa not mistaken. A 
look of anxieti began to lurk about hi eyes, and he seem languid, and 
at last he avow that he wa no longer in perfect health; he wa 
troubled, he said, with a sensat of dizziness, and awok now and then 
of night from fear dreams, terrifi and cold with ici sweats. "I am 
take care of myself," he said; "so you must not trouble. I pass the 
whole of yesterday afternoon in idleness, lean back in that 
comfort chair you gave me, and scribbl nonsens on a sheet of 
paper. no, no; I will not overdo my work. I shall be well enough in a 
week or two, depend upon it." 

yet, in spite of hi assurances, I could see that he grew no better, but 
rather worse; he would enter the drawing-room with a face all miser 
wrinkl and despondent, and endeavor to look gayli when my eye fell on 
him, and I thought such symptom of evil omen, and wa frighten 
sometim at the nervou irrit of hi movements, and at glanc 
which I could not decipher. much against hi will, I prevail on him to 
have medic advice, and with an ill grace he call in our old doctor. 

dr. haberden cheer me after hi examin of hi patient. 

"there is noth realli much amiss," he said to me. "no doubt he read 
too hard, and eat hastily, and then goe back again to hi book in too 
great a hurry; and the natur consequ is some digest trouble, 
and a littl mischief in the nervou system. but I think--i do, indeed, 
miss leicester--that we shall be abl to set thi all right. I have 
written him a prescript which ought to do great things. So you have 
no caus for anxiety." 

My brother insist on have the prescript made up by a chemist in 
the neighborhood; it wa an odd old-fashion shop, devoid of the 
studi coquetri and calcul glitter that make so gay a show on the 
counter and shelv of the modern apothecary; but franci like the old 
chemist, and believ in the scrupul puriti of hi drugs. the 
medicin wa sent in due course, and I saw that my brother took it 
regularli after lunch and dinner. It wa an innocent-look white 
powder, of which a littl wa dissolved, in a glass of cold water. I 
stir it in, and it seem to disappear, leav the water clear and 
colorless. At first franci seem to benefit greatly; the weari 
vanish from hi face, and he becam more cheer than he had ever 
been sinc the time when he left school; he talk gayli of reform 
himself, and avow to me that he had wast hi time. 

"I have given too mani hour to law," he said, laughing; "I think you 
have save me in the nick of time. come, I shall be lord chancellor yet, 
but I must not forget life. you and I will have a holiday togeth 
befor long; we will go to pari and enjoy ourselves, and keep away from 
the bibliothèqu nationale." 

I confess myself delight with the prospect. 

"when shall we go?" I said. "I can start the day after to-morrow, if you 
like." 

"ah, that is perhap a littl too soon; after all, I do not know london 
yet, and I suppos a man ought to give the pleasur of hi own countri 
the first choice. but we will go off togeth in a week or two, so tri 
and furbish up your french. I onli know law french myself, and I am 
afraid that wouldn't do." 

We were just finish dinner, and he quaf off hi medicin with a 
parad of carous as if it had been wine from some choicest bin. 

"ha it ani particular taste?" I said. 

"no; I should not know I wa not drink water," and he got up from hi 
chair, and began to pace up and down the room as if he were undecid as 
to what he should do next. 

"shall we have coffe in the drawing-room," I said, "or would you like 
to smoke?" 

"no; I think I will take a turn, it seem a pleasant evening. look at 
the afterglow; why, it is as if a great citi were burn in flames, and 
down there between the dark hous it is rain blood fast, fast. yes, 
I will go out. I may be in soon, but I shall take my key, so good-night, 
dear, if I don't see you again." 

the door slam behind him, and I saw him walk lightli down the street, 
swing hi malacca cane, and I felt grate to dr. haberden for such 
an improvement. 

I believ my brother came home veri late that night; but he wa in a 
merri mood the next morning. 

"I walk on without think where I wa going," he said, "enjoy the 
fresh of the air, and liven by the crowd as I reach more 
frequent quarters. and then I met an old colleg friend, orford, in 
the press of the pavement, and then--well, we enjoy ourselves. I have 
felt what it is to be young and a man, I find I have blood in my veins, 
as other men have. I made an appoint with orford for to-night; there 
will be a littl parti of us at the restaurant. yes, I shall enjoy 
myself for a week or two, and hear the chime at midnight, and then we 
will go for our littl trip together." 

such wa the transmut of my brother' charact that in a few day 
he becam a lover of pleasure, a careless and merri idler of western 
pavements, a hunter out of snug restaurants, and a fine critic of 
fantast dancing; he grew fat befor my eyes, and said no more of 
paris, for he had clearli found hi paradis in london. I rejoiced, and 
yet wonder a little, for there was, I thought, someth in hi gayeti 
that indefinit displeas me, though I could not have defin my 
feeling. but by degre there came a change; he return still in the 
cold, hour of the morning, but I heard no more about hi pleasures, and 
one morn as we sat at breakfast together, I look suddenli into hi 
eye and saw a stranger befor me. 

"oh, francis!" I cried; "oh, francis, francis, what have you done?" and 
rend sob cut the word short, and I went weep out of the room, 
for though I knew nothing, yet I knew all, and by some odd play of 
thought I rememb the even when he first went abroad to prove hi 
manhood, and the pictur of the sunset sky glow befor me; the cloud 
like a citi in burn flames, and the rain of blood. yet I did battl 
with such thoughts, resolv that perhaps, after all, no great harm 
had been done, and in the even at dinner I resolv to press him to 
fix a day for our holiday in paris. We had talk easili enough, and my 
brother had just taken hi medicine, which he had continu all the 
while. I wa about to begin my topic, when the word form in my mind 
vanished, and I wonder for a second what ici and intoler weight 
oppress my heart and suffoc me as with the unutter horror of 
the coffin-lid nail down on the living. 

We had dine without candles, and the room had slowli grown from 
twilight to gloom, and the wall and corner were indistinct in the 
shadow. but from where I sat I look out into the street; and as I 
thought of what I would say to francis, the sky began to flush and 
shine, as it had done on a well-rememb evening, and in the gap 
between two dark mass that were hous an aw pageantri of flame 
appeared. lurid whorl of writh cloud, and utter depth burning, and 
gray mass like the fume blown from a smoke city, and an evil glori 
blaze far abov shot with tongu of more ardent fire, and below as if 
there were a deep pool of blood. I look down to where my brother sat 
face me, and the word were shape on my lips, when I saw hi hand 
rest on the table. between the thumb and forefing of the close 
hand, there wa a mark, a small patch about the size of a sixpence, and 
somewhat of the color of a bad bruise. yet, by some sens I cannot 
define, I knew that what I saw wa no bruis at all. oh, if human flesh 
could burn with flame, and if flame could be black as pitch, such wa 
that befor me! without thought or fashion of words, gray horror 
shape within me at the sight, and in an inner cell it wa known to be a 
brand. for a moment the stain sky becam dark as midnight, and when 
the light return to me, I wa alon in the silent room, and soon after 
I heard my brother go out. 

late as it was, I put on my bonnet and went to dr. haberden, and in hi 
great consulting-room, ill-light by a candl which the doctor brought 
in with him, with stammer lips, and a voic that would break in spite 
of my resolve, I told him all; from the day on which my brother began to 
take the medicin down to the dread thing I had seen scarc half an 
hour before. 

when I had done, the doctor look at me for a minut with an express 
of great piti on hi face. 

"mi dear miss leicester," he said, "you have evid been anxiou 
about your brother; you have been worri over him, I am sure. come, 
now, is it not so? 

"I have certainli been anxious," I said. "for the last week or two I 
have not felt at ease." 

"quit so; you know, of course, what a queer thing the brain is?" 

"I understand what you mean; but I wa not deceived. I saw what I have 
told you with my own eyes." 

"yes, yes, of course. but your eye had been stare at that veri 
curiou sunset we had to-night. that is the onli explanation. you will 
see it in the proper light to-morrow, I am sure. but, remember, I am 
alway readi to give ani help that is in my power; do not scrupl to 
come to me, or to send for me if you are in ani distress." 

I went away but littl comforted, all confus and terror and sorrow, 
not know where to turn. when my brother and I met the next day, I 
look quickli at him, and noticed, with a sicken at heart, that the 
right hand, the hand on which I had clearli seen the patch as of a black 
fire, wa wrap up with a handkerchief. 

"what is the matter with your hand, francis?" I said in a steadi voice. 

"noth of consequence. I cut a finger last night, and it bled rather 
awkwardly, so I did it up roughli to the best of my ability." 

"I will do it neatli for you, if you like." 

"no, thank you, dear, thi will answer veri well. suppos we have 
breakfast; I am quit hungry." 

We sat down, and I watch him. He scarc ate or drank at all, but 
toss hi meat to the dog when he thought my eye were turn away; and 
there wa a look in hi eye that I had never yet seen, and the thought 
fled across my mind that it wa a look that wa scarc human. I wa 
firmli convinc that aw and incred as wa the thing I had seen 
the night before, yet it wa no illusion, no glamour of bewild 
sense, and in the cours of the morn I went again to the doctor' 
house. 

He shook hi head with an air puzzl and incredulous, and seem to 
reflect for a few minutes. 

"and you say he still keep up the medicine? but why? As I understand, 
all the symptom he complain of have disappear long ago; whi should 
he go on take the stuff when he is quit well? and by the bye where 
did he get it made up? At sayce's? I never send ani one there; the old 
man is get careless. suppos you come with me to the chemist's; I 
should like to have some talk with him." 

We walk togeth to the shop. old sayc knew dr. haberden, and wa 
quit readi to give ani information. 

"you have been send that in to mr. leicest for some weeks, I think, 
on my prescription," said the doctor, give the old man a pencil 
scrap of paper. 

the chemist put on hi great spectacl with trembl uncertainty, and 
held up the paper with a shake hand. 

"oh, yes," he said, "I have veri littl of it left; it is rather an 
uncommon drug, and I have had it in stock some time. I must get in some 
more, if mr. leicest goe on with it." 

"kindli let me have a look at the stuff," said haberden; and the chemist 
gave him a glass bottle. He took out the stopper and smelt the contents, 
and look strang at the old man. 

"where did you get this?" he said, "and what is it? for one thing, mr. 
sayce, it is not what I prescribed. yes, yes, I see the label is right 
enough, but I tell you thi is not the drug." 

"I have had it a long time," said the old man, in feebl terror. "I got 
it from burbage' in the usual way. It is not prescrib often, and I 
have had it on the shelf for some years. you see there is veri littl 
left." 

"you had better give it to me," said haberden. "I am afraid someth 
wrong ha happened." 

We went out of the shop in silence, the doctor carri the bottl 
neatli wrap in paper under hi arm. 

"dr. haberden," I said when we had walk a littl way--"dr. haberden." 

"yes," he said, look at me gloomili enough. 

"I should like you to tell me what my brother ha been take twice a 
day for the last month or so." 

"frankly, miss leicester, I don't know. We will speak of thi when we 
get to my house," 

We walk on quickli without anoth word till we reach dr. 
haberden's. He ask me to sit down, and began pace up and down the 
room, hi face cloud over, as I could see, with no common fears. 

"well," he said at length, "thi is all veri strange; it is onli natur 
that you should feel alarmed, and I must confess that my mind is far 
from easy. We will put aside, if you please, what you told me last night 
and thi morning, but the fact remain that for the last few week mr. 
leicest ha been impregn hi system with a drug which is 
complet unknown to me. I tell you, it is not what I ordered; and what 
that stuff in the bottl realli is remain to be seen." 

He undid the wrapper, and cautious tilt a few grain of the white 
powder on to a piec of paper, and peer curious at it. 

"yes," he said, "it is like the sulphat of quinine, as you say; it is 
flaky. but smell it." 

He held the bottl to me, and I bent over it. It wa a strang sickli 
smell, vapor and overpowering, like some strong anæsthetic. 

"I shall have it analyzed," said haberden. "I have a friend who ha 
devot hi whole life to chemistri as a science. then we shall have 
someth to go upon. no, no, say no more about that other matter; I 
cannot listen to that, and take my advic and think no more about it 
yourself." 

that even my brother did not go out as usual after dinner. 

"I have had my fling," he said with a queer laugh; "and I must go back 
to my old ways. A littl law will be quit a relax after so sharp a 
dose of pleasure," and he grin to himself, and soon after went up to 
hi room. hi hand wa still all bandaged. 

dr. haberden call a few day later. 

"I have no special news to give you," he said. "chamber is out of town, 
so I know no more about that stuff than you do. but I should like to see 
mr. leicest if he is in." 

"he is in hi room," I said; "I will tell him you are here." 

"no, no, I will go up to him; we will have a littl quiet talk together. 
I dare say that we have made a good deal of fuss about veri little; for, 
after all, whatev the white powder may be, it seem to have done him 
good." 

the doctor went upstairs, and stand in the hall I heard hi knock, 
and the open and shut of the door; and then I wait in the 
silent hous for an hour, and the still grew more and more intens 
as the hand of the clock crept round. then there sound from abov the 
nois of a door shut sharply, and the doctor wa come down the stairs. 
hi footstep cross the hall, and there wa a paus at the door. I 
drew a long sick breath with difficulty, and saw my face white in a 
littl mirror, and he came in and stood at the door. there wa an 
unutter horror shine in hi eyes; he steadi himself by hold 
the back of a chair with one hand, and hi lower lip trembl like a 
horse's, and he gulp and stammer unintellig sound befor he 
spoke. 

"I have seen that man," he began in a dri whisper. "I have been sit 
in hi presenc for the last hour. My god! and I am aliv and in my 
senses! I, who have dealt with death all my life, and have dabbl with 
the melt ruin of the earthli tabernacle. but not this! oh, not this," 
and he cover hi face with hi hand as if to shut out the sight 
of someth befor him. 

"do not send for me again, miss leicester," he said with more composure. 
"I can do noth in thi house. good-bye." 

As I watch him totter down the step and along the pavement toward 
hi house, it seem to me that he had age by ten year sinc the 
morning. 

My brother remain in hi room. He call out to me in a voic I hardli 
recognized, that he wa veri busy, and would like hi meal brought to 
hi door and left there, and I gave the order to the servants. from that 
day it seem as if the arbitrari concept we call time had been 
annihil for me. I live in an ever present sens of horror, go 
through the routin of the hous mechanically, and onli speak a few 
necessari word to the servants. now and then I went out and pace the 
street for an hour or two and came home again; but whether I were 
without or within, my spirit delay befor the close door of the upper 
room, and, shuddering, wait for it to open. I have said that I 
scarc reckon time, but I suppos it must have been a fortnight 
after dr. haberden' visit that I came home from my stroll a littl 
refresh and lightened. the air wa sweet and pleasant, and the hazi 
form of green leaves, float cloud-lik in the square, and the smell 
of blossoms, had charm my senses, and I felt happier and walk more 
briskly. As I delay a moment at the verg of the pavement, wait for 
a van to pass by befor cross over to the house, I happen to look 
up at the windows, and instantli there wa the rush and swirl of deep 
cold water in my ears, and my heart leapt up, and fell down, down as 
into a deep hollow, and I wa amaz with a dread and terror without 
form or shape. I stretch out a hand blindli through fold of thick 
darkness, from the black and shadowi valley, and held myself from 
falling, while the stone beneath my feet rock and sway and tilted, 
and the sens of solid thing seem to sink away from under me. I had 
glanc up at the window of my brother' study, and at that moment the 
blind wa drawn aside, and someth that had life stare out into the 
world. nay, I cannot say I saw a face or ani human likeness; a live 
thing, two eye of burn flame glare at me, and they were in the 
midst of someth as formless as my fear, the symbol and presenc of 
all evil and all hideou corruption. I stood shudder and quak as 
with the grip of ague, sick with unspeak agoni of fear and 
loathing, and for five minut I could not summon forc or motion to my 
limbs. when I wa within the door, I ran up the stair to my brother' 
room, and knocked. 

"francis, francis," I cried, "for heaven' sake answer me. what is the 
horribl thing in your room? cast it out, francis, cast it from you!" 

I heard a nois as of feet shuffl slowli and awkwardly, and a 
choking, gurgl sound, as if some one wa struggl to find 
utterance, and then the nois of a voice, broken and stifled, and word 
that I could scarc understand. 

"there is noth here," the voic said, "pray do not disturb me. I am 
not veri well to-day." 

I turn away, horrifi and yet helpless. I could do nothing, and I 
wonder whi franci had lie to me, for I had seen the appear 
beyond the glass too plainli to be deceived, though it wa but the sight 
of a moment. and I sat still, consciou that there had been someth 
else, someth I had seen in the first flash of terror befor those 
burn eye had look at me. suddenli I remembered; as I lift my 
face the blind wa be drawn back, and I had had an instant' glanc 
of the thing that wa move it, and in my recollect I knew that a 
hideou imag wa engrav forev on my brain. It wa not a hand: there 
were no finger that held the blind, but a black stump push it aside; 
the moulder outlin and the clumsi movement as of a beast' paw had 
glow into my sens befor the darkl wave of terror had 
overwhelm me as I went down quick into the pit. My mind wa aghast at 
the thought of this, and of the aw presenc that dwelt with my 
brother in hi room; I went to hi door and cri to him again, but no 
answer came. that night one of the servant came up to me and told me in 
a whisper that for three day food had been regularli place at the door 
and left untouched; the maid had knocked, but had receiv no answer; 
she had heard the nois of shuffl feet that I had noticed. day after 
day went by, and still my brother' meal were brought to hi door and 
left untouched; and though I knock and call again and again, I could 
get no answer. the servant began to talk to me; it appear they were 
as alarm as I. the cook said that when my brother first shut himself 
up in hi room, she use to hear him come out at night and go about the 
house; and once, she said, the hall door had open and close again, 
but for sever night she had heard no sound. the climax came at last. 
It wa in the dusk of the evening, and I wa sit in the darken 
dreari room when a terribl shriek jar and rang harshli out of the 
silence, and I heard a frighten scurri of feet dash down the 
stairs. I waited, and the servant maid stagger into the room and face 
me, white and trembling. 

"O miss helen," she whispered. "oh, for the lord' sake, miss helen, 
what ha happened? look at my hand, miss; look at that hand!" I drew her 
to the window, and saw there wa a black wet stain upon her hand. 

"I do not understand you," I said. "will you explain to me?" 

"I wa do your room just now," she began. "I wa turn down the 
bedclothes, and all of a sudden there wa someth fell upon my hand 
wet, and I look up, and the ceil wa black and drip on me." 

I look bard at her, and bit my lip. "come with me," I said. "bring 
your candl with you." 

the room I slept in wa beneath my brother's, and as I went in I felt I 
wa trembling. I look up at the ceiling, and saw a patch, all black 
and wet and a dew of black drop upon it, and a pool of horribl liquor 
soak into the white bedclothes. 

I ran upstair and knock loudly. 

"O francis, francis, my dear brother," I cried, "what ha happen to 
you?" 

and I listened. there wa a sound of choking, and a nois like water 
bubbl and regurgitating, but noth else, and I call louder, but 
no answer came. 

In spite of what dr. haberden had said, I went to him, and with tear 
stream down my cheeks, I told him of all that had happened, and he 
listen to me with a face set hard and grim. 

"for your father' sake," he said at last, "I will go with you, though I 
can do nothing." 

We went out together; the street were dark and silent, and heavi with 
heat and a drought of mani weeks. I saw the doctor' face white under 
the gas-lamps, and when we reach the hous hi hand wa shaking. We 
did not hesitate, but went upstair directly. I held the lamp, and he 
call out in a loud, determin voice:-- 

"mr. leicester, do you hear me? I insist on see you. answer me at 
once." 

there wa no answer, but we both heard that choke nois I have 
mentioned. 

"mr. leicester, I am wait for you. open the door thi instant, or I 
shall break it down." and he call a third time in a voic that rang 
and echo from the walls. 

"mr. leicester! for the last time I order you to open the door." 

"ah!" he said, after a paus of heavi silence, "we are wast time 
here. will you be so kind as to get me a poker, or someth of the 
kind?" 

I ran into a littl room at the back where odd articl were kept, and 
found a heavi adze-lik tool that I thought might serv the doctor' 
purpose. 

"veri good," he said, "that will do, I dare say. I give you notice, mr. 
leicester," he cri loudli at the keyhole, "that I am now about to break 
into your room." 

then I heard the wrench of the adze, and the woodwork split and crack 
under it, and with a loud crash the door suddenli burst open; and for a 
moment we start back aghast at a fear scream cry, no human 
voice, but as the roar of a monster, that burst forth inarticul and 
struck at us out of the darkness. 

"hold the lamp," said the doctor, and we went in and glanc quickli 
round the room. "there it is," said dr. haberden, draw a quick 
breath; "look, in that corner." 

I looked, and a pang of horror seiz my heart as with a white-hot iron. 
there upon the floor wa a dark and putrid mass, seeth with 
corrupt and hideou rottenness, neither liquid nor solid, but 
melt and chang befor our eyes, and bubbl with unctuou oili 
bubbl like boil pitch. and out of the midst of it shone two burn 
point like eyes, and I saw a writh and stir as of limbs, and 
someth move and lift up that might have been an arm. the doctor 
took a step forward, and rais the iron bar and struck at the burn 
points, and drove in the weapon, and struck again and again in a furi of 
loathing. At last the thing wa quiet. 

* * * * * 

A week or two later, when I had to some extent recov from the 
terribl shock, dr. haberden came to see me. 

"I have sold my practice," he began, "and to-morrow I am sail on a 
long voyage. I do not know whether I shall ever return to england; in 
all probabl I shall buy a littl land in california, and settl 
there for the remaind of my life. I have brought you thi packet, 
which you may open and read when you feel abl to do so. It contain the 
report of dr. chamber on what I submit to him. good-bye, miss 
leicester, good-bye." 

when he wa gone, I open the envelope; I could not wait, and proceed 
to read the paper within. here is the manuscript; and if you will allow 
me, I will read you the astound stori it contains. 

"mi dear haberden," the letter began, "I have delay inexcus in 
answer your question as to the white substanc you sent me. To tell 
you the truth, I have hesit for some time as to what cours I should 
adopt, for there is a bigotri and an orthodox standard in physic 
scienc as in theology, and I knew that if I told you the truth I 
should offend root prejudic which I onc held dear myself. however, 
I have determin to be plain with you, and first I must enter into a 
short person explanation. 

"you have known me, haberden, for mani year as a scientif man; you 
and I have often talk of our profess together, and discuss the 
hopeless gulf that open befor the feet of those who think to attain to 
truth by ani mean whatsoever, except the beaten way of experi and 
observation, in the sphere of materi things. I rememb the scorn with 
which you have spoken to me of men of scienc who have dabbl a littl 
in the unseen, and have timidli hint that perhap the sens are not, 
after all, the eternal, impenetr bound of all knowledge, the 
everlast wall beyond which no human be ha ever passed. We have 
laugh togeth heartily, and I think justly, at the "occult" folli 
of the day, disguis under variou names,--th mesmerisms, 
spiritualisms, materializations, theosophies, all the rabbl rant of 
imposture, with their machineri of poor trick and feebl conjuring, the 
true back-parlor magic of shabbi london streets. yet, in spite of what I 
have said, I must confess to you that I am no materialist, take the 
word of cours in it usual signification. It is now mani year sinc I 
have convinc myself, convinc myself a sceptic remember, that the old 
iron-bound theori is utterli and entir false. perhap thi confess 
will not wound you so sharpli as it would have done twenti year ago; 
for I think you cannot have fail to notic that for some time 
hypothes have been advanc by men of pure scienc which are noth 
less than transcendental, and I suspect that most modern chemist and 
biologist of reput would not hesit to subscrib the _dictum_ of the 
old schoolman, _omnia exeunt in mysterium_, which means, I take it, that 
everi branch of human knowledg if trace up to it sourc and final 
principl vanish into mystery. I need not troubl you now with a 
detail account of the pain step which led me to my conclusions; a 
few simpl experi suggest a doubt as to my then standpoint, and a 
train of thought that rose from circumst compar trifl 
brought me far. My old concept of the univers ha been swept away, 
and I stand in a world that seem as strang and aw to me as the 
endless wave of the ocean seen for the first time, shining, from a peak 
in darien. now I know that the wall of sens that seem so 
impenetrable, that seem to loom up abov the heaven and to be found 
below the depths, and to shut us in forevermore, are no such everlast 
impass barrier as we fancied, but thinnest and most airi veil that 
melt away befor the seeker, and dissolv as the earli mist of the 
morn about the brooks. I know that you never adopt the extrem 
materialist position: you did not go about tri to prove a univers 
negative, for your logic sens withheld you from that crown 
absurdity; yet I am sure that you will find all that I am say strang 
and repel to your habit of thought. yet, haberden, what I tell you 
is the truth, nay, to adopt our common language, the sole and scientif 
truth, verifi by experience; and the univers is verili more splendid 
and more aw than we use to dream. the whole universe, my friend, is 
a tremend sacrament; a mystic, ineff forc and energy, veil by 
an outward form of matter; and man, and the sun and the other stars, and 
the flower of the grass, and the crystal in the test-tube, are each and 
everi one as spiritual, as material, and subject to an inner working. 

"you will perhap wonder, haberden, whenc all thi tends; but I think a 
littl thought will make it clear. you will understand that from such a 
standpoint the whole view of thing is changed, and what we thought 
incred and absurd may be possibl enough. In short, we must look at 
legend and belief with other eyes, and be prepar to accept tale that 
had becom mere fables. indeed, thi is no such great demand. after all, 
modern scienc will conced as much, in a hypocrit manner. you must 
not, it is true, believ in witchcraft, but you may credit hypnotism; 
ghost are out of date, but there is a good deal to be said for the 
theori of telepathy. give a superstit a greek name, and believ in 
it, should almost be a proverb. 

"so much for my person explanation. you sent me, haberden, a phial, 
stopper and sealed, contain a small quantiti of a flaki white 
powder, obtain from a chemist who ha been dispens it to one of 
your patients. I am not surpris to hear that thi powder refus to 
yield ani result to your analysis. It is a substanc which wa known to 
a few mani hundr year ago, but which I never expect to have 
submit to me from the shop of a modern apothecary. there seem no 
reason to doubt the truth of the man' tale; he no doubt got, as he 
says, the rather uncommon salt you prescrib from the wholesal 
chemist's; and it ha probabl remain on hi shelf for twenti years, 
or perhap longer. here what we call chanc and coincid begin to 
work; dure all these year the salt in the bottl wa expos to 
certain recur variat of temperature, variat probabl rang 
from 40° to 80°. and, as it happens, such changes, recur year after 
year at irregular intervals, and with vari degre of intens and 
duration, have constitut a process, and a process so complic and 
so delicate, that I question whether modern scientif apparatu 
direct with the utmost precis could produc the same result. the 
white powder you sent me is someth veri differ from the drug you 
prescribed; it is the powder from which the wine of the sabbath, the 
_vinum sabbati_ wa prepared. No doubt you have read of the witches' 
sabbath, and have laugh at the tale which terrifi our ancestors; 
the black cats, and the broomsticks, and doom pronounc against some 
old woman' cow. sinc I have known the truth I have often reflect 
that it is on the whole a happi thing that such burlesqu as thi is 
believed, for it serv to conceal much that it is better should not be 
known generally. however, if you care to read the appendix to payn 
knight' monograph, you will find that the true sabbath wa someth 
veri different, though the writer ha veri nice refrain from 
print all he knew. the secret of the true sabbath were the secret 
of remot time surviv into the middl ages, secret of an evil 
scienc which exist long befor aryan man enter europe. men and 
women, seduc from their home on speciou pretences, were met by 
be well qualifi to assume, as they did assume, the part of devils, 
and taken by their guid to some, desol and lone place, known to 
the initi by long tradit and unknown to all else. perhap it wa a 
cave in some bare and wind-swept hill; perhap some inmost recess of a 
great forest, and there the sabbath wa held. there, in the blackest 
hour of night, the _vinum sabbati_ wa prepared, and thi evil graal wa 
pour forth and offer to the neophytes, and they partook of an 
infern sacrament; _sument calicem principi inferorum,_ as an old 
author well express it. and suddenly, each one that had drunk found 
himself attend by a companion, a shape of glamour and unearthli 
allurement, beckon him apart to share in joy more exquisite, more 
pierc than the thrill of ani dream, to the consumm of the 
marriag of the sabbath. It is hard to write of such thing as these, 
and chiefli becaus that shape that allur with loveli wa no 
hallucination, but, aw as it is to express, the man himself. By the 
power of that sabbath wine, a few grain of white powder thrown into a 
glass of water, the hous of life wa riven asunder, and the human 
triniti dissolved, and the worm which never dies, that which lie 
sleep within us all, wa made tangibl and an extern thing, and 
cloth with a garment of flesh. and then in the hour of midnight, the 
primal fall wa repeat and represented, and the aw thing veil in 
the mytho of the tree in the garden wa done anew. such wa the 
_nuptiæ sabbati_. 

"I prefer to say no more; you, haberden, know as well as I do that the 
most trivial law of life are not to be broken with impunity; and for so 
terribl an act as this, in which the veri inmost place of the templ 
wa broken open and defiled, a terribl vengeanc followed. what began 
with corrupt end also with corruption." 

* * * * * 

underneath is the follow in dr. haberden' writing:-- 

"the whole of the abov is unfortun strictli and entir true. 
your brother confess all to me on that morn when I saw him in hi 
room. My attent wa first attract to the bandag hand, and I 
forc him to show it me. what I saw made me, a medic man of mani 
year standing, grow sick with loathing; and the stori I wa forc to 
listen to wa infinit more fright than I could have believ 
possible. It ha tempt me to doubt the etern good which can 
permit natur to offer such hideou possibilities; and if you had not 
with your own eye seen the end, I should have said to you--disbeliev 
it all. I have not, I think, mani more week to live, but you are young, 
and may forget all this. 

"joseph haberden, m.d." 

In the cours of two or three month I heard that dr. haberden had die 
at sea, shortli after the ship left england. 

miss leicest ceas speaking, and look pathet at dyson, who 
could not refrain from exhibit some symptom of uneasiness. 

He stutter out some broken phrase express of hi deep interest in 
her extraordinari history, and then said with a better grace-- 

"but, pardon me, miss leicester, I understood you were in some 
difficulty. you were kind enough to ask me to assist you in some way." 

"ah," she said, "I had forgotten that. My own present troubl seem of 
such littl consequ in comparison with what I have told you. but as 
you are so good to me, I will go on. you will scarc believ it, but I 
found that certain person suspected, or rather pretend to suspect 
that I had murder my brother. these person were rel of mine, 
and their motiv were extrem sordid ones; but I actual found 
myself subject to the shame indign of be watched. yes, sir, my 
step were dog when I went abroad, and at home I found myself expos 
to constant if art observation. with my high spirit thi wa more 
than I could brook, and I resolv to set my wit to work and elud the 
person who were shadow me. I wa so fortun as to succeed. I 
assum thi disguise, and for some time have lain snug and unsuspected. 
but of late I have reason to believ that the pursuer is on my track; 
unless I am greatli deceived, I saw yesterday the detect who is 
charg with the odiou duti of observ my movements. you, sir, are 
watch and keen-sighted; tell me, did you see ani one lurk about 
thi evening?" 

"I hardli think so," said dyson, "but perhap you would give me some 
descript of the detect in question." 

"certainly; he is a youngish man, dark, with dark whiskers. He ha 
adopt spectacl of larg size in the hope of disguis himself 
effectually, but he cannot disguis hi uneasi manner, and the quick, 
nervou glanc he cast to right and left." 

thi piec of descript wa the last straw for the unhappi dyson, who 
wa foam with impati to get out of the house, and would gladli 
have sworn eighteenth centuri oath if proprieti had not frown on such 
a course. 

"excus me, miss leicester," he said with cold politeness, "I cannot 
assist you." 

"ah!" she said sadly, "I have offend you in some way. tell me what I 
have done, and I will ask you to forgiv me." 

"you are mistaken," said dyson, grab hi hat, but speak with some 
difficulty; "you have done nothing. but, as I say, I cannot help you. 
perhaps," he added, with some ting of sarcasm, "mi friend russel might 
be of service." 

"thank you," she replied; "I will tri him," and the ladi went off into a 
shriek of laughter, which fill up mr. dyson' cup of scandal and 
confusion. 

He left the hous shortli afterwards, and had the peculiar delight of a 
five-mil walk, through street which slowli chang from black to gray, 
and from gray to shine passag of glori for the sun to brighten. here 
and there he met or overtook stray revellers, but he reflect that no 
one could have spent the night in a more futil fashion than himself; 
and when he reach hi home he had made resolv for reformation. He 
decid that he would abjur all milesian and arabian method of 
entertainment, and subscrib to mudie' for a regular suppli of mild and 
innocu romance. 




strang occurr IN clerkenwell. 


mr. dyson had inhabit for some year a coupl of room in a moder 
quiet street in bloomsbury, where, as he somewhat pompous express 
it, he held hi finger on the puls of life without be deafen with 
the thousand rumor of the main arteri of london. It wa to him a 
sourc of peculiar, if esoter gratification, that from the adjac 
corner of tottenham court road a hundr line of omnibus went to the 
four quarter of the town; he would dilat on the facil for 
visit dalston, and dwell on the admir line that knew extremest 
eal and the street beyond whitechapel. hi rooms, which had been 
origin "furnish apartments," he had gradual purg of their more 
peccant parts; and though one would not find here the glow splendor 
of hi old chamber in the street off the strand, there wa someth of 
sever grace about the appoint which did credit to hi taste. the 
rug were old, and of the true fade beauty; the etchings, nearli all of 
them proof print by the artist, made a good show with broad white 
margin and black frames, and there wa no spuriou black oak. indeed, 
there wa but littl furnitur of ani kind: a plain and honest table, 
squar and sturdy, stood in one corner; a seventeenth centuri settl 
front the hearth; and two wooden elbow-chairs, and a bookshelf of the 
empir made up the equipment, with an except worthi of note. for 
dyson care for none of these things. hi place wa at hi own bureau, a 
quaint old piec of lacquered-work at which he would sit for hour after 
hour, with hi back to the room, engag in the desper pursuit of 
literature, or, as he term hi profession, the chase of the phrase. 
the neat array of pigeon-hol and drawer teem and overflow with 
manuscript and note-books, the experi and effort of mani years; 
and the inner well, a vast and cavern receptacle, wa stuf with 
accumul ideas. dyson wa a craftsman who glove all the detail and 
the techniqu of hi work intensely; and if, as ha been hinted, he 
delud himself a littl with the name of artist, yet hi amus 
were emin harmless, and, so far as can be ascertained, he (or the 
publishers) had chosen the good part of not tire the world with 
print matter. 

here, then, dyson would shut himself up with hi fancies, experi 
with words, and striving, as hi friend the reclus of bayswat strove, 
with the almost invinc problem of style, but alway with a fine 
confidence, extrem differ from the chronic depress of the 
realist. He had been almost continu at work on some scheme that 
struck him as well-nigh magic in it possibl sinc the night of 
hi adventur with the ingeni tenant of the first floor in abingdon 
grove; and as he laid down the pen with a glow of triumph, he reflect 
that he had not viewed, the street for five day in succession. with 
all the enthusiasm of hi accomplish labor still work in hi brain, 
he put away hi papers, and went out, pace the pavement at first in 
that rare mood of exult which find in everi stone upon the way the 
possibl of a masterpiece. It wa grow late, and the autumn 
even wa draw to a close amidst veil of haze and mist, and in the 
still air the voices, and the roar traffic, and incess feet 
seemed, to dyson like the nois upon the stage when all the hous is 
silent. In the square, the leav rippl down as quick as summer rain, 
and the street beyond wa begin to flare with the light in the 
butcher' shop and the vivid illumin of the green-grocer. It wa a 
saturday night, and the swarm popul of the slum were turn 
out in force; the batter women in rusti black had begun to paw the 
lump of cagmag, and other gloat over unwholesom cabbages, and there 
wa a brisk demand for four-ale. dyson pass through these night-fir 
with some relief; he love to meditate, but hi thought were not as De 
quincey' after hi dose; he care not two straw whether onion were 
dear or cheap, and would not have exult if meat had fallen to twopenc 
a pound. absorb in the wilder of the tale he had been writing, 
weigh nice the point of plot and construction, relish the 
recollect of thi and that happi phrase, and dread failur here 
and there, he left the rush and the whistl of the gas-flar behind 
him, and began to touch upon pavement more deserted. 

He had turned, without take note, to the northward, and wa pass 
through an ancient fallen street, where now notic of floor and 
offic to let hung out, but still about it there wa the grace and the 
stiff of the age of wigs; a broad roadway, a broad pavement, and on 
each side a grave line of hous with long and narrow window flush with 
the walls, all of mellow brick-work. dyson walk with quick steps, as 
he resolv that short work must be made of a certain episode; but he 
wa in that happi humor of invention, and anoth chapter rose in the 
inner chamber of hi brain, and he dwelt on the circumst he wa to 
write down with curiou pleasure. It wa charm to have the quiet 
street to walk in, and in hi thought he made a whole district the 
cabinet of hi studies, and vow he would come again. heedless of hi 
course, he struck off to the east again, and soon found himself involv 
in a squalid network of gray two-stori houses, and then in the wast 
void and element of brick-work, the passag and unmad road behind 
great factori walls, encumb with the refus of the neighborhood, 
forlorn, ill-lighted, and desperate. A brief turn, and there rose befor 
him the unexpected, a hill suddenli lift from the level ground, it 
steep ascent mark by the light lamps, and eager as an explor dyson 
found hi way to the place, wonder where hi crook path had 
brought him. here all wa again decorous, but hideou in the extreme. 
the builder, some one lost in the deep gloom of the earli 'twenties, had 
conceiv the idea of twin villa in gray brick, shape in a manner to 
recal the outlin of the parthenon, each with it classic form 
broadli mark with rais band of stucco. the name of the street wa 
all strange, and for a further surprise, the top of the hill wa crown 
with an irregular plot of grass and fade trees, call a square, and 
here again the parthenon-mot had persisted. beyond the street were 
curious, wild in their irregularities, here a row of sordid, dingi 
dwellings, dirti and disreput in appearance, and there, without 
warning, stood a hous genteel and prim with wire blind and brazen 
knocker, as clean and trim as if it had been the doctor' hous in some 
benight littl countri town. these surpris and discoveri began to 
exhaust dyson, and he hail with delight the blaze window of a 
public-house, and went in with the intent of test the beverag 
provid for the dweller in thi region, as remot as libya and 
pamphylia and the part about mesopotamia. the babbl of voic from 
within warn him that he wa about to assist at the true parliament of 
the london workman, and he look about him for that more retir 
entranc call private. when he had settl himself on an exigu 
bench, and had order some beer, he began to listen to the jangl 
talk in the public bar beyond; it wa a senseless argument, altern 
furiou and maudlin, with appeal to bill and tom, and mediæv 
surviv of speech, word that chaucer wrote belch out with zeal and 
relish, and the din of pot jerk down and copper rap smartli on 
the zinc counter made a thorough bass for it all. dyson wa calmli 
smoke hi pipe between the sip of beer, when an indefinit look 
figur slid rather than walk into the compartment. the man start 
violent when he saw dyson placidli sit in the corner, and glanc 
keenli about him. He seem to be on wires, control by some electr 
machine, for he almost bolt out of the door when the barman ask with 
what he could serv him, and hi hand shiver as he took the glass. 
dyson inspect him with a littl curiosity; he wa muffl up almost to 
the lips, and a soft felt hat wa drawn down over hi eyes; he look as 
if he shrank from everi glance, and a more raucou voic suddenli 
uplift in the public bar seem to find in him a sympathi that made 
him shake and quiver like a jelly. It wa pitiabl to see ani one so 
thrill with nervousness, and dyson wa about to address some trivial 
remark of casual inquiri to the man, when anoth person came into the 
compartment, and, lay a hand on hi arm, mutter someth in an 
undertone, and vanish as he came. but dyson had recogn him as the 
smooth-tongu and smooth-shaven burton, who had display so sumptuou 
a gift in lying; and yet he thought littl of it, for hi whole faculti 
of observ wa absorb in the lament and yet grotesqu 
spectacl befor him. At the first touch of the hand on hi arm, the 
unfortun man had wheel round as if spun on a pivot, and shrank back 
with a low, piteou cry, as if some dumb beast were caught in the toils. 
the blood fled away from the wretch' face, and the skin becam gray as 
if a shadow of death had pass in the air and fallen on it, and dyson 
caught a choke whisper-- 

"mr. davies! for god' sake, have piti on me, mr. davies. On my oath, I 
say--" and hi voic sank to silenc as he heard the message, and strove 
in vain to bite hi lip; and summon up to hi aid some ting of manhood. 
He stood there a moment, waver as the leav of an aspen, and then he 
wa gone out into the street, as dyson thought silently, with hi doom 
upon hi head. He had not been gone a minut when it suddenli flash 
into dyson' mind that he knew the man; it wa undoubtedli the young man 
with spectacl for whom so mani ingeni person were searching; the 
spectacl inde were missing, but the pale face, the dark whiskers, 
and the timid glanc were enough to identifi him, dyson saw at onc 
that by a success of hazard he had unawar hit upon the scent of 
some desper conspiracy, waver as the track of a loathsom snake in 
and out of the highway and byway of the london cosmos; the truth wa 
instantli pictur befor him, and he divin that all unconsci and 
unheed he had been privileg to see the shadow of hidden forms, 
chase and hurrying, and grasp and vanish across the bright 
curtain of common life, soundless and silent, or onli babbl fabl 
and pretences. for him in an instant the jargon of voices, the garish 
splendor, and all the vulgar tumult of the public-hous becam part of 
magic; for here befor hi eye a scene in thi grim mysteri play had 
been enacted, and he had seen human flesh grow gray with a palsi of 
fear; the veri hell of cowardic and terror had gape wide within an 
arm' breadth. In the midst of these reflections, the barman came up and 
stare at him as if to hint that he had exhaust hi right to take hi 
ease, and dyson bought anoth leas of the seat by an order for more 
beer. As he ponder the brief glimps of tragedy, he recollect that 
with hi first start of haunt fear the young man with whisker had 
drawn hi hand swiftli from hi great coat pocket, and that he had heard 
someth fall to the ground; and pretend to have drop hi pipe, 
dyson began to grope in the corner, search with hi fingers. He 
touch some thing, and drew it gentli to him, and with one brief 
glance, as he put it quietli in hi pocket, he saw it wa a littl 
old-fashion note book, bound in fade green morocco. 

He drank down hi beer at a gulp, and left the place, overjoy at hi 
fortun discovery, and busi with conjectur as to the possibl 
import of the find. By turn he dread to find perhap mere blank 
leaves, or the labor folli of a betting-book, but the fade morocco 
cover seem to promis better things, and hint at mysteries. He pilot 
himself with no littl difficulti out of the sour and squalid quarter he 
had enter with a light heart, and emerg at gray' inn road, struck 
off down guilford street, and hasten home, onli anxiou for a light 
candl and solitude. 

dyson sat down at hi bureau, and place the littl book befor him; it 
wa an effort to open the leav and dare disappointment. but in 
desper at last he laid hi finger between the page at haphazard, 
and rejoic to see a compact rang of write with a margin, and as it 
chanced, three word caught hi glance, and stood out apart from the 
mass. dyson read: 

the gold tiberius, 

and hi face flush with fortun and the lust of the hunter. 

He turn at onc to the first leaf of the pocket-book, and proceed to 
read with rapt interest the 




histori OF the young man with spectacl 


from the filthi and obscur lodging, situated, I verili believe, in one 
of the foulest slum of clerkenwell, I indit thi histori of a life 
which, daili threatened, cannot last for veri much longer. everi day, 
nay, everi hour, I know too well my enemi are draw their net 
closer about me; even now, I am condemn to be a close prison in my 
squalid room, and I know that when I go out I shall go to my 
destruction. thi history, if it chanc to fall into good hands, may, 
perhaps, be of servic in warn young men of the danger and pitfal 
that most sure must accompani ani deviat from the way of 
rectitude. 

My name is joseph walters. when I came of age I found myself in 
possess of a small but suffici income, and I determin that I 
would devot my life to scholarship. I do not mean the scholarship of 
these days; I had no intent of associ myself with men whose 
live are spent in the unspeak degrad occup of "editing" 
classics, befoul the fair margin of the fairest book with idl and 
superflu annotation, and do their utmost to give a last 
disgust of all that is beautiful. An abbey church turn to the base use 
of a stabl or a bake-hous is a sorri sight; but more pitiabl still is 
a masterpiec splutter over with the commentator' pen, and hi 
hideou mark "cf." 

for my part I chose the gloriou career of scholar in it ancient sense; 
I long to possess encyclopæd learning, to grow old amongst books, to 
distil day by day, and year after year, the inmost sweet of all 
worthi writings. I wa not rich enough to collect a library, and I wa 
therefor forc to betak myself to the reading-room of the british 
museum. 

O dim, far-lift and mighti dome, mecca of mani minds, mausoleum of 
mani hopes, sad hous where all desir fail. for there men enter in 
with heart uplifted, and dream minds, see in those exalt stair 
a ladder to fame, in that pompou portico the gate of knowledge; and 
go in, find but vain vanity, and all but in vain. there, when the 
long street are ringing, is silence, there etern twilight, and the 
odor of heaviness. but there the blood flow thin and cold, and the 
brain burn adust; there is the hunt of shadows, and the chase of 
embattl phantoms; a strive against ghosts, and a war that ha no 
victory. O dome, tomb of the quick; sure in thi galleri where no 
reverber voic can call, sigh whisper ever, and mutter of dead 
hopes; and there men' soul mount like moth toward the flame, and 
fall scorch and blacken beneath thee, O dim, far-lifted, and mighti 
dome. 

bitterli do I now regret the day when I took my place at a desk for the 
first time, and began my studies. I had not been an habitué of the place 
for mani months, when I becam acquaint with a seren and benevol 
gentleman, a man somewhat past middl age, who nearli alway occupi a 
desk next to mine. In the reading-room it take littl to make an 
acquaintance, a casual offer of assistance, a hint as to the search in 
the catalogue, and the ordinari polit of men who constantli sit 
near each other; it wa thu I came to know the man call himself dr. 
lipsius. By degre I grew to look for hi presence, and to miss him 
when he wa away, as wa sometim the case, and so a friendship sprang 
up between us. hi immens rang of learn wa place freeli at my 
service; he would often astonish me by the way in which he would sketch 
out in a few minut the bibliographi of a given subject, and befor 
long I had confid to him my ambitions. 

"ah," he said, "you should have been a german. I wa like that myself 
when I wa a boy. It is a wonder resolve, an infinit career. 'I will 
know all things;' yes, it is a devic indeed. but it mean this--a life 
of labor without end, and a desir unsatisfi at last. the scholar ha 
to die, and die saying, 'I know veri little.'" 

gradually, by speech such as these, lipsiu seduc me: he would 
prais the career, and at the same time hint that it wa as hopeless as 
the search for the philosopher' stone, and so by art suggestions, 
insinu with infinit address, he by degre succeed in undermin 
all my principles. "after all," he use to say, "the greatest of all 
sciences, the key to all knowledge, is the scienc and art of pleasure. 
rabelai wa perhap the greatest of all the encyclopæd scholars; and 
he, as you know, wrote the most remark book that ha ever been 
written. and what doe he teach men in thi book? surely, the joy of 
living. I need not remind you of the words, suppress in most of the 
editions, the key of all the rabelaisian mythology, of all the enigma 
of hi grand philosophy, _vivez joyeux_. there you have all hi 
learning; hi work is the institut of pleasur as the fine art; the 
finest art there is; the art of all arts. rabelai had all science, but 
he had all life too. and we have gone a long way sinc hi time. you are 
enlightened, I think; you do not consid all the petti rule and 
by-law that a corrupt societi ha made for it own selfish conveni 
as the immut decre of the eternal." 

such were the doctrin that he preached; and it wa by such insidi 
arguments, line upon line, here a littl and there a little, that he at 
last succeed in make me a man at war with the whole social system. I 
use to long for some opportun to break the chain and to live a free 
life, to be my own rule and measure. I view exist with the eye of 
a pagan, and lipsiu understood to perfect the art of stimul the 
natur inclin of a young man hitherto a hermit. As I gaze up at 
the great dome I saw it flush with the flame and color of a world of 
enticement, unknown to me, my imagin play me a thousand wanton 
tricks, and the forbidden drew me as sure as a loadston draw on 
iron. At last my resolut wa taken, and I boldli ask lipsiu to be 
my guide. 

He told me to leav the museum at my usual hour, half past four, to walk 
slowli along the northern pavement of great russel street, and to wait 
at the corner of the street till I wa addressed, and then to obey in 
all thing the instruct of the person who came up to me. I carri 
out these directions, and stood at the corner look about me 
anxiously, my heart beat fast, and my breath come in gasps. I 
wait there for some time, and had begun to fear I had been made the 
object of a joke, when I suddenli becam consciou of a gentleman who 
wa look at me with evid amus from the opposit pavement of 
tottenham court road. He came over, and rais hi hat, polit beg 
me to follow him, and I did so without a word, wonder where we were 
going, and what wa to happen. I wa taken to a hous of quiet and 
respect aspect in a street lie to the north of oxford street, and 
my guid rang the bell, and a servant show us into a larg room, 
quietli furnished, on the ground floor. We sat there in silenc for some 
time, and I notic that the furniture, though unpretending, wa 
extrem valuable. there were larg oak-presses, two book-cas of 
extrem elegance, and in one corner a carv chest which must have been 
mediæval. present dr. lipsiu came in and welcom me with hi usual 
manner, and after some desultori conversation, my guid left the room. 
then an elderli man drop in and began talk to lipsius; and from 
their convers I understood that my friend wa a dealer in antiques; 
they spoke of the hittit seal, and of the prospect of further 
discoveries, and later, when two or three more person had join us, 
there wa an argument as to the possibl of a systemat explor 
of the pre-celt monument in england I was; in fact, present at an 
archæolog recept of an inform kind; and at nine o'clock, when 
the antiquari were gone, I stare at lipsiu in a manner that show I 
wa puzzled, and sought an explanation. 

"now," he said, "we will go upstairs." 

As we pass up the stairs, lipsiu light the way with a hand-lamp, I 
heard the sound of a jar lock and bolt and bar shot on at the 
front door. My guid drew back a baiz door, and we went down a passage, 
and I began to hear odd sounds, a nois of curiou mirth, and then he 
push me through a second door, and my initi began. I cannot write 
down what I wit that night; I cannot bear to recal what went on 
in those secret room fast shutter and curtain so that no light 
should escap into the quiet street; they gave me red wine to drink, and 
a woman told me as I sip it that it wa wine of the red jar that 
avallauniu had made. anoth ask me how I like the wine of the 
fauns, and I heard a dozen fantast names, while the stuff boil in my 
veins, and stirred, I think, someth that had slept within me from the 
moment I wa born. It seem as if my self-consci desert me; I 
wa no longer a think agent, but at onc subject and object. I 
mingl in the horribl sport and watch the mysteri of the greek 
grove and fountain enact befor me, saw the reel dance, and heard 
the music call as I sat besid my mate, and yet I wa outsid it all, 
and view my own part an idl spectator. thu with strang rite they 
made me drink the cup, and when I woke up in the morn I wa one of 
them, and had sworn to be faithful. At first I wa shown the entic 
side of things. I wa bidden to enjoy myself and care for noth but 
pleasure, and lipsiu himself indic to me as the acutest enjoy 
the spectacl of the terror of the unfortun person who were from 
time to time decoy into the evil house. but after a time it wa 
point out to me that I must take my share in the work, and so I found 
myself compel to be in my turn a seducer; and thu it is on my 
conscienc that I have led mani to the depth of the pit. 

one day lipsiu summon me to hi privat room, and told me that he had 
a difficult task to give me. He unlock a drawer, and gave me a sheet 
of type-written paper, and had me read it. It wa without place, or 
date, or signature, and ran as follows:-- 

"mr. jame headley, f.s.a., will receiv from hi agent in armenia, on 
the 12th inst., a uniqu coin, the gold tiberius. It hear on the 
revers a faun, with the legend victoria. It is believ that thi coin 
is of immens value. mr. headley will come up to town to show the coin 
to hi friend, professor memys, of cheni street, oxford street, on 
some date between the 13th and the 18th." 

dr. lipsiu chuckl at my face of blank surpris when I laid down thi 
singular communication. 

"you will have a good chanc of show your discretion," he said. "thi 
is not a common case; it requir great manag and infinit tact. I 
am sure I wish I had a panurg in my service, but we will see what you 
can do." 

"but is it not a joke?" I ask him. "how can you know, or rather how 
can thi correspond of your know that a coin ha been despatch 
from armenia to mr. headley? and how is it possibl to fix the period in 
which mr. headley will take it into hi head to come up to town? It 
seem to me a lot of guess work." 

"mi dear mr. walters," he replied; "we do not deal in guess work here. 
It would bore you if I went into all these littl details, the cog and 
wheels, if I may say so, which move the machine. don't you think it is 
much more amus to sit in front of the hous and be astonished, than 
to be behind the scene and see the mechanism? better trembl at the 
thunder, believ me, than see the man roll the cannon ball. but, 
after all, you needn't bother about the how and why; you have your share 
to do. Of course, I shall give you full instructions, but a great deal 
depend on the way the thing is carri out. I have often heard veri 
young men maintain that style is everyth in literature, and I can 
assur you that the same maxim hold good in our far more delic 
profession. with us style is absolut everything, and that is whi we 
have friend like yourself." 

I went away in some perturbation; he had no doubt designedli left 
everyth in mystery, and I did not know what part I should have to 
play. though I had assist at scene of hideou revelry, I wa not yet 
dead to all echo of human feeling, and I trembl lest I should receiv 
the order to be mr. headley' executioner. 

A week later, it wa on the sixteenth of the month, dr. lipsiu made me 
a sign to come into hi room. 

"it is for to-night," he began. "pleas to attend care to what I am 
go to say, mr. walters, and on peril of your life, for it is a 
danger matter,--on peril of your life I say, follow these 
instruct to the letter. you understand? well, to-night at about 
half-past seven you will stroll quietli up the hampstead road till you 
come to vincent street. turn down here and walk along, take the third 
turn to your right, which is lambert terrace. then follow the 
terrace, cross the road, and go along hertford street, and so into 
lillington square. the second turn you will come to in the squar is 
call sheen street; but in realiti it is more a passag between blank 
wall than a street. whatev you do, take care to be at the corner of 
thi street at eight o'clock precisely. you will walk along it, and just 
at the bend, where you lose sight of the square, you will find an old 
gentleman with white beard and whiskers. He will in all probabl be 
abus a cabman for have brought him to sheen street instead of 
cheni street. you will go up to him quietli and offer your services; 
he will tell you where he want to go, and you will be so courteou as 
to offer to show him the way. I may say that professor memi moved, 
into cheni street a month ago; thu mr. headley ha never been to see 
him there, and moreov he is veri short-sighted, and know littl of 
the topographi of london. inde he ha quit live the life of a 
learn hermit at audley hall. 

"well, need I say more to a man of your intelligence? you will bring him 
to thi house; he will ring the bell, and a servant in quiet liveri will 
let him in. then your work will be done, and I am sure done well. you 
will leav mr. headley at the door, and simpli continu your walk, and I 
shall hope to see you the next day. I realli don't think there is 
anyth more I can tell you." 

these minut instruct I took care to carri out to the letter. I 
confess that I walk up the tottenham court road by no mean blindly, 
but with an uneasi sens that I wa come to a decis point in my 
life. the nois and rumor of the crowd pavement were to me but 
dumb-show. I revolv again and again in ceaseless iter the task 
that had been laid on me, and I question myself as to the possibl 
results. As I got near the point of turning, I ask myself whether 
danger were not about my steps; the cold thought struck me that I wa 
suspect and observed, and everi chanc foot-passeng who gave me a 
second glanc seem to me an offic of police. My time wa run 
out, the sky had darkened, and I hesitated, half resolv to go no 
farther, but to abandon lipsiu and hi friend forever. I had almost 
determin to take thi course, when the convict suddenli came to me 
that the whole thing wa a gigant joke, a fabric of rank 
improbability. who could have procur the inform about the 
armenian agent, I ask myself. By what mean could lipsiu have known 
the particular day, and the veri train that mr. headley wa to take? how 
engag him to enter one special cab amongst the dozen wait at 
paddington? I vow it a mere milesian tale, and went forward merrily, 
and turn down vincent street, and thread out the rout that lipsiu 
had so care impress upon me. the variou street he had name 
were all place of silenc and an oppress cheap gentility; it wa 
dark, and I felt alon in the musti squar and crescents, where peopl 
patter by at intervals, and the shadow were grow blacker. I 
enter sheen street, and found it, as lipsiu had said, more a passag 
than a street; it wa a by-way, on one side a low wall and neglect 
garden and grim back of a line of houses, and on the other a timber 
yard. I turn the corner, and lost sight of the square, and then to my 
astonish I saw the scene of which I had been told. A hansom cab had 
come to a stop besid the pavement, and an old man carri a handbag 
wa fierc abus the cabman, who sat on hi perch the imag of 
bewilderment. 

"yes, but i'm sure you said sheen street, and that' where I brought 
you," I heard him saying, as I came up, and the old gentleman boil in 
a fury, and threaten polic and suit at law. 

the sight gave me a shock; and in an instant I resolv to go through 
with it. I stroll on, and without notic the cabman, lift my hat 
polit to old mr. headley. 

"pardon me, sir," I said, "but is there ani difficulty? I see you are a 
traveller; perhap the cabman ha made a mistake. can I direct you?" 

the old fellow turn to me, and I notic that he snarl and show 
hi teeth like an ill-temp cur as he spoke. 

"thi drunken fool ha brought me here," he said. "I told him to drive 
to cheni street, and he bring me to thi infern place. I won't pay 
him a farthing, and I meant to have given him a handsom sum. I am go 
to call for the polic and give him in charge." 

At thi threat the cabman seem to take alarm. He glanc round as if 
to make sure that no policeman wa in sight and drove off grumbl 
loudly, and mr. headley grinned, savag with satisfact at have 
save hi fare, and put back one and sixpenc into hi pocket, the 
"handsom sum" the cabman had lost. 

"mi dear sir," I said, "I am afraid thi piec of stupid ha annoy 
you a great deal. It is a long way to cheni street, and you will have 
some difficulti in find the place unless you know london pretti 
well." 

"I know it veri little," he replied. "I never come up except on 
import business, and i'v never been to cheni street in my life." 

"really? I should be happi to show you the way. I have been for a 
stroll, and it will not at all inconveni me to take you to your 
destination." 

"I want to go to professor memys, at number 15. it' most annoy to 
me. i'm short-sighted, and I can never make out the number on the 
doors." 

"thi way if you please," I said, and we set out. 

I did not find mr. headley an agreeabl man; indeed, he grumbl the 
whole way. He inform me of hi name, and I took care to say, "the 
well-known antiquary?" and thenceforth I wa compel to listen to the 
histori of hi complic squabbl with publishers, who had treat 
him, as he said, disgracefully. the man wa a chapter in the 
irrit of authors. He told me that he had been on the point of 
make the fortun of sever firms, but had been compel to abandon 
the design owe to their rank ingratitude. besid these ancient 
histori of wrong and the more recent misadventur of the cabman, he 
had anoth grievou complaint to make. As he came along in the train, 
he had been sharpen a pencil, and the sudden jolt of the engin as it 
drew up at a station had driven the penknif against hi face, 
inflict a small triangular wound just on the cheek-bone, which he 
show me. He denounc the railway company, and heap imprec on 
the head of the driver, and talk of claim damages. thu he grumbl 
all the way, not notic in the least where he wa going, and so 
inami did hi conduct appear to me that I began to enjoy the trick I 
wa play on him. 

nevertheless my heart beat a littl faster as we turn into the street 
where lipsiu wa waiting. A thousand accidents, I thought, might 
happen. some chanc might bring one of headley' friend to meet us; 
perhaps, though he knew not cheni street, he might know the street 
where I wa take him; in spite of hi short-sight he might possibl 
make out the number, or in a sudden fit of suspicion he might make an 
inquiri of the policeman at the corner. thu everi step upon the 
pavement, as we drew nearer to the goal, wa to me a pang and a terror, 
and everi approach passeng carri a certain threat of danger. I 
gulp down my excit with an effort, and made shift to say pretti 
quietly:-- 

"no. 15, I think you said? that is the third hous from this. If you 
will allow me, I will leav you now; I have been delay a little, and 
my way lie on the other side of tottenham court road." 

He snarl out some kind of thanks, and I turn my back and walk 
swiftli in the opposit direction. A minut or two later, I look round 
and saw mr. headley stand on the doorstep, and then the door open 
and he went in. for my part I gave a sigh of relief, and hasten to get 
away from the neighborhood and endeavor to enjoy myself in merri 
company. 

the whole of the next day I kept away from lipsius. I felt anxious, but 
I did not know what had happen or what wa happening, and a reason 
regard for my own safeti told me that I should do well to remain quietli 
at home. My curiosity, however, to learn the end of the odd drama in 
which I had play a part stung me to the quick, and late in the even 
I made up my mind to go and see how event had turn out. lipsiu 
nod when I came in, and ask me if I could give him five minutes' 
talk. We went into hi room, and he began to walk up and down, and I sat 
wait for him to speak. 

"mi dear mr. walters," he said at length, "I congratul you warmly. 
your work wa done in the most thorough and artist manner. you will go 
far. look." 

He went to hi escritoir and press a secret spring, and a drawer flew 
out, and he laid someth on the table. It wa a gold coin, and I took 
it up and examin it eagerly, and read the legend about the figur of 
the faun. 

"victoria," I said, smiling. 

"yes, it wa a great capture, which we owe to you. I had great 
difficulti in persuad mr. headley that a littl mistak had been 
made; that wa how I put it. He wa veri disagreeable, and inde 
ungentlemanli about it; didn't he strike you as a veri cross old man?" 

I held the coin, admir the choic and rare design, clear cut as if 
from the mint; and I thought the fine gold glow and burn like a 
lamp. 

"and what final becam of mr. headley?" I said at last. 

lipsiu smile and shrug hi shoulders. 

"what on earth doe it matter?" he said. "he might be here, or there, or 
anywhere; but what possibl consequ could it be? besides, your 
question rather surpris me. you are an intellig man, mr. walters. 
just think it over, and i'm sure you won't repeat the question." 

"mi dear sir," I said, "I hardli think you are treat me fairly. you 
have paid me some handsom compliment on my share in the capture, and I 
natur wish to know how the matter ended. from what I saw of mr. 
headley, I should think you must have had some difficulti with him." 

He gave me no answer for the moment, but began again to walk up and down 
the room, appar absorb in thought. 

"well," he said at last, "I suppos there is someth in what you say. 
We are certainli indebt to you. I have said, that I have a high 
opinion of your intelligence, mr. walters. just look here, will you." 

He open a door commun with anoth room and pointed. 

there wa a great box lie on the floor; a queer coffin-shap thing. I 
look at it and saw it wa a mummi case like those in the british 
museum, vividli paint in the brilliant egyptian colors, with I knew 
not what proclam of digniti or hope of life immortal. the mummy, 
swath about in the robe of death, wa lie within, and the face had 
been uncovered. 

"you are go to send thi away?" I said, forget the question I had 
put. 

"yes; I have an order from a local museum. look a littl more closely, 
mr. walters." 

puzzl by hi manner, I peer into the face, while he held up the 
lamp. the flesh wa black with the pass of the centuries; but as I 
look I saw upon the right cheek-bon a small triangular scar, and the 
secret of the mummi flash upon me. I wa look at the dead bodi of 
the man whom I had decoy into that house. 

there wa no thought or design of action in my mind. I held the accurs 
coin in my hand, burn me with a foretast of hell, and I fled as I 
would have fled from pestil and death, and dash into the street 
in blind horror, not know where I went. I felt the gold coin grasp 
in my clench list, and threw it away, I knew not where, and ran on and 
on through by-street and dark ways, till at last I issu out into a 
crowd thoroughfare, and check myself. then, as conscious 
returned, I realiz my instant peril, and understood what would happen 
if I fell into the hand of lipsius. I knew that I had put forth my 
finger to thwart a relentless mechan rather than a man; my recent 
adventur with the unfortun mr. headley had taught me that lipsiu 
had agent in all quarters, and I foresaw that if I fell into hi hands, 
he would remain true to hi doctrin of style, and caus me to die a 
death of some horribl and ingeni torture. I bent my whole mind to 
the task of outwit him and hi emissaries, three of whom I knew to 
have prove their abil for track down person who for variou 
reason prefer to remain obscure. these servant of lipsiu were two 
men and a woman, and the woman wa incompar the most subtl and the 
most deadly. yet I consid that I too had some portion of craft, and 
I took my resolve. sinc then I have match myself day by day and hour 
by hour against the ingenu of lipsiu and hi myrmidons. for a time I 
wa successful; though they beat furious after me in the covert of 
london, I remain _perdu_, and watch with some amus their 
frantic effort to recov the scent lost in two or three minutes. everi 
lure and wile wa put forth to entic me from my hiding-place. I wa 
inform by the medium of the public print that what I had taken had 
been recovered, and meet were propos in which I might hope to 
gain a great deal without the slightest risk. I laugh at their 
endeavors, and began a littl to despis the organ I had so 
dreaded, and ventur more abroad. not onc or twice, but sever times, 
I recogn the two men who were charg with my capture, and I 
succeed in elud them easili at close quarters; and a littl hastili 
I decid that I had noth to dread, and that my craft wa greater 
than theirs. but in the mean while, while I congratul myself on my 
cunning, the third of lipsius' emissari wa weav her nets, and in 
an evil hour I paid a visit to an old friend, a literari man name 
russell, who live in a quiet street in bayswater. the woman, as I found 
out too late, a day or two ago, occupi room in the same house, and I 
wa follow and track down. too late, as I have said, I recogn 
that I had made a fatal mistake, and that I wa besieged. sooner or 
later I shall find myself in the power of an enemi without pity; and so 
sure as I leav thi hous I shall go to receiv doom. I hardli dare 
to guess how it will at last fall upon me. My imagination, alway a 
vivid one, paint to me appal pictur of the unspeak tortur 
which I shall probabl endure; and I know that I shall die with lipsiu 
stand near and gloat over the refin of my suffer and my 
shame. 

hours, nay, minutes, have becom veri preciou to me. I sometim paus 
in the midst of anticip my tortures, to wonder whether even now I 
cannot hit upon some suprem stroke, some design of infinit subtlety, 
to free myself from the toils. but I find that the faculti of 
combin ha left me. I am as the scholar in the old myth, desert 
by the power which ha helped, me hitherto. I do not know when the 
suprem moment will come, but sooner or later it is inevitable, and 
befor long I shall receiv sentence, and from the sentenc to execut 
will not be long. 

* * * * * 

I cannot remain here a prison ani longer. I shall go out to-night when 
the street are full of crowd and clamors, and make a last effort to 
escape. 

* * * * * 

It wa with profound astonish that dyson close the littl book, and 
thought of the strang seri of incid which had brought him into 
touch with the plot and counterplot connect with the gold tiberius. 
He had bestow the coin care away, and he shudder at the bare 
possibl of it place of deposit becom known to the evil band who 
seem to possess such extraordinari sourc of information. 

It had grown late while he read, and he put the pocket-book away, hope 
with all hi heart that the unhappi walter might even at the eleventh 
hour escap the doom he dreaded. 




adventur OF the desert residence. 


"A wonder story, as you say; an extraordinari sequenc and play of 
coincidence. I confess that your express when you first show me 
the gold tiberiu were not exaggerated. but do you think that walter 
ha realli some fear fate to dread?" 

"I cannot say. who can presum to predict event when life itself put 
on the robe of coincid and play at drama? perhap we have not yet 
reach the last chapter in the queer story. but, look, we are draw 
near to the verg of london; there are gaps, you see, in the serri 
rank of brick, and a vision of green field beyond." 

dyson had persuad the ingeni mr. phillipp to accompani him on one 
of those aimless walk to which he wa himself so addicted. start 
from the veri heart of london, they had made their way westward through 
the stoni avenues, and were now just emerg from the red line of an 
extrem suburb, and present the half-finish road ended, a quiet lane 
began, and they were beneath the shade of elm-trees. the yellow autumn 
sunlight that had lit up the bare distanc of the suburban street now 
filter down through the bough of the tree and shone on the glow 
carpet of fallen leaves, and the pool of rain glitter and shot back 
the gleam of light. over all the broad pastur there wa peac and the 
happi rest of autumn befor the great wind begin, and afar off, london 
lay all vagu and immens amidst the veil mist; here and there a 
distant window catch the sun and kindl with fire, and a spire 
gleam high, and below the street in shadow, and the turmoil of life. 
dyson and phillipp walk on in silenc beneath the high hedges, till 
at a turn of the lane they saw a moulder and ancient gate stand 
open, and the prospect of a hous at the end of a moss-grown carriag 
drive. 

"there is a surviv for you," said dyson; "it ha come to it last 
days, I imagine. look how the laurel have grown gaunt, and weedy, and 
black, and bare, beneath; look at the house, cover with yellow wash 
and patch with green damp. why, the veri notice-board which inform 
all and singular that the place is to be let ha crack and half 
fallen." 

"suppos we go in and see it," said phillipps. "I don't think there is 
anybodi about." 

they turn up the drive, and walk slowly, toward thi remnant of old 
days. It wa a larg straggl house, with curv wing at either end, 
and behind a seri of irregular roof and projections, show that the 
place had been ad to at diver dates; the two wing were roof in 
cupola fashion, and at one side, as they came nearer, they could see a 
stable-yard, and a clock turret with a bell, and the dark mass of 
gloomi cedars. amidst all the lineament of dissolution, there wa but 
one note of contrast: the sun wa set beyond the elm-trees, and all 
the west and the south were in flames, and on the upper window of the 
hous the glow shone reflected, and it seem as if blood and fire were 
mingled. befor the yellow front of the mansion, stained, as dyson had 
remarked, with gangren patches, green and blackening, stretch what 
onc had been, no doubt, a well-kept lawn, but it wa now rough and 
ragged, and nettl and great docks, and all manner of coars weeds, 
struggl in the place of the flower-beds. the urn had fallen from 
their pillar besid the walk, and lay broken in shard upon the ground, 
and everywher from grass-plot and path a fungoid growth had sprung up 
and multiplied, and lay dank and slimi like a fester sore upon the 
earth. In the middl of the rank grass of the lawn wa a desol 
fountain; the rim of the basin wa crumbl and pulver with decay, 
and within, the water stood stagnant, with green scum for the lili 
that had onc bloom there; and rust had eaten into the bronz flesh of 
the triton that stood in the middle, and the conch-shel he held wa 
broken. 

"here," said dyson, "one might moral over decay and death. here all 
the stage is deck out with the symbol of dissolution; the cedarn 
gloom and twilight hang heavi around us, and everywher within the pale 
dank ha found a harbor, and the veri air is chang and brought to 
accord with the scene. To me, I confess, thi desert hous is as moral 
as a graveyard, and I find someth sublim in that lone triton, 
desert in the midst of hi water-pool. He is the last of the gods; 
they have left him and he rememb the sound of water fall on water, 
and the day that were sweet." 

"I like your reflect extremely," said phillipps, "but I may mention 
that the door of the hous is open.". 

"let us go in then." 

the door wa just ajar, and they pass into the mouldi hall, and look 
in at a room on one side. It wa a larg room, go far back, and the 
rich old red flock paper wa peel from the wall in long strips, and 
blacken with vagu patch of rise damp; the ancient clay, the dank 
reek earth rise up again, and subdu all the work of men' hand 
after the conquest of mani years. and the floor wa thick with the dust 
of decay, and the paint ceil fade from all gay color and light 
fanci of cupid in a career, and disfigur with sore of dampness, 
seem transmut into other work. No longer the amorini chase one 
anoth pleasantly, with limb that sought not to advance, and hand 
that mere simul the act of grasp at the wreath flowers, but 
it appear some savag burlesqu of the old careless world and of it 
cherish conventions, and the danc of the love had becom a danc of 
death; black pustul and fester sore swell and cluster on fair 
limbs, and smile face show corruption, and the fairi blood had 
boil with the germ of foul disease; it wa a parabl of the leaven 
working, and worm devour for a banquet the heart of the rose. 

strangely, under the paint ceiling, against the decay walls, two 
old chair still stood alone, the sole furnitur of the empti place. 
high-backed, with curv arm and twist legs, cover with fade gold 
leaf, and upholst in tatter damask, they too were a part of the 
symbolism, and struck dyson with surprise. "what have we here?" he said. 
"who ha sat in these chairs? who, clad in peach-bloom satin, with lace 
ruffl and diamond buckles, all golden, _a conté fleurettes_ to hi 
companion? phillipps, we are in anoth age. I wish I had some snuff to 
offer you, but fail that, I beg to offer you a seat, and we will sit 
and smoke tobacco. A horrid practice, but I am no pedant." 

they sat down on the queer old chairs, and look out of the dim and 
grimi pane to the ruin lawn, and the fallen urns, and the desert 
triton. 

present dyson ceas hi imit of eighteenth centuri airs; he no 
longer pull forward imaginari ruffles, or tap a ghostli snuff-box. 

"it' a foolish fancy," he said at last, "but I keep think I hear a 
nois like some one groaning. listen; no, I can't hear it now. there it 
is again! did you notic it, phillipps? 

"no, I can't say I heard anything. but I believ that old place like 
thi are like shell from the shore, ever echo with noises. the old 
beams, moulder piecemeal, yield a littl and groan, and such a hous 
as thi I can fanci all reson at night with voices, the voic of 
matter so slowli and so sure transform into other shapes; the voic 
of the worm that gnaw at last the veri heart of the oak; the voic of 
stone grind on stone, and the voic of the conquest of time." 

they sat still in the old armchair and grew graver in the musti ancient 
air,--th air of a hundr year ago. 

"I don't like the place," said phillipps, after a long pause. "to me it 
seems, as if there were a sickly, unwholesom smell about it, a smell of 
someth burning." 

"you are right; there is an evil odor here. I wonder what it is! hark! 
did you hear that?" 

A hollow sound, a nois of infinit sad and infinit pain broke in 
upon the silence; and the two men look fear at one another, 
horror and the sens of unknown thing glimmer in their eyes. 

"come," said dyson, "we must see into this," and they went into the hall 
and listen in the silence. 

"do you know," said phillipps, "it seem absurd, but I could almost 
fanci that the smell is that of burn flesh." 

they went up the hollow-sound stairs, and the the odor becam thick 
and noisome, stifl the breath; and a vapor, sicken as the smell of 
the chamber of death, choke them. A door wa open and they enter the 
larg upper room, and clung hard to one another, shudder at the sight 
they saw. 

A nake man wa lie on the floor, hi arm and leg stretch wide 
apart, and bound to peg that had been hammer into the boards. the 
bodi wa torn and mutil in the most hideou fashion, scar with 
the mark of red-hot irons, a shame ruin of the human shape. but upon 
the middl of the bodi a fire of coal wa smouldering; the flesh had 
been burn through. the man wa dead, but the smoke of hi torment 
mount still, a black vapor. 

"the young man with spectacles," said mr. dyson. 


the end. 





end of the project gutenberg ebook of the three impostors, by arthur machen 

*** end OF thi project gutenberg ebook the three impostor *** 

***** thi file should be name 35517-8.txt or 35517-8.zip ***** 
thi and all associ file of variou format will be found in: 
http://www.gutenberg.org/3/5/5/1/35517/ 

produc by marc d'hoogh at http://www.freeliterature.org 

updat edit will replac the previou one--th old edit 
will be renamed. 

creat the work from public domain print edit mean that no 
one own a unit state copyright in these works, so the foundat 
(and you!) can copi and distribut it in the unit state without 
permiss and without pay copyright royalties. special rules, 
set forth in the gener term of use part of thi license, appli to 
copi and distribut project gutenberg-tm electron work to 
protect the project gutenberg-tm concept and trademark. project 
gutenberg is a regist trademark, and may not be use if you 
charg for the ebooks, unless you receiv specif permission. If you 
do not charg anyth for copi of thi ebook, compli with the 
rule is veri easy. you may use thi ebook for nearli ani purpos 
such as creation of deriv works, reports, perform and 
research. they may be modifi and print and given away--y may do 
practic anyth with public domain ebooks. redistribut is 
subject to the trademark license, especi commerci 
redistribution. 



*** start: full licens *** 

the full project gutenberg licens 
pleas read thi befor you distribut OR use thi work 

To protect the project gutenberg-tm mission of promot the free 
distribut of electron works, by use or distribut thi work 
(or ani other work associ in ani way with the phrase "project 
gutenberg"), you agre to compli with all the term of the full project 
gutenberg-tm licens (avail with thi file or onlin at 
http://gutenberg.net/license). 


section 1. gener term of use and redistribut project gutenberg-tm 
electron work 

1.a. By read or use ani part of thi project gutenberg-tm 
electron work, you indic that you have read, understand, agre to 
and accept all the term of thi licens and intellectu properti 
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agre to abid by all 
the term of thi agreement, you must ceas use and return or destroy 
all copi of project gutenberg-tm electron work in your possession. 
If you paid a fee for obtain a copi of or access to a project 
gutenberg-tm electron work and you do not agre to be bound by the 
term of thi agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or 
entiti to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.e.8. 

1.b. "project gutenberg" is a regist trademark. It may onli be 
use on or associ in ani way with an electron work by peopl who 
agre to be bound by the term of thi agreement. there are a few 
thing that you can do with most project gutenberg-tm electron work 
even without compli with the full term of thi agreement. see 
paragraph 1.c below. there are a lot of thing you can do with project 
gutenberg-tm electron work if you follow the term of thi agreement 
and help preserv free futur access to project gutenberg-tm electron 
works. see paragraph 1.e below. 

1.c. the project gutenberg literari archiv foundat ("the foundation" 
or pglaf), own a compil copyright in the collect of project 
gutenberg-tm electron works. nearli all the individu work in the 
collect are in the public domain in the unit states. If an 
individu work is in the public domain in the unit state and you are 
locat in the unit states, we do not claim a right to prevent you from 
copying, distributing, performing, display or creat deriv 
work base on the work as long as all refer to project gutenberg 
are removed. Of course, we hope that you will support the project 
gutenberg-tm mission of promot free access to electron work by 
freeli share project gutenberg-tm work in complianc with the term of 
thi agreement for keep the project gutenberg-tm name associ with 
the work. you can easili compli with the term of thi agreement by 
keep thi work in the same format with it attach full project 
gutenberg-tm licens when you share it without charg with others. 

1.d. the copyright law of the place where you are locat also govern 
what you can do with thi work. copyright law in most countri are in 
a constant state of change. If you are outsid the unit states, check 
the law of your countri in addit to the term of thi agreement 
befor downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distribut or 
creat deriv work base on thi work or ani other project 
gutenberg-tm work. the foundat make no represent concern 
the copyright statu of ani work in ani countri outsid the unit 
states. 

1.e. unless you have remov all refer to project gutenberg: 

1.e.1. the follow sentence, with activ link to, or other immedi 
access to, the full project gutenberg-tm licens must appear promin 
whenev ani copi of a project gutenberg-tm work (ani work on which the 
phrase "project gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "project 
gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed, 
copi or distributed: 

thi ebook is for the use of anyon anywher at no cost and with 
almost no restrict whatsoever. you may copi it, give it away or 
re-us it under the term of the project gutenberg licens includ 
with thi ebook or onlin at www.gutenberg.net 

1.e.2. If an individu project gutenberg-tm electron work is deriv 
from the public domain (doe not contain a notic indic that it is 
post with permiss of the copyright holder), the work can be copi 
and distribut to anyon in the unit state without pay ani fee 
or charges. If you are redistribut or provid access to a work 
with the phrase "project gutenberg" associ with or appear on the 
work, you must compli either with the requir of paragraph 1.e.1 
through 1.e.7 or obtain permiss for the use of the work and the 
project gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraph 1.e.8 or 
1.e.9. 

1.e.3. If an individu project gutenberg-tm electron work is post 
with the permiss of the copyright holder, your use and distribut 
must compli with both paragraph 1.e.1 through 1.e.7 and ani addit 
term impos by the copyright holder. addit term will be link 
to the project gutenberg-tm licens for all work post with the 
permiss of the copyright holder found at the begin of thi work. 

1.e.4. Do not unlink or detach or remov the full project gutenberg-tm 
licens term from thi work, or ani file contain a part of thi 
work or ani other work associ with project gutenberg-tm. 

1.e.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribut or redistribut thi 
electron work, or ani part of thi electron work, without 
promin display the sentenc set forth in paragraph 1.e.1 with 
activ link or immedi access to the full term of the project 
gutenberg-tm license. 

1.e.6. you may convert to and distribut thi work in ani binary, 
compressed, mark up, nonproprietari or proprietari form, includ ani 
word process or hypertext form. however, if you provid access to or 
distribut copi of a project gutenberg-tm work in a format other than 
"plain vanilla ascii" or other format use in the offici version 
post on the offici project gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net), 
you must, at no addit cost, fee or expens to the user, provid a 
copy, a mean of export a copy, or a mean of obtain a copi upon 
request, of the work in it origin "plain vanilla ascii" or other 
form. ani altern format must includ the full project gutenberg-tm 
licens as specifi in paragraph 1.e.1. 

1.e.7. Do not charg a fee for access to, viewing, displaying, 
performing, copi or distribut ani project gutenberg-tm work 
unless you compli with paragraph 1.e.8 or 1.e.9. 

1.e.8. you may charg a reason fee for copi of or provid 
access to or distribut project gutenberg-tm electron work provid 
that 

- you pay a royalti fee of 20% of the gross profit you deriv from 
the use of project gutenberg-tm work calcul use the method 
you alreadi use to calcul your applic taxes. the fee is 
owe to the owner of the project gutenberg-tm trademark, but he 
ha agre to donat royalti under thi paragraph to the 
project gutenberg literari archiv foundation. royalti payment 
must be paid within 60 day follow each date on which you 
prepar (or are legal requir to prepare) your period tax 
returns. royalti payment should be clearli mark as such and 
sent to the project gutenberg literari archiv foundat at the 
address specifi in section 4, "inform about donat to 
the project gutenberg literari archiv foundation." 

- you provid a full refund of ani money paid by a user who notifi 
you in write (or by e-mail) within 30 day of receipt that s/he 
doe not agre to the term of the full project gutenberg-tm 
license. you must requir such a user to return or 
destroy all copi of the work possess in a physic medium 
and discontinu all use of and all access to other copi of 
project gutenberg-tm works. 

- you provide, in accord with paragraph 1.f.3, a full refund of ani 
money paid for a work or a replac copy, if a defect in the 
electron work is discov and report to you within 90 day 
of receipt of the work. 

- you compli with all other term of thi agreement for free 
distribut of project gutenberg-tm works. 

1.e.9. If you wish to charg a fee or distribut a project gutenberg-tm 
electron work or group of work on differ term than are set 
forth in thi agreement, you must obtain permiss in write from 
both the project gutenberg literari archiv foundat and michael 
hart, the owner of the project gutenberg-tm trademark. contact the 
foundat as set forth in section 3 below. 

1.f. 

1.f.1. project gutenberg volunt and employe expend consider 
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcrib and proofread 
public domain work in creat the project gutenberg-tm 
collection. despit these efforts, project gutenberg-tm electron 
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain 
"defects," such as, but not limit to, incomplete, inaccur or 
corrupt data, transcript errors, a copyright or other intellectu 
properti infringement, a defect or damag disk or other medium, a 
comput virus, or comput code that damag or cannot be read by 
your equipment. 

1.f.2. limit warranty, disclaim OF damag - except for the "right 
of replac or refund" describ in paragraph 1.f.3, the project 
gutenberg literari archiv foundation, the owner of the project 
gutenberg-tm trademark, and ani other parti distribut a project 
gutenberg-tm electron work under thi agreement, disclaim all 
liabil to you for damages, cost and expenses, includ legal 
fees. you agre that you have NO remedi for negligence, strict 
liability, breach OF warranti OR breach OF contract except those 
provid IN paragraph 1.f.3. you agre that the foundation, the 
trademark owner, and ani distributor under thi agreement will not BE 
liabl TO you for actual, direct, indirect, consequential, punit OR 
incident damag even IF you give notic OF the possibl OF such 
damage. 

1.f.3. limit right OF replac OR refund - If you discov a 
defect in thi electron work within 90 day of receiv it, you can 
receiv a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by send a 
written explan to the person you receiv the work from. If you 
receiv the work on a physic medium, you must return the medium with 
your written explanation. the person or entiti that provid you with 
the defect work may elect to provid a replac copi in lieu of a 
refund. If you receiv the work electronically, the person or entiti 
provid it to you may choos to give you a second opportun to 
receiv the work electron in lieu of a refund. If the second copi 
is also defective, you may demand a refund in write without further 
opportun to fix the problem. 

1.f.4. except for the limit right of replac or refund set forth 
in paragraph 1.f.3, thi work is provid to you 'as-is' with NO other 
warranti OF ani kind, express OR implied, includ but not limit TO 
warranti OF merchant OR fit for ani purpose. 

1.f.5. some state do not allow disclaim of certain impli 
warranti or the exclus or limit of certain type of damages. 
If ani disclaim or limit set forth in thi agreement violat the 
law of the state applic to thi agreement, the agreement shall be 
interpret to make the maximum disclaim or limit permit by 
the applic state law. the invalid or unenforc of ani 
provis of thi agreement shall not void the remain provisions. 

1.f.6. indemn - you agre to indemnifi and hold the foundation, the 
trademark owner, ani agent or employe of the foundation, anyon 
provid copi of project gutenberg-tm electron work in accord 
with thi agreement, and ani volunt associ with the production, 
promot and distribut of project gutenberg-tm electron works, 
harmless from all liability, cost and expenses, includ legal fees, 
that aris directli or indirectli from ani of the follow which you do 
or caus to occur: (a) distribut of thi or ani project gutenberg-tm 
work, (b) alteration, modification, or addit or delet to ani 
project gutenberg-tm work, and (c) ani defect you cause. 


section 2. inform about the mission of project gutenberg-tm 

project gutenberg-tm is synonym with the free distribut of 
electron work in format readabl by the widest varieti of comput 
includ obsolete, old, middle-ag and new computers. It exist 
becaus of the effort of hundr of volunt and donat from 
peopl in all walk of life. 

volunt and financi support to provid volunt with the 
assist they need are critic to reach project gutenberg-tm' 
goal and ensur that the project gutenberg-tm collect will 
remain freeli avail for gener to come. In 2001, the project 
gutenberg literari archiv foundat wa creat to provid a secur 
and perman futur for project gutenberg-tm and futur generations. 
To learn more about the project gutenberg literari archiv foundat 
and how your effort and donat can help, see section 3 and 4 
and the foundat web page at http://www.pglaf.org. 


section 3. inform about the project gutenberg literari archiv 
foundat 

the project gutenberg literari archiv foundat is a non profit 
501(c)(3) educ corpor organ under the law of the 
state of mississippi and grant tax exempt statu by the intern 
revenu service. the foundation' ein or feder tax identif 
number is 64-6221541. it 501(c)(3) letter is post at 
http://pglaf.org/fundraising. contribut to the project gutenberg 
literari archiv foundat are tax deduct to the full extent 
permit by u.s. feder law and your state' laws. 

the foundation' princip offic is locat at 4557 melan dr. S. 
fairbanks, ak, 99712., but it volunt and employe are scatter 
throughout numer locations. it busi offic is locat at 
809 north 1500 west, salt lake city, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email 
business@pglaf.org. email contact link and up to date contact 
inform can be found at the foundation' web site and offici 
page at http://pglaf.org 

for addit contact information: 
dr. gregori B. newbi 
chief execut and director 
gbnewby@pglaf.org 


section 4. inform about donat to the project gutenberg 
literari archiv foundat 

project gutenberg-tm depend upon and cannot surviv without wide 
spread public support and donat to carri out it mission of 
increas the number of public domain and licens work that can be 
freeli distribut in machin readabl form access by the widest 
array of equip includ outdat equipment. mani small donat 
($1 to $5,000) are particularli import to maintain tax exempt 
statu with the irs. 

the foundat is commit to compli with the law regul 
chariti and charit donat in all 50 state of the unit 
states. complianc requir are not uniform and it take a 
consider effort, much paperwork and mani fee to meet and keep up 
with these requirements. We do not solicit donat in locat 
where we have not receiv written confirm of compliance. To 
send donat or determin the statu of complianc for ani 
particular state visit http://pglaf.org 

while we cannot and do not solicit contribut from state where we 
have not met the solicit requirements, we know of no prohibit 
against accept unsolicit donat from donor in such state who 
approach us with offer to donate. 

intern donat are grate accepted, but we cannot make 
ani statement concern tax treatment of donat receiv from 
outsid the unit states. u.s. law alon swamp our small staff. 

pleas check the project gutenberg web page for current donat 
method and addresses. donat are accept in a number of other 
way includ includ checks, onlin payment and credit card 
donations. To donate, pleas visit: http://pglaf.org/don 


section 5. gener inform about project gutenberg-tm electron 
works. 

professor michael S. hart is the origin of the project gutenberg-tm 
concept of a librari of electron work that could be freeli share 
with anyone. for thirti years, he produc and distribut project 
gutenberg-tm ebook with onli a loos network of volunt support. 


project gutenberg-tm ebook are often creat from sever print 
editions, all of which are confirm as public domain in the u.s. 
unless a copyright notic is included. thus, we do not necessarili 
keep ebook in complianc with ani particular paper edition. 


most peopl start at our web site which ha the main PG search facility: 

http://www.gutenberg.net 

thi web site includ inform about project gutenberg-tm, 
includ how to make donat to the project gutenberg literari 
archiv foundation, how to help produc our new ebooks, and how to 
subscrib to our email newslett to hear about new ebooks. 
