the project gutenberg ebook, A thin ghost and others, by M. R. (montagu 
rhodes) jame 


thi ebook is for the use of anyon anywher at no cost and with 
almost no restrict whatsoever. you may copi it, give it away or 
re-us it under the term of the project gutenberg licens includ 
with thi ebook or onlin at www.gutenberg.org 





title: A thin ghost and other 


author: M. R. (montagu rhodes) jame 



releas date: januari 16, 2007 [ebook #20387] 

language: english 


***start OF the project gutenberg ebook A thin ghost and others*** 


e-text prepar by dian monico and the project gutenberg onlin 
distribut proofread team (http://www.pgdp.net/c/) 



A thin ghost and other 

by 

montagu rhode james, litt.d. 

provost Of eton colleg 
author of "ghost stori of an antiquary," "more ghost stories," etc. 

third impress 







new york 
longmans, green & co. 
london: edward arnold 
1920 
(all right reserved) 




prefac 


two of these stories, the third and fourth, have appear in print in 
the _cambridg review_, and I wish to thank the proprietor for 
permit me to republish them here. 

I have had my doubt about the wisdom of publish a third set of 
tales; sequel are, not onli proverbi but actually, veri hazard 
things. however, the tale make no pretenc but to amuse, and my 
friend have not seldom ask for the publication. So not a great deal 
is risked, perhaps, and perhap also some one' christma may be the 
cheerful for a storybook which, I think, onli onc mention the 
war. 




content 


page 

the resid AT whitminst 1 

the diari OF mr. poynter 49 

AN episod OF cathedr histori 73 

the stori OF A disappear and AN appear 107 

two doctor 135 




the resid AT whitminst 




A thin ghost and other 

the resid AT whitminst 


dr. ashton--thoma ashton, doctor of divinity--sat in hi study, 
habit in a dressing-gown, and with a silk cap on hi shaven 
head--hi wig be for the time taken off and place on it block on 
a side table. He wa a man of some fifty-f years, strongli made, of 
a sanguin complexion, an angri eye, and a long upper lip. face and 
eye were light up at the moment when I pictur him by the level ray 
of an afternoon sun that shone in upon him through a tall sash window, 
give on the west. the room into which it shone wa also tall, line 
with book-cases, and, where the wall show between them, panelled. On 
the tabl near the doctor' elbow wa a green cloth, and upon it what 
he would have call a silver standish--a tray with inkstands--quil 
pens, a calf-bound book or two, some papers, a churchwarden pipe and 
brass tobacco-box, a flask case in plait straw, and a liqueur 
glass. the year wa 1730, the month december, the hour somewhat past 
three in the afternoon. 

I have describ in these line pretti much all that a superfici 
observ would have note when he look into the room. what met dr. 
ashton' eye when he look out of it, sit in hi leather 
arm-chair? littl more than the top of the shrub and fruit-tre of 
hi garden could be seen from that point, but the red brick wall of it 
wa visibl in almost all the length of it western side. In the 
middl of that wa a gate--a doubl gate of rather elabor iron 
scroll-work, which allow someth of a view beyond. through it he 
could see that the ground slope away almost at onc to a bottom, 
along which a stream must run, and rose steepli from it on the other 
side, up to a field that wa park-lik in character, and thickli 
stud with oaks, now, of course, leafless. they did not stand so 
thick togeth but that some glimps of sky and horizon could be seen 
between their stems. the sky wa now golden and the horizon, a horizon 
of distant woods, it seemed, wa purple. 

but all that dr. ashton could find to say, after contempl thi 
prospect for mani minutes, was: "abominable!" 

A listen would have been aware, immedi upon this, of the sound 
of footstep come somewhat hurriedli in the direct of the study: 
by the reson he could have told that they were travers a much 
larger room. dr. ashton turn round in hi chair as the door opened, 
and look expectant. the incom wa a lady--a stout ladi in the 
dress of the time: though I have made some attempt at indic the 
doctor' costume, I will not enterpris that of hi wife--for it wa 
mrs. ashton who now entered. she had an anxious, even a sore 
distracted, look, and it wa in a veri disturb voic that she almost 
whisper to dr. ashton, put her head close to his, "he' in a 
veri sad way, love, worse, i'm afraid." "tt--tt, is he really?" and he 
lean back and look in her face. she nodded. two solemn bells, high 
up, and not far away, rang out the half-hour at thi moment. mrs. 
ashton started. "oh, do you think you can give order that the minster 
clock be stop chime to-night? 'ti just over hi chamber, and 
will keep him from sleeping, and to sleep is the onli chanc for him, 
that' certain." "why, to be sure, if there were need, real need, it 
could be done, but not upon ani light occasion. thi frank, now, do 
you assur me that hi recoveri stand upon it?" said dr. ashton: hi 
voic wa loud and rather hard. "I do verili believ it," said hi 
wife. "then, if it must be, bid molli run across to simpkin and say 
on my author that he is to stop the clock chime at sunset: 
and--yes--sh is after that to say to my lord saul that I wish to see 
him present in thi room." mrs. ashton hurri off. 

befor ani other visitor enters, it will be well to explain the 
situation. 

dr. ashton wa the holder, among other preferments, of a prebend in 
the rich collegi church of whitminster, one of the foundat 
which, though not a cathedral, surviv dissolut and reformation, 
and retain it constitut and endow for a hundr year after 
the time of which I write. the great church, the resid of the 
dean and the two prebendaries, the choir and it appurtenances, were 
all intact and in work order. A dean who flourish soon after 1500 
had been a great builder, and had erect a spaciou quadrangl of red 
brick adjoin the church for the resid of the officials. some of 
these person were no longer required: their offic had dwindl 
down to mere titles, born by clergi or lawyer in the town and 
neighbourhood; and so the hous that had been meant to accommod 
eight or ten peopl were now share among three, the dean and the two 
prebendaries. dr. ashton' includ what had been the common parlour 
and the dining-hal of the whole body. It occupi a whole side of the 
court, and at one end had a privat door into the minster. the other 
end, as we have seen, look out over the country. 

So much for the house. As for the inmates, dr. ashton wa a wealthi 
man and childless, and he had adopted, or rather undertaken to bring 
up, the orphan son of hi wife' sister. frank sydal wa the lad' 
name: he had been a good mani month in the house. then one day came a 
letter from an irish peer, the earl of kildonan (who had known dr. 
ashton at college), put it to the doctor whether he would consid 
take into hi famili the viscount saul, the earl' heir, and act 
in some sort as hi tutor. lord kildonan wa shortli to take up a post 
in the lisbon embassy, and the boy wa unfit to make the voyage: "not 
that he is sickly," the earl wrote, "though you'll find him whimsical, 
or of late i'v thought him so, and to confirm this, 'twa onli 
to-day hi old nurs came expressli to tell me he wa possess'd: but 
let that pass; i'll warrant you can find a spell to make all straight. 
your arm wa stout enough in old days, and I give you plenari 
author to use it as you see fit. the truth is, he ha here no boy 
of hi age or qualiti to consort with, and is given to mope about in 
our rath and graveyards: and he bring home romanc that fright my 
servant out of their wits. So there are you and your ladi 
forewarned." It wa perhap with half an eye open to the possibl 
of an irish bishopr (at which anoth sentenc in the earl' letter 
seem to hint) that dr. ashton accept the charg of my lord 
viscount saul and of the 200 guinea a year that were to come with 
him. 

So he came, one night in september. when he got out of the chais that 
brought him, he went first and spoke to the postboy and gave him some 
money, and pat the neck of hi horse. whether he made some movement 
that scare it or not, there wa veri nearli a nasti accident, for the 
beast start violently, and the postilion be unreadi wa thrown 
and lost hi fee, as he found afterwards, and the chais lost some 
paint on the gateposts, and the wheel went over the man' foot who wa 
take out the baggage. when lord saul came up the step into the 
light of the lamp in the porch to be greet by dr. ashton, he wa 
seen to be a thin youth of, say, sixteen year old, with straight 
black hair and the pale colour that is common to such a figure. He 
took the accid and commot calmli enough, and express a proper 
anxieti for the peopl who had been, or might have been, hurt: hi 
voic wa smooth and pleasant, and without ani trace, curiously, of an 
irish brogue. 

frank sydal wa a younger boy, perhap of eleven or twelve, but lord 
saul did not for that reject hi company. frank wa abl to teach him 
variou game he had not known in ireland, and he wa apt at learn 
them; apt, too, at hi books, though he had had littl or no regular 
teach at home. It wa not long befor he wa make a shift to 
puzzl out the inscript on the tomb in the minster, and he would 
often put a question to the doctor about the old book in the librari 
that requir some thought to answer. It is to be suppos that he 
made himself veri agreeabl to the servants, for within ten day of 
hi come they were almost fall over each other in their effort 
to oblig him. At the same time, mrs. ashton wa rather put to it to 
find new maidservants; for there were sever changes, and some of the 
famili in the town from which she had been accustom to draw seem 
to have no one available. she wa forc to go further afield than wa 
usual. 

these gener I gather from the doctor' note in hi diari and 
from letters. they are generalities, and we should like, in view of 
what ha to be told, someth sharper and more detailed. We get it in 
entri which begin late in the year, and, I think, were post up all 
togeth after the final incident; but they cover so few day in all 
that there is no need to doubt that the writer could rememb the 
cours of thing accurately. 

On a friday morn it wa that a fox, or perhap a cat, made away 
with mrs. ashton' most prize black cockerel, a bird without a singl 
white feather on it body. her husband had told her often enough that 
it would make a suitabl sacrific to æsculapius; that had discomfit 
her much, and now she would hardli be consoled. the boy look 
everywher for trace of it: lord saul brought in a few feathers, 
which seem to have been partial burnt on the garden rubbish-heap. 
It wa on the same day that dr. ashton, look out of an upper 
window, saw the two boy play in the corner of the garden at a game 
he did not understand. frank wa look earnestli at someth in the 
palm of hi hand. saul stood behind him and seem to be listening. 
after some minut he veri gentli laid hi hand on frank' head, and 
almost instantli thereupon, frank suddenli drop whatev it wa 
that he wa holding, clap hi hand to hi eyes, and sank down on 
the grass. saul, whose face express great anger, hastili pick the 
object up, of which it could onli be seen that it wa glittering, put 
it in hi pocket, and turn away, leav frank huddl up on the 
grass. dr. ashton rap on the window to attract their attention, and 
saul look up as if in alarm, and then spring to frank, pull him 
up by the arm and led him away. when they came in to dinner, saul 
explain that they had been act a part of the tragedi of 
radamistus, in which the heroin read the futur fate of her father' 
kingdom by mean of a glass ball held in her hand, and is overcom by 
the terribl event she ha seen. dure thi explan frank said 
nothing, onli look rather bewilderedli at saul. He must, mrs. ashton 
thought, have contract a chill from the wet of the grass, for that 
even he wa certainli feverish and disordered; and the disord wa 
of the mind as well as the body, for he seem to have someth he 
wish to say to mrs. ashton, onli a press of household affair 
prevent her from pay attent to him; and when she went, 
accord to her habit, to see that the light in the boys' chamber had 
been taken away, and to bid them good-night, he seem to be sleeping, 
though hi face wa unnatur flushed, to her thinking: lord saul, 
however, wa pale and quiet, and smile in hi slumber. 

next morn it happen that dr. ashton wa occupi in church and 
other business, and unabl to take the boys' lessons. He therefor set 
them task to be written and brought to him. three times, if not 
oftener, frank knock at the studi door, and each time the doctor 
chanc to be engag with some visitor, and sent the boy off rather 
roughly, which he later regretted. two clergymen were at dinner thi 
day, and both remarked--b father of families--that the lad seem 
sicken for a fever, in which they were too near the truth, and it 
had been better if he had been put to bed forthwith: for a coupl of 
hour later in the afternoon he came run into the house, cri 
out in a way that wa realli terrifying, and rush to mrs. ashton, 
clung about her, beg her to protect him, and saying, "keep them 
off! keep them off!" without intermission. and it wa now evid that 
some sick had taken strong hold of him. He wa therefor got to 
bed in anoth chamber from that in which he commonli lay, and the 
physician brought to him: who pronounc the disord to be grave and 
affect the lad' brain, and prognost a fatal end to it if 
strict quiet were not observed, and those sed remedi use which 
he should prescribe. 

We are now come by anoth way to the point we had reach before. the 
minster clock ha been stop from striking, and lord saul is on the 
threshold of the study. 

"what account can you give of thi poor lad' state?" wa dr. ashton' 
first question. "why, sir, littl more than you know already, I fancy. 
I must blame myself, though, for give him a fright yesterday when we 
were act that foolish play you saw. I fear I made him take it more 
to heart than I meant." "how so?" "well, by tell him foolish tale 
I had pick up in ireland of what we call the second sight." 
"_second_ sight! what kind of sight might that be?" "why, you know our 
ignor peopl pretend that some are abl to forese what is to 
come--sometim in a glass, or in the air, maybe, and at kildonan we 
had an old woman that pretend to such a power. and I daresay I 
colour the matter more highli than I should: but I never dream 
frank would take it so near as he did." "you were wrong, my lord, veri 
wrong, in meddl with such superstiti matter at all, and you 
should have consid whose hous you were in, and how littl 
becom such action are to my charact and person or to your own: 
but pray how came it that you, acting, as you say, a play, should fall 
upon anyth that could so alarm frank?" "that is what I can hardli 
tell, sir: he pass all in a moment from rant about battl and 
lover and cleodora and antigen to someth I could not follow at 
all, and then drop down as you saw." "yes: wa that at the moment 
when you laid your hand on the top of hi head?" lord saul gave a 
quick look at hi questioner--quick and spiteful--and for the first 
time seem unreadi with an answer. "about that time it may have 
been," he said. "I have tri to recollect myself, but I am not sure. 
there was, at ani rate, no signific in what I did then." "ah!" 
said dr. ashton, "well, my lord, I should do wrong were I not to tell 
you that thi fright of my poor nephew may have veri ill consequ 
to him. the doctor speak veri despondingli of hi state." lord saul 
press hi hand togeth and look earnestli upon dr. ashton. "I am 
will to believ you had no bad intention, as assuredli you could 
have no reason to bear the poor boy malice: but I cannot wholli free 
you from blame in the affair." As he spoke, the hurri step were 
heard again, and mrs. ashton came quickli into the room, carri a 
candle, for the even had by thi time close in. she wa greatli 
agitated. "O come!" she cried, "come directly. i'm sure he is going." 
"going? frank? Is it possible? already?" with some such incoher 
word the doctor caught up a book of prayer from the tabl and ran 
out after hi wife. lord saul stop for a moment where he was. 
molly, the maid, saw him bend over and put both hand to hi face. If 
it were the last word she had to speak, she said afterwards, he wa 
strive to keep back a fit of laughing. then he went out softly, 
follow the others. 

mrs. ashton wa sadli right in her forecast. I have no inclin to 
imagin the last scene in detail. what dr. ashton record is, or may 
be taken to be, import to the story. they ask frank if he would 
like to see hi companion, lord saul, onc again. the boy wa quit 
collected, it appears, in these moments. "no," he said, "I do not want 
to see him; but you should tell him I am afraid he will be veri cold." 
"what do you mean, my dear?" said mrs. ashton. "onli that;" said 
frank, "but say to him besid that I am free of them now, but he 
should take care. and I am sorri about your black cockerel, aunt 
ashton; but he said we must use it so, if we were to see all that 
could be seen." 

not mani minut after, he wa gone. both the ashton were grieved, 
she natur most; but the doctor, though not an emot man, felt 
the patho of the earli death: and, besides, there wa the grow 
suspicion that all had not been told him by saul, and that there wa 
someth here which wa out of hi beaten track. when he left the 
chamber of death, it wa to walk across the quadrangl of the 
resid to the sexton' house. A pass bell, the greatest of the 
minster bells, must be rung, a grave must be dug in the minster yard, 
and there wa now no need to silenc the chime of the minster clock. 
As he came slowli back in the dark, he thought he must see lord saul 
again. that matter of the black cockerel--trifl as it might 
seem--would have to be clear up. It might be mere a fanci of the 
sick boy, but if not, wa there not a witch-trial he had read, in 
which some grim littl rite of sacrific had play a part? yes, he 
must see saul. 

I rather guess these thought of hi than find written author for 
them. that there wa anoth interview is certain: certain also that 
saul would (or, as he said, could) throw no light on frank' words: 
though the message, or some part of it, appear to affect him 
horribly. but there is no record of the talk in detail. It is onli 
said that saul sat all that even in the study, and when he bid 
good-night, which he did most reluctantly, ask for the doctor' 
prayers. 

the month of januari wa near it end when lord kildonan, in the 
embassi at lisbon, receiv a letter that for onc grave disturb 
that vain man and neglect father. saul wa dead. the scene at 
frank' burial had been veri distressing. the day wa aw in 
black and wind: the bearers, stagger blindli along under the 
flap black pall, found it a hard job, when they emerg from the 
porch of the minster, to make their way to the grave. mrs. ashton wa 
in her room--women did not then go to their kinsfolk' funerals--but 
saul wa there, drape in the mourn cloak of the time, and hi face 
wa white and fix as that of one dead, except when, as wa notic 
three or four times, he suddenli turn hi head to the left and 
look over hi shoulder. It wa then aliv with a terribl express 
of listen fear. No one saw him go away: and no one could find him 
that evening. all night the gale buffet the high window of the 
church, and howl over the upland and roar through the woodland. It 
wa useless to search in the open: no voic of shout or cri for 
help could possibl be heard. all that dr. ashton could do wa to warn 
the peopl about the college, and the town constables, and to sit up, 
on the alert for ani news, and thi he did. new came earli next 
morning, brought by the sexton, whose busi it wa to open the 
church for earli prayer at seven, and who sent the maid rush 
upstair with wild eye and fli hair to summon her master. the two 
men dash across to the south door of the minster, there to find lord 
saul cling desper to the great ring of the door, hi head sunk 
between hi shoulders, hi stock in rags, hi shoe gone, hi leg 
torn and bloody. 

thi wa what had to be told to lord kildonan, and thi realli end 
the first part of the story. the tomb of frank sydal and of the lord 
viscount saul, onli child and heir to william earl of kildonan, is 
one: a stone altar tomb in whitminst churchyard. 

dr. ashton live on for over thirti year in hi prebend house, I do 
not know how quietly, but without visibl disturbance. hi successor 
prefer a hous he alreadi own in the town, and left that of the 
senior prebendari vacant. between them these two men saw the 
eighteenth centuri out and the nineteenth in; for mr. hindes, the 
successor of ashton, becam prebendari at nine-and-twenti and die at 
nine-and-eighty. So that it wa not till 1823 or 1824 that ani one 
succeed to the post who intend to make the hous hi home. the man 
who did wa dr. henri oldys, whose name may be known to some of my 
reader as that of the author of a row of volum label _oldys' 
works_, which occupi a place that must be honoured, sinc it is so 
rare touched, upon the shelv of mani a substanti library. 

dr. oldys, hi niece, and hi servant took some month to transfer 
furnitur and book from hi dorsetshir parsonag to the quadrangl 
of whitminster, and to get everyth into place. but eventu the 
work wa done, and the hous (which, though untenanted, had alway 
been kept sound and weather-tight) woke up, and like mont cristo' 
mansion at auteuil, lived, sang, and bloom onc more. On a certain 
morn in june it look especi fair, as dr. oldi stroll in 
hi garden befor breakfast and gaze over the red roof at the minster 
tower with it four gold vanes, back by a veri blue sky, and veri 
white littl clouds. 

"mary," he said, as he seat himself at the breakfast tabl and laid 
down someth hard and shini on the cloth, "here' a find which the 
boy made just now. you'll be sharper than I if you can guess what it' 
meant for." It wa a round and perfectli smooth tablet--a much as an 
inch thick--of what seem clear glass. "it is rather attract at 
all events," said mary: she wa a fair woman, with light hair and 
larg eyes, rather a devote of literature. "yes," said her uncle, "I 
thought you'd be pleas with it. I presum it came from the house: it 
turn up in the rubbish-heap in the corner." "i'm not sure that I do 
like it, after all," said mary, some minut later. "whi in the world 
not, my dear?" "I don't know, i'm sure. perhap it' onli fancy." 
"yes, onli fanci and romance, of course. what' that book, now--th 
name of that book, I mean, that you had your head in all yesterday?" 
"_the talisman_, uncle. oh, if thi should turn out to be a talisman, 
how enchant it would be!" "yes, _the talisman_: ah, well, you'r 
welcom to it, whatev it is: I must be off about my business. Is all 
well in the house? doe it suit you? ani complaint from the servants' 
hall?" "no, indeed, noth could be more charming. the onli _soupçon_ 
of a complaint besid the lock of the linen closet, which I told you 
of, is that mrs. mapl say she cannot get rid of the sawfli out of 
that room you pass through at the other end of the hall. By the way, 
are you sure you like your bedroom? It is a long way off from ani one 
else, you know." "like it? To be sure I do; the further off from you, 
my dear, the better. there, don't think it necessari to beat me: 
accept my apologies. but what are sawflies? will they eat my coats? If 
not, they may have the room to themselv for what I care. We are not 
like to be use it." "no, of cours not. well, what she call 
sawfli are those reddish thing like a daddy-longlegs, but 
smaller,[1] and there are a great mani of them perch about that 
room, certainly. I don't like them, but I don't fanci they are 
mischievous." "there seem to be sever thing you don't like thi 
fine morning," said her uncle, as he close the door. miss oldi 
remain in her chair look at the tablet, which she wa hold in 
the palm of her hand. the smile that had been on her face fade slowli 
from it and gave place to an express of curios and almost 
strain attention. her reveri wa broken by the entranc of mrs. 
maple, and her invari opening, "oh, miss, could I speak to you a 
minute?" 

A letter from miss oldi to a friend in lichfield, begun a day or two 
before, is the next sourc for thi story. It is not devoid of trace 
of the influenc of that leader of femal thought in her day, miss 
anna seward, known to some as the swan of lichfield. 

"mi sweetest emili will be rejoic to hear that we are at length--mi 
belov uncl and myself--settl in the hous that now call us 
master--nay, master and mistress--a in past age it ha call so 
mani others. here we tast a mingl of modern eleg and hoari 
antiquity, such as ha never ere now grace life for either of us. the 
town, small as it is, afford us some reflection, pale indeed, but 
veritable, of the sweet of polit intercourse: the adjac countri 
number amid the occup of it scatter mansion some whose polish 
is annual refresh by contact with metropolitan splendour, and 
other whose robust and home genial is, at times, and by way of 
contrast, not less cheer and acceptable. tire of the parlour and 
drawing-room of our friends, we have readi to hand a refug from the 
clash of wit or the small talk of the day amid the solemn beauti of 
our vener minster, whose silvern chime daili 'knoll us to 
prayer,' and in the shadi walk of whose tranquil graveyard we muse 
with soften heart, and ever and anon with moisten eye, upon the 
memori of the young, the beautiful, the aged, the wise, and the 
good." 

here there is an abrupt break both in the write and the style. 

"but my dearest emily, I can no longer write with the care which you 
deserve, and in which we both take pleasure. what I have to tell you 
is wholli foreign to what ha gone before. thi morn my uncl 
brought in to breakfast an object which had been found in the garden; 
it wa a glass or crystal tablet of thi shape (a littl sketch is 
given), which he hand to me, and which, after he left the room, 
remain on the tabl by me. I gaze at it, I know not why, for some 
minutes, till call away by the day' duties; and you will smile 
incredul when I say that I seem to myself to begin to descri 
reflect in it object and scene which were not in the room where I 
was. you will not, however, be surpris that after such an experi 
I took the first opportun to seclud myself in my room with what I 
now half believ to be a talisman of mickl might. I wa not 
disappointed. I assur you, emily, by that memori which is dearest to 
both of us, that what I went through thi afternoon transcend the 
limit of what I had befor deem credible. In brief, what I saw, 
seat in my bedroom, in the broad daylight of summer, and look 
into the crystal depth of that small round tablet, wa this. first, a 
prospect, strang to me, of an enclosur of rough and hillocki grass, 
with a grey stone ruin in the midst, and a wall of rough stone about 
it. In thi stood an old, and veri ugly, woman in a red cloak and 
rag skirt, talk to a boy dress in the fashion of mayb a 
hundr year ago. she put someth which glitter into hi hand, 
and he someth into hers, which I saw to be money, for a singl coin 
fell from her trembl hand into the grass. the scene passed--i 
should have remarked, by the way, that on the rough wall of the 
enclosur I could distinguish bones, and even a skull, lie in a 
disorderli fashion. next, I wa look upon two boys; one the figur 
of the former vision, the other younger. they were in a plot of 
garden, wall round, and thi garden, in spite of the differ in 
arrangement, and the small size of the trees, I could clearli 
recogn as be that upon which I now look from my window. the boy 
were engag in some curiou play, it seemed. someth wa 
smoulder on the ground. the elder place hi hand upon it, and 
then rais them in what I took to be an attitud of prayer: and I 
saw, and start at seeing, that on them were deep stain of blood. 
the sky abov wa overcast. the same boy now turn hi face toward 
the wall of the garden, and beckon with both hi rais hands, and 
as he did so I wa consciou that some move object were becom 
visibl over the top of the wall--wheth head or other part of some 
anim or human form I could not tell. upon the instant the elder boy 
turn sharply, seiz the arm of the younger (who all thi time had 
been pore over what lay on the ground), and both hurri off. I then 
saw blood upon the grass, a littl pile of bricks, and what I thought 
were black feather scatter about. that scene closed, and the next 
wa so dark that perhap the full mean of it escap me. but what I 
seem to see wa a form, at first crouch low among tree or bush 
that were be thresh by a violent wind, then run veri swiftly, 
and constantli turn a pale face to look behind him, as if he fear 
a pursuer: and, indeed, pursuer were follow hard after him. their 
shape were but dimli seen, their number--thre or four, perhaps, 
onli guessed. I suppos they were on the whole more like dog than 
anyth else, but dog such as we have seen they assuredli were not. 
could I have close my eye to thi horror, I would have done so at 
once, but I wa helpless. the last I saw wa the victim dart 
beneath an arch and clutch at some object to which he clung: and 
those that were pursu him overtook him, and I seem to hear the 
echo of a cri of despair. It may be that I becam unconscious: 
certainli I had the sensat of awak to the light of day after an 
interv of darkness. such, in liter truth, emily, wa my vision--i 
can call it by no other name--of thi afternoon. tell me, have I not 
been the unwil wit of some episod of a tragedi connect with 
thi veri house?" 

the letter is continu next day. "the tale of yesterday wa not 
complet when I laid down my pen. I said noth of my experi to 
my uncle--y know, yourself, how littl hi robust common-sens would 
be prepar to allow of them, and how in hi eye the specif remedi 
would be a black draught or a glass of port. after a silent evening, 
then--silent, not sullen--i retir to rest. judg of my terror, 
when, not yet in bed, I heard what I can onli describ as a distant 
bellow, and knew it for my uncle' voice, though never in my hear 
so exert before. hi sleeping-room is at the further extrem of 
thi larg house, and to gain access to it one must travers an 
antiqu hall some eighti feet long and a lofti panel chamber, and 
two unoccupi bedrooms. In the second of these--a room almost devoid 
of furniture--i found him, in the dark, hi candl lie smash on 
the floor. As I ran in, bear a light, he clasp me in arm that 
trembl for the first time sinc I have known him, thank god, and 
hurri me out of the room. He would say noth of what had alarm 
him. 'to-morrow, to-morrow,' wa all I could get from him. A bed wa 
hastili improvis for him in the room next to my own. I doubt if hi 
night wa more rest than mine. I could onli get to sleep in the 
small hours, when daylight wa alreadi strong, and then my dream were 
of the grimmest--particularli one which stamp itself on my brain, 
and which I must set down on the chanc of dispers the impress 
it ha made. It wa that I came up to my room with a heavi forebod 
of evil oppress me, and went with a hesit and reluct I 
could not explain to my chest of drawers. I open the top drawer, in 
which wa noth but ribbon and handkerchiefs, and then the second, 
where wa as littl to alarm, and then, O heavens, the third and last: 
and there wa a mass of linen neatli folded: upon which, as I look 
with curios that began to be ting with horror, I perceiv a 
movement in it, and a pink hand wa thrust out of the fold and began 
to grope feebli in the air. I could bear it no more, and rush from 
the room, clap the door after me, and strove with all my forc to 
lock it. but the key would not turn in the wards, and from within the 
room came a sound of rustl and bumping, draw nearer and nearer 
to the door. whi I did not flee down the stair I know not. I 
continu grasp the handle, and mercifully, as the door wa pluck 
from my hand with an irresist force, I awoke. you may not think 
thi veri alarming, but I assur you it wa so to me. 

"at breakfast to-day my uncl wa veri uncommunicative, and I think 
asham of the fright he had given us; but afterward he inquir of 
me whether mr. spearman wa still in town, ad that he thought that 
wa a young man who had some sens left in hi head. I think you 
know, my dear emily, that I am not inclin to disagre with him 
there, and also that I wa not unlik to be abl to answer hi 
question. To mr. spearman he accordingli went, and I have not seen him 
since. I must send thi strang budget of news to you now, or it may 
have to wait over more than one post." 

the reader will not be far out if he guess that miss mari and mr. 
spearman made a match of it not veri long after thi month of june. 
mr. spearman wa a young spark, who had a good properti in the 
neighbourhood of whitminster, and not unfrequ about thi time 
spent a few day at the "king' head," ostens on business. but he 
must have had some leisure, for hi diari is copious, especi for 
the day of which I am tell the story. It is probabl to me that he 
wrote thi episod as fulli as he could at the bid of miss mary. 

"uncl oldi (how I hope I may have the right to call him so befor 
long!) call thi morning. after throw out a good mani short 
remark on indiffer topics, he said 'I wish, spearman, you'd listen 
to an odd stori and keep a close tongu about it just for a bit, till 
I get more light on it.' 'to be sure,' said I, 'you may count on me.' 
'I don't know what to make of it,' he said. 'you know my bedroom. It 
is well away from everi one else's, and I pass through the great hall 
and two or three other room to get to it.' 'i it at the end next the 
minster, then?' I asked. 'yes, it is: well, now, yesterday morn my 
mari told me that the room next befor it wa infest with some sort 
of fli that the housekeep couldn't get rid of. that may be the 
explanation, or it may not. what do you think?' 'why,' said I, 'you'v 
not yet told me what ha to be explained.' 'true enough, I don't 
believ I have; but by-the-by, what are these sawflies? what' the 
size of them?' I began to wonder if he wa touch in the head. 'what 
I call a sawfly,' I said veri patiently, 'i a red animal, like a 
daddy-longlegs, but not so big, perhap an inch long, perhap less. It 
is veri hard in the body, and to me'--i wa go to say 'particularli 
offensive,' but he broke in, 'come, come; an inch or less. that won't 
do.' 'I can onli tell you,' I said, 'what I know. would it not be 
better if you told me from first to last what it is that ha puzzl 
you, and then I may be abl to give you some kind of an opinion.' He 
gaze at me meditatively. 'perhap it would,' he said. 'I told mari 
onli to-day that I thought you had some vestig of sens in your 
head.' (I bow my acknowledgements.) 'the thing is, i'v an odd kind 
of shyness about talk of it. noth of the sort ha happen to me 
before. well, about eleven o'clock last night, or after, I took my 
candl and set out for my room. I had a book in my other hand--i 
alway read someth for a few minut befor I drop off to sleep. A 
danger habit: I don't recommend it: but I know how to manag my 
light and my bed curtains. now then, first, as I step out of my 
studi into the great half that' next to it, and shut the door, my 
candl went out. I suppos I had clap the door behind me too 
quick, and made a draught, and I wa annoyed, for i'd no tinder-box 
nearer than my bedroom. but I knew my way well enough, and went on. 
the next thing wa that my book wa struck out of my hand in the dark: 
if I said twitch out of my hand it would better express the 
sensation. It fell on the floor. I pick it up, and went on, more 
annoy than before, and a littl startled. but as you know, that hall 
ha mani window without curtains, and in summer night like these it 
is easi to see not onli where the furnitur is, but whether there' 
ani one or anyth moving, and there wa no one--noth of the kind. 
So on I went through the hall and through the audit chamber next to 
it, which also ha big windows, and then into the bedroom which lead 
to my own, where the curtain were drawn, and I had to go slower 
becaus of step here and there. It wa in the second of those room 
that I nearli got my _quietus_. the moment I open the door of it I 
felt there wa someth wrong. I thought twice, I confess, whether I 
shouldn't turn back and find anoth way there is to my room rather 
than go through that one. then I wa asham of myself, and thought 
what peopl call better of it, though I don't know about "better" in 
thi case. If I wa to describ my experi exactly, I should say 
this: there wa a dry, light, rustl sound all over the room as I 
went in, and then (you rememb it wa perfectli dark) someth 
seem to rush at me, and there was--i don't know how to put it--a 
sensat of long thin arms, or legs, or feelers, all about my face, 
and neck, and body. veri littl strength in them, there seem to be, 
but spearman, I don't think I wa ever more horrifi or disgust in 
all my life, that I remember: and it doe take someth to put me 
out. I roar out as loud as I could, and flung away my candl at 
random, and, know I wa near the window, I tore at the curtain and 
somehow let in enough light to be abl to see someth wave which I 
knew wa an insect' leg, by the shape of it: but, lord, what a size! 
whi the beast must have been as tall as I am. and now you tell me 
sawfli are an inch long or less. what do you make of it, spearman?' 

"'for good sake finish your stori first,' I said. 'I never heard 
anyth like it.' 'oh,' said he, 'there' no more to tell. mari ran 
in with a light, and there wa noth there. I didn't tell her what 
wa the matter. I chang my room for last night, and I expect for 
good.' 'have you search thi odd room of yours?' I said. 'what do 
you keep in it?' 'we don't use it,' he answered. 'there' an old press 
there, and some littl other furniture.' 'and in the press?' said I. 
'I don't know; I never saw it opened, but I do know that it' locked.' 
'well, I should have it look into, and, if you had time, I own to 
have some curios to see the place myself.' 'I didn't exactli like 
to ask you, but that' rather what I hope you'd say. name your time 
and i'll take you there.' 'no time like the present,' I said at once, 
for I saw he would never settl down to anyth while thi affair wa 
in suspense. He got up with great alacrity, and look at me, I am 
tempt to think, with mark approval. 'come along,' wa all he said, 
however; and wa pretti silent all the way to hi house. My mari (a 
he call her in public, and I in private) wa summoned, and we 
proceed to the room. the doctor had gone so far as to tell her that 
he had had someth of a fright there last night, of what natur he 
had not yet divulged; but now he point out and described, veri 
briefly, the incid of hi progress. when we were near the 
import spot, he pull up, and allow me to pass on. 'there' the 
room,' he said. 'go in, spearman, and tell us what you find.' whatev 
I might have felt at midnight, noonday I wa sure would keep back 
anyth sinister, and I flung the door open with an air and step 
in. It wa a well-light room, with it larg window on the right, 
though not, I thought, a veri airi one. the princip piec of 
furnitur wa the gaunt old press of dark wood. there was, too, a 
four-post bedstead, a mere skeleton which could hide nothing, and 
there wa a chest of drawers. On the window-sil and the floor near it 
were the dead bodi of mani hundr sawflies, and one torpid one 
which I had some satisfact in killing. I tri the door of the 
press, but could not open it: the drawers, too, were locked. 
somewhere, I wa conscious, there wa a faint rustl sound, but I 
could not locat it, and when I made my report to those outside, I 
said noth of it. but, I said, clearli the next thing wa to see 
what wa in those lock receptacles. uncl oldi turn to mary. 
'mrs. maple,' he said, and mari ran off--no one, I am sure, step like 
her--and soon came back at a sober pace, with an elderli ladi of 
discreet aspect. 

"'have you the key of these things, mrs. maple?' said uncl oldys. 
hi simpl word let loos a torrent (not violent, but copious) of 
speech: had she been a shade or two higher in the social scale, mrs. 
mapl might have stood as the model for miss bates. 

"'oh, doctor, and miss, and you too, sir,' she said, acknowledg my 
presenc with a bend, 'them keys! who wa that again that come when 
first we took over thing in thi house--a gentleman in busi it 
was, and I gave him hi luncheon in the small parlour on account of us 
not have everyth as we should like to see it in the larg 
one--chicken, and apple-pie, and a glass of madeira--dear, dear, 
you'll say i'm run on, miss mary; but I onli mention it to bring 
back my recollection; and there it comes--gardner, just the same as it 
did last week with the artichok and the text of the sermon. now that 
mr. gardner, everi key I got from him were label to itself, and 
each and everi one wa a key of some door or anoth in thi house, 
and sometim two; and when I say door, my mean is door of a room, 
not like such a press as thi is. yes, miss mary, I know full well, 
and i'm just make it clear to your uncl and you too, sir. but now 
there _was_ a box which thi same gentleman he give over into my 
charge, and think no harm after he wa gone I took the liberty, 
know it wa your uncle' property, to rattl it: and unless i'm 
most surprisingli deceived, in that box there wa keys, but what keys, 
that, doctor, is known elsewhere, for open the box, no that I would 
not do.' 

"I wonder that uncl oldi remain as quiet as he did under thi 
address. mary, I knew, wa amus by it, and he probabl had been 
taught by experi that it wa useless to break in upon it. At ani 
rate he did not, but mere said at the end, 'have you that box handy, 
mrs. maple? If so, you might bring it here.' mrs. mapl point her 
finger at him, either in accus or in gloomi triumph. 'there,' she 
said, 'wa I to choos out the veri word out of your mouth, doctor, 
them would be the ones. and if i'v took it to my own rebuk one 
half-a-dozen times, it' been nearer fifty. laid awak I have in my 
bed, sat down in my chair I have, the same you and miss mari gave me 
the day I wa twenti year in your service, and no person could desir 
a better--yes, miss mary, but it _is_ the truth, and well we know who 
it is would have it differ if he could. "all veri well," say I to 
myself, "but pray, when the doctor call you to account for that box, 
what are you go to say?" no, doctor, if you wa some master i'v 
heard of and I wa some servant I could name, I should have an easi 
task befor me, but thing being, humanli speaking, what they are, the 
one cours open to me is just to say to you that without miss mari 
come to my room and help me to my recollection, which her wit 
_may_ manag what' slip beyond mine, no such box as that, small 
though it be, will cross your eye thi mani a day to come.' 

"'why, dear mrs. maple, whi didn't you tell me befor that you want 
me to help you to find it?' said my mary. 'no, never mind tell me 
whi it was: let us come at onc and look for it.' they hasten off 
together. I could hear mrs. mapl begin an explan which, I 
doubt not, last into the furthest recess of the housekeeper' 
department. uncl oldi and I were left alone. 'A valuabl servant,' 
he said, nod toward the door. 'noth goe wrong under her: the 
speech are seldom over three minutes.' 'how will miss oldi manag 
to make her rememb about the box?' I asked. 

"'mary? oh, she'll make her sit down and ask her about her aunt' last 
illness, or who gave her the china dog on the mantel-piece--someth 
quit off the point. then, as mapl says, one thing bring up another, 
and the right one will come round sooner than you could suppose. 
there! I believ I hear them come back already.' 

"it wa inde so, and mrs. mapl wa hurri on ahead of mari with 
the box in her outstretch hand, and a beam face. 'what wa it,' 
she cri as she drew near, 'what wa it as I said, befor ever I come 
out of dorsetshir to thi place? not that i'm a dorset woman myself, 
nor had need to be. "safe bind, safe find," and there it wa in the 
place where i'd put it--what?--two month back, I daresay.' she hand 
it to uncl oldys, and he and I examin it with some interest, so 
that I ceas to pay attent to mrs. ann mapl for the moment, 
though I know that she went on to expound exactli where the box had 
been, and in what way mari had help to refresh her memori on the 
subject. 

"it wa an oldish box, tie with pink tape and sealed, and on the lid 
wa past a label inscrib in old ink, 'the senior prebendary' 
house, whitminster.' On be open it wa found to contain two key 
of moder size, and a paper, on which, in the same hand as the 
label, wa 'key of the press and box of drawer stand in the 
disus chamber.' also this: 'the effect in thi press and box are 
held by me, and to be held by my successor in the residence, in trust 
for the nobl famili of kildonan, if claim be made by ani survivor of 
it. I have made all the enquiri possibl to myself am of the 
opinion that that nobl hous is wholli extinct: the last earl have 
been, as is notorious, cast away at sea, and hi onli child and heir 
deceas'd in my hous (the paper as to which melancholi casualti were 
by me repos'd in the same press in thi year of our lord 1753, 21 
march). I am further of opinion that unless grave discomfort arise, 
such persons, not be of the famili of kildonan, as shall becom 
possess'd of these keys, will be well advis to leav matter as they 
are: which opinion I do not express without weighti and suffici 
reason; and am happi to have my judgment confirm'd by the other 
member of thi colleg and church who are convers with the event 
referr'd to in thi paper. tho. ashton, _s.t.p._, _præb. senr._ will. 
blake, _s.t.p._, _decanus_. hen. goodman, _s.t.b._, _præb. junr._' 

"'ah!' said uncl oldys, 'grave discomfort! So he thought there might 
be something. I suspect it wa that young man,' he went on, point 
with the key to the line about the 'onli child and heire.' 'eh, mary? 
the viscounti of kildonan wa saul.' 'how _do_ you know that, uncle?' 
said mary. 'oh, whi not? it' all in debrett--two littl fat books. 
but I meant the tomb by the lime walk. he' there. what' the story, I 
wonder? Do you know it, mrs. maple? and, by the way, look at your 
sawfli by the window there.' 

"mrs. maple, thu confront with two subject at once, wa a littl 
put to it to do justic to both. It wa no doubt rash in uncl oldi 
to give her the opportunity. I could onli guess that he had some 
slight hesit about use the key he held in hi hand. 

"'oh them flies, how bad they was, doctor and miss, thi three or four 
days: and you, too, sir, you wouldn't guess, none of you! and how they 
come, too! first we took the room in hand, the shutter wa up, and 
had been, I daresay, year upon years, and not a fli to be seen. then 
we got the shutter bar down with a deal of troubl and left it so for 
the day, and next day I sent susan in with the broom to sweep about, 
and not two minut hadn't pass when out she come into the hall like 
a blind thing, and we had regular to beat them off her. whi her cap 
and her hair, you couldn't see the colour of it, I do assur you, and 
all cluster round her eyes, too. fortun enough she' not a girl 
with fancies, els if it had been me, whi onli the tickl of the 
nasti thing would have drove me out of my wits. and now there they 
lay like so mani dead things. well, they wa live enough on the 
monday, and now here' thursday, is it, or no, friday. onli to come 
near the door and you'd hear them patter up against it, and onc 
you open it, dash at you, they would, as if they'd eat you. I 
couldn't help think to myself, "if you wa bats, where should we be 
thi night?" nor you can't cresh 'em, not like a usual kind of a fly. 
well, there' someth to be thank for, if we could but learn by 
it. and then thi tomb, too,' she said, hasten on to her second 
point to elud ani chanc of interruption, 'of them two poor young 
lads. I say poor, and yet when I recollect myself, I wa at tea with 
mrs. simpkins, the sexton' wife, befor you come, doctor and miss 
mary, and that' a famili ha been in the place, what? I daresay a 
hundr year in that veri house, and could put their hand on ani tomb 
or yet grave in all the yard and give you name and age. and hi 
account of that young man, mr. simpkins' I mean to say--_well_!' she 
compress her lip and nod sever times. 'tell us, mrs. maple,' 
said mary. 'go on,' said uncl oldys. 'what about him?' said I. 
'never wa such a thing seen in thi place, not sinc queen mary' 
time and the pope and all,' said mrs. maple. 'why, do you know he 
live in thi veri house, him and them that wa with him, and for all 
I can tell in thi ident room' (she shift her feet uneasili on 
the floor). 'who wa with him? Do you mean the peopl of the house?' 
said uncl oldi suspiciously. 'not to call people, doctor, dear no,' 
wa the answer; 'more what he brought with him from ireland, I believ 
it was. no, the peopl in the hous wa the last to hear anyth of 
hi goings-on. but in the town not a famili but knew how he stop 
out at night: and them that wa with him, whi they were such as would 
strip the skin from the child in it grave; and a wither heart make 
an ugli thin ghost, say mr. simpkins. but they turn on him at the 
last, he says, and there' the mark still to be seen on the minster 
door where they run him down. and that' no more than the truth, for I 
got him to show it to myself, and that' what he said. A lord he was, 
with a bibl name of a wick king, whatev hi godfath could have 
been think of.' 'saul wa the name,' said uncl oldys. 'to be sure 
it wa saul, doctor, and thank you; and now isn't it king saul that we 
read of rais up the dead ghost that wa slumber in it tomb till 
he disturb it, and isn't that a strang thing, thi young lord to 
have such a name, and mr. simpkins' grandfath to see him out of hi 
window of a dark night go about from one grave to anoth in the 
yard with a candle, and them that wa with him follow through the 
grass at hi heels: and one night him to come right up to old mr. 
simpkins' window that give on the yard and press hi face up against 
it to find out if there wa ani one in the room that could see him: 
and onli just time there wa for old mr. simpkin to drop down like, 
quiet, just under the window and hold hi breath, and not stir till he 
heard him step away again, and thi rustling-lik in the grass 
after him as he went, and then when he look out of hi window in the 
morn there wa tread in the grass and a dead man' bone. oh, he 
wa a cruel child for certain, but he had to pay in the end, and 
after.' 'after?' said uncl oldys, with a frown. 'oh yes, doctor, 
night after night in old mr. simpkins' time, and hi son, that' our 
mr. simpkins' father, yes, and our own mr. simpkin too. Up against 
that same window, particular when they'v had a fire of a chilli 
evening, with hi face right on the panes, and hi hand flutter 
out, and hi mouth open and shut, open and shut, for a minut or more, 
and then gone off in the dark yard. but open the window at such times, 
no, that they dare not do, though they could find it in their heart to 
piti the poor thing, that pinch up with the cold, and seemingli 
fade away to a nothink as the year pass on. well, indeed, I 
believ it is no more than the truth what our mr. simpkin say on hi 
own grandfather' word, "A wither heart make an ugli thin ghost."' 
'I daresay,' said uncl oldi suddenly: so suddenli that mrs. mapl 
stop short. 'thank you. come away, all of you.' 'why, _uncle_,' 
said mary, 'are you not go to open the press after all?' uncl 
oldi blushed, actual blushed. 'mi dear,' he said, 'you are at 
liberti to call me a coward, or applaud me as a prudent man, whichev 
you please. but I am neither go to open that press nor that chest 
of drawer myself, nor am I go to hand over the key to you or to 
ani other person. mrs. maple, will you kindli see about get a man 
or two to move those piec of furnitur into the garret?' 'and when 
they do it, mrs. maple,' said mary, who seem to me--i did not then 
know why--mor reliev than disappoint by her uncle' decision, 'I 
have someth that I want put with the rest; onli quit a small 
packet.' 

"we left that curiou room not unwillingly, I think. uncl oldys' 
order were carri out that same day. and so," conclud mr. 
spearman, "whitminst ha a bluebeard' chamber, and, I am rather 
inclin to suspect, a jack-in-the-box, await some futur occup 
of the resid of the senior prebendary." 

footnotes: 

[footnot 1: appar the ichneumon fli (_ophion obscurum_), and not 
the true sawfly, is meant.] 




the diari OF mr. poynter 




the diari OF mr. poynter 


the sale-room of an old and famou firm of book auction in london 
is, of course, a great meeting-plac for collectors, librarians, 
dealers: not onli when an auction is in progress, but perhap even 
more notabl when book that are come on for sale are upon view. It 
wa in such a sale-room that the remark seri of event began 
which were detail to me not mani month ago by the person whom they 
princip affected, namely, mr. jame denton, m.a., f.s.a., etc., 
etc., some time of triniti hall, now, or lately, of rendcomb manor in 
the counti of warwick. 

he, on a certain spring day not mani year since, wa in london for a 
few day upon busi connect princip with the furnish of 
the hous which he had just finish build at rendcomb. It may be a 
disappoint to you to learn that rendcomb manor wa new; that I 
cannot help. there had, no doubt, been an old house; but it wa not 
remark for beauti or interest. even had it been, neither beauti 
nor interest would have enabl it to resist the disastr fire which 
about a coupl of year befor the date of my stori had raze it to 
the ground. I am glad to say that all that wa most valuabl in it had 
been saved, and that it wa fulli insured. So that it wa with a 
compar light heart that mr. denton wa abl to face the task of 
build a new and consider more conveni dwell for himself 
and hi aunt who constitut hi whole _ménage_. 

be in london, with time on hi hands, and not far from the 
sale-room at which I have obscur hinted, mr. denton thought that he 
would spend an hour there upon the chanc of finding, among that 
portion of the famou thoma collect of mss., which he knew to be 
then on view, someth bear upon the histori or topographi of hi 
part of warwickshire. 

He turn in accordingly, purchas a catalogu and ascend to the 
sale-room, where, as usual, the book were dispos in case and some 
laid out upon the long tables. At the shelves, or sit about at the 
tables, were figures, mani of whom were familiar to him. He exchang 
nod and greet with several, and then settl down to examin hi 
catalogu and note like items. He had made good progress through 
about two hundr of the five hundr lots--everi now and then rise 
to take a volum from the shelf and give it a cursori glance--when a 
hand wa laid on hi shoulder, and he look up. hi interrupt wa 
one of those intellig men with a point beard and a flannel shirt, 
of whom the last quarter of the nineteenth centuri was, it seem to 
me, veri prolific. 

It is no part of my plan to repeat the whole convers which ensu 
between the two. I must content myself with state that it larg 
refer to common acquaintances, e.g., to the nephew of mr. denton' 
friend who had recent marri and settl in chelsea, to the 
sister-in-law of mr. denton' friend who had been serious 
indisposed, but wa now better, and to a piec of china which mr. 
denton' friend had purchas some month befor at a price much below 
it true value. from which you will rightli infer that the 
convers wa rather in the natur of a monologue. In due time, 
however, the friend bethought himself that mr. denton wa there for a 
purpose, and said he, "what are you look out for in particular? I 
don't think there' much in thi lot." "why, I thought there might be 
some warwickshir collections, but I don't see anyth under warwick 
in the catalogue." "no, appar not," said the friend. "all the 
same, I believ I notic someth like a warwickshir diary. what 
wa the name again? drayton? potter? painter--eith a P or a D, I 
feel sure." He turn over the leav quickly. "yes, here it is. 
poynter. lot 486. that might interest you. there are the books, I 
think: out on the table. some one ha been look at them. well, I 
must be get on. good-bye, you'll look us up, won't you? couldn't 
you come thi afternoon? we'v got a littl music about four. well, 
then, when you'r next in town." He went off. mr. denton look at hi 
watch and found to hi confus that he could spare no more than a 
moment befor retriev hi luggag and go for the train. the 
moment wa just enough to show him that there were four largish 
volum of the diary--that it concern the year about 1710, and that 
there seem to be a good mani insert in it of variou kinds. It 
seem quit worth while to leav a commiss of five and twenti 
pound for it, and thi he wa abl to do, for hi usual agent enter 
the room as he wa on the point of leav it. 

that even he rejoin hi aunt at their temporari abode, which wa 
a small dower-hous not mani hundr yard from the manor. On the 
follow morn the two resum a discuss that had now last for 
some week as to the equip of the new house. mr. denton laid 
befor hi rel a statement of the result of hi visit to 
town--particular of carpets, of chairs, of wardrobes, and of bedroom 
china. "yes, dear," said hi aunt, "but I don't see ani chintz here. 
did you go to ----?" mr. denton stamp on the floor (where else, 
indeed, could he have stamped?). "oh dear, oh dear," he said, "the one 
thing I missed. I _am_ sorry. the fact is I wa on my way there and I 
happen to be pass robins's." hi aunt threw up her hands. 
"robins's! then the next thing will be anoth parcel of horribl old 
book at some outrag price. I do think, james, when I am take 
all thi troubl for you, you might contriv to rememb the one or 
two thing which I special beg you to see after. it' not as if I 
wa ask it for myself. I don't know whether you think I get ani 
pleasur out of it, but if so I can assur you it' veri much the 
reverse. the thought and worri and troubl I have over it you have no 
idea of, and _you_ have simpli to go to the shop and order the 
things." mr. denton interpos a moan of penitence. "oh, aunt----" 
"yes, that' all veri well, dear, and I don't want to speak sharply, 
but you _must_ know how veri annoy it is: particularli as it delay 
the whole of our busi for I can't tell how long: here is 
wednesday--th simpson come to-morrow, and you can't leav them. then 
on saturday we have friends, as you know, come for tennis. yes, 
indeed, you spoke of ask them yourself, but, of course, I had to 
write the notes, and it is ridiculous, james, to look like that. We 
must occasion be civil to our neighbours: you wouldn't like to 
have it said we were perfect bears. what wa I saying? well, anyhow it 
come to this, that it must be thursday in next week at least, befor 
you can go to town again, and until we have decid upon the chintz 
it is imposs to settl upon one singl other thing." 

mr. denton ventur to suggest that as the paint and wallpap had 
been dealt with, thi wa too sever a view: but thi hi aunt wa 
not prepar to admit at the moment. nor, indeed, wa there ani 
proposit he could have advanc which she would have found herself 
abl to accept. however, as the day went on, she reced a littl from 
thi position: examin with lessen disfavour the sampl and price 
list submit by her nephew, and even in some case gave a qualifi 
approv to hi choice. 

As for him, he wa natur somewhat dash by the conscious of 
duti unfulfilled, but more so by the prospect of a lawn-tenni party, 
which, though an inevit evil in august, he had thought there wa 
no occas to fear in may. but he wa to some extent cheer by the 
arriv on the friday morn of an intim that he had secur at 
the price of £12 10s. the four volum of poynter' manuscript diary, 
and still more by the arriv on the next morn of the diari itself. 

the necess of take mr. and mrs. simpson for a drive in the car on 
saturday morn and of attend to hi neighbour and guest that 
afternoon prevent him from do more than open the parcel until the 
parti had retir to bed on the saturday night. It wa then that he 
made certain of the fact, which he had befor onli suspected, that he 
had inde acquir the diari of mr. william poynter, squir of 
acrington (about four mile from hi own parish)--that same poynter 
who wa for a time a member of the circl of oxford antiquaries, the 
centr of which wa thoma hearne, and with whom hearn seem 
ultim to have quarrelled--a not uncommon episod in the career of 
that excel man. As is the case with hearne' own collections, the 
diari of poynter contain a good mani note from print books, 
descript of coin and other antiqu that had been brought to 
hi notice, and draft of letter on these subjects, besid the 
chronicl of everyday events. the descript in the sale-catalogu 
had given mr. denton no idea of the amount of interest which seem to 
lie in the book, and he sat up read in the first of the four 
volum until a reprehens late hour. 

On the sunday morning, after church, hi aunt came into the studi and 
wa divert from what she had been go to say to him by the sight 
of the four brown leather quarto on the table. "what are these?" she 
said suspiciously. "new, aren't they? oh! are these the thing that 
made you forget my chintzes? I thought so. disgusting. what did you 
give for them, I should like to know? over ten pounds? james, it is 
realli sinful. well, if you have money to throw away on thi kind of 
thing, there _can_ be no reason whi you should not subscribe--and 
subscrib handsomely--to my anti-vivisect league. there is not, 
indeed, james, and I shall be veri serious annoy if----. who did 
you say wrote them? old mr. poynter, of acrington? well, of course, 
there is some interest in get togeth old paper about thi 
neighbourhood. but ten pounds!" she pick up one of the volumes--not 
that which her nephew had been reading--and open it at random, 
dash it to the floor the next instant with a cri of disgust as a 
earwig fell from between the pages. mr. denton pick it up with a 
smother explet and said, "poor book! I think you'r rather hard 
on mr. poynter." "wa I, my dear? I beg hi pardon, but you know I 
cannot abid those horrid creatures. let me see if i'v done ani 
mischief." "no, I think all' well: but look here what you'v open 
him on." "dear me, yes, to be sure! how veri interesting. Do unpin it, 
james, and let me look at it." 

It wa a piec of pattern stuff about the size of the quarto page, 
to which it wa fasten by an old-fashion pin. jame detach it 
and hand it to hi aunt, care replac the pin in the paper. 

now, I do not know exactli what the fabric was; but it had a design 
print upon it, which complet fascin miss denton. she went 
into raptur over it, held it against the wall, made jame do the 
same, that she might retir to contempl it from a distance: then 
pore over it at close quarters, and end her examin by 
express in the warmest term her appreci of the tast of the 
ancient mr. poynter who had had the happi idea of preserv thi 
sampl in hi diary. "it is a most charm pattern," she said, "and 
remark too. look, james, how delight the line ripple. It 
remind one of hair, veri much, doesn't it. and then these knot of 
ribbon at intervals. they give just the relief of colour that is 
wanted. I wonder----" "I wa go to say," said jame with deference, 
"I wonder if it would cost much to have it copi for our curtains." 
"copied? how could you have it copied, james?" "well, I don't know the 
details, but I suppos that is a print pattern, and that you could 
have a block cut from it in wood or metal." "now, really, that is a 
capit idea, james. I am almost inclin to be glad that you were 
so--that you forgot the chintz on monday. At ani rate, i'll promis 
to forgiv and forget if you get thi _lovely_ old thing copied. No 
one will have anyth in the least like it, and mind, james, we won't 
allow it to be sold. now I _must_ go, and i'v total forgotten what 
it wa I came in to say: never mind, it'll keep." 

after hi aunt had gone jame denton devot a few minut to 
examin the pattern more close than he had yet had a chanc of 
doing. He wa puzzl to think whi it should have struck miss benton 
so forcibly. It seem to him not special remark or pretty. No 
doubt it wa suitabl enough for a curtain pattern: it ran in vertic 
bands, and there wa some indic that these were intend to 
converg at the top. she wa right, too, in think that these main 
band resembl rippling--almost curling--tress of hair. well, the 
main thing wa to find out by mean of trade directories, or 
otherwise, what firm would undertak the reproduct of an old 
pattern of thi kind. not to delay the reader over thi portion of 
the story, a list of like name wa made out, and mr. denton fix a 
day for call on them, or some of them, with hi sample. 

the first two visit which he paid were unsuccessful: but there is 
luck in odd numbers. the firm in bermondsey which wa third on hi 
list wa accustom to handl thi line. the evid they were abl 
to produc justifi their be entrust with the job. "our mr. 
cattell" took a fervent person interest in it. "it' 'eartrending, 
isn't it, sir," he said, "to pictur the quantiti of reelli love 
medeevi stuff of thi kind that lay well-nigh unnot in mani of 
our residenti countri 'ouses: much of it in peril, I take it, of 
be cast asid as so much rubbish. what is it shakespear 
says--unconsid trifles. ah, I often say he 'a a word for us all, 
sir. I say shakespeare, but i'm well awar all don't 'old with me 
there--i 'ad someth of an upset the other day when a gentleman came 
in--a titl man, too, he was, and I think he told me he'd wrote on 
the topic, and I 'appen to cite out someth about 'ercul and the 
paint cloth. dear me, you never see such a pother. but as to this, 
what you'v kindli confid to us, it' a piec of work we shall take 
a reel enthusiasm in achiev it out to the veri best of our ability. 
what man 'a done, as I wa observ onli a few week back to anoth 
esteem client, man can do, and in three to four weeks' time, all 
be well, we shall 'ope to lay befor you evid to that effect, 
sir. take the address, mr. 'iggins, if you please." 

such wa the gener drift of mr. cattell' observ on the 
occas of hi first interview with mr. denton. about a month later, 
be advis that some sampl were readi for hi inspection, mr. 
denton met him again, and had, it seems, reason to be satisfi with 
the faith of the reproduct of the design. It had been 
finish off at the top in accord with the indic I mentioned, 
so that the vertic band joined. but someth still need to be 
done in the way of match the colour of the original. mr. cattel 
had suggest of a technic kind to offer, with which I need not 
troubl you. He had also view as to the gener desir of the 
pattern which were vagu adverse. "you say you don't wish thi to be 
suppli except to person friend equip with a author 
from yourself, sir. It shall be done. I quit understand your wish to 
keep it exclusive: lend it a catchit, doe it not, to the suite? 
what' everi man's, it' been said, is no man's." 

"do you think it would be popular if it were gener obtainable?" 
ask mr. denton. 

"I 'ardli think it, sir," said cattell, pensiv clasp hi beard. 
"I 'ardli think it. not popular: it wasn't popular with the man that 
cut the block, wa it, mr. 'iggins?" 

"did he find it a difficult job?" 

"he'd no call to do so, sir; but the fact is that the artist 
temperament--and our men are artists, sir, everi man of them--tru 
artist as much as mani that the world style by that term--it' apt 
to take some strang 'ardli account like or dislikes, and here 
wa an example. the twice or thrice that I went to inspect hi 
progress: languag I could understand, for that' 'abitu to him, but 
reel distast for what I should call a dainti enough thing, I did not, 
nor am I now abl to fathom. It seemed," said mr. cattell, look 
narrowli upon mr. denton, "a if the man scent someth almost 
hevil in the design." 

"indeed? did he tell you so? I can't say I see anyth sinist in it 
myself." 

"neether can I, sir. In fact I said as much. 'come, gatwick,' I said, 
'what' to do here? what' the reason of your prejudice--for I can 
call it no more than that?' but, no! no explan wa forthcoming. 
and I wa mere reduced, as I am now, to a shrug of the shoulders, 
and a _cui bono_. however, here it is," and with that the technic 
side of the question came to the front again. 

the match of the colour for the background, the hem, and the knot 
of ribbon wa by far the longest part of the business, and 
necessit mani send to and fro of the origin pattern and of 
new samples. dure part of august and september, too, the denton 
were away from the manor. So that it wa not until octob wa well in 
that a suffici quantiti of the stuff had been manufactur to 
furnish curtain for the three or four bedroom which were to be 
fit up with it. 

On the feast of simon and jude the aunt and nephew return from a 
short visit to find all completed, and their satisfact at the 
gener effect wa great. the new curtains, in particular, agre to 
admir with their surroundings. when mr. denton wa dress for 
dinner, and took stock of hi room, in which there wa a larg amount 
of the chintz displayed, he congratul himself over and over again 
on the luck which had first made him forget hi aunt' commiss and 
had then put into hi hand thi extrem effect mean of 
remedi hi mistake. the pattern was, as he said at dinner, so 
rest and yet so far from be dull. and miss denton--who, by the 
way, had none of the stuff in her own room--wa much dispos to agre 
with him. 

At breakfast next morn he wa induc to qualifi hi satisfact 
to some extent--but veri slightly. "there is one thing I rather 
regret," he said, "that we allow them to join up the vertic band 
of the pattern at the top. I think it would have been better to leav 
that alone." 

"oh?" said hi aunt interrogatively. 

"yes: as I wa read in bed last night they kept catch my eye 
rather. that is, I found myself look across at them everi now and 
then. there wa an effect as if some one kept peep out between the 
curtain in one place or another, where there wa no edge, and I think 
that wa due to the join up of the band at the top. the onli other 
thing that troubl me wa the wind." 

"why, I thought it wa a perfectli still night." 

"perhap it wa onli on my side of the house, but there wa enough to 
sway my curtain and rustl them more than I wanted." 

that night a bachelor friend of jame denton' came to stay, and wa 
lodg in a room on the same floor as hi host, but at the end of a 
long passage, halfway down which wa a red baiz door, put there to 
cut off the draught and intercept noise. 

the parti of three had separated. miss denton a good first, the two 
men at about eleven. jame denton, not yet inclin for bed, sat him 
down in an arm-chair and read for a time. then he dozed, and then he 
woke, and bethought himself that hi brown spaniel, which ordinarili 
slept in hi room, had not come upstair with him. then he thought he 
wa mistaken: for happen to move hi hand which hung down over the 
arm of the chair within a few inch of the floor, he felt on the back 
of it just the slightest touch of a surfac of hair, and stretch it 
out in that direct he stroke and pat a round something. but 
the feel of it, and still more the fact that instead of a respons 
movement, absolut still greet hi touch, made him look over 
the arm. what he had been touch rose to meet him. It wa in the 
attitud of one that had crept along the floor on it belly, and it 
was, so far as could be collected, a human figure. but of the face 
which wa now rise to within a few inch of hi own no featur wa 
discernible, onli hair. shapeless as it was, there wa about it so 
horribl an air of menac that as he bound from hi chair and rush 
from the room he heard himself moan with fear: and doubtless he did 
right to fly. As he dash into the baiz door that cut the passag in 
two, and--forget that it open toward him--beat against it with 
all the forc in him, he felt a soft ineffectu tear at hi back 
which, all the same, seem to be grow in power, as if the hand, or 
whatev wors than a hand wa there, were becom more materi as 
the pursuer' rage wa more concentrated. then he rememb the trick 
of the door--h got it open--h shut it behind him--h gain hi 
friend' room, and that is all we need know. 

It seem curiou that, dure all the time that had elaps sinc the 
purchas of poynter' diary, jame denton should not have sought an 
explan of the presenc of the pattern that had been pin into 
it. well, he had read the diari through without find it mentioned, 
and had conclud that there wa noth to be said. but, on leav 
rendcomb manor (he did not know whether for good), as he natur 
insist upon do on the day after experienc the horror I have 
tri to put into words, he took the diari with him. and at hi 
seasid lodg he examin more narrowli the portion whenc the 
pattern had been taken. what he rememb have suspect about it 
turn out to be correct. two or three leav were past together, 
but written upon, as wa patent when they were held up to the light. 
they yield easili to steaming, for the past had lost much of it 
strength, and they contain someth relev to the pattern. 

the entri wa made in 1707. 

"old mr. casbury, of acrington, told me thi day much of 
young sir everard charlett, whom he remember'd common of 
univers college, and thought wa of the same famili as 
dr. arthur charlett, now master of ye coll. thi charlett 
wa a person young gent., but a loos atheist 
companion, and a great lifter, as they then call'd the hard 
drinkers, and for what I know do so now. He wa noted, and 
subject to several censur at differ time for hi 
extravagancies: and if the full histori of hi debaucheri 
had bin known, no doubt would have been expell'd ye coll., 
suppos that no interest had been imploy'd on hi behalf, 
of which mr. casburi had some suspicion. He wa a veri 
beauti person, and constantli wore hi own hair, which 
wa veri abundant, from which, and hi loos way of living, 
the cant name for him wa absalom, and he wa accustom'd to 
say that inde he believ'd he had shorten old david' 
days, mean hi father, sir job charlett, an old worthi 
cavalier. 

"note that mr. casburi said that he rememb not the year 
of sir everard charlett' death, but it wa 1692 or 3. He 
die suddenli in october. [sever line describ hi 
unpleas habit and reput delinqu are omitted.] 
have seen him in such top spirit the night before, 
mr. casburi wa amaz'd when he learn'd the death. He wa 
found in the town ditch, the hair as wa said pluck'd clean 
off hi head. most bell in oxford rung out for him, be a 
nobleman, and he wa buri next night in st. peter' in the 
east. but two year after, be to be move to hi countri 
estat by hi successor, it wa said the coffin, break by 
mischance, prove quit full of hair: which sound fabulous, 
but yet I believ preced are upon record, as in dr. 
plot' _histori of staffordshire_. 

"hi chamber be afterward stripp'd, mr. casburi came by 
part of the hang of it, which 'twa said thi charlett 
had design'd expressli for a memori of hi hair, give 
the fellow that drew it a lock to work by, and the piec 
which I have fasten'd in here wa parcel of the same, which 
mr. casburi gave to me. He said he believ'd there wa a 
subtleti in the drawing, but had never discover'd it 
himself, nor much like to pore upon it." 

* * * * * 

the money spent upon the curtain might as well have been thrown into 
the fire, as they were. mr. cattell' comment upon what he heard of 
the stori took the form of a quotat from shakespeare. you may guess 
it without difficulty. It began with the word "there are more 
things." 




AN episod OF cathedr histori 




AN episod OF cathedr histori 


there wa onc a learn gentleman who wa deput to examin and 
report upon the archiv of the cathedr of southminster. the 
examin of these record demand a veri consider expenditur 
of time: henc it becam advis for him to engag lodg in the 
city: for though the cathedr bodi were profus in their offer of 
hospitality, mr. lake felt that he would prefer to be master of hi 
day. thi wa recogn as reasonable. the dean eventu wrote 
advis mr. lake, if he were not alreadi suited, to commun with 
mr. worby, the princip verger, who occupi a hous conveni to 
the church and wa prepar to take in a quiet lodger for three or 
four weeks. such an arrang wa precis what mr. lake desired. 
term were easili agre upon, and earli in december, like anoth mr. 
datcheri (a he remark to himself), the investig found himself 
in the occup of a veri comfort room in an ancient and 
"cathedraly" house. 

one so familiar with the custom of cathedr churches, and treat 
with such obviou consider by the dean and chapter of thi 
cathedr in particular, could not fail to command the respect of the 
head verger. mr. worbi even acquiesc in certain modif of 
statement he had been accustom to offer for year to parti of 
visitors. mr. lake, on hi part, found the verger a veri cheeri 
companion, and took advantag of ani occas that present itself 
for enjoy hi convers when the day' work wa over. 

one evening, about nine o'clock, mr. worbi knock at hi lodger' 
door. "i'v occasion," he said, "to go across to the cathedral, mr. 
lake, and I think I made you a promis when I did so next I would give 
you the opportun to see what it look like at night time. It is 
quit fine and dri outside, if you care to come." 

"to be sure I will; veri much oblig to you, mr. worby, for think 
of it, but let me get my coat." 

"here it is, sir, and i'v anoth lantern here that you'll find 
advis for the steps, as there' no moon." 

"ani one might think we were jasper and durdles, over again, mightn't 
they," said lake, as they cross the close, for he had ascertain 
that the verger had read _edwin drood_. 

"well, so they might," said mr. worby, with a short laugh, "though I 
don't know whether we ought to take it as a compliment. odd ways, I 
often think, they had at that cathedral, don't it seem so to you, sir? 
full choral matin at seven o'clock in the morn all the year round. 
wouldn't suit our boys' voic nowadays, and I think there' one or 
two of the men would be appli for a rise if the chapter wa to 
bring it in--particular the alltoes." 

they were now at the south-west door. As mr. worbi wa unlock it, 
lake said, "did you ever find anybodi lock in here by accident?" 

"twice I did. one wa a drunk sailor; howev he got in I don't know. 
I s'pose he went to sleep in the service, but by the time I got to him 
he wa pray fit to bring the roof in. lor'! what a nois that man 
did make! said it wa the first time he'd been insid a church for ten 
years, and blest if ever he'd tri it again. the other wa an old 
sheep: them boy it was, up to their games. that wa the last time 
they tri it on, though. there, sir, now you see what we look like; 
our late dean use now and again to bring parti in, but he prefer 
a moonlight night, and there wa a piec of vers he'd coat to 'em, 
relat to a scotch cathedral, I understand; but I don't know; I 
almost think the effect' better when it' all dark-like. seem to add 
to the size and heighth. now if you won't mind stop somewher in 
the nave while I go up into the choir where my busi lays, you'll 
see what I mean." 

accordingli lake waited, lean against a pillar, and watch the 
light waver along the length of the church, and up the step into 
the choir, until it wa intercept by some screen or other furniture, 
which onli allow the reflect to be seen on the pier and roof. 
not mani minut had pass befor worbi reappear at the door of the 
choir and by wave hi lantern signal to lake to rejoin him. 

"I suppos it _is_ worby, and not a substitute," thought lake to 
himself, as he walk up the nave. there was, in fact, noth 
untoward. worbi show him the paper which he had come to fetch out 
of the dean' stall, and ask him what he thought of the spectacle: 
lake agre that it wa well worth seeing. "I suppose," he said, as 
they walk toward the altar-step together, "that you'r too much 
use to go about here at night to feel nervous--but you must get a 
start everi now and then, don't you, when a book fall down or a door 
swing to." 

"no, mr. lake, I can't say I think much about noises, not nowadays: 
i'm much more afraid of find an escap of ga or a burst in the 
stove pipe than anyth else. still there have been times, year 
ago. did you notic that plain altar-tomb there--fifteenth centuri we 
say it is, I don't know if you agre to that? well, if you didn't look 
at it, just come back and give it a glance, if you'd be so good." It 
wa on the north side of the choir, and rather awkwardli placed: onli 
about three feet from the enclos stone screen. quit plain, as the 
verger had said, but for some ordinari stone panelling. A metal cross 
of some size on the northern side (that next to the screen) wa the 
solitari featur of ani interest. 

lake agre that it wa not earlier than the perpendicular period: 
"but," he said, "unless it' the tomb of some remark person, 
you'll forgiv me for say that I don't think it' particularli 
noteworthy." 

"well, I can't say as it is the tomb of anybodi note in 'istory," 
said worby, who had a dri smile on hi face, "for we don't own ani 
record whatsoev of who it wa put up to. for all that, if you'v 
half an hour to spare, sir, when we get back to the house, mr. lake, I 
could tell you a tale about that tomb. I won't begin on it now; it 
strike cold here, and we don't want to be dawdl about all night." 

"of cours I should like to hear it immensely." 

"veri well, sir, you shall. now if I might put a question to you," he 
went on, as they pass down the choir aisle, "in our littl local 
guide--and not onli there, but in the littl book on our cathedr in 
the series--you'l find it state that thi portion of the build 
wa erect previou to the twelfth century. now of cours I should be 
glad enough to take that view, but--mind the step, sir--but, I put it 
to you--do the lay of the stone 'ere in thi portion of the wall 
(which he tap with hi key) doe it to your eye carri the flavour 
of what you might call saxon masonry? no? I thought not; no more it 
doe to me: now, if you'll believ me, i'v said as much to those 
men--one' the librarian of our free libri here, and the other came 
down from london on purpose--fifti times, if I have once, but I might 
just as well have talk to that bit of stonework. but there it is, I 
suppos everi one' got their opinions." 

the discuss of thi peculiar trait of human natur occupi mr. 
worbi almost up to the moment when he and lake re-ent the former' 
house. the condit of the fire in lake' sitting-room led to a 
suggest from mr. worbi that they should finish the even in hi 
own parlour. We find them accordingli settl there some short time 
afterwards. 

mr. worbi made hi stori a long one, and I will not undertak to tell 
it wholli in hi own words, or in hi own order. lake commit the 
substanc of it to paper immedi after hear it, togeth with 
some few passag of the narr which had fix themselv 
_verbatim_ in hi mind; I shall probabl find it expedi to condens 
lake' record to some extent. 

mr. worbi wa born, it appeared, about the year 1828. hi father 
befor him had been connect with the cathedral, and likewis hi 
grandfather. one or both had been choristers, and in later life both 
had done work as mason and carpent respect about the fabric. 
worbi himself, though possessed, as he frankli acknowledged, of an 
indiffer voice, had been draft into the choir at about ten year 
of age. 

It wa in 1840 that the wave of the gothic reviv smote the cathedr 
of southminster. "there wa a lot of love stuff went then, sir," 
said worby, with a sigh. "mi father couldn't hardli believ it when he 
got hi order to clear out the choir. there wa a new dean just come 
in--dean burscough it was--and my father had been 'prentic to a good 
firm of joiner in the city, and knew what good work wa when he saw 
it. crool it was, he use to say: all that beauti wainscot oak, as 
good as the day it wa put up, and garlands-lik of foliag and fruit, 
and love old gild work on the coat of arm and the organ pipes. 
all went to the timber yard--everi bit except some littl piec 
work up in the ladi chapel, and 'ere in thi overmantel. well--i may 
be mistook, but I say our choir never look as well since. still 
there wa a lot found out about the histori of the church, and no 
doubt but what it did stand in need of repair. there were veri few 
winter pass but what we'd lose a pinnicle." mr. lake express hi 
concurr with worby' view of restoration, but own to a fear 
about thi point lest the stori proper should never be reached. 
possibl thi wa percept in hi manner. 

worbi hasten to reassur him, "not but what I could carri on about 
that topic for hour at a time, and do do when I see my opportunity. 
but dean burscough he wa veri set on the gothic period, and noth 
would serv him but everyth must be made agreeabl to that. and one 
morn after servic he appoint for my father to meet him in the 
choir, and he came back after he'd taken off hi robe in the vestry, 
and he'd got a roll of paper with him, and the verger that wa then 
brought in a table, and they begun spread it out on the tabl with 
prayer book to keep it down, and my father help 'em, and he saw it 
wa a pictur of the insid of a choir in a cathedral; and the 
dean--h wa a quick spoken gentleman--h says, 'well, worby, what do 
you think of that?' 'why', say my father, 'I don't think I 'ave the 
pleasur of know that view. would that be hereford cathedral, mr. 
dean?' 'no, worby,' say the dean, 'that' southminst cathedr as 
we hope to see it befor mani years.' 'in-deed, sir,' say my father, 
and that wa all he did say--leastway to the dean--but he use to 
tell me he felt realli faint in himself when he look round our 
choir as I can rememb it, all comfort and furnished-like, and 
then see thi nasti littl dri picter, as he call it, drawn out by 
some london architect. well, there I am again. but you'll see what I 
mean if you look at thi old view." 

worbi reach down a frame print from the wall. "well, the long and 
the short of it wa that the dean he hand over to my father a copi 
of an order of the chapter that he wa to clear out everi bit of the 
choir--mak a clean sweep--readi for the new work that wa be 
design up in town, and he wa to put it in hand as soon as ever he 
could get the breaker together. now then, sir, if you look at that 
view, you'll see where the pulpit use to stand: that' what I want 
you to notice, if you please." It was, indeed, easili seen; an 
unusu larg structur of timber with a dome sounding-board, 
stand at the east end of the stall on the north side of the choir, 
face the bishop' throne. worbi proceed to explain that dure the 
alterations, servic were held in the nave, the member of the choir 
be therebi disappoint of an anticip holiday, and the organist 
in particular incur the suspicion of have wil damag the 
mechan of the temporari organ that wa hire at consider 
expens from london. 

the work of demolit began with the choir screen and organ loft, and 
proceed gradual eastwards, disclosing, as worbi said, mani 
interest featur of older work. while thi wa go on, the 
member of the chapter were, naturally, in and about the choir a great 
deal, and it soon becam appar to the elder worby--who could not 
help overhear some of their talk--that, on the part of the senior 
canon especially, there must have been a good deal of disagr 
befor the polici now be carri out had been adopted. some were of 
opinion that they should catch their death of cold in the 
return-stalls, unprotect by a screen from the draught in the nave: 
other object to be expos to the view of person in the choir 
aisles, especially, they said, dure the sermons, when they found it 
help to listen in a postur which wa liabl to misconstruction. 
the strongest opposition, however, came from the oldest of the body, 
who up to the last moment object to the remov of the pulpit. "you 
ought not to touch it, mr. dean," he said with great emphasi one 
morning, when the two were stand befor it: "you don't know what 
mischief you may do." "mischief? it' not a work of ani particular 
merit, canon." "don't call me canon," said the old man with great 
asperity, "that is, for thirti year i'v been known as dr. ayloff, 
and I shall be obliged, mr. dean, if you would kindli humour me in 
that matter. and as to the pulpit (which i'v preach from for thirti 
years, though I don't insist on that) all i'll say is, I _know_ you'r 
do wrong in move it." "but what sens could there be, my dear 
doctor, in leav it where it is, when we'r fit up the rest of 
the choir in a total differ _style_? what reason could be 
given--apart from the look of the thing?" "reason! reason!" said old 
dr. ayloff; "if you young men--if I may say so without ani disrespect, 
mr. dean--if you'd onli listen to reason a little, and not be alway 
ask for it, we should get on better. but there, i'v said my say." 
the old gentleman hobbl off, and as it proved, never enter the 
cathedr again. the season--it wa a hot summer--turn sickli on a 
sudden. dr. ayloff wa one of the first to go, with some affect of 
the muscl of the thorax, which took him pain at night. and at 
mani servic the number of choirmen and boy wa veri thin. 

meanwhil the pulpit had been done away with. In fact, the 
sounding-board (part of which still exist as a tabl in a 
summer-hous in the palac garden) wa taken down within an hour or 
two of dr. ayloff' protest. the remov of the base--not effect 
without consider trouble--disclos to view, greatli to the 
exult of the restor party, an altar-tomb--th tomb, of course, 
to which worbi had attract lake' attent that same evening. much 
fruitless research wa expend in attempt to identifi the occupant; 
from that day to thi he ha never had a name put to him. the 
structur had been most care box in under the pulpit-base, so 
that such slight ornament as it possess wa not defaced; onli on the 
north side of it there wa what look like an injury; a gap between 
two of the slab compos the side. It might be two or three inch 
across. palmer, the mason, wa direct to fill it up in a week' 
time, when he came to do some other small job near that part of the 
choir. 

the season wa undoubtedli a veri tri one. whether the church wa 
built on a site that had onc been a marsh, as wa suggested, or for 
whatev reason, the resid in it immedi neighbourhood had, 
mani of them, but littl enjoy of the exquisit sunni day and 
the calm night of august and september. To sever of the older 
people--dr. ayloff, among others, as we have seen--th summer prove 
downright fatal, but even among the younger, few escap either a 
sojourn in bed for a matter of weeks, or at the least, a brood 
sens of oppression, accompani by hate nightmares. gradual 
there formul itself a suspicion--which grew into a conviction--that 
the alter in the cathedr had someth to say in the matter. 
the widow of a former old verger, a pension of the chapter of 
southminster, wa visit by dreams, which she retail to her 
friends, of a shape that slip out of the littl door of the south 
transept as the dark fell in, and flitted--tak a fresh direct 
everi night--about the close, disappear for a while in hous after 
house, and final emerg again when the night sky wa paling. she 
could see noth of it, she said, but that it wa a move form: onli 
she had an impress that when it return to the church, as it 
seem to do in the end of the dream, it turn it head: and then, 
she could not tell why, but she thought it had red eyes. worbi 
rememb hear the old ladi tell thi dream at a tea-parti in the 
hous of the chapter clerk. it recurr might, perhaps, he said, be 
taken as a symptom of approach illness; at ani rate befor the end 
of septemb the old ladi wa in her grave. 

the interest excit by the restor of thi great church wa not 
confin to it own county. one day that summer an f.s.a., of some 
celebrity, visit the place. hi busi wa to write an account of 
the discoveri that had been made, for the societi of antiquaries, 
and hi wife, who accompani him, wa to make a seri of 
illustr draw for hi report. In the morn she employ 
herself in make a gener sketch of the choir; in the afternoon she 
devot herself to details. she first drew the newli expos 
altar-tomb, and when that wa finished, she call her husband' 
attent to a beauti piec of diaper-orna on the screen just 
behind it, which had, like the tomb itself, been complet conceal 
by the pulpit. Of course, he said, an illustr of that must be 
made; so she seat herself on the tomb and began a care draw 
which occupi her till dusk. 

her husband had by thi time finish hi work of measur and 
description, and they agre that it wa time to be get back to 
their hotel. "you may as well brush my skirt, frank," said the lady, 
"it must have got cover with dust, i'm sure." He obey dutifully; 
but, after a moment, he said, "I don't know whether you valu thi 
dress particularly, my dear, but i'm inclin to think it' seen it 
best days. there' a great bit of it gone." "gone? where?" said she. 
"I don't know where it' gone, but it' off at the bottom edg behind 
here." she pull it hastili into sight, and wa horrifi to find a 
jag tear extend some way into the substanc of the stuff; veri 
much, she said, as if a dog had rent it away. the dress was, in ani 
case, hopelessli spoilt, to her great vexation, and though they look 
everywhere, the miss piec could not be found. there were mani 
ways, they concluded, in which the injuri might have come about, for 
the choir wa full of old bit of woodwork with nail stick out of 
them. finally, they could onli suppos that one of these had caus 
the mischief, and that the workmen, who had been about all day, had 
carri off the particular piec with the fragment of dress still 
attach to it. 

It wa about thi time, worbi thought, that hi littl dog began to 
wear an anxiou express when the hour for it to be put into the 
shed in the back yard approached. (for hi mother had ordain that it 
must not sleep in the house.) one evening, he said, when he wa just 
go to pick it up and carri it out, it look at him "like a 
christian, and wave it 'and, I wa go to say--well, you know 'ow 
they do carri on sometimes, and the end of it wa I put it under my 
coat, and 'uddl it upstairs--and i'm afraid I as good as deceiv my 
poor mother on the subject. after that the dog act veri art with 
'ide itself under the bed for half-an-hour or more befor bed-tim 
came, and we work it so as my mother never found out what we'd 
done." Of cours worbi wa glad of it compani anyhow, but more 
particularli when the nuisanc that is still rememb in 
southminst as "the crying" set in. 

"night after night," said worby, "that dog seem to know it wa 
coming; he'd creep out, he would, and snuggl into the bed and cuddl 
right up to me shivering, and when the cri come he'd be like a wild 
thing, shove hi head under my arm, and I wa fulli near as bad. six 
or seven time we'd hear it, not more, and when he'd dror out hi 'ed 
again i'd know it wa over for that night. what wa it like, sir? 
well, I never heard but one thing that seem to hit it off. I 
happen to be play about in the close, and there wa two of the 
canon met and said 'good morning' one to another. 'sleep well last 
night?' say one--it wa mr. henslow that one, and mr. lyall wa the 
other--'can't say I did,' say mr. lyall, 'rather too much of isaiah 
34. 14 for me.' '34. 14,' say mr. henslow, 'what' that?' 'you call 
yourself a bibl reader!' say mr. lyall. (mr. henslow, you must know, 
he wa one of what use to be term simeon' lot--pretti much what we 
should call the evangel party.) 'you go and look it up.' I want 
to know what he wa get at myself, and so off I ran home and got 
out my own bible, and there it was: 'the satyr shall cri to hi 
fellow.' well, I thought, is that what we'v been listen to these 
past nights? and I tell you it made me look over my shoulder a time or 
two. Of cours i'd ask my father and mother about what it could be 
befor that, but they both said it wa most like cats: but they 
spoke veri short, and I could see they wa troubled. My word! that wa 
a noise--'ungry-like, as if it wa call after some one that 
wouldn't come. If ever you felt you want company, it would be when 
you wa wait for it to begin again. I believ two or three night 
there wa men put on to watch in differ part of the close; but 
they all use to get togeth in one corner, the nearest they could to 
the high street, and noth came of it. 

"well, the next thing wa this. Me and anoth of the boys--he' in 
busi in the citi now as a grocer, like hi father befor him--we'd 
gone up in the close after morn servic wa over, and we heard old 
palmer the mason bellow to some of hi men. So we went up nearer, 
becaus we knew he wa a rusti old chap and there might be some fun 
going. It appear palmer'd told thi man to stop up the chink in that 
old tomb. well, there wa thi man keep on say he'd done it the 
best he could, and there wa palmer carri on like all possess 
about it. 'call that make a job of it?' he says. 'if you had your 
right you'd get the sack for this. what do you suppos I pay you your 
wage for? what do you suppos i'm go to say to the dean and 
chapter when they come round, as come they may do ani time, and see 
where you'v been bungl about cover the 'ole place with mess 
and plaster and lord know what?' 'well, master, I done the best I 
could,' say the man; 'I don't know no more than what you do 'ow it 
come to fall out thi way. I tamp it right in the 'ole,' he says, 
'and now it' fell out,' he says, 'I never see.' 

"'fell out?' say old palmer, 'whi it' nowher near the place. blow 
out, you mean,' and he pick up a bit of plaster, and so did I, that 
wa lay up against the screen, three or four feet off, and not dri 
yet; and old palmer he look at it curious-like, and then he turn 
round on me and he says, 'now then, you boys, have you been up to some 
of your game here?' 'no,' I says, 'I haven't, mr. palmer; there' 
none of us been about here till just thi minute,' and while I wa 
talk the other boy, evans, he got look in through the chink, and 
I heard him draw in hi breath, and he came away sharp and up to us, 
and say he, 'I believ there' someth in there. I saw someth 
shiny.' 'what! I daresay,' say old palmer; 'well, I ain't got time to 
stop about there. you, william, you go off and get some more stuff and 
make a job of it thi time; if not, there'l be troubl in my yard,' 
he says. 

"so the man he went off, and palmer too, and us boy stop behind, 
and I say to evans, 'did you realli see anyth in there?' 'yes,' he 
says, 'I did indeed.' So then I says, 'let' shove someth in and 
stir it up.' and we tri sever of the bit of wood that wa lay 
about, but they were all too big. then evan he had a sheet of music 
he'd brought with him, an anthem or a service, I forget which it wa 
now, and he roll it up small and shove it in the chink; two or 
three time he did it, and noth happened. 'give it me, boy,' I 
said, and I had a try. no, noth happened. then, I don't know whi I 
thought of it, i'm sure, but I stoop down just opposit the chink 
and put my two finger in my mouth and whistled--y know the way--and 
at that I seem to think I heard someth stirring, and I say to 
evans, 'come away,' I says; 'I don't like this.' 'oh, rot,' he says, 
'give me that roll,' and he took it and shove it in. and I don't 
think ever I see ani one go so pale as he did. 'I say, worby,' he 
says, 'it' caught, or els some one' got hold of it.' 'pull it out 
or leav it,' I says, 'come and let' get off.' So he gave a good 
pull, and it came away. leastway most of it did, but the end wa 
gone. torn off it was, and evan look at it for a second and then he 
gave a sort of a croak and let it drop, and we both made off out of 
there as quick as ever we could. when we got outsid evan say to me, 
'did you see the end of that paper.' 'no,' I says, 'onli it wa torn.' 
'yes, it was,' he says, 'but it wa wet too, and black!' well, partli 
becaus of the fright we had, and partli becaus that music wa want 
in a day or two, and we knew there'd be a set-out about it with the 
organist, we didn't say noth to ani one else, and I suppos the 
workmen they swept up the bit that wa left along with the rest of the 
rubbish. but evans, if you were to ask him thi veri day about it, 
he'd stick to it he saw that paper wet and black at the end where it 
wa torn." 

after that the boy gave the choir a wide berth, so that worbi wa not 
sure what wa the result of the mason' renew mend of the tomb. 
onli he made out from fragment of convers drop by the workmen 
pass through the choir that some difficulti had been met with, and 
that the governor--mr. palmer to wit--had tri hi own hand at the 
job. A littl later, he happen to see mr. palmer himself knock at 
the door of the deaneri and be admit by the butler. A day or so 
after that, he gather from a remark hi father let fall at breakfast 
that someth a littl out of the common wa to be done in the 
cathedr after morn servic on the morrow. "and i'd just as soon 
it wa to-day," hi father added, "I don't see the use of run 
risks." "'father,' I says, 'what are you go to do in the cathedr 
to-morrow?' and he turn on me as savag as I ever see him--h wa a 
wonder good-temp man as a gener thing, my poor father was. 
'mi lad,' he says, 'i'll troubl you not to go pick up your elders' 
and betters' talk: it' not manner and it' not straight. what i'm 
go to do or not go to do in the cathedr to-morrow is none of 
your business: and if I catch sight of you hang about the place 
to-morrow after your work' done, i'll send you home with a flea in 
your ear. now you mind that.' Of cours I said I wa veri sorri and 
that, and equal of cours I went off and laid my plan with evans. 
We knew there wa a stair up in the corner of the transept which you 
can get up to the triforium, and in them day the door to it wa 
pretti well alway open, and even if it wasn't we knew the key usual 
laid under a bit of mat hard by. So we made up our mind we'd be 
put away music and that, next morn while the rest of the boy 
wa clear off, and then slip up the stair and watch from the 
triforium if there wa ani sign of work go on. 

"well, that same night I drop off asleep as sound as a boy does, 
and all of a sudden the dog woke me up, come into the bed, and 
thought I, now we'r go to get it sharp, for he seem more 
frighten than usual. after about five minut sure enough came thi 
cry. I can't give you no idea what it wa like; and so near 
too--near than i'd heard it yet--and a funni thing, mr. lake, you 
know what a place thi close is for an echo, and particular if you 
stand thi side of it. well, thi cri never made no sign of an echo 
at all. but, as I said, it wa dread near thi night; and on the 
top of the start I got with hear it, I got anoth fright; for I 
heard someth rustl outsid in the passage. now to be sure I 
thought I wa done; but I notic the dog seem to perk up a bit, and 
next there wa some one whisper outsid the door, and I veri near 
laugh out loud, for I knew it wa my father and mother that had got 
out of bed with the noise. 'whatev is it?' say my mother. 'hush! I 
don't know,' say my father, excited-like, 'don't disturb the boy. I 
hope he didn't hear nothing.' 

"so, me know they were just outside, it made me bolder, and I 
slip out of bed across to my littl window--giv on the 
close--but the dog he bore right down to the bottom of the bed--and I 
look out. first go off I couldn't see anything. then right down in 
the shadow under a buttress I made out what I shall alway say wa two 
spot of red--a dull red it was--noth like a lamp or a fire, but 
just so as you could pick 'em out of the black shadow. I hadn't but 
just sight 'em when it seem we wasn't the onli peopl that had 
been disturbed, becaus I see a window in a hous on the left-hand 
side becom light up, and the light moving. I just turn my head to 
make sure of it, and then look back into the shadow for those two 
red things, and they were gone, and for all I peer about and stared, 
there wa not a sign more of them. then come my last fright that 
night--someth come against my bare leg--but that wa all right: 
that wa my littl dog had come out of bed, and pranc about, make 
a great to-do, onli hold hi tongue, and me see he wa quit in 
spirit again, I took him back to bed and we slept the night out! 

"next morn I made out to tell my mother i'd had the dog in my room, 
and I wa surprised, after all she'd said about it before, how quiet 
she took it. 'did you?' she says. 'well, by good right you ought to 
go without your breakfast for do such a thing behind my back: but I 
don't know as there' ani great harm done, onli anoth time you ask 
my permission, do you hear?' A bit after that I said someth to my 
father about have heard the cat again. '_cats_,' he says, and he 
look over at my poor mother, and she cough and he says, 'oh! ah! 
yes, cats. I believ I heard 'em myself.' 

"that wa a funni morn altogether: noth seem to go right. the 
organist he stop in bed, and the minor canon he forgot it wa the 
19th day and wait for the _venite_; and after a bit the deputi he 
set off play the chant for evensong, which wa a minor; and then 
the decani boy were laugh so much they couldn't sing, and when it 
came to the anthem the solo boy he got took with the giggles, and made 
out hi nose wa bleeding, and shove the book at me what hadn't 
practis the vers and wasn't much of a singer if I had known it. 
well, thing wa rougher, you see, fifti year ago, and I got a nip 
from the counter-tenor behind me that I remembered. 

"so we got through somehow, and neither the men nor the boy weren't 
by way of wait to see whether the canon in residence--mr. henslow 
it was--would come to the vestri and fine 'em, but I don't believ 
he did: for one thing I fanci he'd read the wrong lesson for the first 
time in hi life, and knew it. anyhow evan and me didn't find no 
difficulti in slip up the stair as I told you, and when we got up 
we laid ourselv down flat on our stomach where we could just 
stretch our head out over the old tomb, and we hadn't but just done 
so when we heard the verger that wa then, first shut the iron 
porch-gat and lock the south-west door, and then the transept 
door, so we knew there wa someth up, and they meant to keep the 
public out for a bit. 

"next thing was, the dean and the canon come in by their door on the 
north, and then I see my father, and old palmer, and a coupl of their 
best men, and palmer stood a talk for a bit with the dean in the 
middl of the choir. He had a coil of rope and the men had crows. all 
of 'em look a bit nervous. So there they stood talking, and at last 
I heard the dean say, 'well, i'v no time to waste, palmer. If you 
think this'll satisfi southminst people, i'll permit it to be done; 
but I must say this, that never in the whole cours of my life have I 
heard such arrant nonsens from a practic man as I have from you. 
don't you agre with me, henslow?' As far as I could hear mr. henslow 
said someth like 'oh! well we'r told, aren't we, mr. dean, not to 
judg others?' and the dean he gave a kind of sniff, and walk 
straight up to the tomb, and took hi stand behind it with hi back to 
the screen, and the other they come edg up rather gingerly. 
henslow, he stop on the south side and scratch on hi chin, he 
did. then the dean spoke up: 'palmer,' he says, 'which can you do 
easiest, get the slab off the top, or shift one of the side slabs?' 

"old palmer and hi men they potter about a bit look round the 
edg of the top slab and sound the side on the south and east and 
west and everywher but the north. henslow said someth about it 
be better to have a tri at the south side, becaus there wa more 
light and more room to move about in. then my father, who'd been 
watch of them, went round to the north side, and knelt down and 
felt of the slab by the chink, and he got up and dust hi knee and 
say to the dean: 'beg pardon, mr. dean, but I think if mr. palmer'l 
tri thi here slab he'll find it'll come out easi enough. seem to me 
one of the men could prize it out with hi crow by mean of thi 
chink.' 'ah! thank you, worby,' say the dean; 'that' a good 
suggestion. palmer, let one of your men do that, will you?' 

"so the man come round, and put hi bar in and bore on it, and just 
that minut when they were all bend over, and we boy got our head 
well out over the edg of the triforium, there come a most fear 
crash down at the west end of the choir, as if a whole stack of big 
timber had fallen down a flight of stairs. well, you can't expect me 
to tell you everyth that happen all in a minute. Of cours there 
wa a terribl commotion. I heard the slab fall out, and the crowbar 
on the floor, and I heard the dean say 'good god!' 

"when I look down again I saw the dean tumbl over on the floor, 
the men wa make off down the choir, henslow wa just go to help 
the dean up, palmer wa go to stop the men, as he said afterwards, 
and my father wa sit on the altar step with hi face in hi 
hands. the dean he wa veri cross. 'I wish to good you'd look 
where you'r come to, henslow,' he says. 'whi you should all take 
to your heel when a stick of wood tumbl down I cannot imagine,' and 
all henslow could do, explain he wa right away on the other side 
of the tomb, would not satisfi him. 

"then palmer came back and report there wa noth to account for 
thi nois and noth seemingli fallen down, and when the dean 
finish feel of himself they gather round--except my father, he 
sat where he was--and some one light up a bit of candl and they 
look into the tomb. 'noth there,' say the dean, 'what did I tell 
you? stay! here' something. what' this: a bit of music paper, and a 
piec of torn stuff--part of a dress it look like. both quit 
modern--no interest whatever. anoth time perhap you'll take the 
advic of an educ man'--or someth like that, and off he went, 
limp a bit, and out through the north door, onli as he went he 
call back angri to palmer for leav the door stand open. palmer 
call out 'veri sorry, sir,' but he shrug hi shoulders, and 
henslow says, 'I fanci mr. dean' mistaken. I close the door behind 
me, but he' a littl upset.' then palmer says, 'why, where' worby?' 
and they saw him sit on the step and went up to him. He wa 
recov himself, it seemed, and wipe hi forehead, and palmer 
help him up on to hi legs, as I wa glad to see. 

"they were too far off for me to hear what they said, but my father 
point to the north door in the aisle, and palmer and henslow both of 
them look veri surpris and scared. after a bit, my father and 
henslow went out of the church, and the other made what hast they 
could to put the slab back and plaster it in. and about as the clock 
struck twelv the cathedr wa open again and us boy made the best 
of our way home. 

"I wa in a great take to know what it wa had given my poor father 
such a turn, and when I got in and found him sit in hi chair 
take a glass of spirits, and my mother stand look anxiou at 
him, I couldn't keep from burst out and make confess where i'd 
been. but he didn't seem to take on, not in the way of lose hi 
temper. 'you wa there, wa you? well did you see it?' 'I see 
everything, father,' I said, 'except when the nois came.' 'did you 
see what it wa knock the dean over?' he says, 'that what come out 
of the monument? you didn't? well, that' a mercy.' 'why, what wa it, 
father?' I said. 'come, you must have seen it,' he says. '_didn't_ 
you see? A thing like a man, all over hair, and two great eye to it?' 

"well, that wa all I could get out of him that time, and later on he 
seem as if he wa asham of be so frightened, and he use to put 
me off when I ask him about it. but year after, when I wa got to 
be a grown man, we had more talk now and again on the matter, and he 
alway said the same thing. 'black it was,' he'd say, 'and a mass of 
hair, and two legs, and the light caught on it eyes.' 

"well, that' the tale of that tomb, mr. lake; it' one we don't tell 
to our visitors, and I should be oblig to you not to make ani use of 
it till i'm out of the way. I doubt mr. evans'l feel the same as I 
do, if you ask him." 

thi prove to be the case. but over twenti year have pass by, and 
the grass is grow over both worbi and evans; so mr. lake felt no 
difficulti about commun hi notes--taken in 1890--to me. He 
accompani them with a sketch of the tomb and a copi of the short 
inscript on the metal cross which wa affix at the expens of dr. 
lyall to the centr of the northern side. It wa from the vulgat of 
isaiah xxxiv., and consist mere of the three words-- 

ibi cubavit lamia. 




the stori OF A disappear 
and AN appear 




the stori OF A disappear 
and AN appear 


the letter which I now publish were sent to me recent by a person 
who know me to be interest in ghost stories. there is no doubt 
about their authenticity. the paper on which they are written, the 
ink, and the whole extern aspect put their date beyond the reach of 
question. 

the onli point which they do not make clear is the ident of the 
writer. He sign with initi only, and as none of the envelop of 
the letter are preserved, the surnam of hi correspondent--obvi 
a marri brother--i as obscur as hi own. No further preliminari 
explan is needed, I think. luckili the first letter suppli all 
that could be expected. 


letter I 

great chrishall, _dec. 22, 1837_. 

MY dear robert,--it is with great regret for the enjoy I am 
losing, and for a reason which you will deplor equal with myself, 
that I write to inform you that I am unabl to join your circl for 
thi christmas: but you will agre with me that it is unavoid when 
I say that I have within these few hour receiv a letter from mrs. 
hunt at b----, to the effect that our uncl henri ha suddenli and 
mysteri disappeared, and beg me to go down there immedi 
and join the search that is be made for him. littl as I, or you 
either, I think, have ever seen of uncle, I natur feel that thi 
is not a request that can be regard lightly, and accordingli I 
propos to go to b---- by thi afternoon' mail, reach it late in 
the evening. I shall not go to the rectory, but put up at the king' 
head, and to which you may address letters. I enclos a small draft, 
which you will pleas make use of for the benefit of the young people. 
I shall write you daili (suppos me to be detain more than a 
singl day) what goe on, and you may be sure, should the busi be 
clear up in time to permit of my come to the manor after all, I 
shall present myself. I have but a few minut at disposal. with 
cordial greet to you all, and mani regrets, believ me, your 
affection bro., 

W. R. 


letter II 

king' head, _dec. 23, '37_. 

MY dear robert,--in the first place, there is as yet no news of uncl 
h., and I think you may final dismiss ani idea--i won't say 
hope--that I might after all "turn up" for xmas. however, my thought 
will be with you, and you have my best wish for a realli festiv 
day. mind that none of my nephew or niec expend ani fraction of 
their guinea on present for me. 

sinc I got here I have been blame myself for take thi affair of 
uncl H. too easily. from what peopl here say, I gather that there is 
veri littl hope that he can still be alive; but whether it is 
accid or design that carri him off I cannot judge. the fact are 
these. On friday the 19th, he went as usual shortli befor five 
o'clock to read even prayer at the church; and when they were over 
the clerk brought him a message, in respons to which he set off to 
pay a visit to a sick person at an outli cottag the better part of 
two mile away. He paid the visit, and start on hi return journey 
at about half-past six. thi is the last that is known of him. the 
peopl here are veri much griev at hi loss; he had been here mani 
years, as you know, and though, as you also know, he wa not the most 
genial of men, and had more than a littl of the _martinet_ in hi 
composition, he seem to have been activ in good works, and unspar 
of troubl to himself. 

poor mrs. hunt, who ha been hi housekeep ever sinc she left 
woodley, is quit overcome: it seem like the end of the world to her. 
I am glad that I did not entertain the idea of take quarter at the 
rectory; and I have declin sever kindli offer of hospit from 
peopl in the place, prefer as I do to be independent, and find 
myself veri comfort here. 

you will, of course, wish to know what ha been done in the way of 
inquiri and search. first, noth wa to be expect from 
investig at the rectory; and to be brief, noth ha transpired. 
I ask mrs. hunt--a other had done before--wheth there wa either 
ani unfavour symptom in her master such as might portend a sudden 
stroke, or attack of illness, or whether he had ever had reason to 
apprehend ani such thing: but both she, and also hi medic man, were 
clear that thi wa not the case. He wa quit in hi usual health. 
In the second place, naturally, pond and stream have been dragged, 
and field in the neighbourhood which he is known to have visit 
last, have been searched--without result. I have myself talk to the 
parish clerk and--mor important--hav been to the hous where he paid 
hi visit. 

there can be no question of ani foul play on these people' part. the 
one man in the hous is ill in bed and veri weak: the wife and the 
children of cours could do noth themselves, nor is there the 
shadow of a probabl that they or ani of them should have agre to 
decoy poor uncl H. out in order that he might be attack on the way 
back. they had told what they knew to sever other inquir already, 
but the woman repeat it to me. the rector wa look just as usual: 
he wasn't veri long with the sick man--"h ain't," she said, "like 
some what ha a gift in prayer; but there, if we wa all that way, 
'owev would the chapel peopl get their living?" He left some money 
when he went away, and one of the children saw him cross the stile 
into the next field. He wa dress as he alway was: wore hi 
bands--i gather he is nearli the last man remain who doe so--at 
ani rate in thi district. 

you see I am put down everything. the fact is that I have noth 
els to do, have brought no busi paper with me; and, moreover, 
it serv to clear my own mind, and may suggest point which have been 
overlooked. So I shall continu to write all that passes, even to 
convers if need be--you may read or not as you please, but pray 
keep the letters. I have anoth reason for write so fully, but it 
is not a veri tangibl one. 

you may ask if I have myself made ani search in the field near the 
cottage. something--a good deal--ha been done by others, as I 
mentioned; but I hope to go over the ground to-morrow. bow street ha 
now been informed, and will send down by to-night' coach, but I do 
not think they will make much of the job. there is no snow, which 
might have help us. the field are all grass. Of cours I wa on the 
_qui vive_ for ani indic to-day both go and returning; but 
there wa a thick mist on the way back, and I wa not in trim for 
wander about unknown pastures, especi on an even when bush 
look like men, and a cow low in the distanc might have been the 
last trump. I assur you, if uncl henri had step out from among 
the tree in a littl cops which border the path at one place, 
carri hi head under hi arm, I should have been veri littl more 
uncomfort than I was. To tell you the truth, I wa rather 
expect someth of the kind. but I must drop my pen for the 
moment: mr. lucas, the curate, is announced. 

_later._ mr. luca ha been, and gone, and there is not much beyond 
the decenc of ordinari sentiment to be got from him. I can see that 
he ha given up ani idea that the rector can be alive, and that, so 
far as he can be, he is truli sorry. I can also discern that even in a 
more emot person than mr. lucas, uncl henri wa not like to 
inspir strong attachment. 

besid mr. lucas, I have had anoth visitor in the shape of my 
boniface--min host of the "king' head"--who came to see whether I 
had everyth I wished, and who realli requir the pen of a boz to 
do him justice. He wa veri solemn and weighti at first. "well, sir," 
he said, "I suppos we must bow our 'ead beneath the blow, as my poor 
wife had use to say. So far as I can gather there' been neither 
hide nor yet hair of our late respect incumb scent out as yet; 
not that he wa what the scriptur term a hairi man in ani sens of 
the word." 

I said--a well as I could--that I suppos not, but could not help 
ad that I had heard he wa sometim a littl difficult to deal 
with. mr. bowman look at me sharpli for a moment, and then pass in 
a flash from solemn sympathi to impass declamation. "when I 
think," he said, "of the languag that man see fit to employ to me in 
thi here parlour over no more a matter than a cask of beer--such a 
thing as I told him might happen ani day of the week to a man with a 
family--though as it turn out he wa quit under a mistake, and that 
I knew at the time, onli I wa that shock to hear him I couldn't lay 
my tongu to the right expression." 

He stop abruptli and eye me with some embarrassment. I onli said, 
"dear me, i'm sorri to hear you had ani littl differences; I suppos 
my uncl will be a good deal miss in the parish?" mr. bowman drew a 
long breath. "ah, yes!" he said; "your uncle! you'll understand me 
when I say that for the moment it had slip my remembr that he 
wa a relative; and natur enough, I must say, as it should, for as 
to you bear ani resembl to--to him, the notion of ani such a 
thing is clean ridiculous. all the same, 'ad I 'ave bore it in my 
mind, you'll be among the first to feel, i'm sure, as I should have 
abstain my lips, or rather I should _not_ have abstain my lip 
with no such reflections." 

I assur him that I quit understood, and wa go to have ask him 
some further questions, but he wa call away to see after some 
business. By the way, you need not take it into your head that he ha 
anyth to fear from the inquiri into poor uncl henry' 
disappearance--though, no doubt, in the watch of the night it will 
occur to him that _i_ think he has, and I may expect explan 
to-morrow. 

I must close thi letter: it ha to go by the late coach. 


letter iii 

_dec. 25, '37_. 

MY dear robert,--thi is a curiou letter to be write on christma 
day, and yet after all there is noth much in it. Or there may 
be--you shall be the judge. At least, noth decisive. the bow 
street men practic say that they have no clue. the length of time 
and the weather condit have made all track so faint as to be 
quit useless: noth that belong to the dead man--i'm afraid no 
other word will do--ha been pick up. 

As I expected, mr. bowman wa uneasi in hi mind thi morning; quit 
earli I heard him hold forth in a veri distinct voice--purpos 
so, I thought--to the bow street offic in the bar, as to the loss 
that the town had sustain in their rector, and as to the necess 
of leav no stone unturn (he wa veri great on thi phrase) in 
order to come at the truth. I suspect him of be an orat of reput 
at convivi meetings. 

when I wa at breakfast he came to wait on me, and took an opportun 
when hand a muffin to say in a low tone, "I 'ope, sir, you recon 
as my feel toward your rel is not actuat by ani taint of 
what you may call melignity--y can leav the room, eliza, I will see 
the gentleman 'a all he requir with my own hands--i ask your 
pardon, sir, but you must be well awar a man is not alway master of 
himself: and when that man ha been 'urt in hi mind by the 
applic of express which I will go so far as to say 'ad not 
ought to have been made use of (hi voic wa rise all thi time and 
hi face grow redder); no, sir; and 'ere, if you will permit of it, 
I should like to explain to you in a veri few word the exact state of 
the bone of contention. thi cask--i might more truli call it a 
firkin--of beer--" 

I felt it wa time to interpose, and said that I did not see that it 
would help us veri much to go into that matter in detail. mr. bowman 
acquiesced, and resum more calmly: 

"well, sir, I bow to your ruling, and as you say, be that here or be 
it there, it don't contribut a great deal, perhaps, to the present 
question. all I wish you to understand is that I am prepar as you 
are yourself to lend everi hand to the busi we have afor us, 
and--a I took the opportun to say as much to the orfic not 
three-quart of an hour ago--to leav no stone unturn as may throw 
even a spark of light on thi pain matter." 

In fact, mr. bowman did accompani us on our exploration, but though I 
am sure hi genuin wish wa to be helpful, I am afraid he did not 
contribut to the seriou side of it. He appear to be under the 
impress that we were like to meet either uncl henri or the 
person respons for hi disappearance, walk about the 
fields--and did a great deal of shade hi eye with hi hand and 
call our attention, by point with hi stick, to distant cattl 
and labourers. He held sever long convers with old women whom 
we met, and wa veri strict and sever in hi manner--but on each 
occas return to our parti saying, "well, I find she don't seem to 
'ave no connexion with thi sad affair. I think you may take it from 
me, sir, as there' littl or no light to be look for from that 
quarter; not without she' keep somethink back intentional." 

We gain no appreci result, as I told you at starting; the bow 
street men have left the town, whether for london or not, I am not 
sure. 

thi even I had compani in the shape of a bagman, a smartish 
fellow. He knew what wa go forward, but though he ha been on the 
road for some day about here, he had noth to tell of suspici 
characters--tramps, wander sailor or gipsies. He wa veri full of 
a capit punch and judi show he had seen thi same day at w----, and 
ask if it had been here yet, and advis me by no mean to miss it 
if it doe come. the best punch and the best tobi dog, he said, he had 
ever come across. tobi dogs, you know, are the last new thing in the 
shows. I have onli seen one myself, but befor long all the men will 
have them. 

now why, you will want to know, do I troubl to write all thi to you? 
I am oblig to do it, becaus it ha someth to do with anoth 
absurd trifl (a you will inevit say), which in my present state 
of rather unquiet fancy--noth more, perhaps--i have to put down. It 
is a dream, sir, which I am go to record, and I must say it is one 
of the oddest I have had. Is there anyth in it beyond what the 
bagman' talk and uncl henry' disappear could have suggested? 
you, I repeat, shall judge: I am not in a suffici cool and 
judici frame to do so. 

It began with what I can onli describ as a pull asid of curtains: 
and I found myself seat in a place--i don't know whether in door or 
out. there were people--onli a few--on either side of me, but I did 
not recogn them, or inde think much about them. they never spoke, 
but, so far as I remember, were all grave and pale-fac and look 
fixedli befor them. face me there wa a punch and judi show, 
perhap rather larger than the ordinari ones, paint with black 
figur on a reddish-yellow ground. behind it and on each side wa 
onli darkness, but in front there wa a suffici of light. I wa 
"strung up" to a high degre of expect and listen everi moment 
to hear the panpip and the roo-too-too-it. instead of that there 
came suddenli an enormous--i can use no other word--an enorm singl 
toll of a bell, I don't know from how far off--somewher behind. the 
littl curtain flew up and the drama began. 

I believ someon onc tri to re-writ punch as a seriou tragedy; 
but whoever he may have been, thi perform would have suit him 
exactly. there wa someth satan about the hero. He vari hi 
method of attack: for some of hi victim he lay in wait, and to see 
hi horribl face--it wa yellowish white, I may remark--p round 
the wing made me think of the vampyr in fuseli' foul sketch. To 
other he wa polit and carneying--particularli to the unfortun 
alien who can onli say _shallabalah_--though what punch said I never 
could catch. but with all of them I came to dread the moment of death. 
the crack of the stick on their skulls, which in the ordinari way 
delight me, had here a crush sound as if the bone wa give way, 
and the victim quiver and kick as they lay. the baby--it sound 
more ridicul as I go on--th baby, I am sure, wa alive. punch 
wrung it neck, and if the choke or squeak which it gave were not 
real, I know noth of reality. 

the stage got percept darker as each crime wa consummated, and at 
last there wa one murder which wa done quit in the dark, so that I 
could see noth of the victim, and took some time to effect. It wa 
accompani by hard breath and horrid muffl sounds, and after it 
punch came and sat on the foot-board and fan himself and look at 
hi shoes, which were bloody, and hung hi head on one side, and 
snigger in so deadli a fashion that I saw some of those besid me 
cover their faces, and I would gladli have done the same. but in the 
meantim the scene behind punch wa clearing, and showed, not the 
usual hous front, but someth more ambitious--a grove of tree and 
the gentl slope of a hill, with a veri natural--in fact, I should say 
a real--moon shine on it. over thi there rose slowli an object 
which I soon perceiv to be a human figur with someth peculiar 
about the head--what, I wa unabl at first to see. It did not stand 
on it feet, but began creep or drag itself across the middl 
distanc toward punch, who still sat back to it; and by thi time, I 
may remark (though it did not occur to me at the moment) that all 
pretenc of thi be a puppet show had vanished. punch wa still 
punch, it is true, but, like the others, wa in some sens a live 
creature, and both move themselv at their own will. 

when I next glanc at him he wa sit in malign reflection; but 
in anoth instant someth seem to attract hi attention, and he 
first sat up sharpli and then turn round, and evid caught sight 
of the person that wa approach him and wa in fact now veri near. 
then, indeed, did he show unmistak sign of terror: catch up 
hi stick, he rush toward the wood, onli just elud the arm of 
hi pursuer, which wa suddenli flung out to intercept him. It wa 
with a revuls which I cannot easili express that I now saw more or 
less clearli what thi pursuer wa like. He wa a sturdi figur clad 
in black, and, as I thought, wear bands: hi head wa cover with 
a whitish bag. 

the chase which now began last I do not know how long, now among the 
trees, now along the slope of the field, sometim both figur 
disappear wholli for a few seconds, and onli some uncertain sound 
let one know that they were still afoot. At length there came a 
moment when punch, evid exhausted, stagger in from the left and 
threw himself down among the trees. hi pursuer wa not long after 
him, and came look uncertainli from side to side. then, catch 
sight of the figur on the ground, he too threw himself down--hi back 
wa turn to the audience--with a swift motion twitch the cover 
from hi head, and thrust hi face into that of punch. everyth on 
the instant grew dark. 

there wa one long, loud, shudder scream, and I awok to find 
myself look straight into the face of--what in all the world do you 
think?--but a larg owl, which wa seat on my window-sil 
immedi opposit my bed-foot, hold up it wing like two 
shroud arms. I caught the fierc glanc of it yellow eyes, and then 
it wa gone. I heard the singl enorm bell again--veri likely, as 
you are say to yourself, the church clock; but I do not think 
so--and then I wa broad awake. 

all this, I may say, happen within the last half-hour. there wa no 
probabl of my get to sleep again, so I got up, put on cloth 
enough to keep me warm, and am write thi rigmarol in the first 
hour of christma day. have I left out anything? yes, there wa no 
tobi dog, and the name over the front of the punch and judi booth 
were kidman and gallop, which were certainli not what the bagman told 
me to look out for. 

By thi time, I feel a littl more as if I could sleep, so thi shall 
be seal and wafered. 


letter IV 

_dec. 26, '37._ 

MY dear robert,--al is over. the bodi ha been found. I do not make 
excus for not have sent off my news by last night' mail, for the 
simpl reason that I wa incap of put pen to paper. the event 
that attend the discoveri bewild me so complet that I need 
what I could get of a night' rest to enabl me to face the situat 
at all. now I can give you my journal of the day, certainli the 
strangest christma day that ever I spent or am like to spend. 

the first incid wa not veri serious. mr. bowman had, I think, been 
keep christma eve, and wa a littl inclin to be captious: at 
least, he wa not on foot veri early, and to judg from what I could 
hear, neither men or maid could do anyth to pleas him. the latter 
were certainli reduc to tears; nor am I sure that mr. bowman 
succeed in preserv a manli composure. At ani rate, when I came 
downstairs, it wa in a broken voic that he wish me the compliment 
of the season, and a littl later on, when he paid hi visit of 
ceremoni at breakfast, he wa far from cheerful: even byronic, I might 
almost say, in hi outlook on life. 

"I don't know," he said, "if you think with me, sir; but everi 
christma as come round the world seem a holler thing to me. why, 
take an exampl now from what lay under my own eye. there' my 
servant eliza--been with me now for go on fifteen years. I thought 
I could have place my confid in elizar, and yet thi veri 
morning--christma morn too, of all the bless day in the 
year--with the bell a ring and--and--al like that--i say, thi 
veri morning, had it not have been for provid watch over us 
all, that girl would have put--inde I may go so far to say, 'ad put 
the chees on your breakfast table----" He saw I wa about to speak, 
and wave hi hand at me. "it' all veri well for you to say, 'yes, 
mr. bowman, but you took away the chees and lock it up in the 
cupboard,' which I did, and have the key here, or if not the actual 
key one veri much about the same size. that' true enough, sir, but 
what do you think is the effect of that action on me? whi it' no 
exagger for me to say that the ground is cut from under my feet. 
and yet when I said as much to eliza, not nasty, mind you, but just 
firm like, what wa my return? 'oh,' she says: 'well,' she says, 
'there wasn't no bone broke, I suppose.' well, sir, it 'urt me, 
that' all I can say: it 'urt me, and I don't like to think of it 
now." 

there wa an omin paus here, in which I ventur to say someth 
like, "yes, veri trying," and then ask at what hour the church 
servic wa to be. "eleven o'clock," mr. bowman said with a heavi 
sigh. "ah, you won't have no such discours from poor mr. luca as 
what you would have done from our late rector. him and me may have 
had our littl differences, and did do, more' the pity." 

I could see that a power effort wa need to keep him off the 
vex question of the cask of beer, but he made it. "but I will say 
this, that a better preacher, nor yet one to stand faster by hi 
rights, or what he consid to be hi rights--however, that' not 
the question now--i for one, never set under. some might say, 'wa he 
a eloqu man?' and to that my answer would be: 'well, there you'v a 
better right per'ap to speak of your own uncl than what I have.' 
other might ask, 'did he keep a hold of hi congregation?' and there 
again I should reply, 'that depends.' but as I say--yes, eliza, my 
girl, i'm coming--eleven o'clock, sir, and you inquir for the king' 
head pew." I believ eliza had been veri near the door, and shall 
consid it in my vail. 

the next episod wa church: I felt mr. luca had a difficult task in 
do justic to christma sentiments, and also to the feel of 
disquiet and regret which, whatev mr. bowman might say, wa clearli 
prevalent. I do not think he rose to the occasion. I wa 
uncomfortable. the organ wolved--y know what I mean: the wind 
died--twic in the christma hymn, and the tenor bell, I suppos owe 
to some neglig on the part of the ringers, kept sound faintli 
about onc in a minut dure the sermon. the clerk sent up a man to 
see to it, but he seem unabl to do much. I wa glad when it wa 
over. there wa an odd incident, too, befor the service. I went in 
rather early, and came upon two men carri the parish bier back to 
it place under the tower. from what I overheard them saying, it 
appear that it had been put out by mistake, by some one who wa not 
there. I also saw the clerk busi fold up a moth-eaten velvet 
pall--not a sight for christma day. 

I dine soon after this, and then, feel disinclin to go out, took 
my seat by the fire in the parlour, with the last number of 
_pickwick_, which I had been save up for some days. I thought I 
could be sure of keep awak over this, but I turn out as bad as 
our friend smith. I suppos it wa half-past two when I wa rous by 
a pierc whistl and laugh and talk voic outsid in the 
market-place. It wa a punch and judy--i had no doubt the one that my 
bagman had seen at w----. I wa half delighted, half not--th latter 
becaus my unpleas dream came back to me so vividly; but, anyhow, I 
determin to see it through, and I sent eliza out with a crown-piec 
to the perform and a request that they would face my window if they 
could manag it. 

the show wa a veri smart new one; the name of the proprietors, I 
need hardli tell you, were italian, foresta and calpigi. the tobi dog 
wa there, as I had been led to expect. all b---- turn out, but did 
not obstruct my view, for I wa at the larg first-floor window and 
not ten yard away. 

the play began on the stroke of a quarter to three by the church 
clock. certainli it wa veri good; and I wa soon reliev to find 
that the disgust my dream had given me for punch' onslaught on hi 
ill-star visitor wa onli transient. I laugh at the demis of 
the turncock, the foreigner, the beadle, and even the baby. the onli 
drawback wa the tobi dog' develop a tendenc to howl in the wrong 
place. someth had occurred, I suppose, to upset him, and someth 
considerable: for, I forget exactli at what point, he gave a most 
lament cry, leapt off the foot board, and shot away across the 
market-plac and down a side street. there wa a stage-wait, but onli 
a brief one. I suppos the men decid that it wa no good go after 
him, and that he wa like to turn up again at night. 

We went on. punch dealt faith with judy, and in fact with all 
comers; and then came the moment when the gallow wa erected, and the 
great scene with mr. ketch wa to be enacted. It wa now that 
someth happen of which I can certainli not yet see the import 
fully. you have wit an execution, and know what the criminal' 
head look like with the cap on. If you are like me, you never wish to 
think of it again, and I do not willingli remind you of it. It wa 
just such a head as that, that I, from my somewhat higher post, saw in 
the insid of the show-box; but at first the audienc did not see it. 
I expect it to emerg into their view, but instead of that there 
slowli rose for a few second an uncov face, with an express of 
terror upon it, of which I have never imagin the like. It seem as 
if the man, whoever he was, wa be forcibl lifted, with hi arm 
somehow pinion or held back, toward the littl gibbet on the 
stage. I could just see the nightcap head behind him. then there 
wa a cri and a crash. the whole show-box fell over backwards; kick 
leg were seen among the ruins, and then two figures--a some said; I 
can onli answer for one--wer visibl run at top speed across the 
squar and disappear in a lane which lead to the fields. 

Of cours everybodi gave chase. I followed; but the pace wa killing, 
and veri few were in, literally, at the death. It happen in a chalk 
pit: the man went over the edg quit blindli and broke hi neck. they 
search everywher for the other, until it occur to me to ask 
whether he had ever left the market-place. At first everyon wa sure 
that he had; but when we came to look, he wa there, under the 
show-box, dead too. 

but in the chalk pit it wa that poor uncl henry' bodi wa found, 
with a sack over the head, the throat horribl mangled. It wa a 
peak corner of the sack stick out of the soil that attract 
attention. I cannot bring myself to write in greater detail. 

I forgot to say the men' real name were kidman and gallop. I feel 
sure I have heard them, but no one here seem to know anyth about 
them. 

I am come to you as soon as I can after the funeral. I must tell you 
when we meet what I think of it all. 




two doctor 




two doctor 


It is a veri common thing, in my experience, to find paper shut up in 
old books; but one of the rarest thing to come across ani such that 
are at all interesting. still it doe happen, and one should never 
destroy them unlook at. now it wa a practic of mine befor the war 
occasion to buy old ledger of which the paper wa good, and which 
possess a good mani blank leaves, and to extract these and use them 
for my own note and writings. one such I purchas for a small sum in 
1911. It wa tightli clasped, and it board were warp by have for 
year been oblig to embrac a number of extran sheets. 
three-quart of thi insert matter had lost all vestig of 
import for ani live human being: one bundl had not. that it 
belong to a lawyer is certain, for it is endorsed: _the strangest 
case I have yet met_, and bear initials, and an address in gray' 
inn. It is onli materi for a case, and consist of statement by 
possibl witnesses. the man who would have been the defend or 
prison seem never to have appeared. the _dossier_ is not complete, 
but, such as it is, it furnish a riddl in which the supernatur 
appear to play a part. you must see what you can make of it. 

the follow is the set and the tale as I elicit it. 

dr. abel wa walk in hi garden one afternoon wait for hi 
hors to be brought round that he might set out on hi visit for the 
day. As the place wa islington, the month june, and the year 1718, we 
conceiv the surround as be countrifi and pleasant. To him 
enter hi confidenti servant, luke jennett, who had been with him 
twenti years. 

"I said I wish to speak to him, and what I had to say might take 
some quarter of an hour. He accordingli bade me go into hi study, 
which wa a room open on the terrac path where he wa walking, and 
came in himself and sat down. I told him that, much against my will, I 
must look out for anoth place. He inquir what wa my reason, in 
consider I had been so long with him. I said if he would excus 
me he would do me a great kindness, becaus (thi appear to have 
been common form even in 1718) I wa one that alway like to have 
everyth pleasant about me. As well as I can remember, he said that 
wa hi case likewise, but he would wish to know whi I should chang 
my mind after so mani years, and, say he, 'you know there can be no 
talk of a remembr of you in my will if you leav my servic now.' 
I said I had made my reckon of that. 

"'then,' say he, 'you must have some complaint to make, and if I 
could I would willingli set it right.' and at that I told him, not 
see how I could keep it back, the matter of my former affidavit and 
of the bedstaff in the dispensing-room, and said that a hous where 
such thing happen wa no place for me. At which he, look veri 
black upon me, said no more, but call me fool, and said he would pay 
what wa owe me in the morning; and so, hi hors be waiting, 
went out. So for that night I lodg with my sister' husband near 
battl bridg and came earli next morn to my late master, who then 
made a great matter that I had not lain in hi hous and stop a 
crown out of my wage owing. 

"after that I took servic here and there, not for long at a time, 
and saw no more of him till I came to be dr. quinn' man at dodd hall 
in islington." 

there is one veri obscur part in thi statement, namely, the 
refer to the former affidavit and the matter of the bedstaff. the 
former affidavit is not in the bundl of papers. It is to be fear 
that it wa taken out to be read becaus of it special oddity, and 
not put back. Of what natur the stori wa may be guess later, but 
as yet no clue ha been put into our hands. 

the rector of islington, jonathan pratt, is the next to step forward. 
He furnish particular of the stand and reput of dr. abel 
and dr. quinn, both of whom live and practis in hi parish. 

"it is not to be supposed," he says, "that a physician should be a 
regular attend at morn and even prayers, or at the wednesday 
lectures, but within the measur of their abil I would say that 
both these person fulfil their oblig as loyal member of the 
church of england. At the same time (a you desir my privat mind) I 
must say, in the languag of the schools, _distinguo_. dr. A. wa to 
me a sourc of perplexity, dr. Q. to my eye a plain, honest believer, 
not inquir over close into point of belief, but squar hi 
practic to what light he had. the other interest himself in 
question to which providence, as I hold, design no answer to be 
given us in thi state: he would ask me, for example, what place I 
believ those be now to hold in the scheme of creation which by 
some are thought neither to have stood fast when the rebel angel 
fell, nor to have join with them to the full pitch of their 
transgression. 

"a wa suitable, my first answer to him wa a question, what warrant 
he had for suppos ani such be to exist? for that there wa none 
in scriptur I took it he wa aware. It appeared--for as I am on the 
subject, the whole tale may be given--that he ground himself on such 
passag as that of the satyr which jerom tell us convers with 
antony; but thought too that some part of scriptur might be cite in 
support. 'and besides,' said he, 'you know 'ti the univers belief 
among those that spend their day and night abroad, and I would add 
that if your call took you so continu as it doe me about the 
countri lane by night, you might not be so surpris as I see you to 
be by my suggestion.' 'you are then of john milton' mind,' I said, 
'and hold that 

million of spiritu creatur walk the earth 
unseen, both when we wake and when we sleep.' 

"'i do not know,' he said, 'whi milton should take upon himself to say 
"unseen"; though to be sure he wa blind when he wrote that. but for 
the rest, why, yes, I think he wa in the right.' 'well,' I said, 
'though not so often as you, I am not seldom call abroad pretti 
late; but I have no mind of meet a satyr in our islington lane in 
all the year I have been here; and if you have had the better luck, I 
am sure the royal societi would be glad to know of it.' 

"I am remind of these trifl express becaus dr. A. took them 
so ill, stamp out of the room in a huff with some such word as that 
these high and dri parson had no eye but for a prayerbook or a pint 
of wine. 

"but thi wa not the onli time that our convers took a 
remark turn. there wa an even when he came in, at first 
seem gay and in good spirits, but afterward as he sat and smoke 
by the fire fall into a muse way; out of which to rous him I 
said pleasantli that I suppos he had had no meet of late with 
hi odd friends. A question which did effectu arous him, for he 
look most wildly, and as if scared, upon me, and said, '_you_ were 
never there? I did not see you. who brought you?' and then in a more 
collect tone, 'what wa thi about a meeting? I believ I must have 
been in a doze.' To which I answer that I wa think of faun and 
centaur in the dark lane, and not of a witches' sabbath; but it 
seem he took it differently. 

"'well,' said he, 'I can plead guilti to neither; but I find you veri 
much more of a sceptic than becom your cloth. If you care to know 
about the dark lane you might do wors than ask my housekeep that 
live at the other end of it when she wa a child.' 'yes,' said I, 
'and the old women in the almshous and the children in the kennel. If 
I were you, I would send to your brother quinn for a bolu to clear 
your brain.' 'damn quinn,' say he; 'talk no more of him: he ha 
embezzl four of my best patient thi month; I believ it is that 
curs man of his, jennett, that use to be with me, hi tongu is 
never still; it should be nail to the pillori if he had hi 
deserts.' this, I may say, wa the onli time of hi show me that he 
had ani grudg against either dr. quinn or jennett, and as wa my 
business, I did my best to persuad him he wa mistaken in them. yet 
it could not be deni that some respect famili in the parish 
had given him the cold shoulder, and for no reason that they were 
will to allege. the end wa that he said he had not done so ill at 
islington but that he could afford to live at eas elsewher when he 
chose, and anyhow he bore dr. quinn no malice. I think I now rememb 
what observ of mine drew him into the train of thought which he 
next pursued. It was, I believe, my mention some juggl trick 
which my brother in the east indi had seen at the court of the rajah 
of mysore. 'A conveni thing enough,' said dr. abel to me, 'if by 
some arrang a man could get the power of commun motion and 
energi to inanim objects.' 'a if the axe should move itself 
against him that lift it; someth of that kind?' 'well, I don't 
know that that wa in my mind so much; but if you could summon such a 
volum from your shelf or even order it to open at the right page.' 

"he wa sit by the fire--it wa a cold evening--and stretch out 
hi hand that way, and just then the fire-irons, or at least the 
poker, fell over toward him with a great clatter, and I did not hear 
what els he said. but I told him that I could not easili conceiv of 
an arrangement, as he call it, of such a kind that would not includ 
as one of it condit a heavier payment than ani christian would 
care to make; to which he assented. 'but,' he said, 'I have no doubt 
these bargain can be made veri tempting, veri persuasive. still, you 
would not favour them, eh, doctor? no, I suppos not.' 

"thi is as much as I know of dr. abell' mind, and the feel 
between these men. dr. quinn, as I said, wa a plain, honest creature, 
and a man to whom I would have gone--inde I have befor now gone to 
him for advic on matter of business. He was, however, everi now and 
again, and particularli of late, not exempt from troublesom fancies. 
there wa certainli a time when he wa so much harass by hi dream 
that he could not keep them to himself, but would tell them to hi 
acquaint and among them to me. I wa at supper at hi house, and 
he wa not inclin to let me leav him at my usual time. 'if you 
go,' he said, 'there will be noth for it but I must go to bed and 
dream of the chrysalis.' 'you might be wors off,' said I. 'I do not 
think it,' he said, and he shook himself like a man who is displeas 
with the complexion of hi thoughts. 'I onli meant,' said I, 'that a 
chrysali is an innoc thing.' 'thi one is not,' he said, 'and I do 
not care to think of it.' 

"however, sooner than lose my compani he wa fain to tell me (for I 
press him) that thi wa a dream which had come to him sever time 
of late, and even more than onc in a night. It wa to thi effect, 
that he seem to himself to wake under an extrem compuls to rise 
and go out of doors. So he would dress himself and go down to hi 
garden door. By the door there stood a spade which he must take, and 
go out into the garden, and at a particular place in the shrubberi 
somewhat clear and upon which the moon shone, for there wa alway in 
hi dream a full moon, he would feel himself forc to dig. and after 
some time the spade would uncov someth light-coloured, which he 
would perceiv to be a stuff, linen or woollen, and thi he must clear 
with hi hands. It wa alway the same: of the size of a man and 
shape like the chrysali of a moth, with the fold show a promis 
of an open at one end. 

"he could not describ how gladli he would have left all at thi stage 
and run to the house, but he must not escap so easily. So with mani 
groans, and know onli too well what to expect, he part these 
fold of stuff, or, as it sometim seem to be, membrane, and 
disclos a head cover with a smooth pink skin, which break as 
the creatur stirred, show him hi own face in a state of death. the 
tell of thi so much disturb him that I wa forc out of mere 
compass to sit with him the greater part of the night and talk with 
him upon indiffer subjects. He said that upon everi recurr of 
thi dream he woke and found himself, as it were, fight for hi 
breath." 

anoth extract from luke jennett' long continu statement come in 
at thi point. 

"I never told tale of my master, dr. abell, to anybodi in the 
neighbourhood. when I wa in anoth servic I rememb to have spoken 
to my fellow-serv about the matter of the bedstaff, but I am sure 
I never said either I or he were the person concerned, and it met 
with so littl credit that I wa affront and thought best to keep it 
to myself. and when I came back to islington and found dr. abel still 
there, who I wa told had left the parish, I wa clear that it behov 
me to use great discretion, for inde I wa afraid of the man, and it 
is certain I wa no parti to spread ani ill report of him. My 
master, dr. quinn, wa a veri just, honest man, and no maker of 
mischief. I am sure he never stir a finger nor said a word by way 
of induc to a soul to make them leav go to dr. abel and come 
to him; nay, he would hardli be persuad to attend them that came, 
until he wa convinc that if he did not they would send into the 
town for a physician rather than do as they had hitherto done. 

"I believ it may be prove that dr. abel came into my master' hous 
more than once. We had a new chambermaid out of hertfordshire, and she 
ask me who wa the gentleman that wa look after the master, that 
is dr. quinn, when he wa out, and seem so disappoint that he wa 
out. she said whoever he wa he knew the way of the hous well, 
run at onc into the studi and then into the dispensing-room, and 
last into the bed-chamber. I made her tell me what he wa like, and 
what she said wa suitabl enough to dr. abell; but besid she told 
me she saw the same man at church and some one told her that wa the 
doctor. 

"it wa just after thi that my master began to have hi bad nights, 
and complain to me and other persons, and in particular what 
discomfort he suffer from hi pillow and bedclothes. He said he must 
buy some to suit him, and should do hi own marketing. and accordingli 
brought home a parcel which he said wa of the right quality, but 
where he bought it we had then no knowledge, onli they were mark in 
thread with a coronet and a bird. the women said they were of a sort 
not commonli met with and veri fine, and my master said they were the 
comfortablest he ever used, and he slept now both soft and deep. also 
the feather pillow were the best sort and hi head would sink into 
them as if they were a cloud: which I have myself remark sever 
time when I came to wake him of a morning, hi face be almost hid 
by the pillow close over it. 

"I had never ani commun with dr. abel after I came back to 
islington, but one day when he pass me in the street and ask me 
whether I wa not look for anoth service, to which I answer I 
wa veri well suit where I was, but he said I wa a tickle-mind 
fellow and he doubt not he should soon hear I wa on the world 
again, which inde prove true." 

dr. pratt is next taken up where he left off. 

"on the 16th I wa call up out of my bed soon after it wa 
light--that is about five--with a messag that dr. quinn wa dead or 
dying. make my way to hi hous I found there wa no doubt which wa 
the truth. all the person in the hous except the one that let me in 
were alreadi in hi chamber and stand about hi bed, but none 
touch him. He wa stretch in the midst of the bed, on hi back, 
without ani disorder, and inde had the appear of one readi laid 
out for burial. hi hands, I think, were even cross on hi breast. 
the onli thing not usual wa that noth wa to be seen of hi face, 
the two end of the pillow or bolster appear to be close quit 
over it. these I immedi pull apart, at the same time rebuk 
those present, and especi the man, for not at onc come to the 
assist of hi master. he, however, onli look at me and shook 
hi head, have evid no more hope than myself that there wa 
anyth but a corps befor us. 

"inde it wa plain to ani one possess of the least experi that 
he wa not onli dead, but had die of suffocation. nor could it be 
conceiv that hi death wa accident caus by the mere fold 
of the pillow over hi face. how should he not, feel the 
oppression, have lift hi hand to put it away? wherea not a fold 
of the sheet which wa close gather about him, as I now observed, 
wa disordered. the next thing wa to procur a physician. I had 
bethought me of thi on leav my house, and sent on the messeng 
who had come to me to dr. abell; but I now heard that he wa away from 
home, and the nearest surgeon wa got, who howev could tell no more, 
at least without open the body, than we alreadi knew. 

"a to ani person enter the room with evil purpos (which wa the 
next point to be cleared), it wa visibl that the bolt of the door 
were burst from their stanchions, and the stanchion broken away from 
the door-post by main force; and there wa a suffici bodi of 
witness, the smith among them, to testifi that thi had been done but 
a few minut befor I came. the chamber be moreov at the top of 
the house, the window wa neither easi of access nor did it show ani 
sign of an exit made that way, either by mark upon the sill or 
footprint below upon soft mould." 

the surgeon' evid form of cours part of the report of the 
inquest, but sinc it ha noth but remark upon the healthi state 
of the larger organ and the coagul of blood in variou part of 
the body, it need not be reproduced. the verdict wa "death by the 
visit of god." 

annex to the other paper is one which I wa at first inclin to 
suppos had made it way among them by mistake. upon further 
consider I think I can divin a reason for it presence. 

It relat to the rifl of a mausoleum in middlesex which stood in a 
park (now broken up), the properti of a nobl famili which I will not 
name. the outrag wa not that of an ordinari resurrect man. the 
object, it seem likely, wa theft. the account is blunt and 
terrible. I shall not quot it. A dealer in the north of london 
suffer heavi penalti as a receiv of stolen good in connexion 
with the affair. 

* * * * * 

_print in great britain by_ 
unwin brothers, limited, the gresham press, woke and london 



***end OF the project gutenberg ebook A thin ghost and others*** 


******* thi file should be name 20387-8.txt or 20387-8.zip ******* 


thi and all associ file of variou format will be found in: 
http://www.gutenberg.org/dirs/2/0/3/8/20387 



updat edit will replac the previou one--th old edit 
will be renamed. 

creat the work from public domain print edit mean that no 
one own a unit state copyright in these works, so the foundat 
(and you!) can copi and distribut it in the unit state without 
permiss and without pay copyright royalties. special rules, 
set forth in the gener term of use part of thi license, appli to 
copi and distribut project gutenberg-tm electron work to 
protect the project gutenberg-tm concept and trademark. project 
gutenberg is a regist trademark, and may not be use if you 
charg for the ebooks, unless you receiv specif permission. If you 
do not charg anyth for copi of thi ebook, compli with the 
rule is veri easy. you may use thi ebook for nearli ani purpos 
such as creation of deriv works, reports, perform and 
research. they may be modifi and print and given away--y may do 
practic anyth with public domain ebooks. redistribut is 
subject to the trademark license, especi commerci 
redistribution. 



*** start: full licens *** 

the full project gutenberg licens 
pleas read thi befor you distribut OR use thi work 

To protect the project gutenberg-tm mission of promot the free 
distribut of electron works, by use or distribut thi work 
(or ani other work associ in ani way with the phrase "project 
gutenberg"), you agre to compli with all the term of the full project 
gutenberg-tm licens (avail with thi file or onlin at 
http://www.gutenberg.org/license). 


section 1. gener term of use and redistribut project gutenberg-tm 
electron work 

1.a. By read or use ani part of thi project gutenberg-tm 
electron work, you indic that you have read, understand, agre to 
and accept all the term of thi licens and intellectu properti 
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agre to abid by all 
the term of thi agreement, you must ceas use and return or destroy 
all copi of project gutenberg-tm electron work in your possession. 
If you paid a fee for obtain a copi of or access to a project 
gutenberg-tm electron work and you do not agre to be bound by the 
term of thi agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or 
entiti to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.e.8. 

1.b. "project gutenberg" is a regist trademark. It may onli be 
use on or associ in ani way with an electron work by peopl who 
agre to be bound by the term of thi agreement. there are a few 
thing that you can do with most project gutenberg-tm electron work 
even without compli with the full term of thi agreement. see 
paragraph 1.c below. there are a lot of thing you can do with project 
gutenberg-tm electron work if you follow the term of thi agreement 
and help preserv free futur access to project gutenberg-tm electron 
works. see paragraph 1.e below. 

1.c. the project gutenberg literari archiv foundat ("the foundation" 
or pglaf), own a compil copyright in the collect of project 
gutenberg-tm electron works. nearli all the individu work in the 
collect are in the public domain in the unit states. If an 
individu work is in the public domain in the unit state and you are 
locat in the unit states, we do not claim a right to prevent you from 
copying, distributing, performing, display or creat deriv 
work base on the work as long as all refer to project gutenberg 
are removed. Of course, we hope that you will support the project 
gutenberg-tm mission of promot free access to electron work by 
freeli share project gutenberg-tm work in complianc with the term of 
thi agreement for keep the project gutenberg-tm name associ with 
the work. you can easili compli with the term of thi agreement by 
keep thi work in the same format with it attach full project 
gutenberg-tm licens when you share it without charg with others. 

1.d. the copyright law of the place where you are locat also govern 
what you can do with thi work. copyright law in most countri are in 
a constant state of change. If you are outsid the unit states, check 
the law of your countri in addit to the term of thi agreement 
befor downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distribut or 
creat deriv work base on thi work or ani other project 
gutenberg-tm work. the foundat make no represent concern 
the copyright statu of ani work in ani countri outsid the unit 
states. 

1.e. unless you have remov all refer to project gutenberg: 

1.e.1. the follow sentence, with activ link to, or other immedi 
access to, the full project gutenberg-tm licens must appear promin 
whenev ani copi of a project gutenberg-tm work (ani work on which the 
phrase "project gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "project 
gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed, 
copi or distributed: 

thi ebook is for the use of anyon anywher at no cost and with 
almost no restrict whatsoever. you may copi it, give it away or 
re-us it under the term of the project gutenberg licens includ 
with thi ebook or onlin at www.gutenberg.org 

1.e.2. If an individu project gutenberg-tm electron work is deriv 
from the public domain (doe not contain a notic indic that it is 
post with permiss of the copyright holder), the work can be copi 
and distribut to anyon in the unit state without pay ani fee 
or charges. If you are redistribut or provid access to a work 
with the phrase "project gutenberg" associ with or appear on the 
work, you must compli either with the requir of paragraph 1.e.1 
through 1.e.7 or obtain permiss for the use of the work and the 
project gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraph 1.e.8 or 
1.e.9. 

1.e.3. If an individu project gutenberg-tm electron work is post 
with the permiss of the copyright holder, your use and distribut 
must compli with both paragraph 1.e.1 through 1.e.7 and ani addit 
term impos by the copyright holder. addit term will be link 
to the project gutenberg-tm licens for all work post with the 
permiss of the copyright holder found at the begin of thi work. 

1.e.4. Do not unlink or detach or remov the full project gutenberg-tm 
licens term from thi work, or ani file contain a part of thi 
work or ani other work associ with project gutenberg-tm. 

1.e.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribut or redistribut thi 
electron work, or ani part of thi electron work, without 
promin display the sentenc set forth in paragraph 1.e.1 with 
activ link or immedi access to the full term of the project 
gutenberg-tm license. 

1.e.6. you may convert to and distribut thi work in ani binary, 
compressed, mark up, nonproprietari or proprietari form, includ ani 
word process or hypertext form. however, if you provid access to or 
distribut copi of a project gutenberg-tm work in a format other than 
"plain vanilla ascii" or other format use in the offici version 
post on the offici project gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org), 
you must, at no addit cost, fee or expens to the user, provid a 
copy, a mean of export a copy, or a mean of obtain a copi upon 
request, of the work in it origin "plain vanilla ascii" or other 
form. ani altern format must includ the full project gutenberg-tm 
licens as specifi in paragraph 1.e.1. 

1.e.7. Do not charg a fee for access to, viewing, displaying, 
performing, copi or distribut ani project gutenberg-tm work 
unless you compli with paragraph 1.e.8 or 1.e.9. 

1.e.8. you may charg a reason fee for copi of or provid 
access to or distribut project gutenberg-tm electron work provid 
that 

- you pay a royalti fee of 20% of the gross profit you deriv from 
the use of project gutenberg-tm work calcul use the method 
you alreadi use to calcul your applic taxes. the fee is 
owe to the owner of the project gutenberg-tm trademark, but he 
ha agre to donat royalti under thi paragraph to the 
project gutenberg literari archiv foundation. royalti payment 
must be paid within 60 day follow each date on which you 
prepar (or are legal requir to prepare) your period tax 
returns. royalti payment should be clearli mark as such and 
sent to the project gutenberg literari archiv foundat at the 
address specifi in section 4, "inform about donat to 
the project gutenberg literari archiv foundation." 

- you provid a full refund of ani money paid by a user who notifi 
you in write (or by e-mail) within 30 day of receipt that s/he 
doe not agre to the term of the full project gutenberg-tm 
license. you must requir such a user to return or 
destroy all copi of the work possess in a physic medium 
and discontinu all use of and all access to other copi of 
project gutenberg-tm works. 

- you provide, in accord with paragraph 1.f.3, a full refund of ani 
money paid for a work or a replac copy, if a defect in the 
electron work is discov and report to you within 90 day 
of receipt of the work. 

- you compli with all other term of thi agreement for free 
distribut of project gutenberg-tm works. 

1.e.9. If you wish to charg a fee or distribut a project gutenberg-tm 
electron work or group of work on differ term than are set 
forth in thi agreement, you must obtain permiss in write from 
both the project gutenberg literari archiv foundat and michael 
hart, the owner of the project gutenberg-tm trademark. contact the 
foundat as set forth in section 3 below. 

1.f. 

1.f.1. project gutenberg volunt and employe expend consider 
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcrib and proofread 
public domain work in creat the project gutenberg-tm 
collection. despit these efforts, project gutenberg-tm electron 
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain 
"defects," such as, but not limit to, incomplete, inaccur or 
corrupt data, transcript errors, a copyright or other intellectu 
properti infringement, a defect or damag disk or other medium, a 
comput virus, or comput code that damag or cannot be read by 
your equipment. 

1.f.2. limit warranty, disclaim OF damag - except for the "right 
of replac or refund" describ in paragraph 1.f.3, the project 
gutenberg literari archiv foundation, the owner of the project 
gutenberg-tm trademark, and ani other parti distribut a project 
gutenberg-tm electron work under thi agreement, disclaim all 
liabil to you for damages, cost and expenses, includ legal 
fees. you agre that you have NO remedi for negligence, strict 
liability, breach OF warranti OR breach OF contract except those 
provid IN paragraph f3. you agre that the foundation, the 
trademark owner, and ani distributor under thi agreement will not BE 
liabl TO you for actual, direct, indirect, consequential, punit OR 
incident damag even IF you give notic OF the possibl OF such 
damage. 

1.f.3. limit right OF replac OR refund - If you discov a 
defect in thi electron work within 90 day of receiv it, you can 
receiv a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by send a 
written explan to the person you receiv the work from. If you 
receiv the work on a physic medium, you must return the medium with 
your written explanation. the person or entiti that provid you with 
the defect work may elect to provid a replac copi in lieu of a 
refund. If you receiv the work electronically, the person or entiti 
provid it to you may choos to give you a second opportun to 
receiv the work electron in lieu of a refund. If the second copi 
is also defective, you may demand a refund in write without further 
opportun to fix the problem. 

1.f.4. except for the limit right of replac or refund set forth 
in paragraph 1.f.3, thi work is provid to you 'as-is', with NO other 
warranti OF ani kind, express OR implied, includ but not limit TO 
warranti OF merchant OR fit for ani purpose. 

1.f.5. some state do not allow disclaim of certain impli 
warranti or the exclus or limit of certain type of damages. 
If ani disclaim or limit set forth in thi agreement violat the 
law of the state applic to thi agreement, the agreement shall be 
interpret to make the maximum disclaim or limit permit by 
the applic state law. the invalid or unenforc of ani 
provis of thi agreement shall not void the remain provisions. 

1.f.6. indemn - you agre to indemnifi and hold the foundation, the 
trademark owner, ani agent or employe of the foundation, anyon 
provid copi of project gutenberg-tm electron work in accord 
with thi agreement, and ani volunt associ with the production, 
promot and distribut of project gutenberg-tm electron works, 
harmless from all liability, cost and expenses, includ legal fees, 
that aris directli or indirectli from ani of the follow which you do 
or caus to occur: (a) distribut of thi or ani project gutenberg-tm 
work, (b) alteration, modification, or addit or delet to ani 
project gutenberg-tm work, and (c) ani defect you cause. 


section 2. inform about the mission of project gutenberg-tm 

project gutenberg-tm is synonym with the free distribut of 
electron work in format readabl by the widest varieti of comput 
includ obsolete, old, middle-ag and new computers. It exist 
becaus of the effort of hundr of volunt and donat from 
peopl in all walk of life. 

volunt and financi support to provid volunt with the 
assist they need, is critic to reach project gutenberg-tm' 
goal and ensur that the project gutenberg-tm collect will 
remain freeli avail for gener to come. In 2001, the project 
gutenberg literari archiv foundat wa creat to provid a secur 
and perman futur for project gutenberg-tm and futur generations. 
To learn more about the project gutenberg literari archiv foundat 
and how your effort and donat can help, see section 3 and 4 
and the foundat web page at http://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/pglaf. 


section 3. inform about the project gutenberg literari archiv 
foundat 

the project gutenberg literari archiv foundat is a non profit 
501(c)(3) educ corpor organ under the law of the 
state of mississippi and grant tax exempt statu by the intern 
revenu service. the foundation' ein or feder tax identif 
number is 64-6221541. contribut to the project gutenberg 
literari archiv foundat are tax deduct to the full extent 
permit by u.s. feder law and your state' laws. 

the foundation' princip offic is locat at 4557 melan dr. S. 
fairbanks, ak, 99712., but it volunt and employe are scatter 
throughout numer locations. it busi offic is locat at 
809 north 1500 west, salt lake city, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email 
business@pglaf.org. email contact link and up to date contact 
inform can be found at the foundation' web site and offici 
page at http://www.gutenberg.org/about/contact 

for addit contact information: 
dr. gregori B. newbi 
chief execut and director 
gbnewby@pglaf.org 

section 4. inform about donat to the project gutenberg 
literari archiv foundat 

project gutenberg-tm depend upon and cannot surviv without wide 
spread public support and donat to carri out it mission of 
increas the number of public domain and licens work that can be 
freeli distribut in machin readabl form access by the widest 
array of equip includ outdat equipment. mani small donat 
($1 to $5,000) are particularli import to maintain tax exempt 
statu with the irs. 

the foundat is commit to compli with the law regul 
chariti and charit donat in all 50 state of the unit 
states. complianc requir are not uniform and it take a 
consider effort, much paperwork and mani fee to meet and keep up 
with these requirements. We do not solicit donat in locat 
where we have not receiv written confirm of compliance. To 
send donat or determin the statu of complianc for ani 
particular state visit http://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/don 

while we cannot and do not solicit contribut from state where we 
have not met the solicit requirements, we know of no prohibit 
against accept unsolicit donat from donor in such state who 
approach us with offer to donate. 

intern donat are grate accepted, but we cannot make 
ani statement concern tax treatment of donat receiv from 
outsid the unit states. u.s. law alon swamp our small staff. 

pleas check the project gutenberg web page for current donat 
method and addresses. donat are accept in a number of other 
way includ checks, onlin payment and credit card donations. 
To donate, pleas visit: 
http://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/don 


section 5. gener inform about project gutenberg-tm electron 
works. 

professor michael S. hart is the origin of the project gutenberg-tm 
concept of a librari of electron work that could be freeli share 
with anyone. for thirti years, he produc and distribut project 
gutenberg-tm ebook with onli a loos network of volunt support. 

project gutenberg-tm ebook are often creat from sever print 
editions, all of which are confirm as public domain in the u.s. 
unless a copyright notic is included. thus, we do not necessarili 
keep ebook in complianc with ani particular paper edition. 

most peopl start at our web site which ha the main PG search facility: 

http://www.gutenberg.org 

thi web site includ inform about project gutenberg-tm, 
includ how to make donat to the project gutenberg literari 
archiv foundation, how to help produc our new ebooks, and how to 
subscrib to our email newslett to hear about new ebooks. 
