the project gutenberg ebook, widdershins, by oliv onion 


thi ebook is for the use of anyon anywher at no cost and with 
almost no restrict whatsoever. you may copi it, give it away or 
re-us it under the term of the project gutenberg licens includ 
with thi ebook or onlin at www.gutenberg.net 





title: widdershin 

author: oliv onion 

releas date: novemb 26, 2004 [ebook #14168] 
[most recent updated: octob 24, 2006] 

language: english 


***start OF the project gutenberg ebook widdershins*** 


e-text prepar by suzann shell, mari meehan, and the project gutenberg 
onlin distribut proofread team 



widdershin 

by 

oliv onion 

1911 







"from ghaisttes, ghouli and long-legg 
beasti and thing that go 
bump in the night-- 

"good lord, deliv us!" 




note 

I have pleasur in acknowledg the courtesi of the proprietor of 
"shurey' publications" by whose permiss "the cigarett case" is 
includ in the present volume. also it ha been suggest that a 
definit should be given of the word that form the volume' title. 
that word mean "contrari to the cours of the sun." 

o.o. 




content 


I. the beckon fair one 
ii. phanta 
iii. rooum 
iv. benlian 
V. IO 
vi. the accid 
vii. the cigarett case 
viii. the rocker 
ix. hic jacet 




the beckon fair one 




I 

the three or four "to let" board had stood within the low pale as 
long as the inhabit of the littl triangular "square" could remember, 
and if they had ever been vertic it wa a veri long time ago. they now 
overhung the pale each at it own angle, and resembl noth so 
much as a row of wooden choppers, ever in the act of fall upon some 
passer-by, yet never cut off a tenant for the old hous from the 
stream of hi fellows. not that there wa ever ani great "stream" through 
the square; the stream pass a furlong and more away, beyond the 
intricaci of tenement and alley and byway that had sprung up sinc the 
old hous had been built, hem it in completely; and probabl the 
hous itself wa onli suffer to stand pend the falling-in of a leas 
or two, when doubtless a clearanc would be made of the whole 
neighbourhood. 

It wa of bloomi old red brick, and built into it wall were the crown 
and clasp hand and other insignia of insur compani long sinc 
defunct. the children of the seclud squar had swung upon the low gate 
at the end of the entrance-alley until littl more than the solid top bar 
of it remained, and the alley itself ran past board basement window on 
which tramp had chalk their cryptic marks. the path wa wash and 
worn uneven by the spill of water from the eav of the encroach 
next house, and cat and dog had made the approach their own. the 
chanc of a tenant did not seem such as to warrant the keep of the 
"to let" board in a state of legibl and repair, and as a matter of 
fact they were not so kept. 

for six month oleron had pass the old place twice a day or oftener, on 
hi way from hi lodg to the room, ten minutes' walk away, he had 
taken to work in; and for six month no hatchet-lik notice-board had 
fallen across hi path. thi might have been due to the fact that he 
usual took the other side of the square. but he chanc one morn to 
take the side that ran past the broken gate and the rain-worn entranc 
alley, and to paus befor one of the inclin boards. the board bore, 
besid the agent' name, the announcement, written appar about the 
time of oleron' own earli youth, that the key wa to be had at number 
six. 

now oleron wa alreadi paying, for hi separ bedroom and workroom, 
more than an author who, without privat means, habitu disregard hi 
public, can afford; and he wa pay in addit a small rent for the 
storag of the greater part of hi grandmother' furniture. moreover, it 
invari happen that the book he wish to read in bed wa at hi 
working-quart half a mile and more away, while the note or letter he 
had sudden need of dure the day wa as like as not to be in the 
pocket of anoth coat hang behind hi bedroom door. and there were 
other inconveni in have a divid domicile. therefor oleron, 
brought suddenli up by the hatchet-lik notice-board, look first down 
through some scanti privet-bush at the board basement windows, then 
up at the blank and grimi window of the first floor, and so up to the 
second floor and the flat stone cope of the leads. He stood for a 
minut thumb hi lean and shaven jaw; then, with anoth glanc at the 
board, he walk slowli across the squar to number six. 

He knocked, and wait for two or three minutes, but, although the door 
stood open, receiv no answer. He wa knock again when a long-nos 
man in shirt-sleev appeared. 

"I wa arsk a bless on our food," he said in sever explanation. 

oleron ask if he might have the key of the old house; and the 
long-nos man withdrew again. 

oleron wait for anoth five minut on the step; then the man, 
appear again and mastic some of the food of which he had spoken, 
announc that the key wa lost. 

"but you won't want it," he said. "the entranc door isn't closed, and a 
push'll open ani of the others. i'm a agent for it, if you'r think of 
take it--" 

oleron recross the square, descend the two step at the broken gate, 
pass along the alley, and turn in at the old wide doorway. To the 
right, immedi within the door, step descend to the roomi cellars, 
and the staircas befor him had a carv rail, and wa broad and 
handsom and filthy. oleron ascend it, avoid contact with the rail 
and wall, and stop at the first landing. A door face him had been 
board up, but he push at that on hi right hand, and an insecur bolt 
or stapl yielded. He enter the empti first floor. 

He spent a quarter of an hour in the place, and then came out again. 
without mount higher, he descend and recross the squar to the 
hous of the man who had lost the key. 

"can you tell me how much the rent is?" he asked. 

the man mention a figure, the compar low of which seem 
account for by the charact of the neighbourhood and the abomin 
state of unrepair of the place. 

"would it be possibl to rent a singl floor?" 

the long-nos man did not know; they might.... 

"who are they?" 

the man gave oleron the name of a firm of lawyer in lincoln' inn. 

"you might mention my name--barrett," he added. 

pressur of work prevent oleron from go down to lincoln' inn that 
afternoon, but he went on the morrow, and wa instantli offer the 
whole hous as a purchas for fifti pound down, the remaind of the 
purchase-money to remain on mortgage. It took him half an hour to 
disabus the lawyer' mind of the idea that he wish anyth more of 
the place than to rent a singl floor of it. thi made certain hum and 
haw of a difference, and the lawyer wa by no mean certain that it lay 
within hi power to do as oleron suggested; but it wa final extract 
from him that, provid the notice-board were allow to remain up, and 
that, provid it wa agre that in the event of the whole hous 
letting, the arrang should termin automat without further 
notice, someth might be done. that the old place should suddenli let 
over hi head seem to oleron the slightest of risk to take, and he 
promis a decis within a week. On the morrow he visit the hous 
again, went through it from top to bottom, and then went home to hi 
lodg to take a bath. 

He wa immens taken with that portion of the hous he had alreadi 
determin should be hi own. scrape clean and repainted, and with 
that old furnitur of oleron' grandmother's, it ought to be entir 
charming. He went to the storag warehous to refresh hi memori of hi 
half-forgotten belongings, and to take measurements; and thenc he went 
to a decorator's. He wa veri busi with hi regular work, and could have 
wish that the notice-board had caught hi attent either a few month 
earlier or els later in the year; but the quickest way would be to 
suspend work entir until after hi removal.... 

A fortnight later hi first floor wa paint throughout in a tender, 
elder-flow white, the paint wa dry, and oleron wa in the middl of 
hi installation. He wa animated, delighted; and he rub hi hand as 
he polish and made dispos of hi grandmother' effects--th tall 
lattice-pan china cupboard with it derbi and mason and spode, the 
larg fold sheraton table, the long, low bookshelv (he had had two 
of them "copied"), the chairs, the sheffield candlesticks, the rivet 
rose-bowls. these thing he set against hi newli paint elder-whit 
walls--wal of wood panel in the happiest proportions, and mould 
and coffer to the low-seat window-recess in a mood of gaieti and 
rest that the builder of room no longer know. the ceil were lofty, 
and faintli paint with an old pattern of stars; even the taper 
mould of hi iron fireplac were as delic design as jewellery; 
and oleron walk about rub hi hands, frequent stop for the 
mere pleasur of the glimps from white room to white room.... 

"charming, charming!" he said to himself. "I wonder what elsi bengough 
will think of this!" 

He bought a bolt and a yale lock for hi door, and shut off hi quarter 
from the rest of the house. If he now want to read in bed, hi book 
could be had for step into the next room. all the time, he thought 
how exceedingli lucki he wa to get the place. He put up a hat-rack in 
the littl squar hall, and hung up hi hat and cap and coats; and 
passer through the small triangular squar late at night, look up 
over the littl serri row of wooden "to let" hatchets, could see the 
light within oleron' red blinds, or els the sudden darken of one 
blind and the illumin of another, as oleron, candlestick in hand, 
pass from room to room, make final settl of hi furniture, or 
prepar to resum the work that hi remov had interrupted. 


II 

As far as the chief busi of hi life--hi writing--wa concerned, 
paul oleron treat the world a good deal better than he wa treat by 
it; but he seldom took the troubl to strike a balance, or to comput how 
far, at forty-four year of age, he wa behind hi point on the 
handicap. To have done so wouldn't have alter matters, and it might 
have depress oleron. He had chosen hi path, and wa commit to it 
beyond possibl of withdrawal. perhap he had chosen it in the day 
when he had been easili sway by someth a littl disinterested, a 
littl generous, a littl noble; and had he ever thought of question 
himself he would still have held to it that a life without nobil and 
generos and disinterested wa no life for him. onli quit 
recently, and rarely, had he even vagu suspect that there wa more 
in it than this; but it wa no good anticip the day when, he 
supposed, he would reach that maximum point of hi power beyond which he 
must inevit decline, and be left face to face with the question 
whether it would not have profit him better to have rule hi life 
by less exig ideals. 

In the meantime, hi remov into the old hous with the insur mark 
built into it brick mere interrupt _romilli bishop_ at the fifteenth 
chapter. 

As thi tall man with the lean, ascet face move about hi new abode, 
arranging, changing, altering, hardli yet into hi working-strid again, 
he gave the impress of almost spinster-lik precis and nicety. for 
twenti year past, in a score of lodgings, garrets, flats, and room 
furnish and unfurnished, he had been accustom to do mani thing for 
himself, and he had discov that it save time and temper to be 
methodical. He had arrang with the wife of the long-nos barrett, a 
stout welsh woman with a falsetto voice, the merionethshir accent of 
which long resid in london had not percept modified, to come 
across the squar each morn to prepar hi breakfast, and also to 
"turn the place out" on saturday mornings; and for the rest, he even 
welcom a littl housework as a relax from the strain of writing. 

hi kitchen, togeth with the adjoin strip of an apart into 
which a modern bath had been fitted, overlook the alley at the side of 
the house; and at one end of it wa a larg closet with a door, and a 
squar slide hatch in the upper part of the door. thi had been a 
powder-closet, and through the hatch the elabor dress head had 
been thrust to receiv the click and puff of the powder-pistol. oleron 
puzzl a littl over thi closet; then, as it use occur to him, he 
smile faintly, a littl moved, he knew not by what.... He would have to 
put it to a veri differ purpos from it origin one; it would 
probabl have to serv as hi larder.... It wa in thi closet that 
he made a discovery. the back of it wa shelved, and, rummag on an 
upper shelf that ran deepli into the wall, oleron found a coupl of 
mushroom-shap old wooden wig-stands. He did not know how they had come 
to be there. doubtless the painter had turn them up somewher or 
other, and had put them there. but hi five rooms, as a whole, were 
short of cupboard and closet-room; and it wa onli by the exercis of 
some ingenu that he wa abl to find place for the bestow of hi 
household linen, hi boxes, and hi seldom-us but not-to-be-destroy 
accumul of papers. 

It wa in earli spring that oleron enter on hi tenancy, and he wa 
anxiou to have _romilly_ readi for public in the come autumn. 
nevertheless, he did not intend to forc it production. should it demand 
longer in the doing, so much the worse; he realis it importance, it 
crucial importance, in hi artist development, and it must have it own 
length and time. In the workroom he had recent left he had been make 
excel progress; _romilly_ had begun, as the say is, to speak and 
act of herself; and he did not doubt she would continu to do so the 
moment the distract of hi remov wa over. thi distract wa 
almost over; he told himself it wa time he pull himself togeth 
again; and on a march morn he went out, return again with two great 
bunch of yellow daffodils, place one bunch on hi mantelpiec between 
the sheffield stick and the other on the tabl befor him, and took out 
the half-complet manuscript of _romilli bishop_. 

but befor begin work he went to a small rosewood cabinet and took 
from a drawer hi cheque-book and pass-book. He tot them up, and hi 
monk-lik face grew thoughtful. hi instal had cost him more than 
he had intend it should, and hi balanc wa rather less than fifti 
pounds, with no immedi prospect of more. 

"hm! i'd forgotten rug and chintz curtain and so forth mount up so," 
said oleron. "but it would have been a piti to spoil the place for the 
want of ten pound or so.... well, _romilly_ simpli _must_ be out for the 
autumn, that' all. So here goes--" 

He drew hi paper toward him. 

but he work badly; or, rather, he did not work at all. the squar 
outsid had it own noises, frequent and new, and oleron could onli hope 
that he would speedili becom accustom to these. first came hawkers, 
with their cart and cries; at midday the children, return from 
school, troop into the squar and swung on oleron' gate; and when the 
children had depart again for afternoon school, an itiner musician 
with a mandolin post himself beneath oleron' window and began to 
strum. thi wa a not unpleas distraction, and oleron, push up hi 
window, threw the man a penny. then he return to hi tabl again.... 

but it wa no good. He came to himself, at long intervals, to find that 
he had been look about hi room and wonder how it had formerli 
been furnished--wheth a sette in buttercup or petunia satin had stood 
under the farther window, whether from the centr mould of the light 
lofti ceil had depend a glimmer crystal chandelier, or where the 
tambour-fram or the picquet-t had stood.... no, it wa no good; he 
had far better be frankli do noth than get fruitlessli tired; 
and he decid that he would take a walk, but, chanc to sit down for a 
moment, doze in hi chair instead. 

"thi won't do," he yawn when he awok at half-past four in the 
afternoon; "I must do better than thi to-morrow--" 

and he felt so delici lazi that for some minut he even 
contempl the breach of an appoint he had for the evening. 

the next morn he sat down to work without even permit himself to 
answer one of hi three letters--two of them tradesmen' accounts, the 
third a note from miss bengough, forward from hi old address. It wa a 
jolli day of white and blue, with a gay noisi wind and a subtl turn in 
the colour of grow things; and over and over again, onc or twice a 
minute, hi room becam suddenli light and then subdu again, as the 
shine white cloud roll north-eastward over the square. the soft 
fit illumin wa reflect in the polish surfac of the tabl 
and even in the footworn old floor; and the morn nois had begun 
again. 

oleron made a pattern of dot on the paper befor him, and then broke off 
to move the jar of daffodil exactli opposit the centr of a creami 
panel. then he wrote a sentenc that ran continu for a coupl of 
lines, after which it broke on into note and jottings. for a time he 
succeed in persuad himself that in make these memoranda he wa 
realli working; then he rose and began to pace hi room. As he did so, he 
wa struck by an idea. It wa that the place might possibl be a littl 
better for more posit colour. It was, perhaps, a thought _too_ 
pale--mild and sweet as a kind old face, but a littl devitalised, even 
wan.... yes, decidedli it would bear a robust note--mor and richer 
flowers, and possibl some warm and gay stuff for cushion for the 
window-seats.... 

"of course, I realli can't afford it," he muttered, as he went for a 
two-foot and began to measur the width of the window recesses.... 

In stoop to measur a recess, hi attitud suddenli chang to one of 
interest and attention. present he rose again, rub hi hand with 
gentl glee. 

"oho, oho!" he said. "these look to me veri much like window-boxes, 
nail up. We must look into this! yes, those are boxes, or 
i'm ... oho, thi is an adventure!" 

On that wall of hi sitting-room there were two window (the third wa in 
anoth corner), and, beyond the open bedroom door, on the same wall, wa 
another. the seat of all had been painted, repainted, and paint again; 
and oleron' investig finger had bare detect the old nailhead 
beneath the paint. under the ledg over which he stoop an old keyhol 
also had been putti up. oleron took out hi penknife. 

He work care for five minutes, and then went into the kitchen for 
a hammer and chisel. drive the chisel cautious under the seat, he 
start the whole lid slightly. again use the penknife, he cut along 
the hing edg and outward along the ends; and then he fetch a 
wedg and a wooden mallet. 

"now for our littl mystery--" he said. 

the sound of the mallet on the wedg seemed, in that sweet and pale 
apartment, somehow a littl brutal--nay, even shocking. the panel 
rang and rattl and vibrat to the blow like a sounding-board. the 
whole hous seem to echo; from the roomi cellarag to the garret 
abov a flock of echo seem to awake; and the sound got a littl on 
oleron' nerves. all at onc he paused, fetch a duster, and muffl the 
mallet.... when the edg wa suffici rais he put hi finger under 
it and lifted. the paint flake and star a little; the rusti old 
nail squeak and grunted; and the lid came up, lay open the box 
beneath. oleron look into it. save for a coupl of inch of scurf and 
mould and old cobweb it wa empty. 

"no treasur there," said oleron, a littl amus that he should have 
fanci there might have been. "_romilly_ will still have to be out by 
the autumn. let' have a look at the others." 

He turn to the second window. 

the rais of the two remain seat occupi him until well into the 
afternoon. that of the bedroom, like the first, wa empty; but from the 
second seat of hi sitting-room he drew out someth yield and fold 
and fur over an inch thick with dust. He carri the object into the 
kitchen, and have swept it over a bucket, took a duster to it. 

It wa some sort of a larg bag, of an ancient frieze-lik material, and 
when unfold it occupi the greater part of the small kitchen floor. In 
shape it wa an irregular, a veri irregular, triangle, and it had a 
coupl of wide flaps, with the remain of strap and buckles. the patch 
that had been uppermost in the fold wa of a fade yellowish brown; 
but the rest of it wa of shade of crimson that vari accord to the 
exposur of the part of it. 

"now whatev can that have been?" oleron muse as he stood survey 
it.... "I give it up. whatev it is, it' settl my work for today, 
i'm afraid--" 

He fold the object up carelessli and thrust it into a corner of the 
kitchen; then, take pan and brush and an old knife, he return to 
the sitting-room and began to scrape and to wash and to line with paper 
hi newli discov receptacles. when he had finished, he put hi spare 
boot and book and paper into them; and he close the lid again, 
amus with hi littl adventure, but also a littl anxiou for the hour 
to come when he should settl fairli down to hi work again. 


iii 

It piqu oleron a littl that hi friend, miss bengough, should dismiss 
with a glanc the place he himself had found so singularli winning. 
inde she scarc lift her eye to it. but then she had alway been 
more or less like that--a littl indiffer to the grace of life, 
careless of appearances, and perhap a shade more herself when she ate 
biscuit from a paper bag than when she dine with greater observ of 
the convenances. she wa an unattach journalist of thirty-four, large, 
showy, fair as butter, pink as a dog-rose, remind one of a florist' 
pick specimen bloom, and given to sudden and ampl movement and moist 
and explos utterances. she "pull a better live out of the pool" 
(a she express it) than oleron did; and by cunningli disguis puff 
of draper and haberdash she "pulled" also the greater part of her 
veri vari wardrobe. she left small whirlwind of air behind her when 
she moved, in which her veil and scarv flutter and spun. 

oleron heard the flurri of her skirt on hi staircas and her singl 
loud knock at hi door when he had been a month in hi new abode. her 
garment brought in the outer air, and she flung a bundl of ladies' 
journal down on a chair. 

"don't knock off for me," she said across a mouth of large-head 
hatpin as she remov her hat and veil. "I didn't know whether you were 
straight yet, so i'v brought some sandwich for lunch. you'v got 
coffee, I suppose?--no, don't get up--i'l find the kitchen--" 

"oh, that' all right, i'll clear these thing away. To tell the truth, 
i'm rather glad to be interrupted," said oleron. 

He gather hi work togeth and put it away. she wa alreadi in the 
kitchen; he heard the run of water into the kettle. He join her, 
and ten minut later follow her back to the sitting-room with the 
coffe and sandwich on a tray. they sat down, with the tray on a small 
tabl between them. 

"well, what do you think of the new place?" oleron ask as she pour 
out coffee. 

"hm!... anybody'd think you were go to get married, paul." 

He laughed. 

"oh no. but it' an improv on some of them, isn't it?" 

"i it? I suppos it is; I don't know. I like the last place, in spite 
of the black ceil and no watertap. how' _romilly_?" 

oleron thumb hi chin. 

"hm! i'm rather asham to tell you. the fact is, i'v not got on veri 
well with it. but it will be all right on the night, as you use to say." 

"stuck?" 

"rather stuck." 

"got ani of it you care to read to me?..." 

oleron had long been in the habit of read portion of hi work to miss 
bengough occasionally. her comment were alway quick and practical, 
sometim directli useful, sometim indirectli suggestive. she, in 
return for hi confidence, alway kept all mention of her own work 
sedul from him. his, she said, wa "real work"; her mere fill 
space, not alway even grammatically. 

"i'm afraid there isn't," oleron replied, still medit dry-shav 
hi chin. then he added, with a littl burst of candour, "the fact 
is, elsie, i'v not written--not actual written--veri much more of 
it--_any_ more of it, in fact. but, of course, that doesn't mean I 
haven't progressed. i'v progressed, in one sense, rather alarmingly. 
i'm now think of reconstruct the whole thing." 

miss bengough gave a gasp. "reconstructing!" 

"make romilli herself a differ type of woman. somehow, i'v begun to 
feel that i'm not get the most out of her. As she stands, i'v 
certainli lost interest in her to some extent." 

"but--but--" miss bengough protested, "you had her so real, so _living_, 
paul!" 

oleron smile faintly. He had been quit prepar for miss bengough' 
disapproval. He wasn't surpris that she like romilli as she at present 
existed; she would. whether she realis it or not, there wa much of 
herself in hi fictiti creation. natur romilli would seem "real," 
"living," to her.... 

"but are you realli serious, paul?" miss bengough ask presently, with a 
round-ey stare. 

"quit serious." 

"you'r realli go to scrap those fifteen chapters?" 

"I didn't exactli say that." 

"that fine, rich love-scene?" 

"I should onli do it reluctantly, and for the sake of someth I thought 
better." 

"and that beautiful, _beau_ti descript of romilli on the shore?" 

"it wouldn't necessarili be wasted," he said a littl uneasily. 

but miss bengough made a larg and windi gesture, and then let him have 
it. 

"really, you are _too_ trying!" she broke out. "I do wish sometim you'd 
rememb you'r human, and live in a world! you know i'd be the _last_ to 
wish you to lower your standard one inch, but it wouldn't be lower it 
to bring it within human comprehension. oh, you'r sometim altogeth 
too godlike!... why, it would be a wicked, crimin wast of your power 
to destroy those fifteen chapters! look at it reasonably, now. you'v 
been work for nearli twenti years; you'v now got what you'v been 
work for almost within your grasp; your affair are at a most critic 
stage (oh, don't tell me; I know you'r about at the end of your money); 
and here you are, deliber propos to withdraw a thing that will 
probabl make your name, and to substitut for it someth that ten to 
one nobodi on earth will ever want to read--and small blame to them! 
really, you tri my patience!" 

oleron had shaken hi head slowli as she had talked. It wa an old stori 
between them. the noisy, able, practic journalist wa an admir 
friend--up to a certain point; beyond that ... well, each of us know 
that point beyond which we stand alone. elsi bengough sometim said 
that had she had one-tenth part of oleron' geniu there were few thing 
she could not have done--thu make that geniu a quantit 
divis thing, a sort of ingredient, to be ad to or subtract 
from in the admixtur of hi work. that it wa a qualit thing, 
essential, indivisible, informing, pass her comprehension. their 
spirit part compani at that point. oleron knew it. she did not appear 
to know it. 

"yes, yes, yes," he said a littl wearily, by-and-by, "practic you'r 
quit right, entir right, and I haven't a word to say. If I could onli 
turn _romilly_ over to you you'd make an enorm success of her. but 
that can't be, and I, for my part, am serious doubt whether she' 
worth my while. you know what that means." 

"what doe it mean?" she demand bluntly. 

"well," he said, smile wanly, "what _does_ it mean when you'r 
convinc a thing isn't worth doing? you simpli don't do it." 

miss bengough' eye swept the ceil for assist against thi 
imposs man. 

"what utter rubbish!" she broke out at last. "why, when I saw you last 
you were simpli ooz _romilly_; you were turn her off at the rate of 
four chapter a week; if you hadn't move you'd have had her three-part 
done by now. what on earth possess you to move right in the middl of 
your most import work?" 

oleron tri to put her off with a recit of inconveniences, but she 
wouldn't have it. perhap in her heart she partli suspect the reason. 
He wa simpli mortal weari of the narrow circumst of hi life. He 
had had twenti year of it--twenti year of garret and roof-chamb 
and dingi flat and shabbi lodgings, and he wa tire of dingi and 
shabbiness. the reward wa as far off as ever--or if it wa not, he no 
longer care as onc he would have care to put out hi hand and take it. 
It is all veri well to tell a man who is at the point of exhaust that 
onli anoth effort is requir of him; if he cannot make it he is as far 
off as ever.... 

"anyway," oleron sum up, "i'm happier here than i'v been for a long 
time. that' some sort of a justification." 

"and do no work," said miss bengough pointedly. 

At that a trifl petul that had been gather in oleron came to a 
head. 

"and whi should I do noth but work?" he demanded. "how much happier am 
I for it? I don't say I don't love my work--when it' done; but I hate 
do it. sometim it' an intoler burden that I simpli long to be 
rid of. onc in mani week it ha a moment, one moment, of glow and 
thrill for me; I rememb the day when it wa all glow and thrill; and 
now i'm forty-four, and it' becom drudgery. nobodi want it; i'm 
ceas to want it myself; and if ani ordinari sensibl man were to ask 
me whether I didn't think I wa a fool to go on, I think I should agre 
that I was." 

miss bengough' come pink face wa serious. 

"but you knew all that, many, mani year ago, paul--and still you chose 
it," she said in a low voice. 

"well, and how should I have known?" he demanded. "I didn't know. I wa 
told so. My heart, if you like, told me so, and I thought I knew. youth 
alway think it knows; then one day it discov that it is nearli 
fifty--" 

"forty-four, paul--" 

"--forty-four, then--and it find that the glamour isn't in front, 
but behind. yes, I knew and chose, if _that's_ know and 
choos ... but it' a costli choic we'r call on to make when 
we'r young!" 

miss bengough' eye were on the floor. without move them she said, 
"you'r not regret it, paul?" 

"am I not?" he took her up. "upon my word, i'v late thought I am! what 
_do_ I get in return for it all?" 

"you know what you get," she replied. 

He might have known from her tone what els he could have had for the 
hold up of a finger--herself. she knew, but could not tell him, that 
he could have done no better thing for himself. had he, ani time these 
ten years, ask her to marri him, she would have repli quietly, 
"veri well; when?" He had never thought of it.... 

"your is the real work," she continu quietly. "without you we jackal 
couldn't exist. you and a few like you hold everyth upon your 
shoulders." 

for a minut there wa a silence. then it occur to oleron that thi 
wa common vulgar grumbling. It wa not hi habit. suddenli he rose and 
began to stack cup and plate on the tray. 

"sorri you catch me like this, elsie," he said, with a littl 
laugh.... "no, i'll take them out; then we'll go for a walk, if you 
like...." 

He carri out the tray, and then began to show miss bengough round hi 
flat. she made few comments. In the kitchen she ask what an old fade 
squar of reddish friez was, that mrs. barrett use as a cushion for her 
wooden chair. 

"that? I should be glad if you could tell _me_ what it is," oleron 
repli as he unfold the bag and relat the stori of it find in 
the window-seat. 

"I think I know what it is," said miss bengough. "it' been use to wrap 
up a harp befor put it into it case." 

"bi jove, that' probabl just what it was," said oleron. "I could make 
neither head nor tail of it...." 

they finish the tour of the flat, and return to the sitting-room. 

"and who live in the rest of the house?" miss bengough asked. 

"I dare say a tramp sleep in the cellar occasionally. nobodi else." 

"hm!... well, i'll tell you what I think about it, if you like." 

"I should like." 

"you'll never work here." 

"oh?" said oleron quickly. "whi not?" 

"you'll never finish _romilly_ here. why, I don't know, but you won't. 
I know it. you'll have to leav befor you get on with that book." 

He muse for a moment, and then said: 

"isn't that a little--prejudiced, elsie?" 

"perfectli ridiculous. As an argument it hasn't a leg to stand on. but 
there it is," she replied, her mouth onc more full of the large-head 
hat pins. 

oleron wa reach down hi hat and coat. He laughed. 

"I can onli hope you'r entir wrong," he said, "for I shall be in a 
seriou mess if _romilly_ isn't out in the autumn." 


IV 

As oleron sat by hi fire that evening, ponder miss bengough' 
prognost that difficulti await him in hi work, he came to the 
conclus that it would have been far better had she kept her belief to 
herself. No man doe a thing better for have hi confid damp at 
the outset, and to speak of difficulti is in a sens to make them. 
speech itself becom a deterr act, to which other discourag 
accret until the veri event of which warn is given is as like as 
not to come to pass. He heartili confound her. An influenc hostil 
to the complet of _romilly_ had been born. 

and in some illogical, dogmat way women seem to have, she had attach 
thi antagonist influenc to hi new abode. wa ever anyth so 
absurd! "you'll never finish _romilly_ here." ... whi not? wa thi her 
idea of the luxuri that sap the spring of action and bring a man down 
to indol and drop out of the race? the place wa well enough--it 
wa entir charming, for that matter--but it wa not so demoralis as 
all that! no; elsi had miss the mark that time.... 

He move hi chair to look round the room that smiled, posit 
smiled, in the firelight. He too smiled, as if piti wa to be 
entertain for a malign apartment. even that slight lack of robust 
colour he had remark wa not notic in the soft glow. the drawn 
chintz curtains--they had a flower and trellis pattern, with basket 
and oaten pipes--fel in long quiet fold to the window-seats; the row 
of bind in old bookcas took the light richly; the last trace of 
sallow had gone with the daylight; and, if the truth must be told, 
it had been elsi herself who had seem a littl out of the picture. 

that reflect struck him a little, and present he return to it. 
yes, the room had, quit accidentally, done miss bengough a disservic 
that afternoon. It had, in some subtl but unmistak way, place her, 
mark a contrast of qualities. assum for the sake of argument the 
slightli ridicul proposit that the room in which oleron sat _was_ 
characteris by a certain sparsiti and lack of vigour; so much the wors 
for miss bengough; she certainli er on the side of redund and 
gener muchness. and if one must contrast abstract qualities, oleron 
inclin to the auster in taste.... 

yes, here oleron had made a distinct discovery; he wonder he had not 
made it before. He pictur miss bengough again as she had appear 
that afternoon--large, showy, moistli pink, with that qualiti of the 
prize bloom exuding, as it were, from her; and instantli she suffer in 
hi thought. He even recognis now that he had notic someth odd at 
the time, and that unconsci hi attitude, even while she had been 
there, had been one of criticism. the mechan of her wa a littl 
obvious; her melt humid wa the result of analys processes; and 
behind her there had seem to lurk some dim shape emblemat of 
mortality. He had never, dure the ten year of their intimacy, dream 
for a moment of ask her to marri him; none the less, he now felt for 
the first time a thank that he had not done so.... 

then, suddenli and swiftly, hi face flame that he should be think 
thu of hi friend. what! elsi bengough, with whom he had spent week 
and week of afternoons--she, the good chum, on whose help he would have 
count had all the rest of the world fail him--she, whose loyalti to 
him would not, he knew, swerv as long as there wa breath in her--elsi 
to be even in thought dissect thus! He wa an ingrat and a cad.... 

had she been there in that moment he would have abas himself befor 
her. 

for ten minut and more he sat, still gaze into the fire, with that 
humili red fade slowli from hi cheeks. all wa still within and 
without, save for a tini music tinkl that came from hi kitchen--th 
drip of water from an imperfectli turned-off tap into the vessel 
beneath it. mechan he began to beat with hi finger to the faintli 
heard fall of the drops; the tini regular movement seem to hasten 
that shame withdraw from hi face. He grew cool onc more; and when 
he resum hi medit he wa all unconsci that he took it up again 
at the same point.... 

It wa not onli her florid superflu of build that he had approach in 
the attitud of criticism; he wa consciou also of the wide differ 
between her mind and hi own. He felt no thank that up to a 
certain point their natur had ever run companion side by side; he 
wa now full of question beyond that point. their intellect diverged; 
there wa no deni it; and, look back, he wa inclin to doubt 
whether there had been ani real coincidence. true, he had read hi 
write to her and she had appear to speak comprehendingli and to the 
point; but what can a man do who, have assum that anoth see as he 
does, is suddenli brought up sharp by someth that falsifi and 
discredit all that ha gone before? He doubt all now.... It did for a 
moment occur to him that the man who demand of a friend more than can be 
given to him is in danger of lose that friend, but he put the thought 
aside. 

again he ceas to think, and again move hi finger to the distant 
drip of the tap.... 

and now (he resum by-and-by), if these thing were true of elsi 
bengough, they were also true of the creation of which she wa the 
prototype--romilli bishop. and sinc he could say of romilli what for 
veri shame he could not say of elsie, he gave hi thought rein. He did 
so in that smiling, fire-light room, to the accompani of the 
faintli heard tap. 

there wa no longer ani doubt about it; he hate the central charact 
of hi novel. even as he had describ her physic she overpow 
the senses; she wa coarse-fibred, over-coloured, rank. It becam true 
the moment he formul hi thought; gulliv had describ the 
brobdingnagian maids-of-honour thus: and mental and spiritu she 
corresponded--wa unsensitive, limited, common. the model (he close hi 
eye for a moment)--th model stuck out through fifteen vulgar and 
blatant chapter to such a pitch that, without see the reason, he had 
been unabl to begin the sixteenth. He marvel that it had onli just 
dawn upon him. 

and _this_ wa to have been hi beatrice, hi vision! As elsi she wa to 
have gone into the furnac of hi art, and she wa to have come out the 
woman all men desire! her thought were to have been cull from hi own 
finest, her form from hi dearest dreams, and her set wherev he 
could find one fit for her worth. He had brood long befor make the 
attempt; then one day he had felt her stir within him as a mother feel 
a quickening, and he had begun to write; and so he had ad chapter to 
chapter.... 

and those fifteen sodden chapter were what he had produced! 

again he sat, softli move hi finger.... 

then he bestir himself. 

she must go, all fifteen chapter of her. that wa settled. for what wa 
to take her place hi mind wa a blank; but one thing at a time; a man 
is not excus from take the wrong cours becaus the right one is not 
immedi reveal to him. better would come if it wa to come; 
in the meantime-- 

He rose, fetch the fifteen chapters, and read them over befor he 
should drop them into the fire. 

but instead of put them into the fire he let them fall from hi hand. 
He becam consciou of the drip of the tap again. It had a tinkl 
gamut of four or five notes, on which it rang irregular changes, and it 
wa foolishli sweet and dulcimer-like. In hi mind oleron could see the 
gather of each drop, it littl trembl on the lip of the tap, and the 
tini percuss of it fall, "plink--plunk," minimis almost to 
inaudibility. follow the lowest note there seem to be a brief 
phrase, irregularli repeated; and present oleron found himself wait 
for the recurr of thi phrase. It wa quit pretty.... 

but it did not conduc to wakefulness, and oleron doze over hi fire. 

when he awok again the fire had burn low and the flame of the candl 
were lick the rim of the sheffield sticks. sluggishli he rose, 
yawned, went hi nightli round of door-lock and window-fastenings, and 
pass into hi bedroom. soon he slept soundly. 

but a curiou littl sequel follow on the morrow. mrs. barrett usual 
tapped, not at hi door, but at the wooden wall beyond which lay oleron' 
bed; and then oleron rose, put on hi dressing-gown, and admit her. He 
wa not consciou that as he did so that morn he hum an air; but 
mrs. barrett linger with her hand on the door-knob and her face a 
littl avert and smiling. 

"de-ar me!" her soft falsetto rose. "but that will be a veri o-ald tune, 
mr. oleron! I will not have heard it thi for-ti years!" 

"what tune?" oleron asked. 

"the tune, indeed, that you wa humming, sir." 

oleron had hi thumb in the flap of a letter. It remain there. 

"_i_ wa humming?... sing it, mrs. barrett." 

mrs. barrett prut-prutted. 

"I have no voic for singing, mr. oleron; it wa ann pugh wa the singer 
of our family; but the tune will be veri o-ald, and it is call 'the 
beckon fair one.'" 

"tri to sing it," said oleron, hi thumb still in the envelope; and mrs. 
barrett, with much dimpl and confusion, hum the air. 

"they do say it wa sung to a harp, mr. oleron, and it will be veri 
o-ald," she concluded. 

"and _i_ wa sing that?" 

"inde you wass. I would not be like to tell you lies." 

with a "veri well--let me have breakfast," oleron open hi letter; but 
the trifl circumst struck him as more odd than he would have 
admit to himself. the phrase he had hum had been that which he had 
associ with the fall from the tap on the even before. 


V 

even more curiou than that the commonplac drip of an ordinari 
water-tap should have talli so close with an actual exist air 
wa anoth result it had, namely, that it awakened, or seem to awaken, 
in oleron an abnorm sensit to other nois of the old house. It 
ha been remark that silenc obtain it fullest and most impress 
qualiti when it is broken by some minut sound; and, truth to tell, the 
place wa never still. perhap the mild of the spring air oper on 
it torpid old timbers; perhap oleron' fire caus it to stretch it 
old anatomy; and certainli a whole world of insect life bore and 
burrow in it baulk and joists. At ani rate, oleron had onli to sit 
quiet in hi chair and to wait for a minut or two in order to becom 
awar of such a chang in the auditori scale as come upon a man who, 
conceiv the midsumm wood to be motionless and still, all at onc 
find hi ear sharpen to the crepit of a myriad insects. 

and he smile to think of man' arbitrari distinct between that which 
ha life and that which ha not. here, quit apart from such recognis 
sound as the scamper of mice, the fall of plaster behind hi 
panelling, and the pop of purs or coffin from hi fire, wa a 
whole hous talk to him had he but known it language. beam settl 
with a tire sigh into their old mortices; creatur tick in the walls; 
joint cracked, board complained; with no palpabl stir of the air 
window-sash chang their posit with a soft knock in their frames. 
and whether the place had life in thi sens or not, it had at all event 
a winsom personality. It need but an hour of muse for oleron to 
conceiv the idea that, as hi own bodi stood in friendli relat to hi 
soul, so, by an extens and an attenuation, hi habit might 
fantast be suppos to stand in some relat to himself. He even 
amus himself with the far-fetch fanci that he might so identifi 
himself with the place that some futur tenant, take possession, might 
regard it as in a sens haunted. It would be rather a joke if he, a 
perfectli harmless author, with noth on hi mind wors than a novel he 
had discov he must begin again, should turn out to be lay the 
foundat of a futur ghost!... 

In proportion, however, as he felt thi grow attach to the fabric 
of hi abode, elsi bengough, from be mere unattracted, began to 
show a dislik of the place that wa more and more marked. and she did 
not scrupl to speak of her aversion. 

"it doesn't belong to to-day at all, and for you especi it' bad," 
she said with decision. "you'r onli too readi to let go your hold on 
actual thing and to slip into apathy; _you_ ought to be in a place 
with concret floor and a patent gas-met and a tradesmen' lift. and 
it would do you all the good in the world if you had a job that made you 
scrambl and rub elbow with your fellow-men. now, if I could get you a 
job, for, say, two or three day a week, one that would allow you heap 
of time for your proper work--would you take it?" 

somehow, oleron resent a littl be diagnos like this. He thank 
miss bengough, but without a smile. 

"thank you, but I don't think so. after all each of us ha hi own life 
to live," he could not refrain from adding. 

"hi own life to live!... how long is it sinc you were out, paul?" 

"about two hours." 

"I don't mean to buy stamp or to post a letter. how long is it sinc you 
had anyth like a stretch?" 

"oh, some littl time perhaps. I don't know." 

"sinc I wa here last?" 

"I haven't been out much." 

"and ha _romilly_ progress much better for your be coop up?" 

"I think she has. i'm lay the foundat of her. I shall begin the 
actual write presently." 

It seem as if miss bengough had forgotten their tussl about the first 
_romilly_. she frowned, turn half away, and then quickli turn again. 

"ah!... So you'v still got that ridicul idea in your head?" 

"if you mean," said oleron slowly, "that i'v discard the old 
_romilly_, and am at work on a new one, you'r right. I have still got 
that idea in my head." 

someth uncordi in hi tone struck her; but she wa a fighter. hi 
own absurd sensit harden her. she gave a "pshaw!" of impatience. 

"where is the old one?" she demand abruptly. 

"why?" ask oleron. 

"I want to see it. I want to show some of it to you. I want, if you'r 
not wool-gath entirely, to bring you back to your senses." 

thi time it wa he who turn hi back. but when he turn round again 
he spoke more gently. 

"it' no good, elsie. i'm respons for the way I go, and you must 
allow me to go it--even if it should seem wrong to you. believ me, I 
am give thought to it.... the manuscript? I wa on the point of burn 
it, but I didn't. it' in that window-seat, if you must see it." 

miss bengough cross quickli to the window-seat, and lift the lid. 
suddenli she gave a littl exclamation, and put the back of her hand 
to her mouth. she spoke over her shoulder: 

"you ought to knock those nail in, paul," she said. 

He strode to her side. 

"what? what is it? what' the matter?" he asked. "I did knock them 
in--or, rather, pull them out." 

"you left enough to scratch with," she replied, show her hand. from 
the upper wrist to the knuckl of the littl finger a well red wound 
showed. 

"good--gracious!" oleron ejaculated.... "here, come to the bathroom and 
bath it quickly--" 

He hurri her to the bathroom, turn on warm water, and bath and 
cleans the bad gash. then, still hold the hand, he turn cold water 
on it, utter broken phrase of astonish and concern. 

"good lord, how did that happen! As far as I knew i'd ... is thi water 
too cold? doe that hurt? I can't imagin how on earth ... there; that'll 
do--" 

"no--on moment longer--i can bear it," she murmured, her eye closed.... 

present he led her back to the sitting-room and bound the hand in one 
of hi handkerchiefs; but hi face did not lose it express of 
perplexity. He had spent half a day in open and make servic the 
three window-boxes, and he could not conceiv how he had come to leav an 
inch and a half of rusti nail stand in the wood. He himself had open 
the lid of each of them a dozen time and had not notic ani nail; but 
there it was.... 

"it shall come out now, at all events," he muttered, as he went for a 
pair of pincers. and he made no mistak about it that time. 

elsi bengough had sunk into a chair, and her face wa rather white; but 
in her hand wa the manuscript of _romilly_. she had not finish with 
_romilly_ yet. present she return to the charge. 

"oh, paul, it will be the greatest mistak you ever, _ever_ made if you 
do not publish this!" she said. 

He hung hi head, genuin distressed. He couldn't get that incid of 
the nail out of hi head, and _romilly_ occupi a second place in hi 
thought for the moment. but still she insisted; and when present he 
spoke it wa almost as if he ask her pardon for something. 

"what can I say, elsie? I can onli hope that when you see the new 
version, you'll see how right I am. and if in spite of all you _don't_ 
like her, well ..." he made a hopeless gesture. "don't you see that I 
_must_ be guid by my own lights?" 

she wa silent. 

"come, elsie," he said gently. "we'v got along well so far; don't let us 
split on this." 

the last word had hardli pass hi lip befor he regret them. she 
had been nurs her injur hand, with her eye onc more closed; but 
her lip and lid quiver simultaneously. her voic shook as she spoke. 

"I can't help say it, paul, but you are so greatli changed." 

"hush, elsie," he murmur soothingly; "you'v had a shock; rest for a 
while. how could I change?" 

"I don't know, but you are. you'v not been yourself ever sinc you came 
here. I wish you'd never seen the place. it' stop your work, it' 
make you into a person I hardli know, and it' made me horribl anxiou 
about you.... oh, how my hand is begin to throb!" 

"poor child!" he murmured. "will you let me take you to a doctor and have 
it properli dressed?" 

"no--i shall be all right presently--i'l keep it raised----" 

she put her elbow on the back of her chair, and the bandag hand rest 
lightli on hi shoulder. 

At that touch an entir new anxieti stir suddenli within him. 
hundr of time previously, on their jaunt and excursions, she had 
slip her hand within hi arm as she might have slip it into the arm 
of a brother, and he had accept the littl affection gestur as a 
brother might have accept it. but now, for the first time, there rush 
into hi mind a hundr startl questions. her eye were still closed, 
and her head had fallen pathet back; and there wa a lost and 
ineff smile on her part lips. the truth broke in upon him. good 
god!... and he had never divin it! 

and stranger than all wa that, now that he did see that she wa lost in 
love of him, there came to him, not sorrow and humil and abasement, 
but someth els that he struggl in vain against--someth entir 
strang and new, that, had he analys it, he would have found to be 
petul and irrit and resent and ungentleness. the sudden 
selfish prompt master him befor he wa aware. He all but gave it 
words. what wa she do there at all? whi wa she not get on with 
her own work? whi wa she here interf with his? who had given her 
thi guardianship over him that late she had put forward so 
assertively?--"changed?" It wa she, not himself, who had changed.... 

but by the time she had open her eye again he had overcom hi 
resent suffici to speak gently, albeit with reserve. 

"I wish you would let me take you to a doctor." 

she rose. 

"no, thank you, paul," she said. "i'll go now. If I need a dress i'll 
get one; take the other hand, please. good-bye--" 

He did not attempt to detain her. He walk with her to the foot of the 
stairs. half-way along the narrow alley she turned. 

"it would be a long way to come if you happen not to be in," she said; 
"i'll send you a postcard the next time." 

At the gate she turn again. 

"leav here, paul," she said, with a mourn look. "everything' wrong 
with thi house." 

then she wa gone. 

oleron return to hi room. He cross straight to the window-box. He 
open the lid and stood long look at it. then he close it again and 
turn away. 

"that' rather frightening," he muttered. "it' simpli not possibl that 
I should not have remov that nail...." 


VI 

oleron knew veri well what elsi had meant when she had said that her 
next visit would be preced by a postcard. she, too, had realis that 
at last, at last he knew--knew, and didn't want her. It gave him a 
miserable, piti pang, therefore, when she came again within a week, 
knock at the door unannounced. she spoke from the landing; she did not 
intend to stay, she said; and he had to press her befor she would so 
much as enter. 

her excus for call wa that she had heard of an inquiri for short 
stori that he might be wise to follow up. He thank her. then, her 
busi over, she seem anxiou to get away again. oleron did not seek 
to detain her; even he saw through the pretext of the stories; and he 
accompani her down the stairs. 

but elsi bengough had no luck whatev in that house. A second accid 
befel her. half-way down the staircas there wa the sharp sound of 
splinter wood, and she check a loud cry. oleron knew the woodwork to 
be old, but he himself had ascend and descend frequent enough 
without mishap.... 

elsi had put her foot through one of the stairs. 

He sprang to her side in alarm. 

"oh, I say! My poor girl!" 

she laugh hysterically. 

"it' my weight--i know i'm get fat--" 

"keep still--let me clear these splinter away," he mutter between hi 
teeth. 

she continu to laugh and sob that it wa her weight--sh wa get 
fat-- 

He thrust downward at the broken boards. the extric wa no easi 
matter, and her torn boot show him how badli the foot and ankl 
within it must be abraded. 

"good god--good god!" he mutter over and over again. 

"I shall be too heavi for anyth soon," she sob and laughed. 

but she refus to reascend and to examin her hurt. 

"no, let me go quickly--let me go quickly," she repeated. 

"but it' a fright gash!" 

"no--not so bad--let me get away quickly--i'm--i'm not wanted." 

At her words, that she wa not wanted, hi head drop as if she had 
given him a buffet. 

"elsie!" he choked, brokenli and shocked. 

but she too made a quick gesture, as if she put someth violent 
aside. 

"oh, paul, not _that_--not _you_--of cours I do mean that too in a 
sense--oh, you know what I mean!... but if the other can't be, spare 
me thi now! i--i wouldn't have come, but--but--oh, I did, I _did_ tri to 
keep away!" 

It wa intolerable, heartbreaking; but what could he do--what could he 
say? He did not love her... 

"let me go--i'm not wanted--let me take away what' left of me--" 

"dear elsie--y are veri dear to me--" 

but again she made the gesture, as of put someth violent aside. 

"no, not that--not anyth less--don't offer me anyth less--leav me 
a littl pride--" 

"let me get my hat and coat--let me take you to a doctor," he muttered. 

but she refused. she refus even the support of hi arm. she gave 
anoth unsteadi laugh. 

"i'm sorri I broke your stairs, paul.... you will go and see about the 
short stories, won't you?" 

He groaned. 

"then if you won't see a doctor, will you go across the squar and let 
mrs. barrett look at you? look, there' barrett pass now--" 

the long-nos barrett wa look curious down the alley, but as 
oleron wa about to call him he made off without a word. elsi seem 
anxiou for noth so much as to be clear of the place, and final 
promis to go straight to a doctor, but insist on go alone. 

"good-bye," she said. 

and oleron watch her until she wa past the hatchet-lik "to let" 
boards, as if he fear that even they might fall upon her and maim her. 

that night oleron did not dine. He had far too much on hi mind. He 
walk from room to room of hi flat, as if he could have walk away 
from elsi bengough' haunt cri that still rang in hi ears. "i'm 
not wanted--don't offer me anyth less--let me take away what' left 
of me--" 

oh, if he could onli have persuad himself that he love her! 

He walk until twilight fell, then, without light candles, he stir 
up the fire and flung himself into a chair. 

poor, poor elsie!... 

but even while hi heart ach for her, it wa out of the question. 
If onli he had known! If onli he had use common observation! but 
those walks, those sisterli take of the arm--what a fool he had 
been!... well, it wa too late now. It wa she, not he, who must now 
act--act by keep away. He would help her all he could. He himself 
would not sit in her presence. If she came, he would hurri her out again 
as fast as he could.... poor, poor elsie! 

hi room grew dark; the fire burn dead; and he continu to sit, 
winc from time to time as a fresh tortur phrase rang again in hi 
ears. 

then suddenly, he knew not why, he found himself anxiou for her in a new 
sense--uneasi about her person safety. A horribl fanci that even then 
she might be look over an embank down into dark water, that she 
might even now be glanc up at the hook on the door, took him. women 
had been known to do those things.... then there would be an inquest, and 
he himself would be call upon to identifi her, and would be ask how 
she had come by an ill-heal wound on the hand and a bad abras of the 
ankle. barrett would say that he had seen her leav hi house.... 

then he recognis that hi thought were morbid. By an effort of will he 
put them aside, and sat for a while listen to the faint creak 
and tick and rap within hi panelling.... If onli he could have 
marri her!... but he couldn't. her face had risen befor him again 
as he had seen it on the stairs, drawn with pain and ugli and swollen 
with tears. ugly--yes, posit blubbered; if tear were women' 
weapons, as they were said to be, such tear were weapon turn against 
themselv ... suicid again.... 

then all at onc he found himself attent consid her two 
accidents. 

extraordinari they had been, both of them. He _could not_ have left that 
old nail stand in the wood; why, he had fetch tool special from 
the kitchen; and he wa convinc that that step that had broken beneath 
her weight had been as sound as the others. It wa inexplicable. If these 
thing could happen, anyth could happen. there wa not a beam nor a 
jamb in the place that might not fall without warning, not a plank that 
might not crash inwards, not a nail that might not becom a dagger. the 
whole place wa full of life even now; as he sat there in the dark he 
heard it crowd of nois as if the hous had been one great 
microphone.... 

onli half consciou that he did so, he had been sit for some time 
identifi these noises, attribut to each crack or creak or knock it 
materi cause; but there wa one nois which, again not fulli consciou 
of the omission, he had not sought to account for. It had last come some 
minut ago; it came again now--a sort of soft sweep rustl that 
seem to hold an almost inaud minut crackling. for half a minut or 
so it had oleron' attention; then hi heavi thought were of elsi 
bengough again. 

He wa nearer to love her in that moment than he had ever been. He 
thought how to some men their love one were but the dearer for those 
poor mortal blemish that tell us we are but sojourn on earth, with a 
common fate not far distant that make it hardli worth while to do 
anyth but love for the time remaining. strangl sobs, blear 
tears, bodi buffet by sickness, heart and mind callou and hard with 
the rub of the world--how littl love there would be were these thing a 
barrier to love! In that sens he did love elsi bengough. what her 
happi had never move in him her sorrow almost awoke.... 

suddenli hi medit went. hi ear had onc more becom consciou 
of that soft and repeat noise--th long sweep with the almost 
inaud crackl in it. again and again it came, with a curiou 
insist and urgency. It quicken a littl as he becam increasingli 
attent ... it seem to oleron that it grew louder.... 

all at onc he start bolt upright in hi chair, tens and listening. 
the silki rustl came again; he wa tri to attach it to something.... 

the next moment he had leapt to hi feet, unnerv and terrified. hi 
chair hung pois for a moment, and then went over, set the 
fire-iron clatter as it fell. there wa onli one nois in the world 
like that which had caus him to spring thu to hi feet.... 

the next time it came oleron felt behind him at the empti air with hi 
hand, and back slowli until he found himself against the wall. 

"god in heaven!" the ejacul broke from oleron' lips. the sound had 
ceased. 

the next moment he had given a high cry. 

"what is it? what' there? _who's_ there?" 

A sound of scuttl caus hi knee to bend under him for a moment; but 
that, he knew, wa a mouse. that wa not someth that hi stomach 
turn sick and hi mind reel to entertain. that other sound, the like 
of which wa not in the world, had now entir ceased; and again he 
called.... 

He call and continu to call; and then anoth terror, a terror of the 
sound of hi own voice, seiz him. He did not dare to call again. hi 
shake hand went to hi pocket for a match, but found none. He thought 
there might be match on the mantelpiece-- 

He work hi way to the mantelpiec round a littl recess, without for a 
moment leav the wall. then hi hand encount the mantelpiece, and 
grope along it. A box of match fell to the hearth. He could just see 
them in the firelight, but hi hand could not pick them up until he had 
corner them insid the fender. 

then he rose and struck a light. 

the room wa as usual. He struck a second match. A candl stood on the 
table. He light it, and the flame sank for a moment and then burn up 
clear. again he look round. 

there wa nothing. 

there wa nothing; but there had been something, and might still be 
something. formerly, oleron had smile at the fantast thought that, 
by a merg and interplay of ident between himself and hi 
beauti room, he might be prepar a ghost for the future; it had not 
occur to him _that there might have been a similar merg and 
coalesc in the past_. yet with thi stagger imposs he wa 
now face to face. someth did persist in the house; it had a tenant 
other than himself; and that tenant, whatsoev or whosoever, had 
appal oleron' soul by produc the sound of a woman brush her 
hair. 


vii 

without quit know how he came to be there oleron found himself 
stride over the loos board he had temporarili place on the step 
broken by miss bengough. He wa hatless, and descend the stairs. not 
until later did there return to him a hazi memori that he had left the 
candl burn on the table, had open the door no wider than wa 
necessari to allow the passag of hi body, and had sidl out, close 
the door softli behind him. At the foot of the stair anoth shock 
await him. someth dash with a flurri up from the disus cellar 
and disappear out of the door. It wa onli a cat, but oleron gave a 
childish sob. 

He pass out of the gate, and stood for a moment under the "to let" 
boards, pluck foolishli at hi lip and look up at the glimmer 
of light behind one of hi red blinds. then, still look over hi 
shoulder, he move stumblingli up the square. there wa a small 
public-hous round the corner; oleron had never enter it; but he 
enter it now, and put down a shill that miss the counter by 
inches. 

"b--b--bran--brandy," he said, and then stoop to look for the shilling. 

He had the littl sawdust bar to himself; what compani there 
was--cart and labour and the small tradesmen of the 
neighbourhood--wa gather in the farther compartment, beyond the space 
where the white-hair landladi move among her tap and bottles. oleron 
sat down on a hardwood sette with a perfor seat, drank half hi 
brandy, and then, think he might as well drink it as spill it, 
finish it. 

then he fell to wonder which of the men whose voic he heard across 
the public-hous would undertak the remov of hi effect on the 
morrow. 

In the meantim he order more brandy. 

for he did not intend to go back to that room where he had left the 
candl burning. Oh no! He couldn't have face even the entri and the 
staircas with the broken step--certainli not that pith-white, 
fascin room. He would go back for the present to hi old 
arrangement, of workroom and separ sleeping-quarters; he would 
go to hi old landladi at once--presently--when he had finish hi 
brandy--and see if she could put him up for the night. hi glass wa 
empti now.... 

He rose, had it refilled, and sat down again. 

and if anybodi ask hi reason for remov again? oh, he had reason 
enough--reason enough! nail that put themselv back into wood again 
and gash people' hands, step that broke when you trod on them, and 
women who came into a man' place and brush their hair in the dark, 
were reason enough! He wa querul and injur about it all. He had 
taken the place for himself, not for invis women to brush their 
hair in; that lawyer fellow in lincoln' inn should be told so, too, 
befor mani hour were out; it wa outrageous, let peopl in for 
agreement like that! 

A cut-glass partit divid the compart where oleron sat from the 
space where the white-hair landladi moved; but it stop seven or 
eight inch abov the level of the counter. there wa no partit at 
the farther bar. present oleron, rais hi eyes, saw that face were 
watch him through the aperture. the face disappear when he look 
at them. 

He move to a corner where he could not be seen from the other bar; but 
thi brought him into line with the white-hair landlady. 

she knew him by sight--had doubtless seen him pass and repassing; and 
present she made a remark on the weather. oleron did not know what he 
replied, but it suffic to call forth the further remark that the winter 
had been a bad one for influenza, but that the spring weather seem to 
be come at last.... even thi slight contact with the commonplac 
steadi oleron a little; an idle, nascent wonder whether the landladi 
brush her hair everi night, and, if so, whether it gave out those 
littl electr cracklings, wa shut down with a snap; and oleron wa 
better.... 

with hi next glass of brandi he wa all for go back to hi flat. not 
go back? indeed, he would go back! they should veri soon see whether he 
wa to be turn out of hi place like that! He began to wonder whi he 
wa do the rather unusu thing he wa do at that moment, unusu 
for him--sit hatless, drink brandy, in a public-house. suppos he 
were to tell the white-hair landladi all about it--to tell her that a 
caller had scratch her hand on a nail, had later had the bad luck to 
put her foot through a rotten stair, and that he himself, in an old hous 
full of squeak and creak and whispers, had heard a minut nois and had 
bolt from it in fright--what would she think of him? that he wa mad, 
of course.... pshaw! the real truth of the matter wa that he hadn't been 
do enough work to occupi him. He had been dream hi day away, 
fill hi head with a lot of moonshin about a new _romilly_ (a if the 
old one wa not good enough), and now he wa surpris that the devil 
should enter an empti head! 

yes, he would go back. He would take a walk in the air first--h hadn't 
walk enough lately--and then he would take himself in hand, settl 
the hash of that sixteenth chapter of _romilly_ (fancy, he had actual 
been fool enough to think of destroy fifteen chapters!) and 
thenceforward he would rememb that he had oblig to hi fellow-men 
and work to do in the world. there wa the matter in a nutshell. 

He finish hi brandi and went out. 

He had walk for some time befor ani other bear of the matter than 
that on himself occur to him. At first, the fresh air had increas 
the headi effect of the brandi he had drunk; but afterward hi mind grew 
clearer than it had been sinc morning. and the clearer it grew, the less 
final did hi boast self-assur become, and the firmer hi 
convict that, when all explan had been made, there remain 
someth that could not be explained. hi hysteria of an hour befor had 
passed; he grew steadili calmer; but the disquiet convict remained. 
A deep fear took possess of him. It wa a fear for elsie. 

for someth in hi place wa inim to her safety. Of themselves, her 
two accid might not have persuad him of this; but she herself had 
said it. "_i'm not want here_..." and she had declar that there wa 
someth wrong with the place. she had seen it befor he had. well and 
good. one thing stood out clearly: namely, that if thi wa so, she must 
be kept away for quit anoth reason than that which had so confound 
and humili oleron. luckili she had express her intent of stay 
away; she must be held to that intention. He must see to it. 

and he must see to it all the more that he now saw hi first impulse, 
never to set foot in the place again, wa absurd. peopl did not do that 
kind of thing. with elsi made secure, he could not with ani respect to 
himself suffer himself to be turn out by a shadow, nor even by a danger 
mere becaus it wa a danger. He had to live somewhere, and he would 
live there. He must return. 

He master the faint chill of fear that came with the decision, and 
turn in hi walk abruptly. should fear grow on him again he would, 
perhaps, take one more glass of brandy.... 

but by the time he reach the short street that led to the squar he wa 
too late for more brandy. the littl public-hous wa still lighted, but 
closed, and one or two men were stand talk on the kerb. oleron 
notic that a sudden silenc fell on them as he passed, and he notic 
further that the long-nos barrett, whom he pass a littl lower down, 
did not return hi good-night. He turn in at the broken gate, hesit 
mere an instant in the alley, and then mount hi stair again. 

onli an inch of candl remain in the sheffield stick, and oleron did 
not light anoth one. deliber he forc himself to take it up and 
to make the tour of hi five room befor retiring. It wa as he return 
from the kitchen across hi littl hall that he notic that a letter lay 
on the floor. He carri it into hi sitting-room, and glanc at the 
envelop befor open it. 

It wa unstamped, and had been put into the door by hand. it handwrit 
wa clumsy, and it ran from begin to end without comma or period. 
oleron read the first line, turn to the signature, and then finish 
the letter. 

It wa from the man barrett, and it inform oleron that he, barrett, 
would be oblig if mr. oleron would make other arrang for the 
prepar of hi breakfast and the cleaning-out of hi place. the sting 
lay in the tail, that is to say, the postscript. thi consist of a text 
of scripture. It embodi an allus that could onli be to elsi 
bengough.... 

A seldom-seen frown had cut deepli into oleron' brow. so! that wa it! 
veri well; they would see about that on the morrow.... for the rest, thi 
seem mere anoth reason whi elsi should keep away.... 

then hi suppress rage broke out.... 

the foul-mind lot! the devil himself could not have given a leer at 
anyth that had ever pass between paul oleron and elsi bengough, 
yet thi nose rascal must be pri and talking!... 

oleron crumpl the paper up, held it in the candl flame, and then 
ground the ash under hi heel. 

one use purpose, however, the letter had served: it had creat in 
oleron a wrath blaze that effectu banish pale shadows. 
nevertheless, one other puzzl circumst wa to close the day. As he 
undressed, he chanc to glanc at hi bed. the coverlet bore an impress 
as if somebodi had lain on them. oleron could not rememb that he 
himself had lain down dure the day--off-hand, he would have said that 
certainli he had not; but after all he could not be positive. hi 
indign for elsie, act possibl with the residu of the brandi in 
him, exclud all other considerations; and he put out hi candle, lay 
down, and pass immedi into a deep and dreamless sleep, which, in 
the absenc of mrs. barrett' morn call, last almost onc round the 
clock. 


viii 

To the man who pay heed to that voic within him which warn him that 
twilight and danger are settl over hi soul, terror is apt to appear 
an absolut thing, against which hi heart must be safeguard in a twink 
unless there is to take place an alter in the whole rang and scale 
of hi nature. mercifully, he ha never far to look for safeguards. Of 
the immedi and small and common and momentari thing of life, of 
usag and observ and mode and conventions, he build up 
fortif against the power of darkness. He is even content that, 
not terror only, but joy also, should for work purpos be place in 
the categori of the absolut things; and the last treason he will commit 
will be that break down of term and limit that strikes, not at one 
man, but at the welfar of the soul of all. 

In hi own person, oleron began to commit thi treason. He began to 
commit it by admit the inexplic and horribl to an increas 
familiarity. He did it insensibly, unconsciously, by a neglect of the 
thing that he now regard it as an impertin in elsi bengough to 
have prescribed. two month before, the word "a haunt house," appli 
to hi love bemus dwelling, would have chill hi marrow; now, 
hi scale of sensat becom depressed, he could ask "haunt by 
what?" and remain unconsci that horror, when it can be prove to be 
relative, by so much lose it proper quality. He wa set asid the 
landmarks. mist and confus had begun to enwrap him. 

and he wa consciou of noth so much as of a voraci 
inquisitiveness. He want _to know_. He wa resolv to know. noth 
but the knowledg would satisfi him; and craftili he cast about for mean 
wherebi he might attain it. 

He might have spare hi craft. the matter wa the easiest imaginable. As 
in time past he had known, in hi writing, moment when hi thought 
had seem to rise of themselv and to embodi themselv in word not to 
be alter afterwards, so now the question he put himself seem to be 
answer even in the moment of their asking. there wa exhilar in 
the swift, easi processes. He had known no so such joy in hi own power 
sinc the day when hi write had been a daili fresh and a delight 
to him. It wa almost as if the cours he must pursu wa be dictat 
to him. 

and the first thing he must do, of course, wa to defin the problem. He 
defin it in term of mathematics. grant that he had not the place to 
himself; grant that the old hous had inexpress caught and engag 
hi spirit; grant that, by virtu of the common denomin of the 
place, thi unknown co-ten stood in some relat to himself: what 
next? clearly, the natur of the other numer must be ascertained. 

and how? ordinarili thi would not have seem simple, but to oleron it 
wa now pellucidli clear. the key, _of course_, lay in hi half-written 
novel--or rather, in both _romillys_, the old and the propos new one. 

A littl while befor oleron would have thought himself mad to have 
embrac such an opinion; now he accept the dizzi hypothesi without 
a quiver. 

He began to examin the first and second _romillys_. 

from the moment of hi do so the thing advanc by leap and bounds. 
swiftli he review the histori of the _romilly_ of the fifteen chapters. 
He rememb clearli now that he had found her insuffici on the veri 
first morn on which he had sat down to work in hi new place. other 
instanc of hi avers leap up to confirm hi obscur investigation. 
there had come the night when he had hardli forborn to throw the whole 
thing into the fire; and the next morn he had begun the plan of 
the new _romilly_. It had been on that morn that mrs. barrett, 
overhear him hum a brief phrase that the drip of a tap the 
night befor had suggested, had inform him that he wa sing some air 
he had never in hi life heard before, call "the beckon fair 
one."... 

the beckon fair one!... 

with scarc a paus in thought he continued: 

the first _romilly_ have been definit thrown over, the second had 
instantli fasten herself upon him, clamour for birth in hi brain. 
He even fanci now, look back, that there had been someth like 
passion, hate almost, in the supplanting, and that more than onc a stray 
thought given to hi discard creation had--(it wa astonish how 
credibl oleron found the almost unthink idea)--had offend the 
supplanter. 

yet that a malign almost homicid should be extend to hi 
fiction' poor mortal prototype.... 

In spite of hi inur to a scale in which the horribl wa now a thing 
to be finger and turn thi way and that, a "good god!" broke from 
oleron. 

thi intrus of the first _romilly's_ prototyp into hi thought 
again wa a factor that for the moment brought hi inquiri into the 
natur of hi problem to a termination; the mere thought of elsi wa 
fatal to anyth abstract. for anoth thing, he could not yet think of 
that letter of barrett's, nor of a littl scene that had follow it, 
without a mount of colour and a quick contract of the brow. for, 
wise or not, he had had that argument out at once. stride across the 
squar on the follow morning, he had beard barrett on hi own 
doorstep. come back again a few minut later, he had been strongli of 
opinion that he had onli made matter worse. the man had been vagu 
itself. He had not been to be either challeng or browbeaten into 
anyth more definit than a mutter farrago in which the word 
"certain thing ... mrs. barrett ... respect hous ... if the cap 
fit ... proceed that shall be nameless," had been constantli 
repeated. 

"not that I make ani charge--" he had concluded. 

"charge!" oleron had cried. 

"I 'ave my idear of things, as I don't doubt you 'ave yours--" 

"ideas--mine!" oleron had cri wrathfully, immedi drop hi 
voic as head had appear at window of the square. "look you here, my 
man; you'v an unwholesom mind, which probabl you can't help, but a 
tongu which you can help, and shall! If there is a breath of thi 
repeat ..." 

"i'll not be talk to on my own doorstep like thi by anybody,..." 
barrett had blustered.... 

"you shall, and i'm do it ..." 

"don't you forget there' a gawd abov all, who 'a said..." 

"you'r a low scandalmonger!..." 

and so forth, continu badli what wa alreadi badli begun. oleron had 
return wrath to hi own house, and thenceforward, look out 
of hi windows, had seen barrett' face at odd times, lift blind or 
peer round curtains, as if he sought to put himself in possess of 
heaven knew what evidence, in case it should be requir of him. 

the unfortun occurr made certain minor differ in oleron' 
domest arrangements. barrett' tongue, he gathered, had alreadi been 
busy; he wa look at askanc by the dweller of the square; and he 
judg it better, until he should be abl to obtain other help, to make 
hi purchas of provis a littl farther afield rather than at the 
small shop of the immedi neighbourhood. for the rest, housekeep 
wa no new thing to him, and he would resum hi old bachelor habits.... 

besides, he wa deep in certain rather abstrus investigations, in which 
it wa better that he should not be disturbed. 

He wa look out of hi window one midday rather tired, not veri well, 
and glad that it wa not veri like he would have to stir out of doors, 
when he saw elsi bengough cross the squar toward hi house. the 
weather had broken; it wa a raw and gusti day; and she had to forc 
her way against the wind that set her ampl skirt belli about her 
opul figur and her veil spin and stream behind her. 

oleron act swiftli and instinctively. seiz hi hat, he sprang to the 
door and descend the stair at a run. A sort of panic had seiz him. 
she must be prevent from set foot in the place. As he ran along the 
alley he wa consciou that hi eye went up to the eav as if someth 
drew them. He did not know that a slate might not accident fall.... 

He met her at the gate, and spoke with curiou volubleness. 

"thi is realli too bad, elsie! just as i'm urgent call away! i'm 
afraid it can't be help though, and that you'll have to think me an 
inhospit beast." He pour it out just as it came into hi head. 

she ask if he wa go to town. 

"yes, yes--to town," he replied. "i'v got to call on--on chambers. you 
know chambers, don't you? no, I rememb you don't; a big man you onc 
saw me with.... I ought to have gone yesterday, and--" thi he felt to be 
a brilliant effort--"and he' go out of town thi afternoon. To 
brighton. I had a letter from him thi morning." 

He took her arm and led her up the square. she had to remind him that hi 
way to town lay in the other direction. 

"of course--how stupid of me!" he said, with a littl loud laugh. "i'm so 
use to go the other way with you--of course; it' the other way to 
the bus. will you come along with me? I am so aw sorri it' happen 
like this...." 

they took the street to the bu terminus. 

thi time elsi bore no sign of have gone through interior struggles. 
If she detect anyth unusu in hi manner she made no comment, and 
he, see her calm, began to talk less recklessli through silences. By 
the time they reach the bu terminus, nobody, see the pallid-fac 
man without an overcoat and the larg ample-skirt girl at hi side, 
would have suppos that one of them wa readi to sink on hi knee for 
thank that he had, as he believed, save the other from a wildli 
unthink danger. 

they mount to the top of the bus, oleron protest that he should not 
miss hi overcoat, and that he found the day, if anything, rather 
oppress hot. they sat down on a front seat. 

now that thi meet wa forc upon him, he had someth els to say 
that would make demand upon hi tact. It had been on hi mind for some 
time, and was, indeed, peculiarli difficult to put. He revolv it for 
some minutes, and then, rememb the success of hi stori of a sudden 
call to town, cut the knot of hi difficulti with anoth lie. 

"i'm think of go away for a littl while, elsie," he said. 

she mere said, "oh?" 

"somewher for a change. I need a change. I think I shall go to-morrow, 
or the day after. yes, to-morrow, I think." 

"yes," she replied. 

"I don't quit know how long I shall be," he continued. "I shall have to 
let you know when I am back." 

"yes, let me know," she repli in an even tone. 

the tone was, for her, suspici even. He wa a littl uneasy. 

"you don't ask me where i'm going," he said, with a littl cumbrou 
effort to ralli her. 

she wa look straight befor her, past the bus-driver. 

"I know," she said. 

He wa startled. "how, you know?" 

"you'r not go anywhere," she replied. 

He found not a word to say. It wa a minut or so befor she continued, 
in the same control voic she had employ from the start. 

"you'r not go anywhere. you weren't go out thi morning. you onli 
came out becaus I appeared; don't behav as if we were strangers, paul." 

A flush of pink had mount to hi cheeks. He notic that the wind had 
given her the pink of earli rhubarb. still he found noth to say. 

"of course, you ought to go away," she continued. "I don't know whether 
you look at yourself often in the glass, but you'r rather noticeable. 
sever peopl have turn to look at you thi morning. so, of course, 
you ought to go away. but you won't, and I know why." 

He shivered, cough a little, and then broke silence. 

"then if you know, there' no use in continu thi discussion," he said 
curtly. 

"not for me, perhaps, but there is for you," she replied. "shall I tell 
you what I know?" 

"no," he said in a voic slightli raised. 

"no?" she asked, her round eye earnestli on him. 

"no." 

again he wa get out of patienc with her; again he wa consciou of 
the strain. her devot and fidel and love plagu him; she wa onli 
humili both herself and him. It would have been bad enough had he 
ever, by word or deed, given her caus for thu fasten herself on 
him ... but there; that wa the worst of that kind of life for a woman. 
women such as she, busi women, in and out of offic all the time, 
always, whether they realis it or not, made comradeship a cover for 
someth else. they accept the unconvent status, came and 
went freely, as men did, were honestli taken by men at their own 
valuation--and then it turn out to be the other thing after all, and 
they went and fell in love. No wonder there wa gossip in shop and 
squar and public houses! In a sens the gossip were in the right of 
it. independent, yet not efficient; with some of womanhood' grace 
forgone, and yet with all the woman' hunger and need; half 
sophisticated, yet not wise; oleron wa tire of it all.... 

and it wa time he told her so. 

"I suppose," he said tremblingly, look down between hi knees, "I 
suppos the real troubl is in the life women who earn their own live 
are oblig to lead." 

He could not tell in what sens she took the lame generality; she mere 
replied, "I suppos so." 

"it can't be helped," he continued, "but you do sacrific a good deal." 

she agreed: a good deal; and then she ad after a moment, "what, for 
instance?" 

"you may or may not be gradual attain a new status, but you'r in a 
fals posit to-day." 

It wa veri likely, she said; she hadn't thought of it much in that 
light-- 

"and," he continu desperately, "you'r bound to suffer. your most 
innoc act are misunderstood; motiv you never dream of are 
attribut to you; and in the end it come to--" he hesit a moment 
and then took the plunge, "--to the sidelong look and the leer." 

she took hi mean with perfect ease. she mere shiver a littl as 
she pronounc the name. 

"barrett?" 

hi silenc told her the rest. 

anyth further that wa to be said must come from her. It came as the 
bu stop at a stage and fresh passeng mount the stairs. 

"you'd better get down here and go back, paul," she said. "I understand 
perfectly--perfectly. It isn't barrett. you'd be abl to deal with 
barrett. it' mere conveni for you to say it' barrett. I know what 
it is ... but you said I wasn't to tell you that. veri well. but befor 
you go let me tell you whi I came up thi morning." 

In a dull tone he ask her why. again she look straight befor her as 
she replied: 

"I came to forc your hand. thing couldn't go on as they have been 
going, you know; and now that' all over." 

"all over," he repeat stupidly. 

"all over. I want you now to consid yourself, as far as i'm concerned, 
perfectli free. I make onli one reservation." 

He hardli had the spirit to ask her what that was. 

"if _i_ mere need _you_," she said, "pleas don't give that a thought; 
that' nothing; I shan't come near for that. but," she drop her voice, 
"if _you're_ in need of _me_, paul--i shall know if you are, _and you 
will be_--then I shall come at no matter what cost. you understand that?" 

He could onli groan. 

"so that' understood," she concluded. "and I think that' all. now go 
back. I should advis you to walk back, for you'r shivering--good-bye--" 

she gave him a cold hand, and he descended. He turn on the edg of the 
kerb as the bu start again. for the first time in all the year he had 
known her she part from him with no smile and no wave of her long arm. 


IX 

He stood on the kerb plung in misery, look after her as long as she 
remain in sight; but almost instantli with her disappear he felt 
the heavi lift a littl from hi spirit. she had given him hi 
liberty; true, there wa a sens in which he had never part with it, 
but now wa no time for split hairs; he wa free to act, and all wa 
clear ahead. swiftli the sens of light grew on him: it becam a 
posit rejoic in hi liberty; and befor he wa halfway home he had 
decid what must be done next. 

the vicar of the parish in which hi dwell wa situat live within 
ten minut of the square. To hi hous oleron turn hi steps. It wa 
necessari that he should have all the inform he could get about thi 
old hous with the insur mark and the slope "to let" boards, and 
the vicar wa the person most like to be abl to furnish it. thi last 
preliminari out of the way, and--aha! oleron chuckled--th might be 
expect to happen! 

but he gain less inform than he had hope for. the house, the 
vicar said, wa old--but there need no vicar to tell oleron that; it 
wa reput (oleron prick up hi ears) to be haunted--but there were 
few old hous about which some such rumour did not circul among the 
ignorant; and the deplor lack of faith of the modern world, the vicar 
thought, did not tend to dissip these superstitions. for the rest, 
hi manner wa the sooth manner of one who prefer not to make 
statement without know how they will be taken by hi hearer. oleron 
smile as he perceiv this. 

"you may leav my nerv out of the question," he said. "how long ha the 
place been empty?" 

"A dozen years, I should say," the vicar replied. 

"and the last tenant--did you know him--or her?" oleron wa consciou of 
a tingl of hi nerv as he offer the vicar the altern of sex. 

"him," said the vicar. "A man. If I rememb rightly, hi name wa 
madley; an artist. He wa a great recluse; seldom went out of the place, 
and--" the vicar hesit and then broke into a littl gush of candour 
"--and sinc you appear to have come for thi information, and sinc it 
is better that the truth should be told than that garbl version should 
get about, I don't mind say that thi man madley die there, under 
somewhat unusu circumstances. It wa ascertain at the post-mortem 
that there wa not a particl of food in hi stomach, although he wa 
found to be not without money. and hi frame wa simpli worn out. suicid 
wa spoken of, but you'll agre with me that deliber starvat is, to 
say the least, an uncommon form of suicide. An open verdict wa 
returned." 

"ah!" said oleron.... "doe there happen to be ani comprehens histori 
of thi parish?" 

"no; partial one only. I myself am not guiltless of have made a number 
of note on it pure ecclesiast history, it regist and so 
forth, which I shall be happi to show you if you would care to see them; 
but it is a larg parish, I have onli one curate, and my leisure, as you 
will readili understand ..." 

the extent of the parish and the scanti of the vicar' leisur 
occupi the remaind of the interview, and oleron thank the vicar, 
took hi leave, and walk slowli home. 

He walk slowli for a reason, twice turn away from the hous within a 
stone's-throw of the gate and take anoth turn of twenti minut or 
so. He had a veri ticklish piec of work now befor him; it requir the 
greatest mental concentration; it wa noth less than to bring hi 
mind, if he might, into such a state of unpreoccup and recept 
that he should see the place as he had seen it on that morn when, 
hi remov accomplished, he had sat down to begin the sixteenth chapter 
of the first _romilly_. 

for, could he recaptur that first impression, he now hope for far more 
from it. formerly, he had carri no end of mental lumber. befor the 
influenc of the place had been abl to find him out at all, it had had 
the inertia of those dreari chapter to overcome. No result had shown. 
the process had been one of slow saturation, charging, fill up to a 
brim. but now he wa light, unburdened, rid at last both of that 
_romilly_ and of her prototype. now for the new unknown, coy, jealous, 
bewitching, beckon fair!... 

At half-past two of the afternoon he put hi key into the yale lock, 
entered, and close the door behind him.... 

hi fantast attempt wa instantli and astonishingli successful. He 
could have shout with triumph as he enter the room; it wa as if he 
had _escaped_ into it. onc more, as in the day when hi write had had 
a daili fresh and wonder and promis for him, he wa consciou of 
that new eas and masteri and exhilar and release. the air of the 
place seem to hold more oxygen; as if hi own specif graviti had 
changed, hi veri tread seem less ponderable. the flower in the bowls, 
the fair proport of the meadowsweet-colour panel and mouldings, 
the polish floor, and the lofti and faintli star ceiling, fairli 
laugh their welcome. oleron actual laugh back, and spoke aloud. 

"oh, you'r pretty, pretty!" he flatter it. 

then he lay down on hi couch. 

He spent that afternoon as a convalesc who expect a dear visitor 
might have spent it--in a delici vacancy, smile now and then as 
if in hi sleep, and ever lift drowsi and content eye to hi 
allur surroundings. He lay thu until dark came, and, with 
darkness, the nocturn nois of the old house.... 

but if he wait for ani specif happening, he wait in vain. 

He wait similarli in vain on the morrow, maintaining, though with less 
ease, that sensitised-plate-lik condit of hi mind. noth occur 
to give it an impression. whatev it wa which he so patient wooed, it 
seem to be both shi and exacting. 

then on the third day he thought he understood. A look of gentl drolleri 
and cun came into hi eyes, and he chuckled. 

"oho, oho!... well, if the wind sit in _that_ quarter we must see what 
els there is to be done. what is there, now?... no, I won't send for 
elsie; we don't need a wheel to break the butterfli on; we won't go to 
those lengths, my butterfly...." 

He wa stand musing, thumb hi lean jaw, look aslant; suddenli 
he cross to hi hall, took down hi hat, and went out. 

"mi ladi is coquettish, is she? well, we'll see what a littl neglect 
will do," he chuckl as he went down the stairs. 

He sought a railway station, got into a train, and spent the rest of the 
day in the country. oh, yes: oleron thought _he_ wa the man to deal with 
fair one who beckoned, and invited, and then took refug in shyness and 
hang back! 

He did not return until after eleven that night. 

"_now_, my fair beckoner!" he murmur as he walk along the alley and 
felt in hi pocket for hi keys.... 

insid hi flat, he wa perfectli composed, perfectli deliberate, 
exceedingli care not to give himself away. As if to intim that he 
intend to retir immediately, he light onli a singl candle; and as 
he set out with it on hi nightli round he affect to yawn. He went 
first into hi kitchen. there wa a full moon, and a lozeng of 
moonlight, almost peacock-blu by contrast with hi candle-frame, lay on 
the floor. the window wa uncurtained, and he could see the reflect of 
the candle, and, faintly, that of hi own face, as he move about. the 
door of the powder-closet stood a littl ajar, and he close it befor 
sit down to remov hi boot on the chair with the cushion made of 
the fold harp-bag. from the kitchen he pass to the bathroom. there, 
anoth slant of blue moonlight cut the windowsil and lay across the 
pipe on the wall. He visit hi seldom-us study, and stood for a 
moment gaze at the silver roof across the square. then, walk 
straight through hi sitting-room, hi stocking feet make no noise, 
he enter hi bedroom and put the candl on the chest of drawers. hi 
face all thi time wore no express save that of tiredness. He had 
never been wilier nor more alert. 

hi small bedroom fireplac wa opposit the chest of drawer on which 
the mirror stood, and hi bed and the window occupi the remain 
side of the room. oleron drew down hi blind, took off hi coat, and 
then stoop to get hi slipper from under the bed. 

He could have given no reason for the conviction, but that the 
manifest that for two day had been withheld wa close at hand he 
never for an instant doubted. nor, though he could not form the faintest 
guess of the shape it might take, did he experi fear. startl or 
surpris it might be; he wa prepar for that; but that wa all; hi 
scale of sensat had becom depressed. hi hand move thi way and that 
under the bed in search of hi slippers.... 

but for all hi caution and method and preparedness, hi heart all at 
onc gave a leap and a paus that wa almost horrid. hi hand had found 
the slippers, but he wa still on hi knees; save for thi circumst 
he would have fallen. the bed wa a low one; the grope for the slipper 
account for the turn of hi head to one side; and he wa care to 
keep the attitud until he had partli recov hi self-possession. when 
present he rose there wa a drop of blood on hi lower lip where he had 
caught at it with hi teeth, and hi watch had jerk out of the pocket 
of hi waistcoat and wa dangl at the end of it short leather 
guard.... 

then, befor the watch had ceas it littl oscillation, he wa himself 
again. 

In the middl of hi mantelpiec there stood a picture, a portrait of hi 
grandmother; he place himself befor thi picture, so that he could see 
in the glass of it the steadi flame of the candl that burn behind him 
on the chest of drawers. He could see also in the picture-glass the 
littl glanc of light from the bevel and facet of the object about 
the mirror and candle. but he could see more. these twinkl and 
reflect and re-reflect did not chang their position; but there 
wa one gleam that had motion. It wa fainter than the rest, and it move 
up and down through the air. It wa the reflect of the candl on 
oleron' black vulcanit comb, and each of it downward movement wa 
accompani by a silki and crackl rustle. 

oleron, watch what went on in the glass of hi grandmother' portrait, 
continu to play hi part. He felt for hi dangl watch and began 
slowli to wind it up. then, for a moment ceas to watch, he began to 
empti hi trouser pocket and to place method in a littl row on 
the mantelpiec the penni and halfpenni he took from them. the 
sweeping, minut electr nois fill the whole bedroom, and had 
oleron alter hi point of observ he could have brought the dim 
gleam of the move comb so into posit that it would almost have 
outlin hi grandmother' head. 

ani other head of which it might have been follow the outlin wa 
invisible. 

oleron finish the empti of hi pockets; then, under cover of anoth 
simul yawn, not so much summon hi resolut as overmast by 
an exhorbit curiosity, he swung suddenli round. that which wa be 
comb wa still not to be seen, but the comb did not stop. It had 
alter it angl a little, and had move a littl to the left. It wa 
passing, in fairli regular sweeps, from a point rather more than five 
feet from the ground, in a direct roughli vertical, to anoth point a 
few inch below the level of the chest of drawers. 

oleron continu to act to admiration. He walk to hi littl washstand 
in the corner, pour out water, and began to wash hi hands. He remov 
hi waistcoat, and continu hi prepar for bed. the comb did 
not cease, and he stood for a moment in thought. again hi eye twinkled. 
the next wa veri cunning-- 

"hm!... _I think i'll read for a quarter of an hour_," he said aloud.... 

He pass out of the room. 

He wa away a coupl of minutes; when he return again the room wa 
suddenli quiet. He glanc at the chest of drawers; the comb lay still, 
between the collar he had remov and a pair of gloves. without 
hesit oleron put out hi hand and pick it up. It wa an ordinari 
eighteenpenni comb, taken from a card in a chemist' shop, of a substanc 
of a definit specif gravity, and no more capabl of rebellion against 
the law by which it exist than are the world that keep their orbit 
through the void. oleron put it down again; then he glanc at the bundl 
of paper he held in hi hand. what he had gone to fetch had been the 
fifteen chapter of the origin _romilly_. 

"hm!" he mutter as he threw the manuscript into a chair.... "a I 
thought.... she' just blindly, ragingly, murder jealous." 

* * * * * 

On the night after that, and on the follow night, and for mani night 
and days, so mani that he began to be uncertain about the count of them, 
oleron, courting, cajoling, neglecting, threatening, beseeching, eaten 
out with unappeas curios and regardless that hi life wa becom 
one consum passion and desire, continu hi search for the unknown 
co-numer of hi abode. 


X 

As time went on, it came to pass that few except the postman mount 
oleron' stairs; and sinc men who do not write letter receiv few, even 
the postman' tread becam so infrequ that it wa not heard more than 
onc or twice a week. there came a letter from oleron' publishers, 
ask when they might expect to receiv the manuscript of hi new book; 
he delay for some day to answer it, and final forgot it. A second 
letter came, which also he fail to answer. He receiv no third. 

the weather grew bright and warm. the privet bush among the 
chopper-lik notice-board flowered, and in the street where oleron did 
hi shop the basket of flower-women line the kerbs. oleron 
purchas flower daily; hi room clamour for flowers, fresh and 
continu renewed; and oleron did not stint it demands. nevertheless, 
the necess for go out to buy them began to irk him more and more, 
and it wa with a greater and ever greater sens of relief that he 
return home again. He began to be consciou that again hi scale of 
sensat had suffer a subtl change--a chang that wa not restor 
to it former capacity, but an extens and enlarg that onc more 
includ terror. It admit it in an entir new form. _lux orco, 
tenebra jovi_. the name of thi terror wa agoraphobia. oleron had begun 
to dread air and space and the horror that might pounc upon the 
unguard back. 

present he so contriv it that hi food and flower were deliv 
daili at hi door. He rub hi hand when he had hit upon thi 
expedient. that wa better! now he could pleas himself whether he went 
out or not.... 

quickli he wa confirm in hi choice. It becam hi pleasur to remain 
immured. 

but he wa not happy--or, if he was, hi happi took an extraordinari 
turn. He fret discontentedly, could sometim have wept for mere 
weak and misery; and yet he wa dimli consciou that he would not 
have exchang hi sad for all the noisi mirth of the world outside. 
and speak of noise: noise, much noise, now caus him the acutest 
discomfort. It wa hardli more to be endur than that new-born fear that 
kept him, on the increasingli rare occas when he did go out, sidl 
close to wall and feel friendli rail with hi hand. He move from 
room to room softli and in slippers, and sometim stood for mani second 
close a door so gentli that not a sound broke the still that wa in 
itself a delight. sunday now becam an intoler day to him, for, sinc 
the come of the fine weather, there had begun to assembl in the squar 
under hi window each sunday morn certain member of the sect to 
which the long-nos barrett adhered. these came with a great drum and 
larg brass-belli instruments; men and women uplift anguish voices, 
struggl with their god; and barrett himself, with uprais face and 
close eye and work brows, pray that the sound of hi voic might 
penetr the ear of all unbelievers--a it certainli did oleron's. one 
day, in the middl of one of these rhapsodies, oleron sprang to hi blind 
and pull it down, and heard as he did so hi own name made the subject 
of a fresh torrent of outpouring. 

and sometimes, but not as expect a reply, oleron stood still and 
call softly. onc or twice he call "romilly!" and then waited; but 
more often hi whisper did not take the shape of a name. 

there wa one spot in particular of hi abod that he began to haunt with 
increas persistency. thi wa just within the open of hi bedroom 
door. He had discov one day that by open everi door in hi place 
(alway except the outer one, which he onli open unwillingly) and by 
place himself on thi particular spot, he could actual see to a 
greater or less extent into each of hi five room without chang hi 
position. He could see the whole of hi sitting-room, all of hi bedroom 
except the part hidden by the open door, and glimps of hi kitchen, 
bathroom, and of hi rare use study. He wa often in thi place, 
breathless and with hi finger on hi lip. one day, as he stood there, he 
suddenli found himself wonder whether thi madley, of whom the vicar 
had spoken, had ever discov the strateg import of the bedroom 
entry. 

light, moreover, now caus him greater disquietud than did darkness. 
direct sunlight, of which, as the sun pass daili round the house, each 
of hi room had now it share, wa like a flame in hi brain; and even 
diffus light wa a dull and numb ache. He began, at success hour 
of the day, one after another, to lower hi crimson blinds. He made short 
and dare excurs in order to do this; but he wa ever care to 
leav hi retreat open, in case he should have sudden need of it. 
present thi lower of the blind had becom a daili method 
exercise, and hi rooms, when he had been hi round, had the blood-r 
half-light of a photographer' darkroom. 

one day, as he drew down the blind of hi littl studi and back in good 
order out of the room again, he broke into a soft laugh. 

"_that_ bilk mr. barrett!" he said; and the baffl of barrett 
continu to afford him mirth for an hour. 

but on anoth day, soon after, he had a fright that left him trembl 
also for an hour. He had seiz the cord to darken the window over the 
seat in which he had found the harp-bag, and wa stand with hi back 
well protect in the embrasure, when he thought he saw the tail of a 
black-and-whit check skirt disappear round the corner of the house. He 
could not be sure--had he run to the window of the other wall, which wa 
blinded, the skirt must have been alreadi past--but he wa _almost_ sure 
that it wa elsie. He listen in an agoni of suspens for her tread on 
the stairs.... 

but no tread came, and after three or four minut he drew a long breath 
of relief. 

"bi jove, but that would have compromis me horribly!" he muttered.... 

and he continu to mutter from time to time, "horribl 
compromis ... _no_ woman would stand that ... not _any_ kind of 
woman ... oh, compromis in the extreme!" 

yet he wa not happy. He could not have assign the caus of the fit of 
quiet weep which took him sometimes; they came and went, like the 
fit illumin of the cloud that travel over the square; and 
perhaps, after all, if he wa not happy, he wa not unhappy. befor 
he could be unhappi someth must have been withdrawn, and noth had 
yet been withdrawn from him, for noth had been granted. He wa wait 
for that granting, in that flower-laden, fright entic apart 
of his, with the pith-whit wall ting and subdu by the crimson 
blind to a blood-lik gloom. 

He paid no heed to it that hi stock of money wa run peril low, 
nor that he had ceas to work. ceas to work? He had not ceas to 
work. they knew veri littl about it who suppos that oleron had ceas 
to work! He wa in truth onli now begin to work. He wa prepar 
such a work ... such a work ... such a mistress wa a-mak in the 
gestat of hi art ... let him but get thi period of probat and 
poignant wait over and men should see.... how _should_ men know her, 
thi fair one of oleron's, until oleron himself knew her? love radiant 
creation are not thrown off like how-d'ye-do's. the men to whom it is 
commit to father them must weep wretch tears, as oleron did, must 
swell with vain presumptu hopes, as oleron did, must pursue, as oleron 
pursued, the capricious, fair, mocking, slippery, eager spirit that, ever 
eluding, ever see to it that the chase doe not slacken. let oleron but 
hunt thi huntress a littl longer... he would have her sparkl 
and pant in hi arm yet.... Oh no: they were veri far from the truth 
who suppos that oleron had ceas to work! 

and if all els wa fall away from oleron, gladli he wa let it 
go. So do we all when our fair one beckon. quit at the begin we 
wink, and promis ourselv that we will put her ladyship through her 
paces, neglect her for a day, turn her own jealou wile against her, 
flout and ignor her when she come wheedling; perhap there lurk within 
us all the time a heartless sprite who is never fooled; but in the end 
all fall away. she beckons, beckons, and all goes.... 

and so oleron kept hi strateg post within the frame of hi bedroom 
door, and watched, and waited, and smiled, with hi finger on hi 
lips.... It wa hi duteou service, hi worship, hi troth-plighting, 
all that he had ever known of love. and when he found himself, as he now 
and then did, hate the dead man madley, and wish that he had never 
lived, he felt that that, too, wa an accept service.... 

but, as he thu prepar himself, as it were, for a marriage, and mope 
and chafe more and more that the bride made no sign, he made a discoveri 
that he ought to have made week before. 

It wa through a thought of the dead madley that he made it. sinc that 
night when he had thought in hi green that a littl studi neglect 
would bring the love beckon to her knees, and had made use of her own 
jealousi to banish her, he had not set eye on those fifteen discard 
chapter of _romilly_. He had thrown them back into the window-seat, 
forgotten their veri existence. but hi own jealousi of madley put him in 
mind of her of her jilt rival of flesh and blood, and he rememb 
them.... fool that he had been! had he, then, expect hi desir to 
manifest herself while there still exist the evid of hi divid 
allegiance? what, and she with a passion so fierc and centr that it 
had not hesit at the destruction, twice attempted, of her rival? fool 
that he had been!... 

but if _that_ wa all the pledg and sacrific she requir she should 
have it--ah, yes, and quickly! 

He took the manuscript from the window-seat, and brought it to the fire. 

He kept hi fire alway burn now; the warmth brought out the last 
vestig of odour of the flower with which hi room wa banked. He did 
not know what time it was; long sinc he had allow hi clock to run 
down--it had seem a foolish measur of time in regard to the 
stupend thing that were happen to oleron; but he knew it wa late. 
He took the _romilly_ manuscript and knelt befor the fire. 

but he had not finish remov the fasten that held the sheet 
togeth befor he suddenli gave a start, turn hi head over hi 
shoulder, and listen intently. the sound he had heard had not been 
loud--it had been, indeed, no more than a tap, twice or thrice 
repeated--but it had fill oleron with alarm. hi face grew dark as 
it came again. 

He heard a voic outsid on hi landing. 

"paul!... paul!..." 

It wa elsie' voice. 

"paul!... I know you'r in... I want to see you...." 

He curs her under hi breath, but kept perfectli still. He did not 
intend to admit her. 

"paul!... you'r in trouble.... I believ you'r in danger... at least 
come to the door!..." 

oleron smother a low laugh. It somehow amus him that she, in such 
danger herself, should talk to him of _his_ danger!... well, if she was, 
serv her right; she knew, or said she knew, all about it.... 

"paul!... paul!..." 

"_paul!... paul!_..." He mimick her under hi breath. 

"oh, paul, it' _horrible_!..." 

horrible, wa it? thought oleron. then let her get away.... 

"I onli want to help you, paul.... I didn't promis not to come if you 
need me...." 

He wa impervi to the piti sob that interrupt the low cry. the 
devil take the woman! should he shout to her to go away and not come 
back? no: let her call and knock and sob. she had a gift for sobbing; she 
mustn't think her sob would move him. they irrit him, so that he set 
hi teeth and shook hi fist at her, but that wa all. let her sob. 

"_paul!... paul!_..." 

with hi teeth hard set, he drop the first page of _romilly_ into the 
fire. then he began to drop the rest in, sheet by sheet. 

for mani minut the call behind hi door continued; then suddenli it 
ceased. He heard the sound of feet slowli descend the stairs. He 
listen for the nois of a fall or a cri or the crash of a piec of the 
handrail of the upper landing; but none of these thing came. she wa 
spared. appar her rival suffer her to crawl abject and beaten 
away. oleron heard the pass of her step under hi window; then she 
wa gone. 

He drop the last page into the fire, and then, with a low laugh rose. 
He look fondli round hi room. 

"lucki to get away like that," he remarked. "she wouldn't have got away 
if i'd given her as much as a word or a look! what devil these women 
are!... but no; I oughtn't to say that; one of 'em show 
forbearance...." 

who show forbearance? and what wa forborne? ah, oleron 
knew!... contempt, no doubt, had been at the bottom of it, but that 
didn't matter: the pester creatur had been allow to go unharmed. 
yes, she wa lucky; oleron hope she knew it.... 

and now, now, now for hi reward! 

oleron cross the room. all hi door were open; hi eye shone as he 
place himself within that of hi bedroom. 

fool that he had been, not to think of destroy the manuscript 
sooner!... 

* * * * * 

how, in a hous of shadows, should he know hi own shadow? how, in a 
hous of noises, distinguish the summon he felt to be at hand? ah, 
trust him! He would know! the place wa full of a juggleri of dim lights. 
the blind at hi elbow that allow the light of a street lamp to 
struggl vagu through--th glimps of greeni blue moonlight seen 
through the distant kitchen door--th sulki glow of the fire under the 
black ash of the burnt manuscript--th glimmer of the tulip and the 
moon-daisi and narcissi in the bowl and jug and jars--thes did not 
so trick and bewild hi eye that he would not know hi own! It wa he, 
not she, who had been delay the shadowi bridal; he hung hi head for a 
moment in mute acknowledgment; then he bent hi eye on the deceiving, 
puzzl gloom again. He would have call her name had he known it--but 
now he would not ask her to share even a name with the other.... 

hi own face, within the frame of the door, glimmer white as the 
narcissi in the darkness.... 

A shadow, light as fleece, seem to take shape in the kitchen (the time 
had been when oleron would have said that a cloud had pass over the 
unseen moon). the low illumin on the blind at hi elbow grew dimmer 
(the time had been when oleron would have conclud that the lamplight 
go hi round had turn low the flame of the lamp). the fire settled, 
let down the black and char papers; a flower fell from a bowl, 
and lay indistinct upon the floor; all wa still; and then a stray 
draught move through the old house, pass befor oleron' face.... 

suddenly, inclin hi head, he withdrew a littl from the door-jamb. 
the wander draught caus the door to move a littl on it hinges. 
oleron trembl violently, stood for a moment longer, and then, put 
hi hand out to the knob, softli drew the door to, sat down on the 
nearest chair, and waited, as a man might await the call of hi name 
that should summon him to some weighty, high and privi audience.... 


XI 

one know not whether there can be human compass for anemia of the 
soul. when the pitch of life is dropped, and the spirit is so put over 
and revers that that onli is horribl which befor wa sweet and 
worldli and of the day, the human relat disappears. the sane soul 
turn appal away, lest not mere itself, but saniti should suffer. 
We are not gods. We cannot drive out devils. We must see selfishli 
to it that devil do not enter into ourselves. 

and thi we must do even though love so transfus us that we may well 
deem our natur to be half divine. We shall but speak of honour and duti 
in vain. the letter drop within the dark door will lie unregarded, or, 
if regard for a brief instant between two unspeak lapses, left and 
forgotten again. the telegram will be undelivered, nor will the whistl 
messeng (wiseli guid than he know to whistle) be consciou as he 
walk away of the drawn blind that is push asid an inch by a finger 
and then fear replac again. no: let the miser wrestl with hi 
own shadows; let him, if inde he be so mad, clip and strain and enfold 
and couch the succubus; but let him do so in a hous into which not an 
air of heaven penetrates, nor a bright finger of the sun pierc the 
filthi twilight. the lost must remain lost. human ha other busi 
to attend to. 

for the handwrit of the two letter that oleron, steal noiselessli 
one june day into hi kitchen to rid hi sitting-room of an arm of 
fetid and decay flowers, had seen on the floor within hi door, had 
had no more mean for him than if it had belong to some dim and 
faraway dream. and at the beat of the telegraph-boy upon the door, 
within a few feet of the bed where he lay, he had gnash hi teeth and 
stop hi ears. He had pictur the lad stand there, just beyond hi 
partition, among packet of provis and bundl of dead and die 
flowers. for hi outer land wa litter with these. oleron had fear 
to open hi door to take them in. after a week, the errand lad had 
report that there must be some mistak about the order, and had left no 
more. inside, in the red twilight, the old flower turn brown and fell 
and decay where they lay. 

gradual hi power wa drain away. the abomin fasten on 
oleron' power. the steadi sap sometim left him for mani hour 
of prostrat gaze vacantli up at hi red-ting ceiling, idli 
suffer such fanci as came of themselv to have their way with him. 
even the strongest of hi memori had no more than a precari hold 
upon hi attention. sometim a flit half-memory, of a novel to be 
written, a novel it wa import that he should write, tantalis him 
for a space befor vanish again; and sometim whole novels, perfect, 
splendid, establish to endure, rose magic befor him. and sometim 
the memori were absurdli remot and trivial, of garret he had 
inhabit and lodg that had shelter him, and so forth. oleron had 
known a good deal about such thing in hi time, but all that wa now 
past. He had at last found a place which he did not intend to leav until 
they fetch him out--a place that some might have thought a littl on 
the green-sick side, that other might have consid to be a littl too 
redol of long-dead and morbid thing for a live man to be mew up 
in, but ah, so irresistible, with such an author of it own, with such 
an associ of it own, and a place of such delight when onc a man had 
ceas to struggl against it inexor will! A novel? somebodi ought 
to write a novel about a place like that! there must be lot to write 
about in a place like that if one could but get to the bottom of it! It 
had probabl alreadi been painted, by a man call madley who had live 
there ... but oleron had not known thi madley--had a strong feel 
that he wouldn't have like him--would rather he had live somewher 
else--r couldn't stand the fellow--h him, madley, in fact. (aha! 
that wa a joke!). He serious doubt whether the man had led the life 
he ought; oleron wa in two mind sometim whether he wouldn't tell that 
long-nos guardian of the public moral across the way about him; but 
probabl he knew, and had made hi pray hullabaloo for him also. 
that wa hi line. why, oleron himself had had a dust-up with him about 
someth or other ... some girl or other ... elsi bengough her name 
was, he remembered.... 

oleron had moment of deep uneasi about thi elsi bengough. Or 
rather, he wa not so much uneasi about her as restless about the thing 
she did. chief of these wa the way in which she persist in thrust 
herself into hi thoughts; and, whenev he wa quick enough, he sent her 
pack the moment she made her appear there. the truth wa that she 
wa not mere a bore; she had alway been that; it had now come to the 
pitch when her veri presenc in hi fanci wa inim to the full 
enjoy of certain experiences.... she had no tact; realli ought to 
have known that peopl are not at home to the thought of everybodi all 
the time; ought in mere polit to have allow him certain season 
quit to himself; and wa monstrous ignor of thing if she did not 
know, as she appear not to know, that there were certain special hour 
when a man' vein ran with fire and dare and power, in which ... well, 
in which he had a reason right to treat folk as he had treat that 
pri barrett--to shut them out completely.... but no: up she popped, 
the thought of her, and ruin all. bright tower fabrics, by the side 
of which even those perfect, magic novel of which he dream were dun 
and grey, vanish utterli at her intrusion. It wa as if a fog should 
suddenli quench some fair-beam star, as if at the threshold of some 
golden portal prepar for oleron a pit should suddenli gape, as if a 
bat-lik shadow should turn the grow dawn to mirk and dark 
again.... therefore, oleron strove to stifl even the nascent thought 
of her. 

nevertheless, there came an occas on which thi woman bengough 
absolut refus to be suppressed. oleron could not have told exactli 
when thi happened; he onli knew by the glimmer of the street lamp on hi 
blind that it wa some time dure the night, and that for some time she 
had not present herself. 

He had no warning, none, of her coming; she just came--wa there. strive 
as he would, he could not shake off the thought of her nor the imag of 
her face. she haunt him. 

but for her to come at that moment of all moments!... really, it wa past 
belief! how she could endur it, oleron could not conceive! actually, to 
look on, as it were, at the triumph of a rival.... good god! It wa 
monstrous! tact--reticence--h had never credit her with an 
overwhelm amount of either: but he had never attribut mere--oh, 
there wa no word for it! monstrous--monstrous! did she intend 
thenceforward.... good god! To look on!... 

oleron felt the blood rush up to the root of hi hair with anger against 
her. 

"damnat take her!" he choked.... 

but the next moment hi heat and resent had chang to a cold sweat 
of cower fear. panic-stricken, he strove to comprehend what he had 
done. for though he knew not what, he knew he had done something, 
someth fatal, irreparable, blasting. anger he had felt, but not _this_ 
blaze of ire that suddenli flood the twilight of hi conscious with 
a white infern light. _that_ appal flash wa not his--not hi 
_that_ open rift of bright and sear hell--not his, not his! hi had 
been the hand of a child, prepar a puni blow; but what wa _thi 
other_ horrif hand that wa drawn back to strike in the same place? had 
_he_ set that in motion? had _he_ provid the spark that had touch off 
the whole accumul power of that formid and relentless place? He 
did not know. He onli knew that that poor ignit particl in himself 
wa blown out, that--oh, impossible!--a cling kiss (how els to 
express it?) had chang on hi veri lip to a gnash and a removal, 
and that for veri piti of the aw odd he must cri out to her against 
whom he had late rage to guard herself ... guard herself.... 

"_look out!_" he shriek aloud.... 

* * * * * 

the revuls wa instant. As if a cold slow billow had broken over him, 
he came to to find that he wa lie in hi bed, that the mist and horror 
that had for so long enwrap him had departed, that he wa paul oleron, 
and that he wa sick, naked, helpless, and unutter abandon and 
alone. hi faculties, though weak, answer at last to hi call upon 
them; and he knew that it must have been a hideou nightmar that had 
left him sweat and shake thus. 

yes, he wa himself, paul oleron, a tire novelist, alreadi past the 
summit of hi best work, and slip downhil again empty-hand from it 
all. He had struck short in hi life' aim. He had tri too much, had 
over-estim hi strength, and wa a failure, a failure.... 

It all came to him in the singl word, enwrap and complete; it need 
no sequenti thought; he wa a failure. He had missed.... 

and he had miss not one happiness, but two. He had miss the eas of 
thi world, which men love, and he had miss also that other shine 
prize for which men forgo ease, the snatch and hold and triumphant 
bear up aloft of which is the onli justif of the mad adventur 
who hazard the enterprise. and there wa no second attempt. fate ha no 
morrow. oleron' morrow must be to sit down to profitless, ill-done, 
unrequir work again, and so on the morrow after that, and the morrow 
after that, and as mani morrow as there might be.... 

He lay there, weakli yet sane consid it.... 

and sinc the whole attempt had failed, it wa hardli worth while to 
consid whether a littl might not be save from the gener wreck. No 
good would ever come of that half-finish novel. He had intend that it 
should appear in the autumn; wa under contract that it should appear; no 
matter; it wa better to pay forfeit to hi publish than to wast what 
day were left. He wa spent; age wa not far off; and path of wisdom 
and sad were the properest for the remaind of the journey.... 

If onli he had chosen the wife, the child the faith friend at the 
fireside, and let them follow an _igni fatuus_ that list!... 

In the meantim it began to puzzl him exceedingli what he should be so 
weak, that hi room should smell so overpoweringli of decay veget 
matter, and that hi hand, chanc to stray to hi face in the darkness, 
should encount a beard. 

"most extraordinary!" he began to mutter to himself. "have I been ill? Am 
I ill now? and if so, whi have they left me alone?... extraordinary!..." 

He thought he heard a sound from the kitchen or bathroom. He rose a 
littl on hi pillow, and listened.... ah! He wa not alone, then! It 
certainli would have been extraordinari if they had left him ill and 
alone--alone? Oh no. He would be look after. He wouldn't be left, ill, 
to shift for himself. If everybodi els had forsaken him, he could trust 
elsi bengough, the dearest chum he had, for that ... bless her faith 
heart! 

but suddenli a short, stifled, splutter cri rang sharpli out: 

"_paul!_" 

It came from the kitchen. 

and in the same moment it flash upon oleron, he knew not how, that two, 
three, five, he knew not how mani minut before, anoth sound, unmark 
at the time but suddenli transfix hi attent now, had striven to 
reach hi intelligence. thi sound had been the slight touch of metal on 
metal--just such a sound as oleron made when he put hi key into the 
lock. 

"hallo!... who' that?" he call sharpli from hi bed. 

He had no answer. 

He call again. "hallo!... who' there?... who is it?" 

thi time he wa sure he heard noises, soft and heavy, in the kitchen. 

"thi is a queer thing altogether," he muttered. "bi jove, i'm as weak as 
a kitten too.... hallo, there! somebodi called, didn't they?... elsie! Is 
that you?..." 

then he began to knock with hi hand on the wall at the side of hi bed. 

"elsie!... elsie!... you called, didn't you?... pleas come here, whoever 
it is!..." 

there wa a sound as of a close door, and then silence. oleron began to 
get rather alarmed. 

"it may be a nurse," he muttered; "elsie'd have to get me a nurse, of 
course. she'd sit with me as long as she could spare the time, brave 
lass, and she'd get a nurs for the rest.... but it wa aw like her 
voice.... elsie, or whoever it is!... I can't make thi out at all. I 
must go and see what' the matter...." 

He put one leg out of bed. feel it feebleness, he reach with hi 
hand for the addit support of the wall.... 

* * * * * 

but befor put out the other leg he stop and considered, pick 
at hi new-found beard. He wa suddenli wonder whether he _dared_ go 
into the kitchen. It wa such a fright long way; no man knew what 
horror might not leap and huddl on hi shoulder if he went so far; 
when a man ha an overmast impuls to get back into bed he ought to 
take heed of the warn and obey it. besides, whi should he go? what 
wa there to go for? If it wa that bengough creatur again, let her look 
after herself; oleron wa not go to have thing cramp themselv on 
hi defenceless back for the sake of such a spoilsport as _she_!... If 
she wa in, let her let herself out again, and the sooner the better for 
her! oleron simpli couldn't be bothered. He had hi work to do. On the 
morrow, he must set about the write of a novel with a heroin so 
winsome, capricious, adorable, jealous, wicked, beautiful, inflaming, and 
altogeth evil, that men should stand amazed. she wa come over him 
now; he knew by the alter of the veri air of the room when she wa 
near him; and that soft thrill of bliss that had begun to stir in him 
never came unless she wa beckoning, beckoning.... 

He let go the wall and fell back into bed again as--oh, unthinkable!--th 
other half of that kiss that a gnash had interrupt wa place (how els 
convey it?) on hi lips, rob him of veri breath.... 


xii 

In the bright june sunlight a crowd fill the square, and look up at 
the window of the old hous with the antiqu insur mark in it 
wall of red brick and the agents' notice-board hang like wooden 
chopper over the paling. two constabl stood at the broken gate of the 
narrow entrance-alley, keep folk back. the women kept to the outskirt 
of the throng, move now and then as if to see the drawn red blind of 
the old hous from a new angle, and talk in whispers. the children 
were in the houses, behind close doors. 

A long-nos man had a littl group about him, and he wa tell some 
stori over and over again; and anoth man, littl and fat and wide-eyed, 
sought to captur the long-nos man' audienc with some relat in 
which a key figured. 

"... and it wa reveal to me that there'd been someth that veri 
afternoon," the long-nos man wa saying. "I wa stand there, where 
constabl saunder is--or rather, I wa pass about my business, when 
they came out. there wa no deceiv me, oh, no deceiv _me! I_ saw 
her face...." 

"what wa it like, mr. barrett?" a man asked. 

"it wa like her whom our lord said to, 'woman, doth ani man accus 
thee?'--whit as paper, and no mistake! don't tell _me_!... and so I 
walk straight across to mrs. barrett, and 'jane,' I says, 'thi must 
stop, and stop at once; we are command to avoid evil,' I says, 'and it 
must come to an end now; let him get help elsewhere.' 

"and she say to me, 'john,' she says, 'it' four-and-sixp a 
week'--them wa her words. 

"'jane,' I says, 'if it wa forty-six thousand pound it should 
stop'... and from that day to thi she hasn't set foot insid that gate." 

there wa a short silence: then, 

"did mrs. barrett ever..._ see_ anythink, like?" somebodi vagu 
inquired. 

barrett turn auster on the speaker. 

"what mrs. barrett saw and mrs. barrett didn't see shall not pass these 
lips; even as it is written, keep thi tongu from speak evil," he 
said. 

anoth man spoke. 

"he wa pretti near can up in the _waggon and horses_ that night, 
weren't he, jim?" 

"yes, 'e 'adn't 'alf cop it...." 

"not stand treat much, neither; he wa in the bar, all on hi own...." 

"so 'e was; we talk about it...." 

the fat, scared-ey man made anoth attempt. 

"she got the key off of me--sh 'ad the number of it--sh come into my 
shop of a tuesday evening...." 

nobodi heed him. 

"shut your heads," a heavi labour comment gruffly, "she hasn't been 
found yet. 'ere' the inspectors; we shall know more in a bit." 

two inspector had come up and were talk to the constabl who guard 
the gate. the littl fat man ran eagerli forward, say that she had 
bought the key of him. "I rememb the number, becaus of it' be 
three one' and three three's--111333!" he exclaim excitedly. 

An inspector put him aside. 

"nobody' been in?" he ask of one of the constables. 

"no, sir." 

"then you, brackley, come with us; you, smith, keep the gate. there' a 
squad on it way." 

the two inspector and the constabl pass down the alley and enter 
the house. they mount the wide carv staircase. 

"thi don't look as if he'd been out much lately," one of the inspector 
mutter as he kick asid a litter of dead leav and paper that lay 
outsid oleron' door. "I don't think we need knock--break a pane, 
brackley." 

the door had two glaze panels; there wa a sound of shatter glass; and 
brackley put hi hand through the hole hi elbow had made and drew back 
the latch. 

"faugh!"... choke one of the inspector as they entered. "let some light 
and air in, quick. It stink like a hearse--" 

the assembl out in the squar saw the red blind go up and the window 
of the old hous flung open. 

"that' better," said one of the inspectors, put hi head out of a 
window and draw a deep breath.... "that seem to be the bedroom in 
there; will you go in, simms, while I go over the rest?..." 

they had drawn up the bedroom blind also, and the waxy-white, emaci 
man on the bed had made a blinker of hi hand against the tortur 
flood of brightness. nor could he believ that hi hear wa not 
play trick with him, for there were two policemen in hi room, 
bend over him and ask where "she" was. He shook hi head. 

"thi woman bengough... goe by the name of miss elsi bengough... d'ye 
hear? where is she?... No good, brackley; get him up; be care with 
him; i'll just shove _my_ head out of the window, I think...." 

the other inspector had been through oleron' studi and had found 
nothing, and wa now in the kitchen, kick asid an ankle-deep mass of 
veget refus that cumber the floor. the kitchen window had no 
blind, and wa over-shadow by the blank end of the hous across the 
alley. the kitchen appear to be empty. 

but the inspector, kick asid the dead flowers, notic that a 
shuffl track that wa not of hi make had been swept to a cupboard 
in the corner. In the upper part of the door of the cupboard wa a squar 
panel that look as if it slid on runners. the door itself wa closed. 

the inspector advanced, put out hi hand to the littl knob, and slid the 
hatch along it groove. 

then he took an involuntari step back again. 

frame in the aperture, and fall forward a littl befor it jam 
again in it frame, wa someth that resembl a larg lumpi pudding, 
done up in a pudding-bag of fade browni red frieze. 

"ah!" said the inspector. 

To close the hatch again he would have had to thrust that pud back 
with hi hand; and somehow he did not quit like the idea of touch 
it. instead, he turn the handl of the cupboard itself. there wa 
weight behind it, so much weight that, after open the door three or 
four inch and peer inside, he had to put hi shoulder to it in order 
to close it again. In close it he left stick out, a few inch from 
the floor, a triangl of black and white check skirt. 

He went into the small hall. 

"all right!" he called. 

they had got oleron into hi clothes. He still use hi hand as 
blinkers, and hi brain wa veri confused. A number of thing were 
happen that he couldn't understand. He couldn't understand the 
extraordinari mess of dead flower there seem to be everywhere; he 
couldn't understand whi there should be polic offic in hi room; he 
couldn't understand whi one of these should be sent for a four-wheel 
and a stretcher; and he couldn't understand what heavi articl they 
seem to be move about in the kitchen--hi kitchen.... 

"what' the matter?" he mutter sleepily.... 

then he heard a murmur in the square, and the stop of a four-wheel 
outside. A polic offic wa at hi elbow again, and oleron wonder 
why, when he whisper someth to him, he should run off a string of 
words--someth about "use in evid against you." they had lift 
him to hi feet, and were assist him toward the door.... 

no, oleron couldn't understand it at all. 

they got him down the stair and along the alley. oleron wa awar of 
confus angri shoutings; he gather that a number of peopl want to 
lynch somebodi or other. then hi attent becam fix on a littl fat 
frightened-ey man who appear to be make a statement that an offic 
wa take down in a notebook. 

"i'd seen her with him ... they wa often togeth ... she came into my 
shop and said it wa for him ... I thought it wa all right ... 111333 
the number was," the man wa saying. 

the peopl seem to be veri angry; mani polic were keep them back; 
but one of the inspector had a voic that oleron thought quit kind and 
friendly. He wa tell somebodi to get somebodi els into the cab 
befor someth or other wa brought out; and oleron notic that a 
four-wheel wa drawn up at the gate. It appear that it wa himself 
who wa to be put into it; and as they lift him up he saw that the 
inspector tri to stand between him and someth that stood behind the 
cab, but wa not quick enough to prevent oleron see that thi 
someth wa a hood stretcher. the angri voic sound like a sea; 
someth hard, like a stone, hit the back of the cab; and the inspector 
follow oleron in and stood with hi back to the window nearer the side 
where the peopl were. the door they had put oleron in at remain open, 
appar till the other inspector should come; and through the open 
oleron had a glimps of the hatchet-lik "to let" board among the 
privet-trees. one of them said that the key wa at number six.... 

suddenli the rage of voic wa hushed. along the entrance-alley 
shuffl step were heard, and the other inspector appear at the 
cab door. 

"right away," he said to the driver. 

He entered, fasten the door after him, and block up the second window 
with hi back. between the two inspector oleron slept peacefully. the 
cab move down the square, the other vehicl went up the hill. the 
mortuari lay that way. 




phanta 


_"for, bar all pother, 
with this, or the other, 
still briton are lord of the main._" 


the chapter OF admir 


I 

As abel keel lay on the galleon' deck, held from roll down it onli 
by hi own weight and the sun-blacken hand that lay outstretch upon 
the planks, hi gaze wandered, but ever return to the bell that hung, 
jam with the danger heel-ov of the vessel, in the small 
ornament belfri immedi abaft the mainmast. the bell wa of cast 
bronze, with half-obliter boss upon it that had been the head of 
cherubs; but wind and salt spray had given it a thick incrust of 
bright, beautiful, lichen green. It wa thi colour that abel 
keeling' eye liked. 

for wherev els on the galleon hi eye rest they found onli 
whiteness--th white of extrem eld. there were slightli vari 
degre in her whiteness; here she wa of a white that glisten like 
salt-granules, there of a greyish chalki white, and again her white 
had the yellowish cast of decay; but everywher it wa the mild, 
disquiet white of materi out of which the life had departed. 
her cordag wa bleach as old straw is bleached, and half her rope 
kept their shape littl more firmli than the ash of a string keep it 
shape after the fire ha passed; her pallid timber were white and clean 
as bone found in sand; and even the wild frankincens with which (for 
lack of tar, at her last touch of land) she had been pitched, had 
dri to a pale hard gum that sparkl like quartz in her open seams. the 
sun wa yet so pale a buckler of silver through the still white mist 
that not a cord or timber cast a shadow; and onli abel keeling' face and 
hand were black, cark and cinder-black from exposur to hi pitiless 
rays. 

the galleon wa the _mari of the tower_, and she had a fright list to 
starboard. So cant wa she that her mainyard dip one of it steel 
sickl into the glassi water, and, had her foremast remained, or more 
than the broken stump of her bonaventur mizzen, she must have turn 
over completely. mani day ago they had strip the mainyard of it 
course, and had pass the sail under the mary' bottom, in the hope that 
it would stop the leak. thi it had partli done as long as the galleon 
had continu to glide one way; then, without come about, she had begun 
to glide the other, the rope had parted, and she had drag the sail 
after her, leav a broad tarnish on the silver sea. 

for it wa broadsid that the galleon glided, almost imperceptibly, ever 
suck down. she glide as if a loadston drew her, and, at first, abel 
keel had thought it wa a loadstone, pull at her iron, draw her 
through the pearli mist that lay like face-cloth to the water and hid 
at a short distanc the tarnish left by the sail. but later he had known 
that it wa no loadston draw at her iron. the motion wa due--must 
be due--to the absolut dead of the calm in that silent, sinister, 
three-miles-broad waterway. with the eye of hi mind he saw that 
loadston now as he lay against a gun-truck, all but toppl down the 
deck. soon that would happen again which had happen for five day past. 
He would hear again the chatter of monkey and the scream of 
parrots, the mat of green and yellow weed would creep in toward the 
mari over the quicksilv sea, onc more the sheer wall of rock would 
rise, and the men would run.... 

but no; the men would not run thi time to drop the fenders. there were 
no men left to do so, unless bligh wa still alive. perhap bligh wa 
still alive. He had walk half-way down the quarter-deck step a littl 
befor the sudden nightfal of the day before, had then fallen and lain 
for a minut (dead, abel keel had supposed, watch him from hi 
place by the gun-truck), and had then got up again and totter forward 
to the forecastle, hi tall figur sway and hi long arm waving. abel 
keel had not seen him since. most likely, he had die in the 
forecastl dure the night. If he had not been dead he would have come 
aft again for water.... 

At the remembr of the water abel keel lift hi head. the strand 
of lean muscl about hi emaci mouth worked, and he made a littl 
pressur of hi sun-blacken hand on the deck, as if to verifi it 
steep and hi own balance. the mainmast wa some seven or eight yard 
away.... He put one stiff leg under him and began, seat as he was, to 
make shuffl movement down the slope. 

To the mainmast, near the belfry, wa affix hi contriv for 
catch water. It consist of a collar of rope set lower at one side 
than at the other (but that had been befor the mast had steev so mani 
degre away from the zenith), and tallow beneath. the mist linger 
later in that gulli of a strait than they did on the open ocean, and the 
collar of rope serv as a collector for the dew that condens on the 
mast. the drop fell into a small earthen pipkin place on the deck 
beneath it. 

abel keel reach the pipkin and look into it. It wa nearli a third 
full of fresh water. good. If bligh, the mate, wa dead, so much the more 
water for abel keeling, master of the _mari of the tower_. He dip two 
finger into the pipkin and put them into hi mouth. thi he did sever 
times. He did not dare to rais the pipkin to hi black and broken lip 
for dread of a rememb agony, he could not have told how mani day 
ago, when a devil had whisper to him, and he had gulp down the 
content of the pipkin in the morning, and for the rest of the day had 
gone waterless.... again he moisten hi finger and suck them; then 
he lay sprawl against the mast, idli watch the drop of water 
as they fell. 

It wa odd how the drop formed. slowli they collect at the edg of the 
tallow collar, trembl in their full for an instant, and fell, 
anoth begin the process instantly. It amus abel keel to watch 
them. whi (he wondered) were all the drop the same size? what caus and 
compuls did they obey that they never varied, and what frail tenuiti 
held the littl globul intact? It must be due to some cause.... He 
rememb that the aromat gum of the wild frankincens with which they 
had parcel the seam had hung on the bucket in great sluggish gouts, 
obedi to a differ compulsion; oil wa differ again, and so were 
juic and balsams. onli quicksilv (perhap the heavi and motionless 
sea put him in mind of quicksilver) seem obedi to no law.... whi wa 
it so? 

bligh, of course, would have had hi explanation: it wa the hand of god. 
that suffic for bligh, who had gone forward the even before, and 
whom abel keel now seem vagu and as at a distanc to rememb as 
the deep-voic fanat who had sung hi hymn as, man by man, he had 
commit the bodi of the ship' compani to the deep. bligh wa that 
sort of man; accept thing without question; wa content to take thing 
as they were and be readi with the fender when the wall of rock rose out 
of the opalesc mists. bligh, too, like the waterdrops, had hi law, 
that wa hi and nobodi else's.... 

there float down from some rotten rope up aloft a flake of scurf, that 
settl in the pipkin. abel keel watch it dulli as it settl 
toward the pipkin' rim. when present he again dip hi finger into 
the vessel the water ran into a littl vortex, draw the flake with it. 
the water settl again; and again the minut flake determin toward 
the rim and adher there, as if the rim had power to draw it.... 

It wa exactli so that the galleon wa glide toward the wall of rock, 
the yellow and green weeds, and the monkey and parrots. put out into 
mid-wat again (while there had been men to put her out) she had glide 
to the other wall. one forc drew the chip in the pipkin and the ship 
over the tranc sea. It wa the hand of god, said bligh.... 

abel keeling, hi mind now note minut thing and now cloud with 
torpor, did not at first hear a voic that wa quakingli lift up 
over by the forecastle--a voic that drew nearer, to an accompani of 
swirl water. 

_"o thou, that jona in the fish 
three day didst keep from pain, 
which wa a figur of thi death 
and rise up again--"_ 

It wa bligh, sing one of hi hymns: 

_"o thou, that noah keptst from flood 
and abram, day by day, 
As he along through egypt pass 
didst guid him in the way--"_ 

the voic ceased, leav the piou period uncompleted. bligh wa alive, 
at ani rate.... abel keel resum hi fit musing. 

yes, that wa the law of bligh' life, to call thing the hand of god; 
but abel keeling' law wa different; no better, no worse, onli 
different. the hand of god, that drew chip and galleons, must work by 
some method; and abel keeling' eye were dulli on the pipkin again as if 
he sought the method there.... 

then consciou thought left him for a space, and when he resum it wa 
without obviou connection. 

oars, of course, were the thing. with oars, men could laugh at calms. 
oars, that onli pinnac and galliass now used, had had their 
advantages. but oar (which wa to say a method, for you could say if you 
like that the hand of god grasp the oar-loom, as the breath of god 
fill the sail)--oar were antiquated, belong to the past, and meant a 
throwing-ov of all that wa good and new and a return to fine lines, a 
battle-form abreast to give effect to the shock of the ram, and a 
day or two at sea and then to port again for provisions. oar ... no. 
abel keel wa one of the new men, the men who swore by the line-ahead, 
the broadsid fire of saker and demi-cannon, and week and month 
without a landfall. perhap one day the wit of such men as he would 
devis a craft, not oar-driven (becaus oar could not penetr into the 
remot sea of the world)--not sail-driven (becaus men who trust to 
sail found themselv in an airless, three-mil strait, suspend 
motionless between cloud and water, ever glide to a wall of rock)--but 
a ship ... a ship ... 

"_to noah and hi son with him 
god spake, and thu said he: 
A coven set I up with you 
and your posterity_--" 

It wa bligh again, wander somewher in the waist. abel keeling' mind 
wa onc more a blank. then slowly, slowly, as the water drop collect 
on the collar of rope, hi thought took shape again. 

A galliasse? no, not a galliasse. the galliass made shift to be two 
things, and wa neither. thi ship, that the hand of man should one day 
make for the hand of god to manage, should be a ship that should take and 
conserv the forc of the wind, take it and store it as she store her 
victuals; at rest when she wished, go ahead when she wished; turn 
the forc both of calm and storm against themselves. for, of course, her 
forc must be wind--stor wind--a bag of the winds, as the children' 
tale had it--wind probabl direct upon the water astern, drive it 
away and urg forward the ship, act by reaction. she would have a 
wind-chamber, into which wind would be pump with pumps.... bligh would 
call that equal the hand of god, thi driving-forc of the ship of the 
futur that abel keel dimli foreshadow as he lay between the 
mainmast and the belfry, turn hi eye now and then from ashi white 
timber to the vivid green bronze-rust of the bell abov him.... 

bligh' face, liver-colour with the sun and ravag from inward by the 
faith that consum him, appear at the head of the quarter-deck steps. 
hi voic beat uncontrolledli out. 

_"and in the earth here is no place 
Of refug to be found, 
nor in the deep and water-cours 
that passeth under ground--"_ 


II 

bligh' eye were lidded, as if in contempl of hi inner ecstasy. 
hi head wa thrown back, and hi brow work up and down tormentedly. 
hi wide mouth remain open as hi hymn wa suddenli interrupt on the 
long-drawn note. from somewher in the shimmer mist the note wa 
taken up, and there drum and rang and reverber through the strait 
a windy, hoarse, and dismal bellow, alarm and sustained. A tremor rang 
through bligh. move like a sightless man, he stumbl forward from the 
head of the quarter-deck steps, and abel keel wa awar of hi gaunt 
figur behind him, taller for the steep of the deck. As that vast 
empti sound die away, bligh laugh in hi mania. 

"lord, hath the grave' wide mouth a tongu to prais thee? lo, again--" 

again the cavern sound possess the air, louder and nearer. through 
it came anoth sound, a slow throb, throb--throb, throb--again the 
sound ceased. 

"even leviathan lifteth up hi voic in praise!" bligh sobbed. 

abel keel did not rais hi head. there had return to him the memori 
of that day when, befor the morn mist had lift from the strait, he 
had empti the pipkin of the water that wa the allow until night 
should fall again. dure that agoni of thirst he had seen shape and 
heard sound with other than hi mortal eye and ears, and even in the 
moment that had altern with hi lightness, when he had known these 
to be hallucinations, they had come again. He had heard the bell on a 
sunday in hi own kentish home, the call of children at play, the 
unconcern sing of men at their daili labour, and the laughter and 
gossip of the women as they had spread the linen on the hedg or 
distribut bread upon the platters. these voic had rung in hi brain, 
interrupt now and then by the groan of bligh and of two other men who 
had been aliv then. some of the voic he had heard had been silent on 
earth thi mani a long year, but abel keeling, thirst-tortured, had heard 
them, even as he wa now hear that vacant moan with the 
intermitt throb that fill the strait with alarm.... 

"prais him, prais him, prais him!" bligh wa call deliriously. 

then a bell seem to sound in abel keeling' ears, and, as if someth 
in the mechan of hi brain had slipped, anoth pictur rose in hi 
fancy--th scene when the _mari of the tower_ had put out, to a braveri 
of swing bell and shrill fife and valiant trumpets. she had not been 
a leper-whit galleon then. the scroll-work on her prow had twinkl with 
gilding; her belfri and stern-galleri and elabor lantern had 
flash in the sun with gold; and her fighting-top and the war-pavess 
about her waist had been gay with paint coat and scutcheons. To her 
sail had been stitch gaudi ramp lion of scarlet saye, and from her 
mainyard, now dip in the water, had hung the broad two-tail pennant 
with the virgin and child embroid upon it.... 

then suddenli a voic about him seem to be saying, "_and a 
half-seven--and a half-seven--_" and in a twink the pictur in abel 
keeling' brain chang again. He wa at home again, instruct hi son, 
young abel, in the cast of the lead from the skiff they had pull out 
of the harbour. 

"_and a half-seven!_" the boy seem to be calling. 

abel keeling' blacken lip muttered: "excel well cast, abel, 
excel well cast!" 

"_and a half-seven--and a half-seven--seven--seven--_" 

"ah," abel keel murmured, "that last wa not a clear cast--giv me the 
line--thu it should go ... ay, so.... soon you shall sail the sea with 
me in the _mari of the tower_. you are alreadi perfect in the star and 
the motion of the planets; to-morrow I will instruct you in the use of 
the backstaff...." 

for a minut or two he continu to mutter; then he dozed. when again he 
came to semi-consci it wa onc more to the sound of bells, at 
first faint, then louder, and final becom a noisi clamour 
immedi abov hi head. It wa bligh. bligh, in a fresh attack of 
delirium, had seiz the bell-lanyard and wa ring the bell insanely. 
the cord broke in hi fingers, but he thrust at the bell with hi hand, 
and again call aloud. 

"upon an harp and an instrument of ten string ... let heaven and earth 
prais thi name!..." 

He continu to call aloud, and to beat on the bronze-rust bell. 

_"ship ahoy! what ship' that?"_ 

one would have said that a verit hail had come out of the mists; but 
abel keel knew those hail that came out of the mists. they came from 
ship which were not there. "ay, ay, keep a good look-out, and have a 
care to your lodemanage," he mutter again to hi son.... 

but, as sometim a sleeper sit up in hi dream, or rise from hi couch 
and walks, so all of a sudden abel keel found himself on hi hand and 
knee on the deck, look back over hi shoulder. In some deep-seat 
region of hi conscious he wa dimli awar that the cant of the deck 
had becom more perilous, but hi brain receiv the intellig and 
forgot it again. He wa look out into the bright and baffl mists. 
the buckler of the sun wa of a more ardent silver; the sea below it wa 
lost in brilliant evaporation; and between them, suspend in the haze, 
no more substanti than the vagu dark that float befor dazzl 
eyes, a pyramid phantom-shap hung. abel keel pass hi hand over 
hi eyes, but when he remov it the shape wa still there, glide 
slowli toward the _mary's_ quarter. it form chang as he watch it. 
the spirit-grey shape that had been a pyramid seem to dissolv into 
four upright members, slightli graduat in tallness, that nearest the 
_mary's_ stern the tallest and that to the left the lowest. It might have 
been the shadow of the gigant set of reed-pip on which that vacant 
mourn note had been sounded. 

and as he looked, with fool eyes, again hi ear becam fooled: 

_"ahoy there! what ship' that? are you a ship?... here, give me that 
trumpet--"_ then a metal barking. _"ahoy there! what the devil are 
you? didn't you ring a bell? ring it again, or blow a blast or something, 
and go dead slow!"_ 

all thi came, as it were, indistinctly, and through a sort of high 
sing in abel keeling' own ears. then he fanci a short bewild 
laugh, follow by a colloquy from somewher between sea and sky. 

"here, ward, just pinch me, will you? tell me what you see there. I want 
to know if i'm awake." 

"see where?" 

"there, on the starboard bow. (stop that ventil fan; I can't 
hear myself think.) see anything? don't tell me it' that damn 
dutchman--don't pitch me that old vanderdecken tale--g me an easi 
one first, someth about a sea-serpent.... you did hear that bell, 
didn't you?" 

"shut up a minute--listen--" 

again bligh' voic wa lift up. 

_"thi is the cov'nant that I make: 
from henceforth nevermor 
will I again the world destroy 
with water, as before."_ 

bligh' voic die away again in abel keeling' ears. 

"_oh--my--fat--aunt--julia!_" the voic that seem to come from between 
sea and sky sound again. then it spoke more loudly. "_i say,_" it began 
with care politeness, "_if you are a ship, do you mind tell us 
where the masquerad is to be? our wireless is out of order, and we 
hadn't heard of it.... oh, you do see it, ward, don't you?... please, 
pleas tell us what the hell you are!_" 

again abel keel had move as a sleepwalk moves. He had rais 
himself up by the belfri timbers, and bligh had sunk in a heap on the 
deck. abel keeling' movement overturn the pipkin, which race the 
littl trickl of it content down the deck and lodg where the still 
and brim sea made, as it were, a chain with the carv balustrad of 
the quarter-deck--on link a still gleam edge, then a dark baluster, 
and then anoth gleam link. for one moment onli abel keel found 
himself notic that that which had driven bligh aft had been the 
rise of the water in the waist as the galleon settl by the head--th 
waist wa now entir submerged; then onc more he wa absorb in 
hi dream, it voices, and it shape in the mist, which had again taken 
the form of a pyramid befor hi eyeballs. 

"_of course_," a voic seem to be complain anew, and still through 
that confus din in abel keeling' ears, "_we can't turn a four-inch 
on it.... and, of course, ward, I don't believ in 'em. d'you hear, ward? 
I don't believ in 'em, I say.... shall we call down to old A. b.? thi 
might interest hi scientif skippership...._" 

"oh, lower a boat and pull out to it--into it--ov it--through it--" 

"look at our chap crowd on the barbett yonder. they'v seen it. 
better not give an order you know won't be obeyed...." 

abel keeling, cramp against the antiqu belfry, had begun to find hi 
dream interesting. for, though he did not know her build, that mirag wa 
the shape of a ship. No doubt it wa project from hi brood on ship 
of half an hour before; and that wa odd.... but perhaps, after all, it 
wa not veri odd. He knew that she did not realli exist; onli the 
appear of her existed; but thing had to exist like that befor they 
realli existed. befor the _mari of the tower_ had exist she had been a 
shape in some man' imagination; befor that, some dreamer had dream 
the form of a ship with oars; and befor that, far away in the dawn and 
infanc of the world, some seer had seen in a vision the raft befor man 
had ventur to push out over the water on hi two planks. and sinc thi 
shape that rode befor abel keeling' eye wa a shape in his, abel 
keeling' dream, he, abel keeling, wa the master of it. hi own brood 
brain had contriv her, and she wa launch upon the illimit ocean 
of hi own mind.... 

_"and I will not unmind be 
Of this, My covenant, pass 
twixt Me and you and everi flesh 
while that the world should last,"_ 

sang bligh, rapt.... 

but as a dreamer, even in hi dream, will scratch upon the wall by hi 
couch some key or word to put him in mind of hi vision on the morrow 
when it ha left him, so abel keel found himself seek some sign to 
be a proof to those to whom no vision is vouchsafed. even bligh sought 
that--could not be silent in hi bliss, but lay on the deck there, 
utter great passion amen and prais hi maker, as he said, upon 
an harp and an instrument of ten strings. So with abel keeling. It would 
be the amen of hi life to have prais god, not upon a harp, but upon a 
ship that should carri her own power, that should store wind or it 
equival as she store her victuals, that should be someth wrest 
from the chao of uninvent and order and disciplin and 
subordin to abel keeling' will.... and there she was, that 
ship-shap thing of spirit-grey, with the four pipe that resembl a 
phantom organ now broadsid and of equal length. and the ghost-crew 
of that ship were speak again.... 

the interrupt silver chain by the quarterdeck balustrad had now becom 
continuous, and the balust made a herring-bon over their own 
motionless reflections. the spilt water from the pipkin had dried, and 
the pipkin wa not to be seen. abel keel stood besid the mast, erect 
as god made man to go. with hi leatheri hand he smote upon the bell. He 
wait for the space of a minute, and then cried: 

"ahoy!... ship ahoy!... what ship' that?" 


iii 

We are not consciou in a dream that we are play a game the begin 
and end of which are in ourselves. In thi dream of abel keeling' a 
voic replied: 

"_hallo, it' found it tongue.... ahoy there! what are you?_" 

loudli and in a clear voic abel keel called: "are you a ship?" 

with a nervou giggl the answer came: 

"_we are a ship, aren't we, ward? I hardli feel sure.... yes, of course, 
we'r a ship. No question about us. the question is what the dicken 
you are._" 

not all the word these voic use were intellig to abel keeling, 
and he knew not what it wa in the tone of these last word that remind 
him of the honour due to the _mari of the tower_. blister-whit and at 
the end of her life as she was, abel keel wa still jealou of her 
dignity; the voic had a youngish ring; and it wa not fit that young 
chin should be wag about hi galleon. He spoke curtly. 

"you that spoke--ar you the master of that ship?" 

"_offic of the watch_," the word float back; "_the captain' 
below_." 

"then send for him. It is with master that master hold speech," abel 
keel replied. 

He could see the two shapes, flat and without relief, stand on a high 
narrow structur with rails. one of them gave a low whistle, and seem 
to be fan hi face; but the other rumbl someth into a sort of 
funnel. present the two shape becam three. there wa a murmuring, 
as of a consultation, and then suddenli a new voic spoke. At it thrill 
and tone a sudden tremor ran through abel keeling' frame. He wonder 
what respons it wa that that voic found in the forgotten recess of 
hi memory.... 

"_ahoy!_" seem to call thi new yet faintli rememb voice. "_what' 
all thi about? listen. we'r hi majesty' destroyer_ seapink, _out of 
devonport last october, and noth particular the matter with us. now 
who are you?_" 

"the _mari of the tower_, out of the port of rye on the day of saint 
anne, and onli two men--" 

A gasp interrupt him. 

"_out of_ where?" that voic that so strang move abel keel said 
unsteadily, while bligh broke into groan of renew rapture. 

"out of the port of rye, in the counti of sussex ... nay, give ear, els 
I cannot make you hear me while thi man' spirit and flesh wrestl so 
together!... ahoy! are you gone?" for the voic had becom a low murmur, 
and the ship-shap had fade befor abel keeling' eyes. again and again 
he called. He wish to be inform of the disposit and economi of the 
wind-chamber.... 

"the wind-chamber!" he called, in an agoni lest the knowledg 
almost within hi grasp should be lost. "I would know about the 
wind-chamber...." 

like an echo, there came back the words, uncomprehendingli uttered, "_the 
wind-chamber_?..." 

"... that driveth the vessel--perch 'ti not wind--a steel bow that 
is bent also conserveth force--th forc you store, to move at will 
through calm and storm...." 

"can you make out what it' drive at?" 

"oh, we shall all wake up in a minute...." 

"quiet, I have it; the engines; it want to know about our engines. 
it'll be want to see our paper presently. rye port!... well, no harm 
in humour it; let' see what it can make of this. ahoy there!" came 
the voic to abel keeling, a littl more strongly, as if a shift wind 
carri it, and speak faster and faster as it went on. "not wind, but 
steam; d'you hear? steam, steam. steam, in eight yarrow water-tub 
boilers. s-t-e-a-m, steam. got it? and we'v twin-screw tripl expans 
engines, indic horse-pow four thousand, and we can do 430 
revolut per minute; savvy? Is there anyth your phantomhood would 
like to know about our armament?..." 

abel keel wa mutter fret to himself. It annoy him that 
word in hi own vision should have no mean for him. how did word 
come to him in a dream that he had no knowledg of when wide awake? the 
_seapink_--that wa the name of thi ship; but a pink wa long and 
narrow, low-carg and square-built aft.... 

"_and as for our armament,_" the voic with the tone that so profoundli 
troubl abel keeling' memori continued, "_we'v two revolv whitehead 
torpedo-tubes, three six-pound on the upper deck, and that' a 
twelve-pound forward there by the conning-tower. I forgot to mention 
that we'r nickel steel, with a coal capac of sixti ton in most 
damnabl place bunkers, and that thirti and a quarter knot is about our 
top. care to come aboard?_" 

but the voic wa speak still more rapidli and feverishly, as if to 
fill a silenc with no matter what, and the shape that wa utter it 
wa strain forward anxious over the rail. 

"_ugh! but i'm glad thi happen in the daylight,_" anoth voic wa 
muttering. 

"I wish I wa sure it wa happen at all.... poor old spook!" 

"I suppos it would keep it feet if her deck wa quit vertical. think 
she'll go down, or just melt?" 

"kind of go down ... without wash...." 

"listen--here' the other one now--" 

for bligh wa sing again: 

"for, lord, thou know'st our natur such 
If we great thing obtain, 
and in the get of the same 
Do feel no grief or pain, 

"we littl do esteem thereof; 
but, hardli brought to pass, 
A thousand time we do esteem 
more than the other was." 

_"but oh, look--look--look at the other!... oh, I say, wasn't he a grand 
old boy! look!"_ 

for, transfigur abel reeling' form as a prophet' form is 
transfigur in the instant of hi rapture, flood hi brain with the 
white eureka-light of perfect knowledge, that for which he and hi dream 
had been at a standstil had come. He knew her, thi ship of the future, 
as if god' finger had bitten her line into hi brain. He knew her as 
those alreadi sink into the grave know things, miraculously, 
completely, accept life' imposs with a nod "of course." 
from the ardent mouth of her eight furnac to the last drip from her 
lubricators, from her bed-plat to the breech of her quick-firers, he 
knew her--read her gauges, thumb her bearings, gave the rang from her 
range-finders, and live the life he live who wa in command of her. and 
he would not forget on the morrow, as he had forgotten on mani morrows, 
for at last he had seen the water about hi feet, and knew that there 
would be no morrow for him in thi world.... 

and even in that moment, with but a sand or two to run in hi glass, 
indomitable, insatiable, dream dream on dream, he could not die until 
he knew more. He had two question to ask, and a master-question; and but 
a moment remained. sharpli hi voic rang out. 

"ho, there!... thi ancient ship, the _mari of the tower_, cannot steam 
thirti and a quarter knots, but yet she can sail the waters. what 
more doe your ship? can she soar abov them, as the fowl of the air 
soar?" 

"_lord, he think we'r an aeroplane!... no, she can't...._" 

"and can you dive, even as the fish of the deep?" 

"_no.... those are submarin ... we aren't a submarine...._" 

but abel keel wait for no more. He gave an exult chuckle. 

"oho, oho--thirti knots, and but on the face of the waters--no more than 
that? oho!... now _my_ ship, the ship I see as a mother see full-grown 
the child she ha but conceived--_my_ ship, I say--oho!--_my_ ship 
shall.... below there--trip that gun!" 

the cri came suddenli and alertly, as a muffl sound came from below and 
an omin tremor shook the galleon. 

"_bi jove, her gun are break loos below--that' her finish_--" 

"trip that gun, and double-breech the others!" abel keeling' voic rang 
out, as if there had been ani to obey him. He had brace himself within 
the belfri frame; and then in the middl of the next order hi voic 
suddenli fail him. hi ship-shape, that for the moment he had 
forgotten, rode onc more befor hi eyes. thi wa the end, and hi 
master-question, apprehens for the answer to which wa now tortur 
hi face and well-nigh burst hi heart, wa still unasked. 

"ho--h that spoke with me--th master," he cri in a voic that ran 
high, "i he there?" 

"_yes, yes!_" came the other voic across the water, sick with suspense. 
"_oh, be quick!_" 

there wa a moment in which hoars cri from mani voices, a heavi thud 
and rumbl on wood, and a crash of timber and a gurgl and a splash were 
indescrib mingled; the gun under which abel keel had lain had 
snap her rotten breech and plung down the deck, carri bligh' 
unconsci form with it. the deck came up vertical, and for one instant 
longer abel keel clung to the belfry. 

"I cannot see your face," he screamed, "but meseem your voic is a voic 
I know. _what is your name_?" 

In a torn sob the answer came across the water: 

"_keeling--abel keeling.... oh, my god!_" 

and abel keeling' cri of triumph, that mount to a victori "huzza!" 
wa lost in the downward plung of the _mari of the tower_, that left 
the strait empti save for the sun' fieri blaze and the last smoke-lik 
evapor of the mists. 




rooum 


for all I ever knew to the contrary, it wa hi own name; and someth 
about him, name or man or both, alway put me in mind, I can't tell you 
how, of negroes. As regard the name, I dare say it wa someth 
huggermugg in the mere sound--someth that I classed, for no 
particular reason, with the dark and ignor sort of words, such as 
"obi" and "hoodoo." I onli know that after I learn that hi name wa 
rooum, I couldn't for the life of me have thought of him as be call 
anyth else. 

the first impress that you got of hi head wa that it wa a patchwork 
of black and white--black bushi hair and short white beard, or els the 
other way about. As a matter of fact, both hair and beard were piebald, 
so that if you saw him in the gloom a dim patch of white show down one 
side of hi head, and dark tuft crop up here and there in hi beard. 
hi eyebrow alon were entir black, with a littl sprout of hair 
almost join them. and perhap hi skin help to make me think of 
negroes, for it wa veri dark, of the dark brown that alway seem to 
have more than a hint of green behind it. hi forehead wa low, and 
score across with deep horizont furrows. 

We never knew when he wa go to turn up on a job. We might not have 
seen him for weeks, but hi face wa alway as like as not to appear 
over the edg of a crane-platform just when that marvel mechan 
intuit of hi wa badli needed. He wasn't certificated. He wasn't even 
trained, as the rest of us understood training; and he scof at the 
drawing-office, and laugh outright at logarithm and our labori 
method of get out quantities. but he could set sheer and tackl in 
a way that made the rest of us look silly. I rememb onc how, through 
the part of a chain, a sixty-foot girder had come down and lay under 
a ruck of other stuff, as the bottom chip lie under a pile of 
spellikins--a hopeless-look smash. myself, i'm certif twice or 
three time over; but I can onli assur you that I want to kick myself 
when, after i'd spent a day and a sleepless night over the job, I saw the 
game of tit-tat-to that rooum made of it in an hour or two. certif 
or not, a man isn't a fool who can do that sort of thing. and he wa 
one of these fellows, too, who can "find water"--tel you where water is 
and what amount of get it is like to take, by just walk over the 
place. We aren't certif up to that yet. 

He wa offer good money to stick to us--to stick to our firm--but he 
alway shook hi black-and-whit piebald head. he'd never be abl to keep 
the bargain if he were to make it, he told us quit fairly. I know there 
are these chap who can't endur to be clock to their work with a 
patent time-clock in the morn and releas of an even with a 
whistle--and it' one of the thing no master can ever understand. So 
rooum came and went erratically, show up mayb in leed or liverpool, 
perhap next on plymouth breakwater, and onc he turn up in an 
out-of-the-way place in glamorganshir just when I wa wonder what had 
becom of him. 

the way I got to know him (got to know him, I mean, more than just to 
nod) wa that he tack himself on to me one night down vauxhal way, 
where we were set up some small plant or other. We had knock off 
for the day, and I wa walk in the direct of the bridg when he 
came up. We walk along together; and we had not gone far befor it 
appear that hi reason for join me wa that he want to know "what 
a molecul was." 

I stare at him a bit. 

"what do you want to know that for?" I said. "what doe a chap like you, 
who can do it all backwards, want with molecules?" 

oh, he just want to know, he said. 

so, on the way across the bridge, I gave it him more or less from the 
book--molecular theori and all the rest of it. but, from the childish 
question he put, it wa plain that he hadn't got the hang of it at all. 
"did the molecular theori allow thing to pass through one another?" he 
want to know; "_could_ thing pass through one another?" and a lot of 
ridicul thing like that. I gave it up. 

"you'r a geniu in your own way, rooum," I said finally; "you know these 
thing without the book we plodder have to depend on. If i'd luck like 
that, I think I should be content with it." 

but he didn't seem satisfied, though he drop the matter for that time. 
but I had hi acquaintance, which wa more than most of us had. He 
ask me, rather timidly, if i'd lend him a book or two. I did so, but 
they didn't seem to contain what he want to know, and he soon return 
them, without remark. 

now you'd expect a fellow to be special sensitive, one way or another, 
who can tell when there' water a hundr feet beneath him; and as you 
know, the big men are squabbl yet about thi water-find business. 
but, somehow, the water-find puzzl me less than it did that rooum 
should be extraordinarili sensit to someth far common and easier 
to understand--ordinari echoes. He couldn't stand echoes. he'd go a 
mile round rather than pass a place that he knew had an echo; and if he 
came on one by chance, sometim he'd hurri through as quick as he 
could, and sometim he'd loiter and listen veri intently. I rather joke 
about thi at first, till I found it realli distress him; then, of 
course, I pretend not to notice. we'r all cranki somewhere, and for 
that matter, I can't touch a spider myself. 

for the remark thing that overtook rooum--(that, by the way, is an 
odd way to put it, as you'll see presently; but the word came that 
way into my head, so let them stand)--for the remark thing that 
overtook rooum, I don't think I can begin better than with the first 
time, or veri soon after the first time, that I notic thi peculiar 
about the echoes. 

It wa earli on a particularli dismal novemb evening, and thi time we 
were somewher out south-east london way, just beyond what they are 
pleas to call the building-line--y know these district of wretch 
tree and grimi field and market-garden that are about the same to real 
countri that a slum is to a town. It rain that night; rain wa the most 
appropri weather for the brickfield and sewage-farm and yard of old 
cart and railway-sleep we were passing. the rain shone on the black 
hand-bag that rooum alway carried; and I suck at the dottl of a pipe 
that it wa too much troubl to fill and light again. We were walk in 
the direct of lewisham (I think it would be), and were still a littl 
way from that erupt of red-brick hous that ... but you'v doubtless 
seen them. 

you know how, when they'r lay out new roads, they lay down the 
narrow strip of kerb first, with neither sett on the one hand nor 
flagston on the other? We had come upon one of these. (I had notic 
how, as we had come a few minut befor under a tall hollow-ring 
railway arch, rooum had all at onc stop talking--it wa the echo, of 
course, that bother him.) the unmad road to which we had come had 
headless lamp-standard at intervals, and rampart of grey road-met 
readi for use; and save for the strip of kerb, it wa a broth of mud 
and stiff clay. A red light or two show where the road-barri 
were--they were lay the mains; a green railway light show on an 
embankment; and the lewisham lamp made a rusti glare through the rain. 
rooum went first, walk along the narrow strip of kerb. 

the lamp-standard were a littl difficult to see, and when I heard rooum 
stop suddenli and draw in hi breath sharply, I thought he had walk 
into one of them. 

"hurt yourself?" I said. 

He walk on without replying; but half a dozen yard farther on he 
stop again. He wa listen again. He wait for me to come up. 

"I say," he said, in an odd sort of voice, "go a yard or two ahead, will 
you?" 

"what' the matter?" I asked, as I pass ahead. He didn't answer. 

well, I hadn't been lead for more than a minut befor he want to 
chang again. He wa breath veri quick and short. 

"why, what ail you?" I demanded, stopping. 

"it' all right.... you'r not play ani tricks, are you?..." 

I saw him pass hi hand over hi brow. 

"come, get on," I said shortly; and we didn't speak again till we struck 
the pavement with the light lamps. then I happen to glanc at him. 

"here," I said brusquely, take him by the sleeve, "you'r not well. 
we'll call somewher and get a drink." 

"yes," he said, again wipe hi brow. "I say ... did you hear?" 

"hear what?" 

"ah, you didn't ... and, of course, you didn't feel anything...." 

"come, you'r shaking." 

when present we came to a brightli light public-hous or hotel, I saw 
that he wa shake even wors than I had thought. the shirt-sleev 
barman notic it too, and watch us curiously. I made rooum sit down, 
and got him some brandy. 

"what wa the matter?" I asked, as I held the glass to hi lips. 

but I could get noth out of him except that it wa "all right--al 
right," with hi head twitch over hi shoulder almost as if he had 
touch of the dance. He began to come round a little. He wasn't the kind 
of man you'd press for explanations, and present we set out again. 
He walk with me as far as my lodgings, refus to come in, but for all 
that linger at the gate as if loath to leave. I watch him turn the 
corner in the rain. 

We came home togeth again the next evening, but by a differ way, 
quit half a mile longer. He had wait for me a littl pertinaciously. 
It seem he want to talk about molecul again. 

well, when a man of hi age--he'd be near fifty--begin to ask questions, 
he' rather wors than a child who want to know where heaven is or some 
such thing--for you can't put him off as you can the child. somewher or 
other he'd pick up the word "osmosis," and seem to have some 
glimmer of it meaning. He drop the molecules, and began to ask me 
about osmosis. 

"it means, doesn't it," he demanded, "that liquid will work their way 
into one another--through a bladder or something? say a thick fluid and a 
thin: you'll find some of the thick in the thin, and the thin in the 
thick?" 

"yes. the thick into the thin is ex-osmosis, and the other end-osmosis. 
that take place more quickly. but I don't know a deal about it." 

"doe it ever take place with solids?" he next asked. 

what wa he drive at? I thought; but replied: "I believ that what is 
commonli call 'adhesion' is someth of the sort, under anoth name." 

"A good deal of thi bookwork seem to be find a dozen name for the 
same thing," he grunted; and continu to ask hi questions. 

but what it wa he realli want to know I couldn't for the life of me 
make out. 

well, he wa due ani time now to disappear again, have work quit six 
week in one place; and he disappeared. He disappear for a good mani 
weeks. I think it would be about februari befor I saw or heard of him 
again. 

It wa februari weather, anyway, and in an echo enough place that I 
found him--th subway of one of the metropolitan stations. he'd probabl 
forgotten the echo when he'd taken the train; but, of course, the 
railway folk won't let a man who happen to dislik echo go wander 
across the metal where he likes. 

He wa twenti yard ahead when I saw him. I recognis him by hi patch 
head and black hand-bag. I ran along the subway after him. 

It wa veri curious. he'd been walk close to the white-til wall, 
and I saw him suddenli stop; but he didn't turn. He didn't even turn 
when I pull up, close behind him; he put out one hand to the wall, as 
if to steadi himself. but, the moment I touch hi shoulder, he just 
dropped--just dropped, half on hi knee against the white tiling. the 
face he turn round and up to me wa transfix with fright. 

there were half a hundr peopl about--a train wa just in--and it isn't 
a difficult matter in london to get a crowd for much less than a man 
crouch terrifi against a wall, look over hi shoulder as rooum 
looked, at anoth man almost as terrified. I felt somebody' hand on 
my own arm. evid somebodi thought i'd knock rooum down. 

the terror went slowli from hi face. He stumbl to hi feet. I shook 
myself free of the man who held me and step up to rooum. 

"what the devil' all thi about?" I demanded, roughli enough. 

"it' all right ... it' all right,..." he stammered. 

"heavens, man, you shouldn't play trick like that!" 

"no ... no ... but for the love of god don't do it again!..." 

"we'll not explain here," I said, still in a good deal of a huff; and 
the small crowd melt away--disappointed, I dare say, that it wasn't 
a fight. 

"now," I said, when we were outsid in the crowd street, "you might let 
me know what all thi is about, and what it is that for the love of 
god i'm not to do again." 

He wa half apologetic, but at the same time half blustering, as if I had 
commit some sort of an outrage. 

"A senseless thing like that!" he mumbl to himself. "but there: you 
didn't know.... you _don't_ know, do you?... I tell you, d'you hear, 
_you'r not to run at all when i'm about_! you'r a nice fellow and all 
that, and get your quantiti somewher near right, if you do go a long 
way round to do it--but i'll not answer for myself if you run, d'you 
hear?... put your hand on a man' shoulder like that, just when ..." 

"certainli I might have spoken," I agreed, a littl stiffly. 

"of course, you ought to have spoken! just you see you don't do it again. 
it' monstrous!" 

I put a curt question. 

"are you sure you'r quit right in your head, rooum?" 

"ah," he cried, "don't you think I just fanci it, my lad! noth so 
easy! I thought you guess that other time, on the new road ... it' as 
plain as a pikestaff... no, no, no! _i_ shall be tell _you_ someth 
about molecul one of these days!" 

We walk for a time in silence. 

suddenli he asked: "what are you do now?" 

"I myself, do you mean? oh, the firm. A railway job, past pinner. 
but we'v a big contract come on in the west end soon they might 
want you for. they call it 'alterations,' but it' one of these big 
shop-rebuildings." 

"i'll come along." 

"oh, it isn't for a month or two yet." 

"I don't mean that. I mean i'll come along to pinner with you now, 
to-night, or whenev you go." 

"oh!" I said. 

I don't know that I special want him. it' a littl wearing, the 
compani of a chap like that. you never know what he' go to let you in 
for next. but, as thi didn't seem to occur to him, I didn't say 
anything. If he realli like catch the last train down, a three-mil 
walk, and then share a double-bed room at a poor sort of alehous 
(which wa my own programme), he wa welcome. We walk a littl farther; 
then I told him the time of the train and left him. 

He turn up at euston, a littl after twelve. We went down together. It 
wa get on for one when we left the station at the other end, and 
then we began the tramp across the weald to the inn. A littl to my 
surpris (for I had begun to expect unaccount behaviour from him) we 
reach the inn without rooum have dodg about chang place with 
me, or have fallen cower under a gorse-bush, or anyth of 
that kind. our talk, too, wa about work, not molecul and osmosis. 

the inn wa onli a roadsid beerhouse--i have forgotten it name--and all 
it sleep accomod wa the one double-bed room. over the head 
of my own bed the ceil wa cut away, follow the roof-line; and the 
wallpap wa perfectli shocking--fad bouquet that made v' and a's, 
interlac everywhere. the other bed wa made up, and lay across the 
room. 

I think I onli spoke onc while we were make readi for bed, and that 
wa when rooum took from hi black hand-bag a brush and a torn nightgown. 

"that' what you alway carri about, is it?" I remarked; and rooum 
grunt something: ye ... never knew where you'd be next ... no harm, 
wa it? We tumbl into bed. 

but, for all the late of the hour, I wasn't sleepy; so from my own 
bag I took a book, set the candl on the end of the mantel, and began 
to read. mark you, I don't say I wa much better inform for the read 
I did, for I wa watch the v' on the wallpap mostly--that, and 
wonder what wa wrong with the man in the other bed who had fallen 
down at a touch in the subway. He wa alreadi asleep. 

now I don't know whether I can make the next clear to you. i'm quit 
certain he wa sound asleep, so that it wasn't just the fact that he 
spoke. even that is a littl unpleasant, I alway think, ani sort of 
sleep-talking; but it' a veri queer sort of sensat when a man 
actual answer a question that' put to him, know noth whatev 
about it in the morning. perhap I ought not to have put that question; 
have put it, I did the next best thing afterwards, as you'll see in a 
moment ... but let me tell you. 

he'd been asleep perhap an hour, and I woolgath about the 
wallpaper, when suddenly, in a far more clear and loud voic than he ever 
use when awake, he said: 

_"what the devil is it prevent me see him, then?"_ 

that startl me, rather, for the second time that evening; and I realli 
think I had spoken befor I had fulli realis what wa happening. 

"from see whom?" I said, sit up in bed. 

"whom?... you'r not attending. the fellow i'm tell you about, who 
run after me," he answered--answ perfectli plainly. 

I could see hi head there on the pillow, black and white, and hi 
eye were closed. He made a slight movement with hi arm, but that did 
not wake him. then it came to me, with a sort of start, what wa 
happening. I slip half out of bed. would he--would he?--answ 
anoth question?... I risk it, breathlessly: 

"have you ani idea who he is?" 

well, that too he answered. 

"who he is? the runner?... don't be silly. _who els should it be?_" 

with everi nerv in me tingling, I tri again. 

"what happens, then, when he catch you?" 

thi time, I realli don't know whether hi word were an answer or not; 
they were these: 

"to hear him catch you up ... and then pad away ahead again! all 
right, all right ... but I guess it' weaken him a bit, too...." 

without notic it, I had got out of bed, and had advanc quit to the 
middl of the floor. 

"what did you say hi name was?" I breathed. 

but that wa a dead failure. He mutter brokenli for a moment, gave a 
deep troubl sigh, and then began to snore loudli and regularly. 

I made my way back to bed; but I assur you that befor I did so I fill 
my basin with water, dip my face into it, and then set the candlestick 
afloat in it, leav the candl burning. I thought i'd like to have a 
light.... It had burn down by morning. rooum, I remember, remark on 
the silli practic of read in bed. 

well, it wa a pretti kind of obsess for a man to have, wasn't it? 
somebodi run after him all the time, and then ... run on ahead? 
and, of course, on a broad pavement there would be plenti of room for 
thi run gentleman to run round; but on an eight- or nine-inch kerb, 
such as that of the new road out lewisham way ... but perhap he wa a 
jump gentleman too, and could jump over a man' head. you'd think he'd 
have to get past some way, wouldn't you?... I rememb vagu wonder 
whether the name of that runner wa not conscience; but conscienc isn't 
a matter of molecul and osmosis.... 

one thing, however, wa clear; i'd got to tell rooum what i'd learned: 
for you can't get hold of a fellow' secret in way like that. I lost 
no time about it. I told him, in fact, soon after we'd left the inn the 
next morning--told him how he'd answer in hi sleep. 

and--what do you think of this?--h seem to think I ought to have 
guess it! _guessed_ a monstrou thing like that! 

"you'r less clever than I thought, with your book and that, if you 
didn't," he grunted. 

"but ... good god, man!" 

"queer, isn't it? but you don't know the queerest ..." 

He ponder for a moment, and then suddenli put hi lip to my ear. 

"i'll tell you," he whispered. "_it get harder everi time_!... At first, 
he just slip through: a bit of a catch at my heart, like when you nod 
off to sleep in a chair and jerk up awak again; and away he went. but 
now it' get grinding, sluggish; and the pain.... you'd notice, that 
night on the road, the littl check it gave me; that' past long since; 
and last night, when i'd just brace myself up stiff to meet it, and you 
tap me on the shoulder ..." He pass the back of hi hand over hi 
brow. 

"I tell you," he continued, "it' an agoni each time. I could scream at 
the thought of it. it' oftener, too, now, and he' get stronger. the 
end-osmosi is get to be ex-osmosis--i that right? just let me tell 
you one more thing--" 

but i'd had enough. i'd ask question the night before, but now--well, 
I knew quit as much as, and more than, I wanted. 

"stop, please," I said. "you'r either off your head, or worse. let' 
call it the first. don't tell me ani more, please." 

"frightened, what? well, I don't blame you. but what would _you_ do?" 

"I should see a doctor; i'm onli an engineer," I replied. 

"doctors?... bah!" he said, and spat. 

I hope you see how the matter stood with rooum. what do you make of it? 
could you have believ it--_do_ you believ it?... he'd made a nearish 
guess when he'd said that much of our knowledg is give name to thing 
we know noth about; onli rule-of-thumb physic think everything' 
explain in the manual; and you'v alway got to rememb one thing: 
you can call it forc or what you like, but it' a certainti that things, 
solid thing of wood and iron and stone, would explode, just go off in a 
puff into space, if it wasn't for someth just as inexplic as that 
that rooum said he felt in hi own person. and if you can swallow that, 
it' a rel small matter whether rooum' light-foot familiar 
slip through him unperceived, or had to struggl through obstinately. 
you see now whi I said that "a queer thing overtook rooum." 

more: I saw it. thi thing, that outrag reason--i saw it happen. that 
is to say, I saw it effects, and it wa in broad daylight, on an 
ordinari afternoon, in the middl of oxford street, of all places. there 
wasn't a shadow of doubt about it. peopl were press and jostl 
about him, and suddenli I saw him turn hi head and listen, as i'd seen 
him before. I tell you, an ici creep ran all over my skin. I fanci I 
felt it approach too, nearer and nearer.... the next moment he had 
made a sort of gather of himself, as if against a gust. He stumbl 
and thrust--thrust with hi body. He swayed, physically, as a tree sway 
in a wind; he clutch my arm and gave a loud scream. then, after 
seconds--minutes--i don't know how long--h wa free again. 

and for the colour of hi face when by-and-bi I glanc at it ... well, I 
onc saw a swarthi italian fall under a sunstroke, and _his_ face wa 
much the same colour that rooum' negro face had gone; a cloudy, whitish 
green. 

"well--you'v seen it--what do you think of it?" he gasp presently, 
turn a ghastli grin on me. 

but it wa night befor the full horror of it had soak into me. 

soon after that he disappear again. I wasn't sorry. 

* * * * * 

our big contract in the west end came on. It wa a time-contract, with 
all manner of penalti claus if we didn't get through; and I assur 
you that we were busy. I myself wa far too busi to think of rooum. 

it' a shop now, the place we were work at, or rather one of these 
huge weld of fifti shop where you can buy anything; and if you'd 
seen us there... but perhap you did see us, for peopl stood up on the 
top of omnibus as they passed, to look over the mud-splash hoard 
into the great excav we'd made. It wa a sight. stage rose on 
staging, tier on tier, with intermin ladder all over the steel 
structure. three or four squat oti lift crouch like iron turtl on 
top, and a lattice-cran on a tower three-corn platform rose a 
hundr and twenti feet into the air. At one end of the vast quarri 
wa a demolish house, show flue and fireplac and a score of 
thick of old wallpaper; and at night--they might well have stood up 
on the top of the buses! A dozen great splutter violet arc-light 
half-blind you; down below were the watchmen' fires; overhead, the 
rivet had their fire-baskets; and in odd corner naphtha-light 
gutter and flared. and the steel rang with the riveters' hammers, and 
the crane-chain rattl and clashed.... there' not much doubt in _my_ 
mind, it' the engin who are the architect nowadays. the chap who 
think they'r the architect are onli a sort of paperhangers, who hang 
brick and terra-cotta on our work and clap a pinnacl or two on top--but 
never mind that. there we were, sweat and clang and navvying, till 
the day shift came to reliev us. 

and I ought to say that fifti feet abov our great gap, and from end to 
end across it, there ran a travel crane on a skeleton line, with 
platform, engine, and wooden cab all compact in one. 

It happen that they had pitch in as one of the foremen some fellow or 
other, a friend of the firm's, a rank duffer, who pester me incessantli 
with hi questions. I did half hi work and all my own, and it hadn't 
improv my temper much. On thi night that i'm tell about, he'd been 
play the fool with hi question as if a time-contract wa a sort of 
summer holiday; and he'd fill me up to that point that I realli can't 
say just when it wa that rooum put in an appear again. I think I had 
heard somebodi mention hi name, but i'd paid no attention. 

well, our johnni fresh came up to me for the twentieth time that night, 
thi time want to know someth about the overhead crane. At that 
I fairli lost my temper. 

"what ail the crane?" I cried. "it' do it work, isn't it? isn't 
everybodi do their work except you? whi can't you ask hopkins? isn't 
hopkin there?" 

"I don't know," he said. 

"then," I snapped, "in that particular i'm as ignor as you, and I hope 
it' the onli one." 

but he grab my arm. 

"look at it now!" he cried, pointing; and I look up. 

either hopkin or somebodi wa danger exceed the speed-limit. the 
thing wa fli along it thirti yard of rail as fast as a tram, and 
the heavi fall-block swung like a ponder kite-tail, thirti feet 
below. As I watched, the engin brought up within a yard of the end of 
the way, the block crash like a ram into the broken hous end, 
fetch down plaster and brick, and then the mechan wa reversed. the 
crane set off at a tear back. 

"who in hell ..." I began; but it wasn't a time to talk. "_hi!_" I 
yelled, and made a spring for a ladder. 

the other had notic it, too, for there were shout all over the place. 
By that time I wa halfway up the second stage. again the crane tore 
past, with the massiv tackl sweep behind it, and again I heard the 
crash at the other end. whoever had the handl of it wa manag 
it skilfully, for there wa bare a foot to spare when it turn again. 

On the fourth platform, at the end of the way, I found hopkins. He wa 
white, and seem to be count on hi fingers. 

"what' the matter here?" I cried. 

"it' rooum," he answered. "I hadn't step out of the cab, not a 
minute, when I heard the lever go. he' run somebodi down, he says; 
he'll run the whole shoot down in a minute--look!..." 

the crane wa come back again. half out of the cab I could see rooum' 
mottl hair and beard. hi brow wa rib like a gridiron, and as he 
rip past one of the arc hi face shone like porcelain with the sweat 
that bath it. 

"now ... you!... now, damn you!..." he wa shouting. 

"get readi to board him when he reverses!" I shout to hopkins. 

just how we scrambl on I don't know. I got one arm over the 
lifting-gear (which, of course, wasn't going), and heard hopkin on 
the other footplate. rooum put the brake down and reversed; again came 
the thud of the fall-blocks; and we were speed back again over the 
gulf of misti orang light. the stage were throng with gape men. 

"ready? now!" I cri to hopkins; and we sprang into the cab. 

hopkin hit rooum' wrist with a spanner. then he seiz the lever, 
jam the brake down and trip rooum, all, as it seemed, in one 
movement. I fell on top of rooum. the crane came to a standstil 
half-way down the line. I held rooum panting. 

but either rooum wa stronger than I, or els he took me veri much 
unawares. all at onc he twist clear from my grasp and stumbl on hi 
knee to the rear door of the cab. He threw up one elbow, and stagger 
to hi feet as I made anoth clutch at him. 

"keep still, you fool!" I bawled. "hit him over the head, hopkins!" 

rooum scream in a high voice. 

"run him down--cut him up with the wheels--down, you!--down, I say!--oh, 
my god!... _ha_!" 

He sprang clear out from the crane door, well-nigh take me with him. 

I told you it wa a skeleton line, two rail and a tie or two. he'd 
actual jump to the right-hand rail. and he wa run along 
it--run along that iron tightrope, out over that well of light and 
watch men. hopkin had start the travelling-gear, as if with some 
insan idea of catch him; but there wa onli one possibl end to it. 
he'd gone fulli a dozen yards, while I watched, horribl fascinated; and 
then I saw the turn of hi head.... 

He didn't meet it thi time; he sprang to the other rail, as if to evad 
it.... 

even at the take-off he missed. As far as I could see, he made no attempt 
to save himself with hi hands. He just went down out of the field of 
my vision. there wa an aw silence; then, from far below ... 

* * * * * 

they weren't the men on the lower stage who move first. the men abov 
went a littl way down, and then they too stopped. present two of them 
descended, but by a distant way. they returned, with two bottl of 
brandy, and there wa a hasti consultation. two men drank the brandi off 
there and then--get on for a pint of brandi apiece; then they went 
down, drunk. 

I, hopkin tell me, had got down on my knee in the crane cab, and wa 
jabber away cheer to myself. when I ask him what I said, 
he hesitated, and then said: "oh, you don't want to know that, sir," and 
I haven't ask him since. 

what do _you_ make of it? 




benlian 


I 

It would be differ if you had known benlian. It would be differ if 
you had had even that glimps of him that I had the veri first time I saw 
him, stand on the littl wooden land at the top of the flight of 
step outsid my studio door. I say "studio"; but realli it wa just a 
sort of loft look out over the timber-yard, and I use it as a studio. 
the real studio, the big one, wa at the other end of the yard, and that 
wa benlian's. 

scarc anybodi ever came there. I wonder mani a time if the 
timber-merch wa dead or had lost hi memori and forgotten all about 
hi business; for hi stack of floorboards, set criss-crosswis to 
season (you know how they pile them up) were grimi with soot, and nobodi 
ever disturb the row of scaffold-pol that stood like palisad along 
the walls. the entranc wa from the street, through a door in a 
billposter' hoarding; and on the river not far away the steamboat 
hooted, and, in windi weather, the floorboard hum to keep them 
company. 

I suppos some of these real, regular artist wouldn't have call me an 
artist at all; for I onli paint miniatures, and it wa trade-work at 
that, copi from photograph and so on. not that I wasn't jolli good at 
it, and punctual too (lot of these high-flown artist have simpli no 
idea of punctuality); and the loft wa cheap, and suit me veri well. 
but, of course, a sculptor want a big place on the ground floor; it' 
slow work, that with block of stone and marbl that cost you twenti 
pound everi time you lift them; so benlian had the studio. hi name wa 
on a plate on the door, but i'd never seen him till thi time i'm tell 
you of. 

I wa work that even at one of the prettiest littl thing i'd ever 
done: a girl' head on ivory, that i'd stippl up just like ... oh, 
you'd never have thought it wa done by hand at all. the daylight had 
gone, but I knew that "prussian" would be about the colour for the eye 
and the bunch of flower at her breast, and I want to finish. 

I wa work at my littl table, with a shade over my eyes; and I jump 
a bit when somebodi knock at the door--not have heard anybodi come up 
the steps, and not have mani visitor anyway. (letter were alway put 
into the box in the yard door.) 

when I open the door, there he stood on the platform; and I gave a bit 
of a start, have come straight from my ivory, you see. He wa one of 
these veri tall, gaunt chaps, that make us littl fellow feel even 
smaller than we are; and I wonder at first where hi eye were, they 
were set so deep in the dark cave on either side of hi nose. like a 
skull, hi head was; I could fanci hi teeth curv round insid hi 
cheeks; and hi zygomat stuck up under hi skin like razorback (but 
if you'r not one of us artist you'll not understand that). A bit of 
smoky, greenish sky show behind him; and then, as hi eye move in 
their big pits, one of them caught the light of my lamp and flash like 
a well of lustre. 

He spoke abruptly, in a deep, shaki sort of voice. 

"I want you to photograph me in the morning," he said. I suppos he'd 
seen my printing-fram out on the window-sash some time or other. 

"come in," I said. "but i'm afraid, if it' a miniatur you want, that 
i'm retained--mi firm retain me--you'd have to do it through them. but 
come in, and i'll show you the kind of thing I do--though you ought to 
have come in the daylight ..." 

He came in. He wa wear a long, grey dressing-gown that came right 
down to hi heel and made him look someth like a noah's-ark figure. 
seen in the light, hi face seem more ghastli boni still; and as he 
glanc for a moment at my littl ivori he made a sound of contempt--i 
know it wa contempt. I thought it rather cheek, come into my place 
and-- 

He turn hi cavern eyehol on me. 

"I don't want anyth of that sort. I want you to photograph me. i'll be 
here at ten in the morning." 

so, just to show him that I wasn't to be treat that way, I said, quit 
shortly, "I can't. i'v an appoint at ten o'clock." 

"what' that?" he said--he'd one of these rich deep voic that alway 
sound consumptive. 

"take that thing off your eyes, and look at me," he ordered. 

well, I wa aw indignant. 

"if you think i'm go to be told to do thing like this--" I began. 

"take that thing off," he just order again. 

i'v got to remember, of course, that you didn't know benlian. _i_ didn't 
then. and for a chap just to stalk into a fellow' place, and tell him to 
photograph him, and order him about ... but you'll see in a minute. I 
took the shade off my eyes, just to show him that _i_ could browbeat a 
bit too. 

I use to have a tall strip of looking-glass lean against my wall; for 
though I didn't use model much, it' aw use to go to natur for 
odd bit now and then, and i'v sketch myself in that glass, oh, 
hundr of times! We must have been stand in front of it, for all at 
onc I saw the eye at the bottom of hi pit look rigidli over my 
shoulder. without move hi eye from the glass, and scarc move hi 
lips, he muttered: 

"get me a pair of gloves, get me a pair of gloves." 

It wa a funni thing to ask for; but I got him a pair of my glove from a 
drawer. hi hand were shake so that he could hardli get them on, and 
there wa a littl glisten of sweat on hi face, that look like the 
salt that dri on you when you'v been bath in the sea. then I 
turned, to see what it wa that he wa look so earnestli and 
profoundli at in the mirror. I saw noth except just the pair of us, he 
with my glove on. 

He step aside, and slowli drew the glove off. I think _i_ could have 
bulli _him_ just then. He turn to me. 

"did that look all right to you?" he asked. 

"why, my dear chap, whatev ail you?" I cried. 

"I suppose," he went on, "you couldn't photograph me to-night--now?" 

I could have done, with magnesium, but I hadn't a scrap in the place. I 
told him so. He wa look round my studio. He saw my camera stand in 
a corner. 

"ah!" he said. 

He made a stride toward it. He unscrew the lens, brought it to the 
lamp, and peer attent through it, now into the air, now at hi 
sleev and hand, as if look for a flaw in it. then he replac it, and 
pull up the collar of hi dressing-gown as if he wa cold. 

"well, anoth night of it," he muttered; "but," he added, face 
suddenli round on me, "if your appoint wa to meet your god himself, 
you must photograph me at ten to-morrow morning!" 

"all right," I said, give in (for he seem horribl ill). "draw up to 
the stove and have a drink of someth and a smoke." 

"I neither drink nor smoke," he replied, move toward the door. 

"sit down and have a chat, then," I urged; for I alway like to be decent 
with fellows, and it wa a lone sort of place, that yard. 

He shook hi head. 

"be readi by ten o'clock in the morning," he said; and he pass down my 
stair and cross the yard to hi studio without even have said "good 
night." 

well, he wa at my door again at ten o'clock in the morning, and I 
photograph him. I made three exposures; but the plate were some that 
i'd had in the place for some time, and they'd gone off and fog in the 
developing. 

"i'm aw sorry," I said; "but i'm go out thi afternoon, and will 
get some more, and we'll have anoth shot in the morning." 

one after the other, he wa hold the neg up to the light and 
examin them. present he put them down quietly, lean them 
method up against the edg of the developing-bath. 

"never mind. It doesn't matter. thank you," he said; and left me. 

after that, I didn't see him for weeks; but at night I could see the 
light of hi roof-window, shine through the wreath river-mists, and 
sometim I heard him move about, and the muffl knock-knock of hi 
hammer on marble. 


II 

Of cours I did see him again, or I shouldn't be tell you all this. He 
came to my door, just as he had done before, and at about the same time 
in the evening. He hadn't come to be photograph thi time, but for all 
that it wa someth about a camera--someth he want to know. he'd 
brought two book with him, big books, print in german. they were on 
light, he said, and physic (or els it wa psychics--i alway get those 
two word wrong). they were full of diagram and equat and figures; 
and, of course, it wa all mile abov my head. 

He talk a lot about "hyper-space," whatev that is; and at first I 
nodded, as if I knew all about it. but he veri soon saw that I didn't, 
and he came down to my level again. what he'd come to ask me wa this: 
did I know anything, of my own experience, about thing "photograph 
through"? (you know the kind of thing: a name that' been paint out on 
a board, say, come up in the plate.) 

well, as it happened, I _had_ onc photograph a draw for a fellow, 
and the easel I had stood it on had come up through the picture; and I 
knew by the way benlian nod that that wa the kind of thing he meant. 

"more," he said. 

I told him i'd onc seen a photograph of a man with a bowler hat on, and 
the shape of hi crown had show through the hat. 

"yes, yes," he said, musing; and then he asked: "have you ever heard of 
thing not photograph at all?" 

but I couldn't tell him anyth about that; and off he start again, 
about light and physic and so on. then, as soon as I could get a word 
in, I said, "but, of course, the camera isn't art." (some of my 
miniatures, you understand, were jolli nice littl things.) 

"no--no," he murmur absently; and then abruptli he said: "eh? what' 
that? and what the devil do _you_ know about it?" 

"well," said I, in a dignifi sort of way, "consid that for ten 
year i'v been--" 

"chut!... hold your tongue," he said, turn away. 

there he was, talk to me again, just as if i'd ask him in to bulli 
me. but you'v got to be decent to a fellow when he' in your own place; 
and by-and-bi I ask him, but in a cold, off-hand sort of way, how hi 
own work wa go on. He turn to me again. 

"would you like to see it?" he asked. 

"_aha_!" thought I, "he' got to a sticking-point with hi work! it' all 
veri well," I thought, "for you to sniff at my miniatures, my friend, but 
we all get stale on our work sometimes, and the fresh eye, even of a 
miniature-paint ..." 

"I shall be glad if I can be of ani help to you," I answered, still a bit 
huffish, but bear no malice. 

"then come," he said. 

We descend and cross the timber-yard, and he held hi door open for 
me to pass in. 

It wa an enorm great place, hi studio, and all full of mist; and the 
galleri that wa hi bedroom wa up a littl staircas at the farther 
end. In the middl of the floor wa a tall structur of scaffolding, with 
a stage or two to stand on; and I could see the dim ghostli marbl figur 
in the gloom. It had been jack up on a heavi base; and as it would have 
taken three or four men to put it into position, and scarc a stranger 
had enter the yard sinc I had been there, I knew that the figur must 
have stood for a long time. sculpture' weary, slow work. 

benlian wa potter about with a taper at the end of a long rod; and 
suddenli the overhead gas-r burst into light. I place myself befor 
the statue--to criticise, you know. 

well, it didn't seem to me that he need to have turn up hi nose at 
my ivories, for I didn't think much of hi statue--except that it wa a 
great, lumping, extraordinari piec of work. It had an outstretch arm 
that, I rememb thinking, wa absolut misshapen--disproportioned, 
big enough for a giant, ridicul out of drawing. and as I look at 
the thing thi way and that, I knew that hi eye in their deep cellar 
never left my face for a moment. 

"it' a god," he said by-and-by. 

then I began to tell him about that monstrou arm; but he cut me veri 
short. 

"I say it' a god," he interrupted, look at me as if he would have 
eaten me. "even you, child as you are, have seen the god men have made 
for themselv befor this. half-god they'v made, all good or all evil 
(and then they'v call them the devil). thi is _my_ god--th god of 
good and of evil also." 

"er--i see," I said, rather taken aback (but quit sure he wa off hi 
head for all that). then I look at the arm again; a child could have 
seen how wrong it was.... 

but suddenly, to my amazement, he took me by the shoulder and turn me 
away. 

"that'll do," he said curtly. "I didn't ask you to come in here with a 
view to learn anyth from you. I want to see how it struck you. I 
shall send for you again--and again--" 

then he began to jabber, half to himself. 

"bah!" he muttered. "'i that all?' they ask befor a stupend thing. 
show them the ocean, the heavens, infinity, and they ask, 'i that all?' 
If they saw their god face to face they'd ask it!... there' onli one 
cause, that work now in good and now in evil, but show It to them and 
they put their head on one side and begin to apprais and patronis 
it!... I tell you, what' seen at a glanc fli away at a glance. god 
come slowli over you, but presently, ah! they begin to grip you, and at 
the end there' no flee from them! you'll tell me more about my statu 
by-and-by!... what wa that you said?" he demanded, face swiftli round 
on me. "that arm? ah, yes; but we'll see what you say about that arm six 
month from now! yes, the arm.... now be off!" he order me. "i'll send 
for you again when I want you!" 

He thrust me out. 

"an asylum, mr. benlian," I thought as I cross the yard, "i the place 
for you!" you see, I didn't know him then, and that he wasn't to be 
judg as an ordinari man is. just you wait till you see.... 

and straight away, I found myself vow that i'd have noth more to do 
with him. I found myself resolv that, as if I were make up my mind 
not to smoke or drink--and (I don't know why) with a similar sens that I 
wa depriv myself of something. but, somehow, I forgot, and within a 
month he'd been in sever time to see me, and onc or twice had fetch 
me in to see hi statue. 

In two month I wa in an extraordinari state of mind about him. I wa 
familiar with him in a way, but at the same time I didn't know one scrap 
more about him. becaus i'm a fool (oh, yes, I know quit well, now, what 
I am) you'll think i'm talk folli if I even begin to tell you what 
sort of a man he was. I don't mean just hi knowledg (though I think he 
knew everything--sciences, languages, and all that) for it wa far more 
than that. somehow, when he wa there, he had me all restless and uneasy; 
and when he wasn't there I wa (there' onli the one word for it) 
jealous--a jealou as if he'd been a girl! even yet I can't make it 
out.... 

and he knew how unsettl he'd got me; and i'll tell you how I found that 
out. 

straight out one night, when he wa sit up in my place, he ask me: 
"do you like me, pudgie?" (I forgot to say that i'd told him they use to 
call me pudgi at home, becaus I wa littl and fat; it wa odd, the 
number of thing I told him that I wouldn't have told anybodi else.) 

"do you like me, pudgie?" he said. 

As for my answer, I don't know how it spurt out. I wa much more 
surpris than he was, for I realli didn't intend it. It wa for all the 
world as if somebodi els wa talk with my mouth. 

"_i loath and ador you!_" it came; and then I look round, aw 
startl to hear myself say that. 

but he didn't look at me. He onli nodded. 

"yes. Of good and evil too--" he mutter to himself. and then all of a 
sudden he got up and went out. 

I didn't sleep for ever so long after that, think how odd it wa I 
should have said that. 

well (to get on), after that someth I couldn't account for began to 
come over me sometim as I worked. It began to come over me, without ani 
warning, that he wa think of me down there across the yard. I use to 
_know_ (thi must sound aw silli to you) that he wa down yonder, 
think of me and do someth to me. and one night I wa so sure 
that it wasn't fanci that I jump straight up from my work, and i'm not 
quit sure what happen then, until I found myself in hi studio, just 
as if i'd walk there in my sleep. 

and he seem to be wait for me, for there wa a chair by hi own, in 
front of the statue. 

"what is it, benlian?" I burst out. 

"ah!" he said.... "well, it' about that arm, pudgie; I want you to tell 
me about the arm. doe it look so strang as it did?" 

"no," I said. 

"I thought it wouldn't," he observed. "but I haven't touch it, 
pudgie--" 

So I stay the even there. 

but you must not think he wa alway do that thing--whatev it 
was--to me. On the other hand, I sometim felt the oddest sort of 
releas (I don't know how els to put it) ... like when, on one of these 
muggy, earthy-smel days, when everything' melancholy, the wind 
freshen up suddenli and you breath again. and that (i'm tri to take 
it in order, you see, so that it will be plain to you) bring me to the 
time I found out that _he_ did that too, and knew when he wa do it. 

i'd gone into hi place one night to have a look at hi statue. It wa 
surpris what a lot I wa find out about that statue. It wa still 
all out of proport (that is to say, I knew it must be--rememb i'd 
thought so--though it didn't annoy me now quit so much. I suppos i'd 
lost _my_ fresh eye by that time). somehow, too, my own miniatur had 
begun to look a bit kiddish; they made me impatient; and that' horrible, 
to be discont with thing that onc seem jolli good to you. 

well, he'd been look at me in the hungriest sort of way, and I look 
at the statue, when all at onc that feel of releas and light 
came over me. the first I knew of it wa that I found myself think of 
some rather import letter my firm had written to me, want to know 
when a job I wa do wa go to be finished. I thought myself it wa 
time I got it finished; I thought i'd better set about it at once; and I 
sat suddenli up in my chair, as if i'd just come out of a sleep. and, 
look at the statue, I saw it as it had seem at first--al misshapen 
and out of drawing. 

the veri next moment, as I wa rising, I sat down again as suddenli as if 
somebodi had pull me back. 

now a chap doesn't like to be chang about like that; so, without 
look at benlian, I mutter a bit testily, "don't, benlian!" 

then I heard him get up and knock hi chair away. He wa stand behind 
me. 

"pudgie," he said, in a move sort of voice, "i'm no good to you. get out 
of this. get out--" 

"no, no, benlian!" I pleaded. 

"get out, do you hear, and don't come again! Go and live somewher 
else--go away from london--don't let me know where you go--" 

"oh, what have I done?" I ask unhappily; and he wa mutter again. 

"perhap it would be better for me too," he muttered; and then he added, 
"come, bundl out!" 

So in home I went, and finish my ivori for the firm; but I can't tell 
you how friendless and unhappi I felt. 

now I use to know in those day a littl girl--a nice, warm-heart 
littl thing, just friendli you know, who use to come to me sometim in 
anoth place I live at and mend for me and so on. It wa an aw long 
time sinc i'd seen her; but she found me out one night--cam to that 
yard, walk straight in, went straight to my linen-bag, and began to 
look over my thing to see what want mending, just as she use to. I 
don't mind confess that I wa a bit sweet on her at one time; and it 
made me feel aw mean, the way she came in, without ask ani 
questions, and took up my mending. 

So she sat do my things, and I sat at my work, glad of a bit of 
company; and she chat as she worked, just jolli and gentl and not at 
all reproach me. 

but as suddenli as a shot, right in the middl of it all, I found myself 
wonder about benlian again. and I wasn't onli wondering; somehow I wa 
horribl uneasi about him. It came to me that he might be ill or 
something. and all the fun of her have come to see me wa gone. I found 
myself do all sort of stupid thing to my work, and glanc at my 
watch that wa lie on the tabl befor me. 

At last I couldn't stand it ani longer. I got up. 

"daisy," I said, "i'v got to go out now." 

she seem surprised. 

"oh, whi didn't you tell me i'd been keep you!" she said, get up 
at once. 

I mutter that I wa aw sorry.... 

I pack her off. I close the door in the hoard behind her. then I 
walk straight across the yard to benlian's. 

He wa lie on a couch, not do anything. 

"I know I ought to have come sooner, benlian," I said, "but I had 
somebodi with me." 

"yes," he said, look hard at me; and I got a bit red. 

"she' aw nice," I stammered; "but you never bother with girls, and 
you don't drink or smoke--" 

"no," he said. 

"well," I continued, "you ought to have a littl relaxation; you'r 
knock yourself up." and, indeed, he look aw ill. 

but he shook hi head. 

"A man' onli a definit amount of forc in him, pudgie," he said, "and 
if he spend it in one way he goe short in another. mine goes--there." 
He glanc at the statue. "I rare sleep now," he added. 

"then you ought to see a doctor," I said, a bit alarmed. (i'd felt sure 
he wa ill.) 

"no, no, pudgie. My forc is all go there--al but the minimum that 
can't be helped, you know.... you'v heard artist talk about 'put 
their soul into their work,' pudgie?" 

"don't rub it in about my rotten miniatures, benlian," I ask him. 

"you'v heard them say that; but they'r charlatans, profession 
artists, all, pudgie. they haven't got ani soul bigger than a sixpenc 
to put into it.... you know, pudgie, that forc and matter are the same 
thing--that it' decid nowaday that you can't defin matter otherwis 
than as 'a point of force'?" 

"yes," I found myself say eagerly, as if i'd heard it dozen of time 
before. 

"so that if they could put their soul into it, it would be just as easi 
for them to put their _bodies_ into it?..." 

I had drawn veri close to him, and again--it wa not fancy--i felt as if 
somebody, not me, wa use my mouth. A flash of comprehens seem to 
come into my brain. 

"_not that, benlian_?" I cri breathlessly. 

He nod three or four times, and whispered. I realli don't know whi we 
both whispered. 

"_realli that, benlian_?" I whisper again. 

"shall I show you?... I tri my hardest not to, you know,..." he still 
whispered. 

"yes, show me!" I repli in a suppress voice. 

"don't breath a sound then! I keep them up there...." 

He put hi finger to hi lip as if we had been two conspirators; then he 
tipto across the studio and went up to hi bedroom in the gallery. 
present he tipto down again, with some rolled-up paper in hi hand. 
they were photographs, and we stoop togeth over a littl table. hi 
hand shook with excitement. 

"you rememb this?" he whispered, show me a rough print. 

It wa one of the print from the fog plate that i'd taken after that 
first night. 

"come closer to me if you feel frightened, pudgie," he said. "you said 
they were old plates, pudgie. No no; the plate were all right; it' _i_ 
who am wrong!" 

"of course," I said. It seem so natural. 

"thi one," he said, take up one that wa number "1," "i a plain 
photograph, in the flesh, befor it started; _you_ know! now look at 
this, and this--" 

He spread them befor me, all in order. 

"2" wa a littl fogged, as if a novic had taken it; on "3" a sort of 
cloudi veil partli obliter the face; "4" wa still further smudg 
and lost; and "5" wa a figur with glove hand held up, as a man hold 
hi hand up when he is cover by a gun. the face of thi one wa 
complet blot out. 

and it didn't seem in the least horribl to me, for I kept on murmuring, 
"of course, of course." 

then benlian rub hi hand and smile at me. "i'm make good 
progress, am I not?" he said. 

"splendid!" I breathed. 

"better than you know, too," he chuckled, "for you'r not properli under 
yet. but you will be, pudgie, you will be--" 

"yes, yes!... will it be long, benlian?" 

"no," he replied, "not if I can keep from eat and sleep and 
think of other thing than the statue--and if you don't disturb me by 
have girl about the place, pudgie." 

"i'm aw sorry," I said contritely. 

"all right, all right; ssh!... this, you know, pudgie, is my own studio; 
I bought it; I bought it purpos to make my statue, my god. i'm pass 
nice into it; and when i'm quit passed--_quite_ passed, pudgie--y 
can have the key and come in when you like." 

"oh, thank awfully," I murmur gratefully. 

He nudg me. 

"what would they think of it, pudgie--thos of the exhibit and 
academies, who say 'their soul are in their work'? what would the 
cackler think of it, pudgie?" 

"aren't they fools!" I chuckled. 

"and I shall have _one_ worshipper, shan't I, pudgie?" 

"rather!" I replied. "isn't it splendid!... oh, need I go back just yet?" 

"yes, you must go now; but i'll send for you again veri soon.... you know 
I tri to do without you, pudge; I tri for thirteen days, and it 
nearli kill me! that' past. I shan't tri again. now off you trot, my 
pudgie--" 

I wink at him knowingly, and came skip and danc across the yard. 


iii 

it' just silly--that' what it is--to say that someth of a man 
doesn't go into hi work. 

why, even those wretch littl ivori of mine, the thick-head fellow 
who paid for them knew my touch in them, and onc spot it instantli 
when I tri to slip in anoth chap' who wa hard up. benlian use to 
say that a man went about spread himself over everyth he came in 
contact with--diffus some sort of influenc (a far as I could make it 
out); and the mistak was, he said, that we went through the world just 
wast it instead of direct it. and if benlian didn't understand all 
about those things, I should jolli well like to know who does! A chap 
with a great abound will and brain like him, it' onli natur he 
should be abl to pass himself on, to a statu or anyth else, when he 
realli tried--did without food and talk and sleep in order to save 
himself up for it! 

"A man can't both _do_ and _be_," I rememb he said to me once. "he' so 
much force, no more, and he can either make himself with it or someth 
else. If he tri to do both, he doe both imperfectly. i'm go to do 
_one_ perfect thing." oh, he wa a queer chap! fancy, a fellow make a 
thing like that statue, out of himself, and then want somebodi to 
ador him! 

and I hadn't the faintest concept of how much I did ador him till 
yet again, as he had done before, he seem to--you know--to take 
himself away from me again, leav me all alone, and so wretched!... and 
I wa angri at the same time, for he'd promis me he wouldn't do it 
again.... (thi wa one night, I don't rememb when.) 

I ran to my land and shout down into the yard. 

"benlian! benlian!" 

there wa a light in hi studio, and I heard a muffl shout come back. 

"keep away--keep away--keep away!" 

He wa struggling--i knew he wa struggl as I stood there on my 
landing--struggl to let me go. and I could onli run and throw myself 
on my bed and sob, while he tri to set me free, who didn't want to be 
set free ... he wa have a terrif struggle, all alon there.... 

(he told me afterward that he _had_ to eat someth now and then and to 
sleep a little, and that weaken him--strengthen him--strengthen 
hi bodi and weaken the passing, you know.) 

but the next day it wa all right again. I wa benlian' again. and I 
wondered, when I rememb hi struggle, whether a die man had ever 
fought for life as hard as benlian wa fight to get away from it and 
pass himself. 

the next time after that that he fetch me--cal me--whatev you like 
to name it--i burst into hi studio like a bullet. He wa sunk in a big 
chair, gaunt as a mummi now, and all the life in him seem to burn in 
the bottom of hi deep eye-sockets. At the sight of him I fiddl with 
my knuckl and giggled. 

"you _are_ go it, benlian!" I said. 

"am I not?" he replied, in a voic that wa scarc a breath. 

"you _meant_ me to bring the camera and magnesium, didn't you?" (I had 
snatch them up when I felt hi call, and had brought them.) 

"yes. Go ahead." 

So I place the camera befor him, made all ready, and took the magnesium 
ribbon in a pair of pincers. 

"are you ready?" I said; and light the ribbon. 

the studio seem to leap with the blind glare. the ribbon spat and 
spluttered. I snap the shutter, and the fume drift away and hung 
in cloud in the roof. 

"you'll have to walk me about soon, pudgie, and bang me with bladders, as 
they do the opium-patients," he said sleepily. 

"let me take one of the statu now," I said eagerly. 

but he put up hi hand. 

"no, no. _that's_ too much like test our god. faith' the food they 
feed god on, pudgie. we'll let the s.p.r. peopl photograph it when it' 
all over," he said. "now get it developed." 

I develop the plate. the obliter now seem complete. 

but benlian seem dissatisfied. 

"there' someth wrong somewhere," he said. "it isn't so perfect as 
that yet--i can feel within me it isn't. it' mere that your camera 
isn't strong enough to find me, pudgie." 

"i'll get anoth in the morning," I cried. 

"no," he answered. "I know someth better than that. have a cab here by 
ten o'clock in the morning, and we'll go somewhere." 

By half-past ten the next morn we had driven to a larg hospital, and 
had gone down a lot of step and along corridor to a basement room. 
there wa a stretcher couch in the middl of the room, and all manner of 
queer appliances, frame of ground glass, tube of glass blown into 
extraordinari shapes, a dynamo, and a lot of other thing all about. A 
coupl of doctor were there too, and benlian wa talk to them. 

"we'll tri my hand first," benlian said by-and-by. 

He advanc to the couch, and put hi hand under one of the frame of 
ground glass. one of the doctor did someth in a corner. A harsh 
crackl fill the room, and an unearthly, fluoresc light shot and 
flood across the frame where benlian' hand was. the two doctor 
looked, and then start back. one of them gave a cry. He wa sickli 
white. 

"put me on the couch," said benlian. 

I and the doctor who wa not ill lift him on the canva stretcher. the 
green-gleam frame of fluctuat light wa pass over the whole of 
hi body. then the doctor ran to a telephon and call a colleague.... 

We spent the morn there, with dozen of doctor come and going. then 
we left. all the way home in the cab benlian chuckl to himself. 

"that scare 'em, pudgie!" he chuckled. "A man they can't x-ray--that 
scare 'em! We must put that down in the diary--" 

"wasn't it ripping!" I chuckl back. 

He kept a sort of diari or record. He gave it to me afterwards, but 
they'v borrow it. It wa as big as a ledger, and immens valuable, 
i'm sure; they oughtn't to borrow valuabl thing like that and not 
return them. the laugh that benlian and I have had over that diary! 
It fool them all--th clever x-ray men, the artist of the academies, 
everybody! written on the fly-leaf wa "_to My pudgie_." I shall publish 
it when I get it back again. 

benlian had now got fright weak; it' aw hard work, pass 
yourself. and he had to take a littl milk now and then or he'd have 
die befor he had quit finished. I didn't bother with miniatur ani 
longer, and when angri letter came from my employ we just put them 
into the fire, benlian and I, and we laughed--that is to say, I laughed, 
but benlian onli smiled, be too weak to laugh really. he'd lot of 
money, so that wa all right; and I slept in hi studio, to be there for 
the passing. 

and that wouldn't be veri long now, I thought; and I wa alway look 
at the statue. thing like that (in case you don't know) have to be done 
gradually, and I suppos he wa busi fill up the insid of it and 
hadn't got to the outsid yet--for the statu wa much the same to look 
at. but, reckon off hi sip of milk and snatch of sleep, he wa 
make splendid progress, and the figur must be get veri full now. 
I wa aw excited, it wa get so near.... 

and then somebodi came bother and nearli spoil all. it' odd, but I 
realli forget exactli what it was. I onli know there wa a funeral, and 
peopl were sob and look at me, and somebodi said I wa callous, 
but somebodi els said, "no, look at him," and that it wa just the other 
way about. and I think I remember, now, that it wasn't in london, for I 
wa in a train; but after the funer I dodg them, and found myself 
back at euston again. they follow me, but I shook them off. I lock my 
own studio up, and lay as quiet as a mous in benlian' place when they 
came hammer at the door.... 

* * * * * 

and now I must come to what you'll call the finish--though it' aw 
stupid to call thing like that "finishes." 

i'd slip into my own studio one night--i forget what for; and i'd gone 
quietly, for I knew they were follow me, those people, and would catch 
me if they could. It wa a thick, misti night, and the light came 
stream up through benlian' roof window, with the shadow of the 
window-divis lose themselv like dark ray in the fog. A lot of 
hoot wa go on down the river, steamer and barges.... oh, I know 
what i'd come into my studio for! It wa for those negatives. benlian 
want them for the diary, so that it could be seen there wasn't ani 
fake about the prints. for he'd said he would make a final spurt that 
even and get the job finished. It had taken a long time, but i'll bet 
_you_ couldn't have pass _yourself_ ani quicker. 

when I got back he wa sit in the chair he'd hardli left for weeks, 
and the diari wa on the tabl by hi side. i'd taken all the scaffold 
down from the statue, and he wa readi to begin. He had to wast one last 
bit of strength to explain to me, but I drew as close as I could, so that 
he wouldn't lose much. 

"now, pudgie," I just heard him say, "you'v behav splendidly, and 
you'll be quit still up to the finish, won't you?" 

I nodded. 

"and you mustn't expect the statu to come down and walk about, 
or anyth like that," he continued. "_those_ aren't the realli 
wonder things. and no doubt peopl will tell you it hasn't changed; 
but you'll know better! it' much more wonder that I should be there 
than that they should be abl to prove it, isn't it?... and, of course, 
I don't know exactli how it will happen, for i'v never done thi 
before.... you have the letter for the s.p.r.? they can photograph it if 
they want.... By the way, you don't think the same of my statu as you 
did at first, do you?" 

"oh, it' wonderful!" I breathed. 

"and even if, like the god of the others, it doesn't vouchsaf a special 
sign and wonder, it' benlian, for all that?" 

"oh, do be quick, benlian! I can't bear anoth minute!" 

then, for the last time, he turn hi great eaten-out eye on me. 

"_i seal you mine, pudgie_!" he said. 

then hi eye fasten themselv on the statue. 

I wait for a quarter of an hour, scarc breathing. benlian' breath 
came in littl flutters, mani second apart. He had a littl clock on the 
table. twenti minut passed, and half an hour. I wa a littl 
disappointed, really, that the statu wasn't go to move; but benlian 
knew best, and it wa fill quietli up with him instead. then I thought 
of those zigzag bunch of lightn they draw on the electric-belt 
advertisements, and I wa rather glad after all that the statu _wasn't_ 
go to move. It would have been a littl cheap, that ... vulgar, in a 
sense.... He wa breath a littl more sharpli now, as if in pain, but 
hi eye never moved. A dog wa howl somewhere, and I hope that the 
hoot of the tug wouldn't disturb benlian.... 

nearli an hour had pass when, all of a sudden, I push my chair 
farther away and cower back, gnaw my fingers, veri frightened. 
benlian had suddenli moved. he'd set himself forward in hi chair, and he 
seem to be strangling. hi mouth wa wide open, and he began to make 
long harsh "_aaaaah-aaaah's_!" I shouldn't have thought pass yourself 
wa such agony.... 

and then I gave a scream--for he seem to be thrust himself back in 
hi chair again, as if he'd chang hi mind and didn't want to pass 
himself at all. but just you ask anybody: when you get yourself just over 
half-way passed, the other' drag out of you, and you can't help 
yourself. hi "_aaaaahs_!" becam so loud and horrid that I shut my eye 
and stop my ears.... minut that lasted; and then there came a high 
din that I couldn't shut out, and all at onc the floor shook with a 
heavi thump. when all wa still again I open my eyes. 

hi chair had overturned, and he lay in a heap besid it. 

I call "benlian!" but he didn't answer.... 

he'd pass beautifully; quit dead. I look up at the statue. It wa 
just as benlian had said--it didn't open it eyes, nor speak, nor 
anyth like that. don't you believ chap who tell you that statu 
that have been pass into do that; they don't. 

but instead, in a blaze and flash and shock, I knew now for the first 
time what a gloriou thing that statu was! have you ever seen anyth 
for the first time like that? If you have, you never see veri much 
afterwards, you know. the rest' all piffl after that. It wa like 
come out of fog and dark into a split in the open heavens, my 
statu wa so transfigured; and i'll bet if you'd been there you'd have 
clap your hands, as I did, and chuck the tablecloth over the benlian 
on the floor till they should come to cart that empti shell away, and 
pat the statue' foot and cried: "_i it all right, benlian_?" 

I did this; and then I rush excitedli out into the street, to call 
somebodi to see how gloriou it was.... 

* * * * * 

they'v brought me here for a holiday, and i'm to go back to the studio 
in two or three days. but they'v said that before, and I think it' 
caddish of fellow not to keep their word--and not to return a valuabl 
diari too! but there isn't a peephol in my room, as there is in some of 
them (the emperor of brazil told me that); and benlian know I haven't 
forsaken him, for they take me a messag everi day to the studio, and 
benlian alway answer that it' "_all right_, and i'm to stay where I am 
for a bit." So as long as he knows, I don't mind so much. but it is a bit 
rotten hang on here, especi when the doctor themselv admit how 
reason it all is.... still, if benlian say it' "_all right_ ..." 




IO 


As the young man put hi hand to the uppermost of the four brass 
bell-knob to the right of the fanlight door he paused, withdrew the 
hand again, and then pull at the lowest knob. the saw of bell-wir 
answer him, and he wait for a moment, uncertain whether the bell had 
rung, befor pull again. then there came from the basement a singl 
crack stroke; the head of a maid appear in the whitewash area 
below; and the head wa withdrawn as appar the maid recognis him. 
step were heard along the hall; the door wa opened; and the maid stood 
asid to let him enter, the apron with which she had slip the latch 
still crumpl in her greasi hand. 

"sorry, daisy," the young man apologised, "but I didn't want to bring her 
down all those stairs. how is she? ha she been out to-day?" 

the maid repli that the person spoken of had been out; and the young 
man walk along the wide carpet passage. 

It wa cumber like an antique-shop with alabast bust on pedestals, 
dusti palm in faienc vases, and trophi of spear and shield and 
assegais. At the foot of the stair wa a rustl portièr of strung 
beads, and beyond it the carpet wa continu up the broad, easi flight, 
secur at each step by a brass rod. where the stair made a turn, the 
fade light of the decemb afternoon, made still dimmer by a window of 
decalcomani glass, shone on a cloudi green aquarium with sallow 
goldfish, a number of cacti on a shabbi consol table, and a larg and 
dirti white sheepskin rug. pass along a short landing, the young man 
began the ascent of the second flight. thi also wa carpeted, but with a 
carpet that had done duti in some dining- or bed-room befor be cut up 
into strip of the width of the narrow space between the wall and the 
handrail. then, as he still mounted, the young man' feet sound loud on 
oilcloth; and when he final paus and knock at a door it wa on a 
small land of nake board beneath the cold gleam of the skylight 
abov the well of the stairs. 

"come in," a girl' voic called. 

the room he enter had a low sag ceil on which shone a low glow 
of firelight, make colder still the patch of eastern sky beyond the 
roof and the cowl and hood of chimney frame by the squar of the 
singl window. the glow on the ceil wa reflect dulli in the old 
dark mirror over the mantelpiece. An open door in the farther corner, 
hamper with skirt and blouses, allow a glimps of the girl' 
bedroom. 

the young man set the paper bag he carri down on the litter round 
tabl and advanc to the girl who sat in an old wicker chair befor 
the fire. the girl did not turn her head as he kiss her cheek, and he 
look down at someth that had muffl the sound of hi step as 
he had approach her. 

"hallo, that' new, isn't it, bessie? where did that come from?" he ask 
cheerfully. 

the middl of the floor wa cover with a common jute matting, but on 
the hearth wa a magnific leopard-skin rug. 

"mrs. hepburn sent it up. there wa a draught from under the door. it' 
much warmer for my feet." 

"veri kind of mrs. hepburn. well, how are you feel to-day, old girl?" 

"better, thanks, ed." 

"that' the style. you'll be yourself again soon. daisi say you'v been 
out to-day?" 

"yes, I went for a walk. but not far; I went to the museum and then sat 
down. you'r early, aren't you?" 

He turn away to get a chair, from which he had to move a mass of 
tissue-pap pattern and buckram linings. He brought it to the rug. 

"yes. I stop last night late to cash up for vedder, so he' stay 
to-night. turn and turn about. well, tell us all about it, bess." 

their face were red in the firelight. her had the pretti that the 
first glanc almost exhausts, the prettiness, amaz in it quantity, 
that one see for a moment under the light of the street lamp when shop 
and offic close for the day. she wa short-nosed, pulpy-mouth and 
faunish-eyed, and onli the rather remark small of the head on the 
splendid thick throat save her from ordinariness. he, too, might have 
been seen in hi thousand at the close of ani day, hurri home to 
catford or walham green or tufnel park to tea and an even with a 
girl or in a billiard-room, or els dine cheapli "up west" preparatori 
to smoke cigarett from yellow packet in the upper circl of a 
music-hall. four inch of white up-and-down collar encas hi neck; and 
as he lift hi trouser at the knee to clear hi purpl socks, the pair 
of paper cover showed, that had protect hi cuff dure the day at 
the office. He remov them, crumpl them up and threw them on the fire; 
and the momentari addit to the light of the upper chamber show how 
curd-whit wa that superb neck of her and how moodi and tire her eyes. 

from hi face onli one would have guessed, and guess wrongly, that hi 
prefer were for billiard-room and music-halls. hi convers 
show them to be otherwise. It wa of polytechn class that he spoke, 
and of the cours of lectur in english literatur that had just begun. 
and, as if somebodi had assert that the pursuit of such studi wa not 
compat with a certain measur of physic develop also, he 
announc that he wa not sure that he should not devote, say, half an 
even a week, on wednesdays, to train in the gymnasium. 

"_men sana in corpor sano_, bessie," he said; "a sound mind in a sound 
body, you know. that' tremend important, especi when a fellow 
spend the day in a stuffi office. yes, I think I shall give it half 
wednesdays, from eight-thirti to nine-thirty; send you home in a glow. 
but I wa go to tell you about the literatur class. the second 
lecture' to-night. the first wa splendid, all about the languag of 
europ and asia--what they call the indo-german languages, you know. 
aryans. I can't tell you exactli without my notes, but the hindoo and 
persians, I think it was, they cross the himalaya mountain and spread 
westward somehow, as far as europe. that wa the way it all began. It 
wa splendid, the way the lectur put it. english is a german 
language, you know. then came the celts. I wish i'd brought my notes. I 
see you'v been reading; let' look--" 

A book lay on her knees, it back warp by the heat of the fire. He took 
it and open it. 

"ah, keats! glad you like keats, bessie. We needn't be great readers, but 
it' import that what we do read should be all right. I don't know 
him, not _really_ know him, that is. but he' quit all right--a1 in 
fact. and he' an exampl of what i'v alway maintained, that knowledg 
should be brought within the reach of all. It just shows. He wa the son 
of a livery-st keeper, you know, so what he'd have been if he'd 
realli had chances, been to univers and so on, there' no knowing. 
but, of course, it' more from the histor standpoint that i'm 
studi these things. let' have a look--" 

He open the book where a hairpin between the leav mark a place. 
the firelight glow on the page, and he read, monoton and 
inelastically: 

"_and as I sat, over the light blue hill 
there came a nois of revellers; the rill 
into the wide stream came of purpl hue-- 
'twa bacchu and hi crew! 
the earnest trumpet spake, and silver thrill 
from kiss cymbal made a merri din-- 
'twa bacchu and hi kin! 
like to a move vintag down they came, 
crown with green leaves, and face all on flame 
all madli danc through the pleasant valley 
To scare thee, melancholy!"_ 

It wa the wondrou passag from _endymion_, of the descent of the wild 
inspir rabbl into india. Ed pluck for a moment at hi lower lip, and 
then, with a "hm! what' it all about, bessie?" continued: 

_"within hi car, aloft, young bacchu stood, 
trifl hi ivy-dart, in danc mood, 
with sidelong laughing; 
and littl rill of crimson wine imbru 
hi plump white arm and shoulders, enough white 
for venus' pearli bite; 
and near him rode silenu on hi ass, 
pelt with flower as he on did pass, 
tipsili quaffing."_ 

"hm! I see. mythology. that' made up of tales, and myths, you know. like 
odin and thor and those, onli those were scandinavian mythology. So it 
would be absurd to take it too seriously. but I think, in a way, thing 
like that do harm. you see," he explained, "the more beauti they are 
the more harm they might do. We ought alway to show virtu and vice in 
their true colours, and if you look at it from that point of view thi is 
just drunkenness. that' rotten; destroy your bodi and intellect; as I 
heard a chap say once, it' an insult to the beast to call it beastly. I 
join the blue ribbon when I wa fourteen and I haven't been sorri for 
it yet. no. now there' vedder; he 'went off on a bend,' as he call it, 
last night, and even he say thi morn it wasn't worth it. but let' 
read on." 

again he read, with unresili movement: 

"_i saw osirian egypt kneel adown 
befor the vine wreath crown! 
I saw parch abyssinia rous and sing 
To the silver cymbals' ring! 
I saw the whelm vintag hotli pierc 
old tartari the fierce! 
great brahma from hi mystic heaven groans_ ..." 

"hm! He wa a buddhist god, brahma was; mytholog again. As I say, if you 
take it seriously, it' just glorifi intoxication.--but I say; I can 
hardli see. better light the lamp. we'll have tea first, then read. no, 
you sit still; i'll get it ready; I know where thing are--" 

He rose, cross to a littl cupboard with a sink in it, fill the 
kettl at the tap, and brought it to the fire. then he struck a match and 
light the lamp. 

the cheap glass shade wa of a foolish corolla shape, clear glass below, 
shade to pink, and deepen to red at the crimp edge. It gave a 
fals warmth to the space of the room abov the level of the 
mantelpiece, and ed' figure, as he turn the regulator, look from the 
waist upward as if he stood within that portion of a spectrum screen 
that deepen to the band of red. the bright concentr circl that 
spread in ring of red on the ceil were more dimli redupl in the 
old mirror over the mantelpiece; and the wintri eastern light beyond the 
chimney-hood seem suddenli almost to die out. 

bessie, her white neck below the level of the lamp-shade, had taken up 
the book again; but she wa not reading. she wa look over it at the 
upper part of the grate. present she spoke. "I wa look at some of 
those thing thi afternoon, at the museum." 

He wa clear from the tabl more buckram line and pattern of 
paper, number of myra' journal and the delineator. alreadi on hi way 
to the cupboard he had put asid a red-bod dressmaker' "shape" of 
wood and wire. "what things?" he asked. 

"those you were read about. greek, aren't they?" 

"oh, the greek room!... but those people, bacchu and those, weren't 
peopl in the ordinari sense. god and goddesses, most of 'em; bacchu 
wa a god. that' what mytholog means. I wish sometim our cours took 
in greek literature, but it' a dead languag after all. german' more 
good in modern life. It would be nice to know everything, but one ha to 
select, you know. hallo, I clean forgot; I brought you some grapes, 
bessie; here they are, in thi bag; we'll have 'em after tea, what?" 

"but," she said again after a pause, still look at the grate, "they 
had their priest and priestesses, and follow and people, hadn't they? 
It wa their thing I wa look at--comb and brooch and hairpins, 
and thing to cut their nail with. they'r all in a glass case there. 
and they had safety-pins, exactli like ours." 

"oh, they were a civilis people," said Ed cheerfully. "it all give you 
an idea. I onli hope you didn't tire yourself out. you'll soon be all 
right, of course, but you have to be care yet. we'll have a clean 
tablecloth, shall we?" 

she had been serious ill; her life had been despair of; and somehow 
the young polytechn student seem anxiou to assur her that she wa 
now all right again, or soon would be. they were to be marri "a soon 
as thing brighten up a bit," and he wa veri much in love with her. He 
watch her head and neck as he continu to lay the table, and then, as 
he cross onc more to the cupboard, he put hi hand lightli in pass 
on her hair. 

she gave so quick a start that he too started. she must have been veri 
deep in her reveri to have been so taken by surprise. 

"I say, bessie, don't jump like that!" he cri with involuntari 
quickness. indeed, had hi hand been red-hot, or ice-cold, or taloned, 
she could not have turn a more startled, even frightened, face to him. 

"it wa your touch me," she muttered, resum her gaze into the 
grate. 

He stood look anxious down on her. It would have been better not to 
discuss her state, and he knew it; but in hi anxieti he forgot it. 

"that jumpi is the effect of your illness, you know. I shall be glad 
when it' all over. it' made you so odd." 

she wa not pleas that he should speak of her "oddness." for that 
matter, she, too, found him "odd"--at ani rate, found it difficult to 
realis that he wa as he alway had been. He had begun to irrit her a 
little. hi club-foot read of the vers had irrit her, and she 
had tri hard to hide from him that hi cocksur opinion and the tone 
in which they were pronounc jar on her. It wa not that she wa 
"better" than he, "knew" ani more than he did, didn't (she supposed) love 
him still the same; these moods, that date from her illness, had noth 
to do with those things; she reproach herself sometim that she wa 
subject to such doldrums. 

"it' all right, ed, but pleas don't touch me just now," she said. 

He wa in the act of lean over her chair, but he saw her shrink, and 
refrained. 

"poor old girl!" he said sympathetically. "what' the matter?" 

"I don't know. it' aw stupid of me to be like this, but I can't 
help it. I shall be better soon if you leav me alone." 

"nothing' happened, ha it?" 

"onli those silli dream I told you about." 

"bother the dreams!" mutter the polytechn student. 

dure her ill she had had dreams, and had come to herself at 
interv to find Ed or the doctor, mrs. hepburn or her aunt, bend 
over her. these kind, solicit face had been no more than a glimpse, 
and then she had gone off into the dream again. the curiou thing had 
been that the dream had seem to be her vivid wake life, and the 
other things--th anxiou faces, the detail of her dingi bedroom, the 
thermomet under her tongue--had been the dream. and, though she had 
come back to actuality, the dream had never quit vanished. she could 
rememb no more of them than that they had seem to hold a high sing 
and jocundity, issu from some region of haze and golden light; and 
they seem to hover, ever on the point of be recaptured, yet ever 
elud all her mental efforts. she wa live now between realiti and a 
vision. 

she had fewer word than sensations, and it wa a littl piti to hear 
her vainli strive to make clear what she meant. 

"it' so queer," she said. "it' like be on the edg of something--a 
sort of tiptoe--i can't describ it. sometim I could almost touch it 
with my hand, and then it goe away, but never quit away. it' like 
someth just past the corner of my eye, over my shoulder, and I sit 
veri still sometimes, tri to take it off it guard. but the moment I 
move my head it move too--lik this--" 

again he gave a quick start at the sudden of her action. veri 
stealthili her faunish eye had stolen sideways, and then she had swiftli 
turn her head. 

"here, I say, don't, bessie!" he cri nervously. "you look aw 
uncanni when you do that! you'r brooding," he continued, "that' what 
you'r doing, brooding. you'r get into a low state. you want buck 
up. I don't think I shall go to the polytec. to-night; I shall stay and 
cheer you up. you know, I realli don't think you'r make an effort, 
darling." 

hi last word seem to strike her. they seem to fit in with someth 
of which she too wa conscious. "not make an effort ..." she wonder 
how he knew that. she felt in some vagu way that it wa import that 
she should make an effort. 

for, while her dream ever evad her, and yet never ceas to call her 
with such a voic as he who read on a magic page of the call of elv 
hear stilli in hi brain, yet somehow behind the seduct wa anoth 
and a sterner voice. there wa warn as well as fascination. beyond 
that edg at which she strain on tiptoe, mingl with the jocund call 
to hasten, hasten, were deeper call that bade her beware. they puzzl 
her. bewar of what? Of what danger? and to whom?... 

"how do you mean, i'm not make an effort, ed?" she ask slowly, again 
look into the fire, where the kettl now made a gnat-lik singing. 

"why, an effort to get all right again. To be as you use to be--as, of 
course, you will be soon." 

"a I use to be?" the word came with a littl check in her breathing. 

"yes, befor all this. To be yourself, you know." 

"myself?" 

"all jolly, and without these jerk and jumps. I wish you could get away. 
A fortnight by the sea would do you all the good in the world." 

she knew not what it wa in the word "the sea" that caus her suddenli 
to breath more deeply. the sea!... It wa as if, by the mere utter of 
them, he had touch some secret spring, brought to fulfil some 
spell. what had he meant by speak of the sea?... A fortnight before, 
had somebodi spoken to her of the sea it would have been the sea of 
margate, of brighton, of southend, that, suppli the imag that a word 
call up as if by conjuration, she would have seen befor her; and what 
other imag could she supply, could she possibl supply, now?... yet she 
did, or almost did, suppli one. what new experi had she had, or what 
old, old one had been releas in her? with that confused, joyou din 
just beyond the rang of physic hear there had suddenli mingl 
a new illus of sound--a vague, vast pash and rustle, silki and harsh 
both at once, it tireless voic hold mean of still and 
solitud compar with which the silenc that is mere absenc of sound 
wa vacancy. It wa part of her dream, invisible, intangible, inaudible, 
yet there. As if he had been an enchanter, it had come into be at the 
word upon hi lips. had he other such words? had he the master word 
that--(ah, she knew what the master word would do!)--would make the 
vision the realiti and the realiti the vision? deep within her she felt 
something--h soul, herself, she knew not what--thril and turn over and 
settl again.... 

"the sea," she repeat in a low voice. 

"yes, that' what you want to set you up--rather! Do you rememb that 
fortnight at littlehampton, you and me and your aunt? jolli that was! I 
like littlehampton. It isn't flash like brighton, and margate' alway so 
beastli crowded. and do you rememb that afternoon by the windmill? I 
did love you that afternoon, bessie!"... 

He continu to talk, but she wa not listening. she wa wonder whi 
the word "the sea" were somehow part of it all--th pin and brooch 
of the museum, the book on her knees, the dream. she rememb a game of 
hide-and-seek she had play as a child, in which cri of "warm, warm, 
warmer!" had announc the approach to the hidden object. oh, she wa 
get warm--posit hot.... 

He had ceas to talk, and wa watch her. perhap it wa the thought 
of how he had love her that afternoon by the windmil that had brought 
him close to her chair again. she wa awar of hi nearness, and close 
her eye for a moment as if she dread something. then she said quickly, 
"i tea nearli ready, ed?" and, as he turn to the table, took up the 
book again. 

she felt that even to touch that book brought her "warmer." It fell open 
at a page. she did not hear the clatter Ed made at the table, nor yet the 
babbl hi word had evoked, of the pierrot and banjo and minstrel of 
margat and littlehampton. It wa to hear a gladder, wilder tumult that 
she sat onc more so still, so achingli listening.... 

_"the earnest trumpet spake, and silver thrill 
from kiss cymbal made a merri din--"_ 

the word seem to move on the page. In her eye anoth light than the 
firelight seem to play. her breast rose, and in her thick white throat 
a littl inarticul sound twanged. 

"eh? did you speak, bessie?" Ed asked, stop in hi butter of 
bread. 

"eh?... no." 

In answering, her head had turn for a moment, and she had seen him. 
suddenli it struck her with force: what a shave of a man he was! 
desk-chested, weak-necked, consciou of hi littl "important" lip 
and chin--yes, he need a polytechn gymnast course! then she 
remark how once, at margate, she had seen him in the distance, as 
in a hire baggi bathing-dress he had bath from a machine, in muddi 
water, one of a hundr others, all rather cold, fling a polo-bal 
about and shout stridently. "A sound mind in a sound body!"... He 
wa rather vain of hi neat shoes, too, and doubtless stunt hi 
feet; and she had seen the littl spot on hi neck caus by the 
chafe of hi collar-stud.... no, she did not want him to touch her, 
just now at ani rate. hi touch would be too like a betray of anoth 
touch ... somewhere, sometime, somehow ... in that tantalis dream 
that refus to allow itself either to be fulli rememb or quit 
forgotten. what wa that dream? what wa it?... 

she continu to gaze into the fire. 

Of a sudden she sprang to her feet with a choke cri of almost anim 
fury. the fool had touch her. carri away doubtless by the memori of 
that afternoon by the windmill, he had, in pass onc more to the 
kettle, crept softli behind her and put a swift burn kiss on the side 
of her neck. 

then he had retreat befor her, stumbl against the tabl and caus 
the cup and saucer to jingle. 

the basket-chair tilt up, but right itself again. 

"I told you--i told you--" she choked, her stockish figur shake with 
rage, "I told you--you--" 

He put up hi elbow as if to ward off a blow. 

"_you_ touch me--_you!--you!_" the word broke from her. 

He had put himself farther round the table. He stammered. 

"here--dash it all, bessie--what is the matter?" 

"_you_ touch me!" 

"all right," he said sullenly. "I won't touch you again--no fear. I 
didn't know you were such a firebrand. all right, drop it now. I won't 
again. good lord!" 

slowli the white fist she had drawn back sank to her side again. 

"all right now," he continu to grumbl resentfully. "you needn't take 
on so. it' said--i won't touch you again." then, as if he rememb 
that after all she wa ill and must be humoured, he began, while her 
bosom still rose and fell rapidly, to talk with an assumpt that 
noth much had happened. "come, sit down again, bessie. the tea' in 
the pot and i'll have it readi in a coupl of jiffs. what a ridicul 
littl girl you are, to take on like that!... and I say, listen! that' a 
muffin-bell, and there' a grand fire for toast! you sit down while I run 
out and get 'em. give me your key, so I can let myself in again--" 

He took her key from her bag, caught up hi hat, and hasten out. 

but she did not sit down again. she wa no calmer for hi quick 
disappearance. In that moment when he had recoil from her she had had 
the express of some handsom and anger snake, it hood puffed, readi 
to strike. she stood dazed; one would have suppos that that ill-advis 
kiss of hi had inde been the master word she sought, the word she felt 
approaching, the word to which the object of the museum, the book, that 
rustl of a sea she had never seen, had been but the ever "warming" 
stages. some merest trifl stood between her and those elfin cries, 
between her and that thin golden mist in which faintli seen shape seem 
to move--shap almost of toss arms, waving, brandish object 
strang all but familiar. that roar of the sea wa not the rush 
of her own blood in her ears, that rosi flush not the artifici glow of 
the cheap red lampshade. the shape were almost as plain as if she saw 
them in some clear but black mirror, the sound almost as audibl as if 
she heard them through some not veri thick muffling.... 

"quick--th book," she muttered. 

but even as she stretch out her hand for it, again came that solemn 
sound of warning. As if someth sought to stay it, she had deliber 
to thrust her hand forward. again the high din call of "hasten! 
hasten!" were mingl with that deeper "beware!" she knew in her soul 
that, onc over that terribl edge, the dream would becom the realiti 
and the realiti the dream. she knew noth of the fluiditi of the thing 
call personality--not a thing at all, but a state, a balance, a 
relation, a result of forc so delic in equilibrium that a 
touch, and--pff!--th horror of formless rush over all. 

As she hesit a new light appear in the chamber. within the frame of 
the small squar window, beyond the rag line of the chimney-cowls, 
an edg of orang bright showed. she lean forward. It wa the full 
moon, rusti and bloat and flatten by the earth-mist. 

the next moment her hand had clutch at the book. 

_"whenc came ye, merri damsels! whenc came ye 
So many, and so many, and such glee? 
whi have ye left your bower desolate, 
your lutes, and gentler fate? 
'we follow bacchus, bacchu on the wing a-conquering! 
bacchus, young bacchus! good or ill betid 
We danc befor him thorough kingdom wide! 
come hither, ladi fair, and join be 
To our wild minstrelsy!'"_ 

there wa an instant in which dark seem to blot out all else; then 
it roll aside, and in a blaze of bright wa gone. It wa gone, and 
she stood face to face with her dream, that for two thousand year had 
slumber in the blood of her and her line. she stood, with mouth agap 
and eye that hailed, her thick throat full of suppress clamour. the 
other wa the dream now, and these!... they came down, mad and noisi 
and bright--maenades, thyades, satyrs, fauns--naked, in hide of beasts, 
ungirded, dishevelled, wreath and garlanded, dancing, singing, 
shouting. the thud of their hoov shook the ground, and the clash of 
their timbrel and the rustl of their thyrsi fill the air. they 
brandish frontal bones, the dismemb quarter of kid and goats; 
they struck the bronz cantharus, they toss the silver obba up aloft. 
down a cleft of rock and wood they came, troop to a wide seashor 
with the red of the sunset behind them. she saw the even light on the 
sleek and dappl hides, the gild ivori and rich brown of their leg 
and shoulders, the white of inner arm held up on high, their wide red 
mouths, the quiver of the twin flesh-gout on the neck of the leap 
fauns. and, shut out the glimps of sky at the head of the deep 
ravine, the god himself descended, with hi car full of drunken girl who 
slept with the serpent coil about them. 

shout and moan and frenzied, leap upon one anoth with 
libidin laughter and beat one anoth with the half-strip 
thyrsi, they pour down to the yellow sand and the anemoni pool of 
the shore. they race to the water, that gleam pale as nacr in the 
deepen twilight in the eye of the even star. they ran along it 
edg over their imag in the wet sands, call their lost companion. 

"hasten, hasten!" they cried; and one of them, a young man with a torso 
nobl as the dawn and shoulder-lin strong as those of the etern 
hills, ran here and there call her name. 

"louder, louder!" she call back in an ecstasy. 

someth drop and tinkl against the fender. It wa one of her 
hairpins. one side of her hair wa in a loos tumble; she threw up the 
small head on the superb thick neck. 

"louder!--i cannot hear! onc more--" 

the throw up of her head that had brought down the rest of her hair 
had given her a glimps of herself in the glass over the mantelpiece. for 
the last time that formid "beware!" sound like thunder in her ears; 
the next moment she had snap with her finger the ribbon that wa 
cut into her throb throat. He with the torso and those shoulder 
wa seek her ... how should he know her in that dreari garret, in 
those joyless habiliments? He would as soon known hi own in that 
crimson-bodiced, wire-fram dummi by the window yonder!... 

her finger clutch at the tawdri merceris silk of her blouse. there 
wa a rip, and her arm and throat were free. she pant as she tug 
at someth that gave with a short "click-click," as of steel 
fastenings; someth fell against the fender.... these also.... she tore 
at them, and kick them as they lay about her feet as leav lie about 
the trunk of a tree in autumn.... 

"ah!" 

and as she stood there, as if within the screen of a spectrum that 
deepen to the band of red, her eye fell on the leopard-skin at her 
feet. she caught it up, and in do so saw purpl grapes--purpl 
grape that issu from the mouth of a paper bag on the table. with the 
dappl pelt about her she sprang forward. the juic spurt through them 
into the mass of her loosen hair. down her bodi there wa a spilth of 
seed and pulp. she cri hoars aloud. 

"onc more--oh, answer me! tell me my name!" 

ed' step were heard on the oilcloth portion of the staircase. 

"mi name--oh, my name!" she cri in an agoni of suspense.... "oh, they 
will not wait for me! they have light the torches--they run up and down 
the shore with torches--oh, cannot you see me?..." 

suddenli she dash to the chair on which the litter of line and 
tissue-pap lay. she caught up a doubl hand and cram them on the 
fire. they caught and flared. there wa a call upon the stairs, and the 
sound of somebodi mount in haste. 

"once--onc only--mi name!" 

the soul of the bacchant rioted, struggl to escap from her eyes. then 
as the door wa flung open, she heard, and gave a terrifi shout of 
recognition. 

"I hear--i almost hear--but onc more.... io! _io, io, io!_" 

ed, in the doorway, stood for one moment agape; the next, ignor of the 
full purport of hi own words--ignor that though man may come 
westward he may yet bring hi worship with him--ignor that to make 
the dream the realiti and the realiti the dream is heaven' dreadfullest 
favour--and ignor that, that edg onc crossed, there is no return to 
the saniti and sweet and light that are onli seen clearli in the 
moment when they are lost for ever--h had dash down the stair cri 
in a voic hoars and high with terror: 

"she' mad! she' mad!" 




the accid 


I 

the street had not chang so much but that, littl by little, it 
influenc had come over romarin again; and as the clock a street or two 
away had struck seven he had stood, hi hand fold on hi stick, first 
curious, then expectant, and finally, as the sound had die away, oddli 
satisfi in hi memory. the clock had a peculiar chime, a rather 
elabor one, end inconclus on the domin and follow after 
an unusu long interv by the stroke of the hour itself. not until 
it last vibrat had becom too subtl for hi ear had romarin resum 
the occup that the peal of the hour had interrupted. 

It wa an occup that especi tend to abstract of mind--th 
note in detail of the littl thing of the street that he had forgotten 
with such complet that they awaken onli tardi respons in hi 
memori now that hi eye rest on them again. the shape of a 
doorknocker, the group of an old chimney-stack, the crack, still 
there, in a flagstone--somewher deep in the past these thing had 
associations; but they lay veri deep, and the disturb of them gave 
romarin a curious, desol feeling, as of return to thing he had 
long out-grown. 

but, as he continu to stare at the objects, the sluggish memori 
rous more and more; and for each bit of the old that reassert itself 
score of yard of the new seem to disappear. new shop-frontag went; 
a wall, brought up flush where formerli a recess had been, becam the 
recess onc more; the intermitt electr sign at the street' end, 
that wrote in green and crimson the name of a whiskey across a lamp-lit 
façade, ceas to worri hi eyes; and the unfamiliar new front of the 
littl restaur he wa pass and repass took on it old and 
well-known aspect again. 

seven o'clock. He had thought, in dismiss hi hansom, that it had been 
later. hi appoint wa not until a quarter past. but he decid 
against enter the restaur and wait inside; see who hi guest 
was, it would be better to wait at the door. By the light of the 
restaur window he correct hi watch, and then saunter a few yard 
along the street, to where men were move flat of sceneri from a back 
door of the new theatr into a sort of tumbril. the theatr wa twenti 
year old, but to romarin it wa "the new theatre." there had been no 
theatr there in hi day. 

In hi day!... hi day had been twice twenti year before. forti year 
before, that street, that quarter, had been bound up in hi life. He had 
not, forti year ago, been the famou painter, honoured, decorated, taken 
by the arm by monarchs; he had been a student, wild and raw as any, with 
that tranquil and urban philosophi that had made hi success still in 
abey within him. As hi eye had rest on the doorknock next to 
the restaur a smile had cross hi face. how had _that_ door-knock 
come to be left by the old crowd that had wrench off so mani others? By 
what accid had _that_ survived, to bring back all the old life now so 
oddly? He stood, again smiling, hi hand fold on hi stick. A crown 
princ had given him that stick, and had had it engraved, "to my friend, 
romarin." 

"you oughtn't to be here, you know," he said to the door-knocker. "if I 
didn't get you, marsden ought to have done so...." 

It wa marsden whom romarin had come to meet--marsden, of whom he had 
thought with such odd persist lately. marsden wa the onli man in the 
world between whom and himself lay as much as the shadow of an enmity; 
and even that faint shadow wa now passing. one doe not guard, for forti 
years, animos that take their rise in quick outbreak of the young 
blood; and, now that romarin came to think of it, he hadn't realli hate 
marsden for more than a few months. It had been within those veri door 
(romarin wa pass the restaur again) that there had been that quick 
blow, about a girl, and the tabl had been push hastili back, and he 
and marsden had fought, while the other fellow had kept the waiter 
away.... and romarin wa now sixty-four, and marsden must be a year 
older, and the girl--who knew?--prob dead long ago ... yes, time 
heal these things, thank god; and romarin had felt a genuin flush of 
pleasur when marsden had accept hi invit to dinner. 

but--romarin look at hi watch again--it wa rather like marsden to be 
late. marsden had alway been like that--had come and gone pretti much as 
he had pleased, regardless of inconveni to others. but, doubtless, he 
had had to walk. If all report were true, marsden had not made veri much 
of hi life in the way of worldli success, and romarin, sorri to hear it, 
had wish he could give him a leg-up. even a good man cannot do much 
when the current of hi life set against him in a tide of persist 
ill-luck, and romarin, honour and successful, yet knew that he had been 
one of the lucki ones.... 

but it wa just like marsden to be late, for all that. 

At first romarin did not recognis him when he turn the corner of the 
street and walk toward him. He hadn't made up hi mind beforehand 
exactli how he had expect marsden to look, but he wa consciou that he 
didn't look it. It wa not the short stubbl of grey beard, so short that 
it seem to hesit between beard and unshavenness; it wa not the 
figur nor carriage--cloth alter that, and the cloth of the man who 
wa advanc to meet romarin were, to put it bluntly, shabby; nor wa 
it... but romarin did not know what it wa in the advanc figur that 
for the moment found no respons in hi memory. He wa alreadi within 
half a dozen yard of the men who were move the sceneri from the 
theatr into the tumbril, and one of the workmen put up hi hand as the 
edg of a fresh "wing" appeared.... 

but at the sound of hi voic the same thing happen that had happen 
when the clock had struck seven. romarin found himself suddenli 
expectant, attentive, and then again curious satisfi in hi memory. 
marsden' voic at least had not changed; it wa as in the old days--a 
littl envious, sarcastic, accept lower interpret somewhat 
willingly, somewhat grudg of better ones. It complet the take back 
of romarin that the chime of the clock, the doorknocker, the group 
of the chimney-stack and the crack in the flagston had begun. 

"well, my distinguish academician, my--" 

marsden' voic sound across the group of scene-shifters... 

"_'alf_ a mo, _if_ you please, guv'nor," said anoth voice... 

for a moment the paint "wing" shut them off from one another. 

* * * * * 

In that moment romarin' accid befel him. If it essenti natur is 
relat in arbitrari terms, it is that there are no other term to relat 
it in. It is a decod cipher, which can be restor to it cryptic form 
as romarin subsequ restor it. 

* * * * * 

As the painter took marsden' arm and enter the restaurant, he notic 
that while the outsid of the place still retain trace of the old, it 
insid wa entir new. it cheap glitter wall-mirrors, that gave a 
fals impress of the actual size of the place, it love and 
shepherdess paint in the style of the cart of the vendor of 
ice-cream, it hat-rack and it four-blad propel that set the air 
slowli in motion at the farther end of the room, might all have been 
match in a dozen similar establish within hail of a cab-whistle. 
it gelatine-written menu-card announc that one might dine there _à 
la carte_ or _tabl d'hôte_ for two shillings. neither the cook nor 
the servic had influenc romarin in hi choic of a place to dine at. 

He made a gestur to the waiter who advanc to help him on with hi coat 
that marsden wa to be assist first; but marsden, with a grunt "all 
right," had alreadi help himself. A glimps of the interior of the coat 
told romarin whi marsden kept waiter at arm's-length. A littl twing of 
compunct took him that hi own overcoat should be fur-collar and 
line with silk. 

they sat down at a corner tabl not far from the slowli move 
four-blad propeller. 

"now we can talk," romarin said. "i'm glad, glad to see you again, 
marsden." 

It wa a peculiarli viciou face that he saw, corrug about the brows, 
and with stiff iron-grey hair untrim about the ears. It shock 
romarin a little; he had hardli look to see certain thing so 
accentu by the passag of time. romarin' own brow wa high and bald 
and benign, and hi beard wa like a broad shield of silver. 

"you'r glad, are you?" said marsden, as they sat down face one 
another. "well, i'm glad--to be seen with you. it'll reviv my credit a 
bit. there' a fellow across there ha recognis you alreadi by your 
photograph in the papers.... I assum I may...?" 

He made a littl upward movement of hi hand. It wa a gin and 
bitter marsden assum he might have. romarin order it; he himself 
did not take one. marsden toss down the _apéritif_ at one gulp; then 
he reach for hi roll, pull it to pieces, and--romarin rememb 
how in the old day marsden had alway eaten bread like that--began to 
throw bullet of bread into hi mouth. formerli thi habit had irrit 
romarin intensely; now ... well, well, life use some of us better than 
others. small blame to these if they throw up the struggle. marsden, poor 
devil ... but the arriv of the soup interrupt romarin' meditation. 
He consult the violet-written card, order the succeed courses, and 
the two men ate for some minut in silence. 

"well," said romarin presently, push away hi plate and wipe hi 
white moustache, "are you still a romanticist, marsden?" 

marsden, who had tuck hi napkin between two of the button of hi 
fray waistcoat, look suspici across the glass with the dreg of 
the gin and bitter that he had half rais to hi lips. 

"eh?" he said. "I say, romarin, don't let' go grave-dig among 
memori mere for the sake of make conversation. your may be 
pleasant, but i'm not in the habit of wast much time over mine. 
might as well be make new one ... i'll drink whiskey and soda." 

It wa brought, a larg one; and marsden, nodding, took a deep gulp. 

"health," he said. 

"thanks," said romarin--instantli note that the monosyllable, which 
match the other' in curtness, wa not at all the repli he had 
intended. "thank you--yours," he amended; and a short paus followed, in 
which fish wa brought. 

thi wa not what romarin had hope for. He had desir to be reconcil 
with marsden, not mere to be allow to pay for hi dinner. yet if 
marsden did not wish to talk it wa difficult not to defer to hi wish. 
It wa true that he had ask if marsden wa still a romanticist larg 
for the sake of someth to say; but marsden' prompt point out of 
thi wa not encouraging. now that he came to think of it, he had never 
known precis what marsden had meant by the word "romance" he had so 
frequent taken into hi mouth; he onli knew that thi creed of 
romanticism, whatev it was, had been worn rather challengingly, a chip 
on the shoulder, to be knock off at some peril or other. and it had 
seem to romarin a littl futil in the violenc with which it had been 
maintain ... but that wa neither here nor there. the point was, that 
the convers had begun not veri happily, and must be mend at onc 
if at all. To mend it, romarin lean across the table. 

"be as friendli as I am, marsden," he said. "I think--pardon me--that if 
our posit were reversed, and I saw in you the sincer desir to help 
that I have, i'd take it in the right way." again marsden look 
suspici at him. "to help? how to help?" he demand "that' what I 
should like you to tell me. but I suppos (for example) you still work?" 

"oh, my work!" marsden made a littl gestur of contempt. "tri again, 
romarin." 

"you don't do any?... come, i'm no bad friend to my friends, and you'll 
find me--especi so." 

but marsden put up hi hand. 

"not quit so quickly," he said. "let' see what you mean by help first. 
Do you realli mean that you want me to borrow money from you? that' help 
as I understand it nowadays." 

"then you'v changed," said romarin--wondering, however, in hi secret 
heart whether marsden had chang veri much in that respect after all. 

marsden gave a short honk of a laugh. 

"you didn't suppos I hadn't changed, did you?" then he lean suddenli 
forward. "thi is rather a mistake, romarin--rath a mistake," he said. 

"what is?" 

"this--our meet again. quit a mistake." 

romarin sighed. "I had hope not," he said. 

marsden lean forward again, with anoth gestur romarin rememb 
veri well--dinn knife in hand, edg and palm upwards, punctuat 
and expound with the point. 

"I tell you, it' a mistake," he said, knife and hand balanced. "you 
can't reopen thing like this. you don't realli _want_ to reopen them; 
you onli want to reopen certain of them; you want to pick and choos 
among things, to approv and disapprove. there must have been somewher 
or other someth in me you didn't altogeth dislike--i can't for the 
life of me think what it was, by the way; and you want to lay stress on 
that and to sink the rest. well, you can't. I won't let you. i'll not 
submit my life to you like that. If you want to go into things, all 
right; but it must be all or none. and i'd like anoth drink." 

He put the knife down with a littl clap as romarin beckon to the 
waiter. 

there wa distress on romarin' face. He wa not consciou of have 
adopt a superior attitude. but again he told himself that he must make 
allowances. men who don't come off in life' struggl are apt to be 
touchy, and he was; after all, the same old marsden, the man with whom he 
desir to be at peace. 

"are you quit fair to me?" he ask presently, in a low voice. 

again the knife wa taken up and it point advanced. 

"yes, I am," said marsden in a slightli rais voice; and he indic 
with the knife the mirror at the end of the table. "you know you'v done 
well, and I, to all appearances, haven't; you can't look at that glass 
and not know it. but i'v follow the line of my develop too, no 
less logic than you. My life' been mine, and i'm not go to 
apologis for it to a singl breath creature. more, i'm proud of it. 
At least, there' been singl of intent about it. So I think i'm 
strictli fair in point that out when you talk about help me." 

"perhap so, perhap so," romarin agre a littl sadly. "it' your tone 
more than anyth els that make thing a littl difficult. believ me, 
i'v no end in my mind except pure friendliness." 

"no-o-o," said marsden--a long "no" that seem to deliberate, to 
examine, and final to admit. "no. I believ that. and you usual get 
what you set out for. Oh yes. i'v watch your rise--i'v made a point 
of watch it. it' been a bit at a time, but you'v got there. you'r 
that sort. it' on your forehead--your destiny." 

romarin smiled. 

"hallo, that' new, isn't it?" he said. "it wasn't your habit to talk 
much about destiny, if I rememb rightly. let me see; wasn't thi more 
your style--'will, passion, laughs-at-imposs and says,' et 
cetera--and so forth? wasn't that it? with alway the suspicion not far 
away that you did thing more from theoret convict than real 
impuls after all?" 

A dispassion observ would have judg that the word went somewher 
near home. marsden wa scrape togeth with the edg of hi knife the 
crumb of hi broken roll. He scrape them into a littl square, and then 
trim the corners. not until the littl pile wa shape to hi like 
did he look surlili up. 

"let it rest, romarin," he said curtly. "drop it," he added. "let it 
alone. If I begin to talk like that, too, we shall onli cut one anoth 
up. clink glasses--there--and let it alone." 

mechan romarin clinked; but hi bald brow wa perplexed. 

"'cut one anoth up?'" he repeated. 

"yes. let it alone." 

"'cut one anoth up?'" he repeat onc more. "you puzzl me entirely." 

"well, perhap i'm altogeth wrong. I onli want to warn you that i'v 
dare a good mani thing in my time. now drop it." 

romarin had fine brown eyes, under orient arch brows. again they 
note the singularli viciou look of the man opposite. they were full 
of mistrust and curiosity, and he stroke hi silver beard. 

"drop it?" he said slowli ... "no, let' go on. I want to hear more of 
this." 

"i'd much rather have anoth drink in peac and quietness.... waiter!" 

either lean back in hi chair, survey the other. "you'r a pervers 
devil still," wa romarin' thought. marsden's, apparently, wa of 
noth but the whiskey and soda the waiter had gone to fetch. 

* * * * * 

romarin wa inclin to look askanc at a man who could follow up a gin 
and bitter with three or four whiskey and soda without turn a hair. 
It argu the season cask. marsden had bidden the waiter leav the 
bottl and the syphon on the table, and wa alreadi mix himself 
anoth stiff peg. 

"well," he said, "sinc you will have it so--to the old days." 

"to the old days," said romarin, watch him gulp it down. 

"queer, look back across all that time at 'em, isn't it? how do you 
feel about it?" 

"in a mix kind of way, I think; the usual thing: pleasur and regret 
mingled." 

"oh, you have regrets, have you?" 

"for certain things, yes. not, let me say, my turn-up with you, marsden," 
he laughed. "that' whi I chose the old place--" he gave a glanc 
round at it glitter newness. "do you happen to rememb what all that 
wa about? i'v onli the vaguest idea." 

marsden gave him a long look. "that all?" he asked. 

"oh, I rememb in a sort of way. that 'romantic' soap-bubbl of your 
wa realli at the bottom of it, I suspect. tell me," he smiled, "did you 
realli suppos life could be live on those mad line you use to lay 
down?" 

"mi life," said marsden calmly, "ha been." 

"not literally." 

"literally." 

"you mean to say that you haven't outgrown _that_?" 

"I hope not." 

romarin had thrown up hi handsom head. "well, well!" he murmur 
incredulously. 

"whi 'well, well'?" marsden demanded.... "but, of course, you never did 
and never will know what I meant." 

"bi romance? ... no, I can't say that I did; but as I conceiv it, it 
wa someth that began in appetit and end in diabetes." 

"not philosophic, eh?" marsden inquired, pick up a chicken bone. 

"highli unphilosophic," said romarin, shake hi head. 

"hm!" grunt marsden, strip the bone... "well, I grant it pay in a 
differ way." 

"it doe pay, then?" romarin asked. 

"oh yes, it pays." 

the restaur had fill up. It wa one frequent by young artists, 
musicians, journalist and the clinger to the rather fray fring of 
the arts. from time to time head were turn to look at romarin' portli 
and handsom figure, which the press, the regent street photograph 
establishments, and the academi supplement had made well known. the 
plump young frenchwoman within the glaze cash offic near the door, 
at whom marsden had sever time glanc in a way at which romarin had 
frowned, wa awar of the honour done the restaurant; and sever time 
the blond-beard proprietor had advanc and inquir with concern 
whether the dinner and the servic wa to the like of m'sieu. 

and the eye that were turn to romarin plainli wonder who the 
scallawag dine with him might be. 

sinc romarin had chosen that their convers should be of the old 
days, and without pick and choosing, marsden wa quit will that 
it should be so. again he wa cast the bullet of bread into hi 
mouth, and again romarin wa consciou of irritation. marsden, too, 
notic it; but in await the _rôti_ he still continu to roll and 
bolt the pellets, wash them down with gulp of whiskey and soda. 

"oh yes, it paid," he resumed. "not in that way, of course--" he 
indic the head, quickli turn away again, of an aureol youngster 
with a larg bunch of black satin tie, "--not in admir of that 
sort, but in other ways--" 

"tell me about it." 

"certainly, if you want it. but you'r my host. won't you let me hear 
your side of it all first?" 

"but I thought you said you knew that--had follow my career?" 

"so I have. it' not your list of honour and degrees; let me see, what 
are you? r.a., d.c.l., doctor of literature, whatev that means, and 
professor of this, that, and the other, and not at the end of it yet. I 
know all that. I don't say you haven't earn it; I admir your painting; 
but it' not that. I want to know what it _feels_ like to be up there 
where you are." 

It wa a childish question, and romarin felt foolish in tri to answer 
it. such thing were the thing the ador aureol youngster a tabl or 
two away would have like to ask. romarin recognis in marsden the old 
crave for sensation; it wa part of the theoret creed marsden had 
made for himself, of do things, not for their own sakes, but in order 
that he might have done them. Of course, it had appear to a fellow like 
that, that romarin himself had alway had a calcul end in view; he 
had not; marsden mere measur romarin' peck out of hi own bushel. It 
had been marsden who, in self-consci seek hi own life, had lost 
it, and romarin wa more than a littl inclin to suspect that the 
vehem with which he protest that he had not lost it wa precis 
the measur of the loss. 

but he essay it--essay to give marsden a _résumé_ of hi career. He 
told him of the stroke of sheer luck that had been the foundat of it 
all, the fall ill of anoth painter who had turn over certain 
commiss to him. He told him of hi poor but happi marriage, and of 
the windfall, not large, but timely, that had come to hi wife. He told 
him of fortun acquaintanceship happili cultivated, of hi first 
import commission, of the fresco that had procur for him hi 
associateship, of hi sale to the chantrey, and of hi quietli 
remun visitorship and hi work on board and committees. 

and as he talked, marsden drew hi empti glass to him, moisten hi 
finger with a littl spilt liquid, and began to run the finger round the 
rim of the glass. they had done that formerly, a whole room of them, 
producing, when each had found the note of hi instrument, a high, thin, 
intoler singing. To thi sing romarin strove to tell hi tale. 

but that thin and bat-lik note silenc him. He end lamely, with some 
empti generalis on success. 

"ah, but success in what?" marsden demanded, interrupt hi play on 
the glass for a moment. 

"in your aim, whatev it may be." 

"ah!" said marsden, resum hi performance. 

romarin had sought in hi recit to minimis differ in 
circumstances; but marsden seem bent on aggrav them. He had the 
miser advantag of the man who ha noth to lose. and bit by bit, 
romarin had begun to realis that he wa go consider more than 
halfway to meet thi old enemi of his, and that amiti seem as far on as 
ever. In hi heart he began to feel the foreknowledg that their meet 
could have no conclusion. He hate the man, the look of hi face and the 
sound of hi voice, as much as ever. 

the proprietor approach with profoundest apolog in hi attitude. 
m'sieu would pardon him, but the nois of the glass ... it wa 
annoy ... anoth m'sieu had made complaint.... 

"eh?..." cri marsden. "oh, that! certainly! It can be put to a much 
better purpose." 

He refil the glass. 

the liquor had begun to tell on him. A quarter of the quantiti would have 
made a clean-liv man incap drunk, but it had onli made marsden' 
eye bright. He gave a sarcast laugh. 

"and is that all?" he asked. 

romarin repli shortli that that wa all. 

"you'v miss out the r.a., and the d.c.l." 

"then let me add that i'm a doctor of civil law and a full member of the 
royal academy," said romarin, almost at the end of hi patience. "and 
now, sinc you don't think much of it, may I hear your own account?" 

"oh, by all means. I don't know, however, that--" he broke off to throw a 
glanc at a woman who had just enter the restaurant--a divest glanc 
that caus romarin to redden to hi crown and drop hi eyes. "I wa 
go to say that you may think as littl of my histori as I do of yours. 
suppl woman that; when the rather scraggi blond doe take it into her 
head to be a devil she' the worst kind there is...." 

without apolog romarin look at hi watch. 

"all right," said marsden, smiling, "for what _i've_ got out of life, 
then. but I warn you, it' entir discreditable." 

romarin did not doubt it. 

"but it' mine, and I boast of it. i'v done--bar receiv honour 
and degrees--everything--everything! If there' anyth I haven't done, 
tell me and lend me a sovereign, and i'll go and do it." 

"you haven't told the story." 

"that' so. here goe then ... well, you know, unless you'v forgotten, 
how I began...." 

fruit and nutshel and nutcrack lay on the tabl between them, and at 
the end of it, shield from draught by the menu cards, the coffe 
apparatu simmer over it elus blue flame. romarin wa take the 
rind from a pear with a table-knife, and marsden had declin port in 
favour of a small golden liqueur of brandy. everi seat in the restaur 
wa now occupied, and the proprietor himself had brought hi finest 
cigarett and cigars. the waiter pour out the coffee, and depart 
with the apparatu in one hand and hi napkin in the other. 

marsden wa alreadi well into hi tale... 

the fright unction with which he told it appal romarin. It wa as 
he had said--ther wa noth he had not done and did not exult in with 
a sicken exultation. It had, indeed, end in diabetes. In the piti 
hunt down of sensat to the last inch he had been fiendishli 
ingeni and utterli unimaginative. hi unholi curios had spare 
nothing, hi unnatur appetit had known no truth. It wa grin sin. 
the detail of it simpli cannot be told.... 

and hi vaniti in it all wa prodigious. romarin wa pale as he listened. 
what! In order that _this_ malign growth in society' breast should 
be abl to say "I know," had sanctiti been profaned, sweet convent 
assailed, puriti blackened, sound infected, and all that wa bright 
and of the day been sunk in the quagmir that thi creatur of the night 
had called--yes, still called--bi the gentl name of romance? yes, 
so it had been. not onli had men and women suffer dishonour, but 
manhood and womanhood and the clean institut by which alon the 
creatur wa suffer to exist had been brought to shame. and what wa he 
to look at when it wa all done?... 

"romance--beauty--th beauti of thing as they are!" he croaked. 

If face in the restaur were now turn to romarin, it wa the horror 
on romarin' own face that drew them. He drew out hi handkerchief and 
mop hi brow. 

"but," he stammer presently, "you are speak of 
generalities--horr theories--th diabol conceiv 
to be done--" 

"what?" cri marsden, check for a moment in hi horribl triumph. "no, 
by god! i'v done 'em, done 'em! don't you understand? If you don't, 
question me!..." 

"no, no!" cri romarin. 

"but I say yes! you came for this, and you shall have it! I tri to stop 
you, but you want it, and by god you shall have it! you think your 
life' been full and mine empty? Ha ha!... romance! I had the convict 
of it, and i'v had the courag too! I haven't told you a tenth of it! 
what would you like? chamber-window when love wa hot? the kill of a 
man who stood in my way? (i'v fought a duel, and killed.) the squeez 
of the juic out of life like _that_?" He point to romarin' plate; 
romarin had been eat grapes. "did you find me say i'd do a thing 
and then draw back from it when we--" he made a quick gestur of both 
hand toward the middl of the restaur floor. 

"when we fought--?" 

"yes, when we fought, here!... Oh no, oh no! i'v lived, I tell you, 
everi moment! not a title, not a degree, but i'v live such a life as 
you never dream of--!" 

"thank god--" 

but suddenli marsden' voice, which had risen, drop again. He began to 
shake with interior chuckles. they were the old, old chuckles, and they 
fill romarin with a hatr hardli to be borne. the sound of the 
animal' voic had begun it, and hi everi word, look, movement, 
gesture, sinc they had enter the restaurant, had ad to it. and he 
wa now chuckling, chuckling, shake with chuckles, as if some 
monstrou tit-bit still remain to be told. alreadi romarin had toss 
asid hi napkin, beckon to the waiter, and said, "m'sieu dine 
with me...." 

"ho ho ho ho!" came the drunken sounds. "it' a long time sinc m'sieu 
dine here with hi old friend romarin! Do you rememb the last time? Do 
you rememb it? _pif, pan_! two smack across the table, romarin--oh, 
you got it in veri well!--and then, _brrrrr_! quick! back with the 
tables--al the fellow round--farquharson for me and smith for you, and 
then to it, romarin!... and you realli don't rememb what it wa all 
about?..." 

romarin had remembered. hi face wa not the face of the philosoph 
master of life now. 

"you said she shouldn't--littl patti hine you know--you said she 
shouldn't--" 

romarin sprang half from hi chair, and brought hi fist down on the 
table. 

"and by heaven, she didn't! At least that' one thing you haven't done!" 

marsden too had risen unsteadily. 

"oho, oho? you think that?" 

A wild thought flash across romarin' brain. 

"you mean--?" 

"I mean?... oho, oho! yes, I mean! she did, romarin...." 

the mirrors, mistili seen through the smoke of half a hundr cigar and 
cigarettes, the love and shepherdess of the garish walls, the diner 
start up in their places, all suddenli seem to swing round in a 
great half-circl befor romarin' eyes. the next moment, feel as if 
he stood on someth on which he found it difficult to keep hi balance, 
he had caught up the table-knif with which he had peel the pear and 
had struck at the side of marsden' neck. the round blade snapped, but 
he struck again with the broken edge, and left the knife where it 
entered. the tabl appear uptilt almost vertical; over it marsden' 
head disappeared; it wa follow by a shower of glass, cigars, 
artifici flower and the tablecloth at which he clutched; and the 
dirti american cloth of the tabl top wa left bare. 

* * * * * 

but the edg behind which marsden' face had disappear remain 
vertical. A group of scene-shift were move a flat of sceneri from a 
theatr into a tumbril-lik cart... 

and romarin knew that, past, present, and future, he had seen it all in 
an instant, and that marsden stood behind that paint wing. 

and he knew, too, that he had onli to wait until that flat pass and to 
take marsden' arm and enter the restaurant, _and it would be so_. A 
drown man is said to see all in one unmeasur instant of time; a 
year-long dream is but, they say, an instantan arrang in the 
moment of wake of the molecul we associ with ideas; and the past 
of histori and the futur of propheci are fold up in the mystic moment 
we call the present.... 

_it would come true_.... 

for one moment romarin stood; the next, he had turn and run for hi 
life. 

At the corner of the street he collid with a loafer, and onli the wall 
save them from go down. feverishli romarin plung hi hand into hi 
pocket and brought out a hand of silver. He cram it into the 
loafer' hand. 

"here--quick--tak it!" he gasped. "there' a man there, by that 
restaur door--he' wait for mr. romarin--tel him--tel him--tel 
him mr. romarin' had an accident--" 

and he dash away, leav the man look at the silver in hi palm. 




the cigarett case 


"A cigarette, loder?" I said, offer my case. for the moment loder wa 
not smoking; for long enough he had not been talking. 

"thanks," he replied, take not onli the cigarette, but the case also. 
the other went on talking; loder becam silent again; but I notic 
that he kept my cigarett case in hi hand, and look at it from time to 
time with an interest that neither it design nor it costli seem 
to explain. present I caught hi eye. 

"A pretti case," he remarked, put it down on the table. "I onc had 
one exactli like it." 

I answer that they were in everi shop window. 

"oh yes," he said, put asid ani question of rarity.... "I lost 
mine." 

"oh?..." 

He laughed. "oh, that' all right--i got it back again--don't be afraid 
i'm go to claim yours. but the way I lost it--found it--th whole 
thing--wa rather curious. i'v never been abl to explain it. I wonder 
if you could?" 

I answer that I certainli couldn't till i'd heard it, whereupon loder, 
take up the silver case again and hold it in hi hand as he talked, 
began: 

"thi happen in provence, when I wa about as old as marsham there--and 
everi bit as romantic. I wa there with carroll--y rememb poor old 
carrol and what a blade of a boy he was--a romant as four marsham 
roll into one. (excus me, marsham, won't you? it' a romant tale, 
you see, or at least the set is.) ... We were in provence, carrol 
and I; twenty-four or thereabouts; romantic, as I say; and--and thi 
happened. 

"and it happen on the top of a whole lot of other things, you must 
understand, the thing that do happen when you'r twenty-four. If it 
hadn't been provence, it would have been somewher else, I suppose, 
nearly, if not quit as good; but thi wa provence, that smell (a you 
might say) of twenty-four as it smell of argelass and wild lavend and 
broom.... 

"we'd had the dicken of a walk of it, just with knapsacks--had start 
somewher in the ardèch and tramp south through the vine and almond 
and olives--montélimar, orange, avignon, and a fortnight at that blanch 
skeleton of a town, le baux. we'd noth to do, and had gone just where 
we liked, or rather just where carrol had liked; and carrol had had the 
_de bello gallico_ in hi pocket, and had had a notion, I fancy, of 
take in the whole ground of the roman conquest--i rememb he lug me 
off to some place or other, pourrièr I believ it name was, because--i 
forget how mani thousands--wer kill in a river-b there, and they 
stove in the water-cask so that if the men want water they'd have to 
go forward and fight for it. and then we'd gone on to arles, where 
carrol had fallen in love with everyth that had a bow of black 
velvet in her hair, and after that tarascon, nîmes, and so on, the usual 
round--i won't bother you with that. In a word, we'd had two month of 
it, eat almond and apricot from the trees, watch the women at the 
commun washing-fountain under the dark plane-trees, sing _magali_ 
and the _qué cantes_, and carrol yarn away all the time about caesar 
and vercingetorix and dante, and tri to learn provenç so that he 
could read the stuff in the _journal de félibriges_ that he'd never have 
look at if it had been in english.... 

"well, we got to darbisson. we'd run across some young chap or 
other--rangon hi name was--who wa a vine-plant in those parts, and 
rangon had ask us to spend a coupl of day with him, with him and hi 
mother, if we happen to be in the neighbourhood. So as we might as 
well happen to be there as anywher else, we sent him a postcard and 
went. thi would be in june or earli in july. all day we walk across 
a plain of vines, past hurdl of wattl _cannes_ and great wind-screen 
of velveti cypresses, sixti feet high, all white with dust on the north 
side of 'em, for the mistral wa have it three-days' revel, and it 
whistl and roar through the _cannes_ till score of yard of 'em 
at a time were bow nearli to the earth. A roar day it was, I 
remember.... but the wind fell a littl late in the afternoon, and we 
were pore over what it had left of our ordnanc survey--lik fools, 
we'd got the unmount paper map instead of the linen ones--when rangon 
himself found us, come out to meet us in a veri badli turned-out trap. 
He drove us back himself, through darbisson, to the house, a mile and a 
half beyond it, where he live with hi mother. 

"he spoke no english, rangon didn't, though, of course, both french and 
provençal; and as he drove us, there wa carroll, use him as a 
franco-provenç dictionary, pepper him with question about the name 
of thing in the patois--i beg it pardon, the language--though there' 
a good deal of my eye and betti martin about that, and I fanci thi 
félibrig busi will be in a good mani piec when frédéric mistral 
is under that court-of-lov pavilion arrang he' had put up for 
himself in the graveyard at maillanne. If the languag ha got to go, 
well, it' got to go, I suppose; and while I person don't want to 
give it a kick, I rather sympathis with the government. those jaunt of 
a sunday out to le baux, for instance, with paper lantern and bengal 
fire and a fellow spout _O blanch venu d'arles_--they'r well 
enough, and compar favour with our bank holiday and sunday leagu 
picnics, but ... but that' noth to do with my tale after all.... So 
he drove on, and by the time we got to rangon' hous carrol had learn 
the greater part of _magali_.... 

"a you, no doubt, know, it' a restrict sort of life in some respect 
that a young _vigneron_ live in those parts, and it wa as we reach 
the hous that rangon rememb something--or he might have been tri 
to tell us as we came along for all I know, and not been abl to get a 
word in edgeway for carrol and hi provençal. It seem that hi mother 
wa away from home for some days--apolog of the most profound, of 
course; our host wa the soul of courtesy, though he did tri to get at 
us a bit later.... We express our polit regrets, naturally; but I 
didn't quit see at first what differ it made. I onli began to see 
when rangon, with more apologies, told us that we should have to go back 
to darbisson for dinner. It appear that when madam rangon went away 
for a few day she dispers the whole of the femal side of her 
establish also, and she'd left her son with nobodi to look after 
him except an old man we'd seen in the yard mend one of these 
double-cylind sulphur-sprinkl they clap across the horse' back 
and drive between the row of vines.... rangon explain all thi as we 
stood in the hall drink an _apéritif_--a hall crowd with oak 
furnitur and photograph and a cradle-lik bread-crib and door open 
to right and left to the other room of the ground floor. He had also, it 
seemed, to ask us to be so infinit oblig as to excus him for one 
hour after dinner--our postcard had come unexpectedly, he said, and 
alreadi he had made an appoint with hi agent about the _vendange_ 
for the come autumn.... we, beg him, of course, not to allow us to 
interfer with hi busi in the slightest degree. He thank us a 
thousand times. 

"'but though we dine in the village, we will take our own wine with us,' 
he said, 'a wine _surfin_--on of my wines--y shall see--' 

"then he show us round hi place--i forget how mani hundr of acr 
of vines, and into the great build with the press and pump and 
cask and the huge barrel they call the thunderbolt--and about seven 
o'clock we walk back to darbisson to dinner, carri our wine with us. 
I think the restaur we dine in wa the onli one in the place, and our 
gaillard of a host--h wa a straight-backed, well-set-up chap, with 
rather fine eyes--did us on the whole pretti well. hi wine certainli wa 
good stuff, and set our tongu going.... 

"A moment ago I said a fellow like rangon lead a restrict sort of life 
in those parts. I saw thi more clearli as dinner went on. We dine by an 
open window, from which we could see the stream with the plank across it 
where the women wash cloth dure the day and assembl in the 
even for gossip. there were a dozen or so of them there as we dined, 
laugh and chat in low tones--they all seem pretty--it wa 
quickli fall dusk--al the girl are pretti then, and are quit 
consciou of it--_you_ know, marsham. behind them, at the end of the 
street, one of these great cypress wind-screen show black against the 
sky, a rag edg someth like the line the needl draw on a rainfal 
chart; and you could onli tell whether they were men or women under the 
plantain by their voic rippl and chatter and suddenli a deeper 
note.... onc I heard a muffl scuffl and a sound like a kiss.... It 
wa then that rangon' littl troubl came out.... 

"it seem that he didn't know ani girls--wasn't allow to know ani 
girls. the girl of the villag were pretti enough, but you see how it 
was--he'd a posit to keep up--appear to maintain--couldn't be 
familiar dure the year with the girl who gather hi grape for him 
in the autumn.... and as soon as carrol gave him a chance, _he_ began to 
ask _us_ questions, about england, english girls, the liberti they had, 
and so on. 

"of course, we couldn't tell him much he hadn't heard already, but that 
made no difference; he could stand ani amount of that, our strap 
young _vigneron_; and he ask us question by the dozen, that we both 
tri to answer at once. and hi delight and envy!... what! In england 
did the young men see the young women of their own class without 
restraint--th sister of their friend _même_--even at the house? wa it 
permit that they drank tea with them in the afternoon, or went without 
invit to pass the _soirée_?... He had all the later prévost in hi 
room, he told us (I don't doubt he had the earlier one also); prévost 
and the disestablish between them must be play the mischief 
with the convent system of educ for young girls; and our young man 
was--what d'you call it?--'co-ed'--co-educationalist--bi jove, yes!... He 
seem to marvel that we should have left a countri so bless as england 
to visit hi dusty, wild-lavender-smelling, girl-less provence.... you 
don't know half your luck, marsham.... 

"well, we talk after thi fashion--we'd left the dining-room of the 
restaur and had plant ourselv on a bench outsid with rangon 
between us--when rangon suddenli look at hi watch and said it wa time 
he wa off to see thi agent of his. would we take a walk, he ask us, 
and meet him again there? he said.... but as hi agent live in the 
direct of hi own home, we said we'd meet him at the hous in an hour 
or so. off he went, envi everi englishman who stepped, I don't 
doubt.... I told you how old--how young--w were.... heigho!... 

"well, off goe rangon, and carrol and I got up, stretch ourselves, 
and took a walk. We walk a mile or so, until it began to get pretti 
dark, and then turned; and it wa as we came into the black of one of 
these cypress hedg that the thing i'm tell you of happened. the 
hedg took a sharp turn at that point; as we came round the angl we saw 
a coupl of women' figur hardli more than twenti yard ahead--don't 
know how they got there so suddenly, i'm sure; and that same moment I 
found my foot on someth small and white and glimmer on the grass. 

"I pick it up. It wa a handkerchief--a woman's--embroidered-- 

"the two figur ahead of us were walk in our direction; there wa 
everi probabl that the handkerchief belong to one of them; so we 
step out.... 

"at my 'pardon, madame,' and lift hat one of the figur turn her 
head; then, to my surprise, she spoke in english--cultiv english. 
I held out the handkerchief. It belong to the elder ladi of the two, 
the one who had spoken, a veri gentle-vo old lady, older by veri mani 
year than her companion. she took the handkerchief and thank me.... 

"somebody--sterne, isn't it?--say that englishmen don't travel to see 
englishmen. I don't know whether he'd stand to that in the case of 
englishwomen; carrol and I didn't.... We were walk rather slowli 
along, four abreast across the road; we ask permiss to introduc 
ourselves, did so, and receiv some name in return which, strang 
enough, i'v entir forgotten--i onli rememb that the ladi were 
aunt and niece, and live at darbisson. they shook their head when I 
mention M. rangon' name and said we were visit him. they didn't 
know him.... 

"i'd never been in darbisson before, and I haven't been since, so I don't 
know the map of the villag veri well. but the place isn't veri big, 
and the hous at which we stop in twenti minut or so is probabl 
there yet. It had a larg doubl door--a doubl door in two senses, 
for it wa a big _porte-cochère_ with a smaller door insid it, and an 
iron grill shut in the whole. the gentle-vo old ladi had alreadi 
taken a key from her reticul and wa thank us again for the littl 
servic of the handkerchief; then, with the littl gestur one make when 
one ha found oneself on the point of omit a courtesy, she gave a 
littl music laugh. 

"'but,' she said with a littl movement of invitation, 'one see so 
few compatriot here--if you have the time to come in and smoke a 
cigarett ... also the cigarette,' she added, with anoth rippl 
laugh, 'for we have few callers, and live alone--' 

"hastili as I wa about to accept, carrol wa befor me, profess a 
nostalgia for the sound of the english tongu that made hi recent 
protest about provenç a shameless hypocrisy. persuas young 
rascal, carrol was--poor chap ... So the elder ladi open the grill 
and the wooden door beyond it, and we entered. 

"bi the light of the candl which the younger ladi took from a bracket 
just within the door we saw that we were in a handsom hall or vestibule; 
and my wonder that rangon had made no mention of what wa appar a 
consider establish wa increas by the fact that it tenant 
must be known to be english and could be seen to be entir charming. I 
couldn't understand it, and i'm afraid hypothes rush into my head 
that cast doubt on the rangons--y know--wheth _they_ were all right. 
We knew noth about our young planter, you see.... 

"I look about me. there were tub here and there against the walls, 
gaili painted, with glossy-leav alo and palm in them--on of the 
aloes, I remember, wa flowering; a littl fountain in the middl made a 
tinkl noise; we put our cap on a carv and gilt consol table; and 
befor us rose a broad staircas with shallow step of spotless stone and 
a beauti wrought-iron handrail. At the top of the staircas were more 
palm and aloes, and doubl door paint in a clear grey. 

"we follow our hostess up the staircase. I can hear yet the sharp 
clean click our boot made on that hard shini stone--se the light of 
the candl gleam on the handrail ... the young girl--sh wa not much 
more than a girl--push at the doors, and we went in. 

"the room we enter wa all of a piec with the rest for rather 
old-fashion fineness. It wa large, lofty, beauti kept. carrol 
went round for miss ... whatev her name wa ... light candl in 
sconces; and as the flame crept up they glimmer on a beauti 
polish floor, which wa bare except for an eastern rug here and there. 
the elder ladi had sat down in a gilt chair, loui fourteenth I should 
say, with a stripe rep of the colour of a petunia; and I realli don't 
know--don't smile, smith--what induc me to lead her to it by the 
finger-tips, bend over her hand for a moment as she sat down. there 
wa an old tambour-fram behind her chair, I remember, and a vast oval 
mirror with cluster candle-bracket fill the greater part of the 
farther wall, the brightest and clearest glass i'v ever seen...." 

He paused, look at my cigarett case, which he had taken into hi hand 
again. He smile at some recollect or other, and it wa a minut or 
so befor he continued. 

"I must admit that I found it a littl annoying, after what we'd 
been talk about at dinner an hour before, that rangon wasn't with 
us. I still couldn't understand how he could have neighbour so 
charm without know about them, but I didn't care to insist on 
thi to the old lady, who for all I knew might have her own reason 
for keep to herself. and, after all, it wa our place to return 
rangon' hospit in london if he ever came there, not, so to speak, 
on hi own doorstep.... So present I forgot all about rangon, and i'm 
pretti sure that carroll, who wa talk to hi companion of some 
félibrig junket or other and have the air of gounod' _mireille_ 
hum softli over to him, didn't wast a thought on him either. soon 
carroll--y rememb what a pretti crooning, hum voic he had--soon 
carrol wa murmur what they call 'seconds,' but so low that the sound 
hardli came across the room; and I came in with a soft bass note from 
time to time. No instrument, you know; just an unaccompani murmur no 
louder than an aeolian harp; and it sound infinit sweet and 
plaintiv and--what shall I say?--weak--attenuated--faint--'pale' you 
might almost say--in that formal, rather old-fashion _salon_, with that 
great clear oval mirror throw back the still flame of the candl in 
the sconc on the walls. outsid the wind had now fallen completely; all 
wa veri quiet; and suddenli in a voic not much louder than a sigh, 
carroll' companion wa sing _oft in the stilli night_--you know 
it...." 

He broke off again to murmur the begin of the air. then, with a 
littl laugh for which we saw no reason, he went on again: 

"well, i'm not go to tri to convinc you of such a special and 
delic thing as the charm of that hour--it wasn't more than an 
hour--it would be all about an hour we stayed. thing like that just 
have to be said and left; you destroy them the moment you begin to 
insist on them; we'v everi one of us had experi like that, and 
don't say much about them. I wa as much in love with my old ladi as 
carrol evid wa with hi young one--i can't tell you why--b 
in love ha just to be taken for grant too, I suppose... marsham 
understands.... We smoke our cigarettes, and sang again, onc more 
fill that clear-painted, quiet apart with a murmur no louder 
than if a light breez found that the bell of a bed of flower were 
realli bell and play on 'em. the old ladi move her finger gentli 
on the round tabl by the side of her chair,.. oh, infinit pretti it 
was.... then carrol wander off into the _qué cantes_--aw 
pretty--'it is not for myself I sing, but for my friend who is near 
me'--and I can't tell you how like four old friend we were, those two 
so oddli met ladi and carrol and myself.... and so to _oft in the 
stilli night_ again.... 

"but for all the sweet and the glamour of it, we couldn't stay on 
indefinitely, and I wonder what time it was, but didn't ask--anyth 
to do with clock and watch would have seem a cold and mechan 
sort of thing just then.... and when present we both got up neither 
carrol nor I ask to be allow to call again in the morn to 
thank them for a charm hour.... and they seem to feel the same as 
we did about it. there wa no 'hope that we should meet again in 
london'--neith an au revoir nor a good-bye--just a tacit understand 
that that hour should remain isolated, accept like a good gift without 
look the gift-hors in the mouth, single, unattach to ani hour 
befor or after--i don't know whether you see what I mean.... give me a 
match somebody.... 

"and so we left, with no more than look exchang and finger-tip 
rest between the back of our hand and our lip for a moment. We 
found our way out by ourselves, down that shallow-step staircas with 
the handsom handrail, and let ourselv out of the doubl door and 
grille, close it softly. We made for the villag without speak a 
word.... heigho!..." 

loder had pick up the cigarett case again, but for all the way hi 
eye rest on it I doubt whether he realli saw it. i'm pretti sure he 
didn't; I knew when he did by the glanc he shot at me, as much as to say 
"I see you'r wonder where the cigarett case come in."... He 
resum with anoth littl laugh. 

"well," he continued, "we got back to rangon' house. I realli don't 
blame rangon for the way he took it when we told him, you know--h 
thought we were pull hi leg, of course, and he wasn't have any; not 
he! there were no english ladi in darbisson, he said.... We told him as 
nearli as we could just where the hous was--w weren't veri precise, i'm 
afraid, for the villag had been in dark as we had come through it, 
and I had to admit that the cypress hedg I tri to describ where we'd 
met our friend wa a good deal like other cypress hedges--and, as I say, 
rangon wasn't take any. I myself wa rather annoy that he should 
think we were return hi hospit by tri to get at him, and it 
wasn't veri easi either to explain in my french and carroll' provenç 
that we were go to let the thing stand as it wa and weren't go to 
call on our charm friend again.... the end of it wa that rangon 
just laugh and yawned.... 

"'i knew it wa good, my wine,' he said, 'but--' a shrug said the rest. 
'not so good as all that,' he meant.... 

"then he gave us our candles, show us to our rooms, shook hands, and 
march off to hi own room and the prévosts. 

"I dream of my old ladi half the night. 

"after coffe the next morn I put my hand into my pocket for my 
cigarett case and didn't find it. I went through all my pockets, and 
then I ask carrol if he'd got it. 

"'no,' he replied.... 'think you left it behind at that place last 
night?' 

"'yes; did you?' rangon pop in with a twinkle. 

"I went through all my pocket again. No cigarett case.... 

"of course, it wa possibl that i'd left it behind, and I wa annoy 
again. I didn't want to go back, you see.... but, on the other hand, I 
didn't want to lose the case--it wa a present--and rangon' smile 
nettl me a good deal, too. It wa both a challeng to our truth 
and a testimoni to that veri good wine of his.... 

"'might have done,' I grunted.... 'well, in that case we'll go and get 
it.' 

"'if one tri the restaur first--?' rangon suggested, smile again. 

"'bi all means,' said I stuffily, though I rememb have the case 
after we'd left the restaurant. 

"we were round at the restaur by half-past nine. the case wasn't 
there. i'd known jolli well beforehand it wasn't, and I saw rangon' 
mouth twitch with amusement. 

"'so we now seek the abod of these english ladies, _hein_?' he said. 

"'yes,' said I; and we left the restaur and strode through the villag 
by the way we'd taken the even before.... 

"that vigneron' smile becam more and more irrit to me.... 'it is 
then the next village?' he said presently, as we left the last hous and 
came out into the open plain. 

"we went back.... 

"I wa irrit becaus we were two to one, you see, and carrol back 
me up. 'A doubl door, with a grill in front of it,' he repeat for 
the fiftieth time.... rangon mere repli that it wasn't our good faith 
he doubted. He didn't actual use the word 'drunk.'... 

"'_mai tiens_,' he said suddenly, tri to conceal hi mirth. '_si 
c'est possible... si c'est possible_... a doubl door with a grille? but 
perhap that I know it, the domicil of these so elus ladies.... come 
thi way.' 

"he took us back along a plantain-grov street, and suddenli turn up 
an alley that wa littl more than two gutter and a crack of sky 
overhead between two broken-til roofs. It wa a dilapidated, desert 
_ruelle_, and I wa posit angri when rangon point to a blister 
old _porte-cochère_ with a half-unhing rail in front of it. 

"'i it that, your house?' he asked. 

"'no,' say I, and 'no,' say carrol ... and off we start again.... 

"but anoth half-hour brought us back to the same place, and carrol 
scratch hi head. 

"'who live there, anyway?' he said, glower at the _porte-cochère_, 
chin forward, hand in pockets. 

"'nobody,' say rangon, as much as to say 'look at it!' 'm'sieu then 
medit take it?'... 

"then I struck in, quit out of temper by thi time. 

"'how much would the rent be?' I asked, as if I realli thought of take 
the place just to get back at him. 

"he mention someth ridicul small in the way of francs. 

"'one might at least see the place,' say I. 'can the key be got?' 

"he bowed. the key wa at the baker's, not a hundr yard away, he 
said.... 

"we got the key. It wa the key of the inner wooden door--that grid of 
rusti iron didn't need one--it came clean off it singl hing when 
carrol touch it. carrol opened, and we stood for a moment motion 
to one anoth to step in. then rangon went in first, and I heard him 
murmur 'pardon, mesdames.'... 

"now thi is the odd part. We pass into a sort of vestibul or hall, 
with a burst lead pipe in the middl of a dri tank in the centr of it. 
there wa a broad staircas rise in front of us to the first floor, and 
doubl door just seen in the half-light at the head of the stairs. old 
tub stood against the walls, but the palm and alo in them were 
dead--onli a cabbage-stalk or two--and the rusti hoop lay on the ground 
about them. one tub had come to piec entir and wa no more than a 
heap of stave on a pile of spilt earth. and everywhere, everywher wa 
dust--th floor wa an inch deep in dust and old plaster that muffl our 
footsteps, cobweb hung like old duster on the walls, a regular goblin' 
tatter of cobweb drape the littl bracket insid the door, and the 
wrought-iron of the hand-rail wa close up with web in which not even a 
spider moved. the whole thing wa preposterous.... 

"'it is possibl that for even a less rental--' 

"rangon murmured, drag hi forefing across the hand-rail and 
leav an inch-deep furrow.... 

"'come upstairs,' said I suddenly.... 

"up we went. all wa in the same state there. A clutter of stuff came 
down as I push at the doubl door of the _salon_, and I had to strike 
a stink french sulphur match to see into the room at all. underfoot 
wa like walk on thick of flannel, and except where we put 
our feet the place wa as printless as a snowfield--dust, dust, unbroken 
grey dust. My match burn down.... 

"'wait a minute--i'v a _bougie_,' said carroll, and struck the wax 
match.... 

"there were the old sconces, with never a candle-end in them. there wa 
the larg oval mirror, but hardli reflect carroll' match for the 
dust on it. and the broken chair were there, all gutless, and the 
ricketi old round table.... 

"but suddenli I dart forward. someth new and bright on the tabl 
twinkl with the light of carroll' match. the match went out, and by 
the time carrol had light anoth I had stopped. I want rangon to 
see what wa on the table.... 

"'you'll see by my footprint how far from that tabl _i've_ been,' I 
said. 'will you pick it up?' 

"and rangon, step forward, pick up from the middl of the table--mi 
cigarett case." 

* * * * * 

loder had finished. nobodi spoke. for quit a minut nobodi spoke, and 
then loder himself broke the silence, turn to me. 

"make anyth of it?" he said. 

I lift my eyebrows. "onli your _vigneron's_ explanation--" I began, but 
stop again, see that wouldn't do. 

"_any_bodi make anyth of it?" said loder, turn from one to another. 

I gather from smith' face that he thought one thing might be made of 
it--namely, that loder had invent the whole tale. but even smith 
didn't speak. 

"were ani english ladi ever found to have live in the place--murdered, 
you know--bodi found and all that?" young marsham ask diffidently, 
yearn for an obviou completeness. 

"not that we could ever learn," loder replied. "we made inquiri 
too.... So you all give it up? well, so do i...." 

and he rose. As he walk to the door, myself follow him to get hi 
hat and stick, I heard him hum softli the lines--they are from 
_oft in the stilli night_-- 

"_i seem like one who tread alon 
some banquet-hal deserted, 
whose guest are fled, whose garland dead, 
and all but he--departed!_" 




the rocker 


I 

there wa littl need for the swart gipsi to explain, as they stood 
knee-deep in the snow round the bailiff of the abbey farm, what it 
wa that had sent them. the unbroken white of the upland told that, 
and, even as they spoke, there came up the hill the dark figur of the 
farm men with shovels, on their way to dig out the sheep. In the summer, 
the bailiff would have been the first to call the gipsi vagabond 
and roost-robbers; now ... they had women with them too. 

"the hare and fox were down four day ago, and the liquid-manur pump 
like a snow man," the bailiff said.... "yes, you can lie in the laith 
and welcome--if you can find 'em. mayb you'll help us find our sheep 
too--" 

the gipsi had done so. come back again, they had had some ado to 
discov the spot where their three caravan made a hummock of white 
against a broken wall. 

the women--they had four women with them--began that afternoon to weav 
the mat and basket they hawk from door to door; and in the forenoon 
of the follow day one of them, the black-haired, soft-voic quean 
whom the bailiff had heard call annabel, set her babe in the sling on 
her back, tuck a bundl of long cane-loop under her oxter, and trudg 
down between eight-foot wall of snow to the abbey farm. she stood in the 
lattic porch, dark and handsom against the whiteness, and then, 
advancing, put her head into the great hall-kitchen. 

"ha the ladi ani chair for the gipsi woman to mend?" she ask in a 
soft and insinu voice.... 

they brought her the old chairs; she seat herself on a box in the 
porch; and there she wove the strip of cane in and out, secur each 
one with a littl wooden peg and a tap of her hammer. the child remain 
in the sling at her back, take the breast from time to time over her 
shoulder; and the silver wed ring could be seen as she whip the 
cane, back and forth. 

As she worked, she cast curiou glanc into the old hall-kitchen. the 
snow outsid cast a pallid, upward light on the heavi ceiling-beams; thi 
wa reflect in the polish stone floor; and the children, who at first 
had shyli stop their play, see the strang woman in the porch--th 
nearest thing they had seen to gipsi befor had been the old itiner 
glazier with hi frame of glass on hi back--resum it, but still eye 
her from time to time. In the ancient walnut chair by the hearth sat the 
old, old ladi who had told them to bring the chairs. her hair, almost 
as white as the snow itself, wa pile up on her head _à la marquise_; 
she wa knitting; but now and then she allow the needl in the littl 
wooden sheath at her waist to lie idle, close her eyes, and rock 
softli in the old walnut chair. 

"ask the woman who is mend the chair whether she is warm enough 
there," the old ladi said to one of the children; and the child went 
to the porch with the message. 

"thank you, littl missie--thank you, ladi dear--annabel is quit warm," 
said the soft voice; and the child return to the play. 

It wa a childish game of funer at which the children played. the hand 
of death, hover over the dolls, had singl out flora, the 
articul of whose sawdust bodi were seam and whose boot were 
paint on her calv of fibrou plaster. for the greater solemnity, the 
children had made themselv sweep train of the garment of their 
elders, and those with crop curl had drape their head with shawls, 
the fring of which they had comb out with their finger to simul 
hair--long hair, such as sabrina, the eldest, had hang so low down 
her back that she could almost sit on it. A cylindrical-bodi horse, 
convert (when hi flat head came out of it socket) into a 
locomotive, head the sad _cortège_; then came the defunct flora; then 
came jack, the raffish sailor doll, with other dolls; and the children 
follow with hush whisperings. 

the youngest of the children pass the high-back walnut chair in which 
the old ladi sat. she stopped. 

"aunt rachel--" she whispered, slowli and grave open veri wide and 
close veri tight her eyes. 

"yes, dear?" 

"flora' dead!" 

the old lady, when she smiled, did so less with her lip than with her 
fade cheeks. So sweet wa her face that you could not help wondering, 
when you look on it, how mani men had also look upon it and love it. 
somehow, you never wonder how mani of them had been love in return. 

"i'm so sorry, dear," aunt rachel, who in realiti wa a great-aunt, said. 
"what did she die of thi time?" 

"she die of ... brown titu ... 'n now she' go to be buri in a 
grave as littl as her bed." 

"in a what, dear?" 

"a littl ... dread ... as littl as my bed ... you say it, sabrina." 

"she means, aunt rachel, 

"_teach me to live that I may dread 
the grave as littl as my bed,_" 

sabrina, the eldest, interpreted. 

"ah!... but won't you play at cheer things, dears?" 

"yes, we will, presently, aunt rachel; gee up, horse!... shall we go and 
ask the chair-woman if she' warm enough?" 

"do, dears." 

again the messag wa taken, and thi time it seem as if annabel, the 
gipsy, wa not warm enough, for she gather up her loop of cane and 
brought the chair she wa mend a littl way into the hall-kitchen 
itself. she sat down on the squar box they use to cover the sew 
machine. 

"thank you, ladi dear," she murmured, lift her handsom almond eye to 
aunt rachel. aunt rachel did not see the long, furtive, curiou glance. 
her own eye were closed, as if she wa tired; her cheek were smiling; 
one of them had drop a littl to one shoulder, as it might have 
drop had she held in her arm a babe; and she wa rocking, softly, 
slowly, the rocker of the chair make a littl regular nois on the 
polish floor. 

the gipsi woman beckon to one of the children. 

"tell the lady, when she wakes, that I will tack a strip of felt to the 
rocker, and then it will make no nois at all," said the low and 
wheedl voice; and the child retir again. 

the inter of flora proceeded.... 

An hour later flora had taken up the burden of life again. It wa as 
angela, the youngest, wa chastis her for some offence, that sabrina, 
the eldest, look with wonder eye on the babe in the gipsy' sling. 
she approach on tiptoe. 

"may I look at it, please?" she ask timidly. 

the gipsi set one shoulder forward, and sabrina put the shawl gentli 
aside, peer at the duski brown morsel within. 

"sometime, perhaps--if i'm veri careful--" 

sabrina ventur diffidently, "--if i'm _very_ careful--may I hold it?" 

befor replying, the gipsi onc more turn her almond eye toward aunt 
rachel' chair. aunt rachel had been awaken for the conclus of 
flora' funeral, but her eye were close again now, and onc more her 
cheek wa drop in that tender suggest littl gesture, and she 
rocked. but you could see that she wa not properli asleep.... It was, 
somehow, less to sabrina, still peer at the babe in the sling, than to 
aunt rachel, appar asleep, that the gipsi seem to reply. 

"you'll know some day, littl missis, that a wean know it own pair of 
arms," her seduct voic came. 

and aunt rachel heard. she open her eye with a start. the littl 
regular nois of the rocker ceased. she turn her head quickly; 
tremul she began to knit again; and, as her eye rest on the 
sidelong eye of the gipsi woman, there wa an express in them that 
almost resembl fright. 


II 

they began to deck the great hall-kitchen for christmas, but the snow 
still lay thick over hill and valley, and the gipsies' caravan remain 
by the broken wall where the drift had overtaken them. though all the 
chair were mended, annabel still came daili to the farm, sat on the box 
they use to cover the sew machine, and wove mats. As she wove them, 
aunt rachel knitted, and from time to time fragment of talk pass 
between the two women. It wa alway the white-hair ladi who spoke 
first, and annabel made all sort of salut and obeis with her eye 
befor replying. 

"I have not seen your husband," aunt rachel said to annabel one day. (the 
children at the other end of the apart had convert a chest into an 
altar, and were solemnis the nuptial of the resurrect flora and 
jack, the raffish sailor-doll.) 

annabel made rove play with her eyes. "he is up at the caravans, ladi 
dear," she replied. "i there anyth annabel can bid him do?" 

"nothing, thank you," said aunt rachel. 

for a minut the gipsi watch aunt rachel, and then she got up from the 
sew machin box and cross the floor. she lean so close toward her 
that she had to put up a hand to steadi the babe at her back. 

"ladi dear," she murmur with irresist softness, "your husband died, 
didn't he?" 

On aunt rachel' finger wa a ring, but it wa not a wed ring. It wa 
a hoop of pearls. 

"I have never had a husband," she said. 

the gipsi glanc at the ring. "then that is--?" 

"that is a betroth ring," aunt rachel replied. 

"ah!..." said annabel. 

then, after a minute, she drew still closer. her eye were fix on aunt 
rachel's, and the insinu voic wa veri low. 

"ah!... and did _it_ die too, ladi dear?" 

again came that quick, half-affright look into aunt rachel' face. her 
eye avoid those of the gipsy, sought them, and avoid them again. 

"did what die?" she ask slowli and guardedly.... 

the child at the gipsy' back did not need suck; nevertheless, annabel' 
finger work at her bosom, and she move the sling. As the child 
settled, annabel gave aunt rachel a long look. 

"whi do you rock?" she ask slowly. 

aunt rachel wa trembling. she did not reply. In a voic soft as slide 
water the gipsi continued: 

"ladi dear, we are a strang folk to you, and even among us there are 
those who shuffl the pack of card and read the palm when silver ha 
been put upon it, know nothing... but some of us _see_--som of us 
_see_." 

It wa more than a minut befor aunt rachel spoke. 

"you are a woman, and you have your babe at your breast now.... everi 
woman see the thing you speak of." 

but the gipsi shook her head. "you speak of see with the heart. I 
speak of eyes--thes eyes." 

again came a long pause. aunt rachel had given a littl start, but had 
becom quiet again. when at last she spoke it wa in a voic scarc 
audible. 

"that cannot be. I know what you mean, but it cannot be.... He die 
on the eve of hi wedding. for my bridal cloth they made me black 
garment instead. It is long ago, and now I wear neither black nor white, 
but--" her hand made a gesture. aunt rachel alway dress as if to suit 
a sorrow that time had depriv of bitterness, in such a tender and 
fleeci grey as one see in the mist that lie like lawn over hedgerow 
and cops earli of a midsummer' morning. "therefore," she resumed, "your 
heart may see, but your eye cannot see that which never was." 

but there came a sudden note of master into the gipsy' voice. 

"with my eyes--_these_ eyes," she repeated, point to them. 

aunt rachel kept her own eye obstin on her knit needles. "none 
except I have seen it. It is not to be seen," she said. 

the gipsi sat suddenli erect. 

"it is not so. keep still in your chair," she ordered, "and I will tell 
you when--" 

It wa a curiou thing that followed. As if all the will went out of 
her, aunt rachel sat veri still; and present her hand flutter and 
dropped. the gipsi sat with her own hand fold over the mat on her 
knees. sever minut passed; then, slowly, onc more that sweetest of 
smile stole over aunt rachel' cheeks. onc more her head dropped. her 
hand moved. noiselessli on the rocker that the gipsi had pad with 
felt the chair began to rock. annabel lift one hand. 

"_dovo se li_" she said. "it is there." 

aunt rachel did not appear to hear her. with that ineff smile still 
on her face, she rocked.... 

then, after some minutes, there cross her face such a look as visit 
the face of one who, wake from sleep, strain hi faculti to 
recaptur some bliss and vanish vision.... 

"_jal_--it is gone," said the gipsi woman. 

aunt rachel open her eye again. she repeat dulli after annabel: 

"it is gone." 

"ghosts," the gipsi whisper presently, "are of the dead. therefor it 
must have lived." 

but again aunt rachel shook her head. "it never lived." 

"you were young, and beautiful?..." 

still the shake of the head. "he die on the eve of hi wedding. they 
took my white garment away and gave me black ones. how then could 
it have lived?" 

"without the kiss, no.... but sometim a woman will lie through her 
life, and at the gravesid still will lie.... tell me the truth." 

but they were the same word that aunt rachel repeated: "he die on the 
eve of hi wedding; they took away my wed garments...." from her lip 
a lie could hardli issue. the gipsy' face becam grave.... 

she broke anoth long silence. 

"I believe," she said at last. "it is a new kind--but no more wonder 
than the other. the other I have seen, now I have seen thi also. tell 
me, doe it come to ani other chair?" 

"it wa hi chair; he die in it," said aunt rachel. 

"and you--shal you die in it?" 

"a god wills." 

"ha ... _other life_ ... visit it long?" 

"mani years; but it is alway small; it never grows." 

"to their mother babe never grow. they remain ever babes.... none other 
ha ever seen it?" 

"except yourself, none. I sit here; present it creep into my arms; it 
is small and warm; I rock, and then... it goes." 

"would it come to anoth chair?" 

"I cannot tell. I think not. It wa hi chair." 

annabel mused. At the other end of the room flora wa now bestow on 
jack, the disreput sailor. the gipsy' eye rest on the bridal 
party.... 

"yet anoth might see it--" 

"none has." 

"no; but yet.... the door doe not alway shut behind us suddenly. 
perhap one who ha toddl but a step or two over the threshold might, 
by look back, catch a glimpse.... what is the name of the smallest 
one?" 

"angela." 

"that mean 'angel'... look, the doll who die yesterday is now be 
married.... It may be that life ha not yet seal the littl one' eyes. 
will you let annabel ask her if she see what it is you hold in your 
arms?" 

again the voic wa soft and wheedling.... 

"no, annabel," said aunt rachel faintly. 

"will you rock again?" 

aunt rachel made no reply. 

"rock..." urg the cajol voice. 

but aunt rachel onli turn the betroth ring on her finger. over at the 
altar jack wa leer at hi new-mad bride, past decency; and littl 
angela held the wooden horse' head, which had part from it body. 

"rock, and comfort yourself--" tempt the voice. 

then slowli aunt rachel rose from her chair. 

"no, annabel," she said gently. "you should not have spoken. when the 
snow melt you will go, and come no more; whi then did you speak? It wa 
mine. It wa not meant to be seen by another. I no longer want it. pleas 
go." 

the swarthi woman turn her almond eye on her onc more. 

"you cannot live without it," she said as she also rose.... 

and as jack and hi bride left the church on the rehead horse, aunt 
rachel walk with hang head from the apartment. 


iii 

thenceforward, as day follow day, aunt rachel rock no more; and with 
the pack and partial melt of the snow the gipsi up at the 
caravan judg it time to be off about their business. It wa on the 
morn of christma eve that they came down in a bodi to the abbey 
farm to express their thank to those who had befriend them; but the 
bailiff wa not there. He and the farm men had ceas work, and were 
down at the church, practis the carols. onli aunt rachel sat, still 
and knitting, in the black walnut chair; and the children play on the 
floor. 

A night in the toy-box had appar bred discont between jack 
and flora--or perhap they sought to keep their counten befor 
the world; at ani rate, they sat on opposit side of the room, jack 
keep boon compani with the lead soldiers, hi spous reposing, her 
lead-balanc eye closed, in the broken clockwork motor-car. with the 
air of perform some vagu moment ritual, the children were 
kiss one anoth beneath the bunch of mistleto that hung from the 
centr beam. In the interv of kiss they told one anoth in 
whisper that aunt rachel wa not veri well, and angela woke flora to 
tell her that aunt rachel had brown titu also. 

"stay you here; I will give the ladi dear our thanks," said annabel to 
the group of gipsi gather about the porch; and she enter the 
great hall-kitchen. she approach the chair in which aunt rachel sat. 

there wa obeis in the bend of her body, but command in her long 
almond eyes, as she spoke. 

"ladi dear, you must rock or you cannot live." 

aunt rachel did not look up from her work. 

"rocking, I should not live long," she replied. 

"we are leav you." 

"all leav me." 

"annabel fear she ha taken away your comfort." 

"onli for a littl while. the door close behind us, but it open again." 

"but for that littl time, rock--" 

aunt rachel shook her head. 

"no. It is finished. anoth ha seen.... say good-by to your 
companions; they are veri welcom to what they have had; and god speed 
you." 

"they thank you, ladi dear.... will you not forget that annabel saw, and 
rock?" 

"no more." 

annabel stoop and kiss the hand that bore the betroth hoop of 
pearls. the other hand aunt rachel place for a moment upon the smoki 
head of the babe in the sling. It trembl as it rest there, but the 
tremor passed, and annabel, turn onc at the porch, gave her a last 
look. then she depart with her companions. 

that afternoon, jack and flora had shaken down to wedlock as marri 
folk should, and sat togeth befor the board spread with the dolls' 
tea-things. the pallid light in the great hall-kitchen faded; the candl 
were lighted; and then the children, first borrow the stock of 
their elder to hang at the bed' foot, were pack off early--for it wa 
the custom to bring them down again at midnight for the carols. aunt 
rachel had their good-night kisses, not as she had them everi night, but 
with the special ceremoni of the mistletoe. 

other folk, grown folk, sat with aunt rachel that evening; but the old 
walnut chair did not move upon it rockers. there wa merri talk, but 
aunt rachel took no part in it. the board wa spread with ale and chees 
and spice loaf for the carol-singers; and the time drew near for their 
coming. 

when at midnight, faintli on the air from the church below, there came 
the chime of christma morning, all bestir themselves. 

"they'll be here in a few minutes," they said; "somebodi go and bring the 
children down;" and within a veri littl while subdu nois were heard 
outside, and the lift of the latch of the yard gate. the children were 
in their nightgowns, hardli fulli awake; a low voic outsid wa heard 
give orders; and then there aros on the night the carol. 

"hush!" they said to the wonder children; "listen!..." 

It wa the cherri tree carol that rose outside, of how sweet mary, the 
queen of galilee, besought joseph to pluck the cherri for her babe, and 
joseph refused; and the voic of the singers, that had begun 
hesitatingly, grew strong and loud and free. 

"... and joseph wouldn't pluck the cherries," somebodi wa whisper to 
the tini angela.... 

"_mari said to cherri tree, 
'bow down to my knee, 
that I may pluck cherri 
for my babe and me._'" 

the carol sang; and "now listen, darling," the one who held angela 
murmured.... 

"_the uppermost spray then 
bow down to her knee; 
'thu you may see, joseph, 
these cherri are for me.' 

"'o, eat your cherries, mary, 
give them your babe now; 
O, eat your cherries, mary, 
that grew upon the bough._'" 

the littl angela, within the arm that held her, murmured, "it' the 
gipsies, isn't it, mother?" 

"no, darling. the gipsi have gone. it' the carol-singers, sing 
becaus jesu wa born." 

"but, mother ... it _is_ the gipsies, isn't it?... 'co look..." 

"look where?" 

"at aunt rachel, mother ... the gipsi woman wouldn't go without her 
littl baby, would she?" 

"no, she wouldn't do that." 

"then ha she _lent_ it to aunt rachel, like I lend my new toy 
sometimes?" 

the mother glanc across at aunt rachel, and then gather the 
night-gown figur more closely. 

"the darling' onli half awake," she murmured.... "poor aunt rachel' 
sleepi too...." 

aunt rachel, her head dropped, her hand lightli fold as if about some 
shape that none saw but herself, her face again ineff with that 
sweet and peac smile, wa onc more rock softli in her chair. 




hic jacet 

A tale OF artist conscienc 

introduct 


As I light my guest down the stair of my chelsea lodgings, turn up 
the hall ga that they might see the step at the front door, and shook 
hand with them, I bade them good night the more heartili that I wa glad 
to see their backs. lest thi should seem but an inhospit confession, 
let me state, first, that they had invit themselves, drop in in 
one and two until seven or eight of them had assembl in my garret, 
and, secondly, that I wa rather extraordinarili curiou to know why, at 
close on midnight, the one I knew least well of all had seen fit to 
remain after the other had taken their departure. To these two 
consider I must add a third, namely, that I had becom tardili 
consciou that, if andriaovski had not linger of himself, I should 
certainli have ask him to do so. 

It wa to noth more than a glance, swift and momentary, direct by 
andriaovski to myself while the other had talked, that I trace thi 
desir to see more of the littl polish painter; but a glanc deriv it 
import from the circumst under which it is given. that rapid turn 
of hi eye in my direct an hour befor had held a hundr questions, 
implications, criticisms, incredulities, condemnations. It had been one 
of those uncoven gestur that hold the promis of the treasur of 
an etern friendship. I wonder as I turn down the ga again and 
remount the stair what person messag and reproach in it had lump 
me in with the others; and by the time I had reach my own door again a 
phrase had fit itself in my mind to that quick, iron turn of 
andriaovsky' eyes: _"et tu, brute!..."_ 

He wa stand where I had left him, hi small shabbi figur in the 
attitud of a diminut colossu on my hearthrug. about him were the 
recent vacat chairs, solemnli and ridicul suggest of still 
continu the high and choic convers that had late finished. the 
same fanci had evid taken andriaovsky, for he wa turn from chair 
to chair, hi head a littl on one side, mischiev and aggravatingli 
smiling. As one of them, the deep wicker chair that jamison had occupied, 
suddenli gave a littl creak of itself, as wicker will when releas from 
a strain, hi smile broaden to a grin. I had been on the point of 
sit down in that chair, but I chang my mind and took another. 

"that' right," said andriaovsky, in that wonder english which he had 
pick up in less than three years, "don't sit in the wisdom-seat; you 
might profan it." 

I knew what he meant. I felt for my pipe and slowli fill it, not 
replying. then, slowli wag hi head from side to side, with hi eye 
humor and banteringli on mine, he utter the veri word I had 
mental associ with that glanc of his. 

_"et tu, brute!"_ he said, wag away, so that with each wag the lens 
of hi spectacl caught the light of the lamp on the table. 

I too smile as I felt for a match. 

"it _was_ rather much, wasn't it?" I said. 

but he suddenli stop hi wagging, and held up a not veri clean 
forefinger. hi whole face wa altogeth too confoundedli intelligent. 

"oh no, you don't!" he said peremptorily. "no get out of it like 
that the moment they'v turn their backs! No running--what is it?--no 
run with the hare and hunt with the hounds! _you_ helped, you 
know!" 

I confess I fidget a little. 

"but hang it all, what could I do? they were in my place," I broke out. 

He chuckled, enjoy my discomfiture. then hi eye fell on those absurd 
and solemn chair again. 

"look at 'em--th art shade in conference!" he chuckled. "that 
rush-seat one, it wa talk half an hour ago about 'scherzo in 
silver and grey!' ... nice, fresh green stuff!" 

To shut him up I told him that he would find cigarett and tobacco on 
the table. 

"'scherzo in silver and grey'!" he chuckl again as he took a 
cigarette.... 

all this, perhaps, need some explanation. It had been the usual thing, 
usual in those days, twenti year ago--smarm about art and the art 
and so forth. they--"we," as appar andriaovski had linger behind 
for the purpos of remind me--had perhap talk a littl more 
soaringli than the ordinary, that wa all. there had been jamison in the 
wicker chair, full to the lip and run over with the colour 
suggest of the late edward calvert; gibbs, in a pulpi state of 
ador of the less legitim side of the paint of watts; and 
magnani, who had advanc that an essenti one underli all the 
arts, and had triumphantli prove hi thesi by analog with the law of 
the co-rel of forces. A book call music and moral had appear 
about that time, and on it they--we--had risen to region of kite-high 
lunaci about colour symphonies, orgi of formless colour thrown on a 
magic-lantern screen--vieux jeu enough at thi time of day. A young 
newspap man, too, had made mental note of our adjectives, for use in 
hi weekli (I nearli spelt it "weakly") half-column of art criticism; 
and--and here wa andriaovsky, grin at the chairs, and mimick 
it all with diabol glee. 

"'scherzo in silver and grey'--'word pastels'--' lyric in stone!'" 
he chuckled. "and what wa it the fat fellow said?' A siren song in 
marble!' phew!... well, i'll get along. I shall just be in time to get 
a pint of bitter to wash it all down if i'm quick... bah!" he broke out 
suddenly. "good men build up form and forms--keep the art each after 
it kind--rais up the dike so that we shan't all be swept away by night 
and nothingness--and these rat come nose and burrow and undermin 
it all!... _et tu, brute!_" 

"well, when you'v finish rub it in--" I grunted. 

"a if _you_ didn't know better!... Is that your way of get back on 
'em, now that you'v chuck draw and gone in for write books? 
phew i... well, i'll go and get my pint of beer--" 

but he didn't go for hi pint of beer. instead, he began to prowl about 
my room, pryingly, nosingly, touch thing here and there. I watch 
him as he pass from one thing to another. He wa veri little, and very, 
veri shabby. hi trouser were frayed, and the sole of one of hi boot 
flap distressingly. hi old bowler hat--h had not thought it 
necessari to wait until he got outsid befor thrust it on the back of 
hi head--wa so limp in substanc that I verili believ that had he run 
incauti downstair he would have found when he got to the bottom 
that it crown had sunk in of it own weight. In spite of hi remark 
about the pint of beer, I doubt if he had the price of one in hi pocket. 

"what' this, brutus--a concertina?" he suddenli asked, stop befor 
the collaps case in which I kept my rather old dress suit. 

I told him what it was, and he hoist up hi shoulders. 

"and these things?" he asked, move to someth else. 

they were a pair of boot-tre of which I had permit myself the 
economy. I rememb they cost me four shill in the old brompton 
road. 

"and that' your bath, I suppose.... dumb-bel too.... and--_oh, good 
lord!_..." 

He had pick up, and drop again as if it had been hot, somebodi or 
other' card with the date of a "day" written across the corner of it.... 

As I help him on with hi overcoat he made no secret of the condit 
of it armhol and lining. I don't for one moment suppos that the 
garment wa his. I took a candl to light him down as soon as it should 
pleas him to depart. 

"well, so long, and joy to you on the high road to success," he said with 
anoth grin for which I could have bundl him down the stairs.... 

In later day I never look to andriaovski for tact; but I stare at him 
for hi lack of it that night. and as I stare I notic for the first 
time the broad and low pylon of hi forehead, hi handsom mouth and 
chin, and the fire and wit and scorn that smoulder behind hi cheap 
spectacles. I look again; and hi smallness, hi malice, hi pathet 
littl brag about hi poverty, seem all to disappear. He had 
stroll back to my hearthrug, wishing, I have no doubt now, to be abl 
to exclaim suddenli that it wa too late for the pint of beer for which 
he hadn't the money, and to curs hi luck; and the pigmi qualiti of hi 
colossusship had somehow gone. 

As I watch him, a neighbour clock struck the half-hour, and he 
did even as I had surmised--curs the close time of the english 
public-houses.... 

I light him down. for one moment, under the hall gas, he almost drop 
hi jest manner. 

"you _do_ know better, harrison, you know," he said. "but, of course, 
you'r go to be a famou author in almost no time. oh, _ca se 
voit_! No garret for _you_! It wa a treat,' the way you handl those 
fellows--r ... well don't forget us other when you'r up there--i 
may want you to write my 'life' some day...." 

I heard the slap of the loos sole as he shuffl down the path. At 
the gate he turn for a moment. 

"good night, brutus," he called. 

when I had mount to my garret again my eye fell onc more on that 
ridicul assemblag of empti chairs, all solemnli talk to one 
another. I burst out into a laugh. then I undressed, put my jacket on the 
hanger, took the morrow' boot from the tree and treed those I had 
removed, chang the pair of trouser under my mattress, and went, still 
laugh at the chairs, to bed. 

thi wa michael andriaovsky, the polish painter, who die four week 
ago. 


I 

I knew the reason of maschka' visit the moment she wa announced. even 
in the stress moment of the funer she had found time to whisper to 
me that she hope to call upon me at an earli date. I dismiss the 
amanuensi to whom I wa dictat the last stori of the fourth seri of 
_martin renard_, gave a few hasti instruct to my secretary, and told 
the servant to show miss andriaovski into the drawing-room, to ask her 
to be so good as to excus me for five minutes, to order tea at once, and 
then to bring my visitor up to the library. 

A few minut later she wa shown into the room. 

she wa dress in the same plainli cut costum of dead black she 
had worn at the funeral, and had push up her heavi veil over the 
close-fit cap of black fur that accentu her sclavon appearance. 
I notic again with distress the pallor of her face and the bistr 
ring that week of nurs had put under her dark eyes. I notic also 
her resemblance, in featur and stature, to her brother. I place a chair 
for her; the tea-tray follow her in; and without more than a murmur 
greet she peel off her glove and prepar to presid at the tray. 

she had fill the cups, and I had hand her toast, befor she spoke. 
then: 

"I suppos you know what i'v come about," she said. 

I nodded. 

"long, long ago you promis it. nobodi els can do it. the onli question 
is 'when.'" 

"that' the onli question," I agreed. 

"we, naturally," she continued, after a glanc in which her eye mute 
thank me for my impli promise, "are anxiou that it should be as soon 
as possible; but, of course--i shall quit understand--" 

she gave a momentari glanc round my library. I help her out. 

"you mean that i'm a veri import person nowadays, and that you'r 
afraid to trespass on my time. never mind that. I shall find time 
for this. but tell me befor we go ani further exactli how you stand and 
precis what it is you expect." 

briefli she did so. It did not in the least surpris me to learn that her 
brother had die penniless. 

"and if you hadn't undertaken the 'life,'" she said, "he might just as 
well not have work in poverti all these years. you can, at least, see 
to hi fame." 

I nod again gravely, and rumin for a moment. then I spoke. 

"I can write it, fulli and in detail, up to five year ago," I said. "you 
know what happen then. I tri my best to help him, but he never would 
let me. tell me, maschka, whi he wouldn't sell me that portrait." 

I knew instantly, from her quick confusion, that her brother had spoken 
to her about the portrait he had refus to sell me, and had probabl 
told her the reason for hi refusal. I watch her as she evad the 
question as well as she could. 

"you know how--queer--h wa about who he sold hi thing to. and as for 
those five year in which you saw less of him, schofield will tell you 
all you want to know." 

I relinquish the point. "who' schofield?" I ask instead. 

"he wa a veri good friend of michael's--of both of us. you can talk 
quit freeli to him. I want to say at the begin that I should like 
him to be associ with you in this." 

I don't know how I divin on the spot her relat to schofield, whoever 
he was. she told me that he too wa a painter. 

"michael thought veri highli of hi things," she said. 

"I don't know them," I replied. 

"you probabl wouldn't," she returned.... 

but I caught the quick drop of her eye from their brief excurs round 
my library, and I felt someth within me stiffen a little. It did not 
need maschka andriaovski to remind me that I had not attain my posit 
without--let us say--split certain differences; the loos of 
the express can be correct hereafter. life consist veri larg of 
compromises. you doubtless know my name, whichev countri or hemispher 
you happen to live in, as that of the creator of martin renard, the 
famou and popular detective; and I wa not at that moment dispos to 
apologise, either to maschka or schofield or anybodi else, for have 
written the stori at the bid of a gape public. the moment the 
public show that it want someth better I wa prepar to give it. 
In the meantime, I sat in my veri comfort library, secur shield 
from distress by my balanc at my banker's. 

"well," I said after a moment, "let' see how we stand. and first 
as to what you'r like to get out of this. It goe without saying, 
of course, that by write the 'life' I can get you ani amount of 
'fame'--advertisement, newspap talk, and all the thing that, it struck 
me, michael alway treat with especi scorn. My name alone, I say, 
will do that. but for anyth els i'm by no mean so sure. you see," I 
explained, "it doesn't follow that becaus I can sell hundr of 
thousand of... you know what... that I can sell anyth i'v a mind to 
sign." I said it, confid that she had not live all those year with 
her brother without have learn the axiomat natur of it. To my 
discomfiture, she began to talk like a callow student. 

"I should have thought that it follow that if you could sell 
something--" she hesit onli for a moment, then courag gave the 
other stuff it proper adjective, "--someth rotten, you could have 
sold someth good when you had the chance." 

"then if you thought that you were wrong," I repli briefli and 
concisely. 

"_michael_ couldn't, of course," she said, put michael out of the 
question with a littl wave of her hand, "becaus michael was--i mean, 
michael wasn't a busi man. you are." 

"i'm speak as one," I replied. "I don't wast time in give peopl 
what they don't want. that is business. I don't undertak your brother' 
'life' as a matter of business, but as an inestim privilege. I 
repeat, it doesn't follow that the public will buy it." 

"but--but--" she stammered, "the public will buy a _pill_ if they see 
your name on the testimonial!" 

"A pill--yes," I said sadly.... geniu and a pill were, alas, differ 
things. "but," I ad more cheerfully, "you can never tell what the 
public will do. they _might_ buy it--there' no tell except by 
trying--" 

"well, schofield think they will," she inform me with decision. 

"I dare say he does, if he' an artist. they mostli do," I replied. 

"he doesn't think michael will ever be popular," she emphasis the 
adject slightly, "but he doe think he ha a consider follow if 
they could onli be discovered." 

I sighed. all artist think that. they will accept ani compromis except 
the one that is offer to them.... I tri to explain to maschka that in 
thi world we have to stand to the chanc of all or nothing. 

"you'v got to be one thing or the other--i don't know that it matter 
veri much which," I said. "there' michael' way, and there's... mine. 
that' all. however, we'll tri it. all you can say to me, and more, i'll 
say to a publish for you. but he'll probabl wink at me." 

for a moment she wa silent. then she said: "schofield rather fanci one 
publisher." 

"oh? who' he?" I asked. 

she mention a name. If I knew anyth at all of busi she might as 
well have offer _the life of michael andriaovsky_ to the religi 
tract societi at once.... 

"hm!... and ha mr. schofield ani other suggestions?" I inquired. 

He had. several. I saw that schofield' posit would have to be defin 
befor we went ani further. 

"hm!" I said again. "well, I shall have to reli on schofield for those 
five year in which I saw littl of michael; but unless schofield know 
more of publish than I do, and can enforc a better contract and a 
larger sum on account than I can, I realli think, maschka, that you'll do 
better to leav thing to me. for one thing, it' onli fair to me. My 
name hasn't much of an artist valu nowadays, but it ha a veri 
consider commerci one, and my worth to publish isn't as a writer 
of the live of geniuses." 

I could see she didn't like it; but that couldn't be helped. It had to be 
so. then, as we sat for a time in silenc over the fire, I notic again 
how like her brother she was. she wa not, it wa true, much like him as 
he had been on that last visit of mine to him ... and I sigh as I 
rememb that visit. the dread scene had come back to me.... 

On account, I suppose, of the diverg of our paths, I had not even 
heard of hi ill until almost the finish. immedi I had hasten 
to the hampstead "home," onli to find him alreadi in the agony. He had 
not been too far gone to recognis me, however, for he had mutter 
someth brokenli about "know better," that a spasm had interrupted. 
besid myself, onli maschka had been there; and I had been thank for 
the summon that had call her for a moment out of the room. I had still 
retain hi alreadi cold hand; hi brow had work with that dread 
struggle; and hi eye had been closed. 

but suddenli he had open them, and the next moment had sat up on hi 
pillow. He had striven to draw hi hand from mine. 

"who are you?" he had suddenli demanded, not know me. 

I had come close to him. "you know me, andriaovsky--harrison?" I had 
ask sorrowfully. 

I had been on the point of repeat my name but suddenly, after hold 
my eye for a moment with a look the profund and familiar of which 
I cannot express, he had broken into the most ghastli haunt laugh I 
have ever heard. 

"_harrison?_" the word had broken throatili from him.... "_oh yes; I 
know you!... you shall veri soon know that I know you if... if..._" 

the cough and rattl had come as maschka had rush into the room. In ten 
second andriaovski had fallen back, dead. 


II 

that same even I began to make note for andriaovsky' "life." On the 
follow day, the last of the fourth seri of the _martin renards_ 
occupi me until I wa thank to get to bed. but thereaft I could 
call rather more of my time my own, and I began in good earnest to devot 
myself to the "life." 

maschka had spoken no more than the truth when she had said that of all 
men live none but I could write that "life." hi remain behind in my 
chelsea garret that even after the other had left had been the 
begin of a friendship that, bar that laps of five year at the 
end, had been for twenti year one of completest intimacy. whatev money 
there might or might not be in the book, I had seen _my_ opportun in 
it--th opportun to make it the vehicl for all the aspirations, 
faiths, enthusiasms, and exalt we had shared; and I myself did not 
realis until I began to note them down one tith of the subtl link and 
associ that had weld our soul together. 

even the outward and visibl sign of these had been wonderful. set 
out from one or other of the score of garret and cheap lodg we had 
in our time inhabited, we had wander together, day after day, night 
after night, far down east, where, as we had thread our way among the 
barrel of sous her and the stall and barrow of unleaven 
bread, he had taught me scrap of hebrew and polish and yiddish; up into 
the bright west, where he could never walk a quarter of a mile without 
meet one of hi extraordinari acquaintances--fur music-hal 
managers, hawker of bootlaces, commerci magnat of hi own faith, 
touts, crossing-sweepers, paint women; into soho, where he had name 
for the veri hors on the cab-rank and the dog who slumber under the 
counter of the seller of french literature; out to the naphtha-light 
and cri of the saturday night street market of islington and the north 
end road; into citi church on wintri afternoons, into the studio of 
famou artist full of handsom dress women, into the studio of 
artist not famous, at the end of dark and break-neck corridors; to tea 
at the suburban home of barmaid and choru girls, to dinner in the 
stabl of a cavalry-barracks, to supper in cabmen' shelters. He wa 
possess in some mysteri way of the password to door in hoard 
behind which excav were in progress; he knew by name the butcher 
of the deptford yards, the men in the blood-cak clothes, so inur to 
blood that they may not with safeti to their live swear at one another; 
he took me into an opium-cellar within a stone's-throw of oxford street, 
and into a roof-chamb to call upon certain friend of hi ... well, 
they _said_ they were fire extinguishers, so i'd better not say they 
were bombs. up, down; here, there; good report, but more frequent 
evil ... we had known thi side of our london as well as two men may. and 
our other adventur and peregrinations, not of the body, but of the 
spirit ... but these must be spoken of in their proper place. 

I had arrang with maschka that schofield should bring me the whole of 
the work andriaovski had left behind him; and he arriv late one 
afternoon in a fourwheeler, with four great packag done up in brown 
paper. I found him to be a big, shaggy-browed, red-haired, raw-bon 
lancashir man of five-and-thirty, given to confidenti demonstr 
at the length of a button-shank, quit unconsci of the gulf between 
hi word and hi right to employ them, and bent on assert an equal 
that I did not disput by a rather aggress use of my surname. 
andriaovski had appoint him hi executor, and he had ever the air of 
suspect that the appoint wa go to be challenged. 

"a'm glad to be associ with ye in thi melancholi duty, harrison," he 
said. "now we won't wast words. miss andriaovski ha told me precis 
how matter stand. I had, as ye know, the honour to be poor michael' 
close friend for a period of five years, and my knowledg of him is 
entir at your disposal." 

I answer that I should be serious handicap without it. 

"just so. It is miss andriaovsky' desir that we should pull together. 
now, in the firrst place, what is your idea about the forrm the book 
should take?" 

"in the first place, if you don't mind," I replied, "perhap we'd better 
run over togeth the thing you'v brought. the daylight will be gone 
soon." 

"just as ye like, harrison," he said, "just as ye like. it' all the same 
to me...." 

I clear a space about my writing-t at the window, and we turn to 
the artist remain of michael andriaovsky. 

I wa astonished, first, at the enorm quantiti of the stuff, and next 
at it utter and complet revel of the man. In a flash I realis 
how superb that portion at least of the book wa go to be. and 
schofield explain that the work he had brought repres but a 
fraction of the whole that wa at our disposal. 

"ye'll know with what foolish generos poor michael alway gave hi 
thing away," he said. "hallard ha a grand set; so ha connolly; and 
from time to time he behav varri handsom to myself. artist of varri 
consider talent both hallard and connolli are; michael thought 
varri highli of their abilities. they express the deepest interest in the 
shape your worrk will take; and that remind me. I myself have draft a 
rough scenario of the forrm it appear to me the 'life' might with 
advantag be cast in. A pure privat opinion, ye'll understand, 
harrison, which ye'll be entir at liberti to disregard...." 

"well, let' finish with the work first," I said. 

with boards, loos sheets, scrap of paper, notes, studies, canvas 
stretch and strip from their stretchers, we pave half the librari 
floor, schofield keep up all the time a run fire of "grand, 
grand! A masterpiece! A gem, that, harrison!" they were all that he said, 
and present I ceas to hear hi voice. the splendour of the work 
issu undim even from the sever test of schofield' praise; and I 
thought again with pride how I, I, wa the onli man live who could 
adequ write that "life.".... 

"aren't they grand? aren't they great?" schofield chant monotonously. 

"they are," I replied, come to a conscious of hi presenc again. 
"but what' that?" 

secret he had kept one packag until the last. He now remov it 
wrap and set it against a chair. 

_"there!"_ he cried. "i'll thank ye, harrison, for your opinion of 
_that!"_ 

It wa the portrait andriaovski had refus to sell me--a portrait of 
himself. 

the portrait wa the climax of the display. the lancastrian still talked; 
but I, profoundli moved, mechan gather up the draw from the 
floor and return them to their proper packag and folios. I wa dine 
at home, alone, that evening, and for form' sake I ask thi faith 
dog of andriaovsky' to share my meal; but he excus himself--h wa 
dine with hallard and connolly. when the draw were all put away, 
all save that portrait, he gave an inquisit glanc round my library. 
It wa the same glanc as maschka had given when she had fear to 
intrud on my time; but schofield did these thing with a much more heavi 
hand. He departed, but not befor tell me that even my mansion 
contain such treasur as it had never held before. 

that evening, after glanc at schofield' "scenario," I care 
fold it up again for return to him, lest when the book should appear 
he should miss the pleasur of say that I had had hi guidanc but 
had disregard it; then I sat down at my writing-t and took out 
the loos note I had made. I made other jottings, each on a blank sheet 
for subsequ amplification; and the sheet overspread the larg 
leather-top tabl and thrust one anoth up the standard of the 
incandesc with the pearli silk shade. the firelight shone low and 
richli in the duski space of the larg apartment; and the thick carpet 
and the doubl door made the place so quiet that I could hear my watch 
tick in my pocket. 

I work for an hour; and then, for the purpos of make yet other 
notes, I rose, cross the room, and took down the three or four 
illustr book to which, in the earlier part of hi career, 
andriaovski had put hi name. I carri them to the table, and twinkl 
as I open the first of them. It wa a book of poems, and in make the 
design for them andriaovski had certainli _not_ found for himself. 
almost ani one of the "art shades," as he had call them, could have 
done the thing equal well, and I twinkl again. I did not propos to 
have much merci on _that_. alreadi schofield' word had given birth to a 
suspicion in my mind--that andriaovsky, in permit these fellows, 
hallard, connolly, and the rest, to suppos that he "thought highly" of 
them and their work, had been give play to that malici humour of 
his; and they natur did not see the joke. that joke, too, wa between 
himself, dead, and me, prepar to write hi "life." As if he had been 
there to hear me, I chuckled, and spoke in a low voice. 

"you were pull their legs, michael, you know. A littl rough on them 
you were. but there' a book here of your that i'm go to tell the 
truth about. you and I won't pretend to one another. it' a rotten book, 
and both you and I know it...." 

I don't know what it wa that caus me suddenli to see just then 
someth that I had been look at long enough without seeing--that 
portrait of himself that I had set lean against the back of a chair at 
the end of my writing-table. It stood there, just within the soft 
penumbra of shadow cast by the silk-shad light. the canva had been 
enlarged, the seam of it clumsili sewn by andriaovsky' own hand; but in 
that half-light the rough ridg of paint did not show, and I confess that 
the posit and effect of the thing startl me for a moment. had I 
care to play a trick with my fanci I could have imagin the head 
wag from side to side, with such rage and fire wa it painted. He had 
had the temer to dash a reflect across one of the glass of hi 
spectacles, conceal the eye behind it. the next moment I had given a 
short laugh. 

"so you'r there, are you?... well, I know you agre veri heartili about 
that book of poems. heigho! If I rememb rightly, you made more money 
out of that book than out of the other put together. but i'm go 
to tell the truth about it. _i_ know better, you know...." 

chancing, befor I turn in that night, to reopen one of hi folios, I 
came across a drawing, there by accident, I don't doubt, that confirm 
me in my suspicion that andriaovski had had hi quiet joke with 
schofield, hallard, connolli and co. It wa a sketch of schofield's, 
imitative, deplorable, a dread show-up of incapacity. well enough 
"drawn," in a sense, it wa ... and I rememb how andriaovski had ever 
urg that "drawing," of itself, did not exist. I wink at the portrait. 
I saw hi point. He himself had no peer, and, rather than invit 
comparison with star of the second magnitude, he chose hi intim 
from among the peddler of the ware that had the least possibl 
connect with hi art. he, too, had understood that the compromis 
must be entir accept or total refused; and while, in the 
diverg of our paths, he had done the one thing and I the other, we 
had each done it thoroughly, with vigour, and with persistence, and each 
could esteem the other, if not as a co-worker, at least as an honour 
and out-and-out opposite. 


iii 

within a fortnight I wa so deep in my task that, in the realest sense, 
the greater part of my life wa in the past. the signific of those 
extraordinari peregrin of our had been in the opportun they had 
afford for a communion of brain and spirit of unusu rarity; and all 
thi determin to my work with the accumul forc of it long 
penning-up. I have spoken of andriaovsky' contempt for such as had the 
concept of their work that it wa someth they "did" as distinct 
from someth they "were"; and unless I succeed in make it plain that, 
not as a mere figur of speech and loos hyperbole, but starkli and 
literally, andriaovski _was_ everyth he did, my tale will be 
pointless. 

there wa not one of the basic fact of life--of faith, honour, 
truth-speaking, falsehood, betrayal, sin--that he did not turn, not to 
moral interpretations, as other do, but to the holi purpos of hi 
nobl and passion art. for ani man, sin is onli mortal when it is sin 
against that which he know to be immort true; and the thing 
andriaovski knew to be immort true were the thing that he had gone 
down into the depth in order to bring forth and place upon hi paper or 
canvas. these thing are not for the perus of many. unless you love the 
thing that he love with a fervour compar in kind, if not in degree, 
with hi own, you may not come near them. "truth, 'the highest thing a 
man may keep,'" he said, "cannot be brought down; a man onli attain it 
by prove hi right to it"; and I think I need not further state hi 
view on the democratis of art. Of ani result from the elabor 
process of art-educ he held out no hope whatever. "it is in a man, 
or it isn't," he ever declared; "if it is, he must bring it out for 
himself; if it isn't, let him turn to someth use and have done with 
it." I need not press the point that in these thing he wa almost a 
solitary. 

He made of these gener despot principl the fiercest person 
applications. I have heard hi passion outbreak of "thief! liar! 
fool!" over a draw when it ha seem to him that a man ha not 
vouch with the safeti of hi immort soul for the shape and line he 
ha commit to it. I have seen him get into such a rage with the eye 
of the artist upon him. I have heard the ice and vinegar of hi word 
when a good man, for money, ha consent to modifi and emascul 
hi work; and there linger in my memori hi side of a telephon 
convers in which he told a publish who had suggest that he 
should do the same thing precis what he thought of him. and on the 
other hand, he onc walk from aldgat to putney hill, with a loos heel 
on one of hi boots, to see a man of whom he had seen but a singl 
drawing. see him he did, too, in spite of the man' footman, hi liveri 
parlourmaid, and the daunt effect of the electr brougham at the 
door. 

"he' a good man," he said to me afterwards, ruefulli look at the 
place where hi boot-heel had been. "you'v got to take your good where 
you find it. I don't care whether he' a rich amateur or skin-and-grief 
in a garret as long as he' got the stuff in him. nobodi els could have 
fetch me up from the east end thi afternoon.... So long; see you in a 
week or so--" 

thi wa the onli time I ever knew him break that sacr time in which he 
celebr each year the passov and the feast of tabernacles. I doubt 
whether thi observ of the ritual of hi faith wa of more essenti 
import to him than that other philosoph religion toward which he 
sometim leaned. I have said what hi real religion was. 

but to the "life." 

with these things, and others, as a beginning, I began to add page to 
page, phase to phase; and, in a time the short of which astonish 
myself, I had pretti well cover the whole of the first ten year of our 
friendship. maschka call rather less, and schofield rather more 
frequently, than I could have wished; and my surmis that he, at least, 
wa in love with her, quickli becam a certainty. thi wa to be seen 
when they call together. 

It wa when they came togeth that someth els also becam apparent. 
thi wa their slightli deris attitud toward the mean by which I 
had attain my success. It wa not the less notic that it took the 
form of compliment on the outward and visibl results. singli I could 
manag them; togeth they were inclin to get a littl out of hand. 

I would have tax them fairli and squar with this, singli or 
together, but for one thing--th beauti eas with which the "life" wa 
proceeding. never had I felt so complet _en rapport_ with my subject. 
So beauti wa the thing run that I had had the idl fanci of 
some actual urg from andriaovski himself; and each night, befor sit 
down to work, I set hi portrait at my desk' end, as if it had been some 
kind of an observance. the most beauti result of all was, that I felt 
what I had not felt for five years--that I too wa not "doing" my work, 
but actual live and be it. At time I took up the sheet I had 
written as ignor of their content as if they had proceed from 
anoth pen--so freshli they came to me. and once, I vow, I found, in my 
own handwriting, a polish name, that I might (it is true) have 
subconsci heard at some time or other, but that stir no chord in 
my memori even when I saw it written. maschka check and confirm it 
afterwards; and I did not tell her by what odd circumst it had issu 
from my pen. 

the day did come, however, when I found I must have it out with schofield 
about thi supercili I have mentioned. the _falchion_ had just 
begun to print the third seri of my _martin renard_; and thi had been 
made the occas of anoth of schofield' ponder compliments. I 
acknowledg it with none too much graciousness; and then he said: 

"i'v na doubt, harrison, that by thi time the famou sleuth-hound of 
crime ha becom quit a creatur of flesh and blood to ye." 

It wa the tone as much as the word that rile me; and I repli that 
hi doubt or the lack of them were a privaci with which I did not wish 
to meddle. from be mere a bore the fellow wa rapidli becom 
insolent. 

"but I opin he'll get wearisom now and then, and in that case poor 
michael' 'life' will come as a grand relaxation," he next observed. 

If I meant to have it out, here wa my opportunity. 

"I should have thought you'd have trace a closer connect than that 
between the two things," I remarked. 

He shot a quick glanc at me from beneath hi shaggi russet brows. 

"how so? I see varri littl connection," he said suspiciously. 

"there' thi connection--that while you speak with some freedom of what 
I do, you are quit will to take advantag of it when it serv 
your turn." 

"'advantage,' harrison?" he said slowly. 

"of the advertis _martin renard_ give you. I must point out that 
you condon a thing when you accept the benefit of it. either you 
shouldn't have come to me at all, or you should deni yourself the 
gratif of these slurs." 

"slurrrrs?" he repeat loweringly. 

"both of you--you and miss andriaovsky, or maschka as I call her, _tout 
court_. don't suppos I don't know as well as you do the exact worth of 
my 'sleuth-hound,' as you call him. you didn't come to me sole becaus 
I knew andriaovski well; you came becaus i'v got the ear of the 
public also; and I tell you plainli that, howev much you dislik it, 
michael' fame as far as i'm of ani use to him, depend on the 
popular of _martin renard."_ 

He shook hi big head. "thi is what I feared," he said. 

"more," I continued, "you can depend upon it that michael, wherev he 
is, know all about that." 

"ay, ay," he said sagely, "I misdoubt your own artist soul' onli to be 
save by the write of poor michael' 'life,' harrison." 

"leav that to me and michael; we'll settl that. In the meantime, if you 
don't like it, write and publish the 'life' yourself." 

He bent hi brow on me. 

"it' precis what I want to do from the varri first," he said. "if 
you'd care to accept my symposium in the spirit in which it wa offered, 
I cannot see that the 'life' would have suffered. but now, when you'r 
next in need of my services, ye'll mebb send for me." 

He took up hi hat. I assur him, and let him take it in what sens he 
liked, that I would do so; and he left me. 

not for one singl moment did I intend that they should bounc me like 
that. with or without their sanction and countenance, I intend to write 
and publish that "life." schofield--in my own hous too--had had the 
advantag that a poor and ill-dress man ha over one who is not poor 
and ill-dressed; but my duti first of all wa neither to him nor to 
maschka, but to my friend. 

the worst of it was, however, that I had begun dimli to suspect that 
the lancastrian had hit at least one nail on the head. "your artist 
soul' onli to be save by write poor michael' 'life,'" he had 
inform me... and it wa truer than I found it pleasant to believe. 
perhaps, after all, my first duti wa not to andriaovsky, but to myself. 
I could have kick myself that the fool had been perspicaci enough to 
see it, but that did not alter the fact. I saw that in the sens in which 
andriaovski understood sin, I had sinned.... 

My onli defenc lay in the magnitud of my sin. I had sin 
thoroughly, out-and-out, and with a will. It had been the onli 
respect way--andriaovsky' own way when he had cut the compani 
of an academician to hobnob with a vagabond. I had at least institut 
no comparison, lower no ideal, wa innoc of the accurs attitud 
of facing-both-way that degrad all love and move things. I was, by 
a paradox, too black a sinner not to hope for redemption.... 

I fell into a long muse on these things.... 

had ani of the admir of _martin renard_ enter the librari of hi 
author that night he would have seen an interest thing. He would 
have seen the creator of that idol of clerk and messenger-lad and 
fourth-form boy frankli put the case befor a portrait prop up on 
a chair. He would have heard that popular author haranguing, pleading, 
curious on hi defence, turn the thing thi way and that. 

"if _you'd_ gone over, michael," that author argued, "you'd have done 
precis the same thing. If i'd stuck it out, we were, after all, of a 
kind; we'v got to be one thing or the other--isn't that so, andriaovsky? 
sinc I made up my mind, i'v face onli one way--onli one way. i'v kept 
your ideal and their entir separ and distinct. not one singl 
beauti phrase will you find in the _martin renards;_ i'v cut 'em 
out, everi one. I may have ceas to worship, but i'v profan no 
temple.... and think what I _might_ have done--what they all do! they 
deal out the slush, but with an apologet glanc at the art shades; 
_you_ know the style!--'oh, harrison; he doe that detect rubbish, but 
that' not harrison; if harrison like to drop that he could be a fine 
artist!'--i _haven't_ done that. I _haven't_ run with the hare and hunt 
with the hounds. I _am_ just harrison, who doe that detect 
rubbish!... these other chaps, schofield and connolly, _they're_ the real 
sinners, michael--th fellow who can't make up their mind to be one 
thing or the other ('artist of consider abilities'--ha! ha!).... Of 
cours you know maschka' go to marri that chap? what'll _they_ do, do 
you think? he'll scrape up a few pound out of the stew where I find 
thousands, marri her, and they'll set up a salon and talk the stuff the 
chair talk that night, you remember!... but you wait until I finish 
your 'life.'..." 

I laid it all befor him, almost as if I sought to propiti him. I 
might have been court hi patronag for hi own "life." then, with a 
start, I came to, to find myself talk nonsens to the portrait that 
year befor andriaovski had refus to sell me. 


IV 

the first check I experienc in the hitherto so easi flow of the "life" 
came at the chapter that dealt with andriaovsky' attitud toward 
"professionalism" in art. He wa inflex on thi point; there ought 
not to be profession artists. when it wa point out that hi posit 
involv a premium upon the rich amateur, he mere repli that rich 
had noth to do with the question, and that the starver in the garret 
wa not excus for hi poverty' sake from the observ of the 
implac conditions. He spoke liter of the "need" to create, 
usual in the french term, _besogne_; and he wa inclin to regard the 
imposit of thi need on a man rather as a curs laid upon him than as 
a privileg and a pleasure. but I must not enlarg upon thi further than 
to observ that thi portion of hi "life" which I wa approach 
coincid in point of time with that period of my own life at which I had 
been confront with the altern of starv for art' sake or 
becom rich by suppli a clamor trade demand. 

It came, thi check I have spoken of, one night, as I wa in the veri 
middl of a sentence; and though I have cudgel my brain in seek 
how best I can describ it, I am reduc to the simpl statement that it 
wa as arresting, as sharp, actual and imposs to resist, as if my 
hand had been seiz and pin down in it passag across the paper. I 
can even see again the fragment of the sentenc I had written: "... _and 
the mere contempl of a betray so essential--_" then came that 
abrupt and remark stop. It wa such an experi as I had formerli 
known onli in nightmare. 

I sat there look blankli and stupidli at my own hand. and not onli wa 
my hand arrested, but my brain also had complet ceas to work. for 
the life of me I could not recal the conclus of the sentenc I had 
plan a moment before. 

I look at my hand, and look again; and as I look I rememb 
someth I had been read onli a few day before--a profoundli 
unsettl descript of an experi in auto-suggestion. the 
experi had consist of the place of a hand upon a table, and the 
lay upon it the conjur that, the will notwithstanding, it should 
not move. and as I watch my own hand, pale on the paper in the pearli 
light, I knew that, by some consent to the nullif of the will that 
did not proceed from, the self I wa accustom to regard as my own, that 
injunct wa alreadi place upon it. My consciou and deliber will 
wa powerless. I could onli sit there and wait until whatev inhibit 
had arrest my write hand should permit it to move forward again. 

It must have been sever minut befor such a tingl of the nerv as 
announc that the blood is onc more return to a cramp member 
warn me that I wa about to be released. warili I await my moment; 
then I pluck my hand to myself again with a sudden that caus a 
littl blot of ink to spurt from my fountain-pen on to the surfac of the 
paper. I drew a deep breath. I wa free again. and with the freedom came 
a resolve--that whatev portion of myself had been respons for thi 
prank should not repeat it if I could possibl prevent it. 

but scarc had I come, as I may say (and not without a littl gush of 
alarm now that it wa over), to myself, when I wa struck by a thought. 
It wa a queer wild sort of thought. It fetch me out of my chair and 
set me stride across the librari to a lower shelf in the farthest 
corner. thi shelf wa the shelf on which I kept my letter-files. I 
stoop and ran my finger along the back of the dusti row. I drew out 
the file for 1900, and brought it back to my writing-table. My contracts, 
I ought to say, repos in a deed-box at my agent' office; but my file 
contained, in the form of my agent' letters, a suffici record of my 
busi transactions. 

I open the file concertina-wise, and turn to the section letter 
"r." I drew out the correspond that relat to the sale of the first 
seri of the _martin renards_. As I did so I glanc at the movabl 
calendar on my table. the date wa januari 20th. 

the file contain no letter for januari of ani signific whatever. 

the thought that had half form in my brain immedi becam nonsense. 
I replac the letter in their compartment, and took the file back to 
it shelf again. for some minut I pace the librari irresolutely; then 
I decid I would work no more that night. when I gather togeth my 
paper I wa care to place that with the half-finish sentenc on the 
top, so that with the first rest of my eye upon it on the morrow my 
memori might hapli be refreshed. 

I tri again to finish that sentenc on the morrow. with certain 
modif that I need not particularis here, my experi wa the 
same as on the previou night. 

It wa the same when I made the attempt on the day after that. 

At ten o'clock of the night of the fourth day I complet the sentenc 
without difficulty. I just sat down in my chair and wrote it. 

with equal eas I finish the chapter on profession artists. 

It wa not like that schofield would have refrain from tell 
maschka of our littl differ on our last meeting; and within a week 
of the date I have just mention I learn that she knew all about it. 
and, as the circumst of my learn thi were in a high degre 
unusual, I will relat them with such clear as I am able. 

I ought first to say, however, that the select of the draw that 
were to illustr the book have been made (the draw for which my 
own text wa to serv as commentari would be the better expression), the 
superintend of their product had been left to schofield. he, 
maschka, and I pass the proof in consultation. the block were almost 
ready; and the reason for their call that even wa to consid the 
possibl of have all readi for product in the earli spring--a 
possibl which wa conting on the state of advanc of my own 
share of the book. 

that even I had experienc my second check. (I omit those that had 
immedi succeed the first one, as resembl that one so close in 
the manner of their coming.) It had not come by ani mean so complet 
and definit as the former one, but it had suffic to make my 
progress, both mental and mechanically, so sluggish and struggl 
a perform that for the time be I had given up the attempt, and wa 
onc more regard with a sort of perturb stupor my hand that held the 
pen. andriaovsky' portrait stood in it usual place, on the chair at the 
end of my writing-table; but I had eye for noth but that refractori 
hand of mine. 

now it is true that dure the past week I had studi andriaovsky' 
portrait thoroughli enough to be abl to call up the vivid mental imag 
of it at will; but that did not entir account for the chang aspect 
with which it now present itself to that uncomprehend sens within 
us that make of these shadow such startl realities. flash and 
life-lik as wa the present on the canva (mind you, I wa not 
look at it, but all the time at my own hand), it wa dead paint by 
comparison with that _mental image_ which I saw (if I may so use a term 
of which custom ha restrict the mean to one kind of seeing) as 
plainli as I ever saw andriaovski in hi life. I know now that it wa 
by virtu of that essenti essenc that bound us heart and brain and 
soul togeth that I so saw him, eye glittering, head sardon 
wagging, fine mouth shape phrase of insight and irony. and the strang 
thing was, that I could not have locat thi so live imag by 
confin it to ani portion of the space within the four wall of my 
library. It wa befor me, behind me, within my head, about me, _wa me_, 
invad and possess the "me" that sat at the table. At one moment 
the eye mockingli invit me to go on with my work; the next, a frown 
had seat itself on that massiv pylon of hi forehead; and then 
suddenli hi counten chang entirely.... A wave of horror broke 
over me. He wa suddenli as I had seen him that last time in the 
hampstead "home"--sit up on hi pillow, look into my eye with 
that terribl look of profund and familiarity, and ask me who I 
was.... _"harrison--ha ha!... you shall veri soon know that I know you, 
if ..."_ 

It is but by the accid of our limit experi that sound are loud 
or soft to that inner ear of us; these word were at one and the same 
time a dread thunder and a voic interstellarli inaccess and 
withdrawn. they, too, were before, behind, without, and within. and 
incorpor (I know not how els to express it) with these word were 
other words, in the english I knew, in the hebrew in which he had quot 
them from the sacr book of hi people, in all languages, in no 
languag save that essenti commun of which languag are but the 
inessenti husk and medium--word that told me that though I took the 
wing of the morn and fled into the uttermost part of the earth, yea, 
though I made my bed in hell, I could not escap him.... 

He had kept hi word. I _did_ know that he knew who and what I was.... 

I cannot tell whether my lip actual shape the question that even in 
that moment burst from me. 

"but form--and forms? It _is_ then true that all thing are but aspect 
of one thing?..." 

"yes--in death," the voic seem to reply. 

My next words, I know, were actual spoken aloud. 

"then tell me--tel me--_do you not wish me to write it?"_ 

suddenli I leapt out of my chair with a gulp cry. A voic _had_ 
spoken.... 

"of cours we wish you to write it...." 

for one instant of time my vision seem to fold on itself like smoke; 
then it wa gone. the face into which I wa wildli stare wa maschka's, 
and behind her stood schofield. they had been announced, but I had heard 
noth of it. 

"were you think of _not_ write it?" she demanded, while schofield 
scowl at me. 

"no--no--," I stammered, as I got up and tardili place them chairs. 

schofield did not speak, but he did not remov hi eye from me. somehow 
I could not meet them. 

"well," she said, "jack had alreadi told me that you seem in two mind 
about it. that' what we'v call about--to know definit what it is 
you propos to do." 

I saw that she had also called, if necessary, to quarrel. I began to 
recov a little. 

"did you tell her that?" I demand of schofield. "if you did, 
you--misinterpret me." 

In my house, he ignor the fact that I wa in the room. He repli to 
maschka. 

"I understood mr. harrison to say definitely, and in those words, that if 
I didn't like the way in which he wa write michael' 'life,' I might 
write and publish one myself," he said. 

"I did say that," I admitted; "but I never said that whatev _you_ did I 
should not go on with mine." 

"yours!" cri maschka. "what right have _you_ in my brother' 'life'?" 

I quickli told her. 

"I have the right to write my recollect of him, and, subject to 
certain provis of the law, to base anyth on them I think fit," I 
replied. 

"but," she cri aghast, "there can't be _two_ 'lives'!..." 

"it' news to me that two were contemplated," I returned. "the point is, 
that I can get mine published, and you can't." 

schofield' harsh voic sound suddenly--but again to maschka, not to 
me. 

"ye might remind mr. harrison that other have capabl in busi 
besid himself. beyond a doubt our sale will be compar small, 
but they'll be to such as have not made the great refusal." 

think of it!... I almost laughed. 

"oh!... been tri it?" I inquired. 

He made no reply. 

"well, those who have made the refus have at least had someth to 
refuse," I said mildly. then, realis that thi wa mere quarrelling, I 
return to the point. "anyhow, there' no question of refus to write 
the 'life.' I admit that dure the last fortnight i'v met with certain 
difficulties; but the task isn't so easi as perhap it looks.... i'm 
make progress." 

"I suppose," she said hesitatingly, after a pause, "that you don't care 
to show it as far as it is written?" 

for a moment I also hesitated. I thought I saw where she was. thank to 
that lancashir jackanapes, there wa divis between us; and I had 
pretti well made up my mind, not onli that he thought himself quit 
capabl of write andriaovsky' "life," himself, but that he had 
actual made an attempt in that direction. they had come in the 
suspicion that I wa throw them over, and, though that suspicion wa 
removed, maschka wished, if there wa ani throw over to be done, to do 
it herself. In a word, she want to compar me with schofield. 

"to see it as far as it is written," I repeat slowly.... "well, you 
may. that is, you, michael' sister, may. but on the condit that 
you neither show it to anybodi els nor speak of it to anybodi else." 

"ah!" she said.... "and onli on those conditions?" 

"onli on those conditions." 

I saw a quick glanc between them. "shall we tell him?" it seem to 
say.... 

"includ the man michael' sister is go to marry?" she said 
abruptly. 

My attitud wa deepli apologetic, but, "includ anybodi whomsoever," I 
answered. 

"then," she said, rising, "we won't bother. but will you at least let us 
know, soon, when we may expect your text?" 

"I will let you know," I repli slowly, "one week from to-day." 

On that assur they left; and when they had gone I cross onc more 
to the lower shelf that contain my letter-files. I turn up the file 
for 1900 onc more. dure their visit I had had an idea. 

I ran through the letters, and then replac them.... 

yes, I ought to be abl to let them know within the week. 


V 

against the day when I myself shall come to die, there are in the 
pigeon-hol of the newspap librari certain biograph record 
that deal roughli with the outward fact of my life; and these, 
supplement by document I shall place in the hand of my executors, 
will tell the stori of how I leap at a bound into wealth and fame with 
the public of _the case of martin renard_. I will set down as much 
of that stori as ha it bear on my present tale. 

_martin renard_ wa not immedi accept by the first editor to whom 
it wa offered. It doe not suffic that in order to be popular a thing 
shall be mere good--or bad; it must be bad--or good--in a particular 
way. for take the respons when they happen to miss that 
particular way editor are paid their salaries. when they happen to hit 
it they grow fat on circulation-money: sinc it becom me ill to quarrel 
with the way in which ani man earn hi money, I content myself with 
mere state the fact. 

By the time the fourth editor had refus my seri I wa about at my 
last gasp. To write the thing at all I had had to sink four month in 
time; and debts, writ and pawnshop were my familiars. I wa littl 
better off than andriaovski at hi veri worst. I had read the first of 
the _martin renards_ to him, by the way; the gigant outburst of mirth 
with which he had receiv it had not encourag me to read him a second. 
I wrote the other in secret. 

I wrote the thing in the spring and summer of 1900; and by the last day 
of septemb I wa confid that I had at last sold them. except by a 
flagrant breach of faith, the editor in whose desk they repos could 
hardli declin them. As it subsequ happened, I have now noth but 
gratitud for him that he did, after all, declin them; for I had a 
duplic copi "on offer" in anoth quarter. 

He declin them, I say; and I wa free to possess my soul again among my 
writs, debt and pawnshops. 

but four day later I receiv the altern offer. It wa from the 
_falchion_. the _falchion_, as you may remember, ha sinc run no less 
than five complet seri of _martin renards_. It bought "both sides," 
that is to say, both british and american serial rights. Of the twelv 
_martin renards_ I had written, my wise agent had offer the _falchion_ 
six only. On hi advic I accept the offer. 

instantan with the public of those six stori came my 
success. In two contin I wa "home"--hom in the heart of the 
public. I had my small cheque--it wa not much more than a hundr 
pounds--but "wait," said my agent; "let' see what we can do with the 
other six...." 

precis what he did with them onli he and I know; but I don't mind 
say that £3000 did not buy my first serial rights. then came second 
and third rights, and after them the book rights, british, american, and 
colonial. then came the translat rights. In french, my creation is, of 
course, as in english, _martin renard_; in german he is martin fuchs; and 
by a similar process you can put him--mi translat have put him--into 
italian, swedish, norwegian, russian, and three-fourth of the tongu of 
europe. and thi wa the first seri only. It wa onli with the second 
seri that the full splendour of my success appeared. My veri imit 
grew rich; my agent' incom from hi compar small percentag on 
my royalti wa handsome; and he chuckl and bade me wait for the 
dramat right and the day when the tour compani should get to 
business.... 

I had "got there." 

and I remember, sadli enough now, my first resolut when the day came 
when I wa abl to survey the situat with anyth approach calm. 
It was, "enough." for the rest of my day I need not know poverti again. 
thenceforward I need not, unless I chose, do ani but worthi work. _martin 
renard_ had serv hi purpos handsomely, and I intend to have noth 
more to do with him. 

then came that dazzl offer for the second series.... 

I accept it. 

I accept the third likewise; and I have told you about the fourth.... 

I have tri to kill _martin renard_. He wa kill me. I have, in 
the page of the _falchion_, actual kill him; but I have had to 
resuscit him. I cannot escap from him.... 

I am not set down one word more of thi than bear directli on my 
tale of andriaovsky' "life." for those days, when my whole futur had 
hung in the balance, _were the veri day cover by that portion of 
andriaovsky' life at which I had now arrived_. I had reached, and wa 
hesit at, our point of divergence. those check and releas which I 
had at first found so unaccount correspond with the vicissitud of 
the _martin renard_ negotiations. 

the actual date did not, of course, coincide--i had quickli discov 
the falsiti of that scent. neither did the interv between them, with 
the except of those few day in which I had been unabl to complet 
that half-written sentence--th few day immedi prior to my 
(parallel) accept by the _falchion_. but, by that other reckon 
of time, of mental and spiritu experience, _they talli exactly_. 
the gambl chanc of five year ago meant present stumbl and 
haltings; the breach of faith of an editor long sinc meant a present 
respite; and anoth week should bring me to that point of my so 
strang redupl experi that, allow for the furiou mental 
rate at which I wa now living, would make anoth node with that other 
point in the more slowli live past that had mark my accept of the 
offer for the second half-dozen of the _martin renards_. 

It had been on thi hazard calcul that I had made my promis to 
maschka. 

I pass that week in a state of constantli increas apprehension. 
true, I work at the "life," even assiduously; but it wa plain sailing, 
mere catalogu of certain of andriaovsky' works, a chapter I had 
deliber plan _pour mieux sauter_--to enhanc the valu of the 
penultim and final chapters. these were the real crux of the "life." 
these were what I wa reserv myself for. these were to show that onli 
hi bodi wa dead, and that hi spirit still live and hi work wa 
still be done wherev a man could be found whose soul burn within 
him with the same divin ardour. 

but I wa now realising, day by day, hour by hour more clearly, what I 
wa incurring. I wa pen noth less than my own artist damnation. 
self-condemned, indeed, I had been thi long time; but I wa now make 
the world a parti to the sentence. the crown of andriaovski involv 
my own annihilation; hi "life" would be my "hic jacet." and yet I wa 
prepared, nay, resolved, to write it. I had started, and I would go 
forward. I would not be spew with the lukewarm out of the mouth of that 
spirit from which proce all that is bright and pure and true. the 
vehem with which I had reject it divin bid should at least be 
correspond with my ador of it. the snivel claim of the 
schofield I spurned. if, as they urged, "an artist must live," he must 
live royal or starv with a tight mouth. No complaining.... 

and one other claim I urg in the teeth of thi spirit, which, if it 
wa a human spirit at all, it could not disregard. those pigeon-hol 
obituari of mine will proclaim to the world, one and all, the virtu 
of my public life. In spite of my royal earnings, I am not a rich man. I 
have not accept wealth without accept the person respons 
for it. sick men and women in more than one hospit lie in ward 
provid by _martin renard_ and myself; and I am not dishonour in my 
institut at poplar. those vagrant wander with andriaovski have 
enabl me to know the poor and those who help the poor. My person 
labour in the administr of the institut are great, for outsid 
the necessari routin I leav littl to subordinates. I have declin 
honour offer to me for my "servic to literature," and I have never 
encourag a youth, of part or lack them, to make of literatur a 
profession. and so on and so forth. all this, and more, you will read 
when the day comes; and I don't doubt the _falchion_ will publish my 
memoir in mourn borders... 

but to resume. 

I finish the chapter I have mentioned. maschka and her fiancé kept 
punctili away. then, befor sit down to the penultim 
chapter, I permit myself the relax of a day in the country. 

I can't tell you precis where I went; I onli know it wa somewher in 
buckinghamshire, and that, order the car to await me a dozen mile 
farther on, I set out to walk. nor can I tell you what I saw dure that 
walk; I don't think I saw anything. there wa a red wintri disc of a sun, 
I remember, and a land grey with rime; and that is all. I wa entir 
occupi with the attempt I wa about to make. I think that even then 
I had the sens of doom, for I know not how otherwis I should have 
found myself sever time make littl husband of my force, as if 
consciou that I should need it all. for I wa determined, as never in my 
life have I been determined, to write that "life." and I intended, not to 
wait to be challenged, but to challenge.... I met the car, return in 
search of me; and I dine at a restaurant, went home to bed, and slept 
dreamlessly. 

On the morrow I deliber refrain from work until the evening. My 
challeng to andriaovski and the power he repres should be boldli 
deliv at the veri gate of their own hour. not until half-past eight, 
with the curtain drawn, the door locked, and order given that on no 
account whatev wa I to be disturbed, did I switch on the pearli light, 
place andriaovsky' portrait in it now accustom place, and draw my 
chair up to my writing-table. 


VI 

but befor I could resum the "life" at the point at which I had left it, 
I felt that there were certain preliminari to be settled. It wa not 
that I wish to sound a parley with ani view of come to terms; I had 
determin what the term were to be. As a boxer who leap from hi 
corner the moment the signal is given, astound with sudden hi 
less prompt antagonist, so I should be readi when the moment came. but I 
wish the issu to be defined. I did not propos to submit the whole of 
my manhood to the trial. I wa mere assert my right to speak of 
certain thing which, if one chose to exagger their import by a 
too narrow and exclus consider of them, I might conceiv be 
thought to have betrayed. 

I drew a sheet of paper toward me, and formal made out my claim. It 
occupi not more than a dozen lines, and it natur ha alreadi been 
suffici indicated. I put my pen down again, lean back in my chair, 
and waited. 

I waited, but noth happened. It seem that if thi wa my attempt to 
justifi myself, the plea wa certainli not disallowed. but neither had I 
ani sign that it wa allowed; and present it occur to me that 
possibl I had couch it in term too general. perhap a more particular 
claim would meet with a differ reception. 

dure the earlier stage of the book' progress I had mani time 
deliber on the desir of a prefac that should state succinctli 
what I consid to be my qualif for the task. though I had 
final decid against ani such statement, the form of the prefac might 
nevertheless serv for the present occasion. I took anoth sheet of 
paper, head it "preface," and began onc more to write. 

I cover the page; I cover a second; and half-way down the third I 
judg my statement to be sufficient. again I laid down my pen, lean 
back, and waited. 

the prefac also produc no result whatever. 

again I considered; and then I saw more clearly. It came to me that, both 
in the first statement and in the preface, I wa mere talk to 
myself. I wa convinc myself, and lose both time and strength in 
do so. the power with which I sought to come to grip wa treat my 
vapour with high disregard. To be snub thu by headquart 
would never, never do.... 

then I saw more clearli still. It seem that my _right to challenge_ 
wa denied. I wa not an adversary, with the right and honour of an 
adversary, but a trangressor, whose trangress had alreadi sever 
time been sharpli visited, and would be visit onc more the moment it 
wa repeated. I might, in a sense, pleas myself whether I brought myself 
into court; but, onc there, I wa not the arraign in the box, but the 
arraign in the dock. 

and I rebel hotly. did I sit there, readi for the struggle, onli to be 
told that there could be no struggle? did that veng angel of the art 
ignor my veri existence?... By yea and nay I swore that he should take 
notic of me! onc before, a mortal had wrestl a whole night with an 
angel, and though he had been worsted, it had not been befor he had 
compel the angel to reveal himself! and so would i... 

challenge, titl to challenge, tentatives, preliminaries, I suddenli cast 
them all aside. We would have it in deeds, not in further words. I open 
a drawer, took out the whole of the "life" so far written, and began to 
read. I want to grasp onc more the plan of it in it entirety. 

page after page, I read on, with deepen attention. quickli I ran 
through half of it. then I began to concentr myself still more 
closely. there would come a point at which I should be flush with the 
stream of it again, again feel the forc of it current; I felt myself 
draw nearer to that point; when I should reach it I would go ahead 
without a pause... 

I read to the end of chapter fifteen, the last complet chapter. then 
instantli I took my pen and wrote, "chapter sixteen...." 

I felt the chang at the veri first word. 

* * * * * 

I will not retravers ani ground I have cover before. If I have not 
alreadi made clear my former sensat of the petrefact of hand and 
brain, I despair of be abl to do so ani better now. suffic it that 
onc more I felt that inhibition, and that onc more I wa awar of the 
ubiquit presenc of the imag of the dead artist. onc more I heard 
those voices, near as thunder and yet interstellarli remote, cri that 
solemn warning, that though I took the wing of the morning, made my bed 
in hell, or cri aloud upon the dark to cover me, there wa one 
spirit from which I could not hope to escape. I felt the slight crawl 
of my flesh on my bone as I listened. 

but there wa now a difference. On the former occasion, to hear again 
those last horribl word of his, "_you shall veri soon know I know who 
you are if_..." had been the signal for the total unnerv of me and for 
that uncontrol cry, "_don't you then want me to write it_?" but now 
I intend to write it if I could. In order that I might tell him so I 
wa now seek him out, in what height or depth I knew not, at what 
peril to myself I care not. I care not, sinc I now felt that I could 
not continu to live unless I press to the uttermost attempt. and I 
must repeat, and repeat again, and yet repeat, that in that hour 
andriaovski wa imman about me, in the whole of me, in the last fibr 
and cell of me, in all my thoughts, from my conscious that I wa 
sit there at my own writing-t to my concept of god himself. 

It may seem strange--wheth it doe so or not will depend on the kind 
of man you yourself are--that as long as I wa content to recognis thi 
imman of andriaovsky' enlarg and liber spirit, _and not to 
disput with it_, I found noth but mild and benign in my 
hazard experience. more, I felt that, in that clear region to which 
in my intensifi state of conscious I wa lifted, I wa abl to move 
(I must trust you to understand the word aright) without restraint, nay, 
with an amplitud and freedom of movement past set down, as long as 
I wa satisfi to possess my soul in quiescence. the state itself wa 
inim neither to my safeti nor to my sanity. I wa consciou of it 
as a transposit into anoth regist of the scale of life. and, as 
in thi life we move in ignor and safeti onli by accept the 
hair-bal of stupend forces, so now I felt that my safeti depend 
on my observ of the condit that govern that region of light 
and clariti and law. 

Of clariti and law; save in the term of the great abstract I may not 
speak of it. and that is well-nigh equal to say that I may not speak 
of it at all. the hand that would have written of it lay (I never for one 
moment ceas to be conscious) heavi as stone on a writing-t in some 
spot quit accident in my new sens of locality; the tongu that would 
have spoken of it seem to slumber in my mouth. and I knew that both 
dumb and still were proper. their opposit would have convict 
me (the flat and earthli comparison must be allowed) of intrus into 
some place of beauti and seren for which the soilur of my birth 
disqualifi me. 

for beauti and serenity, auster and benign and peace, were the 
condit of that place. To other place belong the wingi and robe 
and starri and golden thing that made the heaven of other live than 
that which I had share with andriaovsky; here, white and shape truth 
alon reigned. none questioned, for all knew; none sinned, for sin wa 
alreadi judg and punish in it committal; none demonstrated, for 
all thing were evident; and those eager to justifi themselv were 
permit no farther than the threshold.... 

and it wa to justify, to challenge, to maintain a right, that I wa 
there. I wa there to wrestle, if need be, with the angel of that place, 
to vanquish him or to compel him to reveal himself. I had not been 
summoned; I had thrust myself there unbidden. there wa a moment in which 
I notic that my writing-t wa a littl more than ordinarili remov 
from me, but veri little, not more than if I had been look over the 
shoulder of anoth writer at it; and I saw my chapter heading. At the 
sight of it someth of the egot that had prompt me to write it 
stir in me again; everywher wa andriaovsky' calm face, priest and 
angel himself; and I becam consciou that I wa tri to write a 
phrase. I also becam consciou that I wa be piti warn not to 
do so... 

suddenli my whole be wa flood with a fright pang of pain. 

It wa not local. It wa no more to be locat than the other imman 
of which I have spoken. It wa pain, pure, essential, dissociated; and 
with the come of it that fair place had grown suddenli horribl and 
black. 

and I knew that the shock came _of my own resistance_, and that it would 
ceas to afflict me the moment I ceas to resist. 

I did cease. instantli the pain passed. but as when a knife is pluck 
from a wound, so onli with it pass did I shriek aloud.... 

for I know not how mani minut I sat in stupefaction. then, as with 
earthli pains, that are assuag with the pass of accident time, the 
memori of it soften a little. blunderingli and onli half consciously, I 
cast about to collect my dispers force. 

for--alreadi I wa consciou of it--ther still remain one claim that 
even in thought I had not advanced. I would, were I permitted, still 
write that "life," but, sinc it wa decre so, I would no longer urg 
that in write it I justifi myself. So I might but write it, I would 
embrac my own portion, the portion of doom; yea, though it should be a 
press of the searing-iron to my lips, I would embrac it; my name 
should not appear. for the mere sake of the man I had love I would write 
it, in self-scorn and abasement, humbl crave not to be denied.... 

_"oh, let me but do for love of you what a sin man can!"_ I 
groaned.... 

A moment later I had again striven to do so. So do we all, when we 
think that out of a poor human love we can alter the law by which our 
state exists. and with such a hideou anguish as wa again mine are we 
visited.... 

and I knew now what that anguish was. It wa the twine of bodi from 
spirit that is call the bitter of death; for not all of the bodi 
are the pang of that severance. with that terribl sword of imperson 
pain the god of peac make sorrow war that peac may come again. with 
it flame He ring the bastion of heaven when satan made assault. onli 
on the gorgon-imag of that pain in the shield may weak man look; and 
it blaze and ire had permeat with deadli near the "everywhere" 
where I was... 

"_oh, not for love? not even for love?_" broke the agonis question from 
me.... 

the next moment I had ceased, and ceas for ever, to resist. 
instantan the terribl flash of that sword becam no more 
than the play of lightn one see far away in the wide cloudfield 
on a peac summer' twilight. I felt a gentl and overpow 
sleep come over me; and as it fold me about I saw, with the last 
look of my eyes, my own figure, busili write at the table. 

had I, then, prevailed? had pain so purg me that I wa permit to 
finish my task? and had my tortur cry, "oh, not even for love?" 
been heard? 

I did not know. 

* * * * * 

I came to myself to find that my head had fallen on my desk. the light 
still shone within it pearli shade, and in the penumbra of it shadow 
the portrait of andriaovski occupi it accustom place. about me were 
my papers, and my pen lay where it had fallen from my hand. 

At first I did not look at my papers. I mere saw that the uppermost of 
them wa written on. but present I took it up, and look at it 
stupidly. then, with no memori at all of how I had come to write what wa 
upon it, I put it down again. 

It wa inde a completion. 

but it wa not of andriaovsky' "life" that it wa the completion. As you 
may or may not know, andriaovsky' "life" is written by "hi friend john 
schofield." I had been allow to write, but it wa my own condemn 
that, in sad and obedience, in the absenc of wrath but also in the 
absenc of mercy, I had written. By the law I had broken I wa broken in 
my turn. It wa the draft for the fifth seri of _the case of martin 
renard_. 

no, not for love--not even for love.... 



***end OF the project gutenberg ebook widdershins*** 


******* thi file should be name 14168-8.txt or 14168-8.zip ******* 


thi and all associ file of variou format will be found in: 
http://www.gutenberg.org/dirs/1/4/1/6/14168 



updat edit will replac the previou one--th old edit 
will be renamed. 

creat the work from public domain print edit mean that no 
one own a unit state copyright in these works, so the foundat 
(and you!) can copi and distribut it in the unit state without 
permiss and without pay copyright royalties. special rules, 
set forth in the gener term of use part of thi license, appli to 
copi and distribut project gutenberg-tm electron work to 
protect the project gutenberg-tm concept and trademark. project 
gutenberg is a regist trademark, and may not be use if you 
charg for the ebooks, unless you receiv specif permission. If you 
do not charg anyth for copi of thi ebook, compli with the 
rule is veri easy. you may use thi ebook for nearli ani purpos 
such as creation of deriv works, reports, perform and 
research. they may be modifi and print and given away--y may do 
practic anyth with public domain ebooks. redistribut is 
subject to the trademark license, especi commerci 
redistribution. 



*** start: full licens *** 

the full project gutenberg licens 
pleas read thi befor you distribut OR use thi work 

To protect the project gutenberg-tm mission of promot the free 
distribut of electron works, by use or distribut thi work 
(or ani other work associ in ani way with the phrase "project 
gutenberg"), you agre to compli with all the term of the full project 
gutenberg-tm licens (avail with thi file or onlin at 
http://gutenberg.net/license). 


section 1. gener term of use and redistribut project gutenberg-tm 
electron work 

1.a. By read or use ani part of thi project gutenberg-tm 
electron work, you indic that you have read, understand, agre to 
and accept all the term of thi licens and intellectu properti 
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agre to abid by all 
the term of thi agreement, you must ceas use and return or destroy 
all copi of project gutenberg-tm electron work in your possession. 
If you paid a fee for obtain a copi of or access to a project 
gutenberg-tm electron work and you do not agre to be bound by the 
term of thi agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or 
entiti to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.e.8. 

1.b. "project gutenberg" is a regist trademark. It may onli be 
use on or associ in ani way with an electron work by peopl who 
agre to be bound by the term of thi agreement. there are a few 
thing that you can do with most project gutenberg-tm electron work 
even without compli with the full term of thi agreement. see 
paragraph 1.c below. there are a lot of thing you can do with project 
gutenberg-tm electron work if you follow the term of thi agreement 
and help preserv free futur access to project gutenberg-tm electron 
works. see paragraph 1.e below. 

1.c. the project gutenberg literari archiv foundat ("the foundation" 
or pglaf), own a compil copyright in the collect of project 
gutenberg-tm electron works. nearli all the individu work in the 
collect are in the public domain in the unit states. If an 
individu work is in the public domain in the unit state and you are 
locat in the unit states, we do not claim a right to prevent you from 
copying, distributing, performing, display or creat deriv 
work base on the work as long as all refer to project gutenberg 
are removed. Of course, we hope that you will support the project 
gutenberg-tm mission of promot free access to electron work by 
freeli share project gutenberg-tm work in complianc with the term of 
thi agreement for keep the project gutenberg-tm name associ with 
the work. you can easili compli with the term of thi agreement by 
keep thi work in the same format with it attach full project 
gutenberg-tm licens when you share it without charg with others. 

1.d. the copyright law of the place where you are locat also govern 
what you can do with thi work. copyright law in most countri are in 
a constant state of change. If you are outsid the unit states, check 
the law of your countri in addit to the term of thi agreement 
befor downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distribut or 
creat deriv work base on thi work or ani other project 
gutenberg-tm work. the foundat make no represent concern 
the copyright statu of ani work in ani countri outsid the unit 
states. 

1.e. unless you have remov all refer to project gutenberg: 

1.e.1. the follow sentence, with activ link to, or other immedi 
access to, the full project gutenberg-tm licens must appear promin 
whenev ani copi of a project gutenberg-tm work (ani work on which the 
phrase "project gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "project 
gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed, 
copi or distributed: 

thi ebook is for the use of anyon anywher at no cost and with 
almost no restrict whatsoever. you may copi it, give it away or 
re-us it under the term of the project gutenberg licens includ 
with thi ebook or onlin at www.gutenberg.net 

1.e.2. If an individu project gutenberg-tm electron work is deriv 
from the public domain (doe not contain a notic indic that it is 
post with permiss of the copyright holder), the work can be copi 
and distribut to anyon in the unit state without pay ani fee 
or charges. If you are redistribut or provid access to a work 
with the phrase "project gutenberg" associ with or appear on the 
work, you must compli either with the requir of paragraph 1.e.1 
through 1.e.7 or obtain permiss for the use of the work and the 
project gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraph 1.e.8 or 
1.e.9. 

1.e.3. If an individu project gutenberg-tm electron work is post 
with the permiss of the copyright holder, your use and distribut 
must compli with both paragraph 1.e.1 through 1.e.7 and ani addit 
term impos by the copyright holder. addit term will be link 
to the project gutenberg-tm licens for all work post with the 
permiss of the copyright holder found at the begin of thi work. 

1.e.4. Do not unlink or detach or remov the full project gutenberg-tm 
licens term from thi work, or ani file contain a part of thi 
work or ani other work associ with project gutenberg-tm. 

1.e.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribut or redistribut thi 
electron work, or ani part of thi electron work, without 
promin display the sentenc set forth in paragraph 1.e.1 with 
activ link or immedi access to the full term of the project 
gutenberg-tm license. 

1.e.6. you may convert to and distribut thi work in ani binary, 
compressed, mark up, nonproprietari or proprietari form, includ ani 
word process or hypertext form. however, if you provid access to or 
distribut copi of a project gutenberg-tm work in a format other than 
"plain vanilla ascii" or other format use in the offici version 
post on the offici project gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net), 
you must, at no addit cost, fee or expens to the user, provid a 
copy, a mean of export a copy, or a mean of obtain a copi upon 
request, of the work in it origin "plain vanilla ascii" or other 
form. ani altern format must includ the full project gutenberg-tm 
licens as specifi in paragraph 1.e.1. 

1.e.7. Do not charg a fee for access to, viewing, displaying, 
performing, copi or distribut ani project gutenberg-tm work 
unless you compli with paragraph 1.e.8 or 1.e.9. 

1.e.8. you may charg a reason fee for copi of or provid 
access to or distribut project gutenberg-tm electron work provid 
that 

- you pay a royalti fee of 20% of the gross profit you deriv from 
the use of project gutenberg-tm work calcul use the method 
you alreadi use to calcul your applic taxes. the fee is 
owe to the owner of the project gutenberg-tm trademark, but he 
ha agre to donat royalti under thi paragraph to the 
project gutenberg literari archiv foundation. royalti payment 
must be paid within 60 day follow each date on which you 
prepar (or are legal requir to prepare) your period tax 
returns. royalti payment should be clearli mark as such and 
sent to the project gutenberg literari archiv foundat at the 
address specifi in section 4, "inform about donat to 
the project gutenberg literari archiv foundation." 

- you provid a full refund of ani money paid by a user who notifi 
you in write (or by e-mail) within 30 day of receipt that s/he 
doe not agre to the term of the full project gutenberg-tm 
license. you must requir such a user to return or 
destroy all copi of the work possess in a physic medium 
and discontinu all use of and all access to other copi of 
project gutenberg-tm works. 

- you provide, in accord with paragraph 1.f.3, a full refund of ani 
money paid for a work or a replac copy, if a defect in the 
electron work is discov and report to you within 90 day 
of receipt of the work. 

- you compli with all other term of thi agreement for free 
distribut of project gutenberg-tm works. 

1.e.9. If you wish to charg a fee or distribut a project gutenberg-tm 
electron work or group of work on differ term than are set 
forth in thi agreement, you must obtain permiss in write from 
both the project gutenberg literari archiv foundat and michael 
hart, the owner of the project gutenberg-tm trademark. contact the 
foundat as set forth in section 3 below. 

1.f. 

1.f.1. project gutenberg volunt and employe expend consider 
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcrib and proofread 
public domain work in creat the project gutenberg-tm 
collection. despit these efforts, project gutenberg-tm electron 
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain 
"defects," such as, but not limit to, incomplete, inaccur or 
corrupt data, transcript errors, a copyright or other intellectu 
properti infringement, a defect or damag disk or other medium, a 
comput virus, or comput code that damag or cannot be read by 
your equipment. 

1.f.2. limit warranty, disclaim OF damag - except for the "right 
of replac or refund" describ in paragraph 1.f.3, the project 
gutenberg literari archiv foundation, the owner of the project 
gutenberg-tm trademark, and ani other parti distribut a project 
gutenberg-tm electron work under thi agreement, disclaim all 
liabil to you for damages, cost and expenses, includ legal 
fees. you agre that you have NO remedi for negligence, strict 
liability, breach OF warranti OR breach OF contract except those 
provid IN paragraph f3. you agre that the foundation, the 
trademark owner, and ani distributor under thi agreement will not BE 
liabl TO you for actual, direct, indirect, consequential, punit OR 
incident damag even IF you give notic OF the possibl OF such 
damage. 

1.f.3. limit right OF replac OR refund - If you discov a 
defect in thi electron work within 90 day of receiv it, you can 
receiv a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by send a 
written explan to the person you receiv the work from. If you 
receiv the work on a physic medium, you must return the medium with 
your written explanation. the person or entiti that provid you with 
the defect work may elect to provid a replac copi in lieu of a 
refund. If you receiv the work electronically, the person or entiti 
provid it to you may choos to give you a second opportun to 
receiv the work electron in lieu of a refund. If the second copi 
is also defective, you may demand a refund in write without further 
opportun to fix the problem. 

1.f.4. except for the limit right of replac or refund set forth 
in paragraph 1.f.3, thi work is provid to you 'as-is', with NO other 
warranti OF ani kind, express OR implied, includ but not limit TO 
warranti OF merchant OR fit for ani purpose. 

1.f.5. some state do not allow disclaim of certain impli 
warranti or the exclus or limit of certain type of damages. 
If ani disclaim or limit set forth in thi agreement violat the 
law of the state applic to thi agreement, the agreement shall be 
interpret to make the maximum disclaim or limit permit by 
the applic state law. the invalid or unenforc of ani 
provis of thi agreement shall not void the remain provisions. 

1.f.6. indemn - you agre to indemnifi and hold the foundation, the 
trademark owner, ani agent or employe of the foundation, anyon 
provid copi of project gutenberg-tm electron work in accord 
with thi agreement, and ani volunt associ with the production, 
promot and distribut of project gutenberg-tm electron works, 
harmless from all liability, cost and expenses, includ legal fees, 
that aris directli or indirectli from ani of the follow which you do 
or caus to occur: (a) distribut of thi or ani project gutenberg-tm 
work, (b) alteration, modification, or addit or delet to ani 
project gutenberg-tm work, and (c) ani defect you cause. 


section 2. inform about the mission of project gutenberg-tm 

project gutenberg-tm is synonym with the free distribut of 
electron work in format readabl by the widest varieti of comput 
includ obsolete, old, middle-ag and new computers. It exist 
becaus of the effort of hundr of volunt and donat from 
peopl in all walk of life. 

volunt and financi support to provid volunt with the 
assist they need, is critic to reach project gutenberg-tm' 
goal and ensur that the project gutenberg-tm collect will 
remain freeli avail for gener to come. In 2001, the project 
gutenberg literari archiv foundat wa creat to provid a secur 
and perman futur for project gutenberg-tm and futur generations. 
To learn more about the project gutenberg literari archiv foundat 
and how your effort and donat can help, see section 3 and 4 
and the foundat web page at http://www.gutenberg.net/fundraising/pglaf. 


section 3. inform about the project gutenberg literari archiv 
foundat 

the project gutenberg literari archiv foundat is a non profit 
501(c)(3) educ corpor organ under the law of the 
state of mississippi and grant tax exempt statu by the intern 
revenu service. the foundation' ein or feder tax identif 
number is 64-6221541. contribut to the project gutenberg 
literari archiv foundat are tax deduct to the full extent 
permit by u.s. feder law and your state' laws. 

the foundation' princip offic is locat at 4557 melan dr. S. 
fairbanks, ak, 99712., but it volunt and employe are scatter 
throughout numer locations. it busi offic is locat at 
809 north 1500 west, salt lake city, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email 
business@pglaf.org. email contact link and up to date contact 
inform can be found at the foundation' web site and offici 
page at http://www.gutenberg.net/about/contact 

for addit contact information: 
dr. gregori B. newbi 
chief execut and director 
gbnewby@pglaf.org 

section 4. inform about donat to the project gutenberg 
literari archiv foundat 

project gutenberg-tm depend upon and cannot surviv without wide 
spread public support and donat to carri out it mission of 
increas the number of public domain and licens work that can be 
freeli distribut in machin readabl form access by the widest 
array of equip includ outdat equipment. mani small donat 
($1 to $5,000) are particularli import to maintain tax exempt 
statu with the irs. 

the foundat is commit to compli with the law regul 
chariti and charit donat in all 50 state of the unit 
states. complianc requir are not uniform and it take a 
consider effort, much paperwork and mani fee to meet and keep up 
with these requirements. We do not solicit donat in locat 
where we have not receiv written confirm of compliance. To 
send donat or determin the statu of complianc for ani 
particular state visit http://www.gutenberg.net/fundraising/don 

while we cannot and do not solicit contribut from state where we 
have not met the solicit requirements, we know of no prohibit 
against accept unsolicit donat from donor in such state who 
approach us with offer to donate. 

intern donat are grate accepted, but we cannot make 
ani statement concern tax treatment of donat receiv from 
outsid the unit states. u.s. law alon swamp our small staff. 

pleas check the project gutenberg web page for current donat 
method and addresses. donat are accept in a number of other 
way includ includ checks, onlin payment and credit card 
donations. To donate, pleas visit: 
http://www.gutenberg.net/fundraising/don 


section 5. gener inform about project gutenberg-tm electron 
works. 

professor michael S. hart is the origin of the project gutenberg-tm 
concept of a librari of electron work that could be freeli share 
with anyone. for thirti years, he produc and distribut project 
gutenberg-tm ebook with onli a loos network of volunt support. 

project gutenberg-tm ebook are often creat from sever print 
editions, all of which are confirm as public domain in the u.s. 
unless a copyright notic is included. thus, we do not necessarili 
keep ebook in complianc with ani particular paper edition. 

most peopl start at our web site which ha the main PG search facility: 

http://www.gutenberg.net 

thi web site includ inform about project gutenberg-tm, 
includ how to make donat to the project gutenberg literari 
archiv foundation, how to help produc our new ebooks, and how to 
subscrib to our email newslett to hear about new ebooks. 
