the project gutenberg ebook, the lost stradivarius, by john mead falkner 


thi ebook is for the use of anyon anywher at no cost and with 
almost no restrict whatsoever. you may copi it, give it away or 
re-us it under the term of the project gutenberg licens includ 
with thi ebook or onlin at www.gutenberg.net 





title: the lost stradivariu 

author: john mead falkner 

releas date: novemb 21, 2004 [ebook #14107] 

language: english 


***start OF the project gutenberg ebook the lost stradivarius*** 


e-text prepar by suzann shell, melissa er-raqabi, and the project 
gutenberg onlin distribut proofread team 



the lost stradivariu 

by 

J. mead falkner 

1895 

penguin book 
harmondsworth middlesex, england 
245 fifth avenue, new york, u.s.a. 







the author 


john mead falkner wa a remark character, as he wa not onli a 
scholar and a writer, but a captain of industri as well. born in 1858, 
the son of a clergyman in wiltshire, he wa educ at marlborough and 
hertford college, oxford. On leav the university, he becam tutor to 
the son of sir andrew noble, then vice-chairman of the 
armstrong-whitworth company; and hi abil so much impress hi 
employ that in 1885 he wa offer a post in the firm. without 
connect or influenc in industri circles, and sole by hi 
intellect, he rose to be a director in 1901, and finally, in 1915, 
chairman of thi enorm business. He wa actual chairman dure the 
import year 1915-1920, and remain a director until 1926. 

hi intellectu energi wa so great that throughout hi life he found 
time for scholarship as well as business. He travel for hi firm in 
europ and south america; and in the interv of negoti with 
foreign govern studi manuscript wherev he found a library. hi 
research in the vatican librari were of special importance, and in 
connect with them he receiv a gold medal from the pope; he wa also 
decor by the italian, turkish and japanes governments. 

hi scholast interest includ archæology, folklore, palæography, 
mediæv history, architectur and church music; and he wa a collector 
of missals. toward the end of hi life he wa made an honorari fellow 
of hertford college, oxford, honorari reader in palæographi to durham 
university, and honorari librarian to the chapter librari of durham 
cathedral, which he left one of the best cathedr librari in europe. 
He die at durham in 1932. 

apart from _the lost stradivarius_, falkner wa the author of two other 
novels, _the nebuli coat_ (1903--also publish in penguin books) and 
_moonfleet_ (1898). He also wrote a histori of oxfordshire, handbook to 
that counti and to berkshire, histor short stories, and some 
mediævalist verse. 






the lost stradivariu 





letter from miss sophia maltrav 
to her nephew, sir edward maltravers, 
then a student at christ church, oxford. 

13 pauncefort buildings, bath, 
oct. 21, 1867. 

MY dear edward, 

It wa your late father' die request that certain event which 
occur in hi last year should be commun to you on your come 
of age. I have reduc them to writing, partli from my own recollection, 
which is, alas! still too vivid, and partli with the aid of note taken 
at the time of my brother' death. As you are now of full age, I submit 
the narr to you. much of it ha necessarili been exceedingli 
pain to me to write, but at the same time I feel it is better that 
you should hear the truth from me than garbl stori from other who 
did not love your father as I did. 

your love aunt, 
sophia maltrav 


To sir edward maltravers, bart. 




"A tale out of season is as music in mourning." 
--ecclesiasticu xxii. 6. 




miss sophia maltravers' stori 

chapter I 


your father, john maltravers, wa born in 1820 at worth, and succeed 
hi father and mine, who die when we were still young children. john 
wa sent to eton in due course, and in 1839, when he wa nineteen year 
of age, it wa determin that he should go to oxford. It wa intend 
at first to enter him at christ church; but dr. sarsdell, who visit us 
at worth in the summer of 1839, persuad mr. thoresby, our guardian, to 
send him instead to magdalen hall. dr. sarsdel wa himself princip of 
that institution, and repres that john, who then exhibit some 
symptom of delicacy, would meet with more person attent under hi 
care than he could hope to do in so larg a colleg as christ church. 
mr. thoresby, ever solicit for hi ward' welfare, readili waiv 
other consider in favour of an arrang which he consid 
conduc to john' health, and he wa accordingli matricul at 
magdalen hall in the autumn of 1839. 

dr. sarsdel had not been unmind of hi promis to look after my 
brother, and had secur him an excel first-floor sitting-room, with 
a bedroom adjoining, have an aspect toward new colleg lane. 

I shall pass over the first two year of my brother' resid at 
oxford, becaus they have noth to do with the present story. they 
were spent, no doubt, in the ordinari routin of work and recreat 
common in oxford at that period. 

from hi earliest boyhood he had been passion devot to music, 
and had attain a consider profici on the violin. In the autumn 
term of 1841 he made the acquaint of mr. william gaskell, a veri 
talent student at new college, and also a more than toler 
musician. the practic of music wa then veri much less common at oxford 
than it ha sinc become, and there were none of those societi 
exist which now do so much to promot it studi among undergraduates. 
It wa therefor a caus of much gratif to the two young men, and 
it afterward becam a strong bond of friendship, to discov that one 
wa as devot to the pianofort as wa the other to the violin. mr. 
gaskell, though in easi circumstances, had not a pianofort in hi 
rooms, and wa pleas to use a fine instrument by d'almain that john 
had that term receiv as a birthday present from hi guardian. 

from that time the two student were thrown much together, and in the 
autumn term of 1841 and easter term of 1842 practis a varieti of music 
in john' rooms, he take the violin part and mr. gaskel that for the 
pianoforte. 

It was, I think, in march 1842 that john purchas for hi room a piec 
of furnitur which wa destin afterward to play no unimport part 
in the stori I am narrating. thi wa a veri larg and low wicker chair 
of a form then come into fashion in oxford, and since, I am told, 
becom a familiar object of most colleg rooms. It wa cushion with a 
gaudi pattern of chintz, and bought for new of an upholster at the 
bottom of the high street. 

mr. gaskel wa taken by hi uncl to spend easter in rome, and 
obtain special leav from hi colleg to prolong hi travels; did not 
return to oxford till three week of the summer term were pass and may 
wa well advanced. So impati wa he to see hi friend that he would 
not let even the first even of hi return pass without come round 
to john' rooms. the two young men sat without light until the night 
wa late; and mr. gaskel had much to narrat of hi travels, and spoke 
special of the beauti music which he had heard at easter in the 
roman churches. He had also had lesson on the piano from a celebr 
professor of the italian style, but seem to have been particularli 
delight with the music of the seventeenth-centuri composers, of whose 
work he had brought back some specimen set for piano and violin. 

It wa past eleven o'clock when mr. gaskel left to return to new 
college; but the night wa unusu warm, with a moon near the full, 
and john sat for some time in a cushion window-seat befor the open 
sash think over what he had heard about the music of italy. feel 
still disinclin for sleep, he lit a singl candl and began to turn 
over some of the music work which mr. gaskel had left on the table. 
hi attent wa especi attract to an oblong book, bound in 
soil vellum, with a coat of arm stamp in gilt upon the side. It wa 
a manuscript copi of some earli suit by graziani for violin and 
harpsichord, and wa appar written at napl in the year 1744, mani 
year after the death of that composer. though the ink wa yellow and 
faded, the transcript had been accur made, and could be read with 
toler comfort by an advanc musician in spite of the antiqu 
notation. 

perhap by accident, or perhap by some mysteri direct which our 
mind are incap of appreciating, hi eye wa arrest by a suit of 
four movement with a _basso continuo_, or figur bass, for the 
harpsichord. the other suit in the book were onli distinguish by 
numbers, but thi one the compos had dignifi with the name of 
"l'areopagita." almost mechan john put the book on hi 
music-stand, took hi violin from it case, and after a moment' tune 
stood up and play the first movement, a live _coranto_. the light of 
the singl candl burn on the tabl wa scarc suffici to 
illumin the page; the shadow hung in the creas of the leaves, which 
had grown into those wavi fold sometim observ in book made of 
thick paper and remain long shut; and it wa with difficulti that he 
could read what he wa playing. but he felt the strang impuls of the 
old-world music urg him forward, and did not even paus to light the 
candl which stood readi in their sconc on either side of the desk. 
the _coranto_ wa follow by a _sarabanda_, and the _sarabanda_ by a 
_gagliarda_. My brother stood playing, with hi face turn to the 
window, with the room and the larg wicker chair of which I have spoken 
behind him. the _gagliarda_ began with a bold and live air, and as he 
play the open bars, he heard behind him a creak of the wicker 
chair. the sound wa a perfectli familiar one--a of some person place 
a hand on either arm of the chair preparatori to lower himself into 
it, follow by anoth as of the same person be leisur seated. 
but for the tone of the violin, all wa silent, and the creak of the 
chair wa strang distinct. the illus wa so complet that my 
brother stop play suddenly, and turn round expect that some 
late friend of hi had slip in unawares, be attract by the sound 
of the violin, or that mr. gaskel himself had returned. with the 
cessat of the music an absolut still fell upon all; the light of 
the singl candl scarc reach the darker corner of the room, but 
fell directli on the wicker chair and show it to be perfectli empty. 
half amused, half vex with himself at have without reason 
interrupt hi music, my brother return to the _gagliarda_; but some 
impuls induc him to light the candl in the sconces, which gave an 
illumin more adequ to the occasion. the _gagliarda_ and the last 
movement, a _minuetto_, were finished, and john close the book, 
intending, as it wa now late, to seek hi bed. As he shut the page a 
creak of the wicker chair again attract hi attention, and he heard 
distinctli sound such as would be made by a person rais himself from 
a sit posture. thi time, be less surprised, he could more aptli 
consid the probabl caus of such a circumstance, and easili arriv 
at the conclus that there must be in the wicker chair osier 
respons to certain note of the violin, as pane of glass in church 
window are observ to vibrat in sympathi with certain tone of the 
organ. but while thi argument approv itself to hi reason, hi 
imagin wa but half convinced; and he could not but be impress 
with the fact that the second creak of the chair had been coincid 
with hi shut the music-book; and, unconsciously, pictur to 
himself some strang visitor wait until the termin of the music, 
and then take hi departure. 

hi conjectur did not, however, either rob him of sleep or even 
disturb it with dreams, and he woke the next morn with a cooler mind 
and one less inclin to fantast imagination. If the strang episod 
of the previou even had not entir vanish from hi mind, it 
seem at least fulli account for by the acoust explan to which 
I have allud above. although he saw mr. gaskel in the cours of the 
morning, he did not think it necessari to mention to him so trivial a 
circumstance, but made with him an appoint to sup togeth in hi 
own room that evening, and to amus themselv afterward by essay 
some of the italian music. 

It wa shortli after nine that night when, supper be finished, mr. 
gaskel seat himself at the piano and john tune hi violin. the 
even wa close in; there had been heavi thunder-rain in the 
afternoon, and the moist air hung now heavi and steaming, while across 
it there throb the distant vibrat of the tenor bell at christ 
church. It wa toll the customari 101 strokes, which are rung everi 
night in term-tim as a signal for close the colleg gates. the two 
young men enjoy themselv for some while, play first a suit by 
cesti, and then two earli sonata by buononcini. both of them were 
suffici expert musician to make read at sight a pleasur rather 
than an effort; and mr. gaskel especi wa well vers in the theori 
of music, and in the correct render of the _basso continuo_. after 
the buononcini mr. gaskel took up the oblong copi of graziani, and 
turn over it leaves, propos that they should play the same suit 
which john had perform by himself the previou evening. hi select 
wa appar perfectli fortuitous, as my brother had purpos 
refrain from direct hi attent in ani way to that piec of 
music. they play the _coranto_ and the _sarabanda_, and in the 
singular fascin of the music john had entir forgotten the 
episod of the previou evening, when, as the bold air of the 
_gagliarda_ commenced, he suddenli becam awar of the same strang 
creak of the wicker chair that he had notic on the first occasion. 
the sound wa identical, and so exact wa it resembl to that of a 
person sit down that he stare at the chair, almost wonder that 
it still appear empty. beyond turn hi head sharpli for a moment to 
look round, mr. gaskel took no notic of the sound; and my brother, 
asham to betray ani foolish interest or excitement, continu the 
_gagliarda_, with it repeat. At it conclus mr. gaskel stop 
befor proceed to the minuet, and turn the stool on which he wa 
sit round toward the room, observed, "how veri strange, 
johnnie,"--for these young men were on term of suffici intimaci to 
address each other in a familiar style,--"how veri strange! I thought I 
heard some one sit down in that chair when we began the _gagliarda_. I 
look round quit expect to see some one had come in. did you hear 
nothing?" 

"it wa onli the chair creaking," my brother answered, feign an 
indiffer which he scarc felt. "certain part of the wicker-work 
seem to be in accord with music note and respond to them; let us 
continu with the _minuetto_." 

thu they finish the suite, mr. gaskel demand a repetit of the 
_gagliarda_, with the air of which he wa much pleased. As the clock 
had alreadi struck eleven, they determin not to play more that night; 
and mr. gaskel rose, blew out the sconces, shut the piano, and put the 
music aside. My brother ha often assur me that he wa quit prepar 
for what followed, and had been almost expect it; for as the book 
were put away, a creak of the wicker chair wa audible, exactli 
similar to that which he had heard when he stop play on the 
previou night. there wa a moment' silence; the young men look 
involuntarili at one another, and then mr. gaskel said, "I cannot 
understand the creak of that chair; it ha never done so before, with 
all the music we have played. I am perhap imagin and excit with 
the fine air we have heard to-night, but I have an impress that I 
cannot dispel that someth ha been sit listen to us all thi 
time, and that now when the concert is end it ha got up and gone." 
there wa a spirit of railleri in hi words, but hi tone wa not so 
light as it would ordinarili have been, and he wa evid ill at 
ease. 

"let us tri the _gagliarda_ again," said my brother; "it is the 
vibrat of the open note which affect the wicker-work, and we 
shall see if the nois is repeated." but mr. gaskel excus himself 
from tri the experiment, and after some desultori conversation, to 
which it wa evid that neither wa give ani seriou attention, he 
took hi leav and return to new college. 




chapter II 


I shall not weari you, my dear edward, by recount similar experi 
which occur on nearli everi occas that the young men met in the 
even for music. the repetit of the phenomenon had accustom them 
to expect it. both profess to be quit satisfi that it wa to be 
attribut to acoust affin of vibrat between the wicker-work 
and certain of the piano wires, and inde thi seem the onli 
explan possible. but, at the same time, the resembl of the 
nois to those caus by a person sit down in or rise from a 
chair wa so marked, that even their frequent recurr never fail to 
make a strang impress on them. they felt a reluct to mention the 
matter to their friends, partli from a fear of be themselv laugh 
at, and partli to spare from ridicul a circumst to which each 
perhaps, in spite of himself, attach some degre of importance. 
experi soon convinc them that the first nois as of one sit 
down never occur unless the _gagliarda_ of the "areopagita" wa 
played, and that thi nois be onc heard, the second onli follow 
it when they ceas play for the evening. they met everi night, 
sit later with the lengthen summer evenings, and everi night, 
as by some tacit understanding, play the "areopagita" suit befor 
parting. At the open bar of the _gagliarda_ the creak of the 
chair occur spontan with the utmost regularity. they seldom 
spoke even to one anoth of the subject; but one night, when john wa 
put away hi violin after a long evening' music without have 
play the "areopagita," mr. gaskell, who had risen from the pianoforte, 
sat down again as by a sudden impuls and said-- 

"johnnie, do not put away your violin yet. It is near twelv o'clock 
and I shall get shut out, but I cannot stop to-night without play the 
_gagliarda_. suppos that all our theori of vibrat and affin are 
wrong, suppos that there realli come here night by night some strang 
visit to hear us, some poor creatur whose heart is bound up in that 
tune; would it not be unkind to send him away without the hear of 
that piec which he seem most to relish? let us not be ill-mannered, 
but humour hi whim; let us play the _gagliarda_." 

they play it with more vigour and precis than usual, and the now 
customari sound of one take hi seat at onc ensued. It wa that night 
that my brother, look steadfastli at the chair, saw, or thought he 
saw, there some slight obscuration, some penumbra, mist, or subtl 
vapour which, as he gazed, seem to struggl to take human form. He 
ceas play for a moment and rub hi eyes, but as he did so all 
dim vanish and he saw the chair perfectli empty. the pianist 
stop also at the cessat of the violin, and ask what ail him. 

"it is onli that my eye were dim," he answered. 

"we have had enough for to-night," said mr. gaskell; "let us stop. 
I shall be lock out." He shut the piano, and as he did so the clock 
in new colleg tower struck twelve. He left the room running, but wa 
late enough at hi colleg door to be reported, admonish with a fine 
against such late hours, and confin for a week to college; for be 
out after midnight wa considered, at that time at least, a somewhat 
seriou offence. 

thu for some day the music practic wa compulsorili intermitted, 
but resum on the first even after mr. gaskell' term of confin 
wa expired. after they had perform sever suit of graziani, and 
finish as usual with the "areopagita," mr. gaskel sat for a time 
silent at the instrument, as though think with himself, and then 
said-- 

"I cannot say how deepli thi old-fashion music affect me. some would 
tri to persuad us that these suites, of which the air bear the name 
of differ dances, were alway written rather as a music essay and 
for purpos of perform than for person to danc to, as their name 
would more natur imply. but I think these critic are wrong at least 
in some instances. It is to me imposs to believ that such a melody, 
for instance, as the _giga_ of corelli which we have played, wa not 
written for actual purpos of dancing. one can almost hear the beat 
of feet upon the floor, and I imagin that in the time of corelli the 
practic of dancing, while not a whit inferior in grace, had more of the 
tripudist or beat charact than is now esteem consist with a 
correct ball-room performance. the _gagliarda_ too, which we play now so 
constantly, possess a singular power of assist the imagin to 
pictur or reproduc such scene as those which it no doubt formerli 
enlivened. I know not why, but it is constantli identifi in my mind 
with some revel which I have perhap seen in a picture, where sever 
coupl are danc a licenti measur in a long room lit by a number 
of silver sconc of the debas model common at the end of the 
seventeenth century. It is probabl a reminisc of my late excurs 
that give to these dancer in my fanci the oliv skin, dark hair, and 
bright eye of the italian type; and they wear dress of exceedingli 
rich fabric and elabor design. imagin is whimsic enough to 
paint for me the charact of the room itself, as have an arcad of 
arch run down one side alone, of the fantast and paganis 
gothic of the renaissance. At the end is a galleri or balconi for the 
musicians, which on it cove front ha a florid coat of arm of foreign 
heraldry. the shield bears, on a field _or_, a cherub' head blow on 
three lilies--a blazon I have no doubt seen somewher in my travels, 
though I cannot recollect where. thi scene, I say, is so nearli 
connect in my brain with the _gagliarda_, that scarc are it first 
note sound ere it present itself to my eye with a vivid which 
increas everi day. the coupl advance, set, and recede, use free 
and licenti gestur which my imagin should be asham to 
recall. amongst so mani foreigners, fanci pictures, I know not in the 
least why, the presenc of a young man of an english type of face, whose 
features, however, alway elud my mind' attempt to fix them. I think 
that the open subject of thi _gagliarda_ is a superior composit 
to the rest of it, for it is onli dure the first sixteen bar that the 
vision of bygon revelri present itself to me. with the last note of 
the sixteenth bar a veil is drawn suddenli across the scene, and with a 
sens almost of some catastroph it vanishes. thi I attribut to the 
fact that the second subject must be inferior in concept to the 
first, and by some sens of incongru destroy the fabric which the 
fascin of the preced one built up." 

My brother, though he had listen with interest to what mr. gaskel had 
said, did not reply, and the subject wa allow to drop. 




chapter iii 


It wa in the same summer of 1842, and near the middl of june, that my 
brother john wrote invit me to come to oxford for the commemor 
festivities. I had been spend some week with mrs. temple, a distant 
cousin of ours, at their hous of royston in derbyshire, and john wa 
desir that mrs. templ should come up to oxford and chaperon 
her daughter constanc and myself at the ball and variou other 
entertain which take place at the close of the summer term. owe 
to royston be some two hundr mile from worth maltravers, our 
famili had hitherto seen littl of one another, but dure my present 
visit I had learn to love mrs. temple, a ladi of singular sweet of 
disposition, and had contract a devot attach to her daughter 
constance. constanc templ wa then eighteen year of age, and to great 
beauti unit such mental grace and excel trait of charact as 
must ever appear to reason person more enduringli valuabl than even 
the highest person attractions. she wa well read and witty, and had 
been train in those principl of true religion which she afterward 
follow with devot consist in the self-sacrific and resign 
pieti of her too short life. In person, I may remind you, my dear 
edward, sinc death remov her ere you were of year to appreci 
either her appear or her qualities, she wa tall, with a somewhat 
long and oval face, with brown hair and eyes. 

mrs. templ readili accept sir john maltravers' invitation. she had 
never seen oxford herself, and wa pleas to afford us the pleasur of 
so delight an excursion. john had secur conveni room for us 
abov the shop of a well-known printsel in high street, and we 
arriv in oxford on friday evening, june 18, 1842. I shall not dilat 
to you on the variou commemor festivities, which have probabl 
alter littl sinc those days, and with which you are familiar. 
suffic it to say that my brother had secur us admiss to everi 
entertainment, and that we enjoy our visit as onli youth with it keen 
sensibl and uncloy pleasur can. I could not help observ 
that john wa veri much struck by the attract of miss constanc 
temple, and that she for her part, while exhibit no unbecom 
forwardness, certainli betray no avers to him. I wa greatli 
pleas both with my own power of observ which had enabl me to 
discov so import a fact, and also with the circumst itself. 
To a romant girl of nineteen it appear high time that a brother of 
twenty-two should be at least prepar some matrimoni project; and my 
friend wa so good and beauti that it seem imposs that I should 
ever obtain a more lovabl sister or my brother a better wife. mrs. 
templ could not refus her sanction to such a scheme; for while their 
mental qualiti seem emin compatible, john wa in hi own right 
master of worth maltravers, and her daughter sole heiress of the royston 
estates. 

the commemor festiv termin on wednesday night with a grand 
ball at the music-room in holywel street. thi wa given by a lodg of 
univers freemasons, and john wa there with mr. gaskell--whos 
acquaint we had made with much gratification--both wear blue silk 
scarv and small white aprons. they introduc us to mani other of 
their friend similarli adorned, and these import and mysteri 
insignia sat not amiss with their youth figur and boyish faces. 
after a long and pleasur programme, it wa decid that we should 
prolong our visit till the next evening, leav oxford at half-past 
ten o'clock at night and drive to didcot, there to join the mail for 
the west. We rose late the next morn and spent the day rambl among 
the old colleg and garden of the most beauti of english cities. 
At seven o'clock we dine togeth for the last time at our lodg 
in high street, and my brother propos that befor part we should 
enjoy the fine even in the garden of st. john' college. thi wa 
at onc agre to, and we proceed thither, john walk on in front 
with constanc and mrs. temple, and I follow with mr. gaskell. My 
companion explain that these garden were esteem the most beauti 
in the university, but that under ordinari circumst it wa not 
permit to stranger to walk there of an evening. here he quot some 
latin about "aurum per medio ire satellites," which I smilingli made as 
if I understood, and did inde gather from it that john had bribe the 
porter to admit us. It wa a warm and veri still night, without a moon, 
but with enough of fade light to show the outlin of the garden 
front. thi long low line of build built in charl i' reign look 
so exquisit beauti that I shall never forget it, though I have not 
sinc seen it oriel window and creeper-cov walls. there wa a veri 
heavi dew on the broad lawn, and we walk at first onli on the paths. 
No one spoke, for we were oppress by the veri beauti of the scene, and 
by the sad which an immin part from friend and from so sweet 
a place combin to cause. john had been silent and depress the whole 
day, nor did mr. gaskel himself seem inclin to conversation. 
constanc and my brother fell a littl way behind, and mr. gaskel ask 
me to cross the lawn if I wa not afraid of the dew, that I might see 
the garden front to better advantag from the corner. mrs. templ wait 
for us on the path, not wish to wet her feet. mr. gaskel point out 
the beauti of the perspect as seen from hi vantage-point, and we 
were fortun in hear the sweet descant of nightingal for which 
thi garden ha ever been famous. As we stood silent and listening, a 
candl wa lit in a small oriel at the end, and the light show the 
traceri of the window ad to the picturesqu of the scene. 

within an hour we were in a landau drive through the still warm lane 
to didcot. I had seen that constance' part with my brother had been 
tender, and I am not sure that she wa not in tear dure some part at 
least of our drive; but I did not observ her closely, have my 
thought elsewhere. 

though we were thu be carri everi moment further from the sleep 
city, where I believ that both our heart were busy, I feel as if I had 
been a person wit of the incid I am about to narrate, so often 
have I heard them from my brother' lips. the two young men, after 
part with us in the high street, return to their respect 
colleges. john reach hi room shortli befor eleven o'clock. He wa 
at onc sad and happy--sad at our departure, but happi in a new-found 
world of delight which hi admir for constanc templ open to 
him. He was, in fact, deepli in love with her, and the full flood of a 
hitherto unknown passion fill him with an emot so overwhelm that 
hi ordinari life seem transfigured. He moved, as it were, in an ether 
superior to our mortal atmosphere, and a new region of high resolv and 
nobl possibl spread itself befor hi eyes. He slam hi heavi 
outsid door (call an "oak") to prevent anyon enter and flung 
himself into the window-seat. here he sat for a long time, the sash 
thrown up and hi head outside, for he wa excit and feverish. hi 
mental exalt wa so great and hi thought of so absorb an 
interest that he took no notic of time, and onli rememb afterward 
that the scent of a syringa-bush wa born up to him from a littl 
garden-patch opposite, and that a bat had circl slowli up and down the 
lane, until he heard the clock strike three. At the same time the 
faint light of dawn made itself felt almost imperceptibly; the classic 
statu on the roof of the school began to stand out against the white 
sky, and a faint glimmer to penetr the darken room. It glisten on 
the varnish top of hi violin-cas lie on the table, and on a jug of 
toast-and-wat place there by hi colleg servant or scout everi night 
befor he left. He drank a glass of thi mixture, and wa move toward 
hi bedroom door when a sudden thought struck him. He turn back, took 
the violin from it case, tune it, and began to play the "areopagita" 
suite. He wa consciou of that mental clear and vigour which not 
unfrequ come with the dawn to those who have sat watch or 
read through the night: and hi thought were exalt by the effect 
which the first conscious of a deep passion caus in imagin 
minds. He had never play the suit with more power; and the airs, 
even without the piano part, seem fraught with a mean hitherto 
unrealised. As he began the _gagliarda_ he heard the wicker chair creak; 
but he had hi back toward it, and the sound wa now too familiar to 
him to caus him even to look round. It wa not till he wa play 
the repeat that he becam awar of a new and overpow sensation. 
At first it wa a vagu feeling, so often experienc by us all, of 
not be alone. He did not stop playing, and in a few second the 
impress of a presenc in the room other than hi own becam so strong 
that he wa actual afraid to look round. but in anoth moment he felt 
that at all hazard he must see what or who thi presenc was. without 
stop he partli turn and partli look over hi shoulder. the 
silver light of earli morn wa fill the room, make the variou 
object appear of less bright colour than usual, and give to 
everyth a pearl-grey neutral tint. In thi cold but clear light he 
saw seat in the wicker chair the figur of a man. 

In the first violent shock of so terrifi a discovery, he could not 
appreci such detail as those of features, dress, or appearance. He 
wa mere consciou that with him, in a lock room of which he knew 
himself to be the onli human inmate, there sat someth which bore a 
human form. He look at it for a moment with a hope, which he felt 
to be vain, that it might vanish and prove a phantom of hi excit 
imagination, but still it sat there. then my brother put down hi 
violin, and he use to assur me that a horror overwhelm him of an 
intens which he had previous believ impossible. whether the imag 
which he saw wa subject or objective, I cannot pretend to say: you 
will be in a posit to judg for yourself when you have finish thi 
narrative. our limit experi would lead us to believ that it wa a 
phantom conjur up by some unusu condit of hi own brain; but we 
are fain to confess that there certainli do exist in natur phenomena 
such as baffl human reason; and it is possibl that, for some hidden 
purpos of providence, permiss may occasion be grant to those 
who have pass from thi life to assum again for a time the form of 
their earthli tabernacle. We must, I say, be content to suspend our 
judgment on such matters; but in thi instanc the subsequ cours of 
event is veri difficult to explain, except on the supposit that 
there wa then present to my brother' view the actual bodili form of 
one long deceased. the dread which took possess of him wa due, he 
ha more than onc told me when analys hi feel long afterwards, 
to two predomin causes. firstly, he felt that mental disloc 
which accompani the sudden subvers of preconceiv theories, 
the sudden alter of long habit, or even the occurr of ani 
circumst beyond the walk of our daili experience. thi I have 
observ myself in the perturb effect which a sudden death, a 
grievou accident, or in recent year the declar of war, ha 
exercis upon all except the most letharg or the most determin 
minds. secondly, he experienc the profound self-abas or mental 
annihil caus by the near concept of a be of a superior 
order. In the presenc of an exist wearing, indeed, the human form, 
but of attribut wide differ from and superior to hi own, he felt 
the combin rever and revuls which even the noblest wild anim 
exhibit when brought for the first time face to face with man. the shock 
wa so great that I feel persuad it exert an effect on him from 
which he never wholli recovered. 

after an interv which seem to him interminable, though it wa onli 
of a second' duration, he turn hi eye again to the occup of the 
wicker chair. hi faculti had so far recov from the first shock 
as to enabl him to see that the figur wa that of a man perhap 
thirty-f year of age and still youth in appearance. the face wa 
long and oval, the hair brown, and brush straight off an except 
high forehead. hi complexion wa veri pale or bloodless. He wa clean 
shaven, and hi fine cut mouth, with compress lips, wore someth 
of a sneer smile. hi gener express wa unpleasing, and from the 
first my brother felt as by intuit that there wa present some malign 
and wick influence. hi eye were not visible, as he kept them cast 
down, rest hi head on hi hand in the attitud of one listening. hi 
face and even hi dress were impress so vividli upon john' mind, that 
he never had ani difficulti in recal them to hi imagination; and he 
and I had afterward an opportun of verifi them in a remark 
manner. He wore a long cut-away coat of green cloth with an edg of gold 
embroidery, and a white satin waistcoat figur with rose-sprigs, a 
full cravat of rich lace, knee-breech of buff silk, and stock of 
the same. hi shoe were of polish black leather with heavi silver 
buckles, and hi costum in gener recal that worn a centuri ago. 
As my brother gaze at him, he got up, put hi hand on the arm 
of the chair to rais himself, and caus the creak so often heard 
before. the hand forc themselv on my brother' notice: they were 
veri white, with the long delic finger of a musician. He show a 
consider height; and still keep hi eye on the floor, walk 
with an ordinari gait toward the end of the bookcas at the side of the 
room farthest from the window. He reach the bookcase, and then john 
suddenli lost sight of him. the figur did not fade gradually, but went 
out, as it were, like the flame of a suddenli extinguish candle. 

the room wa now fill with the clear light of the summer morning: the 
whole vision had last but a few seconds, but my brother knew that 
there wa no possibl of hi have been mistaken, that the mysteri 
of the creak chair wa solved, that he had seen the man who had come 
even by even for a month past to listen to the rhythm of the 
_gagliarda_. terribl disturbed, he sat for some time half dread and 
half expect a return of the figure; but all remain unchanged: he 
saw nothing, nor did he dare to challeng it reappear by play 
again the _gagliarda_, which seem to have so strang an attract for 
it. At last, in the full sunlight of a late june morn at oxford, he 
heard the step of earli pedestrian on the pavement below hi windows, 
the cri of a milkman, and other sound which show the world wa awake. 
It wa after six o'clock, and go to hi bedroom he flung himself on 
the outsid of the bed for an hour' troubl slumber. 




chapter IV 


when hi servant call him about eight o'clock my brother sent a note 
to mr. gaskel at new college, beg him to come round to magdalen 
hall as soon as might be in the cours of the morning. hi summon wa 
at onc obeyed, and mr. gaskel wa with him befor he had finish 
breakfast. My brother wa still much agitated, and at onc told him what 
had happen the night before, detail the variou circumst with 
minuteness, and not even conceal from him the sentiment which he 
entertain toward miss constanc temple. In narrat the appear 
which he had seen in the chair, hi agit wa still so excess 
that he had difficulti in control hi voice. 

mr. gaskel heard him with much attention, and did not at onc repli 
when john had finish hi narration. At length he said, "I suppos mani 
friend would think it right to affect, even if they did not feel, an 
incredul as to what you have just told me. they might consid it 
more prudent to attempt to allay your distress by persuad you that 
what you have seen ha no object reality, but is mere the phantasm 
of an excit imagination; that if you had not been in love, had not sat 
up all night, and had not thu overtax your physic powers, you would 
have seen no vision. I shall not argu thus, for I am as certainli 
convinc as of the fact that we sit here, that on all the night when 
we have play thi suit call the 'areopagita,' there ha been some 
one listen to us, and that you have at length been fortun or 
unfortun enough to see him." 

"do not say fortunate," said my brother; "for I feel as though I shall 
never recov from last night' shock." 

"that is like enough," mr. gaskel answered, coolly; "for as in the 
histori of the race or individual, increas cultur and a finer mental 
suscept necessarili impair the brute courag and power of 
endur which we note in savages, so ani supernatur vision such 
as you have seen must be purchas at the cost of physic reaction. 
from the first even that we play thi music, and heard the nois 
mimick so close the sit down and rise up of some person, I 
have felt convinc that caus other than those which we usual call 
natur were at work, and that we were veri near the manifest of 
some extraordinari phenomenon." 

"I do not quit apprehend your meaning." 

"I mean this," he continued, "that thi man or spirit of a man ha been 
sit here night after night, and that we have not been abl to see 
him, becaus our mind are dull and obtuse. last night the elev 
forc of a strong passion, such as that which you have confid to me, 
combin with the power of fine music, so exalt your mind that you 
becam endowed, as it were, with a sixth sense, and suddenli were 
enabl to see that which had previous been invisible. To thi sixth 
sens music gives, I believe, the key. We are at present onli on the 
threshold of such a knowledg of that art as will enabl us to use it 
eventu as the greatest of all humanis and educ agents. 
music will prove a ladder to the loftier region of thought; inde I 
have long found for myself that I cannot attain to the highest rang of 
my intellectu power except when hear good music. all poets, and 
most writer of prose, will say that their thought is never so exalted, 
their sens of beauti and proport never so just, as when they are 
listen either to the artifici music made by man, or to some of the 
grander tone of nature, such as the roar of a western ocean, or the 
sigh of wind in a clump of firs. though I have often felt on such 
occas on the veri verg of some high mental discovery, and though 
a hand ha been stretch forward as it were to rend the veil, yet it 
ha never been vouchsaf me to see behind it. thi you no doubt were 
allow in a measur to do last night. you probabl play the music 
with a deeper intuit than usual, and this, combin with the 
excit under which you were alreadi labouring, rais you for a 
moment to the requir pitch of mental exaltation." 

"it is true," john said, "that I never felt the melodi so deepli as when 
I play it last night." 

"just so," answer hi friend; "and there is probabl some link between 
thi air and the histori of the man whom you saw last night; some fatal 
power in it which enabl it to exert an attract on him even after 
death. for we must rememb that the influenc of music, though alway 
powerful, is not alway for good. We can scarc doubt that as certain 
form of music tend to rais us abov the sensual of the animal, or 
the more degrad passion of materi gain, and to transport us into 
the ether of higher thought, so other form are directli calcul to 
awaken in us luxuri emotions, and to whet those sensual appetit 
which it is the busi of a philosoph not inde to annihil or to 
be asham of, but to keep rigidli in check. thi possibl of music 
to effect evil as well as good I have seen recognised, and veri aptli 
express in some beauti vers by mr. kebl which I have just 
read:-- 

"'cease, stranger, ceas those witch notes, 
the art of syren choirs; 
hush the seduct voic that float 
across the trembl wires. 

"'music' ether power wa given 
not to dissolv our clay, 
but draw promethean beam from heaven 
To purg the dross away.'" 


"they are fine lines," said my brother, "but I do not see how you appli 
your argument to the present instance." 

"I mean," mr. gaskel answered, "that I have littl doubt that the 
melodi of thi _gagliarda_ ha been connect in some manner with the 
life of the man you saw last night. It is not unlikely, either, that it 
wa a favourit air of hi whilst in the flesh, or even that it wa 
play by himself or other at the moment of some crisi in hi history. 
It is possibl that such connect may be due mere to the innoc 
pleasur the melodi gave him in life; but the natur of the music 
itself, and a peculiar effect it ha upon my own thoughts, induc me to 
believ that it wa associ with some occas when he either fell 
into great sin or when some evil fate, perhap even death itself, 
overtook him. you will rememb I have told you that thi air call up 
to my mind a certain scene of italian revelri in which an englishman 
take part. It is true that I have never been abl to fix hi featur 
in my mind, nor even to say exactli how he wa dressed. yet now some 
instinct tell me that it is thi veri man whom you saw last night. It 
is not for us to attempt to pierc the mysteri which veil from our eye 
the secret of an after-death existence; but I can scarc suppos that 
a spirit entir at rest would feel so deepli the power of a certain 
melodi as to be call back by it to hi old haunt like a dog by hi 
master' whistle. It is more probabl that there is some evil histori 
connect with the matter, and this, I think, we ought to consid if it 
be possibl to unravel." 

My brother assenting, he continued, "when thi man left you, johnnie, 
did he walk to the door?" 

"no; he made for the side wall, and when he reach the end of the 
bookcas I lost sight of him." 

mr. gaskel went to the bookcas and look for a moment at the titl 
of the books, as though expect to see someth in them to assist 
hi inquiries; but find appar no clue, he said-- 

"thi is the last time we shall meet for three month or more; let us 
play the _gagliarda_ and see if there be ani response." 

My brother at first would not hear of this, show a live dread of 
challeng ani reappear of the figur he had seen: inde he felt 
that such an event would probabl fling him into a state of seriou 
physic disorder. mr. gaskell, however, continu to press him, 
assur him that the fact of hi now be no longer alon should 
larg allay ani fear on hi part, and urg that thi would be the 
last opportun they would have of play togeth for some months. 

At last, be overborne, my brother took hi violin, and mr. gaskel 
seat himself at the pianoforte. john wa veri agitated, and as he 
commenc the _gagliarda_ hi hand trembl so that he could scarc 
play the air. mr. gaskel also exhibit some nervousness, not 
perform with hi customari correctness. but for the first time the 
charm failed: no nois accompani the music, nor did anyth of an 
unusu charact occur. they repeat the whole suite, but with a 
similar result. 

both were surprised, but neither, had ani explan to offer. My 
brother, who at first dread intens a repetit of the vision, wa 
now almost disappoint that noth had occurred; so quickli doe the 
mood of man change. 

after some further convers the young men part for the long 
vacation--john return to worth maltrav and mr. gaskel go to 
london, where he wa to pass a few day befor he proceed to hi home 
in westmorland. 




chapter V 


john spent nearli the whole of thi summer vacat at worth maltravers. 
He had been anxiou to pay a visit to royston; but the continu and 
seriou ill of mrs. temple' sister had call her and constanc to 
scotland, where they remain until the death of their rel allow 
them to return to derbyshir in the late autumn. john and I had been 
brought up togeth from childhood. when he wa at eton we had alway 
spent the holiday at worth, and after my dear mother' death, when we 
were left quit alone, the bond of our love were natur drawn still 
closer. even after my brother went to oxford, at a time when most young 
men are anxiou to enjoy a new-found liberty, and to travel or to visit 
friend in their vacation, john' ardent affect for me and for worth 
maltrav kept him at home; and he wa pleas on most occas to 
make me the partner of hi thought and of hi pleasures. thi long 
vacat of 1842 was, I think, the happiest of our lives. In my case I 
know it wa so, and I think it wa happi also for him; for none could 
guess that the small cloud seen in the distanc like a man' hand wa 
afterward to rise and darken all hi later days. It wa a summer of 
brilliant and continu sunshine; mani of the old peopl said that they 
could never recollect so fine a season, and both fruit and crop were 
alik abundant. john hire a small cutter-yacht, the _palestine_, which 
he kept in our littl harbour of encombe, and in which he and I made 
mani excursions, visit weymouth, lyme regis, and other place of 
interest on the south coast. 

In thi summer my brother confid to me two secrets,--hi love 
for constanc temple, which inde wa after all no secret, and the 
histori of the apparit which he had seen. thi last fill me with 
inexpress dread and distress. It seem cruel and unnatur that ani 
influenc so dark and mysteri should thu intrud on our bright life, 
and from the first I had an impress which I could not entir shake 
off, that ani such appear or convers of a disembodi spirit must 
portend misfortune, if not worse, to him who saw or heard it. It never 
occur to me to combat or to doubt the realiti of the vision; he 
believ that he had seen it, and hi convict wa enough to convinc 
me. He had meant, he said, to tell no one, and had given a promis to 
mr. gaskel to that effect; but I think that he could not bear to keep 
such a matter in hi own breast, and within the first week of hi 
return he made me hi confidant. I remember, my dear edward, the look 
everyth wore on that sad night when he first told me what afterward 
prove so terribl a secret. We had dine quit alone, and he had been 
moodi and depress all the evening. It wa a chilli night, with some 
fret blow up from the sea. the moon show that blunt and deform 
appear which she assum a day or two past the full, and the 
moistur in the air encircl her with a stormy-look halo. We had 
step out of the dining-room window on to the littl terrac look 
down toward smedmor and encombe. the glaucou shrub that grow in 
between the balust were wet and drip with the salt breath of the 
sea, and we could hear the wave come into the cove from the west. 
after stand a minut I felt chill, and propos that we should go 
back to the billiard-room, where a fire wa lit on all except the 
warmest nights. "no," john said, "I want to tell you something, sophy," 
and then we walk on to the old boat summer-house. there he told me 
everything. I cannot describ to you my feel of anguish and horror 
when he told me of the appear of the man. the interest of the tale 
wa so absorb to me that I took no note of time, nor of the cold 
night air, and it wa onli when it wa all finish that I felt how 
deadli chill it had become. "let us go in, john," I said; "I am cold and 
feel benumbed." 

but youth is hope and strong, and in anoth week the impress had 
fade from our minds, and we were enjoy the full glori of midsumm 
weather, which I think onli those know who have watch the blue sea 
come rippl in at the foot of the white chalk cliff of dorset. 

I had felt a reluct even so much as to hear the air of the 
_gagliarda_, and though he had spoken to me of the subject on more than 
one occasion, my brother had never offer to play it to me. I knew that 
he had the copi of graziani' suit with him at worth maltravers, 
becaus he had told me that he had brought it from oxford; but I had 
never seen the book, and fanci that he kept it intent lock 
up. He did not, however, neglect the violin, and dure the summer 
mornings, as I sat read or work on the terrace, I often heard him 
play to himself in the library. though he had never even given me ani 
descript of the melodi of the _gagliarda_, yet I felt certain that he 
not infrequ play it. I cannot say how it was; but from the moment 
that I heard him one morn in the librari perform an air set in a 
curious low key, it forc itself upon my attention, and I knew, as it 
were by instinct, that it must be the _gagliarda_ of the "areopagita." 
He wa use a _sordino_ and play it veri softly; but I wa not 
mistaken. one wet afternoon in october, onli a week befor the time of 
hi leav us to return to oxford for the autumn term, he walk into 
the drawing-room where I wa sitting, and propos that we should play 
some music together. To thi I readili agreed. though but a mediocr 
performer, I have alway taken much pleasur in the use of the 
pianoforte, and esteem it an honour whenev he ask me to play with 
him, sinc my power as a musician were so veri much inferior to his. 
after we had play sever pieces, he took up an oblong music-book 
bound in white vellum, place it upon the desk of the pianoforte, and 
propos that we should play a suit by graziani. I knew that he meant 
the "areopagita," and beg him at onc not to ask me to play it. He 
ralli me lightli on my fears, and said it would much pleas him to 
play it, as he had not heard the pianofort part sinc he had left 
oxford three month ago. I saw that he wa eager to perform it, and 
be loath to disoblig so kind a brother dure the last week of hi 
stay at home, I at length overcam my scrupl and set out to play it. 
but I wa so alarm at the possibl of ani evil consequ 
ensuing, that when we commenc the _gagliarda_ I could scarc find 
my notes. noth in ani way unusual, however, occurred; and be 
reassur by this, and feel an irresist charm in the music, I 
finish the suit with more appear of ease. My brother, however, 
was, I fear, not satisfi with my performance, and compar it, veri 
possibly, with that of mr. gaskell, to which it wa necessarili much 
inferior, both through weak of execut and from my insuffici 
knowledg of the principl of the _basso continuo_. We stop playing, 
and john stood look out of the window across the sea, where the sky 
wa clear low down under the clouds. the sun went down behind 
portland in a fieri glow which cheer us after a long day' rain. I had 
taken the copi of graziani' suit off the desk, and wa hold it on 
my lap turn over the old fox and yellow pages. As I close it a 
streak of even sunlight fell across the room and light up a coat 
of arm stamp in gilt on the cover. It wa much fade and would 
ordinarili have been hard to make out; but the ray of strong light 
illumin it, and in an instant I recognis the same shield which mr. 
gaskel had pictur to himself as hang on the musicians' galleri of 
hi phantasm dancing-room. My brother had often recount to me thi 
effort of hi friend' imagination, and here I saw befor me the same 
florid foreign blazon, a cherub' head blow on three lili on a gold 
field. thi discoveri wa not onli of interest, but afford me much 
actual relief; for it account ration for at least one item of the 
strang story. mr. gaskel had no doubt notic at some time thi shield 
stamp on the outsid of the book, and bear the impress of it 
unconsci in hi mind, had reproduc it in hi imagin revels. 
I said as much to my brother, and he wa greatli interested, and after 
examin the shield agre that thi wa certainli a probabl solut 
of that part of the mystery. On the 12th of octob john return to 
oxford. 




chapter VI 


My brother told me afterward that more than onc dure the summer 
vacat he had serious consid with himself the proprieti of 
chang hi room at magdalen hall. He had thought that it might thu 
be possibl for him to get rid at onc of the memori of the apparition, 
and of the fear of ani reappear of it. He could either have move 
into anoth set of room in the hall itself, or els gone into lodg 
in the town--a usual proceeding, I am told, for gentlemen near the end 
of their cours at oxford. would to god that he had inde done so! but 
with the supin which has, I fear, my dear edward, been too 
frequent a characterist of our family, he shrank from the troubl 
such a cours would involve, and the open of the autumn term found 
him still in hi old rooms. you will forgiv me for enter here on a 
veri brief descript of your father' sitting-room. It is, I think, 
necessari for the proper understand of the incid that follow. It 
wa not a larg room, though probabl the finest in the small build 
of magdalen hall, and panel from floor to ceil with oak which 
success gener had obscur by numer coat of paint. On one 
side were two window have an aspect on to new colleg lane, and 
fit with deep cushion seat in the recesses. outsid these window 
there were box of flowers, the bright of which form in the 
summer term a pretti contrast to the grey and crumbl stone, and 
afford pleasur at onc to the inmat and to passers-by. along nearli 
the whole length of the wall opposit to the windows, some tenant in 
year long past had had mahogani book-shelv placed, reach to a 
height of perhap five feet from the floor. they were handsom made 
in the style of the eighteenth centuri and pleas my brother' taste. 
He had alway exhibit a partial for books, and the fine librari at 
worth maltrav had no doubt contribut to foster hi tast in that 
direction. At the time of which I write he had form a small collect 
for himself at oxford, pay particular attent to the bindings, and 
acquir mani excel specimen of that art, princip I think, 
from messrs. payn & foss, the celebr london booksellers. 

toward the end of the autumn term, have occas one cold day to take 
down a volum of plato from it shelf, he found to hi surpris that the 
book wa quit warm. A closer examin easili explain to him the 
reason--namely, that the flue of a chimney, pass behind one end of 
the bookcase, sensibl heat not onli the wall itself, but also the 
book in the shelves. although he had been in hi room now near three 
years, he had never befor observ thi fact; partly, no doubt, becaus 
the book in these shelv were seldom handled, be more for show as 
specimen of bind than for practic use. He wa somewhat annoy 
at thi discovery, fear lest such a heat, which in moder is 
benefici to books, might through it excess warp the leather or 
otherwis injur the bindings. mr. gaskel wa sit with him at the 
time of the discovery, and inde it wa for hi use that my brother had 
taken down the volum of plato. He strongli advis that the bookcas 
should be moved, and suggest that it would be better to place it 
across that end of the room where the pianofort then stood. they 
examin it and found that it would easili admit of removal, being, in 
fact, onli the frame of a bookcase, and show at the back the paint 
panel of the wall. mr. gaskel note it as curiou that all the 
shelv were fix and immov except one at the end, which had been 
fit with the ordinari arrang allow it posit to be alter 
at will. My brother thought that the chang would improv the appear 
of hi rooms, besid be advantag for the books, and gave 
instruct to the colleg upholster to have the necessari work 
carri out at once. 

the two young men had resum their music studies, and had often 
play the "areopagita" and other music of graziani sinc their return 
to oxford in the autumn. they remarked, however, that the chair no 
longer creak dure the _gagliarda_--and, in fact, that no unusu 
occurr whatev attend it performance. At time they were almost 
tempt to doubt the accuraci of their own remembrances, and to consid 
as entir mythic the mysteri which had so much disturb them in the 
summer term. My brother had also point out to mr. gaskel my discoveri 
that the coat of arm on the outsid of the music-book wa ident 
with that which hi fanci portray on the musicians' gallery. He 
readili admit that he must at some time have notic and afterward 
forgotten the blazon on the book, and that an unconsci reminisc 
of it had no doubt inspir hi imagin in thi instance. He rebuk 
my brother for have agit me unnecessarili by tell me at all of 
so idl a tale; and wa pleas to write a few line to me at worth 
maltravers, felicit me on my shrewd of perception, but speak 
banteringli of the whole matter. 

On the even of the 14th of novemb my brother and hi friend were 
sit talk in the former' room. the posit of the bookcas had 
been chang on the morn of that day, and mr. gaskel had come round 
to see how the book look when place at the end instead of at the 
side of the room. He had applaud the new arrangement, and the young 
men sat long over the fire, with a bottl of colleg port and a dish of 
medlar which I had sent my brother from our famou tree in the upper 
croft at worth maltravers. later on they fell to music, and play a 
varieti of pieces, perform also the "areopagita" suite. mr. gaskel 
befor he left compliment john on the improv which the alter 
in the place of the bookcas had made in hi room, saying, "not onli 
do the book in their present place veri much enhanc the gener 
appear of the room, but the chang seem to me to have affect also 
a mark acoust improvement. the oak panel now expos on the 
side of the room ha given a reson properti to the wall which is 
peculiarli respons to the tone of your violin. while you were 
play the _gagliarda_ to-night, I could almost have imagin that 
someon in an adjac room wa play the same air with a _sordino_, 
so distinct wa the echo." 

shortli after thi he left. 

My brother partli undress himself in hi bedroom, which adjoined, and 
then return to hi sitting-room, pull the larg wicker chair in 
front of the fire, and sat there look at the glow coals, and 
think perhap of miss constanc temple. the night promis to be veri 
cold, and the wind whistl down the chimney, increas the comfort 
sensat of the clear fire. He sat watch the ruddi reflect of the 
firelight danc on the panel wall, when he notic that a pictur 
place where the end of the bookcas formerli stood wa not truli hung, 
and need adjustment. A pictur hung askew wa particularli offens 
to hi eyes, and he got up at onc to alter it. He rememb as he went 
up to it that at thi precis spot four month ago he had lost sight 
of the man' figur which he saw rise from the wicker chair, and at 
the memori felt an involuntari shudder. thi reminisc probabl 
influenc hi fanci also in anoth direction; for it seem to him 
that veri faintly, as though play far off, and with the _sordino_, 
he could hear the air of the _gagliarda_. He put one hand behind the 
pictur to steadi it, and as he did so hi finger struck a veri slight 
project in the wall. He pull the pictur a littl to one side, and 
saw that what he had touch wa the back of a small hing sunk in the 
wall, and almost obliter with mani coat of paint. hi curios 
wa excited, and he took a candl from the tabl and examin the wall 
carefully. inspect soon show him anoth hing a littl further up, 
and by degre he perceiv that one of the panel had been made at some 
time in the past to open, and serv probabl as the door of a cupboard. 
At thi point he assur me that a feverish anxieti to re-open thi 
cupboard door took possess of him, and that the intens excit 
fill hi mind which we experi on the eve of a discoveri which 
we fanci may produc import results. He loosen the paint in the 
crack with a penknife, and attempt to press open the door; but hi 
instrument wa not adequ to such a purpose, and all hi effort 
remain ineffective. hi excit had now reach an overmast 
pitch; for he anticipated, though he knew not why, some strang 
discoveri to be made in thi seal cupboard. He look round the room 
for some weapon with which to forc the door, and at length with hi 
penknif cut away suffici wood at the joint to enabl him to insert 
the end of the poker in the hole. the clock in the new colleg tower 
struck one at the exact moment when with a sharp effort he thu forc 
open the door. It appear never to have had a fastening, but mere to 
have been stuck fast by the accumul of paint. As he bent it slowli 
back upon the rust hing hi heart beat so fast that he could 
scarc catch hi breath, though he wa consciou all the while of a 
ludicr aspect of hi position, know that it wa most probabl 
that the caviti within would be found empty. the cupboard wa small but 
veri deep, and in the obscur light seem at first to contain noth 
except a small heap of dust and cobwebs. hi sens of disappoint wa 
keen as he thrust hi hand into it, but chang again in a moment to 
breathless interest on feel someth solid in what he had imagin 
to be onli an accumul of mould and dirt. He snatch up a candle, 
and hold thi in one hand, with the other pull out an object from 
the cupboard and put it on the table, cover as it wa with the curiou 
draperi of black and cling cobweb which I have seen adher to 
bottl of old wine. It lay there between the dish of medlar and the 
decanter, veil inde with thick dust as with a mantle, but reveal 
beneath it the shape and contour of a violin. 




chapter vii 

john wa excit at hi discovery, and felt hi thought confus in a 
manner that I have often experienc myself on the unexpect receipt of 
news interest me deeply, whether for pleasur or pain. yet at the 
same time he wa half amus at hi own excitement, feel that it 
wa childish to be move over an event so simpl as the find of a 
violin in an old cupboard. He soon collect himself and took up the 
instrument, use great care, as he fear lest age should have render 
the wood brittl or rotten. with some vigor puff of breath and a 
littl dust with a handkerchief he remov the heavi outer coat 
of cobwebs, and began to see more clearli the delic curv of the 
bodi and of the scroll. A few minutes' more gentl handl left the 
instrument suffici clean to enabl him to appreci it chief 
points. it seclus from the outer world, which the heavi accumul 
of dust prove to have been for mani years, did not seem to have damag 
it in the least; and the fact of a chimney-flu pass through the wall 
at no great distanc had no doubt conduc to maintain the air in the 
cupboard at an equabl temperature. So far as he wa abl to judge, the 
wood wa as sound as when it left the maker' hands; but the string 
were of cours broken, and curl up in littl tangl knots. the bodi 
wa of a light-r colour, with a varnish of peculiar lustr and 
softness. the neck seem rather longer than ordinary, and the scroll 
wa remark bold and free. 

the violin which my brother wa in the habit of use wa a fine 
_pressenda_, given to him on hi fifteenth birthday by mr. thoresby, hi 
guardian. It wa of that maker' later and best period, and a copi of 
the stradivariu model. john took thi from it case and laid it side by 
side with hi new discovery, mean to compar them for size and form. 
He perceiv at onc that while the model of both wa identical, the 
superior of the older violin in everi detail wa so mark as to 
convinc him that it wa undoubtedli an instrument of except value. 
the extrem beauti of it varnish impress him vividly, and though he 
had never seen a genuin stradivarius, he felt a convict gradual 
gain on him that he stood in the presenc of a masterpiec of that 
great maker. On look into the interior he found that surprisingli 
littl dust had penetr into it, and by blow through the 
sound-hol he soon clear it suffici to enabl him to discern a 
label. He put the candl close to him, and held the violin up so that 
a littl patch of light fell through the sound-hol on to the label. 
hi heart leapt with a violent pulsat as he read the characters, 
"_antoniu stradiuariu cremonensi faciebat_, 1704." under ordinari 
circumst it would natur be conclud that such a label wa 
a forgery, but the condit were entir alter in the case of a 
violin found in a forgotten cupboard, with proof so evid of it 
have remain there for a veri long period. 

He wa not at that time as familiar with the histori of the fiddl of 
the great maker as he, and inde I also, afterward became. thu he 
wa unabl to decid how far the exact year of it manufactur would 
determin it valu as compar with other specimen of stradivarius. 
but although the pressenda he had been use to play on wa alway 
consid a veri fine instrument both in make and varnish, hi new 
discoveri so far excel it in both point as to assur him that it 
must be one of the cremones master' greatest productions. 

He examin the violin minutely, scrutinis each separ feature, 
and find each in turn to be of the utmost perfection, so far as hi 
knowledg of the instrument would enabl him to judge. He lit more 
candl that he might be abl better to see it, and hold it on hi 
knees, sat still admir it until the die fire and increas cold 
warn him that the night wa now far advanced. At last, carri it to 
hi bedroom, he lock it care into a drawer and retir for the 
night. 

He woke next morn with that pleasur conscious of there 
be some reason for gladness, which we feel on wake in season of 
happiness, even befor our reason, locat it, remind us what the 
actual sourc of our joy may be. He wa at first afraid lest hi 
excitement, work on the imagination, should have led him on the 
previou night to overestim the fine of the instrument, and he 
took it from the drawer half expect to be disappoint with it 
daylight appearance. but a glanc suffic to convinc him of the 
unfound natur of hi suspicions. the variou beauti which he had 
befor observ were enhanc a hundredfold by the light of day, and he 
realis more fulli than ever that the instrument wa one of altogeth 
except value. 

and now, my dear edward, I shall ask your forgiv if in the histori 
I have to relat ani observ of mine should seem to reflect on the 
charact of your late father, sir john maltravers. and I beg you to 
consid that your father wa also my dear and onli brother, and that it 
is inexpress pain to me to recount ani action of hi which may 
not seem becom to a nobl gentleman, as he sure was. I onli now 
proceed because, when veri near hi end, he most strictli enjoin me to 
narrat these circumst to you fulli when you should come of age. 
We must humbl rememb that to god alon belong judgment, and that 
it is not for poor mortal to decid what is right or wrong in certain 
instanc for their fellows, but that each should strive most earnestli 
to do hi own duty. 

your father entir conceal from me the discoveri he had made. It 
wa not till long afterward that I had it narrat to me, and I onli 
obtain a knowledg of thi and mani other of the fact which I am now 
tell you at a date much subsequ to their actual occurrence. 

He explain to hi servant that he had discov and open an old 
cupboard in the panelling, without mention the fact of hi have 
found anyth in it, but mere ask him to give instruct for the 
paint to be mend and the cupboard put into a usabl state. befor he 
had finish a veri late breakfast mr. gaskel wa with him, and it ha 
been a sourc of last regret to me that my brother conceal also 
from hi most intim and trust friend the discoveri of the previou 
night. He did, indeed, tell him that he had found and open an old 
cupboard in the panelling, but made no mention of there have been 
anyth within. I cannot say what prompt him to thi action; for the 
two young men had for long been on such intim term that the one 
share almost as a matter of cours with the other ani pleasur or pain 
which might fall to hi lot. mr. gaskel look at the cupboard with 
some interest, say afterwards, "I know now, johnnie, whi the one 
shelf of the bookcas which stood there wa made movabl when all the 
other were fixed. some former occup use the cupboard, no doubt, 
as a secret receptacl for hi treasures, and mask it with the 
book-shelv in front. who know what he kept in here, or who he was! I 
should not be surpris if he were that veri man who use to come here 
so often to hear us play the 'areopagita,' and whom you saw that night 
last june. He had the one shelf made, you see, to move so as to give him 
access to thi caviti on occasion: then when he left oxford, or perhap 
died, the mysteri wa forgotten, and with a few time of paint the 
crack close up." 

mr. gaskel shortli afterward took hi leav as he had a lectur 
to attend, and my brother wa left alon to the contempl of hi 
new-found treasure. after some consider he determin that he would 
take the instrument to london, and obtain the opinion of an expert as 
to it authent and value. He wa well acquaint with the late mr. 
georg smart, the celebr london dealer, from whom hi guardian, mr. 
thoresby, had purchas the pressenda violin which john commonli used. 
besid be a dealer in valuabl instruments, mr. smart wa a famou 
collector of stradivariu fiddles, esteem one of the first author 
in europ in that domain of art, and author of a valuabl work of 
refer in connect with it. It wa to him, therefore, that my 
brother decid to submit the violin, and he wrote a letter to mr. smart 
say that he should give himself the pleasur of wait on him the 
next day on a matter of business. He then call on hi tutor, and with 
some excus obtain leav to journey to london the next morning. He 
spent the rest of the day in veri care clean the violin, and 
noon of the next saw him with it, secur packed, in mr. smart' 
establish in bond street. 

mr. smart receiv sir john maltrav with deference, demand in what 
way he could serv him; and on hear that hi opinion wa requir on 
the authent of a violin, smile somewhat dubious and led the way 
into a back parlour. 

"mi dear sir john," he said, "I hope you have not been led into buy 
ani instrument by a faith in it antiquity. So mani good copi of 
instrument by famou maker and bear their label are now afloat, 
that the chanc of obtain a genuin fiddl from an unrecognis 
sourc are quit remote; of hundr of violin submit to me for 
opinion, I find that scarc one in fifti is actual that which it 
repres itself to be. In fact the onli safe rule," he ad as a 
profession commentary, "i never to buy a violin unless you obtain it 
from a dealer with a reput to lose, and are prepar to pay a 
reason price for it." 

My brother had meanwhil unpack the violin and laid it on the table. 
As he took from it the last leaf of silver paper he saw mr. smart' 
smile of condescens fade, and assum a look of interest and 
excitement, he step forward, took the violin in hi hands, and 
scrutinis it minutely. He turn it over in silenc for some moments, 
look narrowli at each feature, and even appli the test of a 
magnifying-glass. At last he said with an alter tone, "sir john, I 
have had in my hand nearli all the finest product of stradivarius, 
and thought myself acquaint with everi instrument of note that ever 
left hi workshop; but I confess myself mistaken, and apologis to you 
for the doubt which I express as to the instrument you had brought me. 
thi violin is of the great master' golden period, is incontest 
genuine, and finer in some respect than ani stradivariu that I have 
ever seen, not even except the famou _dolphin_ itself. you need be 
under no apprehens as to it authenticity: no connoisseur could hold 
it in hi hand for a second and entertain a doubt on the point." 

My brother wa greatli pleas at so favour a verdict, and mr. smart 
continued-- 

"the varnish is of that rich red which stradivariu use in hi best 
period after he had abandon the yellow tint copi by him at first 
from hi master amati. I have never seen a varnish thicker or more 
lustrous, and it show on the back that peculiar shade to imit wear 
which we term 'break up.' the purfl also is of an unsurpass 
excellence. it execut is so fine that I should recommend you to use 
a magnifying-glass for it examination." 

So he ran on, find from moment to moment some new beauti to 
admire. 

My brother wa at first anxiou lest mr. smart should ask him whenc so 
extraordinari an instrument came, but he saw that the expert had alreadi 
jump to a conclus in the matter. He knew that john had recent 
come of age, and evid suppos that he had found the violin among 
the heirloom of worth maltravers. john allow mr. smart to continu in 
thi misconception, mere say that he had discov the instrument 
in an old cupboard, where he had reason to think it had remain hidden 
for mani years. 

"are there no record attach to so splendid an instrument?" ask mr. 
smart. "I suppos it ha been with your famili a number of years. Do you 
not know how it came into their possession?" 

I believ thi wa the first occas on which it had occur to john 
to consid what right he had to the possess of the instrument. He 
had been so excit by it discoveri that the question of ownership had 
never hitherto cross hi mind. the unwelcom suggest that it wa 
not hi after all, that the colleg might right prefer a claim to 
it, present itself to him for a moment; but he set it instantli aside, 
quiet hi conscienc with the reflect that thi at least wa not 
the moment to make such a disclosure. 

He fenc with mr. smart' inquiri as best he could, say that he wa 
ignor of the histori of the instrument, but not contradict the 
assumpt that it had been a long time in hi family' possession. 

"it is inde singular," mr. smart continued, "that so magnific 
an instrument should have lain buri so long; that even those best 
acquaint with such matter should be in perfect ignor of it 
existence. I shall have to revis the list of famou instrument in the 
next edit of my 'histori of the violin,' and to write," he ad 
smiling, "a special paragraph on the 'worth maltrav stradivarius.'" 

after much more, which I need not narrate, mr. smart suggest that 
the violin should be left with him that he might examin it more at 
leisure, and that my brother should return in a week' time, when he 
would have the instrument opened, an oper which would be in ani 
case advisable. "the interior," he added, "appear to be in a strictli 
origin state, and thi I shall be abl to ascertain when opened. the 
label is perfect, but if I am not mistaken I can see someth higher up 
on the back which appear like a second label. thi excit my interest, 
as I know of no instanc of an instrument bear two labels." 

To thi propos my brother readili assented, be anxiou to enjoy 
alon the pleasur of so gratifi a discoveri as that of the undoubt 
authent of the instrument. 

As he thought over the matter more at leisure, he grew anxiou as to 
what might be the import of the second label in the violin of which mr. 
smart had spoken. I blush to say that he fear lest it might bear some 
owner' name or other inscript prove that the instrument had not 
been so long in the maltrav famili as he had allow mr. smart to 
suppose. So within so short a time it wa possibl that sir john 
maltrav of worth should dread be detected, if not in an absolut 
falsehood, at least in have by hi silenc assent to one. 

dure the ensu week john remain in an excit and anxiou 
condition. He did littl work, and neglect hi friends, have hi 
thought continu occupi with the strang discoveri he had made. 
I know also that hi sens of honour troubl him, and that he wa not 
satisfi with the cours he wa pursuing. the even of hi return 
from london he went to mr. gaskell' room at new college, and spent an 
hour convers with him on indiffer subjects. In the cours of their 
talk he propos to hi friend as a moral problem the question of the 
cours of action to be taken were one to find some articl of valu 
conceal in hi room. mr. gaskel answer unhesitatingli that he 
should feel bound to disclos it to the authorities. He saw that my 
brother wa ill at ease, and with a clear of judgment which he 
alway exhibited, guess that he had actual made some discoveri of 
thi sort in the old cupboard in hi rooms. He could not divine, of 
course, the exact natur of the object found, and thought it might 
probabl relat to a hoard of gold; but insist with much urgenc on 
the oblig to at onc disclos anyth of thi kind. My brother, 
however, misled, I fear, by that feel of inalien right which the 
treasure-hunt experi over the treasure, paid no more attent to 
the advic of hi friend than to the prompt of hi own conscience, 
and went hi way. 

from that day, my dear edward, he began to exhibit a spirit of 
secret and reserv entir alien to hi own open and honour 
disposition, and also saw less of mr. gaskell. hi friend tried, indeed, 
to win hi confid and affect in everi way in hi power; but in 
spite of thi the rift between them widen insensibly, and my brother 
lost the fellowship and counsel of a true friend at a time when he could 
ill afford to be without them. 

He return to london the ensu week, and met mr. georg smart by 
appoint in bond street. If the expert had been enthusiast on a 
former occasion, he wa ten time more so on this. He spoke in term 
almost of raptur about the violin. He had compar it with two 
magnific instrument in the collect of the late mr. jame loding, 
then the finest in europe; and it wa admittedli superior to either, 
both in the delic mark of it wood and singularli fine varnish. 
"of it tone," he said, "we cannot, of course, yet pronounc with 
certainty, but I am veri sure that it voic will not beli it splendid 
exterior. It ha been care opened, and is in a strang perfect 
condition. sever person emin qualifi to judg unit with me 
in consid that it ha been exceedingli littl play upon, and 
admit that never ha so intact an interior been seen. the scroll is 
except bold and original. although undoubtedli from the hand of 
the great master, thi is of a pattern entir differ and distinct 
from ani that have ever come under my observation." 

He then point out to my brother that the side line of the scroll were 
unusu deepli cut, and that the front of it project far more than 
is common with such instruments. 

"the most remark feature," he concluded, "i that the instrument 
bear a doubl label. besid the label which you have alreadi seen 
bear '_antoniu stradiuariu cremonensi faciebat_,' with the date of 
hi most splendid period, 1704, so clearli that the ink seem scarc 
dry, there is anoth smaller one higher up on the back which I will 
show you." 

He took the violin apart and show him a small label with charact 
written in fade ink. "that is the write of antonio stradivariu 
himself, and is easili recognisable, though it is much firmer than 
a specimen which I onc saw, written in extrem old age, and give 
hi name and the date 1736. He wa then ninety-two, and die in the 
follow year. but this, as you will see, doe not give hi name, but 
mere the two word '_porphyriu philosophus_.' what thi may refer 
to I cannot say: it is beyond my experience. My friend mr. calvert ha 
suggest that stradivariu may have dedic thi violin to the pagan 
philosopher, or name it after him; but thi seem improbable. I have, 
indeed, heard of two famou violin be call 'peter' and 'paul,' 
but the instanc of such name are veri rare; and I believ it to be 
altogeth without preced to find a name attach thu on a label. 

"in ani case, I must leav thi matter to your ingenu to decipher. 
neither the sound-post nor the bass-bar have ever been moved, and you 
see here a stradivariu violin wear exactli the same appear as 
it onc wore in the great master' workshop, and in exactli the same 
condition; yet I think the belli is suffici strong to stand modern 
stringing. I should advis you to leav the instrument with me for some 
littl while, that I may give it due care and attent and ensur it 
be properli strung." 

My brother thank him and left the violin with him, say that he 
would instruct him later by letter to what address he wish it sent. 




chapter viii 


within a few day after thi the autumn term came to an end, and in 
the second week of decemb john return to worth maltrav for 
the christma vacation. hi advent wa alway a veri great pleasur 
to me, and on thi occas I had look forward to hi compani with 
anticip keener than usual, as I had been disappoint of the visit 
of a friend and had spent the last month alone. after the joy of our 
first meet had somewhat sobered, it wa not long befor I remark a 
chang in hi manner, which puzzl me. It wa not that he wa less kind 
to me, for I think he wa even more tenderli forbear and gentl than 
I had ever known him, but I had an uneasi feel that some shadow had 
crept in between us. It wa the small cloud rise in the distanc that 
afterward darken hi horizon and mine. I miss the old candour and 
open-heart frank that he had alway shown; and there seem to be 
alway someth in the background which he wa tri to keep from me. 
It wa obviou that hi thought were constantli elsewhere, so much so 
that on more than one occas he return vagu and incoher answer 
to my questions. At time I wa content to believ that he wa in love, 
and that hi thought were with miss constanc temple; but even so, 
I could not persuad myself that hi alter manner wa to be thu 
entir account for. At other time a daze air, entir foreign to 
hi bright disposition, which I observ particularli in the morning, 
rais in my mind the terribl suspicion that he wa in the habit of 
take some secret narcot or other deleteri drug. 

We had never spent a christma away from worth maltravers, and it had 
alway been a season of quiet joy for both of us. but under these 
alter circumst it wa a great relief and caus of thank 
to me to receiv a letter from mrs. templ invit us both to spend 
christma and new year at royston. thi invit had upon my brother 
precis the effect that I had hope for. It rous him from hi moodi 
condition, and he profess much pleasur in accept it, especi as 
he had never hitherto been in derbyshire. 

there wa a small but veri agreeabl parti at royston, and we pass a 
most enjoy fortnight. My brother seem thoroughli to have shaken 
off hi indisposition; and I saw my fondest hope realis in the warm 
attach which wa evid spring up between him and miss 
constanc temple. 

our visit drew near it close, and it wa within a week of john' return 
to oxford. mrs. templ celebr the termin of the christma 
festiv by give a ball on twelfth-night, at which a larg parti 
were present, includ most of the counti families. royston wa 
admir adapt for such entertainments, from the number and great 
size of it reception-rooms. though elizabethan in date and extern 
appearance, succeed gener had much modifi and enlarg the 
house; and an ancestor in the middl of the last centuri had built at 
the back an enorm hall after the classic model, and cover it with a 
dome or cupola. In thi room the danc went forward. supper wa serv 
in the older hall in the front, and it wa while thi wa in progress 
that a thunderstorm began. the rariti of such a phenomenon in the depth 
of winter form the subject of gener remark; but though the lightn 
wa extrem brilliant, be seen distinctli through the curtain 
windows, the storm appear to be at some distance, and, except for one 
peal, the thunder wa not loud. after supper danc wa resumed, and 
I wa take part in a polka (called, I remember, the "_king pippin_"), 
when my partner point out that one of the footmen wish to speak with 
me. I beg him to lead me to one side, and the servant then inform 
me that my brother wa ill. sir john, he said, had been seiz with a 
faint fit, but had been got to bed, and wa be attend by dr. 
empson, a physician who chanc to be present among the visitors. 

I at onc left the hall and hurri to my brother' room. On the way 
I met mrs. templ and constance, the latter much agit and in tears. 
mrs. templ assur me that dr. empson report favour of my 
brother' condition, attribut hi faint to over-exert in the 
dancing-room. the medic man had got him to bed with the assist of 
sir john' valet, had given him a quiet draught, and order that he 
should not be disturb for the present. It wa better that I should not 
enter the room; she beg that I would kindli comfort and reassur 
constance, who wa much upset, while she herself return to her guests. 

I led constanc to my bedroom, where there wa a bright fire burning, 
and calm her as best I could. her interest in my brother wa evid 
veri real and unaffected, and while not admit her partial for him 
in words, she made no effort to conceal her sentiment from me. I kiss 
her tenderly, and bade her narrat the circumst of john' attack. 

It seem that after supper they had gone upstair into the music-room, 
and he had himself propos that they should walk thenc into the 
picture-gallery, where they would better he abl to see the lightning, 
which wa then particularli vivid. the picture-galleri at royston is a 
veri long, narrow, and rather low room, run the whole length of the 
south wing, and termin in a larg tudor oriel or flat bay window 
look east. In thi oriel they had sat for some time watch the 
flashes, and the wintri landscap reveal for an instant and then 
plung into outer blackness. the galleri itself wa not illuminated, 
and the effect of the lightn wa veri fine. 

there had been an unusu bright flash accompani by that singl 
reverber peal of thunder which I had previous noticed. constanc 
had spoken to my brother, but he had not replied, and in a moment she 
saw that he had swooned. she summon aid without delay, but it wa some 
short time befor conscious had been restor to him. 

she had conclud thi narrative, and sat hold my hand in hers. We 
were specul on the caus of my brother' illness, think it might 
be due to over-exertion, or to sit in a chilli atmospher as the 
picture-galleri wa not warmed, when mrs. templ knock at the door and 
said that john wa now more compos and desir earnestli to see me. 

On enter my brother' bedroom I found him sit up in bed wear a 
dressing-gown. parnham, hi valet, who wa arrang the fire, left the 
room as I came in. A chair stood at the head of the bed and I sat down 
by him. He took my hand in hi and without a word burst into tears. 
"sophy," he said, "I am so unhappy, and I have sent for you to tell you 
of my trouble, becaus I know you will be forbear to me. An hour 
ago all seem so bright. I wa sit in the picture-galleri with 
constance, whom I love dearly. We had been watch the lightning, till 
the thunder had grown fainter and the storm seem past. I wa just 
about to ask her to becom my wife when a brighter flash than all the 
rest burst on us, and I saw--i saw, sophy, stand in the galleri as 
close to me as you are now--i saw--that man I told you about at oxford; 
and then thi faint came on me." 

"whom do you mean?" I said, not understand what he spoke of, and 
think for a moment he refer to someon else. "did you see mr. 
gaskell?" 

"no, it wa not he; but that dead man whom I saw rise from my wicker 
chair the night you went away from oxford." 

you will perhap smile at my weakness, my dear edward, and inde I had 
at that time no justif for it; but I assur you that I have not 
yet forgotten, and never shall forget, the impress of overwhelm 
horror which hi word produc upon me. It seem as though a fear 
which had hitherto stood vagu and shadowi in the background, began now 
to advanc toward me, gather more distinct as it approached. 
there wa to me someth morbidli terribl about the apparit of thi 
man at such a moment crisi in my brother' life, and I at onc 
recognis that unknown form as be the shadow which wa gradual 
steal between john and myself. though I feign incredul as best 
I might, and employ those argument or platitud which will alway be 
use on such occasions, urg that such a phantom could onli exist in a 
mind disord by physic weakness, my brother wa not deceiv by my 
words, and perceiv in a moment that I did not even believ in them 
myself. 

"dearest sophy," he said, with a much calmer air, "let us put asid all 
dissimulation. I _know_ that what I have to-night seen, and that what I 
saw last summer at oxford, are _not_ phantom of my brain; and I believ 
that you too in your inmost soul are convinc of thi truth. Do not, 
therefore, endeavour to persuad me to the contrary. If I am not to 
believ the evid of my senses, it were better at onc to admit my 
madness--and I know that I am not mad. let us rather consid what such 
an appear can portend, and who the man is who is thu presented. 
I cannot explain to you whi thi appear inspir me with so great 
a revulsion. I can onli say that in it presenc I seem to be brought 
face to face with some abysm and repel wickedness. It is not that 
the form he wear is hideous. last night I saw him exactli as I saw him 
at oxford--hi face waxen pale, with a sneer mouth, the same lofti 
forehead, and hair brush straight up so as almost to appear stand 
on end. He wore the same long coat of green cloth and white waistcoat. 
He seem as if he had been stand listen to what we said, though 
we had not seen him till thi bright flash of lightn made him 
manifest. you will rememb that when I saw him at oxford hi eye were 
alway cast down, so that I never knew their colour. thi time they were 
wide open; inde he wa look full at us, and they were a light brown 
and veri brilliant." 

I saw that my brother wa excit himself, and wa still weak from hi 
recent swoon. I knew, too, that ani ordinari person of strong mind would 
say at onc that hi brain wandered, and yet I had a dread convict 
all the while that what he told me wa the truth. all I could do wa to 
beg him to calm himself, and to reflect how vain such fanci must be. 
"we must trust, dear john," I said, "in god. I am sure that so long as 
we are not live in consciou sin, we shall never be given over to ani 
evil power; and I know my brother too well to think that he is do 
anyth he know to be evil. If there be evil spirits, as we are taught 
there are, we are taught also that there are good spirit stronger than 
they, who will protect us." 

So I spoke with him a littl while, until he grew calmer; and then we 
talk of constanc and of hi love for her. He wa deepli pleas to 
hear from me how she had shown such obvious, sign of interest in hi 
illness, and sincer affect for him. In ani case, he made me promis 
that I would never mention to her either what he had seen thi night or 
last summer at oxford. 

It had grown late, and the undul beat of the dances, which had 
been distinctli sensibl in hi room--even though we could not hear 
ani definit noise--had now ceased. mrs. templ knock at the door as 
she went to bed and inquir how he did, give him at the same time 
a kind messag of sympathi from constance, which afford him much 
gratification. after she had left I prepar also to retire; but befor 
go he beg me to take a prayer-book lie on the table, and to read 
aloud a collect which he point out. It wa that for the second sunday 
in lent, and evid well known to him. As I read it the word seem 
to bear a new and deeper significance, and my heart repeat with 
fervour the petit for protect from those "evil thought which may 
assault and hurt the soul." I bade him good night and went away veri 
sorrowful. parnham, at john' request, had arrang to sleep on a sofa 
in hi master' bedroom. 

I rose betim the next morn and inquir at my brother' room how 
he was. parnham report that he had pass a restless night, and on 
enter a littl later I found him in a high fever, slightli delirious, 
and evid not so well as when I saw him last. mrs. temple, with much 
kind and forethought, had beg dr. empson to remain at royston for 
the night, and he wa soon in attend on hi patient. hi verdict 
wa suffici grave: john wa suffer from a sharp access of 
brain-fever; hi condit afford caus for alarm; he could not answer 
for ani turn hi sick might take. you will easili imagin how much 
thi intellig affect me; and mrs. templ and constanc share my 
anxieti and solicitude. constanc and I talk much with one anoth 
that morning. unaffect anxieti had larg remov her reserve, and 
she spoke openli of her feel toward my brother, not conceal her 
partial for him. I on my part let her understand how welcom to me 
would be ani union between her and john, and how sincer I should 
valu her as a sister. 

It wa a wild winter' morning, with some snow fall and a high wind. 
the hous wa in the disord condit which is gener observ 
on the day follow a ball or other import festivity. I roam 
restlessli about, and at last found my way to the picture-gallery, 
which had form the scene of john' adventur on the previou night. 
I had never been in thi part of the hous before, as it contain no 
facil for heating, and so often remain shut in the winter months. 
I found a listless pleasur in admir the pictur which line the 
walls, most of them be portrait of former member of the family, 
includ the famou pictur of sir ralph templ and hi family, 
attribut to holbein. I had reach the end of the galleri and sat 
down in the oriel watch the snow-flak fall sparsely, and the 
evergreen below me wave wildli in the sudden rush of the wind. My 
thought were busi with the event of the previou evening,--with john' 
illness, with the ball,--and I found myself hum the air of a waltz 
that had caught my fancy. At last I turn away from the garden scene 
toward the gallery, and as I did so my eye fell on a remark 
pictur just opposit to me. 

It wa a full-length portrait of a young man, life-size, and I had 
bare time to appreci even it main featur when I knew that I had 
befor me the paint counterfeit of my brother' vision. the discoveri 
caus me a violent shock, and it wa with an infinit repuls that 
I recognis at onc the featur and dress of the man whom john had 
seen rise from the chair at oxford. So accur had my brother' 
imagin describ him to me, that it seem as if I had myself seen 
him often before. I note each feature, compar them with my brother' 
description, and find them all familiar and correspond exactly. 
He wa a man still in the prime of life. hi featur were regular and 
beauti modelled; yet there wa someth in hi face that inspir 
me with a deep aversion, though hi brown eye were open and brilliant. 
hi mouth wa sharpli cut, with a slight sneer on the lips, and hi 
complexion of that extrem pallor which had impress itself deepli on 
my brother' imagin and my own. 

after the first intens surpris had somewhat subsided, I experienc 
a feel of great relief, for here wa an extraordinari explan 
of my brother' vision of last night. It wa certain that the flash 
of lightn had lit up thi ill-star picture, and that to hi 
predispos fanci the paint figur had stood forth as an actual 
embodiment. that such an incident, howev startling, should have been 
abl to fling john into a brain-fever, show that he must alreadi have 
been in a veri low and reduc state, on which excit would act much 
more power than on a more robust condit of health. A similar 
state of weakness, perturb by the excit of hi passion for 
constanc temple, might sure also have conjur up the vision which 
he thought he saw the night of our leav oxford in the summer. 
these thoughts, my dear edward, gave me great relief; for it seem 
a compar trivial matter that my brother should be ill, even 
serious ill, if onli hi physic indisposit could explain away the 
supernatur dread which had haunt us for the past six months. the 
cloud were break up. It wa evid that john had been serious 
unwel for some months; hi physic weak had act on hi brain; 
and I had lent colour to hi wander fanci by be alarm by them, 
instead of reject them at onc or gentli laugh them away as I 
should have done. but these glad thought took me too far, and I wa 
suddenli brought up by a reflect that did not admit of so simpl an 
explanation. If the man' form my brother saw at oxford were mere an 
effort of disord imagination, how wa it that he had been abl to 
describ it exactli like that repres in thi picture? He had never 
in hi life been to royston, therefor he could have no imag of the 
pictur impress unconsci on or hidden away in hi mind. yet hi 
descript had never varied. It had been so close as to enabl me to 
produc in my fanci a vivid represent of the man he had seen; and 
here I had befor me the featur and dress exactli reproduced. In the 
presenc of a coincid so extraordinari reason stood confounded, and 
I knew not what to think. I walk nearer to the pictur and scrutinis 
it closely. 

the dress correspond in everi detail with that which my brother had 
describ the figur as wear at oxford: a long cut-away coat of green 
cloth with an edg of gold embroidery, a white satin waistcoat with 
sprig of embroid roses, gold-lac at the pocket-holes, buff silk 
knee-breeches, and low down on the fine model neck a full cravat 
of rich lace. the figur wa pose neglig against a flute stone 
pedest or short column on which the left elbow leant, and the right 
foot wa cross lightli over the left. hi shoe were of polish 
black leather with heavi silver buckles, and the whole costum wa veri 
old-fashioned, and such as I had onli seen worn at fanci dress balls. On 
the foot of the pedest wa the painter' name, "battoni pinxit, romæ, 
1750." On the top of the pedestal, and under hi left elbow, wa a long 
roll appar of music, of which one end, unfolded, hung over the 
edge. 

for some minut I stood still gaze at thi portrait which so much 
astonish me, but turn on hear footstep in the gallery, and saw 
constance, who had come to seek for me. 

"constance," I said, "whose portrait is this? It is a veri strike 
picture, is it not?" 

"yes, it is a splendid painting, though of a veri bad man. hi name wa 
adrian temple, and he onc own royston. I do not know much about him, 
but I believ he wa veri wick and veri clever. My mother would be 
abl to tell you more. It is a pictur we none of us like, although so 
fine painted; and perhap becaus he wa alway point out to me from 
childhood as a bad man, I have myself an avers to it. It is singular 
that when the veri bright flash of lightn came last night while your 
brother john and I were sit here, it lit thi pictur with a 
dazzl glare that made the figur stand out so strang as to seem 
almost alive. It wa just after that I found that john had fainted." 

the memori wa not a pleasant one for either of us and we chang the 
subject. "come," I said, "let us leav the gallery, it is veri cold 
here." 

though I said noth more at the time, her word had made a great 
impress on me. It wa so strang that, even with the littl she knew 
of thi adrian temple, she should speak at onc of hi notori evil 
life, and of her person dislik to the picture. rememb what my 
brother had said on the previou night, that in the presenc of thi man 
he felt himself brought face to face with some indescrib wickedness, 
I could not but be surpris at the coincidence. the whole stori seem 
to me now to resembl one of those puzzl pictur or map which I have 
play with as a child, where each bit fit into some other until the 
outlin is complete. It wa as if I were find the piec one by one 
of a bygon history, and fit them to one anoth until some terribl 
whole should be gradual built up and stand out in it complet 
deformity. 

dr. empson spoke grave of john' illness, and entertain without 
reluct the propos of mrs. temple, that dr. dobie, a celebr 
physician in derby, should be summon to a consultation. dr. dobi came 
more than once, and wa at last abl to report an amend in john' 
condition, though both the doctor absolut forbad anyon to visit 
him, and said that under the most favour circumst a period of 
some week must elaps befor he could be moved. 

mrs. templ invit me to remain at royston until my brother should be 
suffici convalesc to be moved; and both she and constance, while 
regret the cause, were good enough to express themselv pleas 
that accid should detain me so long with them. 

As the report of the doctor becam gradual more favourable, and our 
mind were in consequ more free to turn to other subjects, I spoke 
to mrs. templ one day about the picture, say that it interest me, 
and ask for some particular as to the life of adrian temple. 

"mi dear child," she said, "I had rather that you should not exhibit 
ani curios as to thi man, whom I wish that we had not to call an 
ancestor. I know littl of him myself, and inde hi life wa of such 
a natur as no woman, much less a young girl, would desir to be well 
acquaint with. He was, I believe, a man of remark talent, and 
spent most of hi time between oxford and italy, though he visit 
royston occasionally, and built the larg hall here, which we use as a 
dancing-room. befor he wa twenti wild stori were preval as to hi 
licenti life, and by thirti hi name wa a by-word among sober and 
upright people. He had constantli with him at oxford and on hi travel 
a boon companion call jocelyn, who aid him in hi wickednesses, 
until on one of their italian tour jocelyn left him suddenli and becam 
a trappist monk. It wa current report that some wild deed of adrian 
templ had shock even him, and so outrag hi surviv instinct of 
common human that he wa snatch as a brand from the burn and 
enabl to turn back even in the full tide of hi wickedness. howev 
that may be, adrian went on in hi evil cours without him, and about 
four year after disappeared. He wa last heard of in naples, and it is 
believ that he succumb dure a violent outbreak of the plagu which 
took place in itali in the autumn of 1752. that is all I shall tell you 
of him, and inde I know littl more myself. the onli good trait that 
ha been hand down concern him is that he wa a masterli musician, 
perform admir upon the violin, which he had studi under the 
illustri tartini himself. yet even hi art of music, if tradit 
speak the truth, wa put by him to the basest of uses." 

I apologis for my indiscret in ask her about an unpleas 
subject, and at the same time thank her for what she had seen fit to 
tell me, profess myself much interested, as inde I realli was. 

"wa he a handsom man?" 

"that is a girl' question," she answered, smiling. "he is said to 
have been veri handsome; and inde hi picture, paint after hi 
first youth wa past, would still lead one to suppos so. but hi 
complexion wa spoiled, it is said, and turn to deadli white by 
certain experiments, which it is neither possibl nor seemli for us to 
understand. hi face is of that long oval shape of which all the templ 
are proud, and he had brown eyes: we sometim teas constance, say 
she is like adrian." 

It wa inde true, as I rememb after mrs. templ had point it 
out, that constanc had a peculiarli long and oval face. It gave her, I 
think, an air of staid and placid beauty, which form in my eyes, and 
perhap in john' also, one of her greatest attractions. 

"I do not like even hi picture," mrs. templ continued, "and strang 
tale have been narrat of it by idl servant which are not worth 
repeating. I have sometim thought of destroy it; but my late 
husband, be a temple, would never hear of this, or even of remov 
it from it present place in the gallery; and I should be loath to do 
anyth now contrari to hi wishes, onc so strongli expressed. It is, 
besides, veri perfect from an artist point of view, be paint by 
battoni, and in hi happiest manner." 

I could never glean more from mrs. temple; but what she told me 
interest me deeply. It seem anoth link in the chain, though 
I could scarc tell why, that adrian templ should be so great a 
musician and violinist. I had, I fancy, a dim idea of that malign and 
outlaw spirit sit alon in dark for a hundr years, until he 
wa call back by the sweet tone of the italian music, and the lilt of 
the "areopagita" that he had love so long ago. 




chapter IX 


john' recovery, though continu and satisfactory, wa but slow; 
and it wa not until easter, which fell early, that hi health wa 
pronounc to be entir re-established. the last few week of hi 
convalesc had prove to all of us a time of thank and tranquil 
enjoyment. If I may judg from my own experience, there are few epoch 
in our life more favour to the growth of sentiment of affect 
and piety, or more full of pleasur content, than is the period of 
gradual recoveri from seriou illness. the chasten effect of our 
recent sick ha not yet pass away, and we are at onc grate to 
our creator for preserv us, and to our friend for the countless act 
of watch kind which it is the peculiar properti of ill to 
evoke. 

No mother ever nurs a son more tenderli than did mrs. templ nurs 
my brother, and befor hi restor to health wa complet the 
attach between him and constanc had ripen into a formal 
betrothal. such an allianc was, as I have befor explained, 
particularli suitable, and it prospect afford the most live 
pleasur to all those concerned. the month of march had been unusu 
mild, and royston be situat in a valley, as is the case with most 
hous of that date, wa well shelter from cold winds. It had, 
moreover, a south aspect, and as my brother gradual gather strength, 
constanc and he and I would often sit out of door in the soft spring 
mornings. We put an easy-chair with mani cushion for him on the gravel 
by the front door, where the warmth of the sun wa reflect from the 
red brick walls, and he would at time read aloud to us while we were 
engag with our crochet-work. mr. tennyson had just publish 
anonym a first volum of poems, and the sober digniti of hi vers 
well suit our frame of mind at that time. the memori of those pleasant 
spring mornings, my dear edward, ha not yet pass away, and I can 
still smell the sweet moist scent of the violets, and see the bright 
colour of the crocus-flow in the parterr in front of us. 

john' mind seem to be gather strength with hi body. He had 
appar flung off the cloud which had overshadow him befor hi 
illness, and avoid entir ani refer to those unpleas event 
which had been previous so constantli in hi thoughts. I had, indeed, 
taken an earli opportun of tell him of my discoveri of the pictur 
of adrian temple, as I thought it would tend to show him that at least 
the last appear of thi ghostli form admit of a ration 
explanation. He seem glad to hear of this, but did not exhibit the 
same interest in the matter that I had expected, and allow it at onc 
to drop. whether through lack of interest, or from a linger dislik 
to revisit the spot where he wa seiz with illness, he did not, I 
believe, onc enter the picture-galleri befor he left royston. 

I cannot say as much for myself. the pictur of adrian templ exert 
a curiou fascin over me, and I constantli took an opportun of 
studi it. It was, indeed, a beauti work; and perhap becaus 
john' recoveri gave a more cheer tone to my thoughts, or perhap 
from the power of custom to dull even the keenest antipathies, I 
gradual got to lose much of the feel of avers which it had at 
first inspired. In time the unpleas look grew less unpleasing, and 
I notic more the beauti oval of the face, the brown eyes, and the 
fine chisel of the features. sometimes, too, I felt a deep piti for 
so clever a gentleman who had die young, and whose life, were it ever 
so wicked, must often have been also lone and bitter. more than onc 
I had been discov by mrs. templ or constanc sit look at the 
picture, and they had gentli laugh at me, say that I had fallen in 
love with adrian temple. 

one morn in earli april, when the sun wa stream brightli through 
the oriel, and the pictur receiv a fuller light than usual, it 
occur to me to examin close the scroll of music paint as hang 
over the top of the pedest on which the figur leant. I had hitherto 
thought that the sign depict on it were mere such as painter might 
convent use to repres a piec of music notation. thi ha 
gener been the case, I think, in such pictur as I have ever seen 
in which a piec of music ha been introduced. I mean that while the 
paint give a gener represent of the music staves, no 
attempt is ever made to paint ani definit note such as would enabl an 
actual piec to be identified. though, as I write this, I do rememb 
that on the monument to handel in westminst abbey there is repres 
a music scroll similar to that in adrian temple' picture, but 
actual sculptur with the open phrase of the majest melody, 
"I know that my redeem liveth." 

On thi morning, then, at royston I thought I perceiv that there were 
paint on the scroll actual music staves, bars, and notes; and my 
interest be excited, I stood upon a chair so as better to examin 
them. though time had somewhat obscur thi portion of the pictur as 
with a veil or film, yet I made out that the painter had intend to 
depict some definit piec of music. In anoth moment I saw that the 
air repres consist of the open bar of the _gagliarda_ in the 
suit by graziani with which my brother and I were so well acquainted. 
though I believ that I had not seen the volum of music in which that 
piec wa contain more than twice, yet the melodi wa veri familiar 
to me, and I had no difficulti whatev in make myself sure that I had 
here befor me the air of the _gagliarda_ and none other. It wa true 
that it wa onli roughli painted, but to one who knew the tune there wa 
no room left for doubt. 

here wa a new cause, I will not say for surprise, but for reflection. 
It might, of course, have been mere a coincid that the artist 
should have chosen to paint in thi pictur thi particular piec of 
music; but it seem more probabl that it had actual been a favourit 
air of adrian temple, and that he had chosen deliber to have it 
repres with him. thi discoveri I kept entir to myself, not 
think it wise to commun it to my brother, lest by do so I 
might reawaken hi interest in a subject which I hope he had final 
dismiss from hi thoughts. 

In the second week of april the happi parti at royston wa dispersed, 
john return to oxford for the summer term, mrs. templ make a short 
visit to scotland, and constanc come to worth maltrav to keep me 
compani for a time. 

It wa john' last term at oxford. He expect to take hi degre in 
june, and hi marriag with constanc templ had been provision 
arrang for the septemb following. He return to magdalen hall 
in the best of spirits, and found hi room look cheer with 
well-fil flower-box in the windows. I shall not detain you with ani 
long narrat of the event of the term, as they have no relat to 
the present history. I will onli say that I believ my brother appli 
himself dilig to hi studies, and took hi amus mostli on 
horseback, ride two hors which he had had sent to him from worth 
maltravers. 

about the second week after hi return he receiv a letter from mr. 
georg smart to the effect that the stradivariu violin wa now in 
complet order. subsequ examination, mr. smart wrote, and the 
unanim verdict of connoisseur whom he had consulted, had mere 
confirm the view he had at first expressed--namely, that the violin 
wa of the finest quality, and that my brother had in hi possess a 
uniqu and intact exampl of stradivarius' best period. He had had it 
properli strung; and as the bass-bar had never been moved, and wa of 
a stronger natur than that usual at the period of it manufacture, he 
had consid it unnecessari to replac it. If ani sign should becom 
visibl of it be inadequ to support the tension of modern 
stringing, anoth could be easili substitut for it at a later date. 
He had allow a young german _virtuoso_ to play on it, and though thi 
gentleman wa one of the first live performers, and had had an 
opportun of handl mani splendid instruments, he assur mr. smart 
that he had never perform on one that could in ani way compar with 
this. My brother wrote in repli thank him, and beg that the 
violin might be sent to magdalen hall. 

the pleasant music evenings, however, which john had formerli 
been use to spend in the compani of mr. gaskel were now entir 
pretermitted. for though there wa no caus for ani diminut of 
friendship between them, and though on mr. gaskell' part there wa an 
ardent desir to maintain their former intimacy, yet the two young men 
saw less and less of one another, until their intercours wa confin 
to an accident greet in the street. I believ that dure all thi 
time my brother play veri frequent on the stradivariu violin, 
but alway alone. it veri possess seem to have engend from 
the first in hi mind a secret tendenc which, as I have alreadi 
observed, wa entir alien to hi real disposition. As he had 
conceal it discoveri from hi sister, so he had also from hi friend, 
and mr. gaskel remain in complet ignor of the exist of such 
an instrument. 

On the even of it arriv from london, john seem to have care 
unpack the violin and tri it with a new bow of tourte' make which 
he had purchas of mr. smart. He had shut the heavi outsid door of hi 
room befor begin to play, so that no one might enter unawares; and 
he told me afterward that though he had natur expect from the 
instrument a veri fine tone, yet it actual merit so far exceed hi 
anticip as entir to overwhelm him. the sound issu from it 
in a volum of such depth and puriti as to give an impress of the 
passag be chorded, or even of anoth violin be play at the 
same time. He had had, of course, no opportun of practis dure 
hi illness, and so expect to find hi skill with the bow somewhat 
diminished; but he perceived, on the contrary, that hi perform wa 
greatli improved, and that he wa play with a masteri and feel 
of which he had never befor been conscious. while attribut thi 
improv veri larg to the beauti of the instrument on which he wa 
performing, yet he could not but believ that by hi illness, or in some 
other unexplain way, he had actual acquir a greater freedom of 
wrist and fluenci of expression, with which reflect he wa not a 
littl elated. He had had a lock fix on the cupboard in which he had 
origin found the violin, and here he care deposit it on each 
occas after playing, befor he open the outer door of hi room. 

So the summer term pass away. the examin had come in their due 
time, and were now over. both the young men had submit themselv 
to the ordeal, and while neither would of cours have admit as 
much to anyon else, both felt secretli that they had no reason to be 
dissatisfi with their performance. the result would not be publish 
for some week to come. the last night of the term had arrived, the last 
night too of john' oxford career. It wa near nine o'clock, but still 
quit light, and the rich orang glow of sunset had not yet left the 
sky. the air wa warm and sultry, as on that event even when just 
a year ago he had for the first time seen the figur or the illus 
of the figur of adrian temple. sinc that time he had play the 
"areopagita" many, mani times; but there had never been ani reappear 
of that form, nor even had the onc familiar creak of the wicker 
chair ever made itself heard. As he sat alon in hi room, think with 
a natur melancholi that he had seen the sun set for the last time on 
hi student life, and reflect on the possibl of the futur 
and perhap on opportun wast in the past, the memori of that 
even last june recur strongli to hi imagination, and he felt an 
irresist impuls to play onc more the "areopagita." He unlock 
the now familiar cupboard and took out the violin, and never had the 
exquisit gradat of colour in it varnish appear to greater 
advantag than in the soft mellow light of the fade day. As he began 
the _gagliarda_ he look at the wicker chair, half expect to see a 
form he well knew seat in it; but noth of the kind ensued, and he 
conclud the "areopagita" without the occurr of ani unusu 
phenomenon. 

It wa just at it close that he heard some one knock at the outer 
door. He hurriedli lock away the violin and open the "oak." It wa 
mr. gaskell. He came in rather awkwardly, as though not sure whether he 
would be welcomed. 

"johnnie," he began, and stopped. 

the forc of ancient habit sometimes, dear nephew, lead us unwittingli 
to accost those who were onc our friend by a familiar or nick-nam 
long after the intimaci that formerli justifi it ha vanished. but 
sometim we intent revert to the use of such a name, not wish 
to proclaim openly, as it were, by a more formal address that we are no 
longer the friend we onc were. I think thi latter wa the case with 
mr. gaskel as he repeat the familiar name. 

"johnnie, I wa pass down new colleg lane, and heard the violin from 
your open windows. you were play the 'areopagita,' and it all sound 
so familiar to me that I thought I must come up. I am not interrupt 
you, am i?" 

"no, not at all," john answered. 

"it is the last night of our undergradu life, the last night we shall 
meet in oxford as students. to-morrow we make our bow to youth and 
becom men. We have not seen much of each other thi term at ani rate, 
and I daresay that is my fault. but at least let us part as friends. 
sure our friend are not so mani that we can afford to fling them 
lightli away." 

He held out hi hand frankly, and hi voic trembl a littl as he 
spoke--partli perhap from real emotion, but more probabl from the 
feel of reluct which I have notic men alway exhibit to 
discov ani sentiment deeper than those usual deem convent 
in correct society. My brother wa move by hi obviou wish to renew 
their former friendship, and grasp the proffer hand. 

there wa a minute' pause, and then the convers wa resumed, a 
littl stiffli at first, but more freeli afterwards. they spoke on mani 
indiffer subjects, and mr. gaskel congratul john on the prospect 
of hi marriage, of which he had heard. As he at length rose up to take 
hi departure, he said, "you must have practis the violin dilig 
of late, for I never knew anyon make so rapid progress with it as you 
have done. As I came along I wa spellbound by your music. I never 
befor heard you bring from the instrument so exquisit a tone: the 
chord passag were so power that I believ there had been 
anoth person play with you. your pressenda is certainli a finer 
instrument than I ever imagined." 

My brother wa pleas with mr. gaskell' compliment, and the latter 
continued, "let me enjoy the pleasur of play with you onc more in 
oxford; let us play the 'areopagita.'" 

and so say he open the pianofort and sat down. 

john wa turn to take out the stradivariu when he rememb that he 
had never even reveal it exist to mr. gaskell, and that if he now 
produc it an explan must follow. In a moment hi mood changed, 
and with less genial he excus himself, somewhat awkwardly, from 
compli with the request, say that he wa fatigued. 

mr. gaskel wa evid hurt at hi friend' alter manner, and 
without renew hi petit rose at onc from the pianoforte, and 
after a littl forc convers took hi departure. On leav he 
shook my brother by the hand, wish him all prosper in hi marriag 
and after-life, and said, "do not entir forget your old comrade, and 
rememb that if at ani time you should stand in need of a true friend, 
you know where to find him!" 

john heard hi footstep echo down the passag and made a 
half-involuntari motion toward the door as if to call him back, but did 
not do so, though he thought over hi last word then and on a 
subsequ occasion. 




chapter X 


the summer wa spent by us in the compani of mrs. templ and constance, 
partli at royston and partli at worth maltravers. john had again 
hire the cutter-yacht _palestine_, and the whole parti made sever 
expedit in her. constanc wa entir devot to her lover; her 
life seem wrap up in his; she appear to have no exist except 
in hi presence. 

I can scarc enumer the reason which prompt such thoughts, but 
dure these month I sometim found myself wonder if john still 
return her affect as ardent as I knew had onc been the case. 
I can certainli call to mind no singl circumst which could justifi 
me in such a suspicion. He perform punctili all those thousand 
littl act of devot which are expect of an accept lover; he 
seem to take pleasur in perfect ani scheme of enjoy to amus 
her; and yet the impress grew in my mind that he no longer felt the 
same heart-whol love to her that she bore him, and that he had himself 
shown six month earlier. I cannot say, my dear edward, how live wa 
the grief that even the suspicion of such a fact caus me, and I 
continu rebuk myself for entertain for a moment a thought so 
unworthy, and dismiss it from my mind with reprobation. alas! ere long 
it wa sure again to make itself felt. We had all seen the stradivariu 
violin; inde it wa imposs for my brother longer to conceal it 
from us, as he now play continu on it. He did not recount to us 
the stori of it discovery, content himself with say that he had 
becom possess of it at oxford. We imagin natur that he had 
purchas it; and for thi I wa sorry, as I fear mr. thoresby, hi 
guardian, who had given him some year previous an excel violin by 
pressenda, might feel hurt at see hi present so unceremoni laid 
aside. none of us were at all intim acquaint with the fanci of 
fiddle-collectors, and were consequ quit ignor of the enorm 
valu that fashion attach to so splendid an instrument. even had 
we known, I do not think that we should have been surpris at john 
purchas it; for he had recent come of age, and wa in possess of 
so larg a fortun as would ampli justifi him in such an indulg had 
he wish to gratifi it. No one, however, could remain unawar of the 
wonder music qualiti of the instrument. it rich and melodi 
tone would commend themselv even to the most unmus ear, and 
form a subject of constant remark. I notic also that my brother' 
knowledg of the violin had improv in a veri percept manner, for 
it wa imposs to attribut the great beauti and power of hi present 
perform entir to the excel of the instrument he wa using. 
He appear more than ever devot to the art, and would shut himself 
up in hi room alon for two or more hour togeth for the purpos of 
play the violin--a habit which wa a sourc of sorrow to constance, 
for he would never allow her to sit with him on such occasions, as she 
natur wish to do. 

So the summer fled. I should have mention that in july, after go up 
to complet the _viva-voce_ part of their examination, both mr. gaskel 
and john receiv inform that they had obtain "first-classes." 
the young men had, it appears, done excel well, and both had 
secur a place in that envi divis of the first-class which wa 
call "abov the line." john' success prove a sourc of much pleasur 
to us all, and mutual congratul were freeli exchanged. We were 
pleas also at mr. gaskell' high place, rememb the kind which 
he had shown us at oxford in the previou year. I desir to send him 
my compliment and felicit when he should next be write to him. 
I did not doubt that my brother would return mr. gaskell' 
congratulations, which he had alreadi received: he said, however, that 
hi friend had given no address to which he could write, and so the 
matter dropped. 

On the 1st of septemb john and constanc templ were married. the 
wed took place at royston, and by john' special desir (with which 
constanc fulli agreed) the ceremoni wa of a strictli privat and 
unpretenti nature. the newli marri pair had determin to spend 
their honeymoon in italy, and left for the contin in the forenoon. 

mrs. templ invit me to remain with her for the present at royston, 
which I wa veri glad to do, feel deepli the loss of a favourit 
brother, and look forward with dismay to six week of loneli 
which must elaps befor I should again see him and my dearest 
constance. 

We receiv news of our travel about a fortnight afterwards, and 
then heard from them at frequent intervals. constanc wrote in the best 
of spirits, and with the keenest appreciation. she had never travel 
in switzerland or itali befor and all wa enchantingli novel to her. 
they had journey through basl to lucerne, spend a few day in that 
delight spot, and thenc proceed by the simplon pass to lugano and 
the italian lakes. then we heard that they had gone further south than 
had been at first contemplated; they had reach rome, and were 
intend to go on to naples. 

after the first few week we neither of us receiv ani more letter 
from john. It wa alway constanc who wrote, and even her letter 
grew veri much less frequent than had at first been the case. thi wa 
perhap natural, as the busi of travel no doubt engross their 
thoughts. but ere long we both perceiv that the letter of our dear 
girl were more constrain and formal than before. It wa as if she wa 
write now rather to compli with a sens of duti than to give vent to 
the light-heart gaieti and naïv enjoy which breath in everi 
line of her earlier communications. So at least it seem to us, and 
again the old suspicion present itself to my mind, and I fear that 
all wa not as it should be. 

napl wa to be the turning-point of their travels, and we expect 
them to return to england by the end of october. novemb had arrived, 
however, and we still had no intim that their return journey had 
commenc or wa even decid on. from john there wa no word, and 
constanc wrote less often than ever. john, she said, wa enraptur 
with napl and it surroundings; he devot himself much to the violin, 
and though she did not say so, thi meant, I knew, that she wa often 
left alone. for her own part, she did not think that a continu 
resid in itali would suit her health; the sudden chang of 
temperatur tri her, and peopl said that the air rise in the 
even from the bay were unwholesome. 

then we receiv a letter from her which much alarm us. It wa written 
from napl and date octob 25. john, she said, had been ail of 
late with nervous and insomnia. On wednesday, two day befor the 
date of her letter, he had suffer all day from a strang restlessness, 
which increas after they had retir for the evening. He could not 
sleep and had dress again, tell her he would walk a littl in the 
night air to compos himself. He had not return till near six in the 
morning, and then wa so deadli pale and seem so exhaust that she 
insist on hi keep to hi bed till she could get medic advice. 
the doctor fear that he had been attack by some strang form of 
malari fever, and said he need much care. our anxieti was, however, 
at least temporarili reliev by the receipt of later tide which 
spoke of john' recovery; but novemb drew to a close without ani 
definit mention of their return have reach us. 

that month is always, I think, a dreari one in the country. It ha 
neither the brilliant tint of october, nor the cosi jolliti of 
mid-wint with it christma joy to allevi it. thi year it wa 
more gloomi than usual. incess rain had mark it close, and the 
roy, a littl brook which skirt the garden not far from the house, 
had swollen to unusu proportions. At last one wild night the flood 
rose so high as to complet cover the garden terraces, work havoc 
in the parterres, and cover the lawn with a thick coat of mud. 
perhap thi gloomi of nature' outer face impress itself in a 
sens of apprehens on our spirits, and it wa with a feel of more 
than ordinari pleasur and relief that earli in decemb we receiv a 
letter date from laon, say that our travel were alreadi well 
advanc on their return journey, and expect to be in england a week 
after the receipt by us of thi advice. It was, as usual, constanc who 
wrote. john begged, she said, that christma might be spent at worth 
maltravers, and that we would at onc proceed thither to see that all 
wa in order against their return. they reach worth about the middl 
of the month, and were, I need not say, receiv with the utmost 
affect by mrs. templ and myself. 

In repli to our inquiri john profess that hi health wa complet 
restored; but though we could inde discern no other sign of ani 
special weakness, we were much shock by hi chang appearance. He had 
complet lost hi old healthi and sunburnt complexion, and hi face, 
though not thin or sunken, wa strang pale. constanc assur us 
that though in other respect he had appar recovered, he had never 
regain hi old colour from the night of hi attack of fever at naples. 

I soon perceiv that her own spirit were not so bright as wa 
ordinarili the case with her; and she exhibit none of the eager to 
narrat to other the incid of travel which is gener observ 
in those who have recent return from a journey. the caus of thi 
depress was, alas! not difficult to discover, for john' former 
abstract and moodi seem to have return with an increas 
force. It wa a sourc of infinit pain to mrs. temple, and perhap 
even more so to me, to observ thi sad state of things. constanc 
never complained, and her affect toward her husband seem onli to 
increas in the face of difficulties. yet the matter wa one which could 
not be hid from the anxiou eye of love kinswomen, and I believ that 
it wa the conscious that these alter circumst could not 
but forc themselv upon our notic that ad poignanc to my poor 
sister' grief. while not markedli neglect her, my brother had 
evid ceas to take that pleasur in her compani which might 
reason have been expect in ani case under the circumst of 
a recent marriage, and a thousand time more so when hi wife wa so 
love and beauti a creatur as constanc temple. He appear littl 
except at meals, and not even alway at lunch, shut himself up for 
the most part in hi morning-room or studi and play continu on 
the violin. It wa in vain that we attempt even by mean of hi music 
to win him back to a sweeter mood. again and again I beg him to allow 
me to accompani him on the pianoforte, but he would never do so, alway 
put me off with some excuse. even when he sat with us in the 
evening, he spoke little, devot himself for the most part to reading. 
hi book were almost alway greek or latin, so that I am ignor of 
the subject of hi study; but he wa content that either constanc or 
I should play on the pianoforte, say that the melody, so far from 
distract hi attention, help him rather to appreci what he wa 
reading. constanc alway beg me to allow her to take her place at 
the instrument on these occasions, and would play to him sometim for 
hour without receiv a word of thanks, be eager even in thi 
unreciproc manner to testifi her love and devot to him. 

christma day, usual so happi a season, brought no allevi of 
our gloom. My brother' reserv continu increased, and even hi 
longest-establish habit appear changed. He had been alway most 
observ of hi religi duties, attend divin servic with the 
utmost regular whatev the weather might be, and say that it wa 
a duti a land proprietor owe as much to hi tenantri as himself to 
set a good exampl in such matters. ever sinc our earliest year he 
and I had gone morn and afternoon on sunday to the littl church of 
worth, and there sat togeth in the maltrav chapel where so mani of 
our name had sat befor us. here their monument and achiev stood 
about us on everi side, and it had alway seem to me that with their 
name and properti we had inherit also the oblig to continu those 
act of piety, in the practic of which so mani of them had live and 
died. It was, therefore, a sourc of surpris and great grief to me 
when on the sunday after hi return my brother omit all religi 
observances, and did not onc attend the parish church. He wa not 
present with us at breakfast, order coffe and a roll to be taken to 
hi privat sitting-room. At the hour at which we usual set out for 
church I went to hi room to tell him that we were all dress and 
wait for him. I tap at the door, but on tri to enter found it 
locked. In repli to my messag he did not open the door, but mere 
beg us to go on to church, say he would possibl follow us later. 
We went alone, and I sat anxious in our seat with my eye fix on the 
door, hope against hope that each late comer might be john, but he 
never came. perhap thi will appear to you, edward, a compar 
trivial circumst (though I hope it may not), but I assur you that 
it brought tear to my eyes. when I sat in the maltrav chapel and 
thought that for the first time my dear brother had prefer in an open 
way hi conveni or hi whim to hi duty, and had of set purpos 
neglect to come to the hous of god, I felt a bitter grief that seem 
to rise up in my throat and choke me. I could not think of the mean 
of the prayer nor join in the singing: and all the time that mr. 
butler, our clergyman, wa preaching, a vers of a littl piec of 
poetri which I learnt as a girl wa run in my head:-- 

"how easi are the path of ill; 
how steep and hard the upward ways; 
A child can roll the stone down hill 
that break a giant' arm to raise." 


It seem to me that our love one had set hi foot upon the downward 
slope, and that not all the effort of those who would have given their 
live to save him could now hold him back. 

It wa even wors on christma day. ever sinc we had been confirm 
john and I had alway taken the sacrament on that happi morning, and 
after servic he had distribut the maltrav dole in our chapel. 
there are given, as you know, on that day to each of twelv old men £5 
and a green coat, and a like sum of money with a blue cloth dress to as 
mani old women. these articl of dress are place on the altar-tomb of 
sir esmoun de maltravers, and have been thenc distribut from day 
immemori by the head of our house. ever sinc he wa twelv year old 
it had been my pride to watch my handsom brother do thi deed of 
nobl charity, and to hear the kindli word he ad with each gift. 

alas! alas! it wa all differ thi christmas. even on thi holi day 
my brother did not approach either the altar or the hous of god. till 
then christma had alway seem to me to be a day given us from above, 
that we might see even while on earth a faint glimps of that seren 
and peac love which will hereaft gild all day in heaven. then 
covet men lay asid their greed and enemi their rancour, then warm 
heart grow warmer, and christian feel their common brotherhood. I can 
scarc imagin ani man so lost or guilti as not to experi on that 
day some desir to turn back to the good onc more, as not to recognis 
some far-off possibl of better things. It wa thought free and 
happi such as these that had previous come into my heart in the 
servic of christma day, and been particularli associ with the 
familiar word that we all love so much. but that morn the harmoni 
were all jangled: it seem as though some evil spirit wa pour 
wick thought into my ear; and even while children sang "hark the 
herald angels," I thought I could hear through it all a melodi which 
I had learnt to loathe, the _gagliarda_ of the "areopagita." 

poor constance! though her veil wa down, I could see her tears, and 
knew her thought must be sadder even than mine: I drew her hand toward 
me, and held it as I would a child's. after the servic wa over a new 
trial await us. john had made no arrang for the distribut of 
the dole. the coat and dress were all pile readi on sir esmoun' 
tomb, and there lay the littl leather pouch of money, but there wa 
no one to give them away. mr. butler look puzzled, and approach 
us, said he fear sir john wa ill--had he made no provis for the 
distribution? pride kept back the tear which were rise fast, and 
I said my brother wa inde unwell, that it would be better for mr. 
butler to give away the dole, and that sir john would himself visit the 
recipi dure the week. then we hurri away, not dare to watch 
the distribut of the dole, lest we should no longer be abl to master 
our feelings, and should openli betray our agitation. 

from one anoth we no longer attempt to conceal our grief. It seem 
as though we had all at onc resolv to abandon the farc of pretend 
not to notic john' estrang from hi wife, or of explain away 
hi neglect and unaccount treatment of her. 

I do not think that three poor women were ever so sad on christma day 
befor as were we on our return from church that morning. none of us had 
seen my brother, but about five in the afternoon constanc went to hi 
room, and through the lock door beg piteous to see him. after a 
few minut he compli with her request and open the door. the exact 
circumst of that interview she never reveal to me, but I knew 
from her manner when she return that someth she had seen or heard 
had both griev and frighten her. she told me onli that she had flung 
herself in an agoni of tear at hi feet, and kneel there, weari and 
broken-hearted, had beg him to tell her if she had done aught amiss, 
had pray him to give her back hi love. To all thi he answer 
little, but her entreati had at least such an effect as to induc him 
to take hi dinner with us that evening. At that meal we tri to put 
asid our gloom, and with feign smile and cheer voices, from which 
the tear were hardli banished, sustain a weari show of convers 
and tri to wile away hi evil mood. but he spoke little; and when 
foster, my father' butler, put on the tabl the three-handl 
maltravers' loving-cup that he had brought up christma by christma for 
thirti years, my brother mere pass it by without a taste. I saw by 
foster' face that the master' maladi wa no longer a secret even from 
the servants. 

I shall not harass my own feel nor yours, my dear edward, by 
enter into further detail of your father' illness, for such it wa 
obviou hi indisposit had become. It wa the onli consolation, and 
that wa a sorri one, that we could use with constance, to persuad her 
that john' estrang from her wa mere the result or manifest 
of some physic infirmity. He obvious grew wors from week to week, 
and hi treatment of hi wife becam colder and more callous. We had 
use all effort to persuad him to take a chang of air--to go to 
royston for a month, and place himself under the care of dr. dobie. mrs. 
templ had even gone so far as to write privat to thi physician, 
tell him as much of the case as wa prudent, and ask hi advice. 
not be awar of the darker side of my brother' ailment, dr. dobi 
repli in a less seriou strain than seem to us convenient, but 
recommend in ani case a complet chang of air and scene. 

It was, therefore, with no ordinari pleasur and relief that we 
heard my brother announc quit unexpectedli one morn in march that 
he had made up hi mind to seek change, and wa go to leav almost 
immedi for the continent. He took hi valet parnham with him, and 
quit worth one morn befor lunch, bid us an unceremoni 
adieu, though he kiss constanc with some appar tenderness. It wa 
the first time for three months, she confess to me afterwards, that 
he had shown her even so ordinari a mark of affection; and her wound 
heart treasur up what she hope would prove a token of return love. 
He had not propos to take her with him, and even had he done so, we 
should have been reluct to assent, as sign were not want that it 
might have been imprud for her to undertak foreign travel at that 
period. 

for nearli a month we had no word of him. then he wrote a short note to 
constanc from naples, give no news, and indeed, scarc speak of 
himself at all, but mention as an address to which she might write if 
she wished, the villa de ang at posilipo. though hi letter wa cold 
and empty, yet constanc wa delight to get it, and wrote henceforth 
herself nearli everi day, pour out her heart to him, and retail 
such news as she thought would cheer him. 




chapter XI 


A month later mrs. templ wrote to john warn him of the state in 
which constanc now found herself, and beg him to return at least 
for a few week in order that he might be present at the time of her 
confinement. though it would have been in the last degre unkind, or 
even inhuman, that a request of thi sort should have been refused, yet 
I will confess to you that my brother' recent strang had prepar 
me for behaviour on hi part howev wild; and it wa with a feel of 
extrem relief that I heard from mrs. templ a littl later that she had 
receiv a short note from john to say that he wa alreadi on hi return 
journey. I believ mrs. templ herself felt as I did in the matter, 
though she said nothing. 

when he return we were all at royston, whither mrs. templ had taken 
constanc to be under dr. dobie' care. We found john' physic 
appear chang for the worse. hi pallor wa as remark as 
before, but he wa visibl thinner; and hi strang mental abstract 
and moodi seem littl if ani abated. At first, indeed, he greet 
constanc kindli or even affectionately. she had been in a terribl 
state of anxieti as to the attitud he would assum toward her, and 
thi mental strain affect prejudici her veri delic bodili 
condition. hi kindness, of an ordinari enough natur indeed, seem 
to her yearn heart a miracl of condescend love, and she wa 
transport with the idea that hi affect to her, onc so sincere, 
wa inde returning. but I griev to say that hi manner thaw onli 
for a veri short time, and ere long he relaps into an attitud of 
complet indifference. It wa as if hi real, true, honest, and love 
charact had made one more vigor effort to assert itself,--a 
though it had for a moment broken through the hard and selfish crust 
that wa form around him; but the blight influenc which wa at 
work prove seemingli too strong for him to struggl against, and 
rivet it chain again upon him with a weight heavier than before. 
that there wa some malef influence, mental or physical, thu work 
on him, no one who had known him befor could for a moment doubt. but 
while mrs. templ and I readili admit thi much, we were entir 
unabl even to form a conjectur as to it nature. It is true that 
mrs. temple' fanci suggest that constanc had some rival in hi 
affections; but we reject such a theori almost befor it wa proposed, 
feel that it wa inher improbable, and that, had it been true, 
we could not have remain entir unawar of the circumst which 
had conduc to such a state of things. It wa thi inexplic natur 
of my brother' afflict that ad immeasur to our grief. If we 
could onli have ascertain it caus we might have combat it; but 
as it was, we were fight in the dark, as against some enemi who wa 
assault us from an obscur so thick that we could not see hi form. 
Of ani mental troubl we thu knew nothing, nor could we say that my 
brother wa suffer from ani definit physic ailment, except that 
he wa certainli grow thinner. 

your birth, my dear edward, follow veri shortly. your poor mother 
ralli in an unusu short time, and wa fill with raptur at the 
new treasur which wa thu given as a solac to her afflictions. your 
father exhibit littl interest at the event, though he sat nearli half 
an hour with her one evening, and allow her even to stroke hi hair 
and caress him as in time long past. although it wa now the height of 
summer he seldom left the house, sit much and sleep in hi own 
room, where he had a field-b provid for him, and continu 
devot himself to the violin. 

one even near the end of juli we were sit after dinner in the 
drawing-room at royston, have the french window look on to the 
lawn open, as the air wa still oppress warm. though thing were 
proceed as indiffer as before, we were perhap less cast down 
than usual, for john had taken hi dinner with us that evening. thi wa 
a circumst now, alas! suffici uncommon, for he had nearli all 
hi meal serv for him in hi own rooms. constance, who wa onc more 
downstairs, sat play at the pianoforte, perform chiefli melodi 
by scarlatti or bach, of which old-fashion music she knew her husband 
to be most fond. A later fashion, as you know, ha reviv the 
cultiv of these composers, but at the time of which I write their 
work were much less commonli known. though she wa more than a passabl 
musician, he would not allow her to accompani him; inde he never now 
perform at all on the violin befor us, reserv hi practic 
entir for hi own chamber. there wa a paus in the music while 
coffe wa served. My brother had been sit in an easy-chair apart 
read some classic work dure hi wife' performance, and take 
littl notic of us. but after a while he put down hi book and said, 
"constance, if you will accompani me, I will get my violin and play a 
littl while." I cannot say how much hi word astonish us. It wa 
so simpl a matter for him to say, and yet it fill us all with an 
unspeak joy. We conceal our emot till he had left the room to 
get hi instrument, then constanc show how deepli she wa gratifi 
by kiss first her mother and then me, squeez my hand but say 
nothing. In a minut he returned, bring hi violin and a music-book. 
By the soil vellum cover and the shape I perceiv instantli that it 
wa the book contain the "areopagita." I had not seen it for near 
two years, and wa not even awar that it wa in the house, but I 
knew at onc that he intend to play that suite. I entertain an 
unreason but profound avers to it melodies, but at that moment 
I would have welcom warmli that or ani other music, so that he would 
onli choos onc more to show some thought for hi neglect wife. He 
put the book open at the "areopagita" on the desk of the pianoforte, 
and ask her to play it with him. she had never seen the music before, 
though I believ she wa not unacquaint with the melody, as she had 
heard him play it by himself, and onc heard, it wa not easili 
forgotten. 

they began the "areopagita" suite, and at first all went well. the 
tone of the violin, and also, I may say with no undu partiality, 
my brother' performance, were so marvel fine that though our 
thought were elsewher when, the music commenced, in a few second they 
were wholli engross in the melody, and we sat spellbound. It wa as 
if the violin had becom suddenli endow with life, and wa sing 
to us in a mystic languag more deep and aw than ani human words. 
constanc wa compar unus to the figur of the _basso 
continuo_, and found some troubl in read it accurately, especi 
in manuscript; but she wa abl to mask ani difficulti she may have had 
until she came to the _gagliarda_. here she confess to me her thought 
seem against her will to wander, and her attent becam too deepli 
rivet on her husband' perform to allow her to watch her own. 
she made first one slight fault, and then grow nervous, another, and 
another. suddenli john stop and said brusquely, "let sophi play, 
I cannot keep time with you." poor constance! the tear came swiftli 
to my own eye when I heard him speak so thoughtlessli to her, and I wa 
almost provok to rebuk him openly. she wa still weak from her recent 
illness; her nerv were excit by the unusu pleasur she felt in 
play onc more with her husband, and thi sudden shatter of her 
hope of a renew tender prove more than she could bear: she put 
her head between her hand upon the keyboard and broke into a paroxysm 
of tears. 

We both ran to her; but while we were attempt to assuag her grief, 
john shut hi violin into it case, took the music-book under hi arm, 
and left the room without say a word to ani of us, not even to the 
weep girl, whose sob seem as though they would break her heart. 

We got her put to bed at once, but it wa some hour befor her 
convuls sob ceased. mrs. templ had administ to her a 
sooth draught of prove efficacy, and after sit with her till 
after one o'clock, I left her at last doze off to sleep, and myself 
sought repose. I wa quit weari out with the weight of my anxiety, 
and with the crush bitter of see my dearest constance' 
feel so wounded. yet in spite, or rather perhap on account of my 
trouble, my head had scarc touch my pillow ere I fell into a deep 
sleep. 

A room in the south wing had been convert for the nonc into a 
nursery, and for the conveni of be near her infant constanc now 
slept in a room adjoining. As thi portion of the hous wa somewhat 
isolated, mrs. templ had suggest that I should keep her daughter 
company, and occupi a room in the same passage, onli remov a few 
doors, and thi I had accordingli done. I wa arous from my sleep that 
night by some one knock gentli on the door of my bedroom; but it wa 
some second befor my thought becam suffici awak to allow me to 
rememb where I was. there wa some moonlight, but I light a candle, 
and look at my watch saw that it wa two o'clock. I conclud that 
either constanc or her babi wa unwell, and that the nurs need my 
assistance. So I left my bed, and move to the door, ask softli who 
wa there. It was, to my surprise, the voic of constanc that replied, 
"O sophy, let me in." 

In a second I had open the door, and found my poor sister wear onli 
her night-dress, and stand in the moonlight befor me. 

she look frighten and unusu pale in her white dress and with the 
cold gleam of the moon upon her. At first I thought she wa walk in 
her sleep, and perhap rehears again in her dream the troubl which 
dog her wake footsteps. I took her gentli by the arm, saying, 
"dearest constance, come back at onc to bed; you will take cold." 

she wa not asleep, however, but made a motion of silence, and said in 
a terrifi whisper, "hush; do you hear nothing?" there wa someth 
so vagu and yet so mysteri in the question and in her evid 
perturb that I wa infect too by her alarm. I felt myself shiver, 
as I strain my ear to catch if possibl the slightest sound. but a 
complet silenc pervad everything: I could hear nothing. 

"can you hear it?" she said again. all sort of imag of ill present 
themselv to my imagination: I thought the babi must be ill with croup, 
and that she wa listen for some stertor breath of anguish; and 
then the dread came over me that perhap her sorrow had been too much 
for her, and that reason had left her seat. At that thought the marrow 
froze in my bones. 

"hush," she said again; and just at that moment, as I strain my ears, 
I thought I caught upon the sleep air a distant and veri faint 
murmur. 

"oh, what is it, constance?" I said. "you will drive me mad;" and while 
I spoke the murmur seem to resolv itself into the vibration, felt 
almost rather than heard, of some distant music instrument. I step 
past her into the passage. all wa deadli still, but I could perceiv 
that music wa be play somewher far away; and almost at the same 
minut my ear recognis faintli but unmistak the _gagliarda_ of 
the "areopagita." 

I have alreadi mention that for some reason which I can scarc 
explain, thi melodi wa veri repugn to me. It seem associ in 
some strang and intim way with my brother' indisposit and moral 
decline. almost at the moment that I had heard it first two year ago, 
peac seem to have risen up and left our house, gather her skirt 
about her, as we read that the angel left the templ at the sieg of 
jerusalem. and now it wa even more detest to my ears, recal as 
it did too vividli the cruel event of the preced evening. 

"john must be sit up playing," I said. 

"yes," she answered; "but whi is he in thi part of the house, and whi 
doe he alway play _that_ tune?" 

It wa if some irresist attract drew us toward the music. 
constanc took my hand in her and we move togeth slowli down the 
passage. the wind had risen, and though there wa a bright moon, her 
beam were constantli eclips by drive clouds. still there wa light 
enough to guid us, and I extinguish the candle. As we reach the end 
of the passag the air of the _gagliarda_ grew more and more distinct. 

our passag open on to a broad land with a balustrade, and from one 
side of it ran out the picture-galleri which you know. 

I look at constanc significantly. It wa evid that john wa 
play in thi gallery. We cross the landing, tread care and 
make no nois with our nake feet, for both of us had been too excit 
even to think of put on shoes. 

We could now see the whole length of the gallery. My poor brother sat in 
the oriel window of which I have befor spoken. He wa sit so as to 
face the pictur of adrian temple, and the great window of the oriel 
flung a strong light on him. At time a cloud hid the moon, and all wa 
plung in darkness; but in a moment the cold light fell full on him, 
and we could trace everi featur as in a picture. He had evid not 
been to bed, for he wa fulli dressed, exactli as he had left us in the 
drawing-room five hour earlier when constanc wa weep over hi 
thoughtless words. He wa play the violin, play with a passion and 
reckless energi which I had never seen, and hope never to see again. 
perhap he rememb that thi spot wa far remov from the rest 
of the house, or perhap he wa careless whether ani were awak and 
listen to him or not; but it seem to me that he wa play with 
a sonor strength greater than I had thought possibl for a singl 
violin. there came from hi instrument such a volum and torrent of 
melodi as to fill the galleri so full, as it were, of sound that it 
throb and vibrat again. He kept hi eye fix on someth at the 
opposit side of the gallery; we could not inde see on what, but I 
have no doubt at all that it wa the portrait of adrian temple. hi gaze 
wa eager and expectant, as though he were wait for someth to 
occur which did not. 

I knew that he had been grow thin of late, but thi wa the first 
time I had realis how sunk were the hollow of hi eye and how 
haggard hi featur had become. It may have been some effect of 
moonlight which I do not well understand, but hi fine-cut face, onc so 
handsome, look on thi night worn and thin like that of an old man. 
He never for a moment ceas playing. It wa alway one same dread 
melody, the _gagliarda_ of the "areopagita," and he repeat it time 
after time with the persever and appar aimless of an 
automaton. 

He did not see us, and we made no sign, stand afar off in silent 
horror at that nocturn sight. constanc clutch me by the arm: she 
wa so pale that I perceiv it even in the moonlight. "sophy," she 
said, "he is sit in the same place as on the first night when he 
told me how he love me." I could answer nothing, my voic wa frozen 
in me. I could onli stare at my brother' poor wither face, realis 
then for the first time that he must be mad, and that it wa the 
haunt of the _gagliarda_ that had made him so. 

We stood there I believ for half an hour without speech or motion, and 
all the time that sad figur at the end of the galleri continu it 
performance. suddenli he stopped, and an express of frantic despair 
came over hi face as he laid down the violin and buri hi head in hi 
hands. I could bear it no longer. "constance," I said, "come back to 
bed. We can do nothing," So we turn and crept away silent as we had 
come. onli as we cross the land constanc stopped, and look back 
for a minut with a heart-broken yearn at the man she loved. He had 
taken hi hand from hi head, and she saw the profil of hi face clear 
cut and hard in the white moonlight. 

It wa the last time her eye ever look upon it. 

she made for a moment as if she would turn back and go to him, but her 
courag fail her, and we went on. befor we reach her room we heard 
in the distance, faintli but distinctly, the burden of the _gagliarda_. 




chapter xii 


the next morning, my maid brought me a hurri note written in pencil by 
my brother. It contain onli a few lines, say that he found that hi 
continu sojourn at royston wa not benefici to hi health, and had 
determin to return to italy. If we wish to write, letter would 
reach him at the villa de angelis: hi valet parnham wa to follow him 
thither with hi baggag as soon as it could be got together. thi wa 
all; there wa no word of adieu even to hi wife. 

We found that he had never gone to bed that night. but in the earli 
morn he had himself saddl hi hors _sentinel_ and ridden in to 
derby, take the earli mail thenc to london. hi resolv to leav 
royston had appar been arriv at veri suddenly, for so far as we 
could discover, he had carri no luggag of ani kind. I could not help 
look somewhat care round hi room to see if he had taken the 
stradivariu violin. No trace of it or even of it case wa to be seen, 
though it wa difficult to imagin how he could have carri it with him 
on horseback. there was, indeed, a lock travelling-trunk which parnham 
wa to bring with him later, and the instrument might, of course, have 
been in that; but I felt convinc that he had actual taken it with 
him in some way or other, and thi prove afterward to have been the 
case. 

I shall draw a veil, my dear edward, over the event which immedi 
follow your father' departure. even at thi distanc of time the 
memori is too inexpress bitter to allow me to do more than briefli 
allud to them. 

A fortnight after john' departure, we left royston and remov to 
worth, wish to get some sea-air, and to enjoy the late summer of the 
south coast. your mother seem entir to have recov from her 
confinement, and to be enjoy as good health as could be reason 
expect under the circumst of her husband' indisposition. but 
suddenli one of those insidi maladi which are incident to women 
in her condit seiz upon her. We had hope and believ that all 
such period of danger wa alreadi happili past; but, alas! it wa not 
so, and within a few hour of her first seizur all realis how seriou 
wa her case. everyth that human skill can do under such condit 
wa done, but without avail. symptom of blood-poison show 
themselves, accompani with high fever, and within a week she wa in 
her coffin. 

though her delirium wa terribl to watch, yet I thank god to thi 
day, that if she wa to die, it pleas him to take her while in an 
unconsci condition. for two day befor her death she recognis 
no one, and wa thu spare at least the sad of pass from life 
without one word of kind or even of reconcili from her unhappi 
husband. 

the commun with a place so distant as napl wa not then to be 
made under fifteen or twenti days, and all wa over befor we could hope 
that the intellig even of hi wife' ill had reach john. both 
mrs. templ and I remain at worth in a state of complet prostration, 
await hi return. when more than a month had pass without hi 
arrival, or even a letter to say that he wa on hi way, our anxieti 
took a new turn, as we fear that some accid had befallen him, or 
that the news of hi wife' death, which would then be in hi hands, 
had so serious affect him as to render him incap of take ani 
action. To repeat subsequ commun we receiv no answer; 
but at last, to a letter which I wrote to parnham, the servant replied, 
state that hi master wa still at the villa de angelis, and in a 
condit of health littl differ from that in which he left royston, 
except that he wa now slightli paler if possibl and thinner. It wa 
not till the end of novemb that ani word came from him, and then he 
wrote onli one page of a sheet of note-pap to me in pencil, make no 
refer whatev to hi wife' death, but say that he should not 
return for christmas, and instruct me to draw on hi banker for ani 
money that I might requir for household purpos at worth. 

I need not tell you the effect that such conduct produc on mrs. 
templ and myself; you can easili imagin what would have been your own 
feel in such a case. nor will I relat ani other circumst which 
occur at thi period, as they would have no direct bear upon my 
narrative. though I still wrote to my brother at frequent intervals, as 
not wish to neglect a duty, no word from him ever came in reply. 

about the end of march, indeed, parnham return to worth maltravers, 
say that hi master had paid him a half-year' wage in advance, 
and then dispens with hi services. He had alway been an excel 
servant, and attach to the family, and I wa glad to be abl to offer 
him a suitabl posit with us at worth until hi master should return. 
He brought disquiet report of john' health, say that he wa 
grow visibl weaker. though I wa sore tempt to ask him mani 
question as to hi master' habit and way of life, my pride forbad me 
to do so. but I heard incident from my maid that parnham had told 
her sir john wa spend money freeli in alter at the villa de 
angelis, and had engag italian to attend him, with which hi english 
valet wa natur much dissatisfied. 

So the spring pass and the summer wa well advanced. 

On the last morn of juli I found wait for me on the 
breakfast-t an envelop address in my brother' hand. I open 
it hastily. It onli contain a few words, which I have befor me as I 
write now. the ink is a littl fade and yellow, but the impress it 
made is yet vivid as on that summer morning. 

"mi dearest sophy," it began,--"com to me here at once, if possible, 
or it may be too late. I want to see you. they say that I am ill, and 
too weak to travel to england. 

"your love brother, 

"john." 


there wa a great chang in the style, from the cold and convent 
note that he had hitherto sent at such long intervals; from the stiff 
"dear sophia" and "sincer yours" to which, I griev to say, I had 
grown accustomed. even the write itself wa altered. It wa more the 
bold boyish hand he wrote when first he went to oxford, than the smaller 
cramp and classic charact of hi later years. though it wa a littl 
matter enough, god knows, in comparison with hi grievou conduct, yet 
it touch me much that he should use again the onc familiar "dearest 
sophy," and sign himself "mi love brother." I felt my heart go out 
toward him; and so strong is woman' affect for her own kin, that I 
had alreadi forgotten ani resent and reprob in my great piti 
for the poor wanderer, lie sick perhap unto death and alon in a 
foreign land. 

I took hi note at onc to mrs. temple. she read it twice or thrice, 
tri to take in the mean of it. then she drew me to her and, 
kiss me, said, "go to him at once, sophy. bring him back to worth; 
tri to bring him back to the right way." 

I order my thing to be packed, determin to drive to southampton 
and take train thenc to london; and at the same time mrs. templ gave 
instruct that all should be prepar for her own return to royston 
within a few days. I knew she did not dare to see john after her 
daughter' death. 

I took my maid with me, and parnham to act as courier. At london we 
hire a carriag for the whole journey, and from calai post direct to 
naples. We took the short rout by marseil and genoa, and travel 
for seventeen day without intermission, as my brother' note made me 
desir of lose no time on the way. I had never been in itali before; 
but my anxieti wa such that my mind wa unabl to appreci either 
the beauti of the sceneri or the incid of travel. I can, in fact, 
rememb noth of our journey now, except the wearisom and 
intermin jolt over bad road and the insuffer heat. It wa 
the middl of august in an except warm summer, and after pass 
genoa the heat becam almost tropical. there wa no relief even at 
night, for the warm air hung stagnant and suffocating, and the insid of 
my travel coach wa often like a furnace. 

We were at last approach the conclus of our journey, and had left 
rome behind us. the day that we set out from aversa wa the hottest that 
I have ever felt, the sun beat down with an astonish power even 
in the earli hours, and the road be thick with a white and blind 
dust. It wa soon after midnight that our carriag began rattl over 
the great stone block with which the street of napl are paved. the 
suburb that we at first pass through were, I remember, in dark 
and perfect quiet; but after travers the heart of the citi and 
reach the western side, we suddenli found ourselv in the midst 
of an enorm and veri dens crowd. there were lantern everywhere, 
and intermin lane of booths, whose proprietor were prais 
their ware with loud shouts; and here acrobats, jugglers, minstrels, 
black-vest priests, and blue-coat soldier mingl with a vast crowd 
whose number at onc arrest the progress of the carriage. though it 
wa so late of a sunday night, all seem here awak and busi as at 
noonday. oil-lamp with reek fume of black smoke flung a glare over 
the scene, and the discord cri and chatter convers unit 
in so deafen a nois as to make me turn faint and giddy, weari as I 
alreadi wa with long travelling. though I felt that intens eager 
and expect which the approach termin of a tediou journey 
inspires, and wa desir of push forward with all imagin 
despatch, yet here our cours wa sadli delayed. the hors could onli 
proceed at the slowest of foot-paces, and we were constantli brought 
to a complet stop for some minut befor the post-boy could forc 
a passag through the unwil crowd. thi produc a feel of 
irritation, and despair of ever reach my destination; and the mirth 
and careless hilar of the peopl round us chafe with bitter contrast 
on my depress spirits. I inquir from the post-boy what wa the 
origin of so great a commotion, and understood him to say in repli that 
it wa a religi festiv held annual in honour of "our ladi of 
the grotto." I cannot, however, conceiv of ani truli religi person 
countenanc such a gathering, which seem to me rather like the 
unclean orgi of a heathen deiti than an act of faith of christian 
people. thi disturb occas us so seriou a delay, that as we 
were climb the steep slope lead up to posilipo it wa alreadi 
three in the morn and the dawn wa at hand. 

after mount steadili for a long time we began to rapidli descend, and 
just as the sun came up over the sea we arriv at the villa de angelis. 
I sprang from the carriage, and pass through a trelli of vines, 
reach the house. A man-serv wa in waiting, and held the door open 
for me; but he wa an italian, and did not understand me when I ask 
in english where sir john maltrav was. He had evidently, however, 
receiv instruct to take me at onc to my brother, and led the way 
to an inner part of the house. As we proceed I heard the sound of a 
rich alto voic sing veri sweetli to a mandolin some sooth or 
religi melody. the servant pull asid a heavi curtain and I found 
myself in my brother' room. An italian youth sat on a stool near the 
door, and it wa he who had been singing. At a few word from john, 
address to him in hi own language, he set down hi mandolin and left 
the room, pull to the curtain and shut a door behind it. 

the room look directli on to the sea: the villa was, in fact, built 
upon rock at the foot of which the wave lapped. through two fold 
window which open on to a balconi the earli light of the summer 
morn stream in with a rosi flush. My brother sat on a low couch 
or sofa, prop up against a heap of pillows, with a rug of brilliant 
colour flung across hi feet and legs. He held out hi arm to me, and 
I ran to him; but even in so brief an interv I had perceiv that he 
wa terribl weak and wasted. 

all my memori of hi past fault had vanish and were dead in that 
sad aspect of hi worn features, and in the convict which I felt, 
even from the first moment, that he had but littl time longer to remain 
with us. I knelt by him on the floor, and with my arm round hi neck, 
embrac him tenderly, not find ani place for words, but onli sob 
in great anguish. neither of us spoke, and my weari from long travel 
and the strang of the situat caus me to feel that paralys 
sensat of doubt as to the realiti of the scene, and even of my own 
existence, which all, I believe, have experienc at time of sever 
mental tension. that I, a plain english girl, should be kneel here 
besid my brother in the italian dawn; that I should read, as I 
believed, on hi young face the unmistak imag and superscript 
of death; and reflect that within so few month he had married, had 
wreck hi home, that my poor constanc wa no more;--thes thing 
seem so unrealis that for a minut I felt that it must all be a 
nightmare, that I should immedi wake with the fresh salt air of 
the channel blow through my bedroom window at worth, and find I had 
been dreaming. but it wa not so; the light of day grew stronger and 
brighter, and even in my sorrow the panorama of the most beauti spot 
on earth, the bay of naples, with vesuviu lie on the far side, as 
seen then from these windows, stamp itself for ever on my mind. It wa 
unreal as a scene in some brilliant dramat spectacle, but, alas! no 
unreal wa here. the flame of the candl in their silver sconc 
wax paler and paler, the line and shadow on my brother' face grew 
darker, and the pallor of hi wast featur show more strike in 
the bright ray of the morn sun. 




chapter xiii 


I had spent near a week at the villa de angelis. john' manner to me 
wa most tender and affectionate; but he show no wish to refer to the 
tragedi of hi wife' death and the sad event which had preced it, or 
to attempt to explain in ani way hi own conduct in the past. nor did 
I ever lead the convers to these topics; for I felt that even if 
there were no other reason, hi great weak render it inadvis 
to introduc such subject at present, or even to lead him to speak at 
all more than wa actual necessary. I wa content to minist to him 
in quiet, and infinit happi in hi restor affection. He seem 
desir of banish from hi mind all thought of the last few months, 
but spoke much of the year befor he had gone to oxford, and of happi 
day which we had spent togeth in our childhood at worth maltravers. 
hi weak wa extreme, but he complain of no particular maladi 
except a short cough which troubl him at night. 

I had spoken to him of hi health, for I could see that hi state wa 
such as to inspir anxiety, and beg that he would allow me to see if 
there wa an english doctor at napl who could visit him. thi he would 
not assent to, say that he wa quit content with the care of an 
italian doctor who visit him almost daily, and that he hope to be 
able, under my escort, to return within a veri short time to england. 

"I shall never be much better, dear sophy," he said one day. "the doctor 
tell me that I am suffer from some sort of consumption, and that I 
must not expect to live long. yet I yearn to see worth onc more, and to 
feel again the west wind blow in the even across from portland, 
and smell the thyme on the dorset downs. In a few day I hope perhap to 
be a littl stronger, and I then wish to show you a discoveri which I 
have made in naples. after that you may order them to har the 
horses, and carri me back to worth maltravers." 

I endeavour to ascertain from signor baravelli, the doctor, someth 
as to the actual state of hi patient; but my knowledg of italian wa 
so slight that I could neither make him understand what I would be at, 
nor comprehend in turn what he replied, so that thi attempt wa 
relinquished. from my brother himself I gather that he had begun to 
feel hi health much impair as far back as the earli spring, but 
though hi strength had sinc then gradual fail him, he had not been 
confin to the hous until a month past. He spent the day and often 
the night reclin on hi sofa and speak little. He had appar 
lost the tast for the violin which had onc absorb so much of hi 
attention; inde I think the bodili strength necessari for it 
perform had probabl now fail him. the stradivariu instrument 
lay near hi couch in it case; but I onli saw the latter open on one 
occasion, I think, and wa deepli thank that john no longer took 
the same delight as heretofor in the practic of thi art,--not onli 
becaus the mere sound of hi violin wa now fraught to me with such 
bitter memories, but also becaus I felt sure that it perform had 
in some way which I could not explain a deleteri effect upon himself. 
He exhibit that absenc of vital which is so often notic in 
those who have not long to live, and on some day lay in a state of 
semi-lethargi from which it wa difficult to rous him. but at other 
time he suffer from a distress restless which forbad him to 
sit still even for a few minutes, and which wa more pain to watch 
than hi letharg stupor. the italian boy, of whom I have alreadi 
spoken, exhibit an untir devot to hi master which won my heart. 
hi name wa raffael carotenuto, and he often sang to us in the 
evening, accompani himself on the mandoline. At nights, too, when 
john could not sleep, raffael would read for hour till at last 
hi master doze off. He wa well educated, and though I could not 
understand the subject he read, I often sat by and listened, be 
charm with hi evid attach to my brother and with the melodi 
inton of a sweet voice. 

My brother wa nervou appar in some respects, and would never be 
left alon even for a few minutes; but in the interv while raffael 
wa with him I had ampl opportun to examin and appreci the 
beauti of the villa de angelis. It wa built, as I have said, on some 
rock jut into the sea, just befor come to the capo di posilipo 
as you proceed from naples. the earlier foundat were, I believe, 
origin roman, and upon them a modern villa had been construct 
in the eighteenth century, and to thi again john had made import 
addit in the past two years. look down upon the sea from the 
window of the villa, one could on calm day easili discern the remain 
of roman pier and mole lie below the surfac of the transpar 
water; and the tufa-rock on which the hous wa built wa burrow with 
those unintellig excav of a classic date so common in the 
neighbourhood. these subterran room and passages, while they 
arous my curiosity, seem at the same time so gloomi and repel 
that I never explor them. but on one sunni morning, as I walk at 
the foot of the rock by the sea, I ventur into one of the larger of 
these chambers, and saw that it had at the far end an open lead 
appar to an inner room. I had walk with me an old italian femal 
servant who took a motherli interest in my proceedings, and who, reli 
princip upon a veri slight knowledg of english, had constitut 
herself my body-guard. encourag by her presence, I penetr thi 
inner room and found that it again open in turn into another, and so 
on until we had pass through no less than four chambers. 

they were all light after a fashion through vent-hol which somewher 
or other reach the outer air, but the fourth room open into a fifth 
which wa unlighted. My companion, who had been show sign of alarm 
and an evid reluct to proceed further, now stop abruptli and 
beg me to return. It may have been that her fear commun itself 
to me also, for on attempt to cross the threshold and explor the 
dark of the fifth cell, I wa seiz by an unreason panic and by 
the feel of undefin horror experienc in a nightmare. I hesit 
for an instant, but my fear becam suddenli more intense, and spring 
back, I follow my companion, who had set out to run back to the outer 
air. We never paus until we stood pant in the full sunlight by the 
sea. As soon as the maid had found her breath, she beg me never to go 
there again, explain in broken english that the cave were known in 
the neighbourhood as the "cell of isis," and were reput to be haunt 
by demons. thi episode, trifl as it may appear, had so great an 
effect upon me that I never again ventur on to the lower walk which 
ran at the foot of the rock by the sea. 

In the hous above, my brother had built a larg hall after the ancient 
roman style, and this, with a dining-room and mani other chambers, were 
decor in the fashion of those discov at pompeii. they had been 
furnish with the utmost luxury, and the beauti of the paintings, 
furniture, carpets, and hang wa enhanc by statu in bronz and 
marble. the villa, indeed, and it fit were of a kind to which 
I wa littl used, and at the same time of such beauti that I never 
ceas to regard all as a creation of an enchanter' wand, or as the 
drop-scen to some drama which might suddenli be rais and disappear 
from my sight. the house, in short, togeth with it furniture, was, 
I believe, intend to be a reproduct of an ancient roman villa, 
and had someth about it repel to my rustic and insular ideas. 
In the contempl of it perfect I experienc a curiou mental 
sensation, which I can onli compar to the physic oppress produc 
on some person by the heavi and cloy perfum of a bouquet of 
gardenia or other too highli scent exotics. 

In my brother' room wa a mediev reproduct in mellow alabast of 
a classic group of a dolphin encircl a cupid. It was, I think, the 
fairest work of art I ever saw, but it jar upon my sens of proprieti 
that close by it should hang an ivori crucifix. I would rather, I think, 
have seen all thing materi and pagan entirely, with everi view of 
the futur life shut out, than have found a medley of thing sacr and 
profane, where the emblem of our highest hope and aspir were 
place in insult indiffer side by side with the embodi form of 
sensuality. here, in thi scene of magic beauty, it seem to me for 
a moment that the year had roll back, that christian had still to 
fight with a _living_ paganism, and that the battl wa not yet won. It 
wa the same all through the house; and there were mani other matter 
which fill me with regret, mingl with vagu and apprehens 
surmis which I shall not here repeat. 

At one end of the hous wa a small library, but it contain few work 
except latin and greek classics. I had gone thither one day to look for 
a book that john had ask for, when in turn out some drawer I found 
a number of letter written from worth by my lost constanc to her 
husband. the shock of be brought suddenli face to face with a 
handwrit that evok memori at onc so dear and sad wa in itself 
a sharp one; but it bitter wa immeasur increas by the 
discoveri that not one of these envelop had ever been opened. while 
that dear heart, now at rest, wa pour forth her love and sorrow to 
the ear that should have been abov all other readi to receiv them, 
her letters, as they arrived, were flung uncar for, unread, even 
unopened, into ani haphazard receptacle. 

the day pass one by one at the villa de ang with but littl 
incident, nor did my brother' health either visibl improv or decline. 
though the weather wa still more than usual warm, a grate breez 
came morn and even from the sea and temper the heat so much as 
to render it alway supportable. john would sometim in the even sit 
prop up with cushion on the trellis balconi look toward baia, 
and watch the fishermen set their nets. We could hear the melodi 
of their deep-voic song carri up on the night air. "it wa here, 
sophy," my brother said, as we sat one even look on a scene like 
this,--"it wa here that the great epicur pollio built himself a famou 
house, and call it by two greek word mean a 'truce to care,' from 
which our name of posilipo is derived. It wa hi _sans-souci_, and here 
he cast asid hi vexations; but they were lighter than mine. posilipo 
ha brought no cessat of care to me. I do not think I shall find ani 
truce thi side the grave; and beyond, who knows?" 

thi wa the first time john had spoken in thi strain, and he seem 
stir to an unusu activity, as though hi own word had suddenli 
remind him how frail wa hi state. He call raffael to him and 
despatch him on an errand to naples. the next morn he sent for me 
earlier than usual, and beg that a carriag might be readi by six in 
the evening, as he desir to drive into the city. I tri at first to 
dissuad him from hi project, urg him to consid hi weak state of 
health. He repli that he felt somewhat stronger, and had someth 
that he particularli wish me to see in naples. thi done, it would be 
better to return at onc to england: he could, he thought, bear the 
journey if we travel by veri short stages. 




chapter xiv 


shortli after six o'clock in the even we left the villa de angelis. 
the day had been as usual cloudlessli serene; but a gentl sea-breeze, 
of which I have spoken, rose in the afternoon and brought with it a 
refresh coolness. We had arrang a sort of couch in the landau with 
mani cushion for my brother, and he mount into the carriag with more 
eas than I had expected. I sat besid him, with raffael face me 
on the opposit seat. We drove down the hill of posilipo through the 
ilex-tre and tamarisk-bush that then skirt the sea, and so into 
the town. john spoke littl except to remark that the carriag wa an 
easi one. As we were pass through one of the princip street he 
bent over to me and said, "you must not be alarm if I show you to-day 
a strang sight. some women might perhap be frighten at what we are 
go to see; but my poor sister ha known alreadi so much of troubl 
that a light thing like thi will not affect her." In spite of hi 
encomium upon my suppos courage, I felt alarm and agit by hi 
words. there wa a vagu in them which frighten me, and bred that 
indefinit apprehens which is often infinit more terrifi than 
the actual object which inspir it. To my inquiri he would give no 
further respons than to say that he had whilst at posilipo made some 
investig in napl lead to a strang discovery, which he wa 
anxiou to commun to me. after travers a consider distance, 
we had penetr appar into the heart of the town. the street 
grew narrow and more dens thronged; the hous were more dirti and 
tumbledown, and the appear of the peopl themselv suggest that 
we had reach some of the lower quarter of the city. here we pass 
through a further network of small street of the name of which I took 
no note, and found ourselv at last in a veri dark and narrow lane 
call the _via del giardino_. although my brother had, so far as I had 
observed, given no order to the coachman, the latter seem to have 
no difficulti in find hi way, drive rapidli in the neapolitan 
fashion, and proceed direct as to a place with which he wa alreadi 
familiar. 

In the via del giardino the hous were of great height, and overhung 
the street so as nearli to touch one another. It seem that thi 
quarter had been formerli inhabited, if not by the aristocracy, at least 
by a class veri much superior to that which now live there; and mani 
of the hous were larg and dignified, though long sinc parcel 
out into smaller tenements. It wa befor such a hous that we at last 
brought up. here must have been at one time a hous or palac of some 
person of distinction, have a long and fine façad adorn with 
delic pilasters, and much florid ornament of the renaiss 
period. the ground-floor wa divid into a seri of small shops, and 
it upper storey were evid peopl by sordid famili of the 
lowest class. befor one of these littl shops, now close and have 
it window care block with boards, our carriag stopped. 
raffael alighted, and take a key from hi pocket unlock the door, 
and assist john to leav the carriage. I followed, and directli we had 
cross the threshold, the boy lock the door behind us, and I heard 
the carriag drive away. 

We found ourselv in a narrow and dark passage, and as soon as my eye 
grew accustom to the gloom I perceiv there wa at the end of it a 
low staircas lead to some upper room, and on the right a door which 
open into the close shop. My brother move slowli along the passage, 
and began to ascend the stairs. He leant with one hand on raffaelle' 
arm, take hold of the balust with the other. but I could see 
that to mount the stair cost him consider effort, and he paus 
frequent to cough and get hi breath again. So we reach a land 
at the top, and found ourselv in a small chamber or magazin directli 
over the shop. It wa quit empti except for a few broken chairs, and 
appear to be a small loft form by divid what had onc been a 
high room into two storeys, of which the shop form the lower. A long 
window, which had no doubt onc form one of sever in the wall of 
thi larg room, wa now divid across it width by the flooring, and 
with it upper part serv to light the loft, while it lower pane 
open into the shop. the ceil was, in consequ of these 
alterations, compar low, but though much mutilated, retain 
evid trace of have been at one time richli decorated, with the 
rais mould and pendant common in the sixteenth century. At one 
end of the loft wa a speci of cove and elabor carv dado, of 
which the former use wa not obvious; but the larg origin room had 
without doubt been divid in length as well as in height, as the 
lath-and-plast wall at either end of the loft had evid been no 
part of the ancient structure. 

My brother sat down in one of the old chairs, and seem to be 
collect hi strength befor speaking. My anxieti wa momentarili 
increasing, and it wa a great relief when he began, talk in a low 
voic as one that had much to say and wish to husband hi strength. 

"I do not know whether you will recollect my have told you of 
someth mr. gaskel onc said about the music of graziani' 
'areopagita' suite. It had always, he use to say, a curiou effect upon 
hi imagination, and the melodi of the _gagliarda_ especi call up 
to hi thought in some strang way a pictur of a certain hall where 
peopl were dancing. He even went so far as to describ the gener 
appear of the room itself, and of the person who were danc 
there." 

"yes," I answered, "I rememb your tell me of this;" and inde my 
memori had in time past so often rehears mr. gaskell' descript 
that, although I had not recent thought of it, it chief featur 
immedi return to my mind. 

"he describ it," my brother continued, "a a long hall with an arcad 
of arch run down one side, of the fantast gothic of the 
renaissance. At the end wa a galleri or balconi for the musicians, 
which on it front carri a coat of arms." 

I rememb thi perfectli and told john so, ad that the shield 
bore a cherub' head fan three lili on a golden field. 

"it is strange," john went on, "that the descript of a scene which 
our friend thought a mere effort of hi own imagin ha impress 
itself so deepli on both our minds. but the pictur which he drew wa 
more than a fancy, for we are at thi minut in the veri hall of hi 
dream." 

I could not gather what my brother meant, and thought hi reason wa 
fail him; but he continued, "thi miser floor on which we stand 
ha of cours been afterward built in; but you see abov you the old 
ceiling, and here at the end wa the musicians' galleri with the shield 
upon it front." 

He point to the carv and whitewash dado which had hitherto so 
puzzl me. I step up to it, and although the lath-and-plast 
partit wall wa now built around it, it wa clear that it curv 
outlin might veri easily, as john said, have form part of the front 
of a cove gallery. I look closer at the relief-work which had adorn 
it. though the edg were all rub off, and the mould in some 
case entir removed, I could trace without difficulti a shield 
in the midst; and a more narrow inspect reveal underneath the 
whitewash, which had partli peel away, enough remnant of colour to 
show that it had certainli been onc paint gold and born a cherub' 
head with three lilies. 

"that is the shield of the old neapolitan hous of doma-cavalli," my 
brother continued; "they bore a cherub' head fan three lili on a 
shield or. It wa in the balconi behind thi shield, long sinc block 
up as you see, that the musician sat on that ball night of which 
gaskel dreamt. from it they look down on the hall below where danc 
wa go forward, and I will now take you downstair that you may see 
if the descript tallies." 

So saying, he rais himself, and descend the stair with much less 
difficulti than he had shown in mount them, flung open the door 
which I had seen in the passag and usher us into the shop on the 
ground-floor. the even light had now fade so much that we could 
scarc see even in the passage, and the shop have it window 
barricad with shutters, wa in complet darkness. raffaelle, however, 
struck a match and lit three half-burnt candl in a tarnish sconc 
upon the wall. 

the shop had evid been late in the occup of a wine-seller, 
and there were still sever empti wooden wine-butts, and some broken 
flask on shelves. In one corner I notic that the earth which form 
the floor had been turn up with spades. there wa a small heap of 
mould, and a larg flat stone wa thu expos below the surface. thi 
stone had an iron ring attach to it, and seem to cover the apertur 
of a well, or perhap a vault. At the back of the shop, and furthest 
from the street, were two lofti arch separ by a column in the 
middle, from which the outsid case had been stripped. 

To these arch john point and said, "that is a part of the arcad 
which onc ran down the whole length of the hall. onli these two arch 
are now left, and the fine marbl which doubtless coat the outsid of 
thi divid pillar have been strip off. On a summer' night about 
one hundr year ago danc wa go on in thi hall. there were a 
dozen coupl danc a wild step such as is never seen now. the tune 
that the musician were play in the galleri abov wa taken from the 
'areopagita' suit of graziani. gaskel ha often told me that when 
he play it the music brought with it to hi mind a sens of some 
impend catastrophe, which culmin at the end of the first movement 
of the _gagliarda_. It wa just at that moment, sophy, that an 
englishman who wa danc here wa stab in the back and foulli 
murdered." 

I had scarc heard all that john had said, and had certainli not been 
abl to take in it import; but without wait to hear if I should say 
anything, he move across to the uncov stone with the ring in it. 
exert a strength which I should have believ entir imposs in 
hi weak condition, he appli to the stone a lever which lay readi at 
hand. raffael at the same time seiz the ring, and so they were abl 
between them to move the cover to one side suffici to allow 
access to a small staircas which thu appear to view. the stair 
wa a wind one, and onc led no doubt to some vault below the 
ground-floor. raffael descend first, take in hi hand the sconc 
of three candles, which he held abov hi head so as to fling a light 
down the steps. john went next, and then I followed, tri to support 
my brother if possibl with my hand. the stair were veri dry, and 
on the wall there wa none of the damp or mould which fanci usual 
associ with a subterran vault. I do not know what it wa I 
expect to see, but I had an uneasi feel that I wa on the brink of 
some evil and distress discovery. after we had descend about twenti 
step we could see the entri to some vault or underground room, and it 
wa just at the foot of the stair that I saw someth lying, as the 
light from the candl fell on it from above. At first I thought it wa 
a heap of dust or refuse, but on look closer it seem rather a 
bundl of rags. As my eye penetr the gloom, I saw there wa about 
it some tatter cloth of a fade green tint, and almost at the same 
minut I seem to trace under the cloth the line or dimens of a 
human figure. for a moment I imagin it wa some poor man lie face 
downward and bent up against the wall. the idea of a man or of a dead 
bodi be there shock me violently, and I cri to my brother, "tell 
me, what is it?" At that instant the light from. raffaelle' candl 
fell in a somewhat differ direction. It light up the white bowl 
of a human skull, and I saw that what I had taken for a man' form wa 
instead that of a cloth skeleton. I turn faint and sick for an 
instant, and should have fallen had it not been for john, who put hi 
arm about me and sustain me with an unexpect strength. 

"god help us!" I exclaimed, "let us go. I cannot bear this; there are 
foul vapour here; let us get back to the outer air." 

He took me by the arm, and point at the huddl heap, said, "do you 
know whose bone those are? that is adrian temple. after it wa all 
over, they flung hi bodi down the steps, dress in the cloth he 
wore." 

At that name, utter in so ill-omen a place, I felt a fresh access of 
terror. It seem as though the soul of that wick man must be still 
hover over hi unburi remains, and bode evil to us all. A chill 
crept over me, the light, the walls, my brother, and raffael all swam 
round, and I sank swoon on the stairs. 

when I return fulli to my sens we were in the landau again make 
our way back to the villa de angelis. 




chapter XV 


the next morn my health and strength were entir restor to me, 
but my brother, on the contrary, seem weak and exhaust from hi 
effort of the previou night. our return journey to the villa de 
ang had pass in complet silence. I had been too much perturb 
to question him on the mani point relat to the strang event as to 
which I wa still complet in the dark, and he on hi side had shown 
no desir to afford me ani further information. when I saw him the next 
morn he exhibit sign of great weakness, and in respons to an 
effort on my part to obtain some explan of the discoveri of adrian 
temple' body, avoid an immedi reply, promis to tell me all he 
knew after our return to worth maltravers. 

I ponder over the last terrifi episod veri frequent in my own 
mind, and as I thought more deepli of it all, it seem to me that the 
outlin of some evil histori were piec by piec develop themselves, 
that I had almost within my grasp the clue that would make all plain, 
and that had elud me so long. In that dim stori adrian temple, the 
music of the _gagliarda_, my brother' fatal passion for the violin, 
all seem to have some mysteri connection, and to have conspir in 
work john' mental and physic ruin. even the stradivariu violin 
bore a part in the tragedy, becoming, as it were, an activ malign 
spirit, though I could not explain how, and wa yet entir unawar of 
the manner in which it had come into my brother' possession. 

I found that john wa still resolv on an immedi return to england. 
hi weakness, it is true, led me to entertain doubt as to how he would 
support so long a journey; but at the same time I did not feel justifi 
in use ani strong effort to dissuad him from hi purpose. I 
reflect that the more wholesom air and associ of england would 
certainli re-invigor both bodi and mind, and that ani extra strain 
brought about by the journey would soon be repair by the comfort and 
watch care with which we could surround him at worth maltravers. 

So the first week in octob saw us onc more with our face set toward 
england. A veri comfort swinging-b or hammock had been arrang 
for john in the travel carriage, and we determin to avoid fatigu 
as much as possibl by divid our journey into veri short stages. My 
brother seem to have no intent of give up the villa de angelis. 
It wa left complet with it luxuri furniture, and with all hi 
servants, under the care of an italian _maggior-duomo_. I felt that as 
john' state of health forbad hi entertain ani hope of an immedi 
return thither, it would have been much better to close entir hi 
italian house. but hi great weak made it imposs for him to 
undertak the effort such a cours would involve, and even if my own 
ignor of the italian tongu had not stood in the way, I wa far too 
eager to get my invalid back to worth to feel inclin to import ani 
further delay, while I should myself adjust matter which were after all 
compar trifling. As parnham wa now readi to discharg hi usual 
duti of valet, and as my brother seem quit content that he should 
do so, raffael wa of cours to be left behind. the boy had quit won 
my heart by hi sweet manners, combin with hi evid affect to 
hi master, and in make him understand that he wa now to leav us, 
I offer him a present of a few pound as a token of my esteem. He 
refused, however, to touch thi money, and shed tear when he learnt 
that he wa to be left in italy, and beg with mani protest of 
devot that he might be allow to accompani us to england. My heart 
wa not proof against hi entreaties, support by so mani sign of 
attachment, and it wa agreed, therefore, that he should at least attend 
us as far as worth maltravers. john show no surpris at the boy be 
with us; inde I never thought it necessari to explain that I had 
origin purpos to leav him behind. 

our journey, though necessarili prolong by the short of it 
stages, wa safe accomplished. john bore it as well as I could have 
hoped, and though hi bodi show no sign of increas vigour, hi 
mind, I think, improv in tone, at ani rate for a time. from the 
even on which he had shown me the terribl discoveri in the via 
del giardino he seem to have laid asid someth of hi care and 
depression. He now exhibit littl trace of the moros and 
selfish which had of late so mar hi character; and though he 
natur felt sever at time the fatigu of travel, yet we had no 
longer to dread ani relaps into that state of lethargi or stupor which 
had so often baffl everi effort to counteract it at posilipo. some 
feel of superstiti avers had prompt me to give order that 
the stradivariu violin should be left behind at posilipo. but befor 
part my brother ask for it, and insist that it should be brought 
with him, though I had never heard him play a note on it for mani weeks. 
He took an interest in all the petti episod of travel, and certainli 
appear to deriv more entertain from the journey than wa to have 
been anticip in hi feebl state of health. 

To the incid of the even spent in the via del giardino he made no 
allus of ani kind, nor did I for my part wish to renew memori of 
so unpleas a nature. hi onli refer occur one sunday even 
as we were pass a small graveyard near genoa. the scene appar 
turn hi thought to that subject, and he told me that he had taken 
measur befor leav napl to ensur that the remain of adrian 
templ should be decent inter in the cemeteri of santa bibiana. 
hi word set me think again, and unsatisfi curios prompt 
me strongli to inquir of him how he had convinc himself that the 
skeleton at the foot of the stair wa inde that of adrian temple. but 
I restrain myself, partli from a relianc on hi promis that he would 
one day explain the whole stori to me, and partli be veri reluct 
to mar the enjoy of the peac scene through which we were 
passing, by the introduct of ani subject so jar and pain as 
those to which I have alluded. 

We reach london at last, and here we stop a few day to make some 
necessari arrang befor go down to worth maltravers. I had 
urg upon john dure the journey that immedi on hi arriv in 
london he should obtain the best english medic advic as to hi own 
health. though he at first demurred, say that noth more wa to be 
done, and that he wa perfectli satisfi with the medicin given him by 
dr. baravelli, which he continu to take, yet by constant entreati I 
prevail upon him to acced to so reason a request. dr. frobisher, 
consid at that time the first live author on diseas of the 
brain and nerves, saw him on the morn after our arrival. He wa good 
enough to speak with me at some length after see my brother, and to 
give me mani hint and recip wherebi I might be better enabl to 
nurs the invalid. 

sir john' condition, he said, wa such as to excit seriou anxiety. 
there was, indeed, no brain mischief of ani kind to be discovered, but 
hi lung were in a state of advanc disease, and there were sign of 
grave heart affection. yet he did not bid me to despair, but said that 
with care nurs life might certainli be prolonged, and even some 
measur of health in time restored. He ask me more than onc if I knew 
of ani troubl or worri that prey upon sir john' mind. were there 
financi difficulties; had he been subject to ani mental shock; had 
he receiv ani sever fright? To all thi I could onli repli in the 
negative. At the same time I told dr. frobish as much of john' 
histori as I consid pertin to the question. He shook hi head 
gravely, and recommend that sir john should remain for the present in 
london, under hi own constant supervision. To thi cours my brother 
would by no mean consent. He wa eager to proceed at onc to hi own 
house, say that if necessari we could return again to london for 
christmas. It wa therefor agre that we should go down to worth 
maltrav at the end of the week. 

parnham had alreadi left us for worth in order that he might have 
everyth readi against hi master' return, and when we arriv we 
found all in perfect order for our reception. A small morning-room next 
to the library, with a pleasant south aspect and open on to the 
terrace, had been prepar for my brother' use, so that he might avoid 
the fatigu of mount stairs, which dr. frobish consid veri 
prejudici in hi present condition. We had also purchas in london a 
chair fit with wheels, which enabl him to be moved, or, if he were 
feel equal to the exertion, to move himself, without difficulty, from 
room to room. 

hi health, I think, improved; veri gradually, it is true, but still 
suffici to inspir me with hope that he might yet be spare to us. 
Of the state of hi mind or thought I knew little, but I could see that 
he wa at time a prey to nervou anxiety. thi show itself in the 
harass look which hi pale face often wore, and in hi mark dislik 
to be left alone. He derived, I think, a certain pleasur from the 
quietud and monotoni of hi life at worth, and perhap also from the 
conscious that he had about him love and devot hearts. I say 
hearts, for everi servant at worth wa attach to him, rememb the 
great consider and courtesi of hi earlier years, and griev to 
see hi youth and onc vigor frame reduc to so sad a strait. 
book he never read himself, and even the charm of raffaelle' read 
seem to have lost it power; though he never tire of hear the boy 
sing, and like to have him sit by hi chair even when hi eye were 
shut and he wa appar asleep. hi gener health seem to me to 
chang but littl either for better or worse. dr. frobish had led me 
to expect some such a sequel. I had not conceal from him that I had 
at time entertain suspicion as to my brother' sanity; but he had 
assur me that they were total unfounded, that sir john' brain wa 
as clear as hi own. At the same time he confess that he could not 
account for the exhaust vital of hi patient,--a condit which he 
would under ordinari circumst have attribut to excess studi or 
sever trouble. He had urg upon me the press necess for complet 
rest, and for much sleep. My brother never even incident refer to 
hi wife, hi child, or to mrs. temple, who constantli wrote to me from 
royston, send kind messag to john, and ask how he did. these 
messag I never dare to give him, fear to agit him, or retard 
hi recoveri by divert hi thought into channel which must 
necessarili be of a pain character. that he should never even mention 
her name, or that of ladi maltravers, led me to wonder sometim if one 
of those curiou freak of memori which occasion accompani a sever 
ill had not entir blot out from hi mind the recollect of 
hi marriag and of hi wife' death. He wa unabl to consid ani 
affair of business, and the manag of the estat remain as it 
had done for the last two year in the hand of our excel agent, 
mr. baker. 

but one even in the earli part of decemb he sent raffael about 
nine o'clock, say he wish to speak to me. I went to hi room, and 
without ani warn he began at once, "you never show me my boy now, 
sophy; he must be grown a big child, and I should like to see him." 
much startl by so unexpect a remark, I repli that the child wa 
at royston under the care of mrs. temple, but that I knew that if it 
pleas him to see edward she would be glad to bring him down to worth. 
He seem gratifi with thi idea, and beg me to ask her to do so, 
desir that hi respect should be at the same time convey to her. I 
almost ventur at that moment to recal hi lost wife to hi thoughts, 
by say that hi child resembl her strongly; for your like at 
that time, and even now, my dear edward, to your poor mother wa veri 
marked. but my courag fail me, and hi talk soon revert to an 
earlier period, compar the mild of the month to that of the first 
winter which he spent at eton. hi thoughts, however, must, I fancy, 
have return for a moment to the day when he first met your mother, 
for he suddenli asked, "where is gaskell? whi doe he never come to see 
me?" thi brought quit a new idea to my mind. I fanci it might do my 
brother much good to have by him so sensibl and true a friend as I knew 
mr. gaskel to be. the latter' address had fortun not slip from 
my memory, and I put all scrupl asid and wrote by the next mail to 
him, set forth my brother' sad condition, say that I had heard 
john mention hi name, and beg him on my own account to be so good 
as to help us if possibl and come to us in thi hour of trial. though 
he wa so far off as westmorland, mr. gaskell' generos brought 
him at onc to our aid, and within a week he wa instal at worth 
maltravers, sleeping, in the library, where we had arrang a bed at 
hi own desire, so that he might be near hi sick friend. 

hi presenc wa of the utmost assist to us all. He treat john 
at onc with the tender of a woman and the firm of a clever 
and strong man. they sat constantli togeth in the mornings, and mr. 
gaskel told me john had not shown with him the same reluct to talk 
freeli of hi marri life as he had discov with me. the tenor of 
hi commun I cannot guess, nor did I ever ask; but I knew that 
mr. gaskel wa much affect by them. 

john even amus himself now at time by have mr. baker into hi room 
of a morning, that the manag of the estat might be discuss with 
hi friend; and he also express hi wish to see the famili solicitor, 
as he desir to draw hi will. think that ani divers of thi 
natur could not but be benefici to him, we sent to dorchest for our 
solicitor, mr. jeffreys, who togeth with hi clerk spent three night 
at worth, and drew up a testament for my brother. 

So time went on, and the year wa draw to a close. 

It wa christma eve, and I had gone to bed shortli after twelv 
o'clock, have an hour earlier bid good night to john and mr. gaskell. 
the long habit of watch with, or be in charg of an invalid at 
night, had made my ear extraordinarili quick to apprehend even the 
slightest murmur. It must have been, I think, near three in the morn 
when I found myself awak and consciou of some unusu sound. It wa 
low and far off, but I knew instantli what it was, and felt a choke 
sensat of fear and horror, as if an ici hand had grip my throat, 
on recognis the air of the _gagliarda_. It wa be play on the 
violin, and a long way off, but I knew that tune too well to permit of 
my have ani doubt on the subject. 

ani troubl or fear becomes, as you will some day learn, my dear nephew, 
immens intensifi and exagger at night. It is so, I suppose, 
becaus our nerv are in an excit condition, and our brain not 
suffici awak to give a due account of our foolish imaginations. I 
have myself mani time lain awak wrestl in thought with difficulti 
which in the hour of dark seem insurmountable, but with the dawn 
resolv themselv into mere trivial inconveniences. So on thi 
night, as I sat up in bed look into the dark, with the sound of that 
melodi in my ears, it seem as if someth too terribl for word had 
happened; as though the evil spirit, which we had hope wa exorcised, 
had return with other sevenfold more wick than himself, and taken 
up hi abod again with my lost brother. the memori of anoth night 
rush to my mind when constanc had call me from my bed at royston, 
and we had stolen togeth down the moonlit passag with the lilt of 
that wick music vibrat on the still summer air. poor constance! she 
wa in her grave now; yet _her_ troubl at least were over, but here, 
as by some bitter irony, instead of carol or sweet symphony, it wa the 
_gagliarda_ that woke me from my sleep on christma morning. 

I flung my dressing-gown about me, and hurri through the corridor and 
down the stair which led to the lower storey and my brother' room. 
As I open my bedroom door the violin ceas suddenli in the middl 
of a bar. it last sound wa not a music note, but rather a horribl 
scream, such as I pray I may never hear again. It wa a sound such as a 
wound beast might utter. there is a pictur I have seen of blake's, 
show the soul of a strong wick man leav hi bodi at death. the 
spirit is fli out through the window with aw stare eyes, aghast 
at the desol into which it is going. If in the agoni of dissolut 
such a lost soul could utter a cry, it would, I think, sound like the 
wail which I heard from the violin that night. 

instantli all wa in absolut stillness. the passag were silent and 
ghostli in the faint light of my candle; but as I reach the bottom 
of the stair I heard the sound of other footsteps, and mr. gaskel met 
me. He wa fulli dressed, and had evid not been to bed. He took me 
kindli by the hand and said, "I fear you might be alarm by the sound 
of music. john ha been walk in hi sleep; he had taken out hi 
violin and wa play on it in a trance. just as I reach him 
someth in it gave way, and the discord caus by the slacken 
string rous him at once. He is awak now and ha return to bed. 
control your alarm for hi sake and your own. It is better that he 
should not know you have been awakened." 

He press my hand and spoke a few more reassur words, and I went 
back to my room still much agitated, and yet feel half asham for 
have shown so much anxieti with so littl reason. 

that christma morn wa one of the most beauti that I ever 
remember. It seem as though summer wa so loath to leav our sunni 
dorset coast that she came back on thi day to bid us adieu befor her 
final departure. I had risen earli and had partaken of the sacrament 
at our littl church. dr. butler had recent introduc thi earli 
service, and though ani alter of time-honour custom in such 
matter might not otherwis have met with my approval, I wa glad to 
avail myself of the privileg on thi occasion, as I wish in ani case 
to spend the later morn with my brother. the singular beauti of the 
earli hours, and the tranquillis effect of the solemn servic brought 
back seren to my mind, and effectu banish from it all memori 
of the preced night. mr. gaskel met me in the hall on my return, and 
after greet me kindli with the establish compliment of the day, 
inquir after my health, and hope that the disturb of my slumber 
on the previou night had not affect me injuriously. He had good news 
for me: john seem decidedli better, wa alreadi dressed, and desired, 
as it wa christma morning, that we would take our breakfast with him 
in hi room. 

To this, as you may imagine, I readili assented. our breakfast parti 
pass off with much content, and even with some quiet humour, john 
sit in hi easy-chair at the head of the tabl and wish us the 
compliment of the season. I found laid in my place a letter from mrs. 
templ greet us all (for she knew mr. gaskel wa at worth), and 
say that she hope to bring littl edward to us at the new year. 
My brother seem much pleas at the prospect of see hi son, and 
though perhap it wa onli imagination, I fanci he wa particularli 
gratifi that mrs. templ herself wa to pay us a visit. she had not 
been to worth sinc the death of ladi maltravers. 

befor we had finish breakfast the sun beat on the pane with an 
unusu strength and brightness. hi ray cheer us all, and it wa so 
warm that john first open the windows, and then wheel hi chair on 
to the walk outside. mr. gaskel brought him a hat and mufflers, and we 
sat with him on the terrac bask in the sun. the sea wa still and 
glassi as a mirror, and the channel lay stretch befor us like a floor 
of move gold. A rose or two still hung against the house, and the 
sun' ray reflect from the red sandston gave us a decemb morn 
more mild and genial than mani june day that I have known in the north. 
We sat for some minut without speaking, immers in our own 
reflect and in the exquisit beauti of the scene. 

the still wa broken by the bell of the parish church ring for 
the morn service. there were two of them, and their sound, familiar 
to us from childhood, seem like the voic of old friends. john look 
at me and said with a sigh, "I should like to go to church. It is long 
sinc I wa there. you and I have alway been on christma mornings, 
sophy, and constanc would have wish it had she been with us." 

hi words, so unexpect and tender, fill my eye with tears; not 
tear of grief, but of deep thank to see my love one turn 
onc more to the old ways. It wa the first time I had heard him speak 
of constance, and that sweet name, with the infinit patho of her 
death, and of the spectacl of my brother' weakness, so overcam me 
that I could not speak. I onli press hi hand and nodded. mr. gaskell, 
who had turn away for a minute, said he thought john would take no 
harm in attend the morn servic provid the church were warm. 
On thi point I could reassur him, have found it properli heat 
even in the earli morning. 

mr. gaskel wa to push john' chair, and I ran off to put on my cloak, 
with my heart full of profound thank for the sign of return 
grace so merci vouchsaf to our dear suffer on thi happi day. 
I wa readi dress and had just enter the librari when mr. gaskel 
step hurriedli through the window from the terrace. "john ha 
fainted!" he said. "run for some smell salt and call parnham!" 

there wa a scene of hurri alarm, give place ere long to terrifi 
despair. parnham mount a hors and set off at a wild gallop to swanag 
to fetch dr. bruton; but an hour befor he return we knew the worst. 
My brother wa beyond the aid of the physician: hi wreck life had 
reach a sudden term! 

* * * * * 

I have now, dear edward, complet the brief narr of some of the 
fact attend the latter year of your father' life. the motiv which 
ha induc me to commit them to write ha been a doubl one. I am 
anxiou to give effect as far as may be to the desir express most 
strongli to mr. gaskel by your father, that you should be put in 
possess of these fact on your come of age. and for my own part I 
think it better that you should thu hear the plain truth from me, lest 
you should be at the merci of haphazard reports, which might at ani time 
reach you from ignor or interest sources. some of the circumst 
were so remark that it is scarc possibl to suppos that they 
were not known, and most probabl frequent discussed, in so larg an 
establish as that of worth maltravers. I even have reason to believ 
that exagger and absurd stori were current at the time of sir 
john' death, and I should be griev to think that such foolish tale 
might by ani chanc reach your ear without your have ani sure mean of 
discov where the truth lay. god know how grievou it ha been to 
me to set down on paper some of the fact that I have here narrated. you 
as a duti son will rever the name even of a father whom you never 
knew; but you must rememb that hi sister did more; she love him with 
a single-heart devotion, and it still griev her to the quick to 
write anyth which may seem to detract from hi memory. only, abov 
all things, let us speak the truth. much of what I have told you needs, 
I feel, further explanation, but thi I cannot give, for I do not 
understand the circumstances. mr. gaskell, your guardian, will, I 
believe, add to thi account a few note of hi own, which may tend to 
elucid some points, as he is in possess of certain fact of which 
I am still ignorant. 




mr. gaskell' note 


I have read what miss maltrav ha written, and have but littl to add 
to it. I can give no explan that will talli with all the fact or 
meet all the difficulti involv in her narrative. the most obviou 
solut of some point would be, of course, to suppos that sir john 
maltrav wa insane. but to anyon who knew him as intim as I 
did, such an hypothesi is untenable; nor, if admitted, would it explain 
some of the strangest incidents. moreover, it wa strongli negativ by 
dr. frobisher, from whose verdict in such matter there wa at the time 
no appeal, by dr. dobie, and by dr. bruton, who had known sir john from 
hi infancy. It is possibl that toward the close of hi life he 
suffer occasion from hallucination, though I could not posit 
affirm even so much; but thi wa onli when hi health had been 
complet undermin by caus which are veri difficult to analyse. 

when I first knew him at oxford he wa a strong man physic as 
well as mentally; open-hearted, and of a merri and genial temperament. 
At the same time he was, like most cultur persons--and especi 
musicians,--highli strung and excitable. but at a certain point in hi 
career hi veri natur seem to change; he becam reserved, secretive, 
and saturnine. On thi moral metamorphosi follow an equal startl 
physic change. hi robust health began to fail him, and although there 
wa no definit maladi which doctor could combat, he went gradual 
from bad to wors until the end came. 

the commenc of thi extraordinari chang coincided, I believe, 
almost exactli with hi discoveri of the stradivariu violin; and 
whether thi was, after all, a mere coincid or someth more it is 
not easi to say. until a veri short time befor hi death neither miss 
maltrav nor I had ani idea how that instrument had come into hi 
possession, or I think someth might perhap have been done to save 
him. 

though toward the end of hi life he spoke freeli to hi sister of the 
find of the violin, he onli told her half the story, for he conceal 
from her entir that there wa anyth els in the hidden cupboard at 
oxford. but as a matter of fact, he had found there also two manuscript 
book contain an elabor diari of some year of a man' life. that 
man wa adrian temple, and I believ that in the perus of thi diari 
must be sought the origin of john maltravers' ruin. the manuscript wa 
beauti written in a clear but cramp eighteenth centuri hand, 
and gave the idea of a man write with deliberation, and wish to 
transcrib hi impress with accuraci for further reference. the 
style wa excellent, and the minut detail given were often of high 
antiquarian interest; but the record throughout wa mar by gross 
licence. adrian temple' life had undoubtedli so definit an influenc 
on sir john' that a brief outlin of it, as gather from hi diaries, 
is necessari for the understand of what followed. 

templ went up to oxford in 1737. He wa seventeen year old, without 
parents, brothers, or sisters; and he possess the royston estat 
in derbyshire, which were then, as now, a most valuabl property. 
with the year 1738 hi diari begin, and though then littl more than 
a boy, he had tast everi illicit pleasur that oxford had to offer. 
hi temptat were no doubt great; for besid be wealthi he wa 
handsome, and had probabl never known ani proper control, as both hi 
parent had die when he wa still veri young. but in spite of other 
failings, he wa a brilliant scholar, and on take hi degree, wa 
made at onc a fellow of st. john's. He took up hi abod in that 
colleg in a fine set of room look on to the gardens, and from thi 
period seem to have use royston but little, live alway either at 
oxford or on the continent. He form at thi time the acquaint of 
one jocelyn, whom he engag as companion and amanuensis. jocelyn wa a 
man of talent, but of irregular life, and wa no doubt an accomplic in 
mani of temple' excesses. In 1743 they both undertook the so-cal 
"grand tour," and though it wa not hi first visit, it wa then 
probabl that templ first felt the fascin of pagan italy,--a 
fascin which increas with everi year of hi after-life. 

On hi return from foreign travel he found himself among the stir 
event of 1745. He wa an ardent support of the pretender, and made no 
attempt to conceal hi views. jacobit tendenc were inde gener 
preval in the colleg at the time, and had thi been the sum of hi 
offending, it is probabl that littl notic would have been taken by 
the colleg authorities. but hi notori wild life told against the 
young man, and certain dark suspicion were not easili pass over. 
after the _fiasco_ of the rebellion dr. holmes, then presid of the 
college, seem to have made a scapegoat of temple. He wa depriv of 
hi fellowship, and though not formal expelled, such pressur wa put 
upon him as result in hi leav st. john' and remov to magdalen 
hall. there hi great wealth evid secur him consideration, and he 
wa given the best room in the hall, that veri set look on to new 
colleg lane which sir john maltrav afterward occupied. 

In the first half of the eighteenth centuri the romanc of the middl 
ages, though dying, wa not dead, and the occult scienc still found 
follow among the oxford towers. from hi earli year temple' mind 
seem to have been set strongli toward mystic of all kinds, and he 
and jocelyn were vers in the jargon of the alchemist and astrologer, 
and practis accord to the ancient rules. It wa hi reput as 
a necromancer, and the stori current of illicit rite perform in 
the garden-room at st. john's, that contribut larg to hi be 
dismiss from that college. He had also becom acquaint with franci 
dashwood, the notori lord le despencer, and mani a winter' night 
saw him ride through the misti thame meadow to the door of the sham 
franciscan abbey. In hi diari were more notic than one of the 
"franciscans" and the nameless orgi of medmenham. 

He wa devot to music. It wa a rare enough accomplish then, and a 
rarer thing still to find a wealthi landown perform on the violin. 
yet so he did, though he kept hi passion veri much to himself, as 
fiddl wa thought lightli of in those days. hi music skill 
wa altogeth exceptional, and he wa the first possessor of the 
stradivariu violin which afterward fell so unfortun into sir 
john' hands. thi violin templ bought in the autumn of 1738, on the 
occas of a first visit to italy. In that year die the nonagenarian 
antoniu stradivarius, the greatest violin-mak the world ha ever 
seen. after stradivarius' death the stock of fiddl in hi shop wa 
sold by auction. templ happen to be travel in cremona at the time 
with a tutor, and at the auction he bought that veri instrument which we 
afterward had caus to know so well. A note in hi diari gave it cost 
at four louis, and said that a curiou histori attach to it. though 
it wa of hi golden period, and probabl the finest instrument he ever 
made, stradivariu would never sell it, and it had hung for more than 
thirti year in hi shop. It wa said that from some whim as he lay 
die he had given order that it should be burnt; but if that were so, 
the instruct were neglected, and after hi death it came under the 
hammer. adrian templ from the first recognis the great valu of the 
instrument. hi note show that he onli use it on certain special 
occasions, and it wa no doubt for it better protect that he devis 
the hidden cupboard where sir john eventu found it. 

the later year of temple' life were spent for the most part in italy. 
On the scoglio di venere, near naples, he built the villa de angelis, 
and there henceforth pass all except the hottest month of the year. 
shortli after the complet of the villa jocelyn left him suddenly, and 
becam a carthusian monk. A caustic note in hi diari hint that even 
thi foul parasit wa shock into the austerest form of religion by 
someth he had seen go forward. At napl temple' dark life becam 
still darker. He dallied, it is true, with neo-platonism, and boast 
that he, like plotinus, had twice pass the circl of the _nous_ and 
enjoy the fruition of the deity; but the ideal of even that easi 
doctrin grew in hi evil life still more miser debased. more than 
onc in the manuscript he made mention by name of the _gagliarda_ 
of graziani as have been play at pagan mysteri which these 
enthusiast reviv at naples, and the air had evid impress 
itself deepli on hi memory. the last entri in hi diari is made on 
the 16th of december, 1752. He wa then in oxford for a few days, but 
shortli afterward return to naples. the accid of hi have just 
complet a second volume, induc him, no doubt, to leav it behind him 
in the secret cupboard. It is probabl that he commenc a third, but if 
so it wa never found. 

In read the manuscript I wa struck with the author' clear and easi 
style, and found the interest of the narr increas rather than 
diminish. At the same time it studi wa inexpress pain to me. 
noth could have support me in my determin to thoroughli 
master it but the convict that if I wa to be of ani real assist 
to my poor friend maltravers, I must know as far as possibl everi 
circumst connect with hi malady. As it was, I felt myself 
breath an atmospher of moral contagion dure the perus of the 
manuscript, and certain passag have sinc return at time to haunt 
me in spite of all effort to dislodg them from my memory. when I came 
to worth at miss maltravers' urgent invitation, I found my friend sir 
john terribl altered. It wa not onli that he wa ill and physic 
weak, but he had entir lost the manner of youth, which, though 
indefinable, is yet so appreciable, and draw so sharp a distinct 
between the first period of life and middl age. but the most strike 
featur of hi ill wa the extraordinari pallor of hi complexion, 
which made hi face resembl a subtl counterfeit of white wax rather 
than that of a live man. He welcom me undemonstratively, but with 
evid sincerity; and there wa an entir absenc of the constraint 
which often accompani the meet again of friend whose cordial 
relat have suffer interruption. from the time of my arriv at 
worth until hi death we were constantli together; inde I wa much 
struck by the almost childish dislik which he show to be left alon 
even for a few moments. As night approach thi feel becam 
intensified. parnham slept alway in hi master' room; but if anyth 
call the servant away even for a minute, he would send for carotenuto 
or myself to be with him until hi return. hi nerv were weak; he 
start violent at ani unexpect noise, and abov all, he dread 
be in the dark. when night fell he had addit lamp brought into 
hi room, and even when he compos himself to sleep, insist on a 
strong light be kept by hi bedside. 

I had often read in book of peopl wear a "hunted" expression, and 
had laugh at the phrase as convent and unmeaning. but when I 
came to worth I knew it truth; for if ani face ever wore a hunted--i 
had almost written a haunted--look, it wa the white face of sir john 
maltravers. hi air seem that of a man who wa constantli expect 
the arriv of some evil tidings, and at time remind me pain of 
the guilti expect of a felon who know that a warrant is issu for 
hi arrest. 

dure my visit he spoke to me frequent about hi past life, and 
instead of show ani reluct to discuss the subject, seem glad of 
the opportun of disburden hi mind. I gather from him that the 
read of adrian temple' memoir had made a deep impress on hi 
mind, which wa no doubt intensifi by the vision which he thought he 
saw in hi room at oxford, and by the discoveri of the portrait at 
royston. Of those singular phenomena I have no explan to offer. 

the romant element in hi disposit render him peculiarli 
suscept to the fascin of that mystic which breath through 
temple' narrative. He told me that almost from the first time he read 
it he wa fill with a long to visit the place and to reviv the 
strang life of which it spoke. thi inclin he kept at first in 
check, but by degre it gather strength enough to master him. 

there is no doubt in my mind that the music of the _gagliarda_ of 
graziani help materi in thi process of mental degradation. It is 
curiou that michael prætoriu in the "syntagma musicum" should speak of 
the galliard gener as an "invent of the devil, full of shame 
and licenti gestur and immodest movements," and the singular melodi 
of the _gagliarda_ in the "areopagita" suit certainli exercis from 
the first a strang influenc over me. I shall not do more than touch 
on the question here, becaus I see miss maltrav ha spoken of it 
at length, and will onli say, that though sinc the day of sir john' 
death I have never heard a note of it, the air is still fresh in my 
mind, and ha at time present itself to me unexpectedly, and alway 
with an unwholesom effect. thi I have found happen gener in time 
of physic depression, and the same air no doubt exert a similar 
influenc on sir john, which hi impression natur render from the 
first more deleteri to him. 

I say thi advisedly, becaus I am sure that if some music is good for 
man and elev him, other melodi are equal bad and enervating. An 
experi far wider than ani we yet possess is necessari to enabl us 
to say how far thi influenc is capabl of extension. how far, that 
is, the mind may be direct on the one hand to ascet abneg by 
the systemat use of certain music, or on the other to illicit and 
danger pleasur by melodi of an opposit tendency. but thi much 
is, I think, certain, that after a compar advanc standard of 
cultur ha onc been attained, music is the readiest if not the onli 
key which admit to the yet narrow circl of the highest imagin 
thought. 

On the occas for travel afford him by hi honeymoon, an impuls 
which he could not at the time explain, but which after-ev have 
convinc me wa the haunt suggest of the _gagliarda_, drove him 
to visit the scene mention so often in temple' diary. He had alway 
been an excel scholar, and a classic of more than ordinari ability. 
rome and southern itali fill him with a strang delight. hi educ 
enabl him to appreci to the full what he saw; he peopl the stage 
with the figur of the origin actors, and tri to assimil hi 
thought to theirs. He began read classic literatur widely, no 
longer from the scholarli but the literari standpoint. In rome he 
spent much time in the librarians' shops, and there met with copi 
of the numer author of the later empir and of those alexandrin 
philosoph which are rare seen in england. In these he found a new 
delight and fresh food for hi mysticism. 

such study, if carri to ani extent, is probabl danger to the 
english character, and certainli wa to a man of maltravers' romant 
sympathies. thi read produc in time so real an effect upon hi 
mind that if he did not definit abandon christianity, as I fear he 
did, he at least adulter it with other doctrin till it becam to 
him neo-platonism. that most seduct of philosophies, which ha 
enthral so mani mind from proclu and julian to augustin and the 
renaissancists, found an easi convert in john maltravers. it passion 
long for the vagu and undefin good, it toler of æsthetic 
impressions, the pleasant superstit of it dynam pantheism, all 
touch respons chord in hi nature. hi mind, he told me, becam 
fill with a measureless yearn for the old cultur of pagan 
philosophy, and as the past becam clearer and more real, so the present 
grew dimmer, and hi thought were gradual wean entir from all 
the natur object of affect and interest which should otherwis 
have occupi them. To what a terribl extent thi process went on, miss 
maltravers' narr shows. soon after reach napl he visit the 
villa de angelis, which templ had built on the ruin of a sea-hous of 
pomponius. the later build had in it turn becom dismantl and 
ruinous, and sir john found no difficulti in buy the site outright. 
He afterward rebuilt it on an elabor scale, endeavour to 
reproduc in it equip the luxuri of the later empire. I had 
occas to visit the hous more than onc in my capac of executor, 
and found it full of priceless work of art, which, though neither so 
difficult to procur at that time nor so costli as they would be now, 
were yet suffici valuabl to have necessit an unjustifi 
outlay. 

the situat of the build foster hi infatu for the past. It 
lay between the bay of napl and the bay of baia, and from it window 
command the same exquisit view which had charm cicero and lucullus, 
severu and the antonines. hard by stood baia, the princ seasid 
resort of the empire. that most luxuri and wanton of all citi of 
antiqu surviv the cataclysm of ages, and onli lost it civic 
continu and becam the ruin villag of to-day in the sack of the 
fifteenth century. but a continu of wicked is not so easili 
broken, and those who know the spot best say that it is still instinct 
with memori of a shame past. 

for mile along that haunt coast the foot cannot be put down except on 
the ruin of some splendid villa, and over all there brood a spirit of 
corrupt and debas actual sensibl and oppressive. Of the dawn 
and sunsets, of the noonday sun temper by the sea-breez and the shade 
of scent groves, those who have been there know the charm, and to 
those who have not no word can describ it. but there are malef 
vapour rise from the corps of a past not altogeth buried, and most 
cultiv englishmen who tarri there long feel their influenc as did 
john maltravers. like so mani _decepti deceptores_ of the neo-platon 
school, he did not practis the abneg enjoin by the veri cult he 
profess to follow. though hi natur wa far too refined, I believe, 
ever to sink into the sensual reveal in temple' diaries, yet it 
wa through the gratif of corpor tast that he endeavour 
to achiev the divin _extasis_; and there were constantli lavish and 
sumptuou entertain at the villa, at which strang guest were 
present. 

In such a nightmar of a life it wa not to be expect that ani mind 
would find repose, and maltrav certainli found none. all those care 
which usual occupi men' minds, all thought of wife, child, and home 
were, it is true, abandoned; but a wild unrest had hold of him, and 
never suffer him to be at ease. though he never told me as much, yet 
I believ he wa under the impress that the form which he had seen 
at oxford and royston had reappear to him on more than one subsequ 
occasion. It must have been, I fancy, with a vagu hope of "laying" thi 
spectr that he now set himself with eager to discov where or 
how templ had died. He rememb that royston tradit said he had 
succumb at napl in the plagu of 1752, but an idea seiz him that 
thi wa not the case; inde I half suspect hi fanci unconsci 
pictur that evil man as still alive. the method by which he 
eventu discov the skeleton, or learnt the episod which 
preced temple' death, I do not know. He promis to tell me some 
day at length, but a sudden death prevent hi ever do so. the 
fact as he narrat them, and as I have littl doubt they actual 
occurred, were these: adrian temple, after jocelyn' departure, had 
made a confid of one palamed domacavalli, a scion of a splendid 
parthenopean famili of that name. palamed had a palac in the heart of 
naples, and wa temple' equal in age and also in hi great wealth. the 
two men becam boon companions, associ in all kind of wicked 
and excess. At length palamed marri a beauti girl name olimpia 
aldobrandini, who wa also of the noblest lineage; but the intimaci 
between him and templ wa not interrupted. about a year subsequ to 
thi marriag danc wa go on after a splendid banquet in the great 
hall of the palazzo domacavalli. adrian, who wa a favour guest, 
call to the musician in the galleri to play the "areopagita" suite, 
and danc it with olimpia, the wife of hi host. the _gagliarda_ wa 
reach but never finished, for near the end of the second movement 
palamed from behind drove a stiletto into hi friend' heart. He had 
found out that day that adrian had not spare even olimpia' honour. 

I have endeavour to condens into a connect stori the fact learnt 
piecem from sir john in conversation. To a certain extent they 
supplied, if not an explanation, at least an account of the chang 
that had come over my friend. but onli to a certain extent; there the 
explan broke down and I wa left baffled. I could imagin that a 
life of unwholesom surround and disord studi might in time 
produc such a loss of mental tone as would lead in turn to moral 
_acolasia_, sensual excess, and physic ruin. but in sir john' case 
the caus wa not adequate; he had, so far as I know, never wholli given 
the rein to sensuality, and the chang wa too abrupt and the breakdown 
of bodi and mind too complet to be account for by such event as 
those of which he had spoken. 

I had, too, an uneasi feeling, which grew upon me the more I saw of him, 
that while he spoke freeli enough on certain topics, and obvious meant 
to give a complet histori of hi past life, there wa in realiti 
someth in the background which he alway kept from my view. He was, 
it seemed, like a young man ask by an indulg father to disclos 
hi debt in order that they may be discharged, who, although he know 
hi parent' leniency, and that ani debt not now disclos will be 
afterward but a weight upon hi own neck, yet hesit for veri shame 
to tell the full amount, and keep some item back. So poor sir john 
kept someth back from me hi friend, whose onli aim wa to afford him 
consol and relief, and whose compass would have made me listen 
without rebuk to the narrat of the blackest crimes. I cannot say how 
much thi convict griev me. I would most willingli have given my 
all, my veri life, to save my friend and miss maltravers' brother; but 
my effort were paralys by the feel that I did not know what I had 
to combat, that some evil influenc wa at work on him which continu 
evad my grasp. onc or twice it seem as though he were within an 
ace of tell me all; onc or twice, I believe, he had definit made 
up hi mind to do so; but then the mood changed, or more probabl hi 
courag fail him. 

It wa on one of these occas that he ask me, somewhat suddenly, 
whether I thought that a man could by ani consciou act commit in the 
flesh take away from himself all possibl of repent and ultim 
salvation. though, I trust, a sincer christian, I am noth of a 
theologian, and the question touch on a topic which had not occur 
to my mind sinc childhood, and which seem to savour rather of 
mediev romanc than of practic religion, took me for a moment aback. 
I hesit for an instant, and then repli that the mean of salvat 
offer man were undoubtedli so suffici as to remov from one truli 
penit the guilt of ani crime howev dark. My hesit had been but 
momentary; but sir john seem to have notic it, and seal hi lip 
to ani confession, if he had inde intend to make any, by chang 
the subject abruptly. thi question natur gave me food for seriou 
reflect and anxiety. It wa the first occas on which he appear 
to me to be undoubtedli suffer from definit hallucination, and I wa 
awar that ani illus connect with religion are gener most 
difficult to remove. At the same time, anyth of thi sort wa the 
more remark in sir john' case, as he had, so far as I knew, for a 
consider time entir abandon the christian belief. 

unabl to elicit ani further inform from him, and be thu thrown 
entir upon my own resources, I determin that I would read through 
again the whole of temple' diaries. the task wa a veri distast 
one, as I have alreadi explained, but I hope that a second read 
might perhap throw some light on the dark misgiv that wa troubl 
sir john. I read the manuscript again with the closest attention. 
nothing, however, of ani import seem to have escap me on the 
former occasions, and I had reach nearli the end of the second volum 
when a compar slight matter arrest my attention. I have said 
that the page were all care numbered, and the event of each day 
record separately; even where templ had found noth of moment to 
notic on a given day, he had still insert the date with the word 
_nil_ written against it. but as I sat one even in the librari at 
worth after sir john had gone to bed, and wa final glanc through 
the day of the month in temple' diari to make sure that all were 
complete, I found one day wa missing. It wa toward the end of the 
second volume, and the day wa the 23d of octob in the year 1752. A 
glanc at the number of the page reveal the fact that three leav 
had been entir removed, and that the page number 349 to 354 were 
not to be found. again I ran through the diari to see whether there 
were ani leav remov in other places, but found no other singl page 
missing. all wa complet except at thi one place, the manuscript 
beauti written, with scarc an error or erasur throughout. A 
closer examin show that these leav had been cut out close to 
the back, and the cut edg of the paper appear too fresh to admit of 
thi be done a centuri ago. A veri short reflect convinc me, in 
fact, that the excis wa not like to have been temple's, and that 
it must have been made by sir john. 

My first intent wa to ask him at onc what the lost page had 
contained, and whi they had been cut out. the matter might be a mere 
trivial which he could explain in a moment. but on softli open hi 
bedroom door I found him sleeping, and parnham (whom the strong light 
alway burnt in the room render more wakeful) inform me that hi 
master had been in a deep sleep for more than an hour. I knew how 
sore hi wast energi need such repose, and step back to the 
librari without awak him. A few minut before, I had been feel 
sleepi at the conclus of my task, but now all wish for sleep wa 
suddenli banish and a pain wake took it place. I wa under 
a speci of mental excit which remind me of my feel some 
year befor at oxford on the first occas of our ever play the 
_gagliarda_ together, and an idea struck me with the forc of intuit 
that in these three lost leav lay the secret of my friend' ruin. 

I turn to the context to see whether there wa anyth in the entri 
preced or follow the lacuna that would afford a clue to the 
miss passage. the record of the few day immedi preced the 
23d of octob wa short and contain noth of ani moment whatever. 
adrian and jocelyn were alon togeth at the villa de angelis. the 
entri on the 22d wa veri unimport and appar quit complete, 
end at the bottom of page 348. Of the 23d there was, as I have said, 
no record at all, and the entri for the 24th began at the top of page 
355. thi last memorandum wa also brief, and written when the author 
wa annoy by jocelyn leav him. 

the defect of hi companion had been appar entir unexpected. 
there wa at least no previou hint of ani such intention. templ wrote 
that jocelyn had left the villa de ang that day and taken up hi 
abod with the carthusian of san martino. No reason for such an 
extraordinari chang wa given; but there wa a hint that jocelyn had 
profess himself shock at someth that had happened. the entri 
conclud with a few bitter remarks: _"so farewel to my holi anchoret; 
and if I cannot speed him with a leprosi as one elisha did hi servant, 
yet at least he went out from my presenc with a face as white as 
snow."_ 

I had read thi sentenc more than onc befor without it attract 
other than a pass attention. the curiou expression, that jocelyn had 
gone out from hi presenc with a face as white as snow, had hitherto 
seem to me to mean noth more than that the two men had part in 
violent anger, and that templ had abus or bulli hi companion. but 
as I sat alon that night in the librari the word seem to assum an 
entir new force, and a strang suspicion began to creep over me. 

I have said that one of the most remark featur of sir john' 
ill wa hi deadli pallor. though I had now spent some time at 
worth, and had been daili struck by thi lack of colour, I had never 
befor rememb in thi connect that a strang pale had also 
been an attribut of adrian temple, and wa inde veri clearli mark 
in the pictur paint of him by battoni. In sir john' account, 
moreover, of the vision which he thought he had seen in hi room at 
oxford, he had alway spoken of the white and waxen face of hi spectral 
visitant. the famili tradit of royston said that templ had lost hi 
colour in some deadli magic experiment, and a convict now flash 
upon me that jocelyn' face "a white as snow" could refer onli to thi 
same unnatur pallor, and that he too had been smitten with it as with 
the mark of the beast. 

In a drawer of my despatch-box, I kept by me all the letter which the 
late ladi maltrav had written home dure her ill-fat honeymoon. 
miss maltrav had place them in my hand in order that I might be 
acquaint with everi fact that could at all elucid the progress of 
sir john' malady. I rememb that in one of these letter mention wa 
made of a sharp attack of fever in naples, and of her notic in him 
for the first time thi singular pallor. I found the letter again 
without difficulti and read it with a new light. everi line breath of 
surpris and alarm. ladi maltrav fear that her husband wa veri 
serious ill. On the wednesday, two day befor she wrote, he had 
suffer all day from a strang restlessness, which had increas after 
they had retir in the evening. He could not sleep and had dress 
again, say he would walk a littl in the night air to compos 
himself. He had not return till near six in the morning, and then 
seem so exhaust that he had sinc been confin to hi bed. He wa 
terribl pale, and the doctor fear he had been attack by some 
strang fever. 

the date of the letter wa the 25th of october, fix the night of the 
23d as the time of sir john' first attack. the coincid of the date 
with that of the day miss in temple' diari wa significant, but it 
wa not need now to convinc me that sir john' ruin wa due to 
someth that occur on that fatal night at naples. 

the question that dr. frobish had ask miss maltrav when he wa 
first call to see her brother in london return to my memori with an 
overwhelm force. "had sir john been subject to ani mental shock; 
had he receiv ani sever fright?" I knew now that the question should 
have been answer in the affirmative, for I felt as certain as if 
sir john had told me himself that he _had_ receiv a violent shock, 
probabl some terribl fright, on the night of the 23d of october. what 
the natur of that shock could have been my imagin wa powerless to 
conceive, onli I knew that whatev sir john had done or seen, adrian 
templ and jocelyn had done or seen also a centuri befor and at the 
same place. that horror which had blanch the face of all three men 
for life had fallen perhap with a less overwhelm forc on temple' 
season wickedness, but had driven the worthless jocelyn to the 
cloister, and wa drive sir john to the grave. 

these thought as they pass through my mind fill me with a vagu 
alarm. the late of the hour, the still and the subdu light, 
made the librari in which I sat seem so vast and lone that I began to 
feel the same dread of be alon that I had observ so often in my 
friend. though onli a door separ me from hi bedroom, and I could 
hear hi deep and regular breathing, I felt as though I must go in 
and waken him or parnham to keep me compani and save me from my own 
reflections. By a strong effort I restrain myself, and sat down to 
think the matter over and endeavour to frame some hypothesi that might 
explain the mystery. but it wa all to no purpose. I mere weari 
myself without be abl to arriv at even a plausibl conjecture, 
except that it seem as though the strang coincid of date might 
point to some ghastli charm or incant which could onli be carri 
out on one certain night of the year. 

It must have been near morn when, quit exhausted, I fell into an 
uneasi slumber in the arm-chair where I sat. My sleep, howev brief, 
wa peopl with a success of fantast visions, in which I 
continu saw sir john, not ill and wast as now, but vigor and 
handsom as I had known him at oxford, stand besid a glow brazier 
and recit word I could not understand, while anoth man with a 
sneer white face sat in a corner play the air of the _gagliarda_ 
on a violin. parnham woke me in my chair at seven o'clock; hi master, 
he said, wa still sleep easily. 

I had made up my mind that as soon as he awok I would inquir of sir 
john as to the page miss from the diary; but though my expect 
and excit were at a high pitch, I wa forc to restrain my 
curiosity, for sir john' slumber continu late into the day. dr. 
bruton call in the morning, and said that thi sleep wa what the 
patient' condit most required, and wa a distinctli favour 
symptom; he wa on no account to be disturbed. sir john did not leav 
hi bed, but continu doze all day till the evening. when at last he 
shook off hi drowsiness, the hour wa alreadi so late that, in spite of 
my anxiety, I hesit to talk with him about the diaries, lest I 
should unduli excit him befor the night. 

As the even advanc he becam veri uneasy, and rose more than onc 
from hi bed. thi restlessness, follow on the repos of the day, 
ought perhap to have made me anxious, for I have sinc observ that 
when death is veri near an apprehens unrest often set in both with 
men and animals. It seem as if they dread to resign themselv to 
sleep, lest as they slumber the last enemi should seiz them unawares. 
they tri to fling off the bedclothes, they sometim must leav their 
bed and walk. So it wa with poor john maltrav on hi last christma 
eve. I had sat with him griev for hi disquiet until he seem to 
grow more tranquil, and at length fell asleep. I wa sleep that night 
in hi room instead of parnham, and tire with sit up through the 
previou night, I flung myself, dress as I was, upon the bed. I had 
scarc doze off, I think, befor the sound of hi violin awok me. 
I found he had risen from hi bed, had taken hi favourit instrument, 
and wa play in hi sleep. the air wa the _gagliarda_ of the 
"areopagita" suite, which I had not heard sinc we had play it last 
togeth at oxford, and it brought back with it a crowd of far-off 
memori and infinit regrets. I curs the sleepi which had 
overcom me at my watchman' post, and allow sir john to play onc 
more that melodi which had alway been fraught with such evil for him; 
and I wa about to wake him gentli when he wa startl from sleep by a 
strang accident. As I walk toward him the violin seem entir to 
collaps in hi hands, and, as a matter of fact, the belli then gave way 
and broke under the strain of the strings. As the string slackened, the 
last note becam an unearthli discord. If I were superstiti I should 
say that some evil spirit then went out of the violin, and broke in hi 
part throe the wooden tabernacl which had so long shelter him. It 
wa the last time the instrument wa ever used, and that hideou chord 
wa the last that maltrav ever played. 

I had fear that the shock of wake thu suddenli from sleep would 
have a veri prejudici effect upon the sleep-walker, but thi seem 
not to be the case. I persuad him to go back at onc to bed, and in a 
few minut he fell asleep again. In the morn he seem for the first 
time distinctli better; there wa inde someth of hi old self in 
hi manner. It seem as though the break of the violin had been an 
actual relief to him; and I believ that on that christma morn hi 
better instinct woke, and that hi old religi train and the 
associ of hi boyhood then made their last appeal. I wa pleas 
at such a change, howev temporari it might prove. He wish to go to 
church, and I determin that again I would subdu my curios and 
defer the question I wa burn to put till after our return from 
the morn service. miss maltrav had gone indoor to make some 
preparation, sir john wa in hi wheel-chair on the terrace, and I wa 
sit by him in the sun. for a few moment he appear immers in 
silent thought, and then bent over toward me till hi head wa close 
to mine, and said, "dear william, there is someth I must tell you. 
I feel I cannot even go to church till I have told you all." hi manner 
shock me beyond expression. I knew that he wa go to tell me the 
secret of the lost pages, but instead of wish ani longer to have my 
curios satisfied, I felt a horribl dread of what he might say next. 
He took my hand in hi and held it tightly, as a man who wa about to 
undergo sever physic pain and sought the consol of a friend' 
support. then he went on--"you will be shock at what I am go to 
tell you; but listen, and do not give me up: you must stand by me and 
comfort me and help me to turn again." He paus for a moment and 
continued--"it wa one night in october, when constanc and I were at 
naples. I took that violin and went by myself to the ruin villa on 
the scoglio di venere." He had been speak with difficulty. hi hand 
clutch mine convulsively, but still I felt it trembling, and I could 
see the moistur stand thick on hi forehead. At thi point the 
effort seem too much for him and he broke off. "I cannot go on, I 
cannot tell you, but you can read it for yourself. In that diari which 
I gave you there are some page missing." the suspens wa becom 
intoler to me, and I broke in, "yes, yes, I know; you cut them out. 
tell me where they are," He went on--"yes, I cut them out lest they 
should possibl fall into anyone' hand unaware. but befor you read 
them you must swear, as you hope for salvation, that you will never tri 
to do what is written in them. swear thi to me now, or I never can 
let you see them." My eager wa too great to stop now to discuss 
trifles, and to humour him I swore as desired. He had been speak with 
a continu increas effort; he cast a hurri and fear glanc 
round as though he expect to see someon listening, and it wa almost 
in a whisper that he went on, "you will find them in--" hi agit 
had becom most pain to watch, and as he spoke the last word a 
convuls pass over hi face, and speech fail him, he sank back on 
hi pillow. A strang fear took hold of me. for a moment I thought there 
were other on the terrac besid myself, and turn round expect to 
see miss maltrav returned; but we were still alone. I even fanci 
that just as sir john spoke hi last word I felt someth brush 
swiftli by me. He put up hi hands, beat the air with a most pain 
gesture, as though he were tri to keep off an antagonist who had 
grip him by the throat, and made a final struggl to speak. but the 
spasm wa too strong for him; a dread still followed, and he wa 
gone. 

there is littl more to add; for sir john' guilti secret, perish with 
him. though I wa sure from hi manner that the miss leav were 
conceal somewher at worth, and though as executor I caus the most 
dilig search to be made, no trace of them wa afterward found; nor 
did ani circumst ever transpir to fling further light upon the 
matter. I must confess that I should have felt the discoveri of these 
page as a relief; for though I dread what I might have had to read, 
yet I wa more anxiou lest, be found at a later period and fall 
into other hands, they should caus a recrudesc of that plagu which 
had blight sir john' life. 

Of the natur of the event which took place on that night at napl 
I can form no conjecture. but as certain physic sight have ere now 
prove so revolt as to unhing the intellect, so I can imagin that 
the mind may in a state of extrem tension conjur up to itself some 
form of moral evil so hideou as metaphys to sear it: and this, 
I believe, happen in the case both of adrian templ and of sir john 
maltravers. 

It is difficult to imagin the accessori use to produc the mental 
excit in which alon such a present of evil could becom 
imaginable. fanci and legend, which have combin to repres as 
possibl appear of the supernatural, agre also in consid them 
as more like to occur at certain time and place than at others; and 
it is possibl that the miss page of the diari contain an account 
of the time, place, and other condit chosen by templ for some 
deadli experiment. sir john most probabl re-enact the scene under 
precis similar conditions, and the effect on hi overwrought 
imagin wa so vivid as to upset the balanc of hi mind. the time 
chosen wa no doubt the night of the 23d of october, and I cannot help 
think that the place wa one of those evil-look and ruinou 
sea-room which had so terrifi an effect on miss maltravers. templ 
may have use on that night one of the mediev incantations, or 
possibl the more ancient invoc of the isiac rite with which a 
man of hi knowledg and procliv would certainli be familiar. the 
accessori of either are suffici hideou to weaken the mind by 
terror, and so prepar it for a belief in some fright apparition. but 
whatev wa done, I feel sure that the music of the _gagliarda_ form 
part of the ceremonial. 

mediev philosoph and theologian held that evil is in it essenc 
so horribl that the human mind, if it could realis it, must perish at 
it contemplation. such realis wa by merci ordinarili withheld, 
but it possibl wa hint in the legend of the _visio malefica_. 
the _visio beatifica_ was, as is well known, that vision of the deiti 
or realis of the perfect good which wa to form the happi of 
heaven, and the reward of the sanctifi in the next world. tradit 
say that thi vision wa accord also to some special elect spirit 
even in thi life, as to enoch, elijah, stephen, and jerome. but there 
wa a convers to the beatif vision in the _visio malefica_, or 
present of absolut evil, which wa to be the chief tortur of the 
damned, and which, like the beatif vision, had been made visibl in 
life to certain desper men. It visit esau, as wa said, when he 
found no place for repentance, and judas, whom it drove to suicide. 
cain saw it when he murder hi brother, and legend relat that in hi 
case, and in that of others, it left a physic brand to be born by 
the bodi to the grave. It wa suppos that the malef vision, besid 
be thu spontan present to typic abandon men, had 
actual been purpos call up by some few great adepts, and use by 
them to blast their enemies. but to do so wa consid equival to a 
consciou surrend to the power of evil, as the vision onc seen took 
away all hope of final salvation. 

adrian templ would undoubtedli be cognis of thi legend, and the 
lost experi may have been an attempt to call up the malef vision. 
It is but a vagu conjectur at the best, for the tree of the knowledg 
of evil bear mani sort of poison fruit, and no one can give full 
account of the extravag of a wayward fancy. 

conjointli with miss sophia, sir john appoint me hi executor and 
guardian of hi onli son. two month later we had lit a great fire 
in the librari at worth. In it, after the servant were gone to bed, 
we burnt the book contain the "areopagita" of graziani, and the 
stradivariu fiddle. the diari of templ I had alreadi destroyed, and 
wish that I could as easili blot out their foul and debas memori 
from my mind. I shall probabl be blame by those who would exalt 
art at the expens of everyth else, for burn a uniqu violin. 
thi reproach I am content to bear. though I am not unreason 
superstitious, and have no sympathi for that potenti pantheism to 
which sir john maltrav surrend hi intellect, yet I felt so great 
an avers to thi violin that I would neither suffer it to remain at 
worth, nor pass into other hands. miss sophia wa entir at one with 
me on thi point. It wa the same feel which restrain ani except 
fool or braggart from wish to sleep in "haunted" rooms, or to live 
in hous pollut with the memori of a revolt crime. No sane mind 
believ in foolish apparitions, but fanci may at time bewitch the best 
of us. So the stradivariu wa burnt. It was, after all, perhap not so 
seriou a matter, for, as I have said, the bass-bar had given way. there 
had alway been a question whether it wa strong enough to resist the 
strain of modern stringing. experi show at last that it wa not. 
with the failur of the bass-bar the belli collapsed, and the wood broke 
across the grain in so extraordinari a manner as to put the fiddl 
beyond repair, except as a curiosity. it loss, therefore, is not to be 
so much regretted. sir edward ha been brought up to think more of a 
cricket-bat than of a violin-bow; but if he wish at ani time to buy a 
stradivarius, the fortun of worth and royston, nurs through two long 
minorities, will certainli justifi hi do so. 

miss sophia and I stood by and watch the holocaust. My heart misgav 
me for a moment when I saw the mellow red varnish blister off the 
back, but I put my regret resolut aside. As the bright flame jump 
up and lap it round, they flung a red glow on the scroll. It wa 
wonder wrought, and differed, as I think miss maltrav ha 
alreadi said, from ani known exampl of stradivarius. As we watch it, 
the scroll took form, and we saw what we had never seen before, that it 
wa cut so that the deep line in a certain light show as the profil 
of a man. It wa a wizen littl paganish face, with sharp-cut featur 
and a bald head. As I look at it I knew at onc (and a cameo ha sinc 
confirm the fact) that it wa a head of porphyry. thu the second 
label found in the violin wa explain and sir john' view confirmed, 
that stradivariu had made the instrument for some neo-platonist 
enthusiast who had dedic it to hi master porphyrius. 

* * * * * 

A year after sir john' death I went with miss maltrav to worth 
church to see a plain slab of slate which we had place over her 
brother' grave. We stood in bright sunlight in the maltrav chapel, 
with the monument of that splendid famili about us. among them were the 
altar-tomb of sir esmoun, and the effigi of more than one crusader. 
As I look on their knightli forms, with their head rest on their 
tilt helms, their face set firm, and their hand join in prayer, 
I could not help envi them that full and unwav faith for which 
they had fought and died. It seem to stand out in such sharp contrast 
with our latter-day sciolism and half-believ creeds, and to be flung 
into higher relief by the dark shadow of john maltravers' ruin life. 
At our feet wa the great brass of one sir roger de maltravers. I 
point out the end of the inscript to my companion--"cviv animæ, 
atqv animabv omnivm fidelivm defvnctorvm, atqv nostri animabv qvvm 
EX hac lvce transiverimvs, propitietvr devs." though no catholic, I 
could not refus to add a sincer amen. miss sophia, who is not ignor 
of latin, read the inscript after me. "ex hac luce," she said, as 
though speak to herself, "out of thi light; alas! alas! for some the 
light is darkness." 



***end OF the project gutenberg ebook the lost stradivarius*** 


******* thi file should be name 14107-8.txt or 14107-8.zip ******* 


thi and all associ file of variou format will be found in: 
http://www.gutenberg.org/dirs/1/4/1/0/14107 



updat edit will replac the previou one--th old edit 
will be renamed. 

creat the work from public domain print edit mean that no 
one own a unit state copyright in these works, so the foundat 
(and you!) can copi and distribut it in the unit state without 
permiss and without pay copyright royalties. special rules, 
set forth in the gener term of use part of thi license, appli to 
copi and distribut project gutenberg-tm electron work to 
protect the project gutenberg-tm concept and trademark. project 
gutenberg is a regist trademark, and may not be use if you 
charg for the ebooks, unless you receiv specif permission. If you 
do not charg anyth for copi of thi ebook, compli with the 
rule is veri easy. you may use thi ebook for nearli ani purpos 
such as creation of deriv works, reports, perform and 
research. they may be modifi and print and given away--y may do 
practic anyth with public domain ebooks. redistribut is 
subject to the trademark license, especi commerci 
redistribution. 



*** start: full licens *** 

the full project gutenberg licens 
pleas read thi befor you distribut OR use thi work 

To protect the project gutenberg-tm mission of promot the free 
distribut of electron works, by use or distribut thi work 
(or ani other work associ in ani way with the phrase "project 
gutenberg"), you agre to compli with all the term of the full project 
gutenberg-tm licens (avail with thi file or onlin at 
http://gutenberg.net/license). 


section 1. gener term of use and redistribut project gutenberg-tm 
electron work 

1.a. By read or use ani part of thi project gutenberg-tm 
electron work, you indic that you have read, understand, agre to 
and accept all the term of thi licens and intellectu properti 
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agre to abid by all 
the term of thi agreement, you must ceas use and return or destroy 
all copi of project gutenberg-tm electron work in your possession. 
If you paid a fee for obtain a copi of or access to a project 
gutenberg-tm electron work and you do not agre to be bound by the 
term of thi agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or 
entiti to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.e.8. 

1.b. "project gutenberg" is a regist trademark. It may onli be 
use on or associ in ani way with an electron work by peopl who 
agre to be bound by the term of thi agreement. there are a few 
thing that you can do with most project gutenberg-tm electron work 
even without compli with the full term of thi agreement. see 
paragraph 1.c below. there are a lot of thing you can do with project 
gutenberg-tm electron work if you follow the term of thi agreement 
and help preserv free futur access to project gutenberg-tm electron 
works. see paragraph 1.e below. 

1.c. the project gutenberg literari archiv foundat ("the foundation" 
or pglaf), own a compil copyright in the collect of project 
gutenberg-tm electron works. nearli all the individu work in the 
collect are in the public domain in the unit states. If an 
individu work is in the public domain in the unit state and you are 
locat in the unit states, we do not claim a right to prevent you from 
copying, distributing, performing, display or creat deriv 
work base on the work as long as all refer to project gutenberg 
are removed. Of course, we hope that you will support the project 
gutenberg-tm mission of promot free access to electron work by 
freeli share project gutenberg-tm work in complianc with the term of 
thi agreement for keep the project gutenberg-tm name associ with 
the work. you can easili compli with the term of thi agreement by 
keep thi work in the same format with it attach full project 
gutenberg-tm licens when you share it without charg with others. 

1.d. the copyright law of the place where you are locat also govern 
what you can do with thi work. copyright law in most countri are in 
a constant state of change. If you are outsid the unit states, check 
the law of your countri in addit to the term of thi agreement 
befor downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distribut or 
creat deriv work base on thi work or ani other project 
gutenberg-tm work. the foundat make no represent concern 
the copyright statu of ani work in ani countri outsid the unit 
states. 

1.e. unless you have remov all refer to project gutenberg: 

1.e.1. the follow sentence, with activ link to, or other immedi 
access to, the full project gutenberg-tm licens must appear promin 
whenev ani copi of a project gutenberg-tm work (ani work on which the 
phrase "project gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "project 
gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed, 
copi or distributed: 

thi ebook is for the use of anyon anywher at no cost and with 
almost no restrict whatsoever. you may copi it, give it away or 
re-us it under the term of the project gutenberg licens includ 
with thi ebook or onlin at www.gutenberg.net 

1.e.2. If an individu project gutenberg-tm electron work is deriv 
from the public domain (doe not contain a notic indic that it is 
post with permiss of the copyright holder), the work can be copi 
and distribut to anyon in the unit state without pay ani fee 
or charges. If you are redistribut or provid access to a work 
with the phrase "project gutenberg" associ with or appear on the 
work, you must compli either with the requir of paragraph 1.e.1 
through 1.e.7 or obtain permiss for the use of the work and the 
project gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraph 1.e.8 or 
1.e.9. 

1.e.3. If an individu project gutenberg-tm electron work is post 
with the permiss of the copyright holder, your use and distribut 
must compli with both paragraph 1.e.1 through 1.e.7 and ani addit 
term impos by the copyright holder. addit term will be link 
to the project gutenberg-tm licens for all work post with the 
permiss of the copyright holder found at the begin of thi work. 

1.e.4. Do not unlink or detach or remov the full project gutenberg-tm 
licens term from thi work, or ani file contain a part of thi 
work or ani other work associ with project gutenberg-tm. 

1.e.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribut or redistribut thi 
electron work, or ani part of thi electron work, without 
promin display the sentenc set forth in paragraph 1.e.1 with 
activ link or immedi access to the full term of the project 
gutenberg-tm license. 

1.e.6. you may convert to and distribut thi work in ani binary, 
compressed, mark up, nonproprietari or proprietari form, includ ani 
word process or hypertext form. however, if you provid access to or 
distribut copi of a project gutenberg-tm work in a format other than 
"plain vanilla ascii" or other format use in the offici version 
post on the offici project gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net), 
you must, at no addit cost, fee or expens to the user, provid a 
copy, a mean of export a copy, or a mean of obtain a copi upon 
request, of the work in it origin "plain vanilla ascii" or other 
form. ani altern format must includ the full project gutenberg-tm 
licens as specifi in paragraph 1.e.1. 

1.e.7. Do not charg a fee for access to, viewing, displaying, 
performing, copi or distribut ani project gutenberg-tm work 
unless you compli with paragraph 1.e.8 or 1.e.9. 

1.e.8. you may charg a reason fee for copi of or provid 
access to or distribut project gutenberg-tm electron work provid 
that 

- you pay a royalti fee of 20% of the gross profit you deriv from 
the use of project gutenberg-tm work calcul use the method 
you alreadi use to calcul your applic taxes. the fee is 
owe to the owner of the project gutenberg-tm trademark, but he 
ha agre to donat royalti under thi paragraph to the 
project gutenberg literari archiv foundation. royalti payment 
must be paid within 60 day follow each date on which you 
prepar (or are legal requir to prepare) your period tax 
returns. royalti payment should be clearli mark as such and 
sent to the project gutenberg literari archiv foundat at the 
address specifi in section 4, "inform about donat to 
the project gutenberg literari archiv foundation." 

- you provid a full refund of ani money paid by a user who notifi 
you in write (or by e-mail) within 30 day of receipt that s/he 
doe not agre to the term of the full project gutenberg-tm 
license. you must requir such a user to return or 
destroy all copi of the work possess in a physic medium 
and discontinu all use of and all access to other copi of 
project gutenberg-tm works. 

- you provide, in accord with paragraph 1.f.3, a full refund of ani 
money paid for a work or a replac copy, if a defect in the 
electron work is discov and report to you within 90 day 
of receipt of the work. 

- you compli with all other term of thi agreement for free 
distribut of project gutenberg-tm works. 

1.e.9. If you wish to charg a fee or distribut a project gutenberg-tm 
electron work or group of work on differ term than are set 
forth in thi agreement, you must obtain permiss in write from 
both the project gutenberg literari archiv foundat and michael 
hart, the owner of the project gutenberg-tm trademark. contact the 
foundat as set forth in section 3 below. 

1.f. 

1.f.1. project gutenberg volunt and employe expend consider 
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcrib and proofread 
public domain work in creat the project gutenberg-tm 
collection. despit these efforts, project gutenberg-tm electron 
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain 
"defects," such as, but not limit to, incomplete, inaccur or 
corrupt data, transcript errors, a copyright or other intellectu 
properti infringement, a defect or damag disk or other medium, a 
comput virus, or comput code that damag or cannot be read by 
your equipment. 

1.f.2. limit warranty, disclaim OF damag - except for the "right 
of replac or refund" describ in paragraph 1.f.3, the project 
gutenberg literari archiv foundation, the owner of the project 
gutenberg-tm trademark, and ani other parti distribut a project 
gutenberg-tm electron work under thi agreement, disclaim all 
liabil to you for damages, cost and expenses, includ legal 
fees. you agre that you have NO remedi for negligence, strict 
liability, breach OF warranti OR breach OF contract except those 
provid IN paragraph f3. you agre that the foundation, the 
trademark owner, and ani distributor under thi agreement will not BE 
liabl TO you for actual, direct, indirect, consequential, punit OR 
incident damag even IF you give notic OF the possibl OF such 
damage. 

1.f.3. limit right OF replac OR refund - If you discov a 
defect in thi electron work within 90 day of receiv it, you can 
receiv a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by send a 
written explan to the person you receiv the work from. If you 
receiv the work on a physic medium, you must return the medium with 
your written explanation. the person or entiti that provid you with 
the defect work may elect to provid a replac copi in lieu of a 
refund. If you receiv the work electronically, the person or entiti 
provid it to you may choos to give you a second opportun to 
receiv the work electron in lieu of a refund. If the second copi 
is also defective, you may demand a refund in write without further 
opportun to fix the problem. 

1.f.4. except for the limit right of replac or refund set forth 
in paragraph 1.f.3, thi work is provid to you 'as-is', with NO other 
warranti OF ani kind, express OR implied, includ but not limit TO 
warranti OF merchant OR fit for ani purpose. 

1.f.5. some state do not allow disclaim of certain impli 
warranti or the exclus or limit of certain type of damages. 
If ani disclaim or limit set forth in thi agreement violat the 
law of the state applic to thi agreement, the agreement shall be 
interpret to make the maximum disclaim or limit permit by 
the applic state law. the invalid or unenforc of ani 
provis of thi agreement shall not void the remain provisions. 

1.f.6. indemn - you agre to indemnifi and hold the foundation, the 
trademark owner, ani agent or employe of the foundation, anyon 
provid copi of project gutenberg-tm electron work in accord 
with thi agreement, and ani volunt associ with the production, 
promot and distribut of project gutenberg-tm electron works, 
harmless from all liability, cost and expenses, includ legal fees, 
that aris directli or indirectli from ani of the follow which you do 
or caus to occur: (a) distribut of thi or ani project gutenberg-tm 
work, (b) alteration, modification, or addit or delet to ani 
project gutenberg-tm work, and (c) ani defect you cause. 


section 2. inform about the mission of project gutenberg-tm 

project gutenberg-tm is synonym with the free distribut of 
electron work in format readabl by the widest varieti of comput 
includ obsolete, old, middle-ag and new computers. It exist 
becaus of the effort of hundr of volunt and donat from 
peopl in all walk of life. 

volunt and financi support to provid volunt with the 
assist they need, is critic to reach project gutenberg-tm' 
goal and ensur that the project gutenberg-tm collect will 
remain freeli avail for gener to come. In 2001, the project 
gutenberg literari archiv foundat wa creat to provid a secur 
and perman futur for project gutenberg-tm and futur generations. 
To learn more about the project gutenberg literari archiv foundat 
and how your effort and donat can help, see section 3 and 4 
and the foundat web page at http://www.gutenberg.net/fundraising/pglaf. 


section 3. inform about the project gutenberg literari archiv 
foundat 

the project gutenberg literari archiv foundat is a non profit 
501(c)(3) educ corpor organ under the law of the 
state of mississippi and grant tax exempt statu by the intern 
revenu service. the foundation' ein or feder tax identif 
number is 64-6221541. contribut to the project gutenberg 
literari archiv foundat are tax deduct to the full extent 
permit by u.s. feder law and your state' laws. 

the foundation' princip offic is locat at 4557 melan dr. S. 
fairbanks, ak, 99712., but it volunt and employe are scatter 
throughout numer locations. it busi offic is locat at 
809 north 1500 west, salt lake city, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email 
business@pglaf.org. email contact link and up to date contact 
inform can be found at the foundation' web site and offici 
page at http://www.gutenberg.net/about/contact 

for addit contact information: 
dr. gregori B. newbi 
chief execut and director 
gbnewby@pglaf.org 

section 4. inform about donat to the project gutenberg 
literari archiv foundat 

project gutenberg-tm depend upon and cannot surviv without wide 
spread public support and donat to carri out it mission of 
increas the number of public domain and licens work that can be 
freeli distribut in machin readabl form access by the widest 
array of equip includ outdat equipment. mani small donat 
($1 to $5,000) are particularli import to maintain tax exempt 
statu with the irs. 

the foundat is commit to compli with the law regul 
chariti and charit donat in all 50 state of the unit 
states. complianc requir are not uniform and it take a 
consider effort, much paperwork and mani fee to meet and keep up 
with these requirements. We do not solicit donat in locat 
where we have not receiv written confirm of compliance. To 
send donat or determin the statu of complianc for ani 
particular state visit http://www.gutenberg.net/fundraising/don 

while we cannot and do not solicit contribut from state where we 
have not met the solicit requirements, we know of no prohibit 
against accept unsolicit donat from donor in such state who 
approach us with offer to donate. 

intern donat are grate accepted, but we cannot make 
ani statement concern tax treatment of donat receiv from 
outsid the unit states. u.s. law alon swamp our small staff. 

pleas check the project gutenberg web page for current donat 
method and addresses. donat are accept in a number of other 
way includ includ checks, onlin payment and credit card 
donations. To donate, pleas visit: 
http://www.gutenberg.net/fundraising/don 


section 5. gener inform about project gutenberg-tm electron 
works. 

professor michael S. hart is the origin of the project gutenberg-tm 
concept of a librari of electron work that could be freeli share 
with anyone. for thirti years, he produc and distribut project 
gutenberg-tm ebook with onli a loos network of volunt support. 

project gutenberg-tm ebook are often creat from sever print 
editions, all of which are confirm as public domain in the u.s. 
unless a copyright notic is included. thus, we do not necessarili 
keep ebook in complianc with ani particular paper edition. 

most peopl start at our web site which ha the main PG search facility: 

http://www.gutenberg.net 

thi web site includ inform about project gutenberg-tm, 
includ how to make donat to the project gutenberg literari 
archiv foundation, how to help produc our new ebooks, and how to 
subscrib to our email newslett to hear about new ebooks. 
