the project gutenberg ebook of john silence, physician extraordinary, by 
algernon blackwood 

thi ebook is for the use of anyon anywher in the unit state and most 
other part of the world at no cost and with almost no restrict 
whatsoever. you may copi it, give it away or re-us it under the term of 
the project gutenberg licens includ with thi ebook or onlin at 
www.gutenberg.org. If you are not locat in the unit states, you'll have 
to check the law of the countri where you are locat befor use thi ebook. 



title: john silence, physician extraordinari 

author: algernon blackwood 

releas date: june 16, 2015 [ebook #49222] 

language: english 

charact set encoding: utf-8 

*** start OF thi project gutenberg ebook john silence, physician *** 




produc by the onlin distribut proofread team at 
http://www.pgdp.net (thi file wa produc from imag 
gener made avail by the internet archive/american 
libraries.) 









john silenc 
physician extraordinari 

BY 
algernon blackwood 

author OF 
“the listener” “the empti house” etc. 

boston 
john W. luce & compani 
1909 




TO 
M. L. W. 
the origin OF john silenc 
and 
MY companion IN mani adventur 




content 


case I 
page 
A psychic invas 1 

case II 
ancient sorceri 75 

case iii 
the nemesi OF fire 143 

case IV 
secret worship 245 

case V 
the camp OF the dog 295 




john silenc 

case I 

A psychic invas 


“and what is it make you think I could be of use in thi particular 
case?” ask dr. john silence, look across somewhat sceptic at 
the swedish ladi in the chair face him. 

“your sympathet heart and your knowledg of occultism----” 

“oh, please--that dread word!” he interrupted, hold up a finger 
with a gestur of impatience. 

“well, then,” she laughed, “your wonder clairvoy gift and your 
train psychic knowledg of the process by which a person may 
be disintegr and destroyed--thes strang studi you’v been 
experi with all these years----” 

“if it’ onli a case of multipl person I must realli cri off,” 
interrupt the doctor again hastily, a bore express in hi eyes. 

“it’ not that; now, please, be serious, for I want your help,” she 
said; “and if I choos my word poorli you must be patient with my 
ignorance. the case I know will interest you, and no one els could 
deal with it so well. In fact, no ordinari profession man could deal 
with it at all, for I know of no treatment or medicin that can restor 
a lost sens of humour!” 

“you begin to interest me with your ‘case,’” he replied, and made 
himself comfort to listen. 

mrs. sivendson drew a sigh of content as she watch him go to the 
tube and heard him tell the servant he wa not to be disturbed. 

“I believ you have read my thought already,” she said; “your 
intuit knowledg of what goe on in other people’ mind is 
posit uncanny.” 

her friend shook hi head and smile as he drew hi chair up to a 
conveni posit and prepar to listen attent to what she had 
to say. He close hi eyes, as he alway did when he wish to absorb 
the real mean of a recit that might be inadequ expressed, 
for by thi method he found it easier to set himself in tune with the 
live thought that lay behind the broken words. 

By hi friend john silenc wa regard as an eccentric, becaus 
he wa rich by accident, and by choice--a doctor. that a man of 
independ mean should devot hi time to doctoring, chiefli 
doctor folk who could not pay, pass their comprehens entirely. 
the nativ nobil of a soul whose first desir wa to help those who 
could not help themselves, puzzl them. after that, it irrit them, 
and, greatli to hi own satisfaction, they left him to hi own devices. 

dr. silenc wa a free-lance, though, among doctors, have neither 
consulting-room, bookkeeper, nor profession manner. He took no 
fees, be at heart a genuin philanthropist, yet at the same time 
did no harm to hi fellow-practitioners, becaus he onli accept 
unremun cases, and case that interest him for some veri 
special reason. He argu that the rich could pay, and the veri poor 
could avail themselv of organis charity, but that a veri larg 
class of ill-paid, self-respect workers, often follow of the 
arts, could not afford the price of a week’ comfort mere to be told 
to travel. and it wa these he desir to help: case often requir 
special and patient study--th no doctor can give for a guinea, and 
that no one would dream of expect him to give. 

but there wa anoth side to hi person and practice, and one 
with which we are now more directli concerned; for the case that 
especi appeal to him were of no ordinari kind, but rather of that 
intangible, elusive, and difficult natur best describ as psychic 
afflictions; and, though he would have been the last person himself to 
approv of the title, it wa beyond question that he wa known more or 
less gener as the “psychic doctor.” 

In order to grappl with case of thi peculiar kind, he had submit 
himself to a long and sever training, at onc physical, mental, and 
spiritual. what precis thi train had been, or where undergone, 
no one seem to know,--for he never spoke of it, as, indeed, he 
betray no singl other characterist of the charlatan,--but the fact 
that it had involv a total disappear from the world for five 
years, and that after he return and began hi singular practic no 
one ever dream of appli to him the so easili acquir epithet of 
quack, spoke much for the serious of hi strang quest and also for 
the genuin of hi attainments. 

for the modern psychic research he felt the calm toler of the 
“man who knows.” there wa a trace of piti in hi voice--contempt he 
never showed--when he spoke of their methods. 

“thi classif of result is uninspir work at best,” he said 
onc to me, when I had been hi confidenti assist for some years. 
“it lead nowhere, and after a hundr year will lead nowhere. It is 
play with the wrong end of a rather danger toy. far better, it 
would be, to examin the causes, and then the result would so easili 
slip into place and explain themselves. for the sourc are accessible, 
and open to all who have the courag to lead the life that alon make 
practic investig safe and possible.” 

and toward the question of clairvoyance, too, hi attitud wa 
significantli sane, for he knew how extrem rare the genuin power 
was, and that what is commonli call clairvoy is noth more than 
a keen power of visualising. 

“it connot a slightli increas sensibility, noth more,” he would 
say. “the true clairvoy deplor hi power, recognis that it add 
a new horror to life, and is in the natur of an affliction. and you 
will find thi alway to be the real test.” 

thu it wa that john silence, thi singularli develop doctor, wa 
abl to select hi case with a clear knowledg of the differ 
between mere hyster delus and the kind of psychic afflict 
that claim hi special powers. It wa never necessari for him to 
resort to the cheap mysteri of divination; for, as I have heard him 
observe, after the solut of some peculiarli intric problem-- 

“system of divination, from geomanc down to read by tea-leaves, 
are mere so mani method of obscur the outer vision, in order 
that the inner vision may becom open. onc the method is mastered, no 
system is necessari at all.” 

and the word were signific of the method of thi remark man, 
the keynot of whose power lay, perhaps, more than anyth else, 
in the knowledge, first, that thought can act at a distance, and, 
secondly, that thought is dynam and can accomplish materi results. 

“learn how to _think_,” he would have express it, “and you have 
learn to tap power at it source.” 

To look at--h wa now past forty--h wa spare built, with speak 
brown eye in which shone the light of knowledg and self-confidence, 
while at the same time they made one think of that wondrou gentl 
seen most often in the eye of animals. A close beard conceal the 
mouth without disguis the grim determin of lip and jaw, 
and the face somehow convey an impress of transparency, almost 
of light, so delic were the featur refin away. On the 
fine forehead wa that indefin touch of peac that come from 
identifi the mind with what is perman in the soul, and let 
the imperman slip by without power to wound or distress; while, from 
hi manner,--so gentle, quiet, sympathetic,--few could have guess the 
strength of purpos that burn within like a great flame. 

“I think I should describ it as a psychic case,” continu the 
swedish lady, obvious tri to explain herself veri intelligently, 
“and just the kind you like. I mean a case where the caus is hidden 
deep down in some spiritu distress, and----” 

“but the symptom first, please, my dear svenska,” he interrupted, with 
a strang compel serious of manner, “and your deduct 
afterwards.” 

she turn round sharpli on the edg of her chair and look him in the 
face, lower her voic to prevent her emot betray itself too 
obviously. 

“in my opinion there’ onli one symptom,” she half whispered, as though 
tell someth disagreeable--“fear--simpli fear.” 

“physic fear?” 

“I think not; though how can I say? I think it’ a horror in the 
psychic region. it’ no ordinari delusion; the man is quit sane; but 
he live in mortal terror of something----” 

“I don’t know what you mean by hi ‘psychic region,’” said the 
doctor, with a smile; “though I suppos you wish me to understand that 
hi spiritual, and not hi mental, process are affected. anyhow, tri 
and tell me briefli and pointedli what you know about the man, hi 
symptoms, hi need for help, _my_ peculiar help, that is, and all that 
seem vital in the case. I promis to listen devotedly.” 

“I am trying,” she continu earnestly, “but must do so in my own word 
and trust to your intellig to disentangl as I go along. He is a 
young author, and live in a tini hous off putney heath somewhere. He 
write humor stories--quit a genr of hi own: pender--y must 
have heard the name--felix pender? oh, the man had a great gift, and 
marri on the strength of it; hi futur seem assured. I say ‘had,’ 
for quit suddenli hi talent utterli fail him. worse, it becam 
transform into it opposite. He can no longer write a line in the 
old way that wa bring him success----” 

dr. silenc open hi eye for a second and look at her. 

“he still writes, then? the forc ha not gone?” he ask briefly, and 
then close hi eye again to listen. 

“he work like a fury,” she went on, “but produc nothing”--sh 
hesit a moment--“noth that he can use or sell. hi earn have 
practic ceased, and he make a precari live by book-review 
and odd jobs--veri odd, some of them. yet, I am certain hi talent ha 
not realli desert him finally, but is merely----” 

again mrs. sivendson hesit for the appropri word. 

“in abeyance,” he suggested, without open hi eyes. 

“obliterated,” she went on, after a moment to weigh the word, “mere 
obliter by someth else----” 

“bi some _one_ else?” 

“I wish I knew. all I can say is that he is haunted, and temporarili 
hi sens of humour is shrouded--gone--replac by someth dread 
that write other things. unless someth compet is done, he will 
simpli starv to death. yet he is afraid to go to a doctor for fear of 
be pronounc insane; and, anyhow, a man can hardli ask a doctor to 
take a guinea to restor a vanish sens of humour, can he?” 

“ha he tri ani one at all----?” 

“not doctor yet. He tri some clergymen and religi people; but 
they _know_ so littl and have so littl intellig sympathy. and 
most of them are so busi balanc on their own littl pedestals----” 

john silenc stop her tirad with a gesture. 

“and how is it that you know so much about him?” he ask gently. 

“I know mrs. pender well--i knew her befor she marri him----” 

“and is she a cause, perhaps?” 

“not in the least. she is devoted; a woman veri well educated, though 
without be realli intelligent, and with so littl sens of humour 
herself that she alway laugh at the wrong places. but she ha 
noth to do with the caus of hi distress; and, indeed, ha chiefli 
guess it from observ him, rather than from what littl he ha 
told her. and he, you know, is a realli lovabl fellow, hard-working, 
patient--altogeth worth saving.” 

dr. silenc open hi eye and went over to ring for tea. He did 
not know veri much more about the case of the humorist than when he 
first sat down to listen; but he realis that no amount of word from 
hi swedish friend would help to reveal the real facts. A person 
interview with the author himself could alon do that. 

“all humorist are worth saving,” he said with a smile, as she pour 
out tea. “we can’t afford to lose a singl one in these strenuou days. 
I will go and see your friend at the first opportunity.” 

she thank him elaborately, effusively, with mani words, and he, with 
much difficulty, kept the convers thenceforward strictli to the 
teapot. 

and, as a result of thi conversation, and a littl more he had 
gather by mean best known to himself and hi secretary, he wa 
whizz in hi motor-car one afternoon a few day later up the putney 
hill to have hi first interview with felix pender, the humor writer 
who wa the victim of some mysteri maladi in hi “psychic region” 
that had obliter hi sens of the comic and threaten to wreck hi 
life and destroy hi talent. and hi desir to help wa probabl of 
equal strength with hi desir to know and to investigate. 

the motor stop with a deep pur sound, as though a great black 
panther lay conceal within it hood, and the doctor--th “psychic 
doctor,” as he wa sometim called--step out through the gather 
fog, and walk across the tini garden that held a blacken fir tree 
and a stunt laurel shrubbery. the hous wa veri small, and it wa 
some time befor ani one answer the bell. then, suddenly, a light 
appear in the hall, and he saw a pretti littl woman stand on 
the top step beg him to come in. she wa dress in grey, and the 
gaslight fell on a mass of deliber brush light hair. stuffed, 
dusti birds, and a shabbi array of african spears, hung on the wall 
behind her. A hat-rack, with a bronz plate full of veri larg cards, 
led hi eye swiftli to a dark staircas beyond. mrs. pender had round 
eye like a child’s, and she greet him with an effus that 
bare conceal her emotion, yet strove to appear natur cordial. 
evid she had been look out for hi arrival, and had outrun the 
servant girl. she wa a littl breathless. 

“I hope you’v not been kept waiting--i think it’ _most_ good of you 
to come----” she began, and then stop sharp when she saw hi face in 
the gaslight. there wa someth in dr. silence’ look that did not 
encourag mere talk. He wa in earnest now, if ever man was. 

“good evening, mrs. pender,” he said, with a quiet smile that won 
confidence, yet deprec unnecessari words, “the fog delay me a 
little. I am glad to see you.” 

they went into a dingi sitting-room at the back of the house, neatli 
furnish but depressing. book stood in a row upon the mantelpiece. 
the fire had evid just been lit. It smoke in great puff into the 
room. 

“mrs. sivendson said she thought you might be abl to come,” ventur 
the littl woman again, look up engagingli into hi face and 
betray anxieti and eager in everi gesture. “but I hardli dare 
to believ it. I think it is realli too good of you. My husband’ case 
is so peculiar that--well, you know, I am quit sure ani _ordinary_ 
doctor would say at onc the asylum----” 

“isn’t he in, then?” ask dr. silenc gently. 

“in the asylum?” she gasped. “oh dear, no--not yet!” 

“in the house, I meant,” he laughed. 

she gave a great sigh. 

“he’ll be back ani minut now,” she replied, obvious reliev to see 
him laugh; “but the fact is, we didn’t expect you so early--i mean, my 
husband hardli thought you would come at all.” 

“I am alway delight to come--when I am realli wanted, and can be of 
help,” he said quickly; “and, perhaps, it’ all for the best that your 
husband is out, for now that we are alon you can tell me someth 
about hi difficulties. So far, you know, I have heard veri little.” 

her voic trembl as she thank him, and when he came and took a 
chair close besid her she actual had difficulti in find word 
with which to begin. 

“in the first place,” she began timidly, and then continu with a 
nervou incoher rush of words, “he will be simpli delight that 
you’v realli come, becaus he said you were the onli person he would 
consent to see at all--th onli doctor, I mean. but, of course, he 
doesn’t know how frighten I am, or how much I have noticed. He 
pretend with me that it’ just a nervou breakdown, and i’m sure he 
doesn’t realis all the odd thing i’v notic him doing. but the main 
thing, I suppose----” 

“yes, the main thing, mrs. pender,” he said encouragingly, notic her 
hesitation. 

“----i that he think we are not alon in the house. that’ the chief 
thing.” 

“tell me more facts--just facts.” 

“it began last summer when I came back from ireland; he had been here 
alon for six weeks, and I thought him look tire and queer--rag 
and scatter about the face, if you know what I mean, and hi manner 
worn out. He said he had been write hard, but hi inspir had 
somehow fail him, and he wa dissatisfi with hi work. hi sens of 
humour wa leav him, or chang into someth else, he said. there 
wa someth in the house, he declared, that”--sh emphasis the 
words--“prev hi feel funny.” 

“someth in the hous that prevent hi feel funny,” repeat the 
doctor. “ah, now we’r get to the heart of it!” 

“yes,” she resum vaguely; “that’ what he kept saying.” 

“and what wa it he _did_ that you thought strange?” he ask 
sympathetically. “be brief, or he may be here befor you finish.” 

“veri small things, but signific it seem to me. He chang hi 
workroom from the library, as we call it, to the sitting-room. He 
said all hi charact becam wrong and terribl in the library; 
they altered, so that he felt like write tragedies--vile, debas 
tragedies, the tragedi of broken souls. but now he say the same of 
the smoking-room, and he’ gone back to the library.” 

“ah!” 

“you see, there’ so littl I can tell you,” she went on, with 
increas speed and countless gestures. “I mean it’ onli veri small 
thing he doe and say that are queer. what frighten me is that he 
assum there is some one els in the hous all the time--som one I 
never see. He doe not actual say so, but on the stair i’v seen him 
stand asid to let some one pass; i’v seen him open a door to let 
some one in or out; and often in our bedroom he put chair about as 
though for some one els to sit in. oh--oh yes, and onc or twice,” she 
cried--“onc or twice----” 

she paused, and look about her with a startl air. 

“yes?” 

“onc or twice,” she resum hurriedly, as though she heard a sound 
that alarm her, “i’v heard him running--com in and out of the 
room breathless as if someth were after him----” 

the door open while she wa still speaking, cut her word off in 
the middle, and a man came into the room. He wa dark and clean-shaven 
sallow rather, with the eye of imagination, and dark hair grow 
scantili about the temples. He wa dress in a shabbi tweed suit, and 
wore an untidi flannel collar at the neck. the domin express of 
hi face wa startled--hunted; an express that might ani moment 
leap into the dread stare of terror and announc a total loss of 
self-control. 

the moment he saw hi visitor a smile spread over hi worn features, 
and he advanc to shake hands. 

“I hope you would come; mrs. sivendson said you might be abl to find 
time,” he said simply. hi voic wa thin and reedy. “I am veri glad to 
see you, dr. silence. It is ‘doctor,’ is it not?” 

“well, I am entitl to the description,” laugh the other, “but I 
rare get it. you know, I do not practis as a regular thing; that is, 
I onli take case that special interest me, or----” 

He did not finish the sentence, for the men exchang a glanc of 
sympathi that render it unnecessary. 

“I have heard of your great kindness.” 

“it’ my hobby,” said the other quickly, “and my privilege.” 

“I trust you will still think so when you have heard what I have to 
tell you,” continu the author, a littl wearily. He led the way 
across the hall into the littl smoking-room where they could talk 
freeli and undisturbed. 

In the smoking-room, the door shut and privaci about them, pender’ 
attitud chang somewhat, and hi manner becam veri grave. the doctor 
sat opposite, where he could watch hi face. already, he saw, it 
look more haggard. evid it cost him much to refer to hi troubl 
at all. 

“what I have is, in my belief, a profound spiritu affliction,” he 
began quit bluntly, look straight into the other’ eyes. 

“I saw that at once,” dr. silenc said. 

“yes, you saw that, of course; my atmospher must convey that much to 
ani one with psychic perceptions. besid which, I feel sure from all 
i’v heard, that you are realli a soul-doctor, are you not, more than a 
healer mere of the body?” 

“you think of me too highly,” return the other; “though I prefer 
cases, as you know, in which the spirit is disturb first, the bodi 
afterwards.” 

“I understand, yes. well, I have experienc a curiou disturb 
in--_not_ in my physic region primarily. I mean my nerv are all 
right, and my bodi is all right I have no delus exactly, but my 
spirit is tortur by a calamit fear which first came upon me in a 
strang manner.” 

john silenc lean forward a moment and took the speaker’ hand and 
held it in hi own for a few brief seconds, close hi eye as he 
did so. He wa not feel hi pulse, or do ani of the thing that 
doctor ordinarili do; he wa mere absorb into himself the main 
note of the man’ mental condition, so as to get complet hi own 
point of view, and thu be abl to treat hi case with true sympathy. A 
veri close observ might perhap have notic that a slight tremor ran 
through hi frame after he had held the hand for a few seconds. 

“tell me quit frankly, mr. pender,” he said soothingly, releas the 
hand, and with deep attent in hi manner, “tell me all the step 
that led to the begin of thi invasion. I mean tell me what the 
particular drug was, and whi you took it, and how it affect you----” 

“then you know it began with a drug!” cri the author, with 
undisguis astonishment. 

“I onli know from what I observ in you, and in it effect upon myself. 
you are in a surpris psychic condition. certain portion of your 
atmospher are vibrat at a far greater rate than others. thi is the 
effect of a drug, but of no ordinari drug. allow me to finish, please. 
If the higher rate of vibrat spread all over, you will become, of 
course, perman cognis of a much larger world than the one you 
know normally. if, on the other hand, the rapid portion sink back to 
the usual rate, you will lose these occasion increas percept 
you now have.” 

“you amaz me!” exclaim the author; “for your word exactli describ 
what I have been feeling----” 

“I mention thi onli in passing, and to give you confid befor 
you approach the account of your real affliction,” continu the 
doctor. “all perception, as you know, is the result of vibrations; and 
clairvoy simpli mean becom sensit to an increas scale of 
vibrations. the awaken of the inner sens we hear so much about 
mean no more than that. your partial clairvoy is easili explained. 
the onli thing that puzzl me is how you manag to procur the drug, 
for it is not easi to get in pure form, and no adulter tinctur 
could have given you the terrif impetu I see you have acquired. but, 
pleas proceed now and tell me your stori in your own way.” 

“thi _cannabi indica_,” the author went on, “came into my possess 
last autumn while my wife wa away. I need not explain how I got it, 
for that ha no importance; but it wa the genuin fluid extract, and 
I could not resist the temptat to make an experiment. one of it 
effects, as you know, is to induc torrenti laughter----” 

“yes; sometimes.” 

“----i am a writer of humor tales, and I wish to increas my own 
sens of laughter--to see the ludicr from an abnorm point of view. 
I wish to studi it a bit, if possible, and----” 

“tell me!” 

“I took an experiment dose. I starv for six hour to hasten the 
effect, lock myself into thi room, and gave order not to be 
disturbed. then I swallow the stuff and waited.” 

“and the effect?” 

“I wait one hour, two, three, four, five hours. noth happened. No 
laughter came, but onli a great weari instead. noth in the room 
or in my thought came within a hundr mile of a humor aspect.” 

“alway a most uncertain drug,” interrupt the doctor. “we make veri 
small use of it on that account.” 

“at two o’clock in the morn I felt so hungri and tire that I 
decid to give up the experi and wait no longer. I drank some 
milk and went upstair to bed. I felt flat and disappointed. I fell 
asleep at onc and must have slept for about an hour, when I awok 
suddenli with a great nois in my ears. It wa the nois of my 
own laughter! I wa simpli shake with merriment. At first I wa 
bewild and thought I had been laugh in dreams, but a moment 
later I rememb the drug, and wa delight to think that after 
all I had got an effect. It had been work all along, onli I had 
miscalcul the time. the onli unpleas thing _then_ wa an odd 
feel that I had not wake naturally, but had been waken by some 
one else--deliberately. thi came to me as a certainti in the middl of 
my noisi laughter and distress me.” 

“ani impress who it could have been?” ask the doctor, now 
listen with close attent to everi word, veri much on the alert. 

pender hesit and tri to smile. He brush hi hair from hi 
forehead with a nervou gesture. 

“you must tell me all your impressions, even your fancies; they are 
quit as import as your certainties.” 

“I had a vagu idea that it wa some one connect with my forgotten 
dream, some one who had been at me in my sleep, some one of great 
strength and great ability--of great force--quit an unusu 
personality--and, I wa certain, too--a woman.” 

“A good woman?” ask john silenc quietly. 

pender start a littl at the question and hi sallow face flushed; 
it seem to surpris him. but he shook hi head quickli with an 
indefin look of horror. 

“evil,” he answer briefly, “appallingli evil, and yet mingl with 
the sheer wicked of it wa also a certain perverseness--th 
pervers of the unbalanc mind.” 

He hesit a moment and look up sharpli at hi interlocutor. A 
shade of suspicion show itself in hi eyes. 

“no,” laugh the doctor, “you need not fear that i’m mere humour 
you, or think you mad. far from it. your stori interest me exceedingli 
and you furnish me unconsci with a number of clue as you tell it. 
you see, I possess some knowledg of my own as to these psychic byways.” 

“I wa shake with such violent laughter,” continu the narrator, 
reassur in a moment, “though with no clear idea what wa amus me, 
that I had the greatest difficulti in get up for the matches, and 
wa afraid I should frighten the servant overhead with my explosions. 
when the ga wa lit I found the room empty, of course, and the door 
lock as usual. then I half dress and went out on to the landing, 
my hilar better under control, and proceed to go downstairs. I 
wish to record my sensations. I stuf a handkerchief into my mouth 
so as not to scream aloud and commun my hyster to the entir 
household.” 

“and the presenc of this--this----?” 

“it wa hang about me all the time,” said pender, “but for the 
moment it seem to have withdrawn. probably, too, my laughter kill 
all other emotions.” 

“and how long did you take get downstairs?” 

“I wa just come to that I see you know all my ‘symptoms’ in advance, 
as it were; for, of course, I thought I should never get to the bottom. 
each step seem to take five minutes, and cross the narrow hall at 
the foot of the stairs--well, I could have sworn it wa half an hour’ 
journey had not my watch certifi that it wa a few seconds. yet I 
walk fast and tri to push on. It wa no good. I walk appar 
without advancing, and at that rate it would have taken me a week to 
get down putney hill.” 

“an experiment dose radic alter the scale of time and space 
sometimes----” 

“but, when at last I got into my studi and lit the gas, the chang came 
horridly, and sudden as a flash of lightning. It wa like a douch of 
ici water, and in the middl of thi storm of laughter----” 

“yes; what?” ask the doctor, lean forward and peer into hi 
eyes. 

“----i wa overwhelm with terror,” said pender, lower hi reedi 
voic at the mere recollect of it. 

He paus a moment and mop hi forehead. the scared, hunt look in 
hi eye now domin the whole face. yet, all the time, the corner 
of hi mouth hint of possibl laughter as though the recollect of 
that merriment still amus him. the combin of fear and laughter 
in hi face wa veri curious, and lent great convict to hi story; 
it also lent a bizarr express of horror to hi gestures. 

“terror, wa it?” repeat the doctor soothingly. 

“yes, terror; for, though the thing that woke me seem to have gone, 
the memori of it still frighten me, and I collaps into a chair. 
then I lock the door and tri to reason with myself, but the 
drug made my movement so prolong that it took me five minut to 
reach the door, and anoth five to get back to the chair again. the 
laughter, too, kept bubbl up insid me--great wholesom laughter 
that shook me like gust of wind--so that even my terror almost made 
me laugh. oh, but I may tell you, dr. silence, it wa altogeth vile, 
that mixtur of fear and laughter, altogeth vile! 

“then, all at once, the thing in the room again present their 
funni side to me and set me off laugh more furious than ever. 
the bookcas wa ludicrous, the arm-chair a perfect clown, the way 
the clock look at me on the mantelpiec too comic for words; the 
arrang of paper and inkstand on the desk tickl me till I roar 
and shook and held my side and the tear stream down my cheeks. and 
that footstool! oh, that absurd footstool!” 

He lay back in hi chair, laugh to himself and hold up hi hand 
at the thought of it, and at the sight of him dr. silenc laugh too. 

“go on, please,” he said, “I quit understand. I know someth myself 
of the hashish laughter.” 

the author pull himself togeth and resumed, hi face grow 
quickli grave again. 

“so, you see, side by side with thi extravagant, appar causeless 
merriment, there wa also an extravagant, appar causeless terror. 
the drug produc the laughter, I knew; but what brought in the terror 
I could not imagine. everywher behind the fun lay the fear. It wa 
terror mask by cap and bells; and I becam the playground for two 
oppos emotions, arm and fight to the death. gradually, then, 
the impress grew in me that thi fear wa caus by the invasion--so 
you call it just now--of the ‘person’ who had waken me: she wa 
utterli evil; inim to my soul, or at least to all in me that wish 
for good. there I stood, sweat and trembling, laugh at everyth 
in the room, yet all the while with thi white terror master my 
heart. and thi creatur wa putting--put her----” 

He hesit again, use hi handkerchief freely. 

“put what?” 

“----put idea into my mind,” he went on, glanc nervous about 
the room. “actual tap my thought-stream so as to switch off the 
usual current and inject her own. how mad that sounds! I know it, 
but it’ true. it’ the onli way I can express it. moreover, while 
the oper terrifi me, the skill with which it wa accomplish 
fill me afresh with laughter at the clumsi of men by comparison. 
our ignorant, bungl method of teach the mind of others, of 
inculc ideas, and so on, overwhelm me with laughter when I 
understood thi superior and diabol method. yet my laughter seem 
hollow and ghastly, and idea of evil and tragedi trod close upon the 
heel of the comic. oh, doctor, I tell you again, it wa unnerving!” 

john silenc sat with hi head thrust forward to catch everi word of 
the stori which the other continu to pour out in nervous, jerki 
sentenc and lower voice. 

“you _saw_ nothing--no one--al thi time?” he asked. 

“not with my eyes. there wa no visual hallucination. but in my mind 
there began to grow the vivid pictur of a woman--large, dark-skinned, 
with white teeth and masculin features, and one eye--th left--so 
droop as to appear almost closed. oh, such a face----!” 

“A face you would recognis again?” 

pender laugh dreadfully. 

“I wish I could forget it,” he whispered, “I onli wish I could forget 
it!” then he sat forward in hi chair suddenly, and grasp the 
doctor’ hand with an emot gesture. 

“I _must_ tell you how grate I am for your patienc and sympathy,” 
he cried, with a tremor in hi voice, “and--that you do not think 
me mad. I have told no one els a quarter of all this, and the 
mere freedom of speech--th relief of share my afflict with 
another--ha help me alreadi more than I can possibl say.” 

dr. silenc press hi hand and look steadili into the frighten 
eyes. hi voic wa veri gentl when he replied. 

“your case, you know, is veri singular, but of absorb interest to 
me,” he said, “for it threatens, not your physic existence, but 
the templ of your psychic existence--th inner life. your mind 
would not be perman affect here and now, in thi world; but in 
the exist after the bodi is left behind, you might wake up with 
your spirit so twisted, so distorted, so befouled, that you would be 
_spiritu insane_--a far more radic condit than mere be 
insan here.” 

there came a strang hush over the room, and between the two men 
sit there face one another. 

“do you realli mean--good lord!” stammer the author as soon as he 
could find hi tongue. 

“what I mean in detail will keep till a littl later, and I need onli 
say now that I should not have spoken in thi way unless I were quit 
posit of be abl to help you. oh, there’ no doubt as to that, 
believ me. In the first place, I am veri familiar with the work 
of thi extraordinari drug, thi drug which ha had the chanc effect 
of open you up to the forc of anoth region; and, in the second, 
I have a firm belief in the realiti of super-sensu occurr as 
well as consider knowledg of psychic process acquir by long 
and pain experiment. the rest is, or should be, mere sympathet 
treatment and practic application. the hashish ha partial open 
anoth world to you by increas your rate of psychic vibration, 
and thu render you abnorm sensitive. ancient forc attach to 
thi hous have attack you. for the moment I am onli puzzl as to 
their precis nature; for were they of an ordinari character, I should 
myself be psychic enough to feel them. yet I am consciou of feel 
noth as yet. but now, pleas continue, mr. pender, and tell me the 
rest of your wonder story; and when you have finished, I will talk 
about the mean of cure.” 

pender shift hi chair a littl closer to the friendli doctor and 
then went on in the same nervou voic with hi narrative. 

“after make some note of my impress I final got upstair again 
to bed. It wa four o’clock in the morning. I laugh all the way 
up--at the grotesqu banisters, the droll physiognomi of the staircas 
window, the burlesqu group of the furniture, and the memori of that 
outrag footstool in the room below; but noth more happen to 
alarm or disturb me, and I woke late in the morn after a dreamless 
sleep, none the wors for my experi except for a slight headach 
and a cold of the extrem due to lower circulation.” 

“fear gone, too?” ask the doctor. 

“I seem to have forgotten it, or at least ascrib it to mere 
nervousness. it’ realiti had gone, anyhow for the time, and all 
that day I wrote and wrote and wrote. My sens of laughter seem 
wonder quicken and my charact act without effort out of 
the heart of true humour. I wa exceedingli pleas with thi result 
of my experi but when the stenograph had taken her departur and 
I came to read over the page she had type out, I recal her sudden 
glanc of surpris and the odd way she had look up at me while I wa 
dictating. I wa amaz at what I read and could hardli believ I had 
utter it.” 

“and why?” 

“it wa so distorted. the words, indeed, were mine so far as I could 
remember, but the mean seem strange. It frighten me. the sens 
wa so altered. At the veri place where my charact were intend to 
tickl the ribs, onli curiou emot of sinist amus resulted. 
dread innuendo had manag to creep into the phrases. there wa 
laughter of a kind, but it wa bizarre, horrible, distressing; and 
my attempt at analysi onli increas my dismay. the story, as it 
read then, made me shudder, for by virtu of these slight chang it 
had come somehow to hold the soul of horror, of horror disguis as 
merriment. the framework of humour wa there, if you understand me, but 
the charact had turn sinister, and their laughter wa evil.” 

“can you show me thi writing?” 

the author shook hi head. 

“I destroy it,” he whispered. “but, in the end, though of cours 
much perturb about it, I persuad myself that it wa due to some 
after-effect of the drug, a sort of reaction that gave a twist to my 
mind and made me read macabr interpret into word and situat 
that did not properli hold them.” 

“and, meanwhile, did the presenc of thi person leav you?” 

“no; that stay more or less. when my mind wa activ employ I 
forgot it, but when idle, dreaming, or do noth in particular, 
there she wa besid me, influenc my mind horribly----” 

“in what way, precisely?” interrupt the doctor. 

“evil, scheme thought came to me, vision of crime, hate pictur 
of wickedness, and the kind of bad imagin that so far ha been 
foreign, inde impossible, to my normal nature----” 

“the pressur of the dark power upon the personality,” murmur the 
doctor, make a quick note. 

“eh? I didn’t quit catch----” 

“pray, go on. I am mere make notes; you shall know their purport 
fulli later.” 

“even when my wife return I wa still awar of thi presenc in the 
house; it associ itself with my inner person in most intim 
fashion; and outwardli I alway felt oddli constrain to be polit and 
respect toward it--to open doors, provid chair and hold myself 
care deferenti when it wa about. It becam veri compel at 
last, and, if I fail in ani littl particular, I seem to know that 
it pursu me about the house, from one room to another, haunt my 
veri soul in it inmost abode. It certainli came befor my wife so far 
as my attent were concerned. 

“but, let me first finish the stori of my experiment dose, for I took 
it again the third night, and underw a veri similar experience, 
delay like the first in coming, and then carri me off my feet 
when it did come with a rush of thi fals demon-laughter. thi time, 
however, there wa a revers of the chang scale of space and 
time; it shortened, instead of lengthened, so that I dress and got 
downstair in about twenti seconds, and the coupl of hour I stay 
and work in the studi pass liter like a period of ten minutes.” 

“that is often true of an overdose,” interject the doctor, “and you 
may go a mile in a few minutes, or a few yard in a quarter of an hour. 
It is quit incomprehens to those who have never experienc it, 
and is a curiou proof that time and space are mere form of thought.” 

“thi time,” pender went on, talk more and more rapidli in hi 
excitement, “anoth extraordinari effect came to me, and I experienc 
a curiou chang of the senses, so that I perceiv extern thing 
through one larg main sense-channel instead of through the five 
divis known as sight, smell, touch, and so forth. you will, I 
know, understand me when I tell you that I _heard_ sight and _saw_ 
sounds. No languag can make thi comprehensible, of course, and I 
can onli say, for instance, that the strike of the clock I saw as a 
visibl pictur in the air befor me. I saw the sound of the tinkl 
bell. and in precis the same way I heard the colour in the room, 
especi the colour of those book in the shelf behind you. those 
red bind I heard in deep sounds, and the yellow cover of the 
french bind next to them made a shrill, pierc note not unlik 
the chatter of starlings. that brown bookcas muttered, and those 
green curtain opposit kept up a constant sort of rippl sound like 
the lower note of a wood-horn. but I onli wa consciou of these 
sound when I look steadili at the differ objects, and thought 
about them. the room, you understand, wa not full of a choru of 
notes; but when I concentr my mind upon a colour, I heard, as well 
as saw, it.” 

“that is a known, though rarely-obtained, effect of _cannabi indica_,” 
observ the doctor. “and it provok laughter again, did it?” 

“onli the mutter of the cupboard-bookcas made me laugh. It wa so 
like a great anim tri to get itself noticed, and made me think 
of a perform bear--which is full of a kind of pathet humour, you 
know. but thi mingl of the sens produc no confus in my 
brain. On the contrary, I wa unusu clear-head and experienc 
an intensif of consciousness, and felt marvel aliv and 
keen-minded. 

“moreover, when I took up a pencil in obedi to an impuls to 
sketch--a talent not normal mine--i found that I could draw noth 
but heads, nothing, in fact, but one head--alway the same--th head 
of a dark-skin woman, with huge and terribl featur and a veri 
droop left eye; and so well drawn, too, that I wa amazed, as you 
may imagine----” 

“and the express of the face----?” 

pender hesit a moment for words, cast about with hi hand in 
the air and hunch hi shoulders. A percept shudder ran over him. 

“what I can onli describ as--_blackness_,” he repli in a low tone; 
“the face of a dark and evil soul.” 

“you destroy that, too?” queri the doctor sharply. 

“no; I have kept the drawings,” he said, with a laugh, and rose to get 
them from a drawer in the writing-desk behind him. 

“here is all that remain of the pictures, you see,” he added, push 
a number of loos sheet under the doctor’ eyes; “noth but a few 
scrawli lines. that’ all I found the next morning. I had realli drawn 
no head at all--noth but those line and blot and wriggles. the 
pictur were entir subjective, and exist onli in my mind which 
construct them out of a few wild stroke of the pen. like the alter 
scale of space and time it wa a complet delusion. these all passed, 
of course, with the pass of the drug’ effects. but the other thing 
did not pass. I mean, the presenc of that dark soul remain with me. 
It is here still. It is real. I don’t know how I can escap from it.” 

“it is attach to the house, not to you personally. you must leav the 
house.” 

“yes. onli I cannot afford to leav the house, for my work is my sole 
mean of support, and--well, you see, sinc thi chang I cannot even 
write. they are horrible, these mirthless tale I now write, with their 
mockeri of laughter, their diabol suggestion. horrible! I shall go 
mad if thi continues.” 

He screw hi face up and look about the room as though he expect 
to see some haunt shape. 

“the influenc in thi house, induc by my experiment, ha kill in 
a flash, in a sudden stroke, the sourc of my humour, and, though I 
still go on write funni tales--i have a certain name, you know--mi 
inspir ha dri up, and much of what I write I have to burn--yes, 
doctor, to burn, befor ani one see it.” 

“a utterli alien to your own mind and personality?” 

“utterly! As though some one els had written it----” 

“ah!” 

“and shocking!” He pass hi hand over hi eye a moment and let the 
breath escap softli through hi teeth. “yet most damnabl clever in 
the consumm way the vile suggest are insinu under cover of 
a kind of high drollery. My stenograph left me, of course--and i’v 
been afraid to take another----” 

john silenc got up and began to walk about the room leisur without 
speaking; he appear to be examin the pictur on the wall and 
read the name of the book lie about. present he paus on the 
hearthrug, with hi back to the fire, and turn to look hi patient 
quietli in the eyes. pender’ face wa grey and drawn; the hunt 
express domin it; the long recit had told upon him. 

“thank you, mr. pender,” he said, a curiou glow show about hi 
fine, quiet face, “thank you for the sincer and frank of your 
account. but I think now there is noth further I need ask you.” He 
indulg in a long scrutini of the author’ haggard features, draw 
purpos the man’ eye to hi own and then meet them with a look 
of power and confid calcul to inspir even the feeblest soul 
with courage. “and, to begin with,” he added, smile pleasantly, “let 
me assur you without delay that you need have no alarm, for you are no 
more insan or delud than I myself am----” 

pender heav a deep sigh and tri to return the smile. 

“----and thi is simpli a case, so far as I can judg at present, of a 
veri singular psychic invasion, and a veri sinist one, too, if you 
perhap understand what I mean----” 

“it’ an odd expression; you use it before, you know,” said the 
author wearily, yet eagerli listen to everi word of the diagnosis, 
and deepli touch by the intellig sympathi which did not at onc 
indic the lunat asylum. 

“possibly,” return the other, “and an odd afflict too, you’ll 
allow, yet one not unknown to the nation of antiquity, nor to those 
moderns, perhaps, who recognis the freedom of action under certain 
pathogen condit between thi world and another.” 

“and you think,” ask pender hastily, “that it is all primarili due to 
the _cannabis_? there is noth radic amiss with myself--noth 
incurable, or----?” 

“due entir to the overdose,” dr. silenc repli emphatically, “to 
the drug’ direct action upon your psychic being. It render you 
ultra-sensit and made you respond to an increas rate of vibration. 
and, let me tell you, mr. pender, that your experi might have had 
result far more dire. It ha brought you into touch with a somewhat 
singular class of invisible, but of one, I think, chiefli human in 
character. you might, however, just as easili have been drawn out of 
human rang altogether, and the result of such a conting would 
have been exceedingli terrible. indeed, you would not now be here to 
tell the tale. I need not alarm you on that score, but mention it as 
a warn you will not misunderstand or underr after what you have 
been through. 

“you look puzzled. you do not quit gather what I am drive at; and 
it is not to be expect that you should, for you, I suppose, are 
the nomin christian with the nomin christian’ lofti standard of 
ethics, and hi utter ignor of spiritu possibilities. beyond 
a somewhat childish understand of ‘spiritu wicked in high 
places,’ you probabl have no concept of what is possibl onc you 
break down the slender gulf that is merci fix between you and 
that outer world. but my studi and train have taken me far outsid 
these orthodox trips, and I have made experi that I could scarc 
speak to you about in languag that would be intellig to you.” 

He paus a moment to note the breathless interest of pender’ face and 
manner. everi word he utter wa calculated; he knew exactli the valu 
and effect of the emot he desir to waken in the heart of the 
afflict be befor him. 

“and from certain knowledg I have gain through variou experiences,” 
he continu calmly, “I can diagnos your case as I said befor to be 
one of psychic invasion.” 

“and the natur of this--er--invasion?” stammer the bewild writer 
of humor tales. 

“there is no reason whi I should not say at onc that I do not yet 
quit know,” repli dr. silence. “I may first have to make one or two 
experiments----” 

“on me?” gasp pender, catch hi breath. 

“not exactly,” the doctor said, with a grave smile, “but with your 
assistance, perhaps. I shall want to test the condit of the 
house--to ascertain, if possible, the charact of the forces, of thi 
strang person that ha been haunt you----” 

“at present you have no idea exactli who--what--why----” ask the 
other in a wild flurri of interest, dread and amazement. 

“I have a veri good idea, but no proof rather,” return the doctor. 
“the effect of the drug in alter the scale of time and space, and 
merg the sens have noth primarili to do with the invasion. they 
come to ani one who is fool enough to take an experiment dose. It is 
the other featur of your case that are unusual. you see, you are now 
in touch with certain violent emotions, desires, purposes, still activ 
in thi house, that were produc in the past by some power and evil 
person that live here. how long ago, or whi they still persist 
so forcibly, I cannot posit say. but I should judg that they are 
mere forc act automat with the momentum of their terrif 
origin impetus.” 

“not direct by a live being, a consciou will, you mean?” 

“possibl not--but none the less danger on that account, and more 
difficult to deal with. I cannot explain to you in a few minut the 
natur of such things, for you have not made the studi that would 
enabl you to follow me; but I have reason to believ that on the 
dissolut at death of a human being, it forc may still persist 
and continu to act in a blind, unconsci fashion. As a rule they 
speedili dissip themselves, but in the case of a veri power 
person they may last a long time. and, in some cases--of which I 
inclin to think thi is one--thes forc may coalesc with certain 
non-human entiti who thu continu their life indefinit and 
increas their strength to an unbeliev degree. If the origin 
person wa evil, the be attract to the left-ov forc 
will also be evil. In thi case, I think there ha been an unusu and 
dread aggrandis of the thought and purpos left behind long 
ago by a woman of consumm wicked and great person power of 
charact and intellect. now, do you begin to see what I am drive at 
a little?” 

pender stare fixedli at hi companion, plain horror show in hi 
eyes. but he found noth to say, and the doctor continued-- 

“in your case, predispos by the action of the drug, you have 
experienc the rush of these forc in undilut strength. they 
wholli obliter in you the sens of humour, fancy, imagination,--al 
that make for cheer and hope. they seek, though perhap 
automat only, to oust your own thought and establish themselv 
in their place. you are the victim of a psychic invasion. At the same 
time, you have becom clairvoy in the true sense. you are also a 
clairvoy victim.” 

pender mop hi face and sighed. He left hi chair and went over to 
the fireplac to warm himself. 

“you must think me a quack to talk like this, or a madman,” laugh 
dr. silence. “but never mind that. I have come to help you, and I can 
help you if you will do what I tell you. It is veri simple: you must 
leav thi hous at once. oh, never mind the difficulties; we will deal 
with those together. I can place anoth hous at your disposal, or 
I would take the leas here off your hands, and later have it pull 
down. your case interest me greatly, and I mean to see you through, so 
that you have no anxiety, and can drop back into your old groov of 
work to-morrow! the drug ha provid you, and therefor me, with a 
short-cut to a veri interest experience. I am grate to you.” 

the author poke the fire vigorously, emot rise in him like a 
tide. He glanc toward the door nervously. 

“there is no need to alarm your wife or to tell her the detail of 
our conversation,” pursu the other quietly. “let her know that you 
will soon be in possess again of your sens of humour and your 
health, and explain that I am lend you anoth hous for six months. 
meanwhil I may have the right to use thi hous for a night or two for 
my experiment. Is that understood between us?” 

“I can onli thank you from the bottom of my heart,” stammer pender, 
unabl to find word to express hi gratitude. 

then he hesit for a moment, search the doctor’ face anxiously. 

“and your experi with the house?” he said at length. 

“of the simplest character, my dear mr. pender. although I am myself an 
artifici train psychic, and consequ awar of the presenc 
of discarn entiti as a rule, I have so far felt noth here at 
all. thi make me sure that the forc act here are of an unusu 
description. what I propos to do is to make an experi with a view 
of draw out thi evil, coax it from it lair, so to speak, in 
order that it may _exhaust itself through me_ and becom dissip for 
ever. I have alreadi been inoculated,” he added; “I consid myself to 
be immune.” 

“heaven above!” gasp the author, collaps on to a chair. 

“hell beneath! might be a more appropri exclamation,” the doctor 
laughed. “but, seriously, mr. pender, thi is what I propos to 
do--with your permission.” 

“of course, of course,” cri the other, “you have my permiss and my 
best wish for success. I can see no possibl objection, but----” 

“but what?” 

“I pray to heaven you will not undertak thi experi alone, will 
you?” 

“oh dear, no; not alone.” 

“you will take a companion with good nerves, and reliabl in case of 
disaster, won’t you?” 

“I shall bring two companions,” the doctor said. 

“ah, that’ better. I feel easier. I am sure you must have among your 
acquaint men who----” 

“I shall not think of bring men, mr. pender.” 

the other look up sharply. 

“no, or women either; or children.” 

“I don’t understand. who will you bring, then?” 

“animals,” explain the doctor, unabl to prevent a smile at hi 
companion’ express of surprise--“two animals, a cat and a dog.” 

pender stare as if hi eye would drop out upon the floor, and then 
led the way without anoth word into the adjoin room where hi wife 
wa await them for tea. 


II 

A few day later the humorist and hi wife, with mind greatli 
relieved, move into a small furnish hous place at their free 
dispos in anoth part of london; and john silence, intent upon hi 
approach experiment, made readi to spend a night in the empti hous 
on the top of putney hill. onli two room were prepar for occupation: 
the studi on the ground floor and the bedroom immedi abov it; 
all other door were to be locked, and no servant wa to be left in 
the house. the motor had order to call for him at nine o’clock the 
follow morning. 

and, meanwhile, hi secretari had instruct to look up the past 
histori and associ of the place, and learn everyth he could 
concern the charact of former occupants, recent or remote. 

the animals, by whose sensit he intend to test ani unusu 
condit in the atmospher of the building, dr. silenc select 
with care and judgment. He believ (and had alreadi made curiou 
experi to prove it) that anim were more often, and more truly, 
clairvoy than human beings. mani of them, he felt convinced, 
possess power of percept far superior to that mere keen of 
the sens common to all dweller in the wild where the sens grow 
special alert; they had what he term “anim clairvoyance,” and 
from hi experi with horses, dogs, cats, and even birds, he had 
drawn certain deductions, which, however, need not be refer to in 
detail here. 

cats, in particular, he believed, were almost continu consciou of 
a larger field of vision, too detail even for a photograph camera, 
and quit beyond the reach of normal human organs. He had, further, 
observ that while dog were usual terrifi in the presenc of such 
phenomena, cat on the other hand were sooth and satisfied. they 
welcom manifest as someth belong peculiarli to their own 
region. 

He select hi animals, therefore, with wisdom so that they might 
afford a differ test, each in it own way, and that one should not 
mere commun it own excit to the other. He took a dog and a 
cat. 

the cat he chose, now full grown, had live with him sinc kittenhood, 
a kittenhood of perplex sweet and audaci mischief. wayward 
it wa and fanciful, ever play it own mysteri game in the 
corner of the room, jump at invis nothings, leap sideway 
into the air and fall with tini mocassin feet on to anoth part 
of the carpet, yet with an air of dignifi earnest which show 
that the perform wa necessari to it own well-being, and not done 
mere to impress a stupid human audience. In the middl of elabor 
wash it would look up, startled, as though to stare at the approach 
of some invisible, cock it littl head sideway and put out a 
velvet pad to inspect cautiously. then it would get absent-minded, and 
stare with equal intent in anoth direct (just to confus the 
onlookers), and suddenli go on furious wash it bodi again, but in 
quit a new place. except for a white patch on it breast it wa coal 
black. and it name was--smoke. 

“smoke” describ it tempera as well as it appearance. it 
movements, it individuality, it pose as a littl furri mass of 
conceal mysteries, it elfin-lik elusiveness, all combin to 
justifi it name; and a subtl painter might have pictur it as a 
wisp of float smoke, the fire below betray itself at two point 
only--th glow eyes. 

all it forc ran to intelligence--secret intelligence, the wordless, 
incalcul intuit of the cat. It was, indeed, _the_ cat for the 
busi in hand. 

the select of the dog wa not so simple, for the doctor own many; 
but after much deliber he chose a collie, call flame from hi 
yellow coat. true, it wa a trifl old, and stiff in the joints, and 
even begin to grow deaf, but, on the other hand, it wa a veri 
particular friend of smoke’s, and had father it from kittenhood 
upward so that a subtl understand exist between them. It wa 
thi that turn the balanc in it favour, thi and it courage. 
moreover, though good-tempered, it wa a terribl fighter, and it 
anger when provok by a righteou caus wa a furi of fire, and 
irresistible. 

It had come to him quit young, straight from the shepherd, with the 
air of the hill yet in it nostrils, and wa then littl more than 
skin and bone and teeth. for a colli it wa sturdili built, it nose 
blunter than most, it yellow hair stiff rather than silky, and it had 
full eyes, unlik the slit eye of it breed. onli it master could 
touch it, for it ignor strangers, and despis their pattings--when 
ani dare to pat it. there wa someth patriarch about the old 
beast. He wa in earnest, and went through life with tremend 
energi and big thing in view, as though he had the reput of hi 
whole race to uphold. and to watch him fight against odd wa to 
understand whi he wa terrible. 

In hi relat with smoke he wa alway absurdli gentle; also he 
wa fatherly; and at the same time betray a certain diffid or 
shyness. He recognis that smoke call for strong yet respect 
management. the cat’ circuit method puzzl him, and hi elabor 
pretenc perhap shock the dog’ like for direct, undisguis 
action. yet, while he fail to comprehend these tortuou felin 
mysteries, he wa never contemptu or condescending; and he presid 
over the safeti of hi furri black friend somewhat as a father, 
love but intuitive, might superintend the vagari of a wayward and 
talent child. and, in return, smoke reward him with exhibit of 
fascin and audaci mischief. 

and these brief descript of their charact are necessari for the 
proper understand of what subsequ took place. 

with smoke sleep in the fold of hi fur coat, and the colli lie 
watch on the seat opposite, john silenc went down in hi motor 
after dinner on the night of novemb 15th. 

and the fog wa so dens that they were oblig to travel at quarter 
speed the entir way. 

* * * * * 

It wa after ten o’clock when he dismiss the motor and enter the 
dingi littl hous with the latchkey provid by pender. He found the 
hall ga turn low, and a fire in the study. book and food had also 
been place readi by the servant accord to instructions. coil of 
fog rush in after him through the open door and fill the hall and 
passag with it cold discomfort. 

the first thing dr. silenc did wa to lock up smoke in the studi with 
a saucer of milk befor the fire, and then make a search of the hous 
with flame. the dog ran cheer behind him all the way while he 
tri the door of the other room to make sure they were locked. He 
nose about into corner and made littl excurs on hi own account. 
hi manner wa expectant. He knew there must be someth unusu about 
the proceeding, becaus it wa contrari to the habit of hi whole 
life not to be asleep at thi hour on the mat in front of the fire. He 
kept look up into hi master’ face, as door after door wa tried, 
with an express of intellig sympathy, but at the same time a 
certain air of disapproval. yet everyth hi master did wa good in 
hi eyes, and he betray as littl impati as possibl with all 
thi unnecessari journey to and fro. If the doctor wa pleas to 
play thi sort of game at such an hour of the night, it wa sure not 
for him to object. So he play it too; and wa veri busi and earnest 
about it into the bargain. 

after an unev search they came down again to the study, and here 
dr. silenc discov smoke wash hi face calmli in front of the 
fire. the saucer of milk wa lick dri and clean; the preliminari 
examin that cat alway make in new surround had evid 
been satisfactorili concluded. He drew an arm-chair up to the fire, 
stir the coal into a blaze, arrang the tabl and lamp to hi 
satisfact for reading, and then prepar surreptiti to watch 
the animals. He wish to observ them care without their be 
awar of it. 

now, in spite of their respect ages, it wa the regular custom of 
these two to play togeth everi night befor sleep. smoke alway made 
the advances, begin with grave impud to pat the dog’ tail, and 
flame play cumbrously, with condescension. It wa hi duty, rather 
than pleasure; he wa glad when it wa over, and sometim he wa veri 
determin and refus to play at all. 

and thi night wa one of the occas on which he wa firm. 

the doctor, look cautious over the top of hi book, watch 
the cat begin the performance. It start by gaze with an innoc 
express at the dog where he lay with nose on paw and eye wide open 
in the middl of the floor. then it got up and made as though it meant 
to walk to the door, go deliber and veri softly. flame’ eye 
follow it until it wa beyond the rang of sight, and then the cat 
turn sharpli and began pat hi tail tent with one paw. 
the tail move slightli in reply, and smoke chang paw and tap 
it again. the dog, however, did not rise to play as wa hi wont, and 
the cat fell to pat it briskli with both paws. flame still lay 
motionless. 

thi puzzl and bore the cat, and it went round and stare hard into 
it friend’ face to see what wa the matter. perhap some inarticul 
messag flash from the dog’ eye into it own littl brain, make 
it understand that the programm for the night had better not begin 
with play. perhap it onli realis that it friend wa immovable. but, 
whatev the reason, it usual persist thenceforward desert it, 
and it made no further attempt at persuasion. smoke yield at onc to 
the dog’ mood; it sat down where it wa and began to wash. 

but the washing, the doctor noted, wa by no mean it real purpose; 
it onli use it to mask someth else; it stop at the most busi 
and furiou moment and began to stare about the room. it thought 
wander absurdly. It peer intent at the curtains; at the shadowi 
corners; at empti space above; leav it bodi in curious awkward 
posit for whole minut together. then it turn sharpli and stare 
with a sudden signal of intellig at the dog, and flame at onc 
rose somewhat stiffli to hi feet and began to wander aimlessli and 
restlessli to and fro about the floor. smoke follow him, pad 
quietli at hi heels. between them they made what seem to be a 
deliber search of the room. 

and, here, as he watch them, note care everi detail of 
the perform over the top of hi book, yet make no effort to 
interfere, it seem to the doctor that the first begin of a 
faint distress betray themselv in the collie, and in the cat the 
stir of a vagu excitement. 

He observ them closely. the fog wa thick in the air, and the 
tobacco smoke from hi pipe ad to it density; the furnitur at the 
far end stood mistily, and where the shadow congreg in hang 
cloud under the ceiling, it wa difficult to see clearli at all; the 
lamplight onli reach to a level of five feet from the floor, abov 
which came layer of compar darkness, so that the room appear 
twice as lofti as it actual was. By mean of the lamp and the fire, 
however, the carpet wa everywher clearli visible. 

the anim made their silent tour of the floor, sometim the dog 
leading, sometim the cat; occasion they look at one anoth 
as though exchang signals; and onc or twice, in spite of the 
limit space, he lost sight of one or other among the fog and the 
shadows. their curiosity, it appear to him, wa someth more than 
the excit lurk in the unknown territori of a strang room; 
yet, so far, it wa imposs to test this, and he purpos kept hi 
mind quietli recept lest the smallest mental excit on hi part 
should commun itself to the anim and thu destroy the valu of 
their independ behaviour. 

they made a veri thorough journey, leav no piec of furnitur 
unexamined, or unsmelt. flame led the way, walk slowli with lower 
head, and smoke follow demur at hi heels, make a transpar 
pretenc of not be interested, yet miss nothing. and, at length, 
they returned, the old colli first, and came to rest on the mat 
befor the fire. flame rest hi muzzl on hi master’ knee, smile 
beatif while he pat the yellow head and spoke hi name; and 
smoke, come a littl later, pretend he came by chance, look from 
the empti saucer to hi face, lap up the milk when it wa given him 
to the last drop, and then sprang upon hi knee and curl round for 
the sleep it had fulli earn and intend to enjoy. 

silenc descend upon the room. onli the breath of the dog upon the 
mat came through the deep stillness, like the puls of time mark 
the minutes; and the steadi drip, drip of the fog outsid upon the 
window-ledg dismal testifi to the inclem of the night beyond. 
and the soft crash of the coal as the fire settl down into the 
grate becam less and less audibl as the fire sank and the flame 
resign their fierceness. 

It wa now well after eleven o’clock, and dr. silenc devot himself 
again to hi book. He read the word on the print page and took 
in their mean superficially, yet without start into life 
the correl of thought and suggest that should accompani 
interest reading. underneath, all the while, hi mental energi 
were absorb in watching, listening, wait for what might come. 
He wa not over sanguin himself, yet he did not wish to be taken 
by surprise. moreover, the animals, hi sensit barometers, had 
incontin gone to sleep. 

after read a dozen pages, however, he realis that hi mind wa 
realli occupi in review the featur of pender’ extraordinari 
story, and that it wa no longer necessari to steadi hi imagin 
by studi the dull paragraph detail in the page befor him. He 
laid down hi book accordingly, and allow hi thought to dwell upon 
the featur of the case. specul as to the meaning, however, he 
rigor suppressed, know that such thought would act upon hi 
imagin like wind upon the glow ember of a fire. 

As the night wore on the silenc grew deeper and deeper, and onli 
at rare interv he heard the sound of wheel on the main road a 
hundr yard away, where the hors went at a walk pace owe to 
the densiti of the fog. the echo of pedestrian footstep no longer 
reach him, the clamour of occasion voic no longer came down the 
side street the night, muffl by fog, shroud by veil of ultim 
mystery, hung about the haunt villa like a doom. noth in the hous 
stirred. stillness, in a thick blanket, lay over the upper storeys. 
onli the mist in the room grew more dense, he thought, and the damp 
cold more penetrating. certainly, from time to time, he shivered. 

the collie, now deep in slumber, move occasionally,--grunted, sighed, 
or twitch hi leg in dreams. smoke lay on hi knees, a pool of warm, 
black fur, onli the closest observ detect the movement of hi 
sleek sides. It wa difficult to distinguish exactli where hi head and 
bodi join in that circl of glisten hair; onli a black satin nose 
and a tini tip of pink tongu betray the secret. 

dr. silenc watch him, and felt comfortable. the collie’ breath 
wa soothing. the fire wa well built, and would burn for anoth two 
hour without attention. He wa not consciou of the least nervousness. 
He particularli wish to remain in hi ordinari and normal state of 
mind, and to forc nothing. If sleep came naturally, he would let it 
come--and even welcom it. the cold of the room, when the fire 
die down later, would be sure to wake him again; and it would then be 
time enough to carri these sleep baromet up to bed. from variou 
psychic premonit he knew quit well that the night would not pass 
without adventure; but he did not wish to forc it arrival; and he 
wish to remain normal, and let the anim remain normal, so that, 
when it came, it would be unattend by excit or by ani strain 
of the attention. mani experi had made him wise. and, for the 
rest, he had no fear. 

accordingly, after a time, he did fall asleep as he had expected, and 
the last thing he remembered, befor oblivion slip up over hi eye 
like soft wool, wa the pictur of flame stretch all four leg at 
once, and sigh noisili as he sought a more comfort posit for 
hi paw and muzzl upon the mat. 

* * * * * 

It wa a good deal later when he becam awar that a weight lay upon 
hi chest, and that someth wa pencil over hi face and mouth. A 
soft touch on the cheek woke him. someth wa pat him. 

He sat up with a jerk, and found himself stare straight into a pair 
of brilliant eyes, half green, half black. smoke’ face lay level with 
hi own; and the cat had climb up with it front paw upon hi chest. 

the lamp had burn low and the fire wa nearli out, yet dr. silenc 
saw in a moment that the cat wa in an excit state. It knead with 
it front paw into hi chest, shift from one to the other. He felt 
them prod against him. It lift a leg veri care and pat 
hi cheek gingerly. it fur, he saw, wa stand ridgewis upon it 
back; the ear were flatten back somewhat; the tail wa switch 
sharply. the cat, of course, had waken him with a purpose, and the 
instant he realis this, he set it upon the arm of the chair and 
sprang up with a quick turn to face the empti room behind him. By some 
curiou instinct, hi arm of their own accord assum an attitud 
of defenc in front of him, as though to ward off someth that 
threaten hi safety. yet noth wa visible. onli shape of fog hung 
about rather heavili in the air, move slightli to and fro. 

hi mind wa now fulli alert, and the last vestig of sleep gone. He 
turn the lamp higher and peer about him. two thing he becam awar 
of at once: one, that smoke, while excited, wa _pleasurably_ excited; 
the other, that the colli wa no longer visibl upon the mat at hi 
feet. He had crept away to the corner of the wall farthest from the 
window, and lay watch the room with wide-open eyes, in which lurk 
plainli someth of alarm. 

someth in the dog’ behaviour instantli struck dr. silenc as 
unusual, and, call him by name, he move across to pat him. flame 
got up, wag hi tail, and came over slowli to the rug, utter a 
low sound that wa half growl, half whine. He wa evid perturb 
about something, and hi master wa proceed to administ comfort 
when hi attent wa suddenli drawn to the antic of hi other 
four-foot companion, the cat. 

and what he saw fill him with someth like amazement. 

smoke had jump down from the back of the arm-chair and now occupi 
the middl of the carpet, where, with tail erect and leg stiff as 
ramrods, it wa steadili pace backward and forward in a narrow 
space, uttering, as it did so, those curiou littl guttur sound of 
pleasur that onli an anim of the felin speci know how to make 
express of suprem happiness. it stiffen leg and arch back 
made it appear larger than usual, and the black visag wore a smile of 
beatif joy. it eye blaze magnificently; it wa in an ecstasy. 

At the end of everi few pace it turn sharpli and stalk back again 
along the same line, pad softly, and pur like a roll of littl 
muffl drums. It behav precis as though it were rub against 
the ankl of some one who remain invisible. A thrill ran down the 
doctor’ spine as he stood and stared. hi experi wa grow 
interest at last. 

He call the collie’ attent to hi friend’ perform to see 
whether he too wa awar of anyth stand there upon the carpet; 
and the dog’ behaviour wa signific and corroborative. He came 
as far as hi master’ knee and then stop dead, refus to 
investig closely. In vain dr. silenc urg him; he wag hi 
tail, whine a little, and stood in a half-crouch attitude, stare 
altern at the cat and at hi master’ face. He was, apparently, 
both puzzl and alarmed, and the whine went deeper and deeper down 
into hi throat till it chang into an ugli snarl of awaken anger. 

then the doctor call to him in a tone of command he had never known 
to be disregarded; but still the dog, though spring up in response, 
declin to move nearer. He made tent motions, pranc a littl 
like a dog about to take to water, pretend to bark, and ran to and 
fro on the carpet. So far there wa no actual fear in hi manner, but 
he wa uneasi and anxious, and noth would induc him to go within 
touch distanc of the walk cat. onc he made a complet circuit, 
but alway care out of reach; and in the end he return to hi 
master’ leg and rub vigor against him. flame did not like the 
perform at all: that much wa quit clear. 

for sever minut john silenc watch the perform of the cat 
with profound attent and without interfering. then he call to the 
anim by name. 

“smoke, you mysteri beastie, what in the world are you about?” he 
said, in a coax tone. 

the cat look up at him for a moment, smile in it ecstasy, blink 
it eyes, but too happi to pause. He spoke to it again. He call to it 
sever times, and each time it turn upon him it blaze eyes, drunk 
with inner delight, open and shut it lips, it bodi larg and 
rigid with excitement. yet it never for one instant paus in it short 
journey to and fro. 

He note exactli what it did: it walked, he saw, the same number of 
pace each time, some six or seven steps, and then it turn sharpli 
and retrac them. By the pattern of the great rose in the carpet 
he measur it. It kept to the same direct and the same line. It 
behav precis as though it were rub against someth solid. 
undoubtedly, there wa someth stand there on that strip of 
carpet, someth invis to the doctor, someth that alarm the 
dog, yet caus the cat unspeak pleasure. 

“smokie!” he call again, “smokie, you black mystery, what is it 
excit you so?” 

again the cat look up at him for a brief second, and then continu 
it sentry-walk, bliss happy, intens preoccupied. and, for an 
instant, as he watch it, the doctor wa awar that a faint uneasi 
stir in the depth of hi own being, focus itself for the moment 
upon thi curiou behaviour of the uncanni creatur befor him. 

there rose in him quit a new realis of the mysteri connect 
with the whole felin tribe, but especi with that common member 
of it, the domest cat--their hidden lives, their strang aloofness, 
their incalcul subtlety. how utterli remot from anyth that 
human be understood lay the sourc of their elus activities. 
As he watch the indescrib bear of the littl creatur minc 
along the strip of carpet under hi eyes, coquet with the power 
of darkness, welcoming, maybe, some fearsom visitor, there stir in 
hi heart a feel strang akin to awe. it indiffer to human 
kind, it seren superior to the obvious, struck him forcibl with 
fresh meaning; so remote, so inaccess seem the secret purpos of 
it real life, so alien to the blunder honesti of other animals. 
it absolut pois of bear brought into hi mind the opium-eater’ 
word that “no digniti is perfect which doe not at some point alli 
itself with the mysterious”; and he becam suddenli awar that the 
presenc of the dog in thi foggy, haunt room on the top of putney 
hill wa uncommonli welcom to him. He wa glad to feel that flame’ 
depend person wa with him. the savag growl at hi heel 
wa a pleasant sound. He wa glad to hear it. that march cat made 
him uneasy. 

find that smoke paid no further attent to hi words, the doctor 
decid upon action. would it rub against hi leg, too? He would take 
it by surpris and see. 

He step quickli forward and place himself upon the exact strip of 
carpet where it walked. 

but no cat is ever taken by surprise! the moment he occupi the space 
of the intruder, set hi feet on the woven rose midway in the line 
of travel, smoke suddenli stop pur and sat down. It lift up 
it face with the most innoc stare imagin of it green eyes. He 
could have sworn it laughed. It wa a perfect child again. In a singl 
second it had resum it simple, domest manner; and it gaze at him 
in such a way that he almost felt smoke wa the normal being, and _his_ 
wa the eccentr behaviour that wa be watched. It wa consummate, 
the manner in which it brought about thi chang so easili and so 
quickly. 

“superb littl actor!” he laugh in spite of himself, and stoop to 
stroke the shine black back. but, in a flash, as he touch it fur, 
the cat turn and spat at him viciously, strike at hi hand with 
one paw. then, with a hurri scutter of feet, it shot like a shadow 
across the floor and a moment later wa calmli sit over by the 
window-curtain wash it face as though noth interest it in the 
whole world but the clean of it cheek and whiskers. 

john silenc straighten himself up and drew a long breath. He 
realis that the perform wa temporarili at an end. the 
collie, meanwhile, who had watch the whole proceed with mark 
disapproval, had now lain down again upon the mat by the fire, no 
longer growling. It seem to the doctor just as though someth that 
had enter the room while he slept, alarm the dog, yet bring 
happi to the cat, had now gone out again, leav all as it wa 
before. whatev it wa that excit it bliss attent had 
retreat for the moment. 

He realis thi intuitively. smoke evid realis it, too, for 
present he deign to march back to the fireplac and jump upon hi 
master’ knees. dr. silence, patient and determined, settl down onc 
more to hi book. the anim soon slept; the fire blaze cheerfully; 
and the cold fog from outsid pour into the room through everi 
avail chink and cranny. 

for a long time silenc and peac reign in the room and dr. silenc 
avail himself of the quiet to make care note of what had 
happened. He enter for futur use in other case an exhaust 
analysi of what he had observed, especi with regard to the 
effect upon the two animals. It is imposs here, nor would it be 
intellig to the reader unvers in the knowledg of the region 
known to a scientif train psychic like dr. silence, to 
detail these observations. but to him it wa clear, up to a certain 
point--and for the rest he must still wait and watch. So far, at least, 
he realis that while he slept in the chair--that is, while hi will 
wa dormant--th room had suffer intrus from what he recognis 
as an intens activ force, and might later be forc to acknowledg 
as someth more than mere a blind force, namely, a distinct 
personality. 

So far it had affect himself scarc at all, but had act directli 
upon the simpler organ of the animals. It stimul keenli the 
centr of the cat’ psychic being, induc a state of instant 
happi (intensifi it conscious probabl in the same way 
a drug or stimul intensifi that of a human being); wherea it 
alarm the less sensit dog, caus it to feel a vagu apprehens 
and distress. 

hi own sudden action and exhibit of energi had serv to dispers 
it temporarily, yet he felt convinced--th indic were not lack 
even while he sat there make notes--that it still remain near to 
him, condit if not spatially, and was, as it were, gather 
forc for a second attack. 

and, further, he intuit understood that the relat between the 
two anim had undergon a subtl change: that the cat had becom 
immeasur superior, confident, sure of itself in it own peculiar 
region, wherea flame had been weaken by an attack he could not 
comprehend and knew not how to repli to. though not yet afraid, he wa 
defiant--readi to act against a fear that he felt to be approaching. He 
wa no longer fatherli and protect toward the cat. smoke held the 
key to the situation; and both he and the cat knew it. 

thus, as the minut passed, john silenc sat and waited, keenli on 
the alert, wonder how soon the attack would be renewed, and at what 
point it would be divert from the anim and direct upon himself. 

the book lay on the floor besid him, hi note were complete. with one 
hand on the cat’ fur, and the dog’ front paw rest against hi 
feet, the three of them doze comfort befor the hot fire while the 
night wore on and the silenc deepen toward midnight. 

It wa well after one o’clock in the morn when dr. silenc turn 
the lamp out and light the candl preparatori to go up to bed. 
then smoke suddenli woke with a loud sharp purr and sat up. It neither 
stretched, wash nor turned: it listened. and the doctor, watch it, 
realis that a certain indefin chang had come about that veri 
moment in the room. A swift readjust of the forc within the four 
wall had taken place--a new disposit of their person equations. 
the balanc wa destroyed, the former harmoni gone. smoke, most 
sensit of barometers, had been the first to feel it, but the dog wa 
not slow to follow suit, for on look down he note that flame wa no 
longer asleep. He wa lie with eye wide open, and that same instant 
he sat up on hi great haunch and began to growl. 

dr. silenc wa in the act of take the match to re-light the lamp 
when an audibl movement in the room behind made him pause. smoke 
leap down from hi knee and move forward a few pace across the 
carpet. then it stop and stare fixedly; and the doctor stood up on 
the rug to watch. 

As he rose the sound wa repeated, and he discov that it wa not 
in the room as he first thought, but outside, and that it came from 
more direct than one. there wa a rushing, sweep nois against 
the window-panes, and simultan a sound of someth brush 
against the door--out in the hall. smoke advanc sedat across the 
carpet, twitch hi tail, and sat down within a foot of the door. the 
influenc that had destroy the harmoni condit of the room had 
appar move in advanc of it cause. clearly, someth wa about 
to happen. 

for the first time that night john silenc hesitated; the thought of 
that dark narrow hall-way, choke with fog, and destitut of human 
comfort, wa unpleasant. He becam awar of a faint creep of hi 
flesh. He knew, of course, that the actual open of the door wa not 
necessari to the invas of the room that wa about to take place, 
sinc neither door nor windows, nor ani other solid barrier could 
interpos an obstacl to what wa seek entrance. yet the open of 
the door would be signific and symbolic, and he distinctli shrank 
from it. 

but for a moment only. smoke, turn with a show of impatience, 
recal him to hi purpose, and he move past the sitting, watch 
creature, and deliber open the door to it full width. 

what subsequ happened, happen in the feebl and flicker light 
of the solitari candl on the mantelpiece. 

through the open door he saw the hall, dimli lit and thick with fog. 
nothing, of course, wa visible--noth but the hat-stand, the african 
spear in dark line upon the wall and the high-back wooden chair 
stand grotesqu underneath on the oilcloth floor. for one instant 
the fog seem to move and thicken oddly; but he set that down to the 
score of the imagination. the door had open upon nothing. 

yet smoke appar thought otherwise, and the deep growl of the 
colli from the mat at the back of the room seem to confirm hi 
judgment. 

for, proud and self-possessed, the cat had again risen to hi feet, 
and have advanc to the door, wa now usher some one slowli into 
the room. noth could have been more evident. He pace from side to 
side, bow hi littl head with great _empressement_ and hold hi 
stiffen tail aloft like a flagstaff. He turn thi way and that, 
minc to and fro, and show sign of suprem satisfaction. He wa 
in hi element. He welcom the intrusion, and appar reckon that 
hi companions, the doctor and the dog, would welcom it likewise. 

the intrud had return for a second attack. 

dr. silenc move slowli backward and took up hi posit on the 
hearthrug, key himself up to a condit of concentr attention. 

He note that flame stood besid him, face the room, with bodi 
motionless, and head move swiftli from side to side with a curiou 
sway movement. hi eye were wide open, hi back rigid, hi neck and 
jaw thrust forward, hi leg tens and readi to leap. savage, readi 
for attack or defence, yet dread puzzl and perhap alreadi a 
littl cowed, he stood and stared, the hair on hi spine and side 
posit bristl outward as though a wind play through them. In 
the dim firelight he look like a great yellow-hair wolf, silent, 
eye shoot dark fire, exceedingli formidable. It wa flame, the 
terrible. 

smoke, meanwhile, advanc from the door toward the middl of the 
room, adopt the veri slow pace of an invis companion. A few 
feet away it stop and began to smile and blink it eyes. there 
wa someth deliber coax in it attitud as it stood there 
undecid on the carpet, clearli wish to effect some sort of 
introduct between the intrud and it canin friend and ally. 
It assum it most win manners, purring, smiling, look 
persuas from one to the other, and make quick tent step 
first in one direct and then in the other. there had alway exist 
such perfect understand between them in everything. sure flame 
would appreci smoke’ intent now, and acquiesce. 

but the old colli made no advances. He bare hi teeth, lift 
hi lip till the gum showed, and stood stockstil with fix eye 
and heav sides. the doctor move a littl farther back, watch 
intent the smallest movement, and it wa just then he divin 
suddenli from the cat’ behaviour and attitud that it wa not onli a 
singl companion it had usher into the room, but _several_. It kept 
cross over from one to the other, look up at each in turn. It 
sought to win over the dog to friendli with them all. the origin 
intrud had come back with reinforcements. and at the same time he 
further realis that the intrud wa someth more than a blindli 
act force, imperson though destructive. It wa a personality, and 
moreov a great personality. and it wa accompani for the purpos 
of assist by a host of other personalities, minor in degree, but 
similar in kind. 

He brace himself in the corner against the mantelpiec and waited, 
hi whole be rous to defence, for he wa now fulli awar that 
the attack had spread to includ himself as well as the animals, 
and he must be on the alert. He strain hi eye through the foggi 
atmosphere, tri in vain to see what the cat and dog saw; but the 
candlelight threw an uncertain and flicker light across the room and 
hi eye discern nothing. On the floor smoke move softli in front of 
him like a black shadow, hi eye gleam as he turn hi head, still 
tri with mani insinu gestur and much pur to bring about 
the introduct he desired. 

but it wa all in vain. flame stood rivet to one spot, motionless as 
a figur carv in stone. 

some minut passed, dure which onli the cat moved, and then there 
came a sharp change. flame began to back toward the wall. He move 
hi head from side to side as he went, sometim turn to snap at 
someth almost behind him. _they_ were advanc upon him, tri to 
surround him. hi distress becam veri mark from now onwards, and 
it seem to the doctor that hi anger merg into genuin terror and 
becam overwhelm by it. the savag growl sound peril like a 
whine, and more than onc he tri to dive past hi master’ legs, as 
though hunt for a way of escape. He wa tri to avoid someth 
that everywher block the way. 

thi terror of the indomit fighter impress the doctor enormously; 
yet also painfully; stir hi impatience; for he had never befor 
seen the dog show sign of give in, and it distress him to wit 
it. He knew, however, that he wa not give in easily, and understood 
that it wa realli imposs for him to gaug the animal’ sensat 
properli at all. what flame felt, and saw, must be terribl inde to 
turn him all at onc into a coward. He face someth that made him 
afraid of more than hi life merely. the doctor spoke a few quick word 
of encourag to him, and stroke the bristl hair. but without 
much success. the colli seem alreadi beyond the reach of comfort 
such as that, and the collaps of the old dog follow inde veri 
speedili after this. 

and smoke, meanwhile, remain behind, watch the advance, but not 
join in it; sitting, pleas and expectant, consid that all 
wa go well and as it wished. It wa knead on the carpet with 
it front paws--slowly, laboriously, as though it feet were dip in 
treacle. the sound it claw made as they caught in the thread wa 
distinctli audible. It wa still smiling, blinking, purring. 

suddenli the colli utter a poignant short bark and leap heavili to 
one side. hi bare teeth trace a line of white through the gloom. 
the next instant he dash past hi master’ legs, almost upset hi 
balance, and shot out into the room, where he went blunder wildli 
against wall and furniture. but that bark wa significant; the doctor 
had heard it befor and knew what it meant: for it wa the cri of the 
fighter against odd and it meant that the old beast had found hi 
courag again. possibl it wa onli the courag of despair, but at ani 
rate the fight would be terrific. and dr. silenc understood, too, 
that he dare not interfere. flame must fight hi own enemi in hi 
own way. 

but the cat, too, had heard that dread bark; and it, too, had 
understood. thi wa more than it had bargain for. across the dim 
shadow of that haunt room there must have pass some secret signal 
of distress between the animals. smoke stood up and look swiftli 
about him. He utter a piteou meow and trot smartli away into the 
greater dark by the windows. what hi object wa onli those endow 
with the spirit-lik intellig of cat might know. but, at ani rate, 
he had at last rang himself on the side of hi friend. and the littl 
beast meant business. 

At the same moment the colli manag to gain the door. the doctor saw 
him rush through into the hall like a flash of yellow light. He shot 
across the oilcloth, and tore up the stairs, but in anoth second he 
appear again, fli down the step and land at the bottom in a 
tumbl heap, whining, cringing, terrified. the doctor saw him slink 
back into the room again and crawl round by the wall toward the cat. 
was, then, even the staircas occupied? did _they_ stand also in the 
hall? wa the whole hous crowd from floor to ceiling? 

the thought came to add to the keen distress he felt at the sight of 
the collie’ discomfiture. and, indeed, hi own person distress had 
increas in a mark degre dure the past minutes, and continu 
to increas steadili to the climax. He recognis that the drain on 
hi own vital grew steadily, and that the attack wa now direct 
against himself even more than against the defeat dog, and the too 
much deceiv cat. 

It all seem so rapid and uncalcul after that--th event that 
took place in thi littl modern room at the top of putney hill between 
midnight and sunrise--that dr. silenc wa hardli abl to follow and 
rememb it all. It came about with such uncanni swift and terror; 
the light wa so uncertain; the movement of the black cat so difficult 
to follow on the dark carpet, and the doctor himself so weari and taken 
by surprise--that he found it almost imposs to observ accurately, 
or to recal afterward precis what it wa he had seen or in what 
order the incid had taken place. He never could understand what 
defect of vision on hi part made it seem as though the cat had 
duplic itself at first, and then increas indefinitely, so that 
there were at least a dozen of them dart silent about the floor, 
leap softli on to chair and tables, pass like shadow from the 
open door to the end of the room, all black as sin, with brilliant 
green eye flash fire in all directions. It wa like the reflect 
from a score of mirror place round the wall at differ angles. 
nor could he make out at the time whi the size of the room seem to 
have altered, grown much larger, and whi it extend away behind him 
where ordinarili the wall should have been. the snarl of the enrag 
and terrifi colli sound sometim so far away; the ceil seem 
to have rais itself so much higher than before, and much of the 
furnitur had chang in appear and shift marvellously. 

It wa all so confus and confusing, as though the littl room he knew 
had becom merg and transform into the dimens of quit anoth 
chamber, that came to him, with it host of cat and it strang 
distances, in a sort of vision. 

but these chang came about a littl later, and at a time when hi 
attent wa so concentr upon the proceed of smoke and the 
collie, that he onli observ them, as it were, subconsciously. and the 
excitement, the flicker candlelight, the distress he felt for the 
collie, and the distort atmospher of fog were the poorest possibl 
alli to care observation. 

At first he wa onli awar that the dog wa repeat hi short 
danger bark from time to time, snap vicious at the empti 
air, a foot or so from the ground. once, indeed, he sprang upward 
and forwards, work furious with teeth and paws, and with a nois 
like wolv fighting, but onli to dash back the next minut against 
the wall behind him. then, after lie still for a bit, he rose to a 
crouch posit as though to spring again, snarl horribl and 
make short half-circl with lower head. and smoke all the while 
meow piteous by the window as though tri to draw the attack upon 
himself. 

then it wa that the rush of the whole dread busi seem to turn 
asid from the dog and direct itself upon hi own person. the colli 
had made anoth spring and fallen back with a crash into the corner, 
where he made nois enough in hi savag rage to waken the dead befor 
he fell to whine and then final lay still. and directli afterward 
the doctor’ own distress becam intoler acute. He had made a half 
movement forward to come to the rescu when a veil that wa denser 
than mere fog seem to drop down over the scene, drape room, walls, 
anim and fire in a mist of dark and fold also about hi own 
mind. other form move silent across the field of vision, form 
that he recognis from previou experiments, and welcom not. unholi 
thought began to crowd into hi brain, sinist suggest of evil 
present themselv seductively. ice seem to settl about hi heart, 
and hi mind trembled. He began to lose memory--memori of hi identity, 
of where he was, of what he ought to do. the veri foundat of hi 
strength were shaken. hi will seem paralysed. 

and it wa then that the room fill with thi hord of cats, all dark 
as the night, all silent, all with lamp eye of green fire. the 
dimens of the place alter and shifted. He wa in a much larger 
space. the whine of the dog sound far away, and all about him the 
cat flew busili to and fro, silent play their tearing, rush 
game of evil, weav the pattern of their dark purpos upon the floor. 
He strove hard to collect himself and rememb the word of power he 
had made use of befor in similar dread posit where hi danger 
practic had sometim led; but he could recal noth consecutively; 
a mist lay over hi mind and memory; he felt daze and hi forc 
scattered. the deep within were too troubl for heal power to come 
out of them. 

It wa glamour, of course, he realis afterwards, the strong glamour 
thrown upon hi imagin by some power person behind the 
veil; but at the time he wa not suffici awar of thi and, as 
with all true glamour, wa unabl to grasp where the true end and 
the fals began. He wa caught momentarili in the same vortex that 
had sought to lure the cat to destruct through it delight, and 
threaten utterli to overwhelm the dog through it terror. 

there came a sound in the chimney behind him like wind boom and 
tear it way down. the window rattled. the candl flicker and 
went out. the glacial atmospher close round him with the cold of 
death, and a great rush sound swept by overhead as though the 
ceil had lift to a great height. He heard the door shut. far 
away it sounded. He felt lost, shelterless in the depth of hi soul. 
yet still he held out and resist while the climax of the fight came 
nearer and nearer.... He had step into the stream of forc awaken 
by pender and he knew that he must withstand them to the end or come to 
a conclus that it wa not good for a man to come to. someth from 
the region of utter cold wa upon him. 

and then quit suddenly, through the confus mist about him, there 
slowli rose up the person that had been all the time direct 
the battle. some forc enter hi be that shook him as the 
tempest shake a leaf, and close against hi eyes--clean level with 
hi face--h found himself stare into the wreck of a vast dark 
countenance, a counten that wa terribl even in it ruin. 

for ruin it was, and terribl it was, and the mark of spiritu 
evil wa brand everywher upon it broken features. eyes, face and 
hair rose level with hi own, and for a space of time he never could 
properli measure, or determine, these two, a man and a woman, look 
straight into each other’ visag and down into each other’ hearts. 

and john silence, the soul with the good, unselfish motive, held hi 
own against the dark discarn woman whose motiv wa pure evil, and 
whose soul wa on the side of the dark powers. 

It wa the climax that touch the depth of power within him and began 
to restor him slowli to hi own. He wa conscious, of course, of 
effort, and yet it seem no superhuman one, for he had recognis the 
charact of hi opponent’ power, and he call upon the good within 
him to meet and overcom it. the inner forc stir and trembl 
in respons to hi call. they did not at first come readili as wa 
their habit, for under the spell of glamour they had alreadi been 
diabol lull into inactivity, but come they eventu did, 
rise out of the inner spiritu natur he had learn with so much 
time and pain to awaken to life. and power and confid came with 
them. He began to breath deepli and regularly, and at the same time 
to absorb into himself the forc oppos to him, and to _turn them to 
hi own account_. By ceas to resist, and allow the deadli stream 
to pour into him unopposed, he use the veri power suppli by hi 
adversari and thu enorm increas hi own. 

for thi spiritu alchemi he had learned. He understood that forc 
ultim is everywher one and the same; it is the motiv behind 
that make it good or evil; and hi motiv wa entir unselfish. He 
knew--provid he wa not first rob of self-control--how vicari 
to absorb these evil radiat into himself and chang them magic 
into hi own good purposes. and, sinc hi motiv wa pure and hi soul 
fearless, they could not work him harm. 

thu he stood in the main stream of evil unwittingli attract by 
pender, deflect it cours upon himself; and after pass through 
the purifi filter of hi own unselfish these energi could onli 
add to hi store of experience, of knowledge, and therefor of power. 
and, as hi self-control return to him, he gradual accomplish 
thi purpose, even though trembl while he did so. 

yet the struggl wa severe, and in spite of the freez chill of the 
air, the perspir pour down hi face. then, by slow degrees, the 
dark and dread counten faded, the glamour pass from hi soul, 
the normal proport return to wall and ceiling, the form melt 
back into the fog, and the whirl of rush shadow-cat disappear 
whenc they came. 

and with the return of the conscious of hi own ident john 
silenc wa restor to the full control of hi own will-power. In a 
deep, modul voic he began to utter certain rhythmic sound that 
slowli roll through the air like a rise sea, fill the room with 
power vibratori activ that whelm all irregular of lesser 
vibrat in it own swell tone. He made certain sigils, gestur 
and movement at the same time. for sever minut he continu to 
utter these words, until at length the grow volum domin the 
whole room and master the manifest of all that oppos it. for 
just as he understood the spiritu alchemi that can transmut evil 
forc by rais them into higher channels, so he knew from long studi 
the occult use of sound, and it direct effect upon the plastic region 
wherein the power of spiritu evil work their fell purposes. harmoni 
wa restor first of all to hi own soul, and thenc to the room and 
all it occupants. 

and, after himself, the first to recognis it wa the old dog lie 
in hi corner. flame began suddenli utter sound of pleasure, that 
“something” between a growl and a grunt that dog make upon be 
restor to their master’ confidence. dr. silenc heard the thump 
of the collie’ tail against the ground. and the grunt and the thump 
touch the depth of affect in the man’ heart, and gave him some 
inkl of what agoni the dumb creatur had suffered. 

next, from the shadow by the window, a somewhat shrill pur 
announc the restor of the cat to it normal state. smoke wa 
advanc across the carpet. He seem veri pleas with himself, and 
smile with an express of suprem innocence. He wa no shadow-cat, 
but real and full of hi usual and perfect self-possession. He march 
along, pick hi way delicately, but with a state digniti that 
suggest hi ancestri with the majesti of egypt. hi eye no longer 
glared; they shone steadili befor him; they radiated, not excitement, 
but knowledge. clearli he wa anxiou to make amend for the mischief 
to which he had unwittingli lent himself owe to hi subtl and 
electr constitution. 

still utter hi sharp high pur he march up to hi master and 
rub vigor against hi legs. then he stood on hi hind feet and 
paw hi knee and stare beseechingli up into hi face. He turn hi 
head toward the corner where the colli still lay, thump hi tail 
feebli and pathetically. 

john silenc understood. He bent down and stroke the creature’ live 
fur, note the line of bright blue spark that follow the motion of 
hi hand down it back. and then they advanc togeth toward the 
corner where the dog was. 

smoke went first and put hi nose gentli against hi friend’ muzzle, 
pur while he rubbed, and utter littl soft sound of affect 
in hi throat. the doctor lit the candl and brought it over. He 
saw the colli lie on it side against the wall; it wa utterli 
exhausted, and foam still hung about it jaws. it tail and eye 
respond to the sound of it name, but it wa evid veri weak and 
overcome. smoke continu to rub against it cheek and nose and eyes, 
sometim even stand on it bodi and knead into the thick yellow 
hair. flame repli from time to time by littl lick of the tongue, 
most of them curious misdirected. 

but dr. silenc felt intuit that someth disastr had 
happened, and hi heart wa wrung. He stroke the dear body, feel 
it over for bruis or broken bones, but find none. He fed it with 
what remain of the sandwich and milk, but the creatur clumsili 
upset the saucer and lost the sandwich between it paws, so that the 
doctor had to feed it with hi own hand. and all the while smoke meow 
piteously. 

then john silenc began to understand. He went across to the farther 
side of the room and call aloud to it. 

“flame, old man! come!” 

At ani other time the dog would have been upon him in an instant, 
bark and leap to the shoulder. and even now he got up, though 
heavili and awkwardly, to hi feet. He start to run, wag hi 
tail more briskly. He collid first with a chair, and then ran 
straight into a table. smoke trot close at hi side, tri hi veri 
best to guid him. but it wa useless. dr. silenc had to lift him up 
into hi own arm and carri him like a baby. for he wa blind. 


iii 

It wa a week later when john silenc call to see the author in hi 
new house, and found him well on the way to recoveri and alreadi busi 
again with hi writing. the haunt look had left hi eyes, and he 
seem cheer and confident. 

“humour restored?” laugh the doctor, as soon as they were comfort 
settl in the room overlook the park. 

“i’v had no troubl sinc I left that dread place,” return pender 
gratefully; “and thank to you----” 

the doctor stop him with a gesture. 

“never mind that,” he said, “we’ll discuss your new plan afterwards, 
and my scheme for reliev you of the hous and help you settl 
elsewhere. Of cours it must be pull down, for it’ not fit for ani 
sensit person to live in, and ani other tenant might be afflict 
in the same way you were. although, personally, I think the evil ha 
exhaust itself by now.” 

He told the astonish author someth of hi experi in it with 
the animals. 

“I don’t pretend to understand,” pender said, when the account wa 
finished, “but I and my wife are intens reliev to be free of it 
all. onli I must say I should like to know someth of the former 
histori of the house. when we took it six month ago I heard no word 
against it.” 

dr. silenc drew a typewritten paper from hi pocket. 

“I can satisfi your curios to some extent,” he said, run 
hi eye over the sheets, and then replac them in hi coat; “for 
by my secretary’ investig I have been abl to check certain 
inform obtain in the hypnot tranc by a ‘sensitive’ who help 
me in such cases. the former occup who haunt you appear to have 
been a woman of singularli atroci life and charact who final 
suffer death by hanging, after a seri of crime that appal the 
whole of england and onli came to light by the merest chance. she came 
to her end in the year 1798, for it wa not thi particular hous she 
live in, but a much larger one that then stood upon the site it now 
occupies, and wa then, of course, not in london, but in the country. 
she wa a person of intellect, possess of a powerful, train will, 
and of consumm audacity, and I am convinc avail herself of the 
resourc of the lower magic to attain her ends. thi goe far to 
explain the virul of the attack upon yourself, and whi she is still 
abl to carri on after death the evil practic that form her main 
purpos dure life.” 

“you think that after death a soul can still conscious direct----” 
gasp the author. 

“I think, as I told you before, that the forc of a power 
person may still persist after death in the line of their origin 
momentum,” repli the doctor; “and that strong thought and purpos 
can still react upon suitabl prepar brain long after their 
origin have pass away. 

“if you knew anyth of magic,” he pursued, “you would know that 
thought is dynamic, and that it may call into exist form and 
pictur that may well exist for hundr of years. for, not far 
remov from the region of our human life, is anoth region where 
float the wast and drift of all the centuries, the limbo of the 
shell of the dead; a dens popul region cram with horror and 
abomin of all descriptions, and sometim galvanis into activ 
life again by the will of a train manipulator, a mind vers in the 
practic of lower magic. that thi woman understood it vile commerce, 
I am persuaded, and the forc she set go dure her life have 
simpli been accumul ever since, and would have continu to do so 
had they not been drawn down upon yourself, and afterward discharg 
and satisfi through me. 

“anyth might have brought down the attack, for, besid drugs, 
there are certain violent emotions, certain mood of the soul, certain 
spiritu fevers, if I may so call them, which directli open the inner 
be to a cognis of thi astral region I have mentioned. In your 
case it happen to be a peculiarli potent drug that did it. 

“but now, tell me,” he added, after a pause, hand to the perplex 
author a pencil-draw he had made of the dark counten that had 
appear to him dure the night on putney hill--“tel me if you 
recognis thi face?” 

pender look at the draw closely, greatli astonished. He shudder 
a littl as he looked. 

“undoubtedly,” he said, “it is the face I kept tri to draw--dark, 
with the great mouth and jaw, and the droop eye. that is the woman.” 

dr. silenc then produc from hi pocket-book an old-fashion woodcut 
of the same person which hi secretari had unearth from the record 
of the newgat calendar. the woodcut and the pencil draw were two 
differ aspect of the same dread visage. the men compar them 
for some moment in silence. 

“it make me thank god for the limit of our senses,” said 
pender quietly, with a sigh; “continu clairvoy must be a sore 
affliction.” 

“it is indeed,” return john silenc significantly, “and if all 
the peopl nowaday who claim to be clairvoy were realli so, the 
statist of suicid and lunaci would be consider higher than they 
are. It is littl wonder,” he added, “that your sens of humour wa 
clouded, with the mind-forc of that dead monster tri to use your 
brain for their dissemination. you have had an interest adventure, 
mr. felix pender, and, let me add, a fortun escape.” 

the author wa about to renew hi thank when there came a sound of 
scratch at the door, and the doctor sprang up quickly. 

“it’ time for me to go. I left my dog on the step, but I suppose----” 

befor he had time to open the door, it had yield to the pressur 
behind it and flew wide open to admit a great yellow-hair collie. 
the dog, wag hi tail and contort hi whole bodi with delight, 
tore across the floor and tri to leap up upon hi owner’ breast. and 
there wa laughter and happi in the old eyes; for they were clear 
again as the day. 




case II 

ancient sorceri 


I 

there are, it would appear, certain wholli unremark persons, with 
none of the characterist that invit adventure, who yet onc or 
twice in the cours of their smooth live undergo an experi so 
strang that the world catch it breath--and look the other way! and 
it wa case of thi kind, perhaps, more than ani other, that fell into 
the widespread net of john silence, the psychic doctor, and, appeal 
to hi deep humanity, to hi patience, and to hi great qualiti of 
spiritu sympathy, led often to the revel of problem of the 
strangest complexity, and of the profoundest possibl human interest. 

matter that seem almost too curiou and fantast for belief he 
love to trace to their hidden sources. To unravel a tangl in the 
veri soul of things--and to releas a suffer human soul in the 
process--wa with him a verit passion. and the knot he unti 
were, indeed, often pass strange. 

the world, of course, ask for some plausibl basi to which it can 
attach credence--someth it can, at least, pretend to explain. 
the adventur type it can understand: such peopl carri about 
with them an adequ explan of their excit lives, and their 
charact obvious drive them into the circumst which produc 
the adventures. It expect noth els from them, and is satisfied. 
but dull, ordinari folk have no right to out-of-the-way experiences, 
and the world have been led to expect otherwise, is disappoint 
with them, not to say shocked. it complac judgment ha been rude 
disturbed. 

“such a thing happen to _that_ man!” it cries--“a commonplac person 
like that! It is too absurd! there must be someth wrong!” 

yet there could be no question that someth did actual happen to 
littl arthur vezin, someth of the curiou natur he describ to 
dr. silence. outwardly, or inwardly, it happen beyond a doubt, and in 
spite of the jeer of hi few friend who heard the tale, and observ 
wise that “such a thing might perhap have come to iszard, that 
crack-brain iszard, or to that odd fish minski, but it could never 
have happen to commonplac littl vezin, who wa fore-ordain to 
live and die accord to scale.” 

but, whatev hi method of death was, vezin certainli did not “live 
accord to scale” so far as thi particular event in hi otherwis 
unev life wa concerned; and to hear him recount it, and watch 
hi pale delic featur change, and hear hi voic grow softer 
and more hush as he proceeded, wa to know the convict that hi 
halt word perhap fail sometim to convey. He live the thing 
over again each time he told it. hi whole person becam muffl 
in the recital. It subdu him more than ever, so that the tale becam 
a lengthi apolog for an experi that he deprecated. He appear to 
excus himself and ask your pardon for have dare to take part in so 
fantast an episode. for littl vezin wa a timid, gentle, sensit 
soul, rare abl to assert himself, tender to man and beast, and 
almost constitut unabl to say no, or to claim mani thing that 
should rightli have been his. hi whole scheme of life seem utterli 
remot from anyth more excit than miss a train or lose an 
umbrella on an omnibus. and when thi curiou event came upon him he 
wa alreadi more year beyond forti than hi friend suspect or he 
care to admit. 

john silence, who heard him speak of hi experi more than once, 
said that he sometim left out certain detail and put in others; 
yet they were all obvious true. the whole scene wa unforgett 
cinematograph on to hi mind. none of the detail were imagin 
or invented. and when he told the stori with them all complete, the 
effect wa undeniable. hi appeal brown eye shone, and much of the 
charm personality, usual so care repressed, came forward and 
reveal itself. hi modesti wa alway there, of course, but in the 
tell he forgot the present and allow himself to appear almost 
vividli as he live again in the past of hi adventure. 

He wa on the way home when it happened, cross northern franc from 
some mountain trip or other where he buri himself solitary-wis 
everi summer. He had noth but an unregist bag in the rack, and 
the train wa jam to suffocation, most of the passeng be 
unredeem holiday english. He dislik them, not becaus they were 
hi fellow-countrymen, but becaus they were noisi and obtrusive, 
obliter with their big limb and tweed cloth all the quieter 
tint of the day that brought him satisfact and enabl him to melt 
into insignific and forget that he wa anybody. these english 
clash about him like a brass band, make him feel vagu that he 
ought to be more self-assert and obstreperous, and that he did not 
claim insist enough all kind of thing that he didn’t want and 
that were realli valueless, such as corner seats, window up or down, 
and so forth. 

So that he felt uncomfort in the train, and wish the journey were 
over and he wa back again live with hi unmarri sister in surbiton. 

and when the train stop for ten pant minut at the littl 
station in northern france, and he got out to stretch hi leg on the 
platform, and saw to hi dismay a further batch of the british isl 
debouch from anoth train, it suddenli seem imposs to him to 
continu the journey. even _his_ flabbi soul revolted, and the idea of 
stay a night in the littl town and go on next day by a slower, 
emptier train, flash into hi mind. the guard wa alreadi shout 
“_en voiture_” and the corridor of hi compart wa alreadi pack 
when the thought came to him. and, for once, he act with decis and 
rush to snatch hi bag. 

find the corridor and step impassable, he tap at the window 
(for he had a corner seat) and beg the frenchman who sat opposit 
to hand hi luggag out to him, explain in hi wretch french that 
he intend to break the journey there. and thi elderli frenchman, he 
declared, gave him a look, half of warning, half of reproach, that to 
hi die day he could never forget; hand the bag through the window 
of the move train; and at the same time pour into hi ear a long 
sentence, spoken rapidli and low, of which he wa abl to comprehend 
onli the last few words: “_à caus du sommeil et à caus de chats_.” 

In repli to dr. silence, whose singular psychic acut at onc 
seiz upon thi frenchman as a vital point in the adventure, 
vezin admit that the man had impress him favour from the 
beginning, though without be abl to explain why. they had sat 
face one anoth dure the four hour of the journey, and though 
no convers had pass between them--vezin wa timid about hi 
stutter french--h confess that hi eye were be continu 
drawn to hi face, almost, he felt, to rudeness, and that each, by a 
dozen nameless littl polit and attentions, had evinc the 
desir to be kind. the men like each other and their person 
did not clash, or would not have clash had they chanc to come to 
term of acquaintance. the frenchman, indeed, seem to have exercis 
a silent protect influenc over the insignific littl englishman, 
and without word or gestur betray that he wish him well and 
would gladli have been of servic to him. 

“and thi sentenc that he hurl at you after the bag?” ask john 
silence, smile that peculiarli sympathet smile that alway melt 
the prejudic of hi patient, “were you unabl to follow it exactly?” 

“it wa so quick and low and vehement,” explain vezin, in hi small 
voice, “that I miss practic the whole of it. I onli caught the 
few word at the veri end, becaus he spoke them so clearly, and hi 
face wa bent down out of the carriag window so near to mine.” 

“_‘a caus du sommeil et à caus de chats’?_” repeat dr. silence, as 
though half speak to himself. 

“that’ it exactly,” said vezin; “which, I take it, mean someth 
like ‘becaus of sleep and becaus of the cats,’ doesn’t it?” 

“certainly, that’ how I should translat it,” the doctor observ 
shortly, evid not wish to interrupt more than necessary. 

“and the rest of the sentence--al the first part I couldn’t 
understand, I mean--wa a warn not to do something--not to stop in 
the town, or at some particular place in the town, perhaps. that wa 
the impress it made on me.” 

then, of course, the train rush off, and left vezin stand on the 
platform alon and rather forlorn. 

the littl town climb in straggl fashion up a sharp hill rise 
out of the plain at the back of the station, and wa crown by the 
twin tower of the ruin cathedr peep over the summit. from the 
station itself it look uninterest and modern, but the fact wa 
that the mediæv posit lay out of sight just beyond the crest. and 
onc he reach the top and enter the old streets, he step clean 
out of modern life into a bygon century. the nois and bustl of the 
crowd train seem day away. the spirit of thi silent hill-town, 
remot from tourist and motor-cars, dream it own quiet life under 
the autumn sun, rose up and cast it spell upon him. long befor he 
recognis thi spell he act under it. He walk softly, almost on 
tiptoe, down the wind narrow street where the gabl all but met 
over hi head, and he enter the doorway of the solitari inn with a 
deprec and modest demeanour that wa in itself an apolog for 
intrud upon the place and disturb it dream. 

At first, however, vezin said, he notic veri littl of all this. the 
attempt at analysi came much later. what struck him then wa onli the 
delight contrast of the silenc and peac after the dust and noisi 
rattl of the train. He felt sooth and stroke like a cat. 

“like a cat, you said?” interrupt john silence, quickli catch him 
up. 

“yes. At the veri start I felt that.” He laugh apologetically. “I 
felt as though the warmth and the still and the comfort made me 
purr. It seem to be the gener mood of the whole place--then.” 

the inn, a rambl ancient house, the atmospher of the old coach 
day still about it, appar did not welcom him too warmly. He felt 
he wa onli tolerated, he said. but it wa cheap and comfortable, and 
the delici cup of afternoon tea he order at onc made him feel 
realli veri pleas with himself for leav the train in thi bold, 
origin way. for to him it had seem bold and original. He felt 
someth of a dog. hi room, too, sooth him with it dark panel 
and low irregular ceiling, and the long slope passag that led to it 
seem the natur pathway to a real chamber of sleep--a littl dim 
cubbi hole out of the world where nois could not enter. It look 
upon the courtyard at the back. It wa all veri charming, and made 
him think of himself as dress in veri soft velvet somehow, and the 
floor seem padded, the wall provid with cushions. the sound of 
the street could not penetr there. It wa an atmospher of absolut 
rest that surround him. 

On engag the two-franc room he had interview the onli person 
who seem to be about that sleepi afternoon, an elderli waiter with 
dundreari whisker and a drowsi courtesy, who had ambl lazili toward 
him across the stone yard; but on come downstair again for a littl 
promenad in the town befor dinner he encount the proprietress 
herself. she wa a larg woman whose hands, feet, and featur seem 
to swim toward him out of a sea of person. they emerged, so to speak. 
but she had great dark, vivaci eye that counteract the bulk of 
her body, and betray the fact that in realiti she wa both vigor 
and alert. when he first caught sight of her she wa knit in a low 
chair against the sunlight of the wall, and someth at onc made him 
see her as a great tabbi cat, dozing, yet awake, heavili sleepy, and 
yet at the same time prepar for instantan action. A great mouser 
on the watch occur to him. 

she took him in with a singl comprehens glanc that wa polit 
without be cordial. her neck, he noticed, wa extraordinarili suppl 
in spite of it proportions, for it turn so easili to follow him, and 
the head it carri bow so veri flexibly. 

“but when she look at me, you know,” said vezin, with that littl 
apologet smile in hi brown eyes, and that faintli deprec 
gestur of the shoulder that wa characterist of him, “the odd 
notion came to me that realli she had intend to make quit a 
differ movement, and that with a singl bound she could have leap 
at me across the width of that stone yard and pounc upon me like some 
huge cat upon a mouse.” 

He laugh a littl soft laugh, and dr. silenc made a note in hi book 
without interrupting, while vezin proceed in a tone as though he 
fear he had alreadi told too much and more than we could believe. 

“veri soft, yet veri activ she was, for all her size and mass, and I 
felt she knew what I wa do even after I had pass and wa behind 
her back. she spoke to me, and her voic wa smooth and running. she 
ask if I had my luggage, and wa comfort in my room, and then 
ad that dinner wa at seven o’clock, and that they were veri earli 
peopl in thi littl countri town. clearly, she intend to convey 
that late hour were not encouraged.” 

evidently, she contriv by voic and manner to give him the impress 
that here he would be “managed,” that everyth would be arrang and 
plan for him, and that he had noth to do but fall into the groov 
and obey. No decid action or sharp person effort would be look 
for from him. It wa the veri revers of the train. He walk quietli 
out into the street feel sooth and peaceful. He realis that he 
wa in a _milieu_ that suit him and stroke him the right way. It wa 
so much easier to be obedient. He began to purr again, and to feel that 
all the town pur with him. 

about the street of that littl town he meander gently, fall 
deeper and deeper into the spirit of repos that characteris it. with 
no special aim he wander up and down, and to and fro. the septemb 
sunshin fell slantingli over the roofs. down wind alleyways, 
fring with tumbl gabl and open casements, he caught fairylik 
glimps of the great plain below, and of the meadow and yellow cops 
lie like a dream-map in the haze. the spell of the past held veri 
potent here, he felt. 

the street were full of picturesqu garb men and women, all busi 
enough, go their respect ways; but no one took ani notic of him 
or turn to stare at hi obvious english appearance. He wa even 
abl to forget that with hi tourist appear he wa a fals note in 
a charm picture, and he melt more and more into the scene, feel 
delight insignific and unimport and unselfconscious. It wa 
like becom part of a softly-colour dream which he did not even 
realis to be a dream. 

On the eastern side the hill fell away more sharply, and the plain 
below ran off rather suddenli into a sea of gather shadow in which 
the littl patch of woodland look like island and the stubbl 
field like deep water. here he stroll along the old rampart of 
ancient fortif that onc had been formidable, but now were 
onli vision-lik with their charm mingl of broken grey wall 
and wayward vine and ivy. from the broad cope on which he sat for a 
moment, level with the round top of clip plane trees, he saw the 
esplanad far below lie in shadow. here and there a yellow sunbeam 
crept in and lay upon the fallen yellow leaves, and from the height 
he look down and saw that the townsfolk were walk to and fro in 
the cool of the evening. He could just hear the sound of their slow 
footfalls, and the murmur of their voic float up to him through the 
gap between the trees. the figur look like shadow as he caught 
glimps of their quiet movement far below. 

He sat there for some time pondering, bath in the wave of murmur 
and half-lost echo that rose to hi ears, muffl by the leav of 
the plane trees. the whole town, and the littl hill out of which it 
grew as natur as an ancient wood, seem to him like a be lie 
there half asleep on the plain and croon to itself as it dozed. 

and, presently, as he sat lazili melt into it dream, a sound of 
horn and string and wood instrument rose to hi ears, and the town 
band began to play at the far end of the crowd terrac below to 
the accompani of a veri soft, deep-throat drum. vezin wa veri 
sensit to music, knew about it intelligently, and had even ventured, 
unknown to hi friends, upon the composit of quiet melodi with 
low-run chord which he play to himself with the soft pedal when 
no one wa about. and thi music float up through the tree from an 
invis and doubtless veri picturesqu band of the townspeopl wholli 
charm him. He recognis noth that they played, and it sound as 
though they were simpli improvis without a conductor. No definit 
mark time ran through the pieces, which end and began oddli after 
the fashion of wind through an æolian harp. It wa part of the place 
and scene, just as the die sunlight and faintly-breath wind were 
part of the scene and hour, and the mellow note of old-fashion 
plaintiv horns, pierc here and there by the sharper strings, all 
half smother by the continu boom of the deep drum, touch hi 
soul with a curious potent spell that wa almost too engross to be 
quit pleasant. 

there wa a certain queer sens of bewitch in it all. the music 
seem to him oddli unartificial. It made him think of tree swept by 
the wind, of night breez sing among wire and chimney-stacks, or 
in the rig of invis ships; or--and the simil leap up in hi 
thought with a sudden sharp of suggestion--a choru of animals, 
of wild creatures, somewher in desol place of the world, cri 
and sing as anim will, to the moon. He could fanci he heard the 
wailing, half-human cri of cat upon the tile at night, rise and 
fall with weird interv of sound, and thi music, muffl by 
distanc and the trees, made him think of a queer compani of these 
creatur on some roof far away in the sky, utter their solemn music 
to one anoth and the moon in chorus. 

It was, he felt at the time, a singular imag to occur to him, yet it 
express hi sensat pictori better than anyth else. the 
instrument play such imposs odd intervals, and the crescendo 
and diminuendo were so veri suggest of cat-land on the tile at 
night, rise swiftly, drop without warn to deep note again, 
and all in such strang confus of discord and accords. but, at the 
same time a plaintiv sweet result on the whole, and the discord 
of these half-broken instrument were so singular that they did not 
distress hi music soul like fiddl out of tune. 

He listen a long time, wholli surrend himself as hi charact 
was, and then stroll homeward in the dusk as the air grew chilly. 

“there wa noth to alarm?” put in dr. silenc briefly. 

“absolut nothing,” said vezin; “but you know it wa all so 
fantast and charm that my imagin wa profoundli impressed. 
perhaps, too,” he continued, gentli explanatory, “it wa thi stir 
of my imagin that caus other impressions; for, as I walk back, 
the spell of the place began to steal over me in a dozen ways, though 
all intellig ways. but there were other thing I could not account 
for in the least, even then.” 

“incidents, you mean?” 

“hardli incidents, I think. A lot of vivid sensat crowd 
themselv upon my mind and I could trace them to no causes. It wa 
just after sunset and the tumbl old build trace magic outlin 
against an opalesc sky of gold and red. the dusk wa run down 
the twist streets. all round the hill the plain press in like a 
dim sea, it level rise with the darkness. the spell of thi kind of 
scene, you know, can be veri moving, and it wa so that night. yet I 
felt that what came to me had noth directli to do with the mysteri 
and wonder of the scene.” 

“not mere the subtl transform of the spirit that come with 
beauty,” put in the doctor, notic hi hesitation. 

“exactly,” vezin went on, duli encourag and no longer so fear 
of our smile at hi expense. “the impress came from somewher 
else. for instance, down the busi main street where men and women were 
bustl home from work, shop at stall and barrows, idli gossip 
in groups, and all the rest of it, I saw that I arous no interest and 
that no one turn to stare at me as a foreign and stranger. I wa 
utterli ignored, and my presenc among them excit no special interest 
or attention. 

“and then, quit suddenly, it dawn upon me with convict that 
all the time thi indiffer and inattent were mere feigned. 
everybodi as a matter of fact wa watch me closely. everi movement 
I made wa known and observed. ignor me wa all a pretence--an 
elabor pretence.” 

He paus a moment and look at us to see if we were smiling, and then 
continued, reassured-- 

“it is useless to ask me how I notic this, becaus I simpli cannot 
explain it. but the discoveri gave me someth of a shock. befor I 
got back to the inn, however, anoth curiou thing rose up strongli in 
my mind and forc my recognit of it as true. and this, too, I may 
as well say at once, wa equal inexplic to me. I mean I can onli 
give you the fact, as fact it wa to me.” 

the littl man left hi chair and stood on the mat befor the fire. 
hi diffid lessen from now onwards, as he lost himself again in 
the magic of the old adventure. hi eye shone a littl alreadi as he 
talked. 

“well,” he went on, hi soft voic rise somewhat with hi excitement, 
“I wa in a shop when it came to me first--though the idea must have 
been at work for a long time subconsci to appear in so complet 
a form all at once. I wa buy socks, I think,” he laughed, “and 
struggl with my dread french, when it struck me that the woman in 
the shop did not care two pin whether I bought anyth or not. she 
wa indiffer whether she made a sale or did not make a sale. she wa 
onli pretend to sell. 

“thi sound a veri small and fanci incid to build upon what 
follows. but realli it wa not small. I mean it wa the spark that lit 
the line of powder and ran along to the big blaze in my mind. 

“for the whole town, I suddenli realised, wa someth other than I 
so far saw it. the real activ and interest of the peopl were 
elsewher and otherwis than appeared. their true live lay somewher 
out of sight behind the scenes. their busy- wa but the outward 
semblanc that mask their actual purposes. they bought and sold, and 
ate and drank, and walk about the streets, yet all the while the main 
stream of their exist lay somewher beyond my ken, underground, in 
secret places. In the shop and at the stall they did not care whether 
I purchas their articl or not; at the inn, they were indiffer 
to my stay or going; their life lay remot from my own, spring 
from hidden, mysteri sources, cours out of sight, unknown. It 
wa all a great elabor pretence, assum possibl for my benefit, 
or possibl for purpos of their own. but the main current of their 
energi ran elsewhere. I almost felt as an unwelcom foreign substanc 
might be expect to feel when it ha found it way into the human 
system and the whole bodi organis itself to eject it or to absorb it. 
the town wa do thi veri thing to me. 

“thi bizarr notion present itself forcibl to my mind as I walk 
home to the inn, and I began busili to wonder wherein the true life of 
thi town could lie and what were the actual interest and activ 
of it hidden life. 

“and, now that my eye were partli opened, I notic other thing 
too that puzzl me, first of which, I think, wa the extraordinari 
silenc of the whole place. positively, the town wa muffled. although 
the street were pave with cobbl the peopl move about silently, 
softly, with pad feet, like cats. noth made noise. all wa 
hushed, subdued, muted. the veri voic were quiet, low-pitch like 
purring. noth clamorous, vehement or emphat seem abl to live 
in the drowsi atmospher of soft dream that sooth thi littl 
hill-town into it sleep. It wa like the woman at the inn--an outward 
repos screen intens inner activ and purpose. 

“yet there wa no sign of lethargi or sluggish anywher about it. 
the peopl were activ and alert. onli a magic and uncanni soft 
lay over them all like a spell.” 

vezin pass hi hand across hi eye for a moment as though the memori 
had becom veri vivid. hi voic had run off into a whisper so that 
we heard the last part with difficulty. He wa tell a true thing 
obviously, yet someth that he both like and hate telling. 

“I went back to the inn,” he continu present in a louder voice, 
“and dined. I felt a new strang world about me. My old world of 
realiti receded. here, whether I like it or no, wa someth new and 
incomprehensible. I regret have left the train so impulsively. 
An adventur wa upon me, and I loath adventur as foreign to my 
nature. moreover, thi wa the begin appar of an adventur 
somewher deep within me, in a region I could not check or measure, 
and a feel of alarm mingl itself with my wonder--alarm for the 
stabil of what I had for forti year recognis as my ‘personality.’ 

“I went upstair to bed, my mind teem with thought that were 
unusu to me, and of rather a haunt description. By way of 
relief I kept think of that nice, prosaic noisi train and all 
those wholesome, bluster passengers. I almost wish I were with 
them again. but my dream took me elsewhere. I dream of cats, and 
soft-mov creatures, and the silenc of life in a dim muffl world 
beyond the senses.” 


II 

vezin stay on from day to day, indefinitely, much longer than he 
had intended. He felt in a kind of dazed, somnol condition. He did 
noth in particular, but the place fascin him and he could not 
decid to leave. decis were alway veri difficult for him and he 
sometim wonder how he had ever brought himself to the point of 
leav the train. It seem as though some one els must have arrang 
it for him, and onc or twice hi thought ran to the swarthi frenchman 
who had sat opposite. If onli he could have understood that long 
sentenc end so strang with “_à caus du sommeil et à caus de 
chats_.” He wonder what it all meant. 

meanwhil the hush soft of the town held him prison and he 
sought in hi muddling, gentl way to find out where the mysteri 
lay, and what it wa all about. but hi limit french and hi 
constitut hatr of activ investig made it hard for him to 
buttonhol anybodi and ask questions. He wa content to observe, and 
watch, and remain negative. 

the weather held on calm and hazy, and thi just suit him. He 
wander about the town till he knew everi street and alley. the 
peopl suffer him to come and go without let or hindrance, though 
it becam clearer to him everi day that he wa never free himself from 
observation. the town watch him as a cat watch a mouse. and he got 
no nearer to find out what they were all so busi with or where the 
main stream of their activ lay. thi remain hidden. the peopl 
were as soft and mysteri as cats. 

but that he wa continu under observ becam more evid from 
day to day. 

for instance, when he stroll to the end of the town and enter a 
littl green public garden beneath the rampart and seat himself upon 
one of the empti bench in the sun, he wa quit alone--at first. 
not anoth seat wa occupied; the littl park wa empty, the path 
deserted. yet, within ten minut of hi coming, there must have been 
fulli twenti person scatter about him, some stroll aimlessli 
along the gravel walks, stare at the flowers, and other seat on 
the wooden bench enjoy the sun like himself. none of them appear 
to take ani notic of him; yet he understood quit well they had all 
come there to watch. they kept him under close observation. In the 
street they had seem busi enough, hurri upon variou errands; yet 
these were suddenli all forgotten and they had noth to do but loll 
and laze in the sun, their duti unremembered. five minut after 
he left, the garden wa again deserted, the seat vacant. but in the 
crowd street it wa the same thing again; he wa never alone. He wa 
ever in their thoughts. 

By degrees, too, he began to see how it wa he wa so cleverli watched, 
yet without the appear of it. the peopl did noth _directly_. 
they behav _obliquely_. He laugh in hi mind as the thought thu 
cloth itself in words, but the phrase exactli describ it. they 
look at him from angl which natur should have led their sight 
in anoth direct altogether. their movement were oblique, too, 
so far as these concern himself. the straight, direct thing wa 
not their way evidently. they did noth obviously. If he enter a 
shop to buy, the woman walk instantli away and busi herself with 
someth at the farther end of the counter, though answer at onc 
when he spoke, show that she knew he wa there and that thi wa 
onli her way of attend to him. It wa the fashion of the cat she 
followed. even in the dining-room of the inn, the be-whisk and 
courteou waiter, lith and silent in all hi movements, never seem 
abl to come straight to hi tabl for an order or a dish. He came 
by zigzags, indirectly, vaguely, so that he appear to be go to 
anoth tabl altogether, and onli turn suddenli at the last moment, 
and wa there besid him. 

vezin smile curious to himself as he describ how he began to 
realis these things. other tourist there were none in the hostel, but 
he recal the figur of one or two old men, inhabitants, who took 
their _déjeuner_ and dinner there, and rememb how fantast 
they enter the room in similar fashion. first, they paus in 
the doorway, peer about the room, and then, after a temporari 
inspection, they came in, as it were, sideways, keep close to the 
wall so that he wonder which tabl they were make for, and at the 
last minut make almost a littl quick run to their particular seats. 
and again he thought of the way and method of cats. 

other small incidents, too, impress him as all part of thi queer, 
soft town with it muffled, indirect life, for the way some of the 
peopl appear and disappear with extraordinari swift puzzl 
him exceedingly. It may have been all perfectli natural, he knew, yet 
he could not make it out how the alley swallow them up and shot 
them forth in a second of time when there were no visibl doorway or 
open near enough to explain the phenomenon. onc he follow two 
elderli women who, he felt, had been particularli examin him from 
across the street--quit near the inn thi was--and saw them turn the 
corner a few feet onli in front of him. yet when he sharpli follow 
on their heel he saw noth but an utterli desert alley stretch 
in front of him with no sign of a live thing. and the onli open 
through which they could have escap wa a porch some fifti yard 
away, which not the swiftest human runner could have reach in time. 

and in just such sudden fashion peopl appear when he never expect 
them. onc when he heard a great nois of fight go on behind a 
low wall, and hurri up to see what wa go on, what should he see 
but a group of girl and women engag in vocifer convers which 
instantli hush itself to the normal whisper note of the town when 
hi head appear over the wall. and even then none of them turn 
to look at him directly, but slunk off with the most unaccount 
rapid into door and shed across the yard. and their voices, he 
thought, had sound so like, so strang like, the angri snarl of 
fight animals, almost of cats. 

the whole spirit of the town, however, continu to evad him as 
someth elusive, protean, screen from the outer world, and at the 
same time intensely, genuin vital; and, sinc he now form part of 
it life, thi conceal puzzl and irrit him; more--it began 
rather to frighten him. 

out of the mist that slowli gather about hi ordinari surfac 
thoughts, there rose again the idea that the inhabit were wait 
for him to declar himself, to take an attitude, to do this, or to do 
that; and that when he had done so they in their turn would at length 
make some direct response, accept or reject him. yet the vital 
matter concern which hi decis wa await came no nearer to him. 

onc or twice he purpos follow littl process or group of 
the citizen in order to find out, if possible, on what purpos they 
were bent; but they alway discov him in time and dwindl away, 
each individu go hi or her own way. It wa alway the same: he 
never could learn what their main interest was. the cathedr wa ever 
empty, the old church of st. martin, at the other end of the town, 
deserted. they shop becaus they had to, and not becaus they wish 
to. the booth stood neglected, the stall unvisited, the littl café 
desolate. yet the street were alway full, the townsfolk ever on the 
bustle. 

“can it be,” he thought to himself, yet with a deprec laugh that 
he should have dare to think anyth so odd, “can it be that these 
peopl are peopl of the twilight, that they live onli at night their 
real life, and come out honestli onli with the dusk? that dure the 
day they make a sham though brave pretence, and after the sun is down 
their true life begins? have they the soul of night-things, and is the 
whole bless town in the hand of the cats?” 

the fanci somehow electrifi him with littl shock of shrink and 
dismay. yet, though he affect to laugh, he knew that he wa begin 
to feel more than uneasy, and that strang forc were tug with a 
thousand invis cord at the veri centr of hi being. someth 
utterli remot from hi ordinari life, someth that had not wake for 
years, began faintli to stir in hi soul, send feeler abroad into 
hi brain and heart, shape queer thought and penetr even into 
certain of hi minor actions. someth exceedingli vital to himself, 
to hi soul, hung in the balance. 

and, alway when he return to the inn about the hour of sunset, 
he saw the figur of the townsfolk steal through the dusk from 
their shop doors, move sentry-wis to and fro at the corner of 
the streets, yet alway vanish silent like shadow at hi near 
approach. and as the inn invari close it door at ten o’clock he 
had never yet found the opportun he rather half-heartedli sought to 
see for himself what account the town could give of itself at night. 

“----_à caus du sommeil et à caus de chats_”--th word now rang in 
hi ear more and more often, though still as yet without ani definit 
meaning. 

moreover, someth made him sleep like the dead. 


iii 

It was, I think, on the fifth day--though in thi detail hi stori 
sometim varied--that he made a definit discoveri which increas 
hi alarm and brought him up to a rather sharp climax. befor that he 
had alreadi notic that a chang wa go forward and certain subtl 
transform be brought about in hi charact which modifi 
sever of hi minor habits. and he had affect to ignor them. here, 
however, wa someth he could no longer ignore; and it startl him. 

At the best of time he wa never veri positive, alway neg 
rather, compliant and acquiescent; yet, when necess aros he wa 
capabl of reason vigor action and could take a strongish 
decision. the discoveri he now made that brought him up with such a 
sharp turn wa that thi power had posit dwindl to nothing. 
He found it imposs to make up hi mind. for, on thi fifth day, 
he realis that he had stay long enough in the town and that for 
reason he could onli vagu defin to himself it wa wiser _and 
safer_ that he should leave. 

and he found that he could not leave! 

thi is difficult to describ in words, and it wa more by gestur and 
the express of hi face that he convey to dr. silenc the state 
of impot he had reached. all thi spi and watching, he said, 
had as it were spun a net about hi feet so that he wa trap and 
powerless to escape; he felt like a fli that had blunder into the 
intricaci of a great web; he wa caught, imprisoned, and could not 
get away. It wa a distress sensation. A numb had crept over 
hi will till it had becom almost incap of decision. the mere 
thought of vigor action--act toward escape--began to terrifi 
him. all the current of hi life had turn inward upon himself, 
strive to bring to the surfac someth that lay buri almost 
beyond reach, determin to forc hi recognit of someth he had 
long forgotten--forgotten year upon years, centuri almost ago. It 
seem as though a window deep within hi be would present open 
and reveal an entir new world, yet somehow a world that wa not 
unfamiliar. beyond that, again, he fanci a great curtain hung; and 
when that too roll up he would see still farther into thi region and 
at last understand someth of the secret life of these extraordinari 
people. 

“i thi whi they wait and watch?” he ask himself with rather a 
shake heart, “for the time when I shall join them--or refus to join 
them? doe the decis rest with me after all, and not with them?” 

and it wa at thi point that the sinist charact of the adventur 
first realli declar itself, and he becam genuin alarmed. the 
stabil of hi rather fluid littl person wa at stake, he felt, 
and someth in hi heart turn coward. 

whi otherwis should he have suddenli taken to walk stealthily, 
silently, make as littl sound as possible, for ever look behind 
him? whi els should he have move almost on tipto about the passag 
of the practic desert inn, and when he wa abroad have found 
himself deliber take advantag of what cover present itself? 
and why, if he wa not afraid, should the wisdom of stay indoor 
after sundown have suddenli occur to him as emin desirable? 
why, indeed? 

and, when john silenc gentli press him for an explan of these 
things, he admit apologet that he had none to give. 

“it wa simpli that I fear someth might happen to me unless I kept 
a sharp look-out. I felt afraid. It wa instinctive,” wa all he could 
say. “I got the impress that the whole town wa after me--want me 
for something; and that if it got me I should lose myself, or at least 
the self I knew, in some unfamiliar state of consciousness. but I am 
not a psychologist, you know,” he ad meekly, “and I cannot defin it 
better than that.” 

It wa while loung in the courtyard half an hour befor the even 
meal that vezin made thi discovery, and he at onc went upstair to 
hi quiet room at the end of the wind passag to think it over 
alone. In the yard it wa empti enough, true, but there wa alway the 
possibl that the big woman whom he dread would come out of some 
door, with her pretenc of knitting, to sit and watch him. thi had 
happen sever times, and he could not endur the sight of her. He 
still rememb hi origin fancy, bizarr though it was, that she 
would spring upon him the moment hi back wa turn and land with one 
singl crush leap upon hi neck. Of cours it wa nonsense, but then 
it haunt him, and onc an idea begin to do that it ceas to be 
nonsense. It ha cloth itself in reality. 

He went upstair accordingly. It wa dusk, and the oil lamp had not 
yet been lit in the passages. He stumbl over the uneven surfac of 
the ancient flooring, pass the dim outlin of door along the 
corridor--door that he had never onc seen opened--room that seem 
never occupied. He moved, as hi habit now was, stealthili and on 
tiptoe. 

half-way down the last passag to hi own chamber there wa a sharp 
turn, and it wa just here, while grope round the wall with 
outstretch hands, that hi finger touch someth that wa 
not wall--someth that moved. It wa soft and warm in texture, 
indescrib fragrant, and about the height of hi shoulder; and he 
immedi thought of a furry, sweet-smel kitten. the next minut 
he knew it wa someth quit different. 

instead of investigating, however,--hi nerv must have been too 
overwrought for that, he said,--h shrank back as close as possibl 
against the wall on the other side. the thing, whatev it was, slip 
past him with a sound of rustling, and retreat with light footstep 
down the passag behind him, wa gone. A breath of warm, scent air 
wa waft to hi nostrils. 

vezin caught hi breath for an instant and paused, stockstill, half 
lean against the wall--and then almost ran down the remain 
distanc and enter hi room with a rush, lock the door hurriedli 
behind him. yet it wa not fear that made him run: it wa excitement, 
pleasur excitement. hi nerv were tingling, and a delici glow 
made itself felt all over hi body. In a flash it came to him that thi 
wa just what he had felt twenty-f year ago as a boy when he wa 
in love for the first time. warm current of life ran all over him and 
mount to hi brain in a whirl of soft delight. hi mood wa suddenli 
becom tender, melting, loving. 

the room wa quit dark, and he collaps upon the sofa by the window, 
wonder what had happen to him and what it all meant. but the onli 
thing he understood clearli in that instant wa that someth in him 
had swiftly, magic changed: he no longer wish to leave, or to 
argu with himself about leaving. the encount in the passage-way 
had chang all that. the strang perfum of it still hung about him, 
bemus hi heart and mind. for he knew that it wa a girl who had 
pass him, a girl’ face that hi finger had brush in the darkness, 
and he felt in some extraordinari way as though he had been actual 
kiss by her, kiss full upon the lips. 

trembling, he sat upon the sofa by the window and struggl to collect 
hi thoughts. He wa utterli unabl to understand how the mere pass 
of a girl in the dark of a narrow passage-way could commun 
so electr a thrill to hi whole be that he still shook with the 
sweet of it. yet, there it was! and he found it as useless to deni 
as to attempt analysis. some ancient fire had enter hi veins, and 
now ran cours through hi blood; and that he wa forty-f instead 
of twenti did not matter one littl jot. out of all the inner turmoil 
and confus emerg the one salient fact that the mere atmosphere, 
the merest casual touch, of thi girl, unseen, unknown in the darkness, 
had been suffici to stir dormant fire in the centr of hi heart, 
and rous hi whole be from a state of feebl sluggish to one of 
tear and tumultu excitement. 

after a time, however, the number of vezin’ year began to assert 
their cumul power; he grew calmer; and when a knock came at 
length upon hi door and he heard the waiter’ voic suggest that 
dinner wa nearli over, he pull himself togeth and slowli made hi 
way downstair into the dining-room. 

everi one look up as he entered, for he wa veri late, but he took 
hi customari seat in the far corner and began to eat. the trepid 
wa still in hi nerves, but the fact that he had pass through the 
courtyard and hall without catch sight of a petticoat serv to calm 
him a little. He ate so fast that he had almost caught up with the 
current stage of the tabl d’hôte, when a slight commot in the room 
drew hi attention. 

hi chair wa so place that the door and the greater portion of the 
long _sall à manger_ were behind him, yet it wa not necessari to 
turn round to know that the same person he had pass in the dark 
passag had now come into the room. He felt the presenc long befor he 
heard or saw ani one. then he becam awar that the old men, the onli 
other guests, were rise one by one in their places, and exchang 
greet with some one who pass among them from tabl to table. and 
when at length he turn with hi heart beat furious to ascertain 
for himself, he saw the form of a young girl, lith and slim, move 
down the centr of the room and make straight for hi own tabl in 
the corner. she move wonderfully, with sinuou grace, like a young 
panther, and her approach fill him with such delici bewilder 
that he wa utterli unabl to tell at first what her face wa like, or 
discov what it wa about the whole present of the creatur that 
fill him anew with trepid and delight. 

“ah, ma’msel est de retour!” he heard the old waiter murmur at hi 
side, and he wa just abl to take in that she wa the daughter of the 
proprietress, when she wa upon him, and he heard her voice. she wa 
address him. someth of red lip he saw and laugh white teeth, 
and stray wisp of fine dark hair about the temples; but all the rest 
wa a dream in which hi own emot rose like a thick cloud befor 
hi eye and prevent hi see accurately, or know exactli what 
he did. He wa awar that she greet him with a charm littl bow; 
that her beauti larg eye look searchingli into hi own; that the 
perfum he had notic in the dark passag again assail hi nostrils, 
and that she wa bend a littl toward him and lean with one 
hand on the tabl at hi side. she wa quit close to him--that wa 
the chief thing he knew--explain that she had been ask after the 
comfort of her mother’ guests, and wa now introduc herself to the 
latest arrival--himself. 

“m’sieur ha alreadi been here a few days,” he heard the waiter say; 
and then her own voice, sweet as singing, replied-- 

“ah, but m’sieur is not go to leav us just yet, I hope. My mother 
is too old to look after the comfort of our guest properly, but now 
I am here I will remedi all that.” she laugh deliciously. “m’sieur 
shall be well look after.” 

vezin, struggl with hi emot and desir to be polite, half rose 
to acknowledg the pretti speech, and to stammer some sort of reply, 
but as he did so hi hand by chanc touch her own that wa rest 
upon the table, and a shock that wa for all the world like a shock of 
electricity, pass from her skin into hi body. hi soul waver and 
shook deep within him. He caught her eye fix upon hi own with a 
look of most curiou intentness, and the next moment he knew that he 
had sat down wordless again on hi chair, that the girl wa alreadi 
half-way across the room, and that he wa tri to eat hi salad with 
a dessert-spoon and a knife. 

long for her return, and yet dread it, he gulp down the 
remaind of hi dinner, and then went at onc to hi bedroom to be 
alon with hi thoughts. thi time the passag were lighted, and he 
suffer no excit contretemps; yet the wind corridor wa dim with 
shadows, and the last portion, from the bend of the wall onwards, 
seem longer than he had ever known it. It ran downhil like the 
pathway on a mountain side, and as he tipto softli down it he felt 
that by right it ought to have led him clean out of the hous into 
the heart of a great forest. the world wa sing with him. strang 
fanci fill hi brain, and onc in the room, with the door secur 
locked, he did not light the candles, but sat by the open window 
think long, long thought that came unbidden in troop to hi mind. 


IV 

thi part of the stori he told to dr. silence, without special coaxing, 
it is true, yet with much stammer embarrassment. He could not in 
the least understand, he said, how the girl had manag to affect him 
so profoundly, and even befor he had set eye upon her. for her mere 
proxim in the dark had been suffici to set him on fire. He 
knew noth of enchantments, and for year had been a stranger to 
anyth approach tender relat with ani member of the opposit 
sex, for he wa encas in shyness, and realis hi overwhelm 
defect onli too well. yet thi bewitch young creatur came to him 
deliberately. her manner wa unmistakable, and she sought him out on 
everi possibl occasion. chast and sweet she wa undoubtedly, yet 
frankli inviting; and she won him utterli with the first glanc of her 
shine eyes, even if she had not alreadi done so in the dark mere by 
the magic of her invis presence. 

“you felt she wa altogeth wholesom and good?” queri the doctor. 
“you had no reaction of ani sort--for instance, of alarm?” 

vezin look up sharpli with one of hi inimit littl apologet 
smiles. It wa some time befor he replied. the mere memori of the 
adventur had suffus hi shi face with blushes, and hi brown eye 
sought the floor again befor he answered. 

“I don’t think I can quit say that,” he explain presently. “I 
acknowledg certain qualms, sit up in my room afterwards. A 
convict grew upon me that there wa someth about her--how shall I 
express it?--well, someth unholy. It is not impur in ani sense, 
physic or mental, that I mean, but someth quit indefin that 
gave me a vagu sensat of the creeps. she drew me, and at the same 
time repel me, more than--than----” 

He hesitated, blush furiously, and unabl to finish the sentence. 

“noth like it ha ever come to me befor or since,” he concluded, 
with lame confusion. “I suppos it was, as you suggest just now, 
someth of an enchantment. At ani rate, it wa strong enough to make 
me feel that I would stay in that aw littl haunt town for year 
if onli I could see her everi day, hear her voice, watch her wonder 
movements, and sometimes, perhaps, touch her hand.” 

“can you explain to me what you felt wa the sourc of her power?” john 
silenc asked, look purpos anywher but at the narrator. 

“I am surpris that _you_ should ask me such a question,” answer 
vezin, with the nearest approach to digniti he could manage. “I think 
no man can describ to anoth convincingli wherein lie the magic of 
the woman who ensnar him. I certainli cannot. I can onli say thi 
slip of a girl bewitch me, and the mere knowledg that she wa live 
and sleep in the same hous fill me with an extraordinari sens of 
delight. 

“but there’ one thing I can tell you,” he went on earnestly, hi eye 
aglow, “namely, that she seem to sum up and synthesis in herself 
all the strang hidden forc that oper so mysteri in the 
town and it inhabitants. she had the silken movement of the panther, 
go smoothly, silent to and fro, and the same indirect, obliqu 
method as the townsfolk, screening, like them, secret purpos of 
her own--purpos that I wa sure had _me_ for their objective. she 
kept me, to my terror and delight, ceaselessli under observation, yet 
so carelessly, so consummately, that anoth man less sensitive, if I 
may say so”--h made a deprec gesture--“or less prepar by what 
had gone before, would never have notic it at all. she wa alway 
still, alway reposeful, yet she seem to be everywher at once, so 
that I never could escap from her. I wa continu meet the stare 
and laughter of her great eyes, in the corner of the rooms, in the 
passages, calmli look at me through the windows, or in the busiest 
part of the public streets.” 

their intimacy, it seems, grew veri rapidli after thi first encount 
which had so violent disturb the littl man’ equilibrium. He wa 
natur veri prim, and prim folk live mostli in so small a world that 
anyth violent unusu may shake them clean out of it, and they 
therefor instinct distrust originality. but vezin began to forget 
hi prim after awhile. the girl wa alway modestli behaved, and 
as her mother’ repres she natur had to do with the guest 
in the hotel. It wa not out of the way that a spirit of camaraderi 
should spring up. besides, she wa young, she wa charmingli pretty, 
she wa french, and--sh obvious like him. 

At the same time, there wa someth indescribable--a certain 
indefin atmospher of other places, other times--that made him tri 
hard to remain on hi guard, and sometim made him catch hi breath 
with a sudden start. It wa all rather like a deliri dream, half 
delight, half dread, he confid in a whisper to dr. silence; and more 
than onc he hardli knew quit what he wa do or saying, as though 
he were driven forward by impuls he scarc recognis as hi own. 

and though the thought of leav present itself again and again to 
hi mind, it wa each time with less insistence, so that he stay on 
from day to day, becom more and more a part of the sleepi life of 
thi dreami mediæv town, lose more and more of hi recognis 
personality. soon, he felt, the curtain within would roll up with an 
aw rush, and he would find himself suddenli admit into the 
secret purpos of the hidden life that lay behind it all. only, by 
that time, he would have becom transform into an entir differ 
being. 

and, meanwhile, he notic variou littl sign of the intent 
to make hi stay attract to him: flower in hi bedroom, a more 
comfort arm-chair in the corner, and even special littl extra 
dish on hi privat tabl in the dining-room. conversations, too, 
with “mademoisel ilsé” becam more and more frequent and pleasant, 
and although they seldom travel beyond the weather, or the detail 
of the town, the girl, he noticed, wa never in a hurri to bring them 
to an end, and often contriv to interject littl odd sentenc that 
he never properli understood, yet felt to be significant. 

and it wa these stray remarks, full of a mean that evad him, that 
point to some hidden purpos of her own and made him feel uneasy. 
they all had to do, he felt sure, with reason for hi stay on in 
the town indefinitely. 

“and ha m’sieur not even yet come to a decision?” she said softli in 
hi ear, sit besid him in the sunni yard befor _déjeuner_, the 
acquaint have progress with signific rapidity. “because, if 
it’ so difficult, we must all tri togeth to help him!” 

the question startl him, follow upon hi own thoughts. It wa 
spoken with a pretti laugh, and a stray bit of hair across one eye, as 
she turn and peer at him half roguishly. possibl he did not quit 
understand the french of it, for her near presenc alway confus 
hi small knowledg of the languag distressingly. yet the words, and 
her manner, and someth els that lay behind it all in her mind, 
frighten him. It gave such point to hi feel that the town wa 
wait for him to make hi mind up on some import matter. 

At the same time, her voice, and the fact that she wa there so close 
besid him in her soft dark dress, thrill him inexpressibly. 

“it is true I find it difficult to leave,” he stammered, lose hi 
way delici in the depth of her eyes, “and especi now that 
mademoisel ilsé ha come.” 

He wa surpris at the success of hi sentence, and quit delight 
with the littl gallantri of it. but at the same time he could have 
bitten hi tongu off for have said it. 

“then after all you like our littl town, or you would not be pleas 
to stay on,” she said, ignor the compliment. 

“I am enchant with it, and enchant with you,” he cried, feel 
that hi tongu wa somehow slip beyond the control of hi brain. 
and he wa on the verg of say all manner of other thing of the 
wildest description, when the girl sprang lightli up from her chair 
besid him, and made to go. 

“it is _soup à l’onion_ to-day!” she cried, laugh back at him 
through the sunlight, “and I must go and see about it. otherwise, you 
know, m’sieur will not enjoy hi dinner, and then, perhaps, he will 
leav us!” 

He watch her cross the courtyard, move with all the grace and 
light of the felin race, and her simpl black dress cloth her, 
he thought, exactli like the fur of the same suppl species. she turn 
onc to laugh at him from the porch with the glass door, and then 
stop a moment to speak to her mother, who sat knit as usual in 
her corner seat just insid the hall-way. 

but how wa it, then, that the moment hi eye fell upon thi ungainli 
woman, the pair of them appear suddenli as other than they were? 
whenc came that transform digniti and sens of power that envelop 
them both as by magic? what wa it about that massiv woman that 
made her appear instantli regal, and set her on a throne in some 
dark and dread scenery, wield a sceptr over the red glare of 
some tempestu orgy? and whi did thi slender stripl of a girl, 
grace as a willow, lith as a young leopard, assum suddenli an air 
of sinist majesty, and move with flame and smoke about her head, and 
the dark of night beneath her feet? 

vezin caught hi breath and sat there transfixed. then, almost 
simultan with it appearance, the queer notion vanish again, 
and the sunlight of day caught them both, and he heard her laugh to 
her mother about the _soup à l’onion_, and saw her glanc back at 
him over her dear littl shoulder with a smile that made him think of a 
dew-kiss rose bend lightli befor summer airs. 

and, indeed, the onion soup wa particularli excel that day, 
becaus he saw anoth cover laid at hi small tabl and, with 
flutter heart, heard the waiter murmur by way of explan that 
“ma’msel ilsé would honour m’sieur to-day at _déjeuner_, as her 
custom sometim is with her mother’ guests.” 

So actual she sat by him all through that deliri meal, talk 
quietli to him in easi french, see that he wa well look after, 
mix the salad-dressing, and even help him with her own hand. 
and, later in the afternoon, while he wa smoke in the courtyard, 
long for a sight of her as soon as her duti were done, she came 
again to hi side, and when he rose to meet her, she stood face him a 
moment, full of a perplex sweet shyness befor she spoke-- 

“mi mother think you ought to know more of the beauti of our littl 
town, and _i_ think so too! would m’sieur like me to be hi guide, 
perhaps? I can show him everything, for our famili ha live here for 
mani generations.” 

she had him by the hand, indeed, befor he could find a singl word 
to express hi pleasure, and led him, all unresisting, out into the 
street, yet in such a way that it seem perfectli natur she should 
do so, and without the faintest suggest of bold or immodesty. 
her face glow with the pleasur and interest of it, and with her 
short dress and tumbl hair she look everi bit the charm child of 
seventeen that she was, innoc and playful, proud of her nativ town, 
and aliv beyond her year to the sens of it ancient beauty. 

So they went over the town together, and she show him what she 
consid it chief interest: the tumble-down old hous where her 
forebear had lived; the sombre, aristocratic-look mansion where her 
mother’ famili dwelt for centuries, and the ancient market-plac where 
sever hundr year befor the witch had been burnt by the score. 
she kept up a live run stream of talk about it all, of which he 
understood not a fiftieth part as he trudg along by her side, curs 
hi forty-f year and feel all the yearn of hi earli manhood 
reviv and jeer at him. and, as she talked, england and surbiton 
seem veri far away indeed, almost in anoth age of the world’ 
history. her voic touch someth immeasur old in him, someth 
that slept deep. It lull the surfac part of hi conscious to 
sleep, allow what wa far more ancient to awaken. like the town, 
with it elabor pretenc of modern activ life, the upper layer 
of hi be becam dulled, soothed, muffled, and what lay underneath 
began to stir in it sleep. that big curtain sway a littl to and 
fro. present it might lift altogether.... 

He began to understand a littl better at last. the mood of the town 
wa reproduc itself in him. In proport as hi ordinari extern 
self becam muffled, that inner secret life, that wa far more real and 
vital, assert itself. and thi girl wa sure the high-priestess of 
it all, the chief instrument of it accomplishment. new thoughts, with 
new interpretations, flood hi mind as she walk besid him through 
the wind streets, while the picturesqu old gabl town, softli 
colour in the sunset, had never appear to him so wholli wonder 
and seductive. 

and onli one curiou incid came to disturb and puzzl him, slight 
in itself, but utterli inexplicable, bring white terror into the 
child’ face and a scream to her laugh lips. He had mere point 
to a column of blue smoke that rose from the burn autumn leav 
and made a pictur against the red roofs, and had then run to the 
wall and call her to hi side to watch the flame shoot here and 
there through the heap of rubbish. yet, at the sight of it, as though 
taken by surprise, her face had alter dreadfully, and she had turn 
and run like the wind, call out wild sentenc to him as she ran, 
of which he had not understood a singl word, except that the fire 
appar frighten her, and she want to get quickli away from it, 
and to get him away too. 

yet five minut later she wa as calm and happi again as though 
noth had happen to alarm or waken troubl thought in her, and 
they had both forgotten the incident. 

they were lean over the ruin rampart togeth listen to 
the weird music of the band as he had heard it the first day of hi 
arrival. It move him again profoundli as it had done before, and 
somehow he manag to find hi tongu and hi best french. the girl 
lean across the stone close besid him. No one wa about. driven by 
some remorseless engin within he began to stammer something--h hardli 
knew what--of hi strang admir for her. almost at the first word 
she sprang lightli off the wall and came up smile in front of him, 
just touch hi knee as he sat there. she wa hatless as usual, and 
the sun caught her hair and one side of her cheek and throat. 

“oh, i’m _so_ glad!” she cried, clap her littl hand softli in hi 
face, “so veri glad, becaus that mean that if you like me you must 
also like what I do, and what I belong to.” 

alreadi he regret bitterli have lost control of himself. someth 
in the phrase of her sentenc chill him. He knew the fear of 
embark upon an unknown and danger sea. 

“you will take part in our real life, I mean,” she ad softly, 
with an indescrib coax of manner, as though she notic hi 
shrinking. “you will come back to us.” 

alreadi thi slip of a child seem to domin him; he felt her power 
come over him more and more; someth eman from her that stole 
over hi sens and made him awar that her personality, for all it 
simpl grace, held forc that were stately, imposing, august. He saw 
her again move through smoke and flame amid broken and tempestu 
scenery, alarmingli strong, her terribl mother by her side. dimli thi 
shone through her smile and appear of charm innocence. 

“you will, I know,” she repeated, hold him with her eyes. 

they were quit alon up there on the ramparts, and the sensat that 
she wa overmast him stir a wild sensuous in hi blood. the 
mingl abandon and reserv in her attract him furiously, and all of 
him that wa man rose up and resist the creep influence, at the 
same time acclaim it with the full delight of hi forgotten youth. 
An irresist desir came to him to question her, to summon what 
still remain to him of hi own littl person in an effort to 
retain the right to hi normal self. 

the girl had grown quiet again, and wa now lean on the broad wall 
close besid him, gaze out across the darken plain, her elbow on 
the coping, motionless as a figur carv in stone. He took hi courag 
in both hands. 

“tell me, ilsé,” he said, unconsci imit her own pur 
soft of voice, yet awar that he wa utterli in earnest, “what is 
the mean of thi town, and what is thi real life you speak of? and 
whi is it that the peopl watch me from morn to night? tell me what 
it all means? and, tell me,” he ad more quickli with passion in hi 
voice, “what you realli are--yourself?” 

she turn her head and look at him through half-clos eyelids, her 
grow inner excit betray itself by the faint colour that ran 
like a shadow across her face. 

“it seem to me,”--h falter oddli under her gaze--“that I have some 
right to know----” 

suddenli she open her eye to the full. “you love me, then?” she 
ask softly. 

“I swear,” he cri impetuously, move as by the forc of a rise 
tide, “I never felt before--i have never known ani other girl who----” 

“then you _have_ the right to know,” she calmli interrupt hi 
confus confession; “for love share all secrets.” 

she paused, and a thrill like fire ran swiftli through him. her word 
lift him off the earth, and he felt a radiant happiness, follow 
almost the same instant in horribl contrast by the thought of death. 
He becam awar that she had turn her eye upon hi own and wa 
speak again. 

“the real life I speak of,” she whispered, “i the old, old life 
within, the life of long ago, the life to which you, too, onc 
belonged, and to which you still belong.” 

A faint wave of memori troubl the deep of hi soul as her low 
voic sank into him. what she wa say he knew instinct to be 
true, even though he could not as yet understand it full purport. 
hi present life seem slip from him as he listened, merg hi 
person in one that wa far older and greater. It wa thi loss of 
hi present self that brought to him the thought of death. 

“you came here,” she went on, “with the purpos of seek it, and the 
peopl felt your presenc and are wait to know what you decide, 
whether you will leav them without have found it, or whether----” 

her eye remain fix upon hi own, but her face began to change, 
grow larger and darker with an express of age. 

“it is their thought constantli play about your soul that make 
you feel they watch you. they do not watch you with their eyes. the 
purpos of their inner life are call to you, seek to claim you. 
you were all part of the same life long, long ago, and now they want 
you back again among them.” 

vezin’ timid heart sank with dread as he listened; but the girl’ 
eye held him with a net of joy so that he had no wish to escape. she 
fascin him, as it were, clean out of hi normal self. 

“alone, however, the peopl could never have caught and held you,” 
she resumed. “the motiv forc wa not strong enough; it ha fade 
through all these years. but i”--sh paus a moment and look at him 
with complet confid in her splendid eyes--“i possess the spell to 
conquer you and hold you: the spell of old love. I can win you back 
again and make you live the old life with me, for the forc of the 
ancient tie between us, if I choos to use it, is irresistible. and 
I do choos to use it I still want you. and you, dear soul of my dim 
past”--sh press closer to him so that her breath pass across hi 
eyes, and her voic posit sang--“i mean to have you, for you love 
me and are utterli at my mercy.” 

vezin heard, and yet did not hear; understood, yet did not understand. 
He had pass into a condit of exaltation. the world wa beneath hi 
feet, made of music and flowers, and he wa fli somewher far abov 
it through the sunshin of pure delight. He wa breathless and giddi 
with the wonder of her words. they intox him. and, still, the 
terror of it all, the dread thought of death, press ever behind 
her sentences. for flame shot through her voic out of black smoke and 
lick at hi soul. 

and they commun with one another, it seem to him, by a process 
of swift telepathy, for hi french could never have compass all he 
said to her. yet she understood perfectly, and what she said to him wa 
like the recit of vers long sinc known. and the mingl pain and 
sweet of it as he listen were almost more than hi littl soul 
could hold. 

“yet I came here wholli by chance----” he heard himself saying. 

“no,” she cri with passion, “you came here becaus I call to you. I 
have call to you for years, and you came with the whole forc of the 
past behind you. you had to come, for I own you, and I claim you.” 

she rose again and move closer, look at him with a certain 
insol in the face--th insol of power. 

the sun had set behind the tower of the old cathedr and the dark 
rose up from the plain and envelop them. the music of the band had 
ceased. the leav of the plane tree hung motionless, but the chill 
of the autumn even rose about them and made vezin shiver. there 
wa no sound but the sound of their voic and the occasion soft 
rustl of the girl’ dress. He could hear the blood rush in hi 
ears. He scarc realis where he wa or what he wa doing. some 
terribl magic of the imagin drew him deepli down into the tomb 
of hi own being, tell him in no unfalt voic that her word 
shadow forth the truth. and thi simpl littl french maid, speak 
besid him with so strang authority, he saw curious alter into quit 
anoth being. As he stare into her eyes, the pictur in hi mind grew 
and lived, dress itself vividli to hi inner vision with a degre 
of realiti he wa compel to acknowledge. As onc before, he saw her 
tall and stately, move through wild and broken sceneri of forest and 
mountain caverns, the glare of flame behind her head and cloud of 
shift smoke about her feet. dark leav encircl her hair, fli 
loos in the wind, and her limb shone through the merest rag of 
clothing. other were about her too, and ardent eye on all side cast 
deliri glanc upon her, but her own eye were alway for one only, 
one whom she held by the hand. for she wa lead the danc in some 
tempestu orgi to the music of chant voices, and the danc she led 
circl about a great and aw figur on a throne, brood over the 
scene through lurid vapours, while innumer other wild face and 
form crowd furious about her in the dance. but the one she held by 
the hand he knew to be himself, and the monstrou shape upon the throne 
he knew to be her mother. 

the vision rose within him, rush to him down the long year 
of buri time, cri aloud to him with the voic of memori 
reawakened.... and then the scene fade away and he saw the clear 
circl of the girl’ eye gaze steadfastli into hi own, and she 
becam onc more the pretti littl daughter of the innkeeper, and he 
found hi voic again. 

“and you,” he whisper tremblingly--“y child of vision and 
enchantment, how is it that you so bewitch me that I love you even 
befor I saw?” 

she drew herself up besid him with an air of rare dignity. 

“the call of the past,” she said; “and besides,” she ad proudly, “in 
the real life I am a princess----” 

“A princess!” he cried. 

“----and my mother is a queen!” 

At this, littl vezin utterli lost hi head. delight tore at hi heart 
and swept him into sheer ecstasy. To hear that sweet sing voice, and 
to see those ador littl lip utter such things, upset hi balanc 
beyond all hope of control. He took her in hi arm and cover her 
unresist face with kisses. 

but even while he did so, and while the hot passion swept him, he 
felt that she wa soft and loathsome, and that her answer kiss 
stain hi veri soul.... and when, presently, she had freed herself 
and vanish into the darkness, he stood there, lean against the 
wall in a state of collapse, creep with horror from the touch of 
her yield body, and inwardli rage at the weak that he alreadi 
dimli realis must prove hi undoing. 

and from the shadow of the old build into which she disappear 
there rose in the still of the night a singular, long-drawn cry, 
which at first he took for laughter, but which later he wa sure he 
recognis as the almost human wail of a cat. 


V 

for a long time vezin leant there against the wall, alon with hi 
surg thought and emotions. He understood at length that he had 
done the one thing necessari to call down upon him the whole forc of 
thi ancient past. for in those passion kiss he had acknowledg 
the tie of olden days, and had reviv it. and the memori of that soft 
impalp caress in the dark of the inn corridor came back to him 
with a shudder. the girl had first master him, and then led him to 
the one act that wa necessari for her purpose. He had been waylaid, 
after the laps of centuries--caught, and conquered. 

dimli he realis this, and sought to make plan for hi escape. but, 
for the moment at ani rate, he wa powerless to manag hi thought or 
will, for the sweet, fantast mad of the whole adventur mount 
to hi brain like a spell, and he glori in the feel that he wa 
utterli enchant and move in a world so much larger and wilder than 
the one he had ever been accustom to. 

the moon, pale and enormous, wa just rise over the sea-lik plain, 
when at last he rose to go. her slant ray drew all the hous into 
new perspective, so that their roofs, alreadi glisten with dew, 
seem to stretch much higher into the sky than usual, and their gabl 
and quaint old tower lay far away in it purpl reaches. 

the cathedr appear unreal in a silver mist. He move softly, 
keep to the shadows; but the street were all desert and veri 
silent; the door were closed, the shutter fastened. not a soul wa 
astir. the hush of night lay over everything; it wa like a town of 
the dead, a churchyard with gigant and grotesqu tombstones. 

wonder where all the busi life of the day had so utterli disappear 
to, he made hi way to a back door that enter the inn by mean of 
the stables, think thu to reach hi room unobserved. He reach 
the courtyard safe and cross it by keep close to the shadow of 
the wall. He sidl down it, minc along on tiptoe, just as the old 
men did when they enter the _sall à manger_. He wa horrifi to 
find himself do thi instinctively. A strang impuls came to him, 
catch him somehow in the centr of hi body--an impuls to drop upon 
all four and run swiftli and silently. He glanc upward and the idea 
came to him to leap up upon hi window-sil overhead instead of go 
round by the stairs. thi occur to him as the easiest, and most 
natur way. It wa like the begin of some horribl transform 
of himself into someth else. He wa fear strung up. 

the moon wa higher now, and the shadow veri dark along the side of 
the street where he moved. He kept among the deepest of them, and 
reach the porch with the glass doors. 

but here there wa light; the inmates, unfortunately, were still about. 
hope to slip across the hall unobserv and reach the stairs, he 
open the door care and stole in. then he saw that the hall wa 
not empty. A larg dark thing lay against the wall on hi left. At 
first he thought it must be household articles. then it moved, and he 
thought it wa an immens cat, distort in some way by the play of 
light and shadow. then it rose straight up befor him and he saw that 
it wa the proprietress. 

what she had been do in thi posit he could onli ventur a 
dread guess, but the moment she stood up and face him he wa awar 
of some terribl digniti cloth her about that instantli recal the 
girl’ strang say that she wa a queen. huge and sinist she stood 
there under the littl oil lamp; alon with him in the empti hall. awe 
stir in hi heart, and the root of some ancient fear. He felt that 
he must bow to her and make some kind of obeisance. the impuls wa 
fierc and irresistible, as of long habit. He glanc quickli about 
him. there wa no one there. then he deliber inclin hi head 
toward her. He bowed. 

“enfin! m’sieur s’est donc décidé. c’est bien alors. j’en sui 
contente.” 

her word came to him sonor as through a great open space. 

then the great figur came suddenli across the flag hall at him and 
seiz hi trembl hands. some overpow forc move with her and 
caught him. 

“on pourrait fair un p’tit tour ensemble, n’est-c pas? nou y allon 
cett nuit et il faut s’exerc un peu d’avanc pour cela. ilsé, ilsé, 
vien donc ici. vien vite!” 

and she whirl him round in the open step of some danc that 
seem oddli and horribl familiar. they made no sound on the stones, 
thi strang assort couple. It wa all soft and stealthy. and 
presently, when the air seem to thicken like smoke, and a red glare 
as of flame shot through it, he wa awar that some one els had join 
them and that hi hand the mother had releas wa now tightli held 
by the daughter. ilsé had come in answer to the call, and he saw her 
with leav of vervain twine in her dark hair, cloth in tatter 
vestig of some curiou garment, beauti as the night, and horribly, 
odiously, loathsom seductive. 

“to the sabbath! to the sabbath!” they cried. “on to the witches’ 
sabbath!” 

Up and down that narrow hall they danced, the women on each side of 
him, to the wildest measur he had ever imagined, yet which he dimly, 
dread remembered, till the lamp on the wall flicker and went 
out, and they were left in total darkness. and the devil woke in hi 
heart with a thousand vile suggest and made him afraid. 

suddenli they releas hi hand and he heard the voic of the mother 
cri that it wa time, and they must go. which way they went he did 
not paus to see. He onli realis that he wa free, and he blunder 
through the dark till he found the stair and then tore up them to 
hi room as though all hell wa at hi heels. 

He flung himself on the sofa, with hi face in hi hands, and groaned. 
swiftli review a dozen way of immedi escape, all equal 
impossible, he final decid that the onli thing to do for the moment 
wa to sit quiet and wait. He must see what wa go to happen. At 
least in the privaci of hi own bedroom he would be fairli safe. the 
door wa locked. He cross over and softli open the window which 
gave upon the courtyard and also permit a partial view of the hall 
through the glass doors. 

As he did so the hum and murmur of a great activ reach hi ear 
from the street beyond--th sound of footstep and voic muffl by 
distance. He lean out cautious and listened. the moonlight wa 
clear and strong now, but hi own window wa in shadow, the silver 
disc be still behind the house. It came to him irresist that 
the inhabit of the town, who a littl while befor had all been 
invis behind close doors, were now issu forth, busi upon some 
secret and unholi errand. He listen intently. 

At first everyth about him wa silent, but soon he becam awar of 
movement go on in the hous itself. rustl and cheep came 
to him across that still, moonlit yard. A concours of live be 
sent the hum of their activ into the night. thing were on the move 
everywhere. A biting, pungent odour rose through the air, come he 
knew not whence. present hi eye becam glu to the window of 
the opposit wall where the moonshin fell in a soft blaze. the roof 
overhead, and behind him, wa reflect clearli in the pane of glass, 
and he saw the outlin of dark bodi move with long footstep over 
the tile and along the coping. they pass swiftli and silently, 
shape like immens cats, in an endless process across the pictur 
glass, and then appear to leap down to a lower level where he lost 
sight of them. He just caught the soft thud of their leaps. 
sometim their shadow fell upon the white wall opposite, and then 
he could not make out whether they were the shadow of human be 
or of cats. they seem to chang swiftli from one to the other. the 
transform look horribl real, for they leap like human beings, 
yet chang swiftli in the air immedi afterwards, and drop like 
animals. 

the yard, too, beneath him, wa now aliv with the creep movement 
of dark form all stealthili draw toward the porch with the glass 
doors. they kept so close to the wall that he could not determin 
their actual shape, but when he saw that they pass on to the great 
congreg that wa gather in the hall, he understood that these 
were the creatur whose leap shadow he had first seen reflect in 
the window-pan opposite. they were come from all part of the town, 
reach the appoint meeting-plac across the roof and tiles, and 
spring from level to level till they came to the yard. 

then a new sound caught hi ear, and he saw that the window all about 
him were be softli opened, and that to each window came a face. A 
moment later figur began drop hurriedli down into the yard. and 
these figures, as they lower themselv down from the windows, were 
human, he saw; but onc safe in the yard they fell upon all four and 
chang in the swiftest possibl second into--cats--huge, silent cats. 
they ran in stream to join the main bodi in the hall beyond. 

so, after all, the room in the hous had not been empti and unoccupied. 

moreover, what he saw no longer fill him with amazement. for he 
rememb it all. It wa familiar. It had all happen befor just 
so, hundr of times, and he himself had taken part in it and known 
the wild mad of it all. the outlin of the old build changed, 
the yard grew larger, and he seem to be stare down upon it from 
a much greater height through smoki vapours. and, as he looked, half 
remembering, the old pain of long ago, fierc and sweet, furious 
assail him, and the blood stir horribl as he heard the call of 
the danc again in hi heart and tast the ancient magic of ilsé 
whirl by hi side. 

suddenli he start back. A great lith cat had leap softli up from 
the shadow below on to the sill close to hi face, and wa stare 
fixedli at him with the eye of a human. “come,” it seem to say, 
“come with us to the dance! chang as of old! transform yourself 
swiftli and come!” onli too well he understood the creature’ soundless 
call. 

It wa gone again in a flash with scarc a sound of it pad feet 
on the stones, and then other drop by the score down the side of 
the house, past hi veri eyes, all chang as they fell and dart 
away rapidly, softly, toward the gather point. and again he felt 
the dread desir to do likewise; to murmur the old incantation, 
and then drop upon hand and knee and run swiftli for the great 
fli leap into the air. oh, how the passion of it rose within him 
like a flood, twist hi veri entrails, send hi heart’ desir 
flame forth into the night for the old, old danc of the sorcer 
at the witches’ sabbath! the whirl of the star wa about him; onc 
more he met the magic of the moon. the power of the wind, rush 
from precipic and forest, leap from cliff to cliff across the 
valleys, tore him away.... He heard the cri of the dancer and their 
wild laughter, and with thi savag girl in hi embrac he danc 
furious about the dim throne where sate the figur with the sceptr 
of majesty.... 

then, suddenly, all becam hush and still, and the fever die down a 
littl in hi heart. the calm moonlight flood a courtyard empti and 
deserted. they had started. the process wa off into the sky. and he 
wa left behind--alone. 

vezin tipto softli across the room and unlock the door. the murmur 
from the streets, grow momentarili as he advanced, met hi ears. He 
made hi way with the utmost caution down the corridor. At the head of 
the stair he paus and listened. below him, the hall where they had 
gather wa dark and still, but through open door and window on 
the far side of the build came the sound of a great throng move 
farther and farther into the distance. 

He made hi way down the creak wooden stairs, dread yet long 
to meet some straggler who should point the way, but find no one; 
across the dark hall, so late throng with living, move things, 
and out through the open front door into the street. He could not 
believ that he wa realli left behind, realli forgotten, that he had 
been purpos permit to escape. It perplex him. 

nervous he peer about him, and up and down the street; then, see 
nothing, advanc slowli down the pavement. 

the whole town, as he went, show itself empti and deserted, as 
though a great wind had blown everyth aliv out of it. the door 
and window of the hous stood open to the night; noth stirred; 
moonlight and silenc lay over all. the night lay about him like a 
cloak. the air, soft and cool, caress hi cheek like the touch of a 
great furri paw. He gain confid and began to walk quickly, though 
still keep to the shadow side. nowher could he discov the 
faintest sign of the great unholi exodu he knew had just taken place. 
the moon sail high over all in a sky, cloudless and serene. 

hardli realis where he wa going, he cross the open market-plac 
and so came to the ramparts, whenc he knew a pathway descend to the 
high road and along which he could make good hi escap to one of the 
other littl town that lay to the northward, and so to the railway. 

but first he paus and gaze out over the scene at hi feet where the 
great plain lay like a silver map of some dream country. the still 
beauti of it enter hi heart, increas hi sens of bewilder 
and unreality. No air stirred, the leav of the plane tree stood 
motionless, the near detail were defin with the sharp of day 
against dark shadows, and in the distanc the field and wood melt 
away into haze and shimmer mistiness. 

but the breath caught in hi throat and he stood stockstil as though 
transfix when hi gaze pass from the horizon and fell upon the near 
prospect in the depth of the valley at hi feet. the whole lower slope 
of the hill, that lay hid from the bright of the moon, were aglow, 
and through the glare he saw countless move forms, shift thick and 
fast between the open of the trees; while overhead, like leav 
driven by the wind, he discern fli shape that hover darkli one 
moment against the sky and then settl down with cri and weird 
sing through the branch into the region that wa aflame. 

spellbound, he stood and stare for a time that he could not measure. 
and then, move by one of the terribl impuls that seem to control 
the whole adventure, he climb swiftli upon the top of the broad 
coping, and balanc a moment where the valley gape at hi feet. but 
in that veri instant, as he stood hovering, a sudden movement among the 
shadow of the hous caught hi eye, and he turn to see the outlin 
of a larg anim dart swiftli across the open space behind him, and 
land with a fli leap upon the top of the wall a littl lower down. 
It ran like the wind to hi feet and then rose up besid him upon the 
ramparts. A shiver seem to run through the moonlight, and hi sight 
trembl for a second. hi heart puls fearfully. ilsé stood besid 
him, peer into hi face. 

some dark substance, he saw, stain the girl’ face and skin, shine 
in the moonlight as she stretch her hand toward him; she wa 
dress in wretch tatter garment that yet becam her mightily; rue 
and vervain twine about her temples; her eye glitter with unholi 
light. He onli just control the wild impuls to take her in hi arm 
and leap with her from their giddi perch into the valley below. 

“see!” she cried, point with an arm on which the rag flutter in 
the rise wind toward the forest aglow in the distance. “see where 
they await us! the wood are alive! alreadi the great one are there, 
and the danc will soon begin! the salv is here! anoint yourself and 
come!” 

though a moment befor the sky wa clear and cloudless, yet even while 
she spoke the face of the moon grew dark and the wind began to toss 
in the crest of the plane tree at hi feet. stray gust brought the 
sound of hoars sing and cri from the lower slope of the hill, 
and the pungent odour he had alreadi notic about the courtyard of the 
inn rose about him in the air. 

“transform, transform!” she cri again, her voic rise like a song. 
“rub well your skin befor you fly. come! come with me to the sabbath, 
to the mad of it furiou delight, to the sweet abandon of 
it evil worship! see! the great one are there, and the terribl 
sacrament prepared. the throne is occupied. anoint and come! anoint 
and come!” 

she grew to the height of a tree besid him, leap upon the wall with 
flame eye and hair strewn upon the night. He too began to chang 
swiftly. her hand touch the skin of hi face and neck, streak him 
with the burn salv that sent the old magic into hi blood with the 
power befor which fade all that is good. 

A wild roar came up to hi ear from the heart of the wood, and the 
girl, when she heard it, leap upon the wall in the frenzi of her 
wick joy. 

“satan is there!” she screamed, rush upon him and strive to draw 
him with her to the edg of the wall. “satan ha come! the sacrament 
call us! come, with your dear apost soul, and we will worship and 
danc till the moon die and the world is forgotten!” 

just save himself from the dread plunge, vezin struggl to 
releas himself from her grasp, while the passion tore at hi rein and 
all but master him. He shriek aloud, not know what he said, and 
then he shriek again. It wa the old impulses, the old aw habit 
instinct find voice; for though it seem to him that he mere 
shriek nonsense, the word he utter realli had mean in them, and 
were intelligible. It wa the ancient call. and it wa heard below. It 
wa answered. 

the wind whistl at the skirt of hi coat as the air round him 
darken with mani fli form crowd upward out of the valley. the 
cri of hoars voic smote upon hi ears, come closer. stroke of 
wind buffet him, tear him thi way and that along the crumbl 
top of the stone wall; and ilsé clung to him with her long shine 
arms, smooth and bare, hold him fast about the neck. but not ilsé 
alone, for a dozen of them surround him, drop out of the air. 
the pungent odour of the anoint bodi stifl him, excit him to 
the old mad of the sabbath, the danc of the witch and sorcer 
do honour to the personifi evil of the world. 

“anoint and away! anoint and away!” they cri in wild choru about 
him. “to the danc that never dies! To the sweet and fear fantasi of 
evil!” 

anoth moment and he would have yield and gone, for hi will turn 
soft and the flood of passion memori all but overwhelm him, 
when--so can a small thing alter the whole cours of an adventure--h 
caught hi foot upon a loos stone in the edg of the wall, and 
then fell with a sudden crash on to the ground below. but he fell 
toward the houses, in the open space of dust and cobbl stones, and 
fortun not into the gape depth of the valley on the farther side. 

and they, too, came in a tumbl heap about him, like fli upon a 
piec of food, but as they fell he wa releas for a moment from 
the power of their touch, and in that brief instant of freedom there 
flash into hi mind the sudden intuit that save him. befor he 
could regain hi feet he saw them scrabbl awkwardli back upon the 
wall, as though bat-lik they could onli fli by drop from a height, 
and had no hold upon him in the open. then, see them perch there 
in a row like cat upon a roof, all dark and singularli shapeless, 
their eye like lamps, the sudden memori came back to him of ilsé’ 
terror at the sight of fire. 

quick as a flash he found hi match and lit the dead leav that lay 
under the wall. 

dri and withered, they caught fire at once, and the wind carri the 
flame in a long line down the length of the wall, lick upward as 
it ran; and with shriek and wailings, the crowd row of form upon 
the top melt away into the air on the other side, and were gone with 
a great rush and whir of their bodi down into the heart of the 
haunt valley, leav vezin breathless and shaken in the middl of 
the desert ground. 

“ilsé!” he call feebly; “ilsé!” for hi heart ach to think that she 
wa realli gone to the great danc without him, and that he had lost 
the opportun of it fear joy. yet at the same time hi relief 
wa so great, and he wa so daze and troubl in mind with the whole 
thing, that he hardli knew what he wa saying, and onli cri aloud in 
the fierc storm of hi emotion.... 

the fire under the wall ran it course, and the moonlight came out 
again, soft and clear, from it temporari eclipse. with one last 
shudder look at the ruin ramparts, and a feel of horrid wonder 
for the haunt valley beyond, where the shape still crowd and flew, 
he turn hi face toward the town and slowli made hi way in the 
direct of the hotel. 

and as he went, a great wail of cries, and a sound of howling, 
follow him from the gleam forest below, grow fainter and 
fainter with the burst of wind as he disappear between the houses. 


VI 

“it may seem rather abrupt to you, thi sudden tame ending,” said 
arthur vezin, glanc with flush face and timid eye at dr. silenc 
sit there with hi notebook, “but the fact is--er--from that moment 
my memori seem to have fail rather. I have no distinct recollect 
of how I got home or what precis I did. 

“it appear I never went back to the inn at all. I onli dimli recollect 
race down a long white road in the moonlight, past wood and 
villages, still and deserted, and then the dawn came up, and I saw the 
tower of a biggish town and so came to a station. 

“but, long befor that, I rememb paus somewher on the road and 
look back to where the hill-town of my adventur stood up in the 
moonlight, and think how exactli like a great monstrou cat it lay 
there upon the plain, it huge front paw lie down the two main 
streets, and the twin and broken tower of the cathedr mark it 
torn ear against the sky. that pictur stay in my mind with the 
utmost vivid to thi day. 

“anoth thing remain in my mind from that escape--namely, the sudden 
sharp remind that I had not paid my bill, and the decis I made, 
stand there on the dusti highroad, that the small baggag I had left 
behind would more than settl for my indebtedness. 

“for the rest, I can onli tell you that I got coffe and bread at a 
café on the outskirt of thi town I had come to, and soon after found 
my way to the station and caught a train later in the day. that same 
even I reach london.” 

“and how long altogether,” ask john silenc quietly, “do you think 
you stay in the town of the adventure?” 

vezin look up sheepishly. 

“I wa come to that,” he resumed, with apologet wriggl of hi 
body. “in london I found that I wa a whole week out in my reckon of 
time. I had stay over a week in the town, and it ought to have been 
septemb 15th,--instead of which it wa onli septemb 10th!” 

“so that, in reality, you had onli stay a night or two in the inn?” 
queri the doctor. 

vezin hesit befor replying. He shuffl upon the mat. 

“I must have gain time somewhere,” he said at length--“somewher or 
somehow. I certainli had a week to my credit. I can’t explain it. I can 
onli give you the fact.” 

“and thi happen to you last year, sinc when you have never been 
back to the place?” 

“last autumn, yes,” murmur vezin; “and I have never dare to go 
back. I think I never want to.” 

“and, tell me,” ask dr. silenc at length, when he saw that the 
littl man had evid come to the end of hi word and had noth 
more to say, “had you ever read up the subject of the old witchcraft 
practic dure the middl ages, or been at all interest in the 
subject?” 

“never!” declar vezin emphatically. “I had never given a thought to 
such matter so far as I know----” 

“or to the question of reincarnation, perhaps?” 

“never--befor my adventure; but I have since,” he repli 
significantly. 

there was, however, someth still on the man’ mind that he wish 
to reliev himself of by confession, yet could with difficulti bring 
himself to mention; and it wa onli after the sympathet tact 
of the doctor had provid numer open that he at length avail 
himself of one of them, and stammer that he would like to show him 
the mark he still had on hi neck where, he said, the girl had touch 
him with her anoint hands. 

He took off hi collar after infinit fumbl hesitation, and lower 
hi shirt a littl for the doctor to see. and there, on the surfac of 
the skin, lay a faint reddish line across the shoulder and extend 
a littl way down the back toward the spine. It certainli indic 
exactli the posit an arm might have taken in the act of embracing. 
and on the other side of the neck, slightli higher up, wa a similar 
mark, though not quit so clearli defined. 

“that wa where she held me that night on the ramparts,” he whispered, 
a strang light come and go in hi eyes. 

* * * * * 

It wa some week later when I again found occas to consult john 
silenc concern anoth extraordinari case that had come under my 
notice, and we fell to discuss vezin’ story. sinc hear it, 
the doctor had made investig on hi own account, and one of hi 
secretari had discov that vezin’ ancestor had actual live 
for gener in the veri town where the adventur came to him. two 
of them, both women, had been tri and convict as witches, and had 
been burn aliv at the stake. moreover, it had not been difficult to 
prove that the veri inn where vezin stay wa built about 1700 upon 
the spot where the funer pyre stood and the execut took place. 
the town wa a sort of headquart for all the sorcer and witch 
of the entir region, and after convict they were burnt there 
liter by scores. 

“it seem strange,” continu the doctor, “that vezin should have 
remain ignor of all this; but, on the other hand, it wa not the 
kind of histori that success gener would have been anxiou to 
keep alive, or to repeat to their children. therefor I am inclin to 
think he still know noth about it. 

“the whole adventur seem to have been a veri vivid reviv of the 
memori of an earlier life, caus by come directli into contact 
with the live forc still intens enough to hang about the place, 
and, by a most singular chanc too, with the veri soul who had taken 
part with him in the event of that particular life. for the mother 
and daughter who impress him so strang must have been lead 
actors, with himself, in the scene and practic of witchcraft which 
at that period domin the imagin of the whole country. 

“one ha onli to read the histori of the time to know that 
these witch claim the power of transform themselv into 
variou animals, both for the purpos of disguis and also to 
convey themselv swiftli to the scene of their imaginari orgies. 
lycanthropy, or the power to chang themselv into wolves, wa 
everywher believ in, and the abil to transform themselv into 
cat by rub their bodi with a special salv or ointment provid 
by satan himself, found equal credence. the witchcraft trial abound in 
evid of such univers beliefs.” 

dr. silenc quot chapter and vers from mani writer on the subject, 
and show how everi detail of vezin’ adventur had a basi in the 
practic of those dark days. 

“but that the entir affair took place subject in the man’ own 
consciousness, I have no doubt,” he went on, in repli to my questions; 
“for my secretari who ha been to the town to investigate, discov 
hi signatur in the visitors’ book, and prove by it that he had 
arriv on septemb 8th, and left suddenli without pay hi bill. 
He left two day later, and they still were in possess of hi dirti 
brown bag and some tourist clothes. I paid a few franc in settlement 
of hi debt, and have sent hi luggag on to him. the daughter wa 
absent from home, but the proprietress, a larg woman veri much as he 
describ her, told my secretari that he had seem a veri strange, 
absent-mind kind of gentleman, and after hi disappear she had 
fear for a long time that he had met with a violent end in the 
neighbour forest where he use to roam about alone. 

“I should like to have obtain a person interview with the daughter 
so as to ascertain how much wa subject and how much actual took 
place with her as vezin told it. for her dread of fire and the sight of 
burn must, of course, have been the intuit memori of her former 
pain death at the stake, and have thu explain whi he fanci more 
than onc that he saw her through smoke and flame.” 

“and that mark on hi skin, for instance?” I inquired. 

“mere the mark produc by hyster brooding,” he replied, “like 
the stigmata of the _religieuses_, and the bruis which appear on 
the bodi of hypnotis subject who have been told to expect them. 
thi is veri common and easili explained. onli it seem curiou that 
these mark should have remain so long in vezin’ case. usual they 
disappear quickly.” 

“obvious he is still think about it all, brooding, and live it 
all over again,” I ventured. 

“probably. and thi make me fear that the end of hi troubl is not 
yet. We shall hear of him again. It is a case, alas! I can do littl to 
alleviate.” 

dr. silenc spoke grave and with sad in hi voice. 

“and what do you make of the frenchman in the train?” I ask 
further--“th man who warn him against the place, _à caus du sommeil 
et à caus de chats_? sure a veri singular incident?” 

“A _very_ singular incid indeed,” he made answer slowly, “and one I 
can onli explain on the basi of a highli improb coincidence----” 

“namely?” 

“that the man wa one who had himself stay in the town and undergon 
there a similar experience. I should like to find thi man and ask him. 
but the crystal is useless here, for I have no slightest clue to go 
upon, and I can onli conclud that some singular psychic affinity, some 
forc still activ in hi be out of the same past life, drew him 
thu to the person of vezin, and enabl him to fear what might 
happen to him, and thu to warn him as he did. 

“yes,” he present continued, half talk to himself, “I suspect in 
thi case that vezin wa swept into the vortex of forc aris out of 
the intens activ of a past life, and that he live over again a 
scene in which he had often play a lead part centuri before. for 
strong action set up forc that are so slow to exhaust themselves, 
they may be said in a sens never to die. In thi case they were not 
vital enough to render the illus complete, so that the littl man 
found himself caught in a veri distress confus of the present 
and the past; yet he wa suffici sensit to recognis that it 
wa true, and to fight against the degrad of returning, even in 
memory, to a former and lower state of development. 

“ah yes!” he continued, cross the floor to gaze at the darken 
sky, and seemingli quit oblivi of my presence, “sublimin 
up-rush of memori like thi can be exceedingli painful, and sometim 
exceedingli dangerous. I onli trust that thi gentl soul may soon 
escap from thi obsess of a passion and tempestu past. but I 
doubt it, I doubt it.” 

hi voic wa hush with sad as he spoke, and when he turn back 
into the room again there wa an express of profound yearn upon 
hi face, the yearn of a soul whose desir to help is sometim 
greater than hi power. 




case iii 

the nemesi OF fire 


I 

By some mean which I never could fathom, john silenc alway contriv 
to keep the compart to himself, and as the train had a clear run 
of two hour befor the first stop, there wa ampl time to go over 
the preliminari fact of the case. He had telephon to me that veri 
morning, and even through the disguis of the mile of wire the thrill 
of incalcul adventur had sound in hi voice. 

“a if it were an ordinari countri visit,” he called, in repli to my 
question; “and don’t forget to bring your gun.” 

“with blank cartridges, I suppose?” for I knew hi rigid principl 
with regard to the take of life, and guess that the gun were 
mere for some obviou purpos of disguise. 

then he thank me for coming, mention the train, snap down the 
receiver, and left me vibrat with the excit of anticip 
to do my packing. for the honour of accompani dr. john silenc on 
one of hi big case wa what mani would have consid an empti 
honour--and risky. certainli the adventur held all manner of 
possibilities, and I arriv at waterloo with the feel of a man who 
is about to embark on some danger and peculiar mission in which the 
danger he expect to run will not be the ordinari danger to life and 
limb, but of some secret charact difficult to name and still more 
difficult to cope with. 

“the manor hous ha a high sound,” he told me, as we sat with our 
feet up and talked, “but I believ it is littl more than an overgrown 
farmhous in the desol heather countri beyond d----, and it owner, 
colonel wragge, a retir soldier with a tast for books, live there 
practic alone, I understand, with an elderli invalid sister. So you 
need not look forward to a live visit, unless the case provid some 
excit of it own.” 

“which is likely?” 

By way of repli he hand me a letter mark “private.” It wa date a 
week ago, and sign “your faithfully, horac wragge.” 

“he heard of me, you see, through captain anderson,” the doctor 
explain modestly, as though hi fame were not almost world-wide; “you 
rememb that indian obsess case----” 

I read the letter. whi it should have been mark privat wa difficult 
to understand. It wa veri brief, direct, and to the point. It refer 
by way of introduct to captain anderson, and then state quit 
simpli that the writer need help of a peculiar kind and ask for a 
person interview--a morn interview, sinc it wa imposs for 
him to be absent from the hous at night. the letter wa dignifi 
even to the point of abruptness, and it is difficult to explain how 
it manag to convey to me the impress of a strong man, shaken 
and perplexed. perhap the restraint of the wording, and the mysteri 
of the affair had someth to do with it; and the refer to the 
anderson case, the horror of which lay still vivid in my memory, may 
have touch the sens of someth rather omin and alarming. but, 
whatev the cause, there wa no doubt that an impress of seriou 
peril rose somehow out of that white paper with the few line of firm 
writing, and the spirit of a deep uneasi ran between the word and 
reach the mind without ani visibl form of expression. 

“and when you saw him----?” I asked, return the letter as the train 
rush clatter noisili through clapham junction. 

“I have not seen him,” wa the reply. “the man’ mind wa charg to 
the brim when he wrote that; full of vivid mental pictures. notic 
the restraint of it. for the main charact of hi case psychometri 
could be depend upon, and the scrap of paper hi hand ha touch 
is suffici to give to anoth mind--a sensit and sympathet 
mind--clear mental pictur of what is go on. I think I have a veri 
sound gener idea of hi problem.” 

“so there may be excit after all?” 

john silenc wait a moment befor he replied. 

“someth veri seriou is amiss there,” he said gravely, at length. 
“some one--not himself, I gather,--ha been meddl with a rather 
danger kind of gunpowder. so--yes, there may be excitement, as you 
put it.” 

“and my duties?” I asked, with a decidedli grow interest. “remember, 
I am your ‘assistant.’” 

“behav like an intellig confidenti secretary. observ everything, 
without seem to. say nothing--noth that mean anything. Be 
present at all interviews. I may ask a good deal of you, for if my 
impress are correct thi is----” 

He broke off suddenly. 

“but I won’t tell you my impress yet,” he resum after a moment’ 
thought. “just watch and listen as the case proceeds. form your 
own impress and cultiv your intuitions. We come as ordinari 
visitors, of course,” he added, a twinkl show for an instant in hi 
eye; “hence, the guns.” 

though disappoint not to hear more, I recognis the wisdom of 
hi word and knew how valueless my impress would be onc the 
power suggest of have heard hi own lay behind them. I likewis 
reflect that intuit join to a sens of humour wa of more use to 
a man than doubl the quantiti of mere “brains,” as such. 

befor put the letter away, however, he hand it back, tell me 
to place it against my forehead for a few moment and then describ ani 
pictur that came spontan into my mind. 

“don’t deliber look for anything. just imagin you see the insid 
of the eyelid, and wait for pictur that rise against it dark screen.” 

I follow hi instructions, make my mind as nearli a blank as 
possible. but no vision came. I saw noth but the line of light 
that pass to and fro like the chang of a kaleidoscop across the 
blackness. A momentari sensat of warmth came and went curiously. 

“you see--what?” he ask presently. 

“nothing,” I wa oblig to admit disappointedly; “noth but the 
usual flash of light one alway sees. only, perhaps, they are more 
vivid than usual.” 

He said noth by way of comment or reply. 

“and they group themselv now and then,” I continued, with pain 
candour, for I long to see the pictur he had spoken of, “group 
themselv into globe and round ball of fire, and the line that 
flash about sometim look like triangl and crosses--almost like 
geometr figures. noth more.” 

I open my eye again, and gave him back the letter. 

“it make my head hot,” I said, feel somehow unworthi for not see 
anyth of interest. but the look in hi eye arrest my attent at 
once. 

“that sensat of heat is important,” he said significantly. 

“it wa certainli real, and rather uncomfortable,” I replied, hope 
he would expand and explain. “there wa a distinct feel of 
warmth--intern warmth somewhere--oppress in a sense.” 

“that is interesting,” he remarked, put the letter back in hi 
pocket, and settl himself in the corner with newspap and books. 
He vouchsaf noth more, and I knew the useless of tri to 
make him talk. follow hi exampl I settl likewis with magazin 
into my corner. but when I close my eye again to look for the 
flash light and the sensat of heat, I found noth but the 
usual phantasmagoria of the day’ events--faces, scenes, memories,--and 
in due cours I fell asleep and then saw noth at all of ani kind. 

when we left the train, after six hours’ travelling, at a littl 
waysid station stand without tree in a world of sand and heather, 
the late octob shadow had alreadi drop their sombr veil upon the 
landscape, and the sun dip almost out of sight behind the moorland 
hills. In a high dogcart, behind a fast horse, we were soon rattl 
across the undul stretch of an open and bleak country, the keen 
air sting our cheek and the scent of pine and bracken strong 
about us. bare hill were faintli visibl against the horizon, and the 
coachman point to a bank of distant shadow on our left where he told 
us the sea lay. occasion stone farmhouses, stand back from the 
road among straggl fir trees, and larg black barn that seem to 
shift past us with a movement of their own in the gloom, were the onli 
sign of human and civilis that we saw, until at the end of a 
brace five mile the light of the lodg gate flare befor us and 
we plung into a thick grove of pine tree that conceal the manor 
hous up to the moment of actual arrival. 

colonel wragg himself met us in the hall. He wa the typic armi 
offic who had seen service, real service, and found himself in the 
process. He wa tall and well built, broad in the shoulders, but lean 
as a greyhound, with grave eyes, rather stern, and a moustach turn 
grey. I judg him to be about sixti year of age, but hi movement 
show a suppl of strength and agil that contradict the 
years. the face wa full of charact and resolution, the face of a man 
to be depend upon, and the straight grey eyes, it seem to me, wore 
a veil of perplex anxieti that he made no attempt to disguise. the 
whole appear of the man at onc cloth the adventur with graviti 
and importance. A matter that gave such a man caus for seriou alarm, 
I felt, must be someth real and of genuin moment. 

hi speech and manner, as he welcom us, were like hi letter, simpl 
and sincere. He had a natur as direct and undevi as a bullet. 
thus, he show plainli hi surpris that dr. silenc had not come 
alone. 

“mi confidenti secretary, mr. hubbard,” the doctor said, introduc 
me, and the steadi gaze and power shake of the hand I then 
receiv were well calculated, I rememb thinking, to drive home the 
impress that here wa a man who wa not to be trifl with, and 
whose perplex must spring from some veri real and tangibl cause. 
and, quit obviously, he wa reliev that we had come. hi welcom wa 
unmistak genuine. 

He led us at onc into a room, half library, half smoking-room, 
that open out of the low-ceiling hall. the manor hous gave the 
impress of a rambl and glorifi farmhouse, solid, ancient, 
comfortable, and wholli unpretentious. and so it was. onli the heat of 
the place struck me as unnatural. thi room with the blaze fire may 
have seem uncomfort warm after the long drive through the night 
air; yet it seem to me that the hall itself, and the whole atmospher 
of the house, breath a warmth that hardli belong to well-fil 
grate or the pipe of hot air and water. It wa not the heat of the 
greenhouse; it wa an oppress heat that somehow got into the head 
and mind. It stir a curiou sens of uneasi in me, and I caught 
myself think of the sensat of warmth that had eman from the 
letter in the train. 

I heard him thank dr. silenc for have come; there wa no 
preamble, and the exchang of civil wa of the briefest 
description. evid here wa a man who, like my companion, love 
action rather than talk. hi manner wa straightforward and direct. I 
saw him in a flash: puzzled, worried, harass into a state of alarm by 
someth he could not comprehend; forc to deal with thing he would 
have prefer to despise, yet face it all with dog serious 
and make no attempt to conceal that he felt secretli asham of hi 
incompetence. 

“so I cannot offer you much entertain beyond that of my own 
company, and the queer busi that ha been go on here, and is 
still go on,” he said, with a slight inclin of the head toward 
me by way of includ me in hi confidence. 

“I think, colonel wragge,” repli john silenc impressively, “that we 
shall none of us find the time hang heavy. I gather we shall have our 
hand full.” 

the two men look at one anoth for the space of some seconds, and 
there wa an indefin qualiti in their silenc which for the first 
time made me admit a swift question into my mind; and I wonder a 
littl at my rash in come with so littl reflect into a big 
case of thi incalcul doctor. but no answer suggest itself, and 
to withdraw was, of course, inconceivable. the gate had close behind 
me now, and the spirit of the adventur wa alreadi besieg my mind 
with it advanc guard of a thousand littl hope and fears. 

explain that he would wait till after dinner to discuss anyth 
serious, as no refer wa ever made befor hi sister, he led the 
way upstair and show us person to our rooms; and it wa just as 
I wa finish dress that a knock came at my door and dr. silenc 
entered. 

He wa alway what is call a seriou man, so that even in moment of 
comedi you felt he never lost sight of the profound graviti of life, 
but as he came across the room to me I caught the express of hi 
face and understood in a flash that he wa now in hi most grave and 
earnest mood. He look almost troubled. I stop fumbl with my 
black tie and stared. 

“it _is_ serious,” he said, speak in a low voice, “more so even than 
I imagined. colonel wragge’ control over hi thought conceal a 
great deal in my psychometris of the letter. I look in to warn you 
to keep yourself well in hand--gener speaking.” 

“haunt house?” I asked, consciou of a distinct shiver down my back. 

but he smile grave at the question. 

“haunt hous of life more likely,” he replied, and a look came into 
hi eye which I had onli seen there when a human soul wa in the toil 
and he wa thick in the fight of rescue. He wa stir in the deeps. 

“colonel wragge--or the sister?” I ask hurriedly, for the gong wa 
sounding. 

“neither directly,” he said from the door. “someth far older, 
someth very, veri remot indeed. thi thing ha to do with the ages, 
unless I am mistaken greatly, the age on which the mist of memori 
have long lain undisturbed.” 

He came across the floor veri quickli with a finger on hi lips, 
look at me with a peculiar searching of gaze. 

“are you awar yet of anything--odd here?” he ask in a whisper. 
“anyth you cannot quit define, for instance. tell me, hubbard, for 
I want to know all your impressions. they may help me.” 

I shook my head, avoid hi gaze, for there wa someth in the eye 
that scare me a little. but he wa so in earnest that I set my mind 
keenli searching. 

“noth yet,” I repli truthfully, wish I could confess to a real 
emotion; “noth but the strang heat of the place.” 

He gave a littl jump forward in my direction. 

“the heat again, that’ it!” he exclaimed, as though glad of my 
corroboration. “and how would you describ it, perhaps?” he ask 
quickly, with a hand on the door knob. 

“it doesn’t seem like ordinari physic heat,” I said, cast about in 
my thought for a definition. 

“more a mental heat,” he interrupted, “a glow of thought and desire, 
a sort of feverish warmth of the spirit. isn’t that it?” 

I admit that he had exactli describ my sensations. 

“good!” he said, as he open the door, and with an indescrib 
gestur that combin a warn to be readi with a sign of prais for 
my correct intuition, he wa gone. 

I hurri after him, and found the two men wait for me in front of 
the fire. 

“I ought to warn you,” our host wa say as I came in, “that my 
sister, whom you will meet at dinner, is not awar of the real object 
of your visit. she is under the impress that we are interest in 
the same line of study--folklore--and that your research have led to 
my seek acquaintance. she come to dinner in her chair, you know. It 
will be a great pleasur to her to meet you both. We have few visitors.” 

So that on enter the dining-room we were prepar to find miss 
wragg alreadi at her place, seat in a sort of bath-chair. she wa 
a vivaci and charm old lady, with smile express and bright 
eyes, and she chat all through dinner with unfail spontaneity. 
she had that face, unlin and fresh, that some peopl carri through 
life from the cradl to the grave; her smooth plump cheek were 
all pink and white, and her hair, still dark, wa divid into two 
glossi and sleek halv on either side of a care parting. she wore 
gold-rim glasses, and at her throat wa a larg scarab of green 
jasper that made a veri handsom brooch. 

her brother and dr. silenc talk little, so that most of the 
convers wa carri on between herself and me, and she told me a 
great deal about the histori of the old house, most of which I fear I 
listen to with but half an ear. 

“and when cromwel stay here,” she babbl on, “he occupi the veri 
room upstair that use to be mine. but my brother think it safer for 
me to sleep on the ground floor now in case of fire.” 

and thi sentenc ha stay in my memori onli becaus of the sudden 
way her brother interrupt her and instantli led the convers 
on to anoth topic. the pass refer to fire seem to have 
disturb him, and thenceforward he direct the talk himself. 

It wa difficult to believ that thi live and anim old lady, 
sit besid me and take so eager an interest in the affair of 
life, wa practically, we understood, without the use of her lower 
limbs, and that her whole exist for year had been pass between 
the sofa, the bed, and the bath-chair in which she chat so natur 
at the dinner-table. she made no allus to her afflict until the 
dessert wa reached, and then, touch a bell, she made us a witti 
littl speech about leav us “like time, on noiseless feet,” and wa 
wheel out of the room by the butler and carri off to her apart 
at the other end of the house. 

and the rest of us were not long in follow suit, for dr. silenc and 
myself were quit as eager to learn the natur of our errand as our 
host wa to impart it to us. He led us down a long flag passag to a 
room at the veri end of the house, a room provid with doubl doors, 
and windows, I saw, heavili shuttered. book line the wall on everi 
side, and a larg desk in the bow window wa pile up with volumes, 
some open, some shut, some show scrap of paper stuck between the 
leaves, and all smother in a gener cataract of untidi foolscap and 
loos half sheets. 

“mi studi and workroom,” explain colonel wragge, with a delight 
touch of innoc pride, as though he were a veri seriou scholar. 
He place arm-chair for us round the fire. “here,” he ad 
significantly, “we shall be safe from interrupt and can talk 
securely.” 

dure dinner the manner of the doctor had been all that wa natur 
and spontaneous, though it wa imposs for me, know him as I 
did, not to be awar that he wa subconsci veri keenli alert and 
alreadi receiv upon the ultra-sensit surfac of hi mind variou 
and vivid impressions; and there wa now someth in the graviti 
of hi face, as well as in the signific tone of colonel wragge’ 
speech, and something, too, in the fact that we three were shut away in 
thi privat chamber about to listen to thing probabl strange, and 
certainli mysterious--someth in all thi that touch my imagin 
sharpli and sent an undeni thrill along my nerves. take the chair 
indic by my host, I lit my cigar and wait for the open of the 
attack, fulli consciou that we were now too far gone in the adventur 
to admit of withdrawal, and wonder a littl anxious where it wa 
go to lead. 

what I expect precisely, it is hard to say. noth definite, 
perhaps. onli the sudden chang wa dramatic. A few hour befor the 
prosaic atmospher of piccadilli wa about me, and now I wa sit in 
a secret chamber of thi remot old build wait to hear an account 
of thing that held possibl the genuin heart of terror. I thought of 
the dreari moor and hill outside, and the dark pine cops sough 
in the wind of night; I rememb my companion’ singular word up in 
my bedroom befor dinner; and then I turn and note care the 
stern counten of the colonel as he face us and lit hi big black 
cigar befor speaking. 

the threshold of an adventure, I reflect as I wait for the first 
words, is alway the most thrill moment--until the climax comes. 

but colonel wragg hesitated--mentally--a long time befor he began. 
He talk briefli of our journey, the weather, the country, and other 
compar trivial topics, while he sought about in hi mind for an 
appropri entri into the subject that wa uppermost in the thought 
of all of us. the fact wa he found it a difficult matter to speak of 
at all, and it wa dr. silenc who final show him the way over the 
hedge. 

“mr hubbard will take a few note when you are ready--y won’t 
object,” he suggested; “I can give my undivid attent in thi way.” 

“bi all means,” turn to reach some of the loos sheet on the 
write table, and glanc at me. He still hesit a little, I 
thought. “the fact is,” he said apologetically, “I wonder if it 
wa quit fair to troubl you so soon. the daylight might suit you 
better to hear what I have to tell. your sleep, I mean, might be less 
disturbed, perhaps.” 

“I appreci your thoughtfulness,” john silenc repli with hi 
gentl smile, take command as it were from that moment, “but realli 
we are both quit immune. there is nothing, I think, that could prevent 
either of us sleeping, except--an outbreak of fire, or some such veri 
physic disturbance.” 

colonel wragg rais hi eye and look fixedli at him. thi 
refer to an outbreak of fire I felt sure wa made with a purpose. 
It certainli had the desir effect of remov from our host’ manner 
the last sign of hesitancy. 

“forgiv me,” he said. “of course, I know noth of your method in 
matter of thi kind--so, perhaps, you would like me to begin at onc 
and give you an outlin of the situation?” 

dr. silenc bow hi agreement. “I can then take my precaut 
accordingly,” he ad calmly. 

the soldier look up for a moment as though he did not quit gather 
the mean of these words; but he made no further comment and 
turn at onc to tackl a subject on which he evid talk with 
diffid and unwillingness. 

“it’ all so utterli out of my line of things,” he began, puf out 
cloud of cigar smoke between hi words, “and there’ so littl to tell 
with ani real evid behind it, that it’ almost imposs to make 
a consecut stori for you. it’ the total cumul effect that is 
so--so disquieting.” He chose hi word with care, as though determin 
not to travel one hair’ breadth beyond the truth. 

“I came into thi place twenti year ago when my elder brother died,” 
he continued, “but could not afford to live here then. My sister, whom 
you met at dinner, kept hous for him till the end, and dure all 
these years, while I wa see servic abroad, she had an eye to the 
place--for we never got a satisfactori tenant--and saw that it wa not 
allow to go to ruin. I myself took possession, however, onli a year 
ago. 

“mi brother,” he went on, after a percept pause, “spent much of 
hi time away, too. He wa a great traveller, and fill the hous 
with stuff he brought home from all over the world. the laundry--a 
small detach build beyond the servants’ quarters--h turn into a 
regular littl museum. the curio and thing I have clear away--they 
collect dust and were alway get broken--but the laundry-hous 
you shall see tomorrow.” 

colonel wragg spoke with such deliber and with so mani paus 
that thi begin took him a long time. but at thi point he came to 
a full stop altogether. evid there wa someth he wish to say 
that cost him consider effort. At length he look up steadili into 
my companion’ face. 

“may I ask you--that is, if you won’t think it strange,” he said, and a 
sort of hush came over hi voic and manner, “whether you have notic 
anyth at all unusual--anyth queer, sinc you came into the house?” 

dr. silenc answer without a moment’ hesitation. 

“I have,” he said. “there is a curiou sensat of heat in the place.” 

“ah!” exclaim the other, with a slight start. “you _have_ notic it. 
thi unaccount heat----” 

“but it cause, I gather, is not in the hous itself--but outside,” I 
wa astonish to hear the doctor add. 

colonel wragg rose from hi chair and turn to unhook a frame map 
that hung upon the wall. I got the impress that the movement wa 
made with the deliber purpos of conceal hi face. 

“your diagnosis, I believe, is amazingli accurate,” he said after a 
moment, turn round with the map in hi hands. “though, of course, I 
can have no idea how you should guess----” 

john silenc shrug hi shoulder expressively. “mere my 
impression,” he said. “if you pay attent to impressions, and do not 
allow them to be confus by deduct of the intellect, you will 
often find them surprisingly, uncannily, accurate.” 

colonel wragg resum hi seat and laid the map upon hi knees. hi 
face wa veri thought as he plung abruptli again into hi story. 

“on come into possession,” he said, look us altern in 
the face, “I found a crop of stori of the most extraordinari and 
imposs kind I had ever heard--stori which at first I treat with 
amus indifference, but later wa forc to regard seriously, if onli 
to keep my servants. these stori I thought I trace to the fact of my 
brother’ death--and, in a way, I think so still.” 

He leant forward and hand the map to dr. silence. 

“it’ an old plan of the estate,” he explained, “but accur enough 
for our purpose, and I wish you would note the posit of the 
plantat mark upon it, especi those near the house. that 
one,” indic the spot with hi finger, “i call the twelv acr 
plantation. It wa just there, on the side nearest the house, that my 
brother and the head keeper met their deaths.” 

He spoke as a man forc to recognis fact that he deplored, and would 
have prefer to leav untouched--th he person would rather 
have treat with ridicul if possible. It made hi word peculiarli 
dignifi and impressive, and I listen with an increas uneasi 
as to the sort of help the doctor would look to me for later. It seem 
as though I were a spectat of some drama of mysteri in which ani 
moment I might be summon to play a part. 

“it wa twenti year ago,” continu the colonel, “but there wa much 
talk about it at the time, unfortunately, and you may, perhaps, have 
heard of the affair. stride, the keeper, wa a passionate, hot-temp 
man, but I regret to say, so wa my brother, and quarrel between them 
seem to have been frequent.” 

“I do not recal the affair,” said the doctor. “may I ask what wa the 
caus of death?” someth in hi voic made me prick up my ear for 
the reply. 

“the keeper, it wa said, from suffocation. and at the inquest the 
doctor aver that both men had been dead the same length of time 
when found.” 

“and your brother?” ask john silence, notic the omission, and 
listen intently. 

“equal mysterious,” said our host, speak in a low voic with 
effort. “but there wa one distress featur I think I ought to 
mention. for those who saw the face--i did not see it myself--and 
though stride carri a gun it chamber were undischarged----” He 
stammer and hesit with confusion. again that sens of terror 
move between hi words. He stuck. 

“yes,” said the chief listen sympathetically. 

“mi brother’ face, they said, look as though it had been scorched. 
It had been swept, as it were, by someth that burned--blasted. It 
was, I am told, quit dreadful. the bodi were found lie side by 
side, face downwards, both point away from the wood, as though they 
had been in the act of running, and not more than a dozen yard from 
it edge.” 

dr. silenc made no comment. He appear to be studi the map 
attentively. 

“I did not see the face myself,” repeat the other, hi manner somehow 
express the sens of awe he contriv to keep out of hi voice, 
“but my sister unfortun did, and her present state I believ to 
be entir due to the shock it gave to her nerves. she never can be 
brought to refer to it, naturally, and I am even inclin to think that 
the memori ha merci been permit to vanish from her mind. but 
she spoke of it at the time as a face swept by flame--blasted.” 

john silenc look up from hi contempl of the map, but with the 
air of one who wish to listen, not to speak, and present colonel 
wragg went on with hi account. He stood on the mat, hi broad 
shoulder hide most of the mantelpiece. 

“they all centr about thi particular plantation, these stories. that 
wa to be expected, for the peopl here are as superstiti as irish 
peasantry, and though I made one or two exampl among them to stop the 
foolish talk, it had no effect, and new version came to my ear everi 
week. you may imagin how littl good dismiss did, when I tell you 
that the servant dismiss themselves. It wa not the hous servants, 
but the men who work on the estat outside. the keeper gave notic 
one after another, none of them with ani reason I could accept; the 
forest refus to enter the wood, and the beater to beat in it. 
word flew all over the countrysid that twelv acr plantat wa a 
place to be avoided, day or night. 

“there came a point,” the colonel went on, now well in hi swing, “when 
I felt compel to make investig on my own account. I could 
not kill the thing by ignor it; so I collect and analys the 
stori at first hand. for thi twelv acr wood, you will see by the 
map, come rather near home. it lower end, if you will look, almost 
touch the end of the back lawn, as I will show you tomorrow, and it 
dens growth of pine form the chief protect the hous enjoy from 
the east wind that blow up from the sea. and in olden days, befor my 
brother interf with it and frighten all the game away, it wa one 
of the best pheasant covert on the whole estate.” 

“and what form, if I may ask, did thi interfer take?” ask dr. 
silence. 

“in detail, I cannot tell you, for I do not know--except that I 
understand it wa the subject of hi frequent differ with the head 
keeper; but dure the last two year of hi life, when he gave up 
travel and settl down here, he took a special interest in thi 
wood, and for some unaccount reason began to build a low stone wall 
round it. thi wall wa never finished, but you shall see the ruin 
tomorrow in the daylight.” 

“and the result of your investigations--thes stories, I mean?” the 
doctor broke in, anxiou to keep him to the main issues. 

“yes, i’m come to that,” he said slowly, “but the wood first, for 
thi wood out of which they grew like mushroom ha noth in ani way 
peculiar about it. It is veri thickli grown, and rise to a clearer 
part in the centre, a sort of mound where there is a circl of larg 
boulders--old druid stones, i’m told. At anoth place there’ a small 
pond. there’ noth distinct about it that I could mention--just 
an ordinari pine-wood, a veri ordinari pine-wood--onli the tree are a 
bit twist in the trunks, some of ’em, and veri dense. noth more. 

“and the stories? well, none of them had anyth to do with my poor 
brother, or the keeper, as you might have expected; and they were all 
odd--such odd things, I mean, to invent or imagine. I never could make 
out how these peopl got such notion into their heads.” 

He paus a moment to relight hi cigar. 

“there’ no regular path through it,” he resumed, puf vigorously, 
“but the field round it are constantli used, and one of the garden 
whose cottag lie over that way declar he often saw move light in 
it at night, and lumin shape like globe of fire over the top of 
the trees, skim and floating, and make a soft hiss sound--most 
of ’em said that, in fact--and anoth man saw shape flit in and 
out among the trees, thing that were neither men nor animals, and all 
faintli luminous. No one ever pretend to see human forms--alway 
queer, huge thing they could not properli describe. sometim the 
whole wood wa lit up, and one fellow--he’ still here and you shall 
see him--ha a most circumstanti yarn about have seen great star 
lie on the ground round the edg of the wood at regular intervals----” 

“what kind of stars?” put in john silenc sharply, in a sudden way that 
made me start. 

“oh, I don’t know quite; ordinari stars, I think he said, onli veri 
large, and appar blaze as though the ground wa alight. He wa 
too terrifi to go close and examine, and he ha never seen them 
since.” 

He stoop and stir the fire into a welcom blaze--welcom for it 
blaze of light rather than for it heat. In the room there wa alreadi 
a strang pervad sensat of warmth that wa oppress in it 
effect and far from comforting. 

“of course,” he went on, straighten up again on the mat, “thi wa 
all commonplac enough--thi see light and figur at night. most 
of these fellow drink, and imagin and terror between them may 
account for almost anything. but other saw thing in broad daylight. 
one of the woodmen, a sober, respect man, took the shortcut home to 
hi midday meal, and swore he wa follow the whole length of the wood 
by someth that never show itself, but dodg from tree to tree, 
alway keep out of sight, yet solid enough to make the branch sway 
and the twig snap on the ground. and it made a noise, he declared--but 
really”--th speaker stop and gave a short laugh--“it’ too 
absurd----” 

“_please!_” insist the doctor; “for it is these small detail that 
give me the best clue always.” 

“----it made a crackl noise, he said, like a bonfire. those were hi 
veri words: like the crackl of a bonfire,” finish the soldier, 
with a repetit of hi short laugh. 

“most interesting,” dr. silenc observ gravely. “pleas omit nothing.” 

“yes” he went on, “and it wa soon after that the fire began--th 
fire in the wood. they start mysteri burn in the patch of 
coars white grass that cover the more open part of the plantation. No 
one ever actual saw them start, but many, myself among the number, 
have seen them burn and smouldering. they are alway small and 
circular in shape, and for all the world like a picnic fire. the head 
keeper ha a dozen explanations, from spark fli out of the hous 
chimney to the sunlight focus through a dewdrop, but none of them, 
I must admit, convinc me as be in the least like or probable. 
they are most singular, I consider, most singular, these mysteri 
fires, and I am glad to say that they come onli at rather long 
interv and never seem to spread. 

“but the keeper had other queer stori as well, and about thing that 
are verifiable. He declar that no life ever willingli enter the 
plantation; more, that no life exist in it at all. No bird nest in 
the trees, or flew into their shade. He set countless traps, but never 
caught so much as a rabbit or a weasel. anim avoid it, and more 
than onc he had pick up dead creatur round the edg that bore no 
obviou sign of how they had met their death. 

“moreover, he told me one extraordinari tale about hi retriev 
chase some invis creatur across the field one day when he wa 
out with hi gun. the dog suddenli point at someth in the field at 
hi feet, and then gave chase, yelp like a mad thing. It follow 
it imaginari quarri to the border of the wood, and then went in--a 
thing he had never known it to do before. the moment it cross the 
edge--it is darkish in there even in daylight--it began fight 
in the most frenzi and terrif fashion. It made him afraid to 
interfere, he said. and at last, when the dog came out, hang it 
tail down and panting, he found someth like white hair stuck to it 
jaws, and brought it to show me. I tell you these detail because----” 

“they are important, believ me,” the doctor stop him. “and you have 
it still, thi hair?” he asked. 

“it disappear in the oddest way,” the colonel explained. “it wa 
curiou look stuff, someth like asbestos, and I sent it to be 
analys by the local chemist. but either the man got wind of it 
origin, or els he didn’t like the look of it for some reason, becaus 
he return it to me and said it wa neither animal, vegetable, nor 
mineral, so far as he could make out, and he didn’t wish to have 
anyth to do with it. I put it away in paper, but a week later, on 
open the package--it wa gone! oh, the stori are simpli endless. I 
could tell you hundr all on the same lines.” 

“and person experi of your own, colonel wragge?” ask john 
silenc earnestly, hi manner show the greatest possibl interest 
and sympathy. 

the soldier gave an almost impercept start. He look distinctli 
uncomfortable. 

“nothing, I think,” he said slowly, “nothing--er--i should like to reli 
on. I mean noth I have the right to speak of, perhaps--yet.” 

hi mouth close with a snap. dr. silence, after wait a littl to 
see if he would add to hi reply, did not seek to press him on the 
point. 

“well,” he resum presently, and as though he would speak 
contemptuously, yet dare not, “thi sort of thing ha gone on at 
interv ever since. It spread like wildfire, of course, mysteri 
chatter of thi kind, and peopl began trespass all over the estate, 
come to see the wood, and make themselv a gener nuisance. 
notic of man-trap and spring-gun onli seem to increas their 
persistence; and--think of it,” he snorted, “some local research 
societi actual wrote and ask permiss for one of their member 
to spend a night in the wood! bolder fools, who didn’t write for 
leave, came and took away bit of bark from the tree and gave them 
to clairvoyants, who invent in their turn a further batch of tales. 
there wa simpli no end to it all.” 

“most distress and annoying, I can well believe,” interpos the 
doctor. 

“then suddenli the phenomena ceas as mysteri as they had begun, 
and the interest flagged. the tale stopped. peopl got interest in 
someth else. It all seem to die out. thi wa last july. I can 
tell you exactly, for i’v kept a diari more or less of what happened.” 

“ah!” 

“but now, quit recently, within the past three weeks, it ha all 
reviv again with a rush--with a kind of furiou attack, so to speak. 
It ha realli becom unbearable. you may imagin what it means, and the 
gener state of affairs, when I say that the possibl of leav 
ha occur to me.” 

“incendiarism?” suggest dr. silence, half under hi breath, but not 
so low that colonel wragg did not hear him. 

“bi jove, sir, you take the veri word out of my mouth!” exclaim 
the astonish man, glanc from the doctor to me and from me to the 
doctor, and rattl the money in hi pocket as though some explan 
of my friend’ divin power were to be found that way. 

“it’ onli that you are think veri vividly,” the doctor said 
quietly, “and your thought form pictur in my mind befor you utter 
them. it’ mere a littl elementari thought-reading.” 

hi intention, I saw, wa not to perplex the good man, but to impress 
him with hi power so as to ensur obedi later. 

“good lord! I had no idea----” He did not finish the sentence, and 
dive again abruptli into hi narrative. 

“I did not see anyth myself, I must admit, but the stori of 
independ eye-wit were to the effect that line of light, like 
stream of thin fire, move through the wood and sometim were seen 
to shoot out precis as flame might shoot out--in the direct of 
thi house. there,” he explained, in a louder voic that made me jump, 
point with a thick finger to the map, “where the westerli fring of 
the plantat come up to the end of the lower lawn at the back of 
the house--wher it link on to those dark patches, which are laurel 
shrubberies, run right up to the back premises--that’ where these 
light were seen. they pass from the wood to the shrubberies, and 
in thi way reach the hous itself. like silent rockets, one man 
describ them, rapid as lightn and exceedingli bright.” 

“and thi evid you spoke of?” 

“they actual reach the side of the house. they’v left a mark of 
scorch on the walls--th wall of the laundri build at the other 
end. you shall see ’em tomorrow.” He point to the map to indic the 
spot, and then straighten himself and glare about the room as though 
he had said someth no one could believ and expect contradiction. 

“scorched--just as the face were,” the doctor murmured, look 
significantli at me. 

“scorched--yes,” repeat the colonel, fail to catch the rest of the 
sentenc in hi excitement. 

there wa a prolong silenc in the room, in which I heard the 
gurgl of the oil in the lamp and the click of the coal and the 
heavi breath of our host. the most unwelcom sensat were 
creep about my spine, and I wonder whether my companion would 
scorn me utterli if I ask to sleep on the sofa in hi room. It wa 
eleven o’clock, I saw by the clock on the mantelpiece. We had cross 
the divid line and were now well in the movement of the adventure. 
the fight between my interest and my dread becam acute. but, even if 
turn back had been possible, I think the interest would have easili 
gain the day. 

“I have enemies, of course,” I heard the colonel’ rough voic break 
into the paus presently, “and have discharg a number of servants----” 

“it’ not that,” put in john silenc briefly. 

“you think not? In a sens I am glad, and yet--ther are some thing 
that can be met and dealt with----” 

He left the sentenc unfinished, and look down at the floor with 
an express of grim sever that betray a momentari glimps of 
character. thi fight man loath and abhor the thought of an 
enemi he could not see and come to grip with. present he move over 
and sat down in the chair between us. someth like a sigh escap 
him. dr. silenc said nothing. 

“mi sister, of course, is kept in ignorance, as far as possible, of all 
this,” he said disconnectedly, and as if talk to himself. “but even 
if she knew, she would find matter-of-fact explanations. I onli wish I 
could. i’m sure they exist.” 

there came then an interv in the convers that wa veri 
significant. It did not seem a real pause, or the silenc real silence, 
for both men continu to think so rapidli and strongli that one almost 
imagin their thought cloth themselv in word in the air of the 
room. I wa more than a littl key up with the strang excit 
of all I had heard, but what stimul my nerv more than anyth 
els wa the obviou fact that the doctor wa clearli upon the trail of 
discovery. In hi mind at that moment, I believe, he had alreadi solv 
the natur of thi perplex psychic problem. hi face wa like a 
mask, and he employ the absolut minimum of gestur and words. all 
hi energi were direct inwards, and by those incalcul method 
and process he had master with such infinit patienc and study, I 
felt sure he wa alreadi in touch with the forc behind these singular 
phenomena and lay hi deep plan for bring them into the open, 
and then effect deal with them. 

colonel wragg meanwhil grew more and more fidgety. from time to time 
he turn toward my companion, as though about to speak, yet alway 
chang hi mind at the last moment. onc he went over and open 
the door suddenly, appar to see if ani one were listen at 
the keyhole, for he disappear a moment between the two doors, and I 
then heard him open the outer one. He stood there for some second and 
made a nois as though he were snif the air like a dog. then he 
close both door cautious and came back to the fireplace. A strang 
excit seem grow upon him. evid he wa tri to make up 
hi mind to say someth that he found it difficult to say. and john 
silence, as I rightli judged, wa wait patient for him to choos 
hi own opportun and hi own way of say it. At last he turn and 
face us, squar hi great shoulders, and stiffen perceptibly. 

dr. silenc look up sympathetically. 

“your own experi help me most,” he observ quietly. 

“the fact is,” the colonel said, speak veri low, “thi past week 
there have been outbreak of fire in the hous itself. three separ 
outbreaks--and all--in my sister’ room.” 

“yes,” the doctor said, as if thi wa just what he had expect to 
hear. 

“utterli unaccountable--al of them,” ad the other, and then sat 
down. I began to understand someth of the reason of hi excitement. 
He wa realis at last that the “natural” explan he had held to 
all along wa becom impossible, and he hate it. It made him angry. 

“fortunately,” he went on, “she wa out each time and doe not know. 
but I have made her sleep now in a room on the ground floor.” 

“A wise precaution,” the doctor said simply. He ask one or two 
questions. the fire had start in the curtains--onc by the window 
and onc by the bed. the third time smoke had been discov by the 
maid come from the cupboard, and it wa found that miss wragge’ 
cloth hang on the hook were smouldering. the doctor listen 
attentively, but made no comment. 

“and now can you tell me,” he said presently, “what your own feel 
about it is--your gener impression?” 

“it sound foolish to say so,” repli the soldier, after a moment’ 
hesitation, “but I feel exactli as I have often felt on activ servic 
in my indian campaigns: just as if the hous and all in it were in a 
state of siege; as though a conceal enemi were encamp about us--in 
ambush somewhere.” He utter a soft nervou laugh. “a if the next 
sign of smoke would precipit a panic--a dread panic.” 

the pictur came befor me of the night shadow the house, and the 
twist pine tree he had describ crowd about it, conceal some 
power enemy; and, glanc at the resolut face and figur of the 
old soldier, forc at length to hi confession, I understood someth 
of all he had been through befor he sought the assist of john 
silence. 

“and tomorrow, unless I am mistaken, is full moon,” said the doctor 
suddenly, watch the other’ face for the effect of hi appar 
careless words. 

colonel wragg gave an uncontrol start, and hi face for the first 
time show unmistak pallor. 

“what in the world----?” he began, hi lip quivering. 

“onli that I am begin to see light in thi extraordinari affair,” 
return the other calmly, “and, if my theori is correct, each month 
when the moon is at the full should wit an increas in the activ 
of the phenomena.” 

“I don’t see the connection,” colonel wragg answer almost savagely, 
“but I am bound to say my diari bear you out.” He wore the most 
puzzl express I have ever seen upon an honest face, but he 
abhor thi addit corrobor of an explan that perplex 
him. 

“I confess,” he repeated; “I cannot see the connection.” 

“whi should you?” said the doctor, with hi first laugh that evening. 
He got up and hung the map upon the wall again. “but I do--becaus 
these thing are my special study--and let me add that I have yet 
to come across a problem that is not natural, and ha not a natur 
explanation. it’ mere a question of how much one knows--and admits.” 

colonel wragg eye him with a new and curiou respect in hi face. but 
hi feel were soothed. moreover, the doctor’ laugh and chang of 
manner came as a relief to all, and broke the spell of grave suspens 
that had held us so long. We all rose and stretch our limbs, and took 
littl walk about the room. 

“I am glad, dr. silence, if you will allow me to say so, that you are 
here,” he said simply, “veri glad indeed. and now I fear I have kept 
you both up veri late,” with a glanc to includ me, “for you must be 
tired, and readi for your beds. I have told you all there is to tell,” 
he added, “and tomorrow you must feel perfectli free to take ani step 
you think necessary.” 

the end wa abrupt, yet natural, for there wa noth more to say, and 
neither of these men talk for mere talking’ sake. 

out in the cold and chilli hall he lit our candl and took us 
upstairs. the hous wa at rest and still, everi one asleep. We move 
softly. through the window on the stair we saw the moonlight fall 
across the lawn, throw deep shadows. the nearer pine tree were just 
visibl in the distance, a wall of impenetr blackness. 

our host came for a moment to our room to see that we had everything. 
He point to a coil of strong rope lie besid the window, fasten 
to the wall by mean of an iron ring. evid it had been recent 
put in. 

“I don’t think we shall need it,” dr. silenc said, with a smile. 

“I trust not,” repli our host gravely. “I sleep quit close to you 
across the landing,” he whispered, point to hi door, “and if 
you--if you want anyth in the night you will know where to find me.” 

He wish us pleasant dream and disappear down the passag into hi 
room, shade the candl with hi big muscular hand from the draughts. 

john silenc stop me a moment befor I went. 

“you know what it is?” I asked, with an excit that even overcam 
my weariness. 

“yes,” he said, “i’m almost sure. and you?” 

“not the smallest notion.” 

He look disappointed, but not half as disappoint as I felt. 

“egypt,” he whispered, “egypt!” 


II 

noth happen to disturb me in the night--nothing, that is, except a 
nightmar in which colonel wragg chase me amid thin streak of fire, 
and hi sister alway prevent my escap by suddenli rise up out of 
the ground in her chair--dead. the deep bay of dog woke me once, 
just befor the dawn, it must have been, for I saw the window frame 
against the sky; there wa a flash of lightning, too, I thought, as I 
turn over in bed. and it wa warm, for octob oppress warm. 

It wa after eleven o’clock when our host suggest go out with 
the guns, these, we understood, be a somewhat thin disguis for 
our true purpose. personally, I wa glad to be in the open air, for 
the atmospher of the hous wa heavi with presentiment. the sens 
of impend disast hung over all. fear stalk the passages, and 
lurk in the corner of everi room. It wa a hous haunted, but realli 
haunted; not by some vagu shadow of the dead, but by a definit 
though incalcul influenc that wa activ alive, and dangerous. 
At the least smell of smoke the entir household quivered. An odour 
of burning, I wa convinced, would paralys all the inmates. for the 
servants, though professedli ignor by the master’ unspoken orders, 
yet share the common dread; and the hideou uncertainty, join with 
thi display of so spite and calcul a spirit of malignity, 
provid a kind of black doom that drape not onli the walls, but also 
the mind of the peopl live within them. 

onli the bright and cheer vision of old miss wragg be push 
about the hous in her noiseless chair, chat and nod briskli 
to everi one she met, prevent us from give way entir to the 
depress which govern the majority. the sight of her wa like a 
gleam of sunshin through the depth of some ill-omen wood, and just 
as we went out I saw her be wheel along by her attend into the 
sunshin of the back lawn, and caught her cheeri smile as she turn 
her head and wish us good sport. 

the morn wa octob at it best. sunshin glisten on the 
dew-drench grass and on leav turn golden-red. the dainti 
messeng of come hoar-frost were alreadi in the air, asearch for 
perman winter quarters. from the wide moor that everywher swept up 
against the sky, like a purpl sea splash by the occasion grey of 
rocki clefts, there stole down the cool and perfum wind of the west. 
and the keen tast of the sea ran through all like a master-flavour, 
born over the space perhap by the seagul that cri and circl 
high in the air. 

but our host took littl interest in thi sparkl beauty, and had 
no thought of show off the sceneri of hi property. hi mind wa 
otherwis intent, and, for that matter, so were our own. 

“those bleak moor and hill stretch unbroken for hours,” he said, with 
a sweep of the hand; “and over there, some four miles,” point in 
anoth direction, “li s---- bay, a long, swampi inlet of the sea, 
haunt by myriad of seabirds. On the other side of the hous are the 
plantat and pine-woods. I thought we would get the dog and go 
first to the twelv acr wood I told you about last night. it’ quit 
near.” 

We found the dog in the stable, and I recal the deep bay of the 
night when a fine bloodhound and two great dane leap out to greet 
us. singular companion for guns, I thought to myself, as we struck out 
across the field and the great creatur bound and ran besid us, 
nose to ground. 

the convers wa scanty. john silence’ grave face did not 
encourag talk. He wore the express I knew well--that look of 
earnest solicitud which meant that hi whole be wa deepli absorb 
and preoccupied. frightened, I had never seen him, but anxiou 
often--it alway move me to wit it--and he wa anxiou now. 

“on the way back you shall see the laundri building,” colonel wragg 
observ shortly, for he, too, found littl to say. “we shall attract 
less attent then.” 

yet not all the crisp beauti of the morn seem abl to dispel the 
feel of uneasi dread that gather increasingli about our mind as 
we went. 

In a veri few minut a clump of pine tree conceal the hous from 
view, and we found ourselv on the outskirt of a densely-grown 
plantat of conifers. colonel wragg stop abruptly, and, produc 
a map from hi pocket, explain onc more veri briefli it posit 
with regard to the house. He show how it ran up almost to the wall 
of the laundri building--though at the moment beyond our actual 
view--and point to the window of hi sister’ bedroom where the 
fire had been. the room, now empty, look straight on to the wood. 
then, glanc nervous about him, and call the dog to heel, 
he propos that we should enter the plantat and make as thorough 
examin of it as we thought worth while. the dogs, he added, might 
perhap be persuad to accompani us a littl way--and he point to 
where they cower at hi feet--but he doubt it. “neither voic 
nor whip will get them veri far, i’m afraid,” he said. “I know by 
experience.” 

“if you have no objection,” repli dr. silence, with decision, and 
speak almost for the first time, “we will make our examin 
alone--mr. hubbard and myself. It will be best so.” 

hi tone wa absolut final, and the colonel acquiesc so polit 
that even a less intuit man than myself must have seen that he wa 
genuin relieved. 

“you doubtless have good reasons,” he said. 

“mere that I wish to obtain my impress uncoloured. thi delic 
clue I am work on might be so easili blur by the thought-curr 
of anoth mind with strongli preconceiv ideas.” 

“perfectly. I understand,” rejoin the soldier, though with an 
express of counten that plainli contradict hi words. “then I 
will wait here with the dogs; and we’ll have a look at the laundri on 
our way home.” 

I turn onc to look back as we clamber over the low stone wall 
built by the late owner, and saw hi straight, soldierli figur 
stand in the sunlit field watch us with a curious intent look 
on hi face. there wa someth to me incongruous, yet distinctli 
pathetic, in the man’ effort to meet all far-fetch explan 
of the mysteri with contempt, and at the same time in hi stolid, 
unswerv investig of it all. He nod at me and made a gestur 
of farewel with hi hand. that pictur of him, stand in the 
sunshin with hi big dogs, steadili watch us, remain with me to 
thi day. 

dr. silenc led the way in among the twist trunks, plant close 
togeth in serri ranks, and I follow sharp at hi heels. the 
moment we were out of sight he turn and put down hi gun against the 
root of a big tree, and I did likewise. 

“we shall hardli want these cumbersom weapon of murder,” he observed, 
with a pass smile. 

“you are sure of your clue, then?” I ask at once, burst with 
curiosity, yet fear to betray it lest he should think me unworthy. 
hi own method were so absolut simpl and untheatrical. 

“I am sure of my clue,” he answer gravely. “and I think we have come 
just in time. you shall know in due course. for the present--b content 
to follow and observe. and think steadily. the support of your mind 
will help me.” 

hi voic had that quiet masteri in it which lead men to face death 
with a sort of happi and pride. I would have follow him anywher 
at that moment. At the same time hi word convey a sens of dread 
seriousness. I caught the thrill of hi confidence; but also, in thi 
broad light of day, I felt the measur of alarm that lay behind. 

“you still have no strong impressions?” he asked. “noth happen in 
the night, for instance? No vivid dreamings?” 

He look close for my answer, I wa aware. 

“I slept almost an unbroken sleep. I wa tremend tired, you know, 
and, but for the oppress heat----” 

“good! you still notic the heat, then,” he said to himself, rather 
than expect an answer. “and the lightning?” he added, “that 
lightn out of a clear sky--that flashing--did you notic _that_?” 

I answer truli that I thought I had seen a flash dure a moment of 
wakefulness, and he then drew my attent to certain fact befor 
move on. 

“you rememb the sensat of warmth when you put the letter to your 
forehead in the train; the heat gener in the hous last evening, 
and, as you now mention, in the night. you heard, too, the colonel’ 
stori about the appear of fire in thi wood and in the hous 
itself, and the way hi brother and the gamekeep came to their death 
twenti year ago.” 

I nodded, wonder what in the world it all meant. 

“and you get no clue from these facts?” he asked, a trifl surprised. 

I search everi corner of my mind and imagin for some inkl of 
hi meaning, but wa oblig to admit that I understood noth so far. 

“never mind; you will later. and now,” he added, “we will go over the 
wood and see what we can find.” 

hi word explain to me someth of hi method. We were to keep our 
mind alert and report to each other the least fanci that cross the 
picture-galleri of our thoughts. then, just as we started, he turn 
again to me with a final warning. 

“and, for your safety,” he said earnestly, “imagin _now_--and for that 
matter, imagin alway until we leav thi place--imagin with the 
utmost keenness, that you are surround by a shell that protect you. 
pictur yourself insid a protect envelope, and build it up with the 
most intens imagin you can evoke. pour the whole forc of your 
thought and will into it. believ vividli all through thi adventur 
that such a shell, construct of your thought, will and imagination, 
surround you completely, and that noth can pierc it to attack.” 

He spoke with dramat conviction, gaze hard at me as though to 
enforc hi meaning, and then move forward and began to pick hi way 
over the rough, tussocki ground into the wood. and meanwhile, know 
the efficaci of hi prescription, I adopt it to the best of my 
ability. 

the tree at onc close about us like the night. their branch met 
overhead in a continu tangle, their stem crept closer and closer, 
the brambl undergrowth thicken and multiplied. We tore our trousers, 
scratch our hands, and our eye fill with fine dust that made it 
most difficult to avoid the clinging, prickli network of branch and 
creepers. coars white grass that caught our feet like string grew here 
and there in patches. It crown the lump of peati growth that stuck 
up like human heads, fantast dressed, thrust up at us out of 
the ground with crest of dead hair. We stumbl and flounder among 
them. It wa hard going, and I could well conceiv it imposs to 
find a way at all in the night-time. We jumped, when possible, from 
tussock to tussock, and it seem as though we were spring among 
head on a battlefield, and that thi dead white grass conceal eye 
that turn to stare as we passed. 

here and there the sunlight shot in with vivid spot of white light, 
dazzl the sight, but onli make the surround gloom deeper by 
contrast and on two occas we pass dark circular place in the 
grass where fire had eaten their mark and left a ring of ashes. dr. 
silenc point to them, but without comment and without pausing, and 
the sight of them woke in me a singular realis of the dread that 
lay so far onli just out of sight in thi adventure. 

It wa exhaust work, and heavi going. We kept close together. the 
warmth, too, wa extraordinary. yet it did not seem the warmth of the 
bodi due to violent exertion, but rather an inner heat of the mind that 
laid glow hand of fire upon the heart and set the brain in a kind 
of steadi blaze. when my companion found himself too far in advance, 
he wait for me to come up. the place had evid been untouch by 
hand of man, keeper, forest or sportsman, for mani a year; and my 
thoughts, as we advanc painfully, were not unlik the state of the 
wood itself--dark, confused, full of a haunt wonder and the shadow 
of fear. 

By thi time all sign of the open field behind us were hid. No 
singl gleam penetrated. We might have been grope in the heart of 
some primev forest. then, suddenly, the brambl and tussock and 
string-lik grass came to an end; the tree open out; and the ground 
began to slope upward toward a larg central mound. We had reach 
the middl of the plantation, and befor us stood the broken druid 
stone our host had mentioned. We walk easili up the littl hill, 
between the sparser stems, and, rest upon one of the ivy-cov 
boulders, look round upon a compar open space, as large, 
perhaps, as a small london square. 

think of the ceremoni and sacrific thi rough circl of 
prehistor monolith might have witnessed, I look up into my 
companion’ face with an unspoken question. but he read my thought and 
shook hi head. 

“our mysteri ha noth to do with these dead symbols,” he said, 
“but with someth perhap even more ancient, and of anoth countri 
altogether.” 

“egypt?” I said half under my breath, hopelessli puzzled, but recal 
hi word in my bedroom. 

He nodded. mental I still floundered, but he seem intens 
preoccupi and it wa no time for ask questions; so while hi word 
circl unintellig in my mind I look round at the scene befor 
me, glad of the opportun to recov breath and some measur of 
composure. but hardli had I time to notic the twist and contort 
shape of mani of the pine tree close at hand when dr. silenc lean 
over and touch me on the shoulder. He point down the slope. and the 
look I saw in hi eye key up everi nerv in my bodi to it utmost 
pitch. 

A thin, almost impercept column of blue smoke wa rise among the 
tree some twenti yard away at the foot of the mound. It curl up and 
up, and disappear from sight among the tangl branch overhead. It 
wa scarc thicker than the smoke from a small brand of burn wood. 

“protect yourself! imagin your shell strongly,” whisper the doctor 
sharply, “and follow me closely.” 

He rose at onc and move swiftli down the slope toward the smoke, 
and I followed, afraid to remain alone. I heard the soft crunch of 
our step on the pine needles. over hi shoulder I watch the thin 
blue spiral, without onc take my eye off it. I hardli know how 
to describ the peculiar sens of vagu horror inspir in me by the 
sight of that streak of smoke pencil it way upward among the 
dark trees. and the sensat of increas heat as we approach wa 
phenomenal. It wa like walk toward a glow yet invis fire. 

As we drew nearer hi pace slackened. then he stop and pointed, and 
I saw a small circl of burnt grass upon the ground. the tussock were 
blacken and smouldering, and from the centr rose thi line of smoke, 
pale, blue, steady. then I notic a movement of the atmospher besid 
us, as if the warm air were rise and the cooler air rush in to 
take it place: a littl centr of wind in the stillness. overhead the 
bough stir and trembl where the smoke disappeared. otherwise, not 
a tree sighed, not a sound made itself heard. the wood wa still as a 
graveyard. A horribl idea came to me that the cours of natur wa 
about to chang without warning, _had_ chang a littl already, that 
the sky would drop, or the surfac of the earth crash inward like a 
broken bubble. something, certainly, reach up to the citadel of my 
reason, caus it throne to shake. 

john silenc move forward again. I could not see hi face, but hi 
attitud wa plainli one of resolution, of muscl and mind readi for 
vigor action. We were within ten feet of the blacken circl when 
the smoke of a sudden ceas to rise, and vanished. the tail of the 
column disappear in the air above, and at the same instant it seem 
to me that the sensat of heat pass from my face, and the motion 
of the wind wa gone. the calm spirit of the fresh octob day resum 
command. 

side by side we advanc and examin the place. the grass wa 
smouldering, the ground still hot. the circl of burn earth wa a 
foot to a foot and a half in diameter. It look like an ordinari 
picnic fire-place. I bent down cautious to look, but in a second 
I sprang back with an involuntari cri of alarm, for, as the doctor 
stamp on the ash to prevent them spreading, a sound of hiss rose 
from the spot as though he had kick a live creature. thi hiss 
wa faintli audibl in the air. It move past us, away toward the 
thicker portion of the wood in the direct of our field, and in a 
second dr. silenc had left the fire and start in pursuit. 

and then began the most extraordinari hunt of invis I can ever 
conceive. 

He went fast even at the beginning, and, of course, it wa perfectli 
obviou that he wa follow something. To judg by the pois of hi 
head he kept hi eye steadili at a certain level--just abov the 
height of a man--and the consequ wa he stumbl a good deal over 
the rough of the ground. the hiss sound had stopped. there wa 
no sound of ani kind, and what he saw to follow wa utterli beyond me. 
I onli know, that in mortal dread of be left behind, and with a 
bite curios to see whatev there wa to be seen, I follow as 
quickli as I could, and even then bare succeed in keep up with 
him. 

and, as we went, the whole mad jumbl of the colonel’ stori ran 
through my brain, touch a sens of frighten laughter that wa onli 
held in check by the sight of thi earnest, hurri figur befor me. 
for john silenc at work inspir me with a kind of awe. He look 
so diminut among these giant twist trees, while yet I knew that 
hi purpos and hi knowledg were so great, and even in hurri he wa 
dignified. the fanci that we were play some queer, exagger game 
togeth met the fact that we were two men danc upon the brink of 
some possibl tragedy, and the mingl of the two emot in my mind 
wa both grotesqu and terrifying. 

He never turn in hi mad chase, but push rapidli on, while I pant 
after him like a figur in some unreason nightmare. and, as I ran, 
it came upon me that he had been awar all the time, in hi quiet, 
intern way, of mani thing that he had kept for hi own secret 
consideration; he had been watching, waiting, plan from the veri 
moment we enter the shade of the wood. By some inner, concentr 
process of mind, dynam if not actual magical, he had been in direct 
contact with the sourc of the whole adventure, the veri essenc of the 
real mystery. and now the forc were move to a climax. someth 
wa about to happen, someth important, someth possibl dreadful. 
everi nerve, everi sense, everi signific gestur of the plung 
figur befor me proclaim the fact just as sure as the skies, the 
winds, and the face of the earth tell the bird the time to migrat and 
warn the anim that danger lurk and they must move. 

In a few moment we reach the foot of the mound and enter the 
tangl undergrowth that lay between us and the sunlight of the field. 
here the difficulti of fast travel increas a hundredfold. there 
were brambl to dodge, low bough to dive under, and countless tree 
trunk close up to make a direct path impossible. yet dr. silenc 
never seem to falter or hesitate. He went, diving, jumping, dodging, 
ducking, but ever in the same main direction, follow a clean trail. 
twice I trip and fell, and both times, when I pick myself up 
again, I saw him ahead of me, still forc a way like a dog after 
it quarry. and sometimes, like a dog, he stop and pointed--human 
point it was, psychic pointing,--and each time he stop to point I 
heard that faint high hiss in the air beyond us. the instinct of an 
infal dowser possess him, and he made no mistakes. 

At length, abruptly, I caught up with him, and found that we stood 
at the edg of the shallow pond colonel wragg had mention in hi 
account the night before. It wa long and narrow, fill with dark 
brown water, in which the tree were dimli reflected. not a rippl 
stir it surface. 

“watch!” he cri out, as I came up. “it’ go to cross. it’ bound 
to betray itself. the water is it natur enemy, and we shall see the 
direction.” 

and, even as he spoke, a thin line like the track of a water-spider, 
shot swiftli across the shini surface; there wa a ghost of steam in 
the air above; and immedi I becam awar of an odour of burning. 

dr. silenc turn and shot a glanc at me that made me think of 
lightning. I began to shake all over. 

“quick!” he cri with excitement, “to the trail again! We must run 
round. it’ go to the house!” 

the alarm in hi voic quit terrifi me. without a fals step I 
dash round the slipperi bank and dive again at hi heel into the 
sea of bush and tree trunks. We were now in the thick of the veri 
dens belt that ran round the outer edg of the plantation, and the 
field wa near; yet so dark wa the tangl that it wa some time befor 
the first shaft of white sunlight becam visible. the doctor now ran 
in zigzags. He wa follow someth that dodg and doubl quit 
wonderfully, yet had begun, I fancied, to move more slowli than before. 

“quick!” he cried. “in the light we shall lose it!” 

I still saw nothing, heard nothing, caught no suggest of a trail; 
yet thi man, guid by some interior divin that seem infallible, 
made no fals turns, though how we fail to crash headlong into the 
tree ha remain a mysteri to me ever since. and then, with a sudden 
rush, we found ourselv on the skirt of the wood with the open field 
lie in bright sunshin befor our eyes. 

“too late!” I heard him cry, a note of anguish in hi voice. “it’ 
out--and, by god, it’ make for the house!” 

I saw the colonel stand in the field with hi dog where we had left 
him. He wa bend double, peer into the wood where he heard us 
running, and he straighten up like a bent whip released. john silenc 
dash passed, call him to follow. 

“we shall lose the trail in the light,” I heard him cri as he ran. “but 
quick! We may yet get there in time!” 

that wild rush across the open field, with the dog at our heels, 
leap and barking, and the elderli colonel behind us run as 
though for hi life, shall I ever forget it? though I had onli vagu 
idea of the mean of it all, I put my best foot forward, and, be 
the youngest of the three, I reach the hous an easi first. I drew 
up, panting, and turn to wait for the others. but, as I turned, 
someth move a littl distanc away caught my eye, and in that 
moment I swear I experienc the most overwhelm and singular shock 
of surpris and terror I have ever known, or can conceiv as possible. 

for the front door wa open, and the waist of the hous be narrow, I 
could see through the hall into the dining-room beyond, and so out on 
to the back lawn, and there I saw no less a sight than the figur of 
miss wragge--running. even at that distanc it wa plain that she had 
seen me, and wa come fast toward me, run with the frantic gait 
of a terror-stricken woman. she had recov the use of her legs. 

her face wa a livid grey, as of death itself, but the gener 
express wa one of laughter, for her mouth wa gaping, and her eyes, 
alway bright shone with the light of a wild merriment that seem the 
merriment of a child, yet wa singularli ghastly. and that veri second, 
as she fled past me into her brother’ arm behind, I smelt again most 
unmistak the odour of burning, and to thi day the smell of smoke 
and fire can come veri near to turn me sick with the memori of what 
I had seen. 

fast on her heels, too, came the terrifi attendant, more mistress of 
herself, and abl to speak--which the old ladi could not do--but with a 
face almost, if not quite, as fearful. 

“we were down by the bush in the sun,”--sh gasp and scream in 
repli to colonel wragge’ distract questionings,--“i wa wheel the 
chair as usual when she shriek and leaped--i don’t know exactly--i 
wa too frighten to see--oh, my god! she jump clean out of the 
chair--_and ran!_ there wa a blast of hot air from the wood, and she 
hid her face and jumped. she didn’t make a sound--sh didn’t cri out, 
or make a sound. she just ran.” 

but the nightmar horror of it all reach the break point a few 
minut later, and while I wa still stand in the hall temporarili 
bereft of speech and movement; for while the doctor, the colonel and 
the attend were half-way up the staircase, help the faint 
woman to the privaci of her room, and all in a confus group of dark 
figures, there sound a voic behind me, and I turn to see the 
butler, hi face drip with perspiration, hi eye start out of 
hi head. 

“the laundry’ on fire!” he cried; “the laundri building’ a-caught!” 

I rememb hi odd express “a-caught,” and want to laugh, but 
find my face rigid and inflexible. 

“the devil’ about again, s’help me gawd!” he cried, in a voic thin 
with terror, run about in circles. 

and then the group on the stair scatter as at the sound of a shot, 
and the colonel and dr. silenc came down three step at a time, 
leav the afflict miss wragg to the care of her singl attendant. 

We were out across the front lawn in a moment and round the corner 
of the house, the colonel leading, silenc and I at hi heels, and 
the portli butler puf some distanc in the rear, get more and 
more mix in hi address to god and the devil; and the moment we 
pass the stabl and came into view of the laundri building, we saw a 
wicked-look volum of smoke pour out of the narrow windows, and 
the frighten women-serv and groom run hither and thither, 
call aloud as they ran. 

the arriv of the master restor order instantly, and thi retir 
soldier, poor thinker perhaps, but capabl man of action, had the 
matter in hand from the start. He issu order like a martinet, and, 
almost befor I could realis it, there were stream bucket on the 
scene and a line of men and women form between the build and the 
stabl pump. 

“inside,” I heard john silenc cry, and the colonel follow him 
through the door, while I wa just quick enough at their heel to hear 
him add, “the smoke’ the worst part of it. there’ no fire yet, I 
think.” 

and, true enough, there wa no fire. the interior wa thick with smoke, 
but it speedili clear and not a singl bucket wa use upon the floor 
or walls. the air wa stifling, the heat fearful. 

“there’ preciou littl to burn in here; it’ all stone,” the colonel 
exclaimed, coughing. but the doctor wa point to the wooden cover 
of the great cauldron in which the cloth were washed, and we saw that 
these were smoulder and charred. and when we sprinkl half a bucket 
of water on them the surround brick hiss and fizz and sent up 
cloud of steam. through the open door and window thi pass out with 
the rest of the smoke, and we three stood there on the brick floor 
stare at the spot and wondering, each in our own fashion, how in the 
name of natur law the place could have caught fire or smoke at all. 
and each wa silent--myself from sheer incapac and befuddlement, the 
colonel from the quiet pluck that face all thing yet speak little, 
and john silenc from the intens mental grappl with thi latest 
manifest of a profound problem that call for concentr of 
thought rather than for ani words. 

there wa realli noth to say. the fact were indisputable. 

colonel wragg wa the first to utter. 

“mi sister,” he said briefly, and move off. In the yard I heard him 
send the frighten servant about their busi in an excel 
matter-of-fact voice, scold some one roundli for make such a big 
fire and let the flue get over-heated, and pay no heed to the 
stammer repli that no fire had been lit there for sever days. then 
he dispatch a groom on horseback for the local doctor. 

then dr. silenc turn and look at me. the absolut control he 
possessed, not onli over the outward express of emot by gesture, 
chang of colour, light in the eyes, and so forth, but also, as I well 
knew, over it veri birth in hi heart, the mask-lik face of the dead 
he could assum at will, made it extrem difficult to know at ani 
given moment what wa at work in hi inner consciousness. but now, when 
he turn and look at me, there wa no sphinx-express there, but 
rather the keen, triumphant face of a man who had solv a danger 
and complic problem, and saw hi way to a clean victory. 

“_now_ do you guess?” he ask quietly, as though it were the simplest 
matter in the world, and ignor were impossible. 

I could onli stare stupidli and remain silent. He glanc down at the 
char cauldron-lids, and trace a figur in the air with hi finger. 
but I wa too excited, or too mortified, or still too dazed, perhaps, 
to see what it wa he outlined, or what it wa he meant to convey. I 
could onli go on stare and shake my puzzl head. 

“A fire-elemental,” he cried, “a fire-element of the most power 
and malign kind----” 

“A what?” thunder the voic of colonel wragg behind us, have 
return suddenli and overheard. 

“it’ a fire-elemental,” repeat dr. silenc more calmly, but 
with a note of triumph in hi voic he could not keep out, “and a 
fire-element enraged.” 

the light began to dawn in my mind at last. but the colonel--who had 
never heard the term before, and wa besid feel consider 
worked-up for a plain man with all thi mysteri he knew not how to 
grappl with--th colonel stood, with the most dumfound look ever 
seen on a human countenance, and continu to roar, and stammer, and 
stare. 

“and why,” he began, savag with the desir to find someth visibl 
he could fight--“why, in the name of all the blazes----?” and then 
stop as john silenc move up and took hi arm. 

“there, my dear colonel wragge,” he said gently, “you touch the heart 
of the whole thing. you ask ‘why.’ that is precis our problem.” He 
held the soldier’ eye firmli with hi own. “and that, too, I think, 
we shall soon know. come and let us talk over a plan of action--that 
room with the doubl doors, perhaps.” 

the word “action” calm him a little, and he led the way, without 
further speech, back into the house, and down the long stone passag to 
the room where we had heard hi stori on the night of our arrival. 
I understood from the doctor’ glanc that my presenc would not make 
the interview easier for our host, and I went upstair to my own 
room--shaking. 

but in the solitud of my room the vivid memori of the last hour 
reviv so mercilessli that I began to feel I should never in my whole 
life lose the dread pictur of miss wragg running--that dread 
human climax after all the non-human mysteri in the wood--and I wa not 
sorri when a servant knock at my door and said that colonel wragg 
would be glad if I would join them in the littl smoking-room. 

“I think it is better you should be present,” wa all colonel wragg 
said as I enter the room. I took the chair with my back to the 
window. there wa still an hour befor lunch, though I imagin that 
the usual divis of the day hardli found a place in the thought of 
ani one of us. 

the atmospher of the room wa what I might call electric. the colonel 
wa posit bristling; he stood with hi back to the fire, finger 
an unlit black cigar, hi face flushed, hi be obvious rous 
and readi for action. He hate thi mystery. It wa poison to hi 
nature, and he long to meet someth face to face--someth he 
could gaug and fight. dr. silence, I notic at once, wa sit 
befor the map of the estat which wa spread upon a table. I knew 
by hi express the state of hi mind. He wa in the thick of it 
all, knew it, delight in it, and wa work at high pressure. He 
recognis my presenc with a lift eyelid, and the flash of the eye, 
contrast with hi still and composure, told me volumes. 

“I wa about to explain to our host briefli what seem to me afoot in 
all thi business,” he said without look up, “when he ask that you 
should join us so that we can all work together.” and, while signifi 
my assent, I caught myself wonder what qualiti it wa in the calm 
speech of thi undemonstr man that wa so full of power, so 
charg with the strange, viril person behind it, and that seem 
to inspir us with hi own confid as by a process of radiation. 

“mr. hubbard,” he went on gravely, turn to the soldier, “know 
someth of my methods, and in more than one--er--interest 
situat ha prove of assistance. what we want now”--and here he 
suddenli got up and took hi place on the mat besid the colonel, and 
look hard at him--“i men who have self-control, who are sure of 
themselves, whose mind at the critic moment will emit posit 
forces, instead of the waver and uncertain current due to neg 
feelings--due, for instance, to fear.” 

He look at us each in turn. colonel wragg move hi feet farther 
apart, and squar hi shoulders; and I felt guilti but said nothing, 
consciou that my latent store of courag wa be deliber haul 
to the front. He wa wind me up like a clock. 

“so that, in what is yet to come,” continu our leader, “each of us 
will contribut hi share of power, and ensur success for my plan.” 

“i’m not afraid of anyth I can _see_,” said the colonel bluntly. 

“i’m ready,” I heard myself say, as it were automatically, “for 
anything,” and then added, feel the declar wa lame 
insufficient, “and everything.” 

dr. silenc left the mat and began walk to and fro about the room, 
both hand plung deep into the pocket of hi shooting-jacket. 
tremend vital stream from him. I never took my eye off the 
small, move figure; small, yes,--and yet somehow make me think of 
a giant plot the destruct of worlds. and hi manner wa gentle, 
as always, sooth almost, and hi word utter quietli without 
emphasi or emotion. most of what he said wa addressed, though not too 
obviously, to the colonel. 

“the violenc of thi sudden attack,” he said softly, pace to and 
fro beneath the bookcas at the end of the room, “i due, of course, 
partli to the fact that to-night the moon is at the full”--her he 
glanc at me for a moment--“and partli to the fact that we have all 
been so deliber concentr upon the matter. our thinking, our 
investigation, ha stir it into unusu activity. I mean that the 
intellig forc behind these manifest ha realis that some 
one is busi about it destruction. and it is now on the defensive: 
more, it is aggressive.” 

“but ‘it’--what is ‘it’?” began the soldier, fuming. “what, in the name 
of all that’ dreadful, _is_ a fire-elemental?” 

“I cannot give you at thi moment,” repli dr. silence, turn to 
him, but undisturb by the interruption, “a lectur on the natur and 
histori of magic, but can onli say that an element is the activ 
forc behind the elements,--wheth earth, air, water, _or fire_,--it 
is imperson in it essenti nature, but can be focused, personified, 
ensouled, so to say, by those who know how--bi magicians, if you 
will--for certain purpos of their own, much in the same way that 
steam and electr can be har by the practic man of thi 
century. 

“alone, these blind element energi can accomplish little, but 
govern and direct by the train will of a power manipul 
they may becom potent activ for good or evil. they are the basi 
of all magic, and it is the motiv behind them that constitut the 
magic ‘black’ or ‘white’; they can be the vehicl of curs or of 
blessings, for a curs is noth more than the thought of a violent 
will perpetuated. and in such cases--cas like this--th conscious, 
direct will of the mind that is use the element stand alway 
behind the phenomena----” 

“you think that my brother----!” broke in the colonel, aghast. 

“ha noth whatev to do with it--directly. the fire-element that 
ha here been torment you and your household wa sent upon it 
mission long befor you, or your family, or your ancestors, or even the 
nation you belong to--unless I am much mistaken--wa even in existence. 
We will come to that a littl later; after the experi I propos to 
make we shall be more positive. At present I can onli say we have to 
deal now, not onli with the phenomenon of attack fire merely, but 
with the vindict and enrag intellig that is direct it from 
behind the scenes--vindict and enraged,”--h repeat the words. 

“that explains----” began colonel wragge, seek furious for word 
he could not find quickli enough. 

“much,” said john silence, with a gestur to restrain him. 

He stop a moment in the middl of hi walk, and a deep silenc 
came down over the littl room. through the window the sunlight 
seem less bright, the long line of dark hill less friendly, make 
me think of a vast wave tower to heaven and about to break and 
overwhelm us. someth formid had crept into the world about us. 
for, undoubtedly, there wa a disquiet thought, hold terror as 
well as awe, in the pictur hi word conjur up: the concept of a 
human will reach it deathless hand, spite and destructive, down 
through the ages, to strike the live and afflict the innocent. 

“but what _is_ it object?” burst out the soldier, unabl to restrain 
himself longer in the silence. “whi doe it come from that plantation? 
and whi should it attack us, or ani one in particular?” question 
began to pour from him in a stream. 

“all in good time,” the doctor answer quietly, have let him run 
on for sever minutes. “but I must first discov posit what, 
or who, it is that direct thi particular fire-elemental. and, to 
do that, we must first”--h spoke with slow deliberation--“seek to 
capture--to confin by visibility--to limit it sphere in a concret 
form.” 

“good heaven almighty!” exclaim the soldier, mix hi word in hi 
unfeign surprise. 

“quit so,” pursu the other calmly; “for in so do I think we 
can releas it from the purpos that bind it, restor it to it 
normal condit of latent fire, and also”--h lower hi voic 
perceptibly--“also discov the face and form of the be that ensoul 
it.” 

“the man behind the gun!” cri the colonel, begin to understand 
something, and lean forward so as not to miss a singl syllable. 

“I mean that in the last resort, befor it return to the womb of 
potenti fire, it will probabl assum the face and figur of it 
director, of the man of magic knowledg who origin bound it with 
hi incant and sent it forth upon it mission of centuries.” 

the soldier sat down and gasp openli in hi face, breath hard; but 
it wa a veri subdu voic that frame the question. 

“and how do you propos to make it visible? how captur and confin it? 
what d’ye mean, dr. john silence?” 

“bi furnish it with the materi for a form. By the process of 
materialis simply. onc limit by dimensions, it will becom 
slow, heavy, visible. We can then dissip it. invis fire, you 
see, is danger and incalculable; lock up in a form we can perhap 
manag it. We must betray it--to it death.” 

“and thi material?” we ask in the same breath, although I think I 
had alreadi guessed. 

“not pleasant, but effective,” came the quiet reply; “the exhal 
of freshly-spil blood.” 

“not human blood!” cri colonel wragge, start up from hi chair 
with a voic like an explosion. I thought hi eye would start from 
their sockets. 

the face of dr. silenc relax in spite of himself, and hi 
spontan littl laugh brought a welcom though momentari relief. 

“the day of human sacrifice, I hope, will never come again,” he 
explained. “anim blood will answer the purpose, and we can make the 
experi as pleasant as possible. only, the blood must be freshli 
spill and strong with the vital eman that attract thi peculiar 
class of element creature. perhaps--perhap if some pig on the estat 
is readi for the market----” 

He turn to hide a smile; but the pass touch of comedi found 
no echo in the mind of our host, who did not understand how to 
chang quickli from one emot to another. clearli he wa debat 
mani thing labori in hi honest brain. but, in the end, the 
earnest and scientif disinterested of the doctor, whose 
influenc over him wa alreadi veri great, won the day, and he 
present look up more calmly, and observ shortli that he thought 
perhap the matter could be arranged. 

“there are other and pleasant methods,” dr. silenc went on to 
explain, “but they requir time and preparation, and thing have gone 
much too far, in my opinion, to admit of delay. and the process need 
caus you no distress: we sit round the bowl and await results. noth 
more. the eman of blood--which, as levi says, is the first 
incarn of the univers fluid--furnish the materi out of which 
the creatur of discarn life, spirit if you prefer, can fashion 
themselv a temporari appearance. the process is old, and lie at 
the root of all blood sacrifice. It wa known to the priest of baal, 
and it is known to the modern ecstasi dancer who cut themselv to 
produc object phantom who danc with them. and the least gift 
clairvoy could tell you that the form to be seen in the vicin of 
slaughterhouses, or hover abov the desert battlefield, are--well, 
simpli beyond all description. I do not mean,” he added, notic the 
uneasi fidget of hi host, “that anyth in our laundry-experi 
need appear to terrifi us, for thi case seem a compar simpl 
one, and it is onli the vindict charact of the intellig 
direct thi fire-element that caus anxieti and make for 
person danger.” 

“it is curious,” said the colonel, with a sudden rush of words, 
draw a deep breath, and as though speak of thing distast 
to him, “that dure my year among the hill tribe of northern india 
I came across--person came across--inst of the sacrific of 
blood to certain deiti be stop suddenly, and all manner of 
disast happen until they were resumed. fire broke out in the 
huts, and even on the clothes, of the natives--and--and I admit I 
have read, in the cours of my studies,”--h made a gestur toward 
hi book and heavili laden table,--“of the yezidi of syria evok 
phantom by mean of cut their bodi with knive dure their 
whirl dances--enorm globe of fire which turn into monstrou 
and terribl forms--and I rememb an account somewhere, too, how the 
emaci form and pallid counten of the spectres, that appear 
to the emperor julian, claim to be the true immortals, and told him 
to renew the sacrific of blood ‘for the fume of which, sinc the 
establish of christianity, they had been pining’--that these were 
in realiti the phantom evok by the rite of blood.” 

both dr. silenc and myself listen in amazement, for thi sudden 
speech wa so unexpected, and betray so much more knowledg than we 
had either of us suspect in the old soldier. 

“then perhap you have read, too,” said the doctor, “how the cosmic 
deiti of savag races, element in their nature, have been kept 
aliv through mani age by these blood rites?” 

“no,” he answered; “that is new to me.” 

“in ani case,” dr. silenc added, “I am glad you are not wholli 
unfamiliar with the subject, for you will now bring more sympathy, and 
therefor more help, to our experiment. for, of course, in thi case, 
we onli want the blood to tempt the creatur from it lair and enclos 
it in a form----” 

“I quit understand. and I onli hesit just now,” he went on, 
hi word come much more slowly, as though he felt he had alreadi 
said too much, “becaus I wish to be quit sure it wa no mere 
curiosity, but an actual sens of necess that dictat thi horribl 
experiment.” 

“it is your safety, and that of your household, and of your sister, 
that is at stake,” repli the doctor. “onc I have _seen_, I hope to 
discov whenc thi element comes, and what it real purpos is.” 

colonel wragg signifi hi assent with a bow. 

“and the moon will help us,” the other said, “for it will be full in 
the earli hour of the morning, and thi kind of elemental-b is 
alway most activ at the period of full moon. hence, you see, the clue 
furnish by your diary.” 

So it wa final settled. colonel wragg would provid the materi 
for the experiment, and we were to meet at midnight. how he would 
contriv at that hour--but that wa hi business. I onli know we 
both realis that he would keep hi word, and whether a pig die at 
midnight, or at noon, wa after all perhap onli a question of the 
sleep and person comfort of the executioner. 

“to-night, then, in the laundry,” said dr. silenc finally, to clinch 
the plan; “we three alone--and at midnight, when the household is 
asleep and we shall be free from disturbance.” 

He exchang signific glanc with our host, who, at that moment, 
wa call away by the announc that the famili doctor had arrived, 
and wa readi to see him in hi sister’ room. 

for the remaind of the afternoon john silenc disappeared. I had my 
suspicion that he made a secret visit to the plantat and also to 
the laundri building; but, in ani case, we saw noth of him, and 
he kept strictli to himself. He wa prepar for the night, I felt 
sure, but the natur of hi prepar I could onli guess. there wa 
movement in hi room, I heard, and an odour like incens hung about the 
door, and know that he regard rite as the vehicl of energies, 
my guess were probabl not far wrong. 

colonel wragge, too, remain absent the greater part of the afternoon, 
and, deepli afflicted, had scarc left hi sister’ bedside, but in 
respons to my inquiri when we met for a moment at tea-time, he told me 
that although she had moment of attempt speech, her talk wa quit 
incoher and hysterical, and she wa still quit unabl to explain 
the natur of what she had seen. the doctor, he said, fear she had 
recov the use of her limbs, onli to lose that of her memory, and 
perhap even of her mind. 

“then the recoveri of her legs, I trust, may be permanent, at ani 
rate,” I ventured, find it difficult to know what sympathi to offer. 
and he repli with a curiou short laugh, “oh yes; about that there 
can be no doubt whatever.” 

and it wa due mere to the chanc of my overhear a fragment of 
conversation--unwillingly, of course--that a littl further light wa 
thrown upon the state in which the old ladi actual lay. for, as I 
came out of my room, it happen that colonel wragg and the doctor 
were go downstair together, and their word float up to my ear 
befor I could make my presenc known by so much as a cough. 

“then you must find a way,” the doctor wa say with decision; “for 
I cannot insist too strongli upon that--and at all cost she must be 
kept quiet. these attempt to go out must be prevented--if necessary, 
by force. thi desir to visit some wood or other she keep talk 
about is, of course, hyster in nature. It cannot be permit for a 
moment.” 

“it shall not be permitted,” I heard the soldier reply, as they reach 
the hall below. 

“it ha impress her mind for some reason----” the doctor went on, by 
way evid of sooth explanation, and then the distanc made it 
imposs for me to hear more. 

At dinner dr. silenc wa still absent, on the public plea of a 
headache, and though food wa sent to hi room, I am inclin to 
believ he did not touch it, but spent the entir time fasting. 

We retir early, desir that the household should do likewise, and 
I must confess that at ten o’clock when I bid my host a temporari 
good-night, and sought my room to make what mental prepar I could, 
I realis in no veri pleasant fashion that it wa a singular and 
formid assignation, thi midnight meet in the laundri building, 
and that there were moment in everi adventur of life when a wise 
man, and one who knew hi own limitations, owe it to hi digniti 
to withdraw discreetly. and, but for the charact of our leader, I 
probabl should have then and there offer the best excus I could 
think of, and have allow myself quietli to fall asleep and wait for 
an excit stori in the morn of what had happened. but with a man 
like john silence, such a laps wa out of the question, and I sat 
befor my fire count the minut and do everyth I could think 
of to fortifi my resolut and fasten my will at the point where I 
could be reason sure that my self-control would hold against all 
attack of men, devils, or elementals. 


iii 

At a quarter befor midnight, clad in a heavi ulster, and with 
slipper feet, I crept cautious from my room and stole down the 
passag to the top of the stairs. outsid the doctor’ door I wait 
a moment to listen. all wa still; the hous in utter darkness; no 
gleam of light beneath ani door; only, down the length of the corridor, 
from the direct of the sick-room, came faint sound of laughter 
and incoher talk that were not thing to reassur a mind alreadi 
half a-tremble, and I made hast to reach the hall and let myself out 
through the front door into the night. 

the air wa keen and frosty, perfum with night smells, and 
exquisit fresh; all the million candl of the sky were alight, and 
a faint breez rose and fell with far-away sigh in the top of the 
pine trees. My blood leap for a moment in the spacious of the 
night, for the splendid star brought courage; but the next instant, 
as I turn the corner of the house, move stealthili down the gravel 
drive, my spirit sank again ominously. for, yonder, over the funer 
plume of the twelv acr plantation, I saw the huge and yellow face 
of the full moon just rise in the east, stare down like some vast 
be come to watch upon the progress of our doom. seen through the 
distort vapour of the earth’ atmosphere, her face look weirdli 
unfamiliar, her usual express of benign vacanc somehow a-twist. 
I slip along by the shadow of the wall, keep my eye upon the 
ground. 

the laundry-house, as alreadi described, stood detach from the other 
offices, with laurel shrubberi crowd thickli behind it, and the 
kitchen-garden so close on the other side that the strong smell of 
soil and grow thing came across almost heavily. the shadow of the 
haunt plantation, huge lengthen by the rise moon behind them, 
reach to the veri wall and cover the stone tile of the roof with 
a dark pall. So keenli were my sens alert at thi moment that I 
believ I could fill a chapter with the endless small detail of the 
impress I received--shadows, odour, shapes, sounds--in the space of 
the few second I stood and wait befor the close wooden door. 

then I becam awar of some one move toward me through the 
moonlight, and the figur of john silence, without overcoat and 
bareheaded, came quickli and without nois to join me. hi eyes, I saw 
at once, were wonder bright, and so mark wa the shine pallor 
of hi face that I could hardli tell when he pass from the moonlight 
into the shade. 

He pass without a word, beckon me to follow, and then push the 
door open, and went in. 

the chill air of the place met us like that of an underground vault; 
and the brick floor and whitewash walls, streak with damp and 
smoke, threw back the cold in our faces. directli opposit gape the 
black throat of the huge open fireplace, the ash of wood fire 
still pile and scatter about the hearth, and on either side of 
the project chimney-column were the deep recess hold the big 
twin cauldron for boil clothes. upon the lid of these cauldron 
stood the two littl oil lamps, shade red, which gave all the light 
there was, and immedi in front of the fireplac there wa a small 
circular tabl with three chair set about it. overhead, the narrow 
slit windows, high up the walls, point to a dim network of wooden 
rafter half lost among the shadows, and then came the dark vault of 
the roof. cheerless and unalluring, for all the red light, it certainli 
was, remind me of some unus conventicle, bare of pew or pulpit, 
ugli and severe, and I wa forcibl struck by the contrast between the 
normal use to which the place wa ordinarili put, and the strang and 
mediæv purpos which had brought us under it roof to-night. 

possibl an involuntari shudder ran over me, for my companion turn 
with a confid look to reassur me, and he wa so complet master 
of himself that I at onc absorb from hi abundance, and felt the 
chink of my fail courag begin to close up. To meet hi eye in 
the presenc of danger wa like find a mental rail that guid 
and support thought along the giddi edg of alarm. 

“I am quit ready,” I whispered, turn to listen for approach 
footsteps. 

He nodded, still keep hi eye on mine. our whisper sound hollow 
as they echo overhead among the rafters. 

“i’m glad you are here,” he said. “not all would have the courage. 
keep your thought controlled, and imagin the protect shell round 
you--round your _inner_ being.” 

“i’m all right,” I repeated, curs my chatter teeth. 

He took my hand and shook it, and the contact seem to shake into me 
someth of hi suprem confidence. the eye and hand of a strong man 
can touch the soul. I think he guess my thought, for a pass smile 
flash about the corner of hi mouth. 

“you will feel more comfortable,” he said, in a low tone, “when 
the chain is complete. the colonel we can count on, of course. 
remember, though,” he ad warningly, “he may perhap becom 
controlled--possessed--when the thing comes, becaus he won’t know how 
to resist. and to explain the busi to such a man----!” He shrug 
hi shoulder expressively. “but it will onli be temporary, and I will 
see that no harm come to him.” 

He glanc round at the arrang with approval. 

“red light,” he said, indic the shade lamps, “ha the lowest rate 
of vibration. materialis are dissip by strong light--won’t 
form, or hold together--in rapid vibrations.” 

I wa not sure that I approv altogeth of thi dim light, for in 
complet dark there is someth protective--th knowledg that one 
cannot be seen, probably--which a half-light destroys, but I rememb 
the warn to keep my thought steady, and forbor to give them 
expression. 

there wa a step outside, and the figur of colonel wragg stood in the 
doorway. though enter on tiptoe, he made consider nois and 
clatter, for hi free movement were imped by the burden he carried, 
and we saw a larg yellowish bowl held out at arms’ length from hi 
body, the mouth cover with a white cloth. hi face, I noted, wa 
rigidli composed. he, too, wa master of himself. and, as I thought of 
thi old soldier move through the long seri of alarms, worn with 
watch and weari with assault, unenlighten yet undismayed, even 
down to the dread shock of hi sister’ terror, and still show 
the dog pluck that persist in the face of defeat, I understood what 
dr. silenc meant when he describ him as a man “to be count on.” 

I think there wa noth beyond thi rigid of hi stern features, 
and a certain grey of the complexion, to betray the turmoil of the 
emot that wa doubtless go on within; and the qualiti of these 
two men, each in hi own way, so key me up that, by the time the door 
wa shut and we had exchang silent greetings, all the latent courag 
I possess wa well to the fore, and I felt as sure of myself as I 
knew I ever could feel. 

colonel wragg set the bowl care in the centr of the table. 

“midnight,” he said shortly, glanc at hi watch, and we all three 
move to our chairs. 

there, in the middl of that cold and silent place, we sat, with 
the vile bowl befor us, and a thin, hardli percept steam 
rise through the damp air from the surfac of the white cloth and 
disappear upward the moment it pass beyond the zone of red light 
and enter the deep shadow thrown forward by the project wall of 
chimney. 

the doctor had indic our respect places, and I found myself 
seat with my back to the door and opposit the black hearth. the 
colonel wa on my left, and dr. silenc on my right, both half face 
me, the latter more in shadow than the former. We thu divid the 
littl tabl into even sections, and sit back in our chair we 
await event in silence. 

for someth like an hour I do not think there wa even the faintest 
sound within those four wall and under the canopi of that vault 
roof. our slipper made no scratch on the gritti floor, and our 
breath wa suppress almost to nothing; even the rustl of our 
cloth as we shift from time to time upon our seat wa inaudible. 
silenc smother us absolutely--th silenc of night, of listening, 
the silenc of a haunt expectancy. the veri gurgl of the lamp wa 
too soft to be heard, and if light itself had sound, I do not think we 
should have notic the silveri tread of the moonlight as it enter 
the high narrow window and threw upon the floor the slender trace of 
it pallid footsteps. 

colonel wragg and the doctor, and myself too for that matter, sat thu 
like figur of stone, without speech and without gesture. My eye 
pass in ceaseless journey from the bowl to their faces, and from 
their face to the bowl. they might have been masks, however, for all 
the sign of life they gave; and the light steam from the horrid 
content beneath the white cloth had long ceas to be visible. 

then presently, as the moon rose higher, the wind rose with it. It 
sighed, like the lightest of pass wings, over the roof; it crept 
most softli round the walls; it made the brick floor like ice beneath 
our feet. with it I saw mental the desol moorland flow like 
a sea about the old house, the treeless expans of lone hills, the 
nearer copses, sombre, and mysteri in the night. _the_ plantation, 
too, in particular I saw, and imagin I heard the mourn whisper 
that must now be a-stir among it tree-top as the breez play 
down between the twist stems. In the depth of the room behind us the 
shaft of moonlight met and cross in a grow network. 

It wa after an hour of thi wear and unbroken attention, and I 
should judg about one o’clock in the morning, when the bay of 
the dog in the stable-yard first began, and I saw john silenc move 
suddenli in hi chair and sit up in an attitud of attention. everi 
forc in my be instantli leap into the keenest vigilance. colonel 
wragg move too, though slowly, and without rais hi eye from the 
tabl befor him. 

the doctor stretch hi arm out and took the white cloth from the bowl. 

It wa perhap imagin that persuad me the red glare of the lamp 
grew fainter and the air over the tabl befor us thickened. I had been 
expect someth for so long that the movement of my companions, 
and the lift of the cloth, may easili have caus the momentari 
delus that someth hover in the air befor my face, touch 
the skin of my cheek with a silken run. but it wa certainli not a 
delus that the colonel look up at the same moment and glanc over 
hi shoulder, as though hi eye follow the movement of someth 
to and fro about the room, and that he then button hi overcoat more 
tightli about him and hi eye sought my own face first, and then the 
doctor’s. and it wa no delus that hi face seem somehow to have 
turn dark, becom spread as it were with a shadowi blackness. I saw 
hi lip tighten and hi express grow hard and stern, and it came to 
me then with a rush that, of course, thi man had told us but a part of 
the experi he had been through in the house, and that there wa 
much more he had never been abl to bring himself to reveal at all. 
I felt sure of it. the way he turn and stare about him betray a 
familiar with other thing than those he had describ to us. It wa 
not mere a sight of fire he look for; it wa a sight of someth 
alive, intelligent, someth abl to evad hi searching; it wa _a 
person_. It wa the watch for the ancient be who sought to obsess 
him. 

and the way in which dr. silenc answer hi look--though it wa onli 
by a glanc of subtlest sympathy--confirm my impression. 

“we may be readi now,” I heard him say in a whisper, and I understood 
that hi word were intend as a steadi warning, and brace myself 
mental to the utmost of my power. 

yet long befor colonel wragg had turn to stare about the room, and 
long befor the doctor had confirm my impress that thing were at 
last begin to stir, I had becom awar in most singular fashion 
that the place held more than our three selves. with the rise of the 
wind thi increas to our number had first taken place. the bay of 
the hound almost seem to have signal it. I cannot say how it may 
be possibl to realis that an empti place ha suddenli become--not 
empty, when the new arriv is noth that appeal to ani one of the 
senses; for thi recognit of an “invisible,” as of the chang in the 
balanc of person forc in a human group, is indefin and beyond 
proof. yet it is unmistakable. and I knew perfectli well at what given 
moment the atmospher within these four wall becam charg with the 
presenc of other live be besid ourselves. and, on reflection, 
I am convinc that both my companion knew it too. 

“watch the light,” said the doctor under hi breath, and, then I knew 
too that it wa no fanci of my own that had turn the air darker, and 
the way he turn to examin the face of our host sent an electr 
thrill of wonder and expect shiver along everi nerv in my body. 

yet it wa no kind of terror that I experienced, but rather a sort of 
mental dizziness, and a sensat as of be suspend in some remot 
and dread altitud where thing might happen, inde were about to 
happen, that had never befor happen within the ken of man. horror 
may have form an ingredient, but it wa not chiefli horror, and in no 
sens ghostli horror. 

uncommon thought kept beat on my brain like tini hammers, soft yet 
persistent, seek admission; their unbidden tide began to wash along 
the far fring of my mind, the current of unwont sensat to rise 
over the remot frontier of my consciousness. I wa awar of thoughts, 
and the fantasi of thoughts, that I never knew befor existed. 
portion of my be stir that had never stir before, and thing 
ancient and inexplic rose to the surfac and beckon me to follow. 
I felt as though I were about to fli off, at some immens tangent, 
into an outer space hitherto unknown even in dreams. and so singular 
wa the result produc upon me that I wa uncommonli glad to anchor my 
mind, as well as my eyes, upon the master person of the doctor 
at my side, for there, I realised, I could draw alway upon the forc 
of saniti and safety. 

with a vigor effort of will I return to the scene befor me, and 
tri to focu my attention, with steadier thoughts, upon the table, 
and upon the silent figur seat round it. and then I saw that 
certain chang had come about in the place where we sat. 

the patch of moonlight on the floor, I noted, had becom curious 
shaded; the face of my companion opposit were not so clearli 
visibl as before; and the forehead and cheek of colonel wragg were 
glisten with perspiration. I realis further, that an extraordinari 
chang had come about in the temperatur of the atmosphere. the 
increas warmth had a pain effect, not alon on colonel wragge, but 
upon all of us. It wa oppress and unnatural. We gasp figur 
as well as actually. 

“you are the first to feel it,” said dr. silenc in low tones, look 
across at him. “you are in more intim touch, of course----” 

the colonel wa trembling, and appear to be in consider distress. 
hi knee shook, so that the shuffl of hi slipper feet becam 
audible. He inclin hi head to show that he had heard, but made no 
other reply. I think, even then, he wa sore put to it to keep himself 
in hand. I knew what he wa struggl against. As dr. silenc had 
warn me, he wa about to be obsessed, and wa savagely, though 
vainly, resisting. 

but, meanwhile, a curiou and whirl sens of exhilar began 
to come over me. the increas heat wa delightful, bring a 
sensat of intens activity, of thought pour through the mind 
at high speed, of vivid pictur in the brain, of fierc desir and 
lightn energi aliv in everi part of the body. I wa consciou of 
no physic distress, such as the colonel felt, but onli of a vagu 
feel that it might all grow suddenli too intense--that I might be 
consumed--that my person as well as my body, might becom resolv 
into the flame of pure spirit. I began to live at a speed too intens 
to last. It wa as if a thousand ecstasi besieg me---- 

“steady!” whisper the voic of john silenc in my ear, and I look 
up with a start to see that the colonel had risen from hi chair. the 
doctor rose too. I follow suit, and for the first time saw down into 
the bowl. To my amaz and horror I saw that the content were 
troubled. the blood wa astir with movement. 

the rest of the experi wa wit by us standing. It came, too, 
with a curiou suddenness. there wa no more dreaming, for me at ani 
rate. 

I shall never forget the figur of colonel wragg stand there besid 
me, upright and unshaken, squar plant on hi feet, look about 
him, puzzl beyond belief, yet full of a fight anger. frame by 
the white walls, the red glow of the lamp upon hi stream cheeks, 
hi eye glow against the deathli pallor of hi skin, breath 
hard and make convuls effort of hand and bodi to keep himself 
under control, hi whole be rous to the point of savag fighting, 
yet with noth visibl to get at anywhere--h stood there, immov 
against odds. and the strang contrast of the pale skin and the burn 
face I had never seen before, or wish to seen again. 

but what ha left an even sharper impress on my memori wa the 
black that then began crawl over hi face, obliter the 
features, conceal their human outline, and hide him inch by 
inch from view. thi wa my first realis that the process of 
materialis wa at work. hi visag becam shrouded. I move from 
one side to the other to keep him in view, and it wa onli then I 
understood that, properli speaking, the black wa not upon the 
counten of colonel wragge, but that someth had insert itself 
between me and him, thu screen hi face with the effect of a dark 
veil. someth that appar rose through the floor wa pass 
slowli into the air abov the tabl and abov the bowl. the blood in 
the bowl, moreover, wa consider less than before. 

and, with thi chang in the air befor us, there came at the same 
time a further change, I thought, in the face of the soldier. one-half 
wa turn toward the red lamps, while the other caught the pale 
illumin of the moonlight fall aslant from the high windows, 
so that it wa difficult to estim thi chang with accuraci of 
detail. but it seem to me that, while the features--eyes, nose, 
mouth--remain the same, the life inform them had undergon some 
profound transformation. the signatur of a new power had crept into 
the face and left it trace there--an express dark, and in some 
unexplain way, terrible. 

then suddenli he open hi mouth and spoke, and the sound of thi 
chang voice, deep and music though it was, made me cold and set 
my heart beat with uncomfort rapidity. the being, as he had 
dreaded, wa alreadi in control of hi brain, use hi mouth. 

“I see a black like the black of egypt befor my face,” said 
the tone of thi unknown voic that seem half hi own and half 
another’s. “and out of thi dark they come, they come.” 

I gave a dread start. the doctor turn to look at me for an 
instant, and then turn to centr hi attent upon the figur of our 
host, and I understood in some intuit fashion that he wa there to 
watch over the strangest contest man ever saw--to watch over and, if 
necessary, to protect. 

“he is be controlled--possessed,” he whisper to me through the 
shadows. hi face wore a wonder expression, half triumph, half 
admiration. 

even as colonel wragg spoke, it seem to me that thi visibl 
dark began to increase, pour up thickli out of the ground by 
the hearth, rise up in sheet and veils, shroud our eye and 
faces. It stole up from below--an aw black that seem to drink 
in all the radiat of light in the building, leav noth but 
the ghost of a radianc in their place. then, out of thi rise sea 
of shadows, issu a pale and spectral light that gradual spread 
itself about us, and from the heart of thi light I saw the shape of 
fire crowd and gather. and these were not human shapes, or the shape 
of anyth I recognis as aliv in the world, but outlin of fire 
that trace globes, triangles, crosses, and the lumin bodi of 
variou geometr figures. they grew bright, faded, and then grew 
bright again with an effect almost of pulsation. they pass swiftli 
to and fro through the air, rise and falling, and particularli in 
the immedi neighbourhood of the colonel, often gather about hi 
head and shoulders, and even appear to settl upon him like giant 
insect of flame. they were accompanied, moreover, by a faint sound of 
hissing--th same sound we had heard that afternoon in the plantation. 

“the fire-element that preced their master,” the doctor said in an 
undertone. “be ready.” 

and while thi weird display of the shape of fire altern flash 
and faded, and the hiss echo faintli among the dim rafter 
overhead, we heard the aw voic issu at interv from the lip of 
the afflict soldier. It wa a voic of power, splendid in some way I 
cannot describe, and with a certain sens of majesti in it cadences, 
and, as I listen to it with quickly-b heart, I could fanci it 
wa some ancient voic of time itself, echo down immens corridor 
of stone, from the depth of vast temples, from the veri heart of 
mountain tombs. 

“I have seen my divin father, osiris,” thunder the great tones. “I 
have scatter the gloom of the night. I have burst through the earth, 
and am one with the starri deities!” 

someth grand came into the soldier’ face. He wa stare fixedli 
befor him, as though see nothing. 

“watch,” whisper dr. silenc in my ear, and hi whisper seem to 
come from veri far away. 

again the mouth open and the awesom voic issu forth. 

“thoth,” it boomed, “ha loosen the bandag of set which fetter my 
mouth. I have taken my place in the great wind of heaven.” 

I heard the littl wind of night, with it mourn voic of ages, 
sigh round the wall and over the roof. 

“listen!” came from the doctor at my side, and the thunder of the voic 
continued-- 

“I have hidden myself with you, O ye star that never diminish. I 
rememb my name--in--the--house--of--fire!” 

the voic ceas and the sound die away. someth about the face and 
figur of colonel wragg relaxed, I thought. the terribl look pass 
from hi face. the be that obsess him wa gone. 

“the great ritual,” said dr. silenc asid to me, veri low, “the book 
of the dead. now it’ leav him. soon the blood will fashion it a 
body.” 

colonel wragge, who had stood absolut motionless all thi time, 
suddenli swayed, so that I thought he wa go to fall,--and, but for 
the quick support of the doctor’ arm, he probabl would have fallen, 
for he stagger as in the begin of collapse. 

“I am drunk with the wine of osiris,” he cried,--and it wa half with 
hi own voic thi time--“but horus, the etern watcher, is about my 
path--for--safety.” the voic dwindl and failed, die away into 
someth almost like a cri of distress. 

“now, watch closely,” said dr. silence, speak loud, “for after the 
cri will come the fire!” 

I began to trembl involuntarily; an aw chang had come without 
warn into the air; my leg grew weak as paper beneath my weight and 
I had to support myself by lean on the table. colonel wragge, I 
saw, wa also lean forward with a kind of droop. the shape of fire 
had vanish all, but hi face wa lit by the red lamp and the pale 
shift moonlight rose behind him like mist. 

We were both gaze at the bowl, now almost empty; the colonel stoop 
so low I fear everi minut he would lose hi balanc and drop into 
it; and the shadow, that had so long been in process of forming, now at 
length began to assum materi outlin in the air befor us. 

then john silenc move forward quickly. He took hi place between us 
and the shadow. erect, formidable, absolut master of the situation, I 
saw him stand there, hi face calm and almost smiling, and fire in hi 
eyes. hi protect influenc wa astound and incalculable. even 
the abhorr dread I felt at the sight of the creatur grow into 
life and substanc befor us, lessen in some way so that I wa abl 
to keep my eye fix on the air abov the bowl without too vivid a 
terror. 

but as it took shape, rise out of noth as it were, and grow 
momentarili more defin in outline, a period of utter and wonder 
silenc settl down upon the build and all it contained. A hush of 
ages, like the sudden centr of peac at the heart of the travel 
cyclone, descend through the night, and out of thi hush, as out of 
the eman of the steam blood, issu the form of the ancient 
be who had first sent the element of fire upon it mission. It 
grew and darken and solidifi befor our eyes. It rose from just 
beyond the tabl so that the lower portion remain invisible, but I 
saw the outlin limn itself upon the air, as though slowli reveal by 
the rise of a curtain. It appar had not then quit concentr 
to the normal proportions, but wa spread out on all side into space, 
huge, though rapidli condensing, for I saw the coloss shoulders, the 
neck, the lower portion of the dark jaws, the terribl mouth, and then 
the teeth and lips--and, as the veil seem to lift further upon the 
tremend face--i saw the nose and cheek bones. In anoth moment I 
should have look straight into the eyes---- 

but what dr. silenc did at that moment wa so unexpected, and took me 
so by surprise, that I have never yet properli understood it nature, 
and he ha never yet seen fit to explain in detail to me. He utter 
some sound that had a note of command in it--and, in so doing, step 
forward and interven between me and the face. the figure, just 
near completeness, he therefor hid from my sight--and I have alway 
thought purpos hid from my sight. 

“the fire!” he cri out. “the fire! beware!” 

there wa a sudden roar as of flame from the veri mouth of the pit, 
and for the space of a singl second all grew light as day. A blind 
flash pass across my face, and there wa heat for an instant that 
seem to shrivel skin, and flesh, and bone. then came steps, and I 
heard colonel wragg utter a great cry, wilder than ani human cri I 
have ever known. the heat suck all the breath out of my lung with a 
rush, and the blaze of light, as it vanished, swept my vision with it 
into envelop darkness. 

when I recov the use of my sens a few moment later I saw that 
colonel wragg with a face of death, it white strang stained, 
had move closer to me. dr. silenc stood besid him, an express of 
triumph and success in hi eyes. the next minut the soldier tri to 
clutch me with hi hand. then he reeled, staggered, and, unabl to save 
himself, fell with a great crash upon the brick floor. 

after the sheet of flame, a wind rage round the build as though it 
would lift the roof off, but then pass as suddenli as it came. and in 
the intens calm that follow I saw that the form had vanished, and 
the doctor wa stoop over colonel wragg upon the floor, tri to 
lift him to a sit position. 

“light,” he said quietly, “more light. take the shade off.” 

colonel wragg sat up and the glare of the unshad lamp fell upon 
hi face. It wa grey and drawn, still run heat, and there wa a 
look in the eye and about the corner of the mouth that seem in thi 
short space of time to have ad year to it age. At the same time, 
the express of effort and anxieti had left it. It show relief. 

“gone!” he said, look up at the doctor in a daze fashion, and 
struggl to hi feet. “thank god! it’ gone at last.” He stare 
round the laundri as though to find out where he was. “did it control 
me--tak possess of me? did I talk nonsense?” he ask bluntly. 
“after the heat came, I rememb nothing----” 

“you’ll feel yourself again in a few minutes,” the doctor said. To my 
infinit horror I saw that he wa surreptiti wipe sundri dark 
stain from the face. “our experi ha been a success and----” 

He gave me a swift glanc to hide the bowl, stand between me and our 
host while I hurriedli stuf it down under the lid of the nearest 
cauldron. 

“----and none of us the wors for it,” he finished. 

“and fires?” he asked, still dazed, “there’l be no more fires?” 

“it is dissipated--partly, at ani rate,” repli dr. silenc cautiously. 

“and the man behind the gun,” he went on, onli half realis what he 
wa saying, I think; “have you discov _that_?” 

“A form materialised,” said the doctor briefly. “I know for certain now 
what the direct intellig wa behind it all.” 

colonel wragg pull himself togeth and got upon hi feet. the word 
convey no clear mean to him yet. but hi memori wa return 
gradually, and he wa tri to piec togeth the fragment into a 
connect whole. He shiver a little, for the place had grown suddenli 
chilly. the air wa empti again, lifeless. 

“you feel all right again now,” dr. silenc said, in the tone of a man 
state a fact rather than ask a question. 

“thank to you--both, yes.” He drew a deep breath, and mop hi face, 
and even attempt a smile. He made me think of a man come from the 
battlefield with the stain of fight still upon him, but scorn of 
hi wounds. then he turn grave toward the doctor with a question 
in hi eyes. memori had return and he wa himself again. 

“precis what I expected,” the doctor said calmly; “a fire-element 
sent upon it mission in the day of thebes, centuri befor christ, 
and to-night, for the first time all these thousand of years, releas 
from the spell that origin bound it.” 

We stare at him in amazement, colonel wragg open hi lip for 
word that refus to shape themselves. 

“and, if we dig,” he continu significantly, point to the floor 
where the black had pour up, “we shall find some underground 
connection--a tunnel most likely--lead to the twelv acr wood. It 
wa made by--your predecessor.” 

“A tunnel made by my brother!” gasp the soldier. “then my sister 
should know--sh live here with him----” He stop suddenly. 

john silenc inclin hi head slowly. “I think so,” he said quietly. 
“your brother, no doubt, wa as much torment as you have been,” 
he continu after a paus in which colonel wragg seem deepli 
preoccupi with hi thoughts, “and tri to find peac by buri it 
in the wood, and surround the wood then, like a larg magic circle, 
with the enchant of the old formulæ. So the star the man saw 
blazing----” 

“but buri _what_?” ask the soldier faintly, step backward 
toward the support of the wall. 

dr. silenc regard us both intent for a moment befor he replied. 
I think he weigh in hi mind whether to tell us now, or when the 
investig wa absolut complete. 

“the mummy,” he said softly, after a moment; “the mummi that your 
brother took from it resting-plac of centuries, and brought 
home--here.” 

colonel wragg drop down upon the nearest chair, hang 
breathlessli on everi word. He wa far too amaz for speech. 

“the mummi of some import person--a priest most likely--protect 
from disturb and desecr by the ceremoni magic of the time. 
for they understood how to attach to the mummy, to lock up with it in 
the tomb, an element forc that would direct itself even after age 
upon ani one who dare to molest it. In thi case it wa an element 
of fire.” 

dr. silenc cross the floor and turn out the lamp one by one. He 
had noth more to say for the moment. follow hi example, I fold 
the tabl togeth and took up the chairs, and our host, still daze 
and silent, mechan obey him and move to the door. 

We remov all trace of the experiment, take the empti bowl back to 
the hous conceal beneath an ulster. 

the air wa cool and fragrant as we walk to the house, the star 
begin to fade overhead and a fresh wind of earli morn blow up 
out of the east where the sky wa alreadi hint of the come day. It 
wa after five o’clock. 

stealthili we enter the front hall and lock the door, and as we 
went on tipto upstair to our rooms, the colonel, peer at us over 
hi candl as he nod good-night, whisper that if we were readi 
the dig should be begun that veri day. 

then I saw him steal along to hi sister’ room and disappear. 


IV 

but not even the mysteri refer to the mummy, or the prospect of 
a revel by digging, were abl to hinder the reaction that follow 
the intens excit of the past twelv hours, and I slept the sleep 
of the dead, dreamless and undisturbed. A touch on the shoulder woke 
me, and I saw dr. silenc stand besid the bed, dress to go out. 

“come,” he said, “it’ tea-time. you’v slept the best part of a dozen 
hours.” 

I sprang up and made a hurri toilet, while my companion sat and 
talked. He look fresh and rested, and hi manner wa even quieter 
than usual. 

“colonel wragg ha provid spade and pickaxes. we’r go out to 
unearth thi mummi at once,” he said; “and there’ no reason we should 
not get away by the morn train.” 

“i’m readi to go to-night, if you are,” I said honestly. 

but dr. silenc shook hi head. 

“I must see thi through to the end,” he said gravely, and in a tone 
that made me think he still anticip seriou things, perhaps. He 
went on talk while I dressed. 

“thi case is realli typic of all stori of mummy-haunting, and 
none of them are case to trifl with,” he explained, “for the mummi 
of import people--kings, priests, magicians--wer laid away with 
profoundli signific ceremonial, and were veri effect protected, 
as you have seen, against desecration, and especi against 
destruction. 

“the gener belief,” he went on, anticip my questions, “held, 
of course, that the perpetu of the mummi guarante that of it 
ka,--th owner’ spirit,--but it is not improb that the magic 
embalm wa also use to retard reincarnation, the preserv of 
the bodi prevent the return of the spirit to the toil and disciplin 
of earth-life; and, in ani case, they knew how to attach power 
guardian-forc to keep off trespassers. and ani one who dare to 
remov the mummy, or especi to unwind it--well,” he added, with 
meaning, “you have seen--and you _will_ see.” 

I caught hi face in the mirror while I struggl with my collar. It 
wa deepli serious. there could be no question that he spoke of what he 
believ and knew. 

“the traveller-broth who brought it here must have been haunt too,” 
he continued, “for he tri to banish it by burial in the wood, make 
a magic circl to enclos it. someth of genuin ceremoni he must 
have known, for the star the man saw were of cours the remain of the 
still flame pentagram he trace at interv in the circle. onli he 
did not know enough, or possibl wa ignor that the mummy’ guardian 
wa a fire-force. fire cannot be enclos by fire, though, as you saw, 
it can be releas by it.” 

“then that aw figur in the laundry?” I asked, thrill to find him 
so communicative. 

“undoubtedli the actual Ka of the mummi oper alway behind it 
agent, the elemental, and most like thousand of year old.” 

“and miss wragge----?” I ventur onc more. 

“ah, miss wragge,” he repeat with increas gravity, “miss wragge----” 

A knock at the door brought a servant with word that tea wa ready, 
and the colonel had sent to ask if we were come down. the thread wa 
broken. dr. silenc move to the door and sign to me to follow. but 
hi manner told me that in ani case no real answer would have been 
forthcom to my question. 

“and the place to dig in,” I asked, unabl to restrain my curiosity, 
“will you find it by some process of divin or----?” 

He paus at the door and look back at me, and with that he left me 
to finish my dressing. 

It wa grow dark when the three of us silent made our way to the 
twelv acr plantation; the sky wa overcast, and a black wind came out 
of the east. gloom hung about the old hous and the air seem full of 
sighings. We found the tool readi laid at the edg of the wood, and 
each shoulder hi piece, we follow our leader at onc in among the 
trees. He went straight forward for some twenti yard and then stopped. 
At hi feet lay the blacken circl of one of the burn places. It 
wa just discern against the surround white grass. 

“there are three of these,” he said, “and they all lie in a line with 
one another. ani one of them will tap the tunnel that connect the 
laundry--th former museum--with the chamber where the mummi now lie 
buried.” 

He at onc clear away the burnt grass and began to dig; we all began 
to dig. while I use the pick, the other shovel vigorously. No 
one spoke. colonel wragg work the hardest of the three. the soil 
wa light and sandy, and there were onli a few snake-lik root and 
occasion loos stone to delay us. the pick made short work of these. 
and meanwhil the dark settl about us and the bite wind swept 
roar through the tree overhead. 

then, quit suddenly, without a cry, colonel wragg disappear up to 
hi neck. 

“the tunnel!” cri the doctor, help to drag him out, red, 
breathless, and cover with sand and perspiration. “now, let me lead 
the way.” and he slip down nimbl into the hole, so that a moment 
later we heard hi voice, muffl by sand and distance, rise up to us. 

“hubbard, you come next, and then colonel wragge--if he wishes,” we 
heard. 

“i’ll follow you, of course,” he said, look at me as I scrambl in. 

the hole wa bigger now, and I got down on all-four in a channel not 
much bigger than a larg sewer-pip and found myself in total darkness. 
A minut later a heavi thud, follow by a cataract of loos sand, 
announc the arriv of the colonel. 

“catch hold of my heel,” call dr. silence, “and colonel wragg can 
take yours.” 

In thi slow, labori fashion we worm our way along a tunnel 
that had been roughli dug out of the shift sand, and wa shore up 
clumsili by mean of wooden pillar and posts. ani moment, it seem to 
me, we might be buri alive. We could not see an inch befor our eyes, 
but had to grope our way feel the pillar and the walls. It wa 
difficult to breathe, and the colonel behind me made but slow progress, 
for the cramp posit of our bodi wa veri severe. 

We had travel in thi way for ten minutes, and gone perhap as much 
as ten yards, when I lost my grasp of the doctor’ heel. 

“ah!” I heard hi voice, sound abov me somewhere. He wa stand 
up in a clear space, and the next moment I wa stand besid him. 
colonel wragg came heavili after, and he too rose up and stood. then 
dr. silenc produc hi candl and we heard prepar for strike 
matches. 

yet even befor there wa light, an indefin sensat of awe came 
over us all. In thi hole in the sand, some three feet under ground, 
we stood side by side, cramp and huddled, struck suddenli with an 
overwhelm apprehens of someth ancient, someth formidable, 
someth incalcul wonderful, that touch in each one of us a 
sens of the sublim and the terribl even befor we could see an inch 
befor our faces. I know not how to express in languag thi singular 
emot that caught us here in utter darkness, touch no sens 
directly, it seemed, yet with the recognit that befor us in the 
black of thi underground night there lay someth that wa mighti 
with the mighti of long past ages. 

I felt colonel wragg press in close to my side, and I understood the 
pressur and welcom it. No human touch, to me at least, ha ever been 
more eloquent. 

then the match flared, a thousand shadow fled on black wings, and I 
saw john silenc fumbl with the candle, hi face lit up grotesqu 
by the flicker light below it. 

I had dread thi light, yet when it came there wa appar noth 
to explain the profound sensat of dread that preced it. We stood 
in a small vault chamber in the sand, the side and roof shore with 
bar of wood, and the ground laid roughli with what seem to be tiles. 
It wa six feet high, so that we could all stand comfortably, and may 
have been ten feet long by eight feet wide. upon the wooden pillar at 
the side I saw that egyptian hieroglyph had been rude trace by 
burning. 

dr. silenc lit three candl and hand one to each of us. He place a 
fourth in the sand against the wall on hi right, and anoth to mark 
the entranc to the tunnel. We stood and stare about us, instinct 
hold our breath. 

“empty, by god!” exclaim colonel wragge. hi voic trembl with 
excitement. and then, as hi eye rest on the ground, he added, “and 
footsteps--look--footstep in the sand!” 

dr. silenc said nothing. He stoop down and began to make a search 
of the chamber, and as he moved, my eye follow hi crouch figur 
and note the queer distort shadow that pour over the wall and 
ceil after him. here and there thin trickl of loos sand ran 
fizz down the sides. the atmosphere, heavili charg with faint yet 
pungent odours, lay utterli still, and the flame of the candl might 
have been paint on the air for all the movement they betrayed. 

and, as I watched, it wa almost necessari to persuad myself forcibl 
that I wa onli stand upright with difficulti in thi littl 
sand-hol of a modern garden in the south of england, for it seem to 
me that I stood, as in vision, at the entranc of some vast rock-hewn 
templ far, far down the river of time. the illus wa powerful, 
and persisted. granit columns, that rose to heaven, pile themselv 
about me, majest uprearing, and a roof like the sky itself spread 
abov a line of coloss figur that move in shadowi process along 
endless and stupend aisles. thi huge and splendid fantasy, born I 
knew not whence, possess me so vividli that I wa actual oblig to 
concentr my attent upon the small stoop figur of the doctor, 
as he grope about the walls, in order to keep the eye of imagin 
on the scene befor me. 

but the limit space render a long search out of the question, and 
hi footsteps, instead of shuffl through loos sand, present 
struck someth of a differ qualiti that gave forth a hollow and 
resound echo. He stoop to examin more closely. 

He wa stand exactli in the centr of the littl chamber when thi 
happened, and he at onc began scrape away the sand with hi feet. In 
less than a minut a smooth surfac becam visible--th surfac of a 
wooden covering. the next thing I saw wa that he had rais it and wa 
peer down into a space below. instantly, a strong odour of nitr 
and bitumen, mingl with the strang perfum of unknown and powder 
aromatics, rose up from the uncov space and fill the vault, 
sting the throat and make the eye water and smart. 

“the mummy!” whisper dr. silence, look up into our face over hi 
candle; and as he said the word I felt the soldier lurch against me, 
and heard hi breath in my veri ear. 

“the mummy!” he repeat under hi breath, as we press forward to 
look. 

It is difficult to say exactli whi the sight should have stir in 
me so prodigi an emot of wonder and veneration, for I have had 
not a littl to do with mummies, have unwound score of them, and even 
experi magic with not a few. but there wa someth in the 
sight of that grey and silent figure, lie in it modern box of lead 
and wood at the bottom of thi sandi grave, swath in the bandag of 
centuri and wrap in the perfum linen that the priest of egypt 
had pray over with their mighti enchant thousand of year 
before--someth in the sight of it lie there and breath it own 
spice-laden atmospher even in the dark of it exil in thi remot 
land, someth that pierc to the veri core of my be and touch 
that root of awe which slumber in everi man near the birth of tear 
and the passion of true worship. 

I rememb turn quickli from the colonel, lest he should see my 
emotion, yet fail to understand it cause, turn and clutch john silenc 
by the arm, and then fall trembl to see that he, too, had lower 
hi head and wa hide hi face in hi hands. 

A kind of whirl storm came over me, rise out of I know not what 
utter deep of memory, and in a white of vision I heard the magic 
old chaunt from the book of the dead, and saw the god pass by in 
dim procession, the mighty, immemori be who were yet themselv 
onli the personifi attribut of the true gods, the god with the 
eye of fire, the god with the face of smoke. I saw again anubis, the 
dog-fac deity, and the children of horus, etern watcher of the 
ages, as they swath osiris, the first mummi of the world, in the 
scent and mystic bands, and I tast again someth of the ecstasi 
of the justifi soul as it embark in the golden boat of ra, and 
journey onward to rest in the field of the blessed. 

and then, as dr. silence, with infinit reverence, stoop and touch 
the still face, so dread stare with it paint eyes, there rose 
again to our nostril wave upon wave of thi perfum of thousand of 
years, and time fled backward like a thing of naught, show me in 
haunt panorama the most wonder dream of the whole world. 

A gentl hiss becam audibl in the air, and the doctor move 
quickli backwards. It came close to our face and then seem to play 
about the wall and ceiling. 

“the last of the fire--stil wait for it full accomplishment,” he 
muttered; but I heard both word and hiss as thing far away, for I 
wa still busi with the journey of the soul through the seven hall of 
death, listen for echo of the grandest ritual ever known to men. 

the earthen plate cover with hieroglyph still lay besid the 
mummy, and round it, care arrang at the point of the compass, 
stood the four jar with the head of the hawk, the jackal, the 
cynocephalus, and man, the jar in which were place the hair, the nail 
parings, the heart, and other special portion of the body. even the 
amulets, the mirror, the blue clay statu of the ka, and the lamp with 
seven wick were there. onli the sacr scarabæu wa missing. 

“not onli ha it been torn from it ancient resting-place,” I heard dr. 
silenc say in a solemn voic as he look at colonel wragg with 
fix gaze, “but it ha been partial unwound,”--h point to the 
wrap of the breast,--“and--th scarabæu ha been remov from the 
throat.” 

the hissing, that wa like the hiss of an invis flame, had 
ceased; onli from time to time we heard it as though it pass 
backward and forward in the tunnel; and we stood look into each 
other’ face without speaking. 

present colonel wragg made a great effort and brace himself. I 
heard the sound catch in hi throat befor the word actual becam 
audible. 

“mi sister,” he said, veri low. and then there follow a long pause, 
broken at length by john silence. 

“it must be replaced,” he said significantly. 

“I knew nothing,” the soldier said, forc himself to speak the word 
he hate saying. “absolut nothing.” 

“it must be returned,” repeat the other, “if it is not now too late. 
for I fear--i fear----” 

colonel wragg made a movement of assent with hi head. 

“it shall be,” he said. 

the place wa still as the grave. 

I do not know what it wa then that made us all three turn round with 
so sudden a start, for there wa no sound audibl to my ears, at least. 

the doctor wa on the point of replac the lid over the mummy, when 
he straighten up as if he had been shot. 

“there’ someth coming,” said colonel wragg under hi breath, and 
the doctor’ eyes, peer down the small open of the tunnel, show 
me the true direction. 

A distant shuffl nois becam distinctli audibl come from a point 
about half-way down the tunnel we had so labori penetrated. 

“it’ the sand fall in,” I said, though I knew it wa foolish. 

“no,” said the colonel calmly, in a voic that seem to have the ring 
of iron, “i’v heard it for some time past. It is someth alive--and 
it is come nearer.” 

He stare about him with a look of resolut that made hi face almost 
noble. the horror in hi heart wa overmastering, yet he stood there 
prepar for anyth that might come. 

“there’ no other way out,” john silenc said. 

He lean the lid against the sand, and waited. I knew by the mask-lik 
express of hi face, the pallor, and the steadi of the eyes, 
that he anticip someth that might be veri terrible--appalling. 

the colonel and myself stood on either side of the opening. I still 
held my candl and wa asham of the way it shook, drip the 
greas all over me; but the soldier had set hi into the sand just 
behind hi feet. 

thought of be buri alive, of be smother like rat in a trap, 
of be caught and done to death by some invis and merciless forc 
we could not grappl with, rush into my mind. then I thought of 
fire--of suffocation--of be roast alive. the perspir began to 
pour from my face. 

“steady!” came the voic of dr. silenc to me through the vault. 

for five minutes, that seem fifty, we stood waiting, look from 
each other’ face to the mummy, and from the mummi to the hole, and 
all the time the shuffl sound, soft and stealthy, came gradual 
nearer. the tension, for me at least, wa veri near the break point 
when at last the caus of the disturb reach the edge. It wa 
hidden for a moment just behind the broken rim of soil. A jet of sand, 
shaken by the close vibration, trickl down on to the ground; I have 
never in my life seen anyth fall with such labori leisure. the 
next second, utter a cri of curiou quality, it came into view. 

and it wa far more distressingli horribl than anyth I had 
anticipated. 

for the sight of some egyptian monster, some god of the tombs, or 
even of some demon of fire, I think I wa alreadi half prepared; but 
when, instead, I saw the white visag of miss wragg frame in that 
round open of sand, follow by her bodi crawl on all-fours, her 
eye bulg and reflect the yellow glare of the candles, my first 
instinct wa to turn and run like a frantic anim seek a way of 
escape. 

but dr. silence, who seem no whit surprised, caught my arm and 
steadi me, and we both saw the colonel then drop upon hi knee and 
come thu to a level with hi sister. for more than a whole minute, as 
though struck in stone, the two face gaze silent at each other: 
her’s, for all the dread emot in it, more like a gargoyl than 
anyth human; and his, white and blank with an express that wa 
beyond either astonish or alarm. she look up; he look down. It 
wa a pictur in a nightmare, and the candle, stuck in the sand close 
to the hole, threw upon it the glare of impromptu footlights. 

then john silenc move forward and spoke in a voic that wa veri low, 
yet perfectli calm and natural. 

“I am glad you have come,” he said. “you are the one person whose 
presenc at thi moment is most required. and I hope that you may yet 
be in time to appeas the anger of the fire, and to bring peac again 
to your household, and,” he ad lower still so that no one heard it 
but myself, “_safeti to yourself_.” 

and while her brother stumbl backwards, crush a candl into the 
sand in hi awkwardness, the old ladi crawl farther into the vault 
chamber and slowli rose upon her feet. 

At the sight of the wrap figur of the mummi I wa fulli prepar 
to see her scream and faint, but on the contrary, to my complet 
amazement, she mere bow her head and drop quietli upon her 
knees. then, after a paus of more than a minute, she rais her eye 
to the roof and her lip began to mutter as in prayer. her right hand, 
meanwhile, which had been fumbl for some time at her throat, 
suddenli came away, and befor the gaze of all of us she held it out, 
palm upwards, over the grey and ancient figur outstretch below. and 
in it we beheld glisten the green jasper of the stolen scarabæus. 

her brother, lean heavili against the wall behind, utter a sound 
that wa half cry, half exclamation, but john silence, stand 
directli in front of her, mere fix hi eye on her and point 
downward to the stare face below. 

“replac it,” he said sternly, “where it belongs.” 

miss wragg wa kneel at the feet of the mummi when thi happened. 
We three men all had our eye rivet on what followed. onli the reader 
who by some remot chanc may have wit a line of mummies, freshli 
laid from their tomb upon the sand, slowli stir and bend as the heat 
of the egyptian sun warm their ancient bodi into the semblanc of 
life, can form ani concept of the ultim horror we experienc 
when the silent figur befor us move in it grave of lead and sand. 
slowly, befor our eyes, it writhed, and, with a faint rustl of the 
immemori cerements, rose up, and, through sightless and bandag 
eyes, stare across the yellow candle-light at the woman who had 
violat it. 

I tri to move--h brother tri to move--but the sand seem to hold 
our feet. I tri to cry--her brother tri to cry--but the sand seem 
to fill our lung and throat. We could onli stare--and, even so, the 
sand seem to rise like a desert storm and cloud our vision.... 

and when I manag at length to open my eye again, the mummi wa lie 
onc more upon it back, motionless, the shrunken and paint face 
upturn toward the ceiling, and the old ladi had tumbl forward and 
wa lie in the semblanc of death with her head and arm upon it 
crumbl body. 

but upon the wrap of the throat I saw the green jasper of the 
sacr scarabæu shine again like a live eye. 

colonel wragg and the doctor recov themselv long befor I did, 
and I found myself help them clumsili and unintellig to rais 
the frail bodi of the old lady, while john silenc care replac 
the cover over the grave and scrape back the sand with hi foot, 
while he issu brief directions. 

I heard hi voic as in a dream; but the journey back along that 
cramp tunnel, weight by a dead woman, blind with sand, suffoc 
with heat, wa in no sens a dream. It took us the best part of half 
an hour to reach the open air. and, even then, we had to wait a 
consider time for the appear of dr. silence. We carri her 
undiscov into the hous and up to her own room. 

“the mummi will caus no further disturbance,” I heard dr. silenc say 
to our host later that even as we prepar to drive for the night 
train, “provid always,” he ad significantly, “that you, and yours, 
caus _it_ no disturbance.” 

It wa in a dream, too, that we left. 

“you did not see her face, I know,” he said to me as we wrap our 
rug about us in the empti compartment. and when I shook my head, quit 
unabl to explain the instinct that had come to me not to look, he 
turn toward me, hi face pale, and genuin sad. 

“scorch and blasted,” he whispered. 




case IV 

secret worship 


harris, the silk merchant, wa in south germani on hi way home from 
a busi trip when the idea came to him suddenli that he would take 
the mountain railway from strassbourg and run down to revisit hi old 
school after an interv of someth more than thirti years. and it 
wa to thi chanc impuls of the junior partner in harri brother of 
st. paul’ churchyard that john silenc owe one of the most curiou 
case of hi whole experience, for at that veri moment he happen to 
be tramp these same mountain with a holiday knapsack, and from 
differ point of the compass the two men were actual converg 
toward the same inn. 

now, deep down in the heart that for thirti year had been concern 
chiefli with the profit buy and sell of silk, thi school had 
left the imprint of it peculiar influence, and, though perhap unknown 
to harris, had strongli colour the whole of hi subsequ existence. 
It belong to the deepli religi life of a small protest 
commun (which it is unnecessari to specify), and hi father had 
sent him there at the age of fifteen, partli becaus he would learn 
the german requisit for the conduct of the silk business, and partli 
becaus the disciplin wa strict, and disciplin wa what hi soul and 
bodi need just then more than anyth else. 

the life, indeed, had prove exceedingli severe, and young harri 
benefit accordingly; for though corpor punish wa unknown, 
there wa a system of mental and spiritu correct which somehow 
made the soul stand proudli erect to receiv it, while it struck at the 
veri root of the fault and taught the boy that hi charact wa be 
clean and strengthened, and that he wa not mere be tortur in 
a kind of person revenge. 

that wa over thirti year ago, when he wa a dreami and impression 
youth of fifteen; and now, as the train climb slowli up the wind 
mountain gorges, hi mind travel back somewhat lovingli over the 
interven period, and forgotten detail rose vividli again befor him 
out of the shadows. the life there had been veri wonderful, it seem 
to him, in that remot mountain village, protect from the tumult 
of the world by the love and worship of the devout brotherhood that 
minist to the need of some hundr boy from everi countri in 
europe. sharpli the scene came back to him. He smelt again the long 
stone corridors, the hot pinewood rooms, where the sultri hour of 
summer studi were pass with bee drone through open window in the 
sunshine, and german charact struggl in the mind with dream of 
english lawns--and then the sudden aw cri of the master in german-- 

“harris, stand up! you sleep!” 

and he recal the dread stand motionless for an hour, book in 
hand, while the knee felt like wax and the head grew heavier than a 
cannon-ball. 

the veri smell of the cook came back to him--th daili _sauerkraut_, 
the wateri chocol on sundays, the flavour of the stringi meat 
serv twice a week at _mittagessen_; and he smile to think again of 
the half-rat that wa the punish for speak english. the 
veri odour of the milk-bowls,--th hot sweet aroma that rose from the 
soak peasant-bread at the six-o’clock breakfast,--cam back to him 
pungently, and he saw the huge _speisesaal_ with the hundr boy in 
their school uniform, all eat sleepili in silence, gulp down 
the coars bread and scald milk in terror of the bell that would 
present cut them short--and, at the far end where the master sat, 
he saw the narrow slit window with the vista of entic field and 
forest beyond. 

and this, in turn, made him think of the great barn-lik room on the 
top floor where all slept togeth in wooden cots, and he heard in 
memori the clamour of the cruel bell that woke them on winter morn 
at five o’clock and summon them to the stone-flag _waschkammer_, 
where boy and master alike, after scanti and ici washing, dress in 
complet silence. 

from thi hi mind pass swiftly, with vivid picture-thoughts, 
to other things, and with a pass shiver he rememb how 
the loneli of never be alon had eaten into him, and how 
everything--work, meals, sleep, walks, leisure--wa done with hi 
“division” of twenti other boy and under the eye of at least two 
masters. the onli solitud possibl wa by ask for half an hour’ 
practic in the cell-lik music rooms, and harri smile to himself as 
he recal the zeal of hi violin studies. 

then, as the train puf labori through the great pine forest 
that cover these mountain with a giant carpet of velvet, he found the 
pleasant layer of memori give up their dead, and he recal with 
admir the kind of the masters, whom all address as brother, 
and marvel afresh at their devot in buri themselv for year 
in such a place, onli to leav it, in most cases, for the still rougher 
life of missionari in the wild place of the world. 

He thought onc more of the still, religi atmospher that hung 
over the littl forest commun like a veil, bar the distress 
world; of the picturesqu ceremoni at easter, christmas, and new 
year; of the numer feast-day and charm littl festivals. the 
_beschehr-fest_, in particular, came back to him,--th feast of gift 
at christmas,--when the entir commun pair off and gave presents, 
mani of which had taken week to make or the save of mani day to 
purchase. and then he saw the midnight ceremoni in the church at new 
year, with the shine face of the _prediger_ in the pulpit,--th 
villag preacher who, on the last night of the old year, saw in the 
empti galleri beyond the organ loft the face of all who were to die 
in the ensu twelv months, and who at last recognis himself among 
them, and, in the veri middl of hi sermon, pass into a state of 
rapt ecstasi and burst into a torrent of praise. 

thickli the memori crowd upon him. the pictur of the small villag 
dream it unselfish life on the mountain-tops, clean, wholesome, 
simple, search vigor for it god, and train hundr of 
boy in the grand way, rose up in hi mind with all the power of an 
obsession. He felt onc more the old mystic enthusiasm, deeper than 
the sea and more wonder than the stars; he heard again the wind 
sigh from leagu of forest over the red roof in the moonlight; he 
heard the brothers’ voic talk of the thing beyond thi life as 
though they had actual experienc them in the body; and, as he sat 
in the jolt train, a spirit of unutter long pass over hi 
sear and tire soul, stir in the depth of him a sea of emot 
that he thought had long sinc frozen into immobility. 

and the contrast pain him,--th idealist dreamer then, the man of 
busi now,--so that a spirit of unworldli peac and beauti known 
onli to the soul in medit laid it feather finger upon hi 
heart, move strang the surfac of the waters. 

harri shiver a littl and look out of the window of hi empti 
carriage. the train had long pass hornberg, and far below the stream 
tumbl in white foam down the limeston rocks. In front of him, dome 
upon dome of wood mountain stood against the sky. It wa october, 
and the air wa cool and sharp, wood-smok and damp moss exquisit 
mingl in it with the subtl odour of the pines. overhead, between 
the tip of the highest firs, he saw the first star peeping, and the 
sky wa a clean, pale amethyst that seem exactli the colour all these 
memori cloth themselv with in hi mind. 

He lean back in hi corner and sighed. He wa a heavi man, and he had 
not known sentiment for years; he wa a big man, and it took much to 
move him, liter and figuratively; he wa a man in whom the dream 
of god that haunt the soul in youth, though overlaid by the scum that 
gather in the fight for money, had not, as with the majority, utterli 
die the death. 

He came back into thi littl neglect pocket of the years, where 
so much fine gold had collect and lain undisturbed, with all hi 
semi-spiritu emot aquiver; and, as he watch the mountain-top 
come nearer, and smelt the forgotten odour of hi boyhood, someth 
melt on the surfac of hi soul and left him sensit to a degre he 
had not known since, thirti year before, he had live here with hi 
dreams, hi conflicts, and hi youth suffering. 

A thrill ran through him as the train stop with a jolt at a tini 
station and he saw the name in larg black letter on the grey stone 
building, and below it, the number of metr it stood abov the level 
of the sea. 

“the highest point on the line!” he exclaimed. “how well I rememb 
it--sommerau--summ meadow. the veri next station is mine!” 

and, as the train ran downhil with brake on and steam shut off, he 
put hi head out of the window and one by one saw the old familiar 
landmark in the dusk. they stare at him like dead face in a dream. 
queer, sharp feelings, half poignant, half sweet, stir in hi heart. 

“there’ the hot, white road we walk along so often with the two 
brüder alway at our heels,” he thought; “and there, by jove, is the 
turn through the forest to ‘_die galgen_,’ the stone gallow where they 
hang the witch in olden days!” 

He smile a littl as the train slid past. 

“and there’ the cops where the lili of the valley powder the 
ground in spring; and, I swear,”--h put hi head out with a sudden 
impulse,--“if that’ not the veri clear where calame, the french 
boy, chase the swallow-tail with me, and bruder pagel gave us 
half-rat for leav the road without permission, and for shout 
in our mother tongues!” and he laugh again as the memori came back 
with a rush, flood hi mind with vivid detail. 

the train stopped, and he stood on the grey gravel platform like a man 
in a dream. It seem half a centuri sinc he last wait there with 
cord wooden boxes, and got into the train for strassbourg and home 
after the two years’ exile. time drop from him like an old garment 
and he felt a boy again. only, thing look so much smaller than hi 
memori of them; shrunk and dwindl they looked, and the distanc 
seem on a curious smaller scale. 

He made hi way across the road to the littl gasthaus, and, as he 
went, face and figur of former schoolfellows,--german, swiss, 
italian, french, russian,--slip out of the shadowi wood and 
silent accompani him. they flit by hi side, rais their eye 
questioningly, sadly, to his. but their name he had forgotten. some 
of the brothers, too, came with them, and most of these he rememb 
by name--brud röst, bruder pagel, bruder schliemann, and the beard 
face of the old preacher who had seen himself in the haunt galleri 
of those about to die--brud gysin. the dark forest lay all about 
him like a sea that ani moment might rush with velvet wave upon the 
scene and sweep all the face away. the air wa cool and wonder 
fragrant, but with everi perfum breath came also a pallid memory.... 

yet, in spite of the underli sad insepar from such an 
experience, it wa all veri interesting, and held a pleasur peculiarli 
it own, so that harri engag hi room and order supper feel 
well pleas with himself, and intend to walk up to the old school 
that veri evening. It stood in the centr of the community’ village, 
some four mile distant through the forest, and he now recollect for 
the first time that thi littl protest settlement dwelt isol 
in a section of the countri that wa otherwis catholic. crucifix 
and shrine surround the clear like the sentri of a beleagur 
army. onc beyond the squar of the village, with it few acr of 
field and orchard, the forest crowd up in solid phalanxes, and beyond 
the rim of tree began the countri that wa rule by the priest of 
anoth faith. He vagu remembered, too, that the cathol had 
show sometim a certain hostil toward the littl protest 
oasi that flourish so quietli and benignli in their midst. He had 
quit forgotten this. how trumperi it all seem now with hi wide 
experi of life and hi knowledg of other countri and the great 
outsid world. It wa like step back, not thirti years, but three 
hundred. 

there were onli two other besid himself at supper. one of them, a 
bearded, middle-ag man in tweeds, sat by himself at the far end, 
and harri kept out of hi way becaus he wa english. He fear he 
might be in business, possibl even in the silk business, and that 
he would perhap talk on the subject. the other traveller, however, 
wa a cathol priest. He wa a littl man who ate hi salad with a 
knife, yet so gentli that it wa almost inoffensive, and it wa the 
sight of “the cloth” that recal hi memori of the old antagonism. 
harri mention by way of convers the object of hi sentiment 
journey, and the priest look up sharpli at him with rais eyebrow 
and an express of surpris and suspicion that somehow piqu him. He 
ascrib it to hi differ of belief. 

“yes,” went on the silk merchant, pleas to talk of what hi mind wa 
so full, “and it wa a curiou experi for an english boy to be 
drop down into a school of a hundr foreigners. I well rememb the 
loneli and intoler heimweh of it at first.” hi german wa veri 
fluent. 

the priest opposit look up from hi cold veal and potato salad and 
smiled. It wa a nice face. He explain quietli that he did not belong 
here, but wa make a tour of the parish of württemberg and baden. 

“it wa a strict life,” ad harris. “we english, I remember, use to 
call it _gefängnisleben_--prison life!” 

the face of the other, for some unaccount reason, darkened. after a 
slight pause, and more by way of polit than becaus he wish to 
continu the subject, he said quietly-- 

“it wa a flourish school in those days, of course. afterwards, 
I have heard----” He shrug hi shoulder slightly, and the odd 
look--it almost seem a look of alarm--cam back into hi eyes. the 
sentenc remain unfinished. 

someth in the tone of the man seem to hi listen uncal 
for--in a sens reproachful, singular. harri bridl in spite of 
himself. 

“it ha changed?” he asked. “I can hardli believe----” 

“you have not heard, then?” observ the priest gently, make a 
gestur as though to cross himself, yet not actual complet it. 
“you have not heard what happen there befor it wa abandoned----?” 

It wa veri childish, of course, and perhap he wa overtir and 
overwrought in some way, but the word and manner of the littl priest 
seem to him so offensive--so disproportion offensive--that he 
hardli notic the conclud sentence. He recal the old bitter 
and the old antagonism, and for a moment he almost lost hi temper. 

“nonsense,” he interrupt with a forc laugh, “_unsinn!_ you must 
forgiv me, sir, for contradict you. but I wa a pupil there 
myself. I wa at school there. there wa no place like it. I cannot 
believ that anyth seriou could have happen to--to take away it 
character. the devot of the brother would be difficult to equal 
anywhere----” 

He broke off suddenly, realis that hi voic had been rais unduli 
and that the man at the far end of the tabl might understand german; 
and at the same moment he look up and saw that thi individual’ 
eye were fix upon hi face intently. they were peculiarli bright. 
also they were rather wonder eyes, and the way they met hi own 
serv in some way he could not understand to convey both a reproach 
and a warning. the whole face of the stranger, indeed, made a vivid 
impress upon him, for it wa a face, he now notic for the first 
time, in whose presenc one would not willingli have said or done 
anyth unworthy. harri could not explain to himself how it wa he 
had not becom consciou sooner of it presence. 

but he could have bitten off hi tongu for have so far forgotten 
himself. the littl priest laps into silence. onli onc he said, 
look up and speak in a low voic that wa not intend to be 
overheard, but that evid _was_ overheard, “you will find it 
different.” present he rose and left the tabl with a polit bow that 
includ both the others. 

and, after him, from the far end rose also the figur in the tweed 
suit, leav harri by himself. 

He sat on for a bit in the darken room, sip hi coffe and 
smoke hi fifteen-pfennig cigar, till the girl came in to light the 
oil lamps. He felt vex with himself for hi laps from good manners, 
yet hardli abl to account for it. most likely, he reflected, he 
had been annoy becaus the priest had unintent chang the 
pleasant charact of hi dream by introduc a jar note. later he 
must seek an opportun to make amends. At present, however, he wa 
too impati for hi walk to the school, and he took hi stick and hat 
and pass out into the open air. 

and, as he cross befor the gasthaus, he notic that the priest 
and the man in the tweed suit were engag alreadi in such deep 
convers that they hardli notic him as he pass and rais hi 
hat. 

He start off briskly, well rememb the way, and hope to reach 
the villag in time to have a word with one of the brüder. they might 
even ask him in for a cup of coffee. He felt sure of hi welcome, and 
the old memori were in full possess onc more. the hour of return 
wa a matter of no consequ whatever. 

It wa then just after seven o’clock, and the octob even wa 
draw in with chill air from the recess of the forest. the road 
plung straight from the railway clear into it depths, and in a 
veri few minut the tree engulf him and the clack of hi boot 
fell dead and echoless against the serri stem of a million firs. It 
wa veri black; one trunk wa hardli distinguish from another. He 
walk smartly, swing hi holli stick. onc or twice he pass a 
peasant on hi way to bed, and the guttur “gruss got,” unheard for 
so long, emphasis the passag of time, while yet make it seem as 
nothing. A fresh group of pictur crowd hi mind. again the figur 
of former schoolfellow flit out of the forest and kept pace by hi 
side, whisper of the do of long ago. one reveri step hard 
upon the heel of another. everi turn in the road, everi clear of 
the forest, he knew, and each in turn brought forgotten associ to 
life. He enjoy himself thoroughly. 

He march on and on. there wa powder gold in the sky till the moon 
rose, and then a wind of faint silver spread silent between the 
earth and stars. He saw the tip of the fir tree shimmer, and heard 
them whisper as the breez turn their needl toward the light. the 
mountain air wa indescrib sweet. the road shone like the foam of a 
river through the gloom. white moth flit here and there like silent 
thought across hi path, and a hundr smell greet him from the 
forest cavern across the years. 

then, when he least expect it, the tree fell away abruptli on both 
sides, and he stood on the edg of the villag clearing. 

He walk faster. there lay the familiar outlin of the houses, 
sheet with silver; there stood the tree in the littl central squar 
with the fountain and small green lawns; there loom the shape of 
the church next to the gasthof der brüdergemeinde; and just beyond, 
dimli rise into the sky, he saw with a sudden thrill the mass of 
the huge school building, block castle-lik with deep shadow in 
the moonlight, stand squar and formid to face him after the 
silenc of more than a quarter of a century. 

He pass quickli down the desert villag street and stop close 
beneath it shadow, stare up at the wall that had onc held 
him prison for two years--two unbroken year of disciplin and 
homesickness. memori and emot surg through hi mind; for the 
most vivid sensat of hi youth had focus about thi spot, and 
it wa here he had first begun to live and learn values. not a singl 
footstep broke the silence, though light glimmer here and there 
through cottag windows; but when he look up at the high wall of 
the school, drape now in shadow, he easili imagin that well-known 
face crowd to the window to greet him--clos window that realli 
reflect onli moonlight and the gleam of stars. 

this, then, wa the old school building, stand foursquar to the 
world, with it shutter windows, it lofty, tile roof, and the 
spike lightning-conductor point like black and talon finger 
from the corners. for a long time he stood and stared. then, 
presently, he came to himself again, and realis to hi joy that a 
light still shone in the window of the _bruderstube_. 

He turn from the road and pass through the iron railings; then 
climb the twelv stone step and stood face the black wooden door 
with the heavi bar of iron, a door he had onc loath and dread 
with the hatr and passion of an imprison soul, but now look upon 
tenderli with a sort of boyish delight. 

almost timor he pull the rope and listen with a tremor of 
excit to the clang of the bell deep within the building. and 
the long-forgotten sound brought the past befor him with such a 
vivid sens of realiti that he posit shivered. It wa like the 
magic bell in the fairy-tal that roll back the curtain of time and 
summon the figur from the shadow of the dead. He had never felt so 
sentiment in hi life. It wa like be young again. and, at the 
same time, he began to bulk rather larg in hi own eye with a certain 
spuriou importance. He wa a big man from the world of strife and 
action. In thi littl place of peac dream would he, perhaps, not 
cut someth of a figure? 

“i’ll tri onc more,” he thought after a long pause, seiz the iron 
bell-rope, and wa just about to pull it when a step sound on the 
stone passag within, and the huge door slowli swung open. 

A tall man with a rather sever cast of counten stood face him in 
silence. 

“I must apologise--it is somewhat late,” he began a trifl pompously, 
“but the fact is I am an old pupil. I have onli just arriv and realli 
could not restrain myself.” hi german seem not quit so fluent as 
usual. “mi interest is so great. I wa here in ’70.” 

the other open the door wider and at onc bow him in with a smile 
of genuin welcome. 

“I am bruder kalkmann,” he said quietli in a deep voice. “I myself wa 
a master here about that time. It is a great pleasur alway to welcom 
a former pupil.” He look at him veri keenli for a few seconds, 
and then added, “I think, too, it is splendid of you to come--veri 
splendid.” 

“it is a veri great pleasure,” harri replied, delight with hi 
reception. 

the dimly-light corridor with it floor of grey stone, and the 
familiar sound of a german voic echo through it,--with the peculiar 
inton the brother alway use in speaking,--al combin to lift 
him bodily, as it were, into the dream-atmospher of long-forgotten 
days. He step gladli into the build and the door shut with the 
familiar thunder that complet the reconstruct of the past. He 
almost felt the old sens of imprisonment, of ach nostalgia, of 
have lost hi liberty. 

harri sigh involuntarili and turn toward hi host, who return 
hi smile faintli and then led the way down the corridor. 

“the boy have retired,” he explained, “and, as you remember, we keep 
earli hour here. but, at least, you will join us for a littl while in 
the _bruderstube_ and enjoy a cup of coffee.” thi wa precis what 
the silk merchant had hoped, and he accept with an alacr that he 
intend to be temper by graciousness. “and tomorrow,” continu the 
bruder, “you must come and spend a whole day with us. you may even find 
acquaintances, for sever pupil of your day have come back here as 
masters.” 

for one brief second there pass into the man’ eye a look that 
made the visitor start. but it vanish as quickli as it came. It wa 
imposs to define. harri convinc himself it wa the effect of a 
shadow cast by the lamp they had just pass on the wall. He dismiss 
it from hi mind. 

“you are veri kind, i’m sure,” he said politely. “it is perhap a 
greater pleasur to me than you can imagin to see the place again. 
ah,”--h stop short opposit a door with the upper half of glass 
and peer in--“sur there is one of the music room where I use to 
practis the violin. how it come back to me after all these years!” 

bruder kalkmann stop indulgently, smiling, to allow hi guest a 
moment’ inspection. 

“you still have the boys’ orchestra? I rememb I use to play ‘_zweit 
geige_’ in it. bruder schliemann conduct at the piano. dear me, I can 
see him now with hi long black hair and--and----” He stop abruptly. 
again the odd, dark look pass over the stern face of hi companion. 
for an instant it seem curious familiar. 

“we still keep up the pupils’ orchestra,” he said, “but bruder 
schliemann, I am sorri to say----” he hesit an instant, and then 
added, “bruder schliemann is dead.” 

“indeed, indeed,” said harri quickly. “I am sorri to hear it.” He wa 
consciou of a faint feel of distress, but whether it aros from 
the news of hi old music teacher’ death, or--from someth else--h 
could not quit determine. He gaze down the corridor that lost itself 
among shadows. In the street and villag everyth had seem so 
much smaller than he remembered, but here, insid the school building, 
everyth seem so much bigger. the corridor wa loftier and longer, 
more spaciou and vast, than the mental pictur he had preserved. hi 
thought wander dreamili for an instant. 

He glanc up and saw the face of the bruder watch him with a smile 
of patient indulgence. 

“your memori possess you,” he observ gently, and the stern look 
pass into someth almost pitying. 

“you are right,” return the man of silk, “they do. thi wa the most 
wonder period of my whole life in a sense. At the time I hate 
it----” He hesitated, not wish to hurt the brother’ feelings. 

“accord to english idea it seem strict, of course,” the other 
said persuasively, so that he went on. 

“----yes, partli that; and partli the ceaseless nostalgia, and the 
solitud which came from never be realli alone. In english school 
the boy enjoy peculiar freedom, you know.” 

bruder kalkmann, he saw, wa listen intently. 

“but it produc one result that I have never wholli lost,” he 
continu self-consciously, “and am grate for.” 

“_ach! wie so, denn?_” 

“the constant inner pain threw me headlong into your religi life, so 
that the whole forc of my be seem to project itself toward the 
search for a deeper satisfaction--a real resting-plac for the soul. 
dure my two year here I yearn for god in my boyish way as perhap 
I have never yearn for anyth since. moreover, I have never quit 
lost that sens of peac and inward joy which accompani the search. I 
can never quit forget thi school and the deep thing it taught me.” 

He paus at the end of hi long speech, and a brief silenc fell 
between them. He fear he had said too much, or express himself 
clumsili in the foreign language, and when bruder kalkmann laid a hand 
upon hi shoulder, he gave a littl involuntari start. 

“so that my memori perhap do possess me rather strongly,” he ad 
apologetically; “and thi long corridor, these rooms, that bar and 
gloomi front door, all touch chord that--that----” hi german fail 
him and he glanc at hi companion with an explanatori smile and 
gesture. but the brother had remov the hand from hi shoulder and wa 
stand with hi back to him, look down the passage. 

“naturally, natur so,” he said hastili without turn round. “_e 
ist doch selbstverständlich._ We shall all understand.” 

then he turn suddenly, and harri saw that hi face had turn most 
oddli and disagre sinister. It may onli have been the shadow 
again play their trick with the wretch oil lamp on the wall, 
for the dark express pass instantli as they retrac their step 
down the corridor, but the englishman somehow got the impress that 
he had said someth to give offence, someth that wa not quit to 
the other’ taste. opposit the door of the _bruderstube_ they stopped. 
harri realis that it wa late and he had possibl stay talk too 
long. He made a tent effort to leave, but hi companion would not 
hear of it. 

“you must have a cup of coffe with us,” he said firmli as though he 
meant it, “and my colleagu will be delight to see you. some of them 
will rememb you, perhaps.” 

the sound of voic came pleasantli through the door, men’ voic 
talk together. bruder kalkmann turn the handl and they enter a 
room ablaz with light and full of people. 

“ah,--but your name?” he whispered, bend down to catch the reply; 
“you have not told me your name yet.” 

“harris,” said the englishman quickli as they went in. He felt nervou 
as he cross the threshold, but ascrib the momentari trepid 
to the fact that he wa break the strictest rule of the whole 
establishment, which forbad a boy under severest penalti to come 
near thi holi of holi where the master took their brief leisure. 

“ah, yes, of course--harris,” repeat the other as though he 
rememb it “come in, herr harris, come in, please. your visit will 
be immens appreciated. It is realli veri fine, veri wonder of you 
to have come in thi way.” 

the door close behind them and, in the sudden light which made hi 
sight swim for a moment, the exagger of the languag escap hi 
attention. He heard the voic of bruder kalkmann introduc him. He 
spoke veri loud, indeed, unnecessarily,--absurdli loud, harri thought. 

“brothers,” he announced, “it is my pleasur and privileg to introduc 
to you herr harri from england. He ha just arriv to make us a 
littl visit, and I have alreadi express to him on behalf of us all 
the satisfact we feel that he is here. He was, as you remember, a 
pupil in the year ’70.” 

It wa a veri formal, a veri german introduction, but harri rather 
like it. It made him feel import and he appreci the tact that 
made it almost seem as though he had been expected. 

the black form rose and bowed; harri bowed; kalkmann bowed. everi one 
wa veri polit and veri courtly. the room swam with move figures; 
the light dazzl him after the gloom of the corridor; there wa thick 
cigar smoke in the atmosphere. He took the chair that wa offer to 
him between two of the brothers, and sat down, feel vagu that hi 
percept were not quit as keen and accur as usual. He felt a 
trifl daze perhaps, and the spell of the past came strongli over him, 
confus the immedi present and make everyth dwindl oddli to 
the dimens of long ago. He seem to pass under the masteri of a 
great mood that wa a composit reproduct of all the mood of hi 
forgotten boyhood. 

then he pull himself togeth with a sharp effort and enter into 
the convers that had begun again to buzz round him. moreover, 
he enter into it with keen pleasure, for the brothers--ther were 
perhap a dozen of them in the littl room--treat him with a charm 
of manner that speedili made him feel one of themselves. this, again, 
wa a veri subtl delight to him. He felt that he had step out 
of the greedy, vulgar, self-seek world, the world of silk and 
market and profit-making--step into the cleaner atmospher where 
spiritu ideal were paramount and life wa simpl and devoted. 
It all charm him inexpressibly, so that he realised--yes, in a 
sense--th degrad of hi twenti years’ absorpt in business. 
thi keen atmospher under the star where men thought onli of their 
souls, and of the soul of others, wa too rarefi for the world he 
wa now associ with. He found himself make comparison to hi 
own disadvantage,--comparison with the mystic littl dreamer that 
had step thirti year befor from the stern peac of thi devout 
community, and the man of the world that he had sinc become,--and 
the contrast made him shiver with a keen regret and someth like 
self-contempt. 

He glanc round at the other face float toward him through 
tobacco smoke--thi acrid cigar smoke he rememb so well: how keen 
they were, how strong, placid, touch with the nobil of great aim 
and unselfish purposes. At one or two he look particularly. He hardli 
knew why. they rather fascin him. there wa someth so veri stern 
and uncompromis about them, and something, too, oddly, subtly, 
familiar, that yet just elud him. but whenev their eye met hi own 
they held undeni welcom in them; and some held more--a kind of 
perplex admiration, he thought, someth that wa between esteem and 
deference. thi note of respect in all the face wa veri flatter to 
hi vanity. 

coffe wa serv presently, made by a black-hair brother who sat 
in the corner by the piano and bore a mark resembl to bruder 
schliemann, the music director of thirti year ago. harri exchang 
bow with him when he took the cup from hi white hands, which he 
notic were like the hand of a woman. He lit a cigar, offer to him 
by hi neighbour, with whom he wa chat delightfully, and who, in 
the glare of the light match, remind him sharpli for a moment of 
bruder pagel, hi former room-master. 

“_e ist wirklich merkwürdig_,” he said, “how mani resembl I see, 
or imagine. It is realli _very_ curious!” 

“yes,” repli the other, peer at him over hi coffe cup, “the 
spell of the place is wonder strong. I can well understand that 
the old face rise befor your mind’ eye--almost to the exclus of 
ourselv perhaps.” 

they both laugh pleasantly. It wa sooth to find hi mood 
understood and appreciated. and they pass on to talk of the mountain 
village, it isolation, it remot from worldli life, it peculiar 
fit for medit and worship, and for spiritu development--of a 
certain kind. 

“and your come back in thi way, herr harris, ha pleas us all so 
much,” join in the bruder on hi left. “we esteem you for it most 
highly. We honour you for it.” 

harri made a deprec gesture. “I fear, for my part, it is onli a 
veri selfish pleasure,” he said a trifl unctuously. 

“not all would have had the courage,” ad the one who resembl 
bruder pagel. 

“you mean,” said harris, a littl puzzled, “the disturb 
memories----?” 

bruder pagel look at him steadily, with unmistak admir and 
respect. “I mean that most men hold so strongli to life, and can give 
up so littl for their beliefs,” he said gravely. 

the englishman felt slightli uncomfortable. these worthi men realli 
made too much of hi sentiment journey. besides, the talk wa get 
a littl out of hi depth. He hardli follow it. 

“the worldli life still ha _some_ charm for me,” he repli 
smilingly, as though to indic that sainthood wa not yet quit 
within hi grasp. 

“all the more, then, must we honour you for so freeli coming,” said the 
brother on hi left; “so unconditionally!” 

A paus followed, and the silk merchant felt reliev when the 
convers took a more gener turn, although he note that it never 
travel veri far from the subject of hi visit and the wonder 
situat of the lone villag for men who wish to develop their 
spiritu power and practis the rite of a high worship. other 
join in, compliment him on hi knowledg of the language, 
make him feel utterli at hi ease, yet at the same time a littl 
uncomfort by the excess of their admiration. after all, it wa such 
a veri small thing to do, thi sentiment journey. 

the time pass along quickly; the coffe wa excellent, the cigar 
soft and of the nutti flavour he loved. At length, fear to outstay 
hi welcome, he rose reluctantli to take hi leave. but the other 
would not hear of it. It wa not often a former pupil return to visit 
them in thi simple, unaffect way. the night wa young. If necessari 
they could even find him a corner in the great _schlafzimmer_ upstairs. 
He wa easili persuad to stay a littl longer. somehow he had becom 
the centr of the littl party. He felt pleased, flattered, honoured. 

“and perhap bruder schliemann will play someth for us--now.” 

It wa kalkmann speaking, and harri start visibl as he heard the 
name, and saw the black-hair man by the piano turn with a smile. for 
schliemann wa the name of hi old music director, who wa dead. could 
thi be hi son? they were so exactli alike. 

“if bruder meyer ha not put hi amati to bed, I will accompani him,” 
said the musician suggestively, look across at a man whom harri had 
not yet noticed, and who, he now saw, wa the veri imag of a former 
master of that name. 

meyer rose and excus himself with a littl bow, and the englishman 
quickli observ that he had a peculiar gestur as though hi neck had 
a fals join on to the bodi just below the collar and fear it might 
break. meyer of old had thi trick of movement. He rememb how the 
boy use to copi it. 

He glanc sharpli from face to face, feel as though some silent, 
unseen process were chang everyth about him. all the face seem 
oddli familiar. pagel, the brother he had been talk with, wa of 
cours the imag of pagel, hi former room-master; and kalkmann, he now 
realis for the first time, wa the veri twin of anoth master whose 
name he had quit forgotten, but whom he use to dislik intens in 
the old days. and, through the smoke, peer at him from the corner 
of the room, he saw that all the brother about him had the face he 
had known and live with long ago--röst, fluheim, meinert, rigel, gysin. 

He stare hard, suddenli grown more alert, and everywher saw, or 
fanci he saw, strang likenesses, ghostli resemblances,--more, the 
ident face of year ago. there wa someth queer about it all, 
someth not quit right, someth that made him feel uneasy. He 
shook himself, mental and actually, blow the smoke from befor hi 
eye with a long breath, and as he did so he notic to hi dismay that 
everi one wa fixedli staring. they were watch him. 

thi brought him to hi senses. As an englishman, and a foreigner, he 
did not wish to be rude, or to do anyth to make himself foolishli 
conspicu and spoil the harmoni of the evening. He wa a guest, and a 
privileg guest at that. besides, the music had alreadi begun. bruder 
schliemann’ long white finger were caress the key to some purpose. 

He subsid into hi chair and smoke with half-clos eye that yet 
saw everything. 

but the shudder had establish itself in hi being, and, whether he 
would or not, it kept repeat itself. As a town, far up some inland 
river, feel the pressur of the distant sea, so he becam awar that 
mighti forc from somewher beyond hi ken were urg themselv 
up against hi soul in thi smoki littl room. He began to feel 
exceedingli ill at ease. 

and as the music fill the air hi mind began to clear. like a lift 
veil there rose up someth that had hitherto obscur hi vision. 
the word of the priest at the railway inn flash across hi brain 
unbidden: “you will find it different.” and also, though whi he 
could not tell, he saw mental the strong, rather wonder eye of 
that other guest at the supper-table, the man who had overhead hi 
conversation, and had later got into earnest talk with the priest. He 
took out hi watch and stole a glanc at it. two hour had slip by. 
It wa alreadi eleven o’clock. 

schliemann, meanwhile, utterli absorb in hi music, wa play a 
solemn measure. the piano sang marvellously. the power of a great 
conviction, the simplic of great art, the vital spiritu messag 
of a soul that had found itself--al this, and more, were in the 
chords, and yet somehow the music wa what can onli be describ as 
impure--atroci and diabol impure. and the piec itself, 
although harri did not recognis it as anyth familiar, wa sure 
the music of a mass--huge, majestic, sombre? It stalk through the 
smoki room with slow power, like the passag of someth that wa 
mighty, yet profoundli intimate, and as it went there stir into each 
and everi face about him the signatur of the enorm forc of which 
it wa the audibl symbol. the counten round him turn sinister, 
but not idly, neg sinister: they grew dark with purpose. He 
suddenli recal the face of bruder kalkmann in the corridor earlier 
in the evening. the motiv of their secret soul rose to the eyes, and 
mouths, and foreheads, and hung there for all to see like the black 
banner of an assembl of ill-star and fallen creatures. demons--wa 
the horribl word that flash through hi brain like a sheet of fire. 

when thi sudden discoveri leap out upon him, for a moment he lost 
hi self-control. without wait to think and weigh hi extraordinari 
impression, he did a veri foolish but a veri natur thing. feel 
himself irresist driven by the sudden stress to some kind of 
action, he sprang to hi feet--and screamed! To hi own utter 
amaz he stood up and shriek aloud! 

but no one stirred. No one, apparently, took the slightest notic of 
hi absurdli wild behaviour. It wa almost as if no one but himself 
had heard the scream at all--a though the music had drown it and 
swallow it up--a though after all perhap he had not realli scream 
as loudli as he imagined, or had not scream at all. 

then, as he glanc at the motionless, dark face befor him, someth 
of utter cold pass into hi being, touch hi veri soul.... all 
emot cool suddenly, leav him like a reced tide. He sat down 
again, ashamed, mortified, angri with himself for behav like a fool 
and a boy. and the music, meanwhile, continu to issu from the white 
and snake-lik finger of bruder schliemann, as poison wine might 
issu from the weirdly-fashion neck of antiqu phials. 

and, with the rest of them, harri drank it in. 

forc himself to believ that he had been the victim of some kind of 
illusori perception, he vigor restrain hi feelings. then the 
music present ceased, and everi one applaud and began to talk at 
once, laughing, chang seats, compliment the player, and behav 
natur and easili as though noth out of the way had happened. 
the face appear normal onc more. the brother crowd round their 
visitor, and he join in their talk and even heard himself thank 
the gift musician. 

but, at the same time, he found himself edg toward the door, nearer 
and nearer, chang hi chair when possible, and join the group 
that stood closest to the way of escape. 

“I must thank you all _tausendmal_ for my littl recept and the 
great pleasure--th veri great honour you have done me,” he began in 
decid tone at length, “but I fear I have trespass far too long 
alreadi on your hospitality. moreover, I have some distanc to walk to 
my inn.” 

A choru of voic greet hi words. they would not hear of hi 
going,--at least not without first partak of refreshment. they 
produc pumpernickel from one cupboard, and rye-bread and sausag from 
another, and all began to talk again and eat. more coffe wa made, 
fresh cigar lighted, and bruder meyer took out hi violin and began to 
tune it softly. 

“there is alway a bed upstair if herr harri will accept it,” said 
one. 

“and it is difficult to find the way out now, for all the door are 
locked,” laugh anoth loudly. 

“let us take our simpl pleasur as they come,” cri a third. “bruder 
harri will understand how we appreci the honour of thi last visit 
of his.” 

they made a dozen excuses. they all laughed, as though the polit 
of their word wa but formal, and veil thinly--mor and more 
thinly--a veri differ meaning. 

“and the hour of midnight draw near,” ad bruder kalkmann with a 
charm smile, but in a voic that sound to the englishman like the 
grate of iron hinges. 

their german seem to him more and more difficult to understand. 
He note that they call him “bruder” too, class him as one of 
themselves. 

and then suddenli he had a flash of keener perception, and 
realis with a creep of hi flesh that he had all along 
misinterpreted--grossli misinterpret all they had been saying. they 
had talk about the beauti of the place, it isol and remot 
from the world, it peculiar fit for certain kind of spiritu 
develop and worship--yet hardly, he now grasped, in the sens in 
which he had taken the words. they had meant someth different. 
their spiritu powers, their desir for loneliness, their passion 
for worship, were not the powers, the solitude, or the worship that 
_he_ meant and understood. He wa play a part in some horribl 
masquerade; he wa among men who cloak their live with religion in 
order to follow their real purpos unseen of men. 

what did it all mean? how had he blunder into so equivoc a 
situation? had he blunder into it at all? had he not rather been led 
into it, deliber led? hi thought grew dread confused, and 
hi confid in himself began to fade. and why, he suddenli thought 
again, were they so impress by the mere fact of hi come to revisit 
hi old school? what wa it they so admir and wonder at in hi 
simpl act? whi did they set such store upon hi have the courag to 
come, to “give himself so freely,” “unconditionally” as one of them had 
express it with such a mockeri of exaggeration? 

fear stir in hi heart most horribly, and he found no answer to ani 
of hi questionings. onli one thing he now understood quit clearly: 
it wa their purpos to keep him here. they did not intend that he 
should go. and from thi moment he realis that they were sinister, 
formid and, in some way he had yet to discover, inim to 
himself, inim to hi life. and the phrase one of them had use a 
moment ago--“thi _last_ visit of his”--ros befor hi eye in letter 
of flame. 

harri wa not a man of action, and had never known in all the cours 
of hi career what it meant to be in a situat of real danger. He 
wa not necessarili a coward, though, perhaps, a man of untri nerve. 
He realis at last plainli that he wa in a veri awkward predica 
indeed, and that he had to deal with men who were utterli in earnest. 
what their intent were he onli vagu guessed. hi mind, indeed, 
wa too confus for definit ratiocination, and he wa onli abl to 
follow blindli the strongest instinct that move in him. It never 
occur to him that the brother might all be mad, or that he himself 
might have temporarili lost hi sens and be suffer under some 
terribl delusion. In fact, noth occur to him--h realis 
nothing--except that he meant to escape--and the quicker the better. A 
tremend revuls of feel set in and overpow him. 

accordingly, without further protest for the moment, he ate hi 
pumpernickel and drank hi coffee, talk meanwhil as natur and 
pleasantli as he could, and when a suitabl interv had passed, he 
rose to hi feet and announc onc more that he must now take hi 
leave. He spoke veri quietly, but veri decidedly. No one hear him 
could doubt that he meant what he said. He had got veri close to the 
door by thi time. 

“I regret,” he said, use hi best german, and speak to a hush 
room, “that our pleasant even must come to an end, but it is now 
time for me to wish you all good-night.” and then, as no one said 
anything, he added, though with a trifl less assurance, “and I thank 
you all most sincer for your hospitality.” 

“on the contrary,” repli kalkmann instantly, rise from hi chair 
and ignor the hand the englishman had stretch out to him, “it is 
we who have to thank you; and we do so most grate and sincerely.” 

and at the same moment at least half a dozen of the brother took up 
their posit between himself and the door. 

“you are veri good to say so,” harri repli as firmli as he could 
manage, notic thi movement out of the corner of hi eye, “but 
realli I had no concept that--mi littl chanc visit could have 
afford you so much pleasure.” He move anoth step nearer the door, 
but bruder schliemann came across the room quickli and stood in front 
of him. hi attitud wa uncompromising. A dark and terribl express 
had come into hi face. 

“but it wa _not_ by chanc that you came, bruder harris,” he said so 
that all the room could hear; “sure we have not misunderstood your 
presenc here?” He rais hi black eyebrows. 

“no, no,” the englishman hasten to reply. “I was--i am delight 
to be here. I told you what pleasur it gave me to find myself among 
you. Do not misunderstand me, I beg.” hi voic falter a little, and 
he had difficulti in find the words. more and more, too, he had 
difficulti in understand _their_ words. 

“of course,” interpos bruder kalkmann in hi iron bass, “_we_ have 
not misunderstood. you have come back in the spirit of true and 
unselfish devotion. you offer yourself freely, and we all appreci 
it. It is your willing and nobil that have so complet won our 
vener and respect.” A faint murmur of applaus ran round the room. 
“what we all delight in--what our great master will especi delight 
in--i the valu of your spontan and voluntary----” 

He use a word harri did not understand. He said “_opfer_.” the 
bewild englishman search hi brain for the translation, and 
search in vain. for the life of him he could not rememb what it 
meant. but the word, for all hi inabl to translat it, touch hi 
soul with ice. It wa worse, far worse, than anyth he had imagined. 
He felt like a lost, helpless creature, and all power to fight sank out 
of him from that moment. 

“it is magnific to be such a willing----” ad schliemann, sidl 
up to him with a dread leer on hi face. He made use of the same 
word--“_opfer_.” 

god! what could it all mean? “offer himself!” “true spirit of 
devotion!” “willing,” “unselfish,” “magnificent!” _opfer, opfer, 
opfer!_ what in the name of heaven did it mean, that strange, 
mysteri word that struck such terror into hi heart? 

He made a valiant effort to keep hi presenc of mind and hold hi 
nerv steady. turning, he saw that kalkmann’ face wa a dead white. 
kalkmann! He understood that well enough. _kalkmann_ meant “man of 
chalk”; he knew that. but what did “_opfer_” mean? that wa the real 
key to the situation. word pour through hi disord mind in an 
endless stream--unusual, rare word he had perhap heard but onc in 
hi life--whil “_opfer_,” a word in common use, entir escap him. 
what an extraordinari mockeri it all was! 

then kalkmann, pale as death, but hi face hard as iron, spoke a few 
low word that he did not catch, and the brother stand by the wall 
at onc turn the lamp down so that the room becam dim. In the half 
light he could onli just discern their face and movements. 

“it is time,” he heard kalkmann’ remorseless voic continu just 
behind him. “the hour of midnight is at hand. let us prepare. He comes! 
He comes; bruder asmodeliu comes!” hi voic rose to a chant. 

and the sound of that name, for some extraordinari reason, wa 
terrible--utterli terrible; so that harri shook from head to foot as 
he heard it. it utter fill the air like soft thunder, and a hush 
came over the whole room. forc rose all about him, transform the 
normal into the horrible, and the spirit of craven fear ran through all 
hi being, bring him to the verg of collapse. 

_asmodelius! asmodelius!_ the name wa appalling. for he understood at 
last to whom it refer and the mean that lay between it great 
syllables. At the same instant, too, he suddenli understood the mean 
of that unrememb word. the import of the word “_opfer_” flash 
upon hi soul like a messag of death. 

He thought of make a wild effort to reach the door, but the weak 
of hi trembl knees, and the row of black figur that stood 
between, dissuad him at once. He would have scream for help, but 
rememb the empti of the vast building, and the loneli of 
the situation, he understood that no help could come that way, and he 
kept hi lip closed. He stood still and did nothing. but he knew now 
what wa coming. 

two of the brother approach and took him gentli by the arm. 

“bruder asmodeliu accept you,” they whispered; “are you ready?” 

then he found hi tongu and tri to speak. “but what have I to do 
with thi bruder asm--asmo----?” he stammered, a desper rush of 
word crowd vainli behind the halt tongue. 

the name refus to pass hi lips. He could not pronounc it as they 
did. He could not pronounc it at all. hi sens of helpless then 
enter the acut stage, for thi inabl to speak the name produc 
a fresh sens of quit horribl confus in hi mind, and he becam 
extraordinarili agitated. 

“I came here for a friendli visit,” he tri to say with a great 
effort, but, to hi intens dismay, he heard hi voic say someth 
quit different, and actual make use of that veri word they had all 
used: “I came here as a will _opfer_,” he heard hi own voic say, 
“and _I am quit ready_.” 

He wa lost beyond all recal now! not alon hi mind, but the veri 
muscl of hi bodi had pass out of control. He felt that he wa 
hover on the confin of a phantom or demon-world,--a world in which 
the name they had spoken constitut the master-name, the word of 
ultim power. 

what follow he heard and saw as in a nightmare. 

“in the half light that veil all truth, let us prepar to worship and 
adore,” chant schliemann, who had preced him to the end of the room. 

“in the mist that protect our face befor the black throne, let us 
make readi the will victim,” echo kalkmann in hi great bass. 

they rais their faces, listen expectantly, as a roar sound, 
like the pass of mighti projectiles, fill the air, far, far away, 
veri wonderful, veri forbidding. the wall of the room trembled. 

“he comes! He comes! He comes!” chant the brother in chorus. 

the sound of roar die away, and an atmospher of still and utter 
cold establish itself over all. then kalkmann, dark and unutter 
stern, turn in the dim light and face the rest. 

“asmodelius, our _hauptbruder_, is about us,” he cri in a voic that 
even while it shook wa yet a voic of iron; “asmodeliu is about us. 
make ready.” 

there follow a paus in which no one stir or spoke. A tall brother 
approach the englishman; but kalkmann held up hi hand. 

“let the eye remain uncovered,” he said, “in honour of so freeli 
give himself.” and to hi horror harri then realis for the first 
time that hi hand were alreadi fasten to hi sides. 

the brother retreat again silently, and in the paus that follow 
all the figur about him drop to their knees, leav him stand 
alone, and as they dropped, in voic hush with mingl rever and 
awe, they cri softly, odiously, appallingly, the name of the be 
whom they momentarili expect to appear. 

then, at the end of the room, where the window seem to have 
disappear so that he saw the stars, there rose into view far up 
against the night sky, grand and terrible, the outlin of a man. A 
kind of grey glori envelop it so that it resembl a steel-cas 
statue, immense, imposing, horrif in it distant splendour; while, 
at the same time, the face wa so spiritu mighty, yet so proudly, 
so auster sad, that harri felt as he stared, that the sight wa 
more than hi eye could meet, and that in anoth moment the power 
of vision would fail him altogether, and he must sink into utter 
nothingness. 

So remot and inaccess hung thi figur that it wa imposs to 
gaug anyth as to it size, yet at the same time so strang close, 
that when the grey radianc from it mightili broken visage, august and 
mournful, beat down upon hi soul, puls like some dark star with the 
power of spiritu evil, he felt almost as though he were look into 
a face no farther remov from him in space than the face of ani one of 
the brother who stood by hi side. 

and then the room fill and trembl with sound that harri 
understood full well were the fail voic of other who had preced 
him in a long seri down the years. there came first a plain, sharp 
cry, as of a man in the last anguish, choke for hi breath, and 
yet, with the veri final expir of it, breath the name of the 
worship--of the dark be who rejoic to hear it. the cri of the 
strangled; the short, run gasp of the suffocated; and the smother 
gurgl of the tighten throat, all these, and more, echo back 
and forth between the walls, the veri wall in which he now stood a 
prisoner, a sacrifici victim. the cries, too, not alon of the broken 
bodies, but--far worse--of beaten, broken souls. and as the ghastli 
choru rose and fell, there came also the face of the lost and unhappi 
creatur to whom they belonged, and, against that curtain of pale grey 
light, he saw float past him in the air, an array of white and piteou 
human counten that seem to beckon and gibber at him as though he 
were alreadi one of themselves. 

slowly, too, as the voic rose, and the pallid crew sail past, that 
giant form of grey descend from the sky and approach the room that 
contain the worshipp and their prisoner. hand rose and sank about 
him in the darkness, and he felt that he wa be drape in other 
garment than hi own; a circlet of ice seem to run about hi head, 
while round the waist, enclos the fasten arms, he felt a girdl 
tightli drawn. At last, about hi veri throat, there ran a soft and 
silken touch which, better than if there had been full light, and a 
mirror held to hi face, he understood to be the cord of sacrifice--and 
of death. 

At thi moment the brothers, still prostrat upon the floor, began 
again their mournful, yet impass chanting, and as they did so a 
strang thing happened. for, appar without move or alter it 
position, the huge figur seemed, at onc and suddenly, to be insid 
the room, almost besid him, and to fill the space around him to the 
exclus of all else. 

He wa now beyond all ordinari sensat of fear, onli a drab feel 
as of death--th death of the soul--stir in hi heart. hi thought 
no longer even beat vainli for escape. the end wa near, and he knew 
it. 

the dread chant voic rose about him in a wave: “we worship! 
We adore! We offer!” the sound fill hi ear and hammered, almost 
meaningless, upon hi brain. 

then the majest grey face turn slowli downward upon him, and hi 
veri soul pass outward and seem to becom absorb in the sea 
of those anguish eyes. At the same moment a dozen hand forc him 
to hi knees, and in the air befor him he saw the arm of kalkmann 
upraised, and felt the pressur about hi throat grow strong. 

It wa in thi aw moment, when he had given up all hope, and the 
help of god or men seem beyond question, that a strang thing 
happened. for befor hi fade and terrifi vision, there slid, as 
in a dream of light,--yet without appar rhyme or reason--wholli 
unbidden and unexplained,--th face of that other man at the supper 
tabl of the railway inn. and the sight, even mentally, of that strong, 
wholesome, vigor english face, inspir him suddenli with a new 
courage. 

It wa but a flash of fade vision befor he sank into a dark and 
terribl death, yet, in some inexplic way, the sight of that face 
stir in him unconquer hope and the certainti of deliverance. It 
wa a face of power, a face, he now realised, of simpl good such 
as might have been seen by men of old on the shore of galilee; a face, 
by heaven, that could conquer even the devil of outer space. 

and, in hi despair and abandonment, he call upon it, and call with 
no uncertain accents. He found hi voic in thi overwhelm moment 
to some purpose; though the word he actual used, and whether they 
were in german or english, he could never remember. their effect, 
nevertheless, wa instantaneous. the brother understood, and that grey 
figur of evil understood. 

for a second the confus wa terrific. there came a great shatter 
sound. It seem that the veri earth trembled. but all harri 
rememb afterward wa that voic rose about him in the clamour of 
terrifi alarm-- 

“A man of power is among us! A man of god!” 

the vast sound wa repeated--th rush through space as of huge 
projectiles--and he sank to the floor of the room, unconscious. the 
entir scene had vanished, vanish like smoke over the roof of a 
cottag when the wind blows. 

and, by hi side, sat down a slight, un-german figure,--th figur of 
the stranger at the inn,--th man who had the “rather wonder eyes.” 

* * * * * 

when harri came to himself he felt cold. He wa lie under the open 
sky, and the cool air of field and forest wa blow upon hi face. 
He sat up and look about him. the memori of the late scene wa 
still horribl in hi mind, but no vestig of it remained. No wall 
or ceil enclos him; he wa no longer in a room at all. there 
were no lamp turn low, no cigar smoke, no black form of sinist 
worshippers, no tremend grey figur hover beyond the windows. 

open space wa about him, and he wa lie on a pile of brick and 
mortar, hi cloth soak with dew, and the kind star shine 
brightli overhead. He wa lying, bruis and shaken, among the 
heaped-up débri of a ruin building. 

He stood up and stare about him. there, in the shadowi distance, lay 
the surround forest, and here, close at hand, stood the outlin of 
the villag buildings. but, underfoot, beyond question, lay noth 
but the broken heap of stone that betoken a build long sinc 
crumbl to dust. then he saw that the stone were blackened, and 
that great wooden beams, half burnt, half rotten, made line through 
the gener débris. He stood, then, among the ruin of a burnt and 
shatter building, the weed and nettl prove conclus that it 
had lain thu for mani years. 

the moon had alreadi set behind the encircl forest, but the star 
that spangl the heaven threw enough light to enabl him to make 
quit sure of what he saw. harris, the silk merchant, stood among these 
broken and burnt stone and shivered. 

then he suddenli becam awar that out of the gloom a figur had risen 
and stood besid him. peer at him, he thought he recognis the face 
of the stranger at the railway inn. 

“are _you_ real?” he ask in a voic he hardli recognis as hi own. 

“more than real--i’m friendly,” repli the stranger; “I follow you 
up here from the inn.” 

harri stood and stare for sever minut without ad anything. 
hi teeth chattered. the least sound made him start; but the simpl 
word in hi own language, and the tone in which they were uttered, 
comfort him inconceivably. 

“you’r english too, thank god,” he said inconsequently. “these german 
devils----” He broke off and put a hand to hi eyes. “but what’ 
becom of them all--and the room--and--and----” the hand travel 
down to hi throat and move nervous round hi neck. He drew a long, 
long breath of relief. “did I dream everything--everything?” he said 
distractedly. 

He stare wildli about him, and the stranger move forward and took hi 
arm. “come,” he said soothingly, yet with a trace of command in the 
voice, “we will move away from here. the high-road, or even the wood 
will be more to your taste, for we are stand now on one of the most 
haunted--and most terribl haunted--spot of the whole world.” 

He guid hi companion’ stumbl footstep over the broken masonri 
until they reach the path, the nettl sting their hands, and 
harri feel hi way like a man in a dream. pass through the 
twist iron rail they reach the path, and thenc made their way 
to the road, shine white in the night. onc safe out of the ruins, 
harri collect himself and turn to look back. 

“but, how is it possible?” he exclaimed, hi voic still shaking. 
“how can it be possible? when I came in here I saw the build in 
the moonlight. they open the door. I saw the figur and heard the 
voic and touched, ye touch their veri hands, and saw their damn 
black faces, saw them far more plainli than I see you now.” He wa 
deepli bewildered. the glamour wa still upon hi eye with a degre 
of realiti stronger than the realiti even of normal life. “wa I so 
utterli deluded?” 

then suddenli the word of the stranger, which he had onli half heard 
or understood, return to him. 

“haunted?” he asked, look hard at him; “haunted, did you say?” He 
paus in the roadway and stare into the dark where the build 
of the old school had first appear to him. but the stranger hurri 
him forward. 

“we shall talk more safe farther on,” he said. “I follow you from 
the inn the moment I realis where you had gone. when I found you it 
wa eleven o’clock----” 

“eleven o’clock,” said harris, rememb with a shudder. 

“----i saw you drop. I watch over you till you recov 
conscious of your own accord, and now--now I am here to guid you 
safe back to the inn. I have broken the spell--th glamour----” 

“I owe you a great deal, sir,” interrupt harri again, begin 
to understand someth of the stranger’ kindness, “but I don’t 
understand it all. I feel daze and shaken.” hi teeth still chattered, 
and spell of violent shiver pass over him from head to foot. He 
found that he wa cling to the other’ arm. In thi way they pass 
beyond the desert and crumbl villag and gain the high-road that 
led homeward through the forest. 

“that school build ha long been in ruins,” said the man at hi side 
presently; “it wa burnt down by order of the elder of the commun 
at least ten year ago. the villag ha been uninhabit ever since. 
but the simulacra of certain ghastli event that took place under 
that roof in past day still continue. and the ‘shells’ of the chief 
particip still enact there the dread deed that led to it final 
destruction, and to the desert of the whole settlement. they were 
devil-worshippers!” 

harri listen with bead of perspir on hi forehead that did 
not come alon from their leisur pace through the cool night. 
although he had seen thi man but onc befor in hi life, and had 
never befor exchang so much as a word with him, he felt a degre of 
confid and a subtl sens of safeti and well-b in hi presenc 
that were the most heal influenc he could possibl have wish 
after the experi he had been through. for all that, he still felt 
as if he were walk in a dream, and though he heard everi word that 
fell from hi companion’ lips, it wa onli the next day that the full 
import of all he said becam fulli clear to him. the presenc of thi 
quiet stranger, the man with the wonder eye which he felt now, 
rather than saw, appli a sooth anodyn to hi shatter spirit 
that heal him through and through. and thi heal influence, 
distil from the dark figur at hi side, satisfi hi first 
imper need, so that he almost forgot to realis how strang and 
opportun it wa that the man should be there at all. 

It somehow never occur to him to ask hi name, or to feel ani undu 
wonder that one pass tourist should take so much troubl on behalf 
of another. He just walk by hi side, listen to hi quiet words, 
and allow himself to enjoy the veri wonder experi after hi 
recent ordeal, of be helped, strengthened, blessed. onli once, 
rememb vagu someth of hi read of year ago, he turn to 
the man besid him, after some more than usual remark words, and 
heard himself, almost involuntarili it seemed, put the question: 
“then are you a rosicrucian, sir, perhaps?” but the stranger had 
ignor the words, or possibl not heard them, for he continu with 
hi talk as though unconsci of ani interruption, and harri becam 
awar that anoth somewhat unusu pictur had taken possess of hi 
mind, as they walk there side by side through the cool reach of the 
forest, and that he had found hi imagin suddenli charg with the 
childhood memori of jacob wrestl with an angel,--wrestl all night 
with a be of superior qualiti whose strength eventu becam hi 
own. 

“it wa your abrupt convers with the priest at supper that first 
put me upon the track of thi remark occurrence,” he heard the 
man’ quiet voic besid him in the darkness, “and it wa from him 
I learn after you left the stori of the devil-worship that becam 
secretli establish in the heart of thi simpl and devout littl 
community.” 

“devil-worship! here----!” harri stammered, aghast. 

“yes--here;--conduct secretli for year by a group of brother befor 
unexplain disappear in the neighbourhood led to it discovery. 
for where could they have found a safer place in the whole wide world 
for their ghastli traffic and pervert power than here, in the veri 
precincts--und cover of the veri shadow of saintli and holi 
living?” 

“awful, awful!” whisper the silk merchant, “and when I tell you the 
word they use to me----” 

“I know it all,” the stranger said quietly. “I saw and heard 
everything. My plan first wa to wait till the end and then to take 
step for their destruction, but in the interest of your person 
safety,”--h spoke with the utmost graviti and conviction,--“in the 
interest of the safeti of your soul, I made my presenc known when I 
did, and befor the conclus had been reached----” 

“mi safety! the danger, then, wa real. they were aliv and----” word 
fail him. He stop in the road and turn toward hi companion, 
the shine of whose eye he could just make out in the gloom. 

“it wa a concours of the shell of violent men, spiritually-develop 
but evil men, seek after death--th death of the body--to prolong 
their vile and unnatur existence. and had they accomplish their 
object you, in turn, at the death of your body, would have pass into 
their power and help to swell their dread purposes.” 

harri made no reply. He wa tri hard to concentr hi mind upon 
the sweet and common thing of life. He even thought of silk and st. 
paul’ churchyard and the face of hi partner in business. 

“for you came all prepar to be caught,” he heard the other’ 
voic like some one talk to him from a distance; “your deepli 
introspect mood had alreadi reconstruct the past so vividly, so 
intensely, that you were _en rapport_ at onc with ani forc of those 
day that chanc still to be lingering. and they swept you up all 
unresistingly.” 

harri tighten hi hold upon the stranger’ arm as he heard. At the 
moment he had room for one emot only. It did not seem to him odd 
that thi stranger should have such intim knowledg of hi mind. 

“it is, alas, chiefli the evil emot that are abl to leav their 
photograph upon surround scene and objects,” the other added, “and 
who ever heard of a place haunt by a nobl deed, or of beauti and 
love ghost revisit the glimps of the moon? It is unfortunate. 
but the wick passion of men’ heart alon seem strong enough to 
leav pictur that persist; the good are ever too lukewarm.” 

the stranger sigh as he spoke. but harris, exhaust and shaken as 
he wa to the veri core, pace by hi side, onli half listening. He 
move as in a dream still. It wa veri wonder to him, thi walk 
home under the star in the earli hour of the octob morning, the 
peac forest all about them, mist rise here and there over the 
small clearings, and the sound of water from a hundr littl invis 
stream fill in the paus of the talk. In after life he alway 
look back to it as someth magic and impossible, someth that 
had seem too beautiful, too curious beautiful, to have been quit 
true. and, though at the time he heard and understood but a quarter of 
what the stranger said, it came back to him afterwards, stay with 
him till the end of hi days, and alway with a curious, haunt sens 
of unreality, as though he had enjoy a wonder dream of which he 
could recal onli faint and exquisit portions. 

but the horror of the earlier experi wa effectu dispelled; and 
when they reach the railway inn, somewher about three o’clock in 
the morning, harri shook the stranger’ hand gratefully, effusively, 
meet the look of those rather wonder eye with a full heart, and 
went up to hi room, think in a hazy, dream-lik way of the word 
with which the stranger had brought their convers to an end as 
they left the confin of the forest-- 

“and if thought and emot can persist in thi way so long after 
the brain that sent them forth ha crumbl into dust, how vital 
import it must be to control their veri birth in the heart, and 
guard them with the keenest possibl restraint.” 

but harris, the silk merchant, slept better than might have been 
expected, and with a sound that carri him half-way through the 
day. and when he came downstair and learn that the stranger had 
alreadi taken hi departure, he realis with keen regret that he had 
never onc thought of ask hi name. 

“yes, he sign in the visitors’ book,” said the girl in repli to hi 
question. 

and he turn over the blot page and found there, the last entry, 
in a veri delic and individu handwriting-- 

“_john silence_, london.” 




case V 

the camp OF the dog 


I 

island of all shape and size troop northward from stockholm by the 
hundred, and the littl steamer that thread their intric maze in 
summer leav the travel in a somewhat bewild state as regard 
the point of the compass when it reach the end of it journey at 
waxholm. but it is onli after waxholm that the true island begin, so 
to speak, to run wild, and start up the coast on their tangl cours 
of a hundr mile of desert loveliness, and it wa in the veri heart 
of thi delight confus that we pitch our tent for a summer 
holiday. A verit wilder of island lay about us: from the mere 
round button of a rock that bore a singl fir, to the mountain 
stretch of a squar mile, dens wooded, and bound by precipit 
cliffs; so close togeth often that a strip of water ran between no 
wider than a countri lane, or, again, so far that an expans stretch 
like the open sea for miles. 

although the larger island boast farm and fish stations, the 
major were uninhabited. carpet with moss and heather, their 
coast-lin show a seri of ravin and cleft and littl sandi 
bays, with a growth of splendid pine-wood that came down to the 
water’ edg and led the eye through unknown depth of shadow and 
mysteri into the veri heart of primit forest. 

the particular island to which we had camp right by virtu 
of pay a nomin sum to a stockholm merchant lay togeth in a 
picturesqu group far beyond the reach of the steamer, one be a mere 
reef with a fring of fairy-lik birches, and two others, cliff-bound 
monster rise with wood head out of the sea. the fourth, which we 
select becaus it enclos a littl lagoon suitabl for anchorage, 
bathing, night-lines, and what-not, shall have what descript is 
necessari as the stori proceeds; but, so far as pay rent wa 
concerned, we might equal well have pitch our tent on ani one of a 
hundr other that cluster about us as thickli as a swarm of bees. 

It wa in the blaze of an even in july, the air clear as crystal, 
the sea a cobalt blue, when we left the steamer on the border of 
civilis and sail away with maps, compasses, and provis for 
the littl group of dot in the skärgård that were to be our home for 
the next two months. the dinghi and my canadian cano trail behind 
us, with tent and dunnag care pile aboard, and when the point 
of cliff interven to hide the steamer and the waxholm hotel we 
realis for the first time that the horror of train and hous wa 
far behind us, the fever of men and cities, the weari of street 
and confin spaces. the wilder open up on all side into endless 
blue reaches, and the map and compass were so frequent call 
into requisit that we went astray more often than not and progress 
wa enchantingli slow. It took us, for instance, two whole day to 
find our crescent-shap home, and the camp we made on the way were 
so fascin that we left them with difficulti and regret, for each 
island seem more desir than the one befor it, and over all lay 
the spell of haunt peace, remot from the turmoil of the world, 
and the freedom of open and desol spaces. 

and so mani of these spot of world-beauti have I sought out and 
dwelt in, that in my mind remain onli a composit memori of their 
faces, a true map of heaven, as it were, from which thi particular 
one stand forth with unusu sharp becaus of the strang thing 
that happen there, and also, I think, becaus anyth in which john 
silenc play a part ha a habit of fix itself in the mind with a 
live and last qualiti of vividness. 

for the moment, however, dr. silenc wa not of the party. some privat 
case in the interior of hungari claim hi attention, and it wa not 
till later--th 15th of august, to be exact--that I had arrang to 
meet him in berlin and then return to london togeth for our harvest 
of winter work. all the member of our party, however, were known to 
him more or less well, and on thi third day as we sail through the 
narrow open into the lagoon and saw the circular ridg of tree in a 
gold and crimson sunset befor us, hi last word to me when we part 
in london for some unaccount reason came back veri sharpli to my 
memory, and recal the curiou impress of propheci with which I 
had first heard them: 

“enjoy your holiday and store up all the forc you can,” he had said as 
the train slip out of victoria; “and we will meet in berlin on the 
15th--unless you should send for me sooner.” 

and now suddenli the word return to me so clearli that it seem 
I almost heard hi voic in my ear: “unless you should send for me 
sooner;” and returned, moreover, with a signific I wa wholli at a 
loss to understand that touch somewher in the depth of my mind a 
vagu sens of apprehens that they had all along been intend in 
the natur of a prophecy. 

In the lagoon, then, the wind fail us thi juli evening, as wa onli 
natur behind the shelter of the belt of woods, and we took to the 
oars, all breathless with the beauti of thi first sight of our island 
home, yet all talk in somewhat hush voic of the best place to 
land, the depth of water, the safest place to anchor, to put up the 
tent in, the most shelter spot for the camp-fires, and a dozen 
thing of import that crop up when a home in the wilder ha 
actual to be made. 

and dure thi busi sunset hour of unload befor the dark, the 
soul of my companion adopt the trick of present themselv veri 
vividli anew befor my mind, and introduc themselv afresh. 

In reality, I suppose, our parti wa in no sens singular. In the 
convent life at home they certainli seem ordinari enough, 
but suddenly, as we pass through these gate of the wilderness, 
I saw them more sharpli than before, with charact strip of 
the atmospher of men and cities. A complet chang of set 
often furnish a startlingli new view of peopl hitherto held for 
well-known; they present anoth facet of their personalities. I seem 
to see my own parti almost as new people--peopl I had not known 
properli hitherto, peopl who would drop all disguis and henceforth 
reveal themselv as they realli were. and each one seem to say: “now 
you will see me as I am. you will see me here in thi primit life 
of the wilder without clothes. all my mask and veil I have left 
behind in the abod of men. so, look out for surprises!” 

the reverend timothi maloney help me to put up the tents, long 
practic make the process easy, and while he drove in peg and 
tighten ropes, hi coat off, hi flannel collar fli open without 
a tie, it wa imposs to avoid the conclus that he wa cut out 
for the life of a pioneer rather than the church. He wa fifti year 
of age, muscular, blue-ey and hearty, and he took hi share of the 
work, and more, without shirking. the way he handl the axe in cut 
down sapl for the tent-pol wa a delight to see, and hi eye in 
judg the level wa unfailing. 

bulli as a young man into a lucr famili living, he had in turn 
bulli hi mind into some semblanc of orthodox beliefs, do the 
honour of the littl countri church with an energi that made one think 
of a coal-heav tend china; and it wa onli in the past few year 
that he had resign the live and taken instead to cram young men 
for their examinations. thi suit him better. It enabl him, too, to 
indulg hi passion for spell of “wild life,” and to spend the summer 
month of most year under canva in one part of the world or anoth 
where he could take hi young men with him and combin “reading” with 
open air. 

hi wife usual accompani him, and there wa no doubt she enjoy 
the trips, for she possessed, though in less degree, the same joy of 
the wilder that wa hi own distinguish characteristic. the onli 
differ wa that while he regard it as the real life, she regard 
it as an interlude. while he camp out with hi heart and mind, she 
play at camp out with her cloth and body. none the less, she 
made a splendid companion, and to watch her busi cook dinner over 
the fire we had built among the stone wa to understand that her heart 
wa in the busi for the moment and that she wa happi even with the 
detail. 

mrs. maloney at home, knit in the sun and believ that the world 
wa made in six days, wa one woman; but mrs. maloney, stand with 
bare arm over the smoke of a wood fire under the pine trees, wa 
another; and peter sangree, the canadian pupil, with hi pale skin, 
and hi loose, though not ungainli figure, stood besid her in veri 
unfavour contrast as he scrape potato and slice bacon with 
slender white finger that seem better suit to hold a pen than a 
knife. she order him about like a slave, and he obeyed, too, with 
will pleasure, for in spite of hi gener appear of debil he 
wa as happi to be in camp as ani of them. 

but more than ani other member of the party, joan maloney, the 
daughter, wa the one who seem a natur and genuin part of the 
landscape, who belong to it all just in the same way that the tree 
and the moss and the grey rock run out into the water belong to 
it. for she wa obvious in her right and natur setting, a creatur 
of the wilds, a gipsi in her own home. 

To ani one with a discern eye thi would have been more or less 
apparent, but to me, who had known her dure all the twenty-two 
year of her life and wa familiar with the in and out of her 
primitive, utterli un-modern type, it wa strikingli clear. To see 
her there made it imposs to imagin her again in civilisation. I 
lost all recollect of how she look in a town. the memori somehow 
evaporated. thi slim creatur befor me, flit to and fro with the 
grace of the woodland life, swift, supple, adroit, on her knee blow 
the fire, or stir the frying-pan through a veil of smoke, suddenli 
seem the onli way I had ever realli seen her. here she wa at home; 
in london she becam some one conceal by clothes, an artifici doll 
overdress and move by clockwork, onli a portion of her alive. here 
she wa aliv all over. 

I forget altogeth how she wa dressed, just as I forget how ani 
particular tree wa dressed, or how the mark ran on ani one of the 
boulder that lay about the camp. she look just as wild and natur 
and untam as everyth els that went to make up the scene, and more 
than that I cannot say. 

pretty, she wa decidedli not. she wa thin, skinny, dark-haired, and 
possess of great physic strength in the form of endurance. she had, 
too, someth of the forc and vigor purpos of a man, tempestu 
sometim and wild to passionate, frighten her mother, and puzzl 
her easy-go father with her storm of waywardness, while at the same 
time she stir hi admir by her violence. A pagan of the pagan 
she wa besides, and with some haunt suggest of old-world pagan 
beauti about her dark face and eyes. altogeth an odd and difficult 
character, but with a generos and high courag that made her veri 
lovable. 

In town life she alway seem to me to feel cramped, bored, a devil 
in a cage, in her eye a hunt express as though ani moment she 
dread to be caught. but up in these spaciou solitud all thi 
disappeared. away from the limit that plagu and stung her, she 
would show at her best, and as I watch her move about the camp 
I repeatedli found myself think of a wild creatur that had just 
obtain it freedom and wa tri it muscles. 

peter sangree, of course, at onc went down befor her. but she wa so 
obvious beyond hi reach, and besid so well abl to take care of 
herself, that I think her parent gave the matter but littl thought, 
and he himself worship at a respect distance, keep admir 
control of hi passion in all respect save one; for at hi age the 
eye are difficult to master, and the yearning, almost the devouring, 
express often visibl in them wa probabl there unknown even to 
himself. he, better than ani one else, understood that he had fallen in 
love with someth most hard of attainment, someth that drew him 
to the veri edg of life, and almost beyond it. it, no doubt, wa a 
secret and terribl joy to him, thi passion worship from afar; onli 
I think he suffer more than ani one guessed, and that hi want of 
vital wa due in larg measur to the constant stream of unsatisfi 
yearn that pour for ever from hi soul and body. moreover, it 
seem to me, who now saw them for the first time together, that there 
wa an unnam something--an elus qualiti of some kind--that 
mark them as belong to the same world, and that although the girl 
ignor him she wa secretly, and perhap unknown to herself, drawn by 
some attribut veri deep in her own natur to some qualiti equal deep 
in his. 

this, then, wa the parti when we first settl down into our two 
months’ camp on the island in the baltic sea. other figur flit 
from time to time across the scene, and sometim one read man, 
sometim another, came to join us and spend hi four hour a day in 
the clergyman’ tent, but they came for short period only, and they 
went without leav much trace in my memory, and certainli they play 
no import part in what subsequ happened. 

the weather favour us that night, so that by sunset the tent were 
up, the boat unloaded, a store of wood collect and chop into 
lengths, and the candle-lantern hung round readi for light on the 
trees. sangree, too, had pick deep mattress of balsam bough for 
the women’ beds, and had clear littl path of brushwood from their 
tent to the central fireplace. all wa prepar for bad weather. It 
wa a cosi supper and a well-cook one that we sat down to and ate 
under the stars, and, accord to the clergyman, the onli meal fit to 
eat we had seen sinc we left london a week before. 

the deep stillness, after that roar of steamers, trains, and tourists, 
held someth that thrilled, for as we lay round the fire there wa 
no sound but the faint sigh of the pine and the soft lap of 
the wave along the shore and against the side of the boat in the 
lagoon. the ghostli outlin of her white sail wa just visibl 
through the trees, idli rock to and fro in her calm anchorage, 
her sheet flap gentli against the mast. beyond lay the dim blue 
shape of other island float in the night, and from all the great 
space about us came the murmur of the sea and the soft breath of 
great woods. the odour of the wilderness--smel of wind and earth, 
of tree and water, clean, vigorous, and mighty--wer the true odour 
of a virgin world unspoilt by men, more penetr and more subtli 
intox than ani other perfum in the whole world. oh!--and 
danger strong, too, no doubt, for some natures! 

“ahhh!” breath out the clergyman after supper, with an indescrib 
gestur of satisfact and relief. “here there is freedom, and room 
for bodi and mind to turn in. here one can work and rest and play. here 
one can be aliv and absorb someth of the earth-forc that never 
get within touching-dist in the cities. By george, I shall make a 
perman camp here and come when it is time to die!” 

the good man wa mere give vent to hi delight at be under 
canvas. He said the same thing everi year, and he said it often. but it 
more or less express the superfici feel of us all. and when, a 
littl later, he turn to compliment hi wife on the fri potatoes, 
and discov that she wa snoring, with her back against a tree, 
he grunt with content at the sight and put a ground-sheet over her 
feet, as if it were the most natur thing in the world for her to fall 
asleep after dinner, and then move back to hi own corner, smoke hi 
pipe with great satisfaction. 

and I, smoke mine too, lay and fought against the most delici 
sleep imaginable, while my eye wander from the fire to the star 
peep through the branches, and then back again to the group about 
me. the rev. timothi soon let hi pipe go out, and succumb as hi 
wife had done, for he had work hard and eaten well. sangree, also 
smoking, lean against a tree with hi gaze fix on the girl, a 
depth of yearn in hi face that he could not hide, and that realli 
distress me for him. and joan herself, with wide stare eyes, alert, 
full of the new forc of the place, evid key up by the magic of 
find herself among all the thing her soul recognis as “home,” sat 
rigid by the fire, her thought roam through the spaces, the blood 
stir about her heart. she wa as unconsci of the canadian’ gaze 
as she wa that her parent both slept. she look to me more like a 
tree, or someth that had grown out of the island, than a live 
girl of the century; and when I spoke across to her in a whisper and 
suggest a tour of investigation, she start and look up at me as 
though she heard a voic in her dreams. 

sangre leap up and join us, and without wake the other we three 
went over the ridg of the island and made our way down to the shore 
behind. the water lay like a lake befor us still colour by the 
sunset. the air wa keen and scented, waft the smell of the wood 
island that hung about us in the darken air. veri small wave 
tumbl softli on the sand. the sea wa sown with stars, and everywher 
breath and puls the beauti of the northern summer night. I confess 
I speedili lost conscious of the human presenc besid me, and I 
have littl doubt joan did too. onli sangre felt otherwise, I suppos 
for present we heard him sighing; and I can well imagin that he 
absorb the whole wonder and passion of the scene into hi ach 
heart, to swell the pain there that wa more search even than the 
pain at the sight of such matchless and incomprehens beauty. 

the splash of a fish jump broke the spell. 

“I wish we had the cano now,” remark joan; “we could paddl out to 
the other islands.” 

“of course,” I said; “wait here and i’ll go across for it,” and wa 
turn to feel my way back through the dark when she stop me in 
a voic that meant what it said. 

“no; mr. sangre will get it. We will wait here and cooee to guid him.” 

the canadian wa off in a moment, for she had onli to hint of her 
wish and he obeyed. 

“keep out from shore in case of rocks,” I cri out as he went, “and 
turn to the right out of the lagoon. that’ the shortest way round by 
the map.” 

My voic travel across the still water and woke echo in the 
distant island that came back to us like peopl call out of space. 
It wa onli thirti or forti yard over the ridg and down the other 
side to the lagoon where the boat lay, but it wa a good mile to coast 
round the shore in the dark to where we stood and waited. We heard him 
stumbl away among the boulders, and then the sound suddenli ceas 
as he top the ridg and went down past the fire on the other side. 

“I didn’t want to be left alon with him” the girl said present in a 
low voice. “i’m alway afraid he’ go to say or do something----” 
she hesit a moment, look quickli over her shoulder toward the 
ridg where he had just disappeared--“someth that might lead to 
unpleasantness.” 

she stop abruptly. 

“_you_ frightened, joan!” I exclaimed, with genuin surprise. “thi is 
a new light on your wick character. I thought the human be who 
could frighten you did not exist.” then I suddenli realis she wa 
talk seriously--look to me for help of some kind--and at onc I 
drop the teas attitude. 

“he’ veri far gone, I think, joan,” I ad gravely. “you must be kind 
to him, whatev els you may feel. he’ exceedingli fond of you.” 

“I know, but I can’t help it,” she whispered, lest her voic should 
carri in the stillness; “there’ someth about him that--that make 
me feel creepi and half afraid.” 

“but, poor man, it’ not hi fault if he is delic and sometim 
look like death,” I laugh gently, by way of defend what I felt to 
be a veri innoc member of my sex. 

“oh, but it’ not that I mean,” she answer quickly; “it’ someth 
I feel about him, someth in hi soul, someth he hardli know 
himself, but that may come out if we are much together. It draw me, I 
feel, tremendously. It stir what is wild in me--deep down--oh, veri 
deep down,--yet at the same time make me feel afraid.” 

“I suppos hi thought are alway play about you,” I said, “but 
he’ nice-mind and----” 

“yes, yes,” she interrupt impatiently, “I can trust myself absolut 
with him. he’ gentl and singularli pure-minded. but there’ someth 
els that----” she stop again sharpli to listen. then she came up 
close besid me in the darkness, whispering-- 

“you know, mr. hubbard, sometim my intuit warn me a littl too 
strongli to be ignored. Oh yes, you needn’t tell me again that it’ 
difficult to distinguish between fanci and intuition. I know all that. 
but I also know that there’ someth deep down in that man’ soul 
that call to someth deep down in mine. and at present it frighten 
me. becaus I cannot make out what it is; and I know, I _know_, he’ll 
do someth some day that--that will shake my life to the veri 
bottom.” she laugh a littl at the strang of her own description. 

I turn to look at her more closely, but the dark wa too great to 
show her face. there wa an intensity, almost of suppress passion, in 
her voic that took me complet by surprise. 

“nonsense, joan,” I said, a littl severely; “you know him well. he’ 
been with your father for month now.” 

“but that wa in london; and up here it’ different--i mean, I feel 
that it may be different. life in a place like thi blow away the 
restraint of the artifici life at home. I know, oh, I know what i’m 
saying. I feel all unti in a place like this; the rigid of one’ 
natur begin to melt and flow. sure _you_ must understand what I 
mean!” 

“of cours I understand,” I replied, yet not wish to encourag her 
in her present line of thought, “and it’ a grand experience--for a 
short time. but you’r overtir to-night, joan, like the rest of us. 
A few day in thi air will set you abov all fear of the kind you 
mention.” 

then, after a moment’ silence, I added, feel I should estrang her 
confid altogeth if I blunder ani more and treat her like a 
child-- 

“I think, perhaps, the true explan is that you piti him for love 
you, and at the same time you feel the repuls of the healthy, 
vigor anim for what is weak and timid. If he came up boldli and 
took you by the throat and shout that he would forc you to love 
him--well, then you would feel no fear at all. you would know exactli 
how to deal with him. isn’t it, perhaps, someth of that kind?” 

the girl made no reply, and when I took her hand I felt that it 
trembl a littl and wa cold. 

“it’ not hi love that i’m afraid of,” she said hurriedly, for at thi 
moment we heard the dip of a paddl in the water, “it’ someth in 
hi veri soul that terrifi me in a way I have never been terrifi 
before,--yet fascin me. In town I wa hardli consciou of hi 
presence. but the moment we got away from civilisation, it began to 
come. He seem so--so _real_ up here. I dread be alon with him. It 
make me feel that someth must burst and tear it way out--that he 
would do something--or I should do something--i don’t know exactli what 
I mean, probably,--but that I should let myself go and scream----” 

“joan!” 

“don’t be alarmed,” she laugh shortly; “I shan’t do anyth silly, 
but I want to tell you my feel in case I need your help. when 
I have intuit as strong as thi they are never wrong, onli I don’t 
know yet what it mean exactly.” 

“you must hold out for the month, at ani rate,” I said in as 
matter-of-fact a voic as I could manage, for her manner had somehow 
chang my surpris to a subtl sens of alarm. “sangre onli stay the 
month, you know. and, anyhow, you are such an odd creatur yourself 
that you should feel gener toward other odd creatures,” I end 
lamely, with a forc laugh. 

she gave my hand a sudden pressure. “i’m glad i’v told you at ani 
rate,” she said quickli under her breath, for the cano wa now glide 
up silent like a ghost to our feet, “and i’m glad you’r here too,” 
she ad as we move down toward the water to meet it. 

I made sangre chang into the bow and got into the steer seat 
myself, put the girl between us so that I could watch them both by 
keep their outlin against the sea and stars. for the intuit 
of certain folk--women and children usually, I confess--i have alway 
felt a great respect that ha more often than not been justifi by 
experience; and now the curiou emot stir in me by the girl’ 
word remain somewhat vividli in my consciousness. I explain it in 
some measur by the fact that the girl, tire out by the fatigu of 
mani days’ travel, had suffer a vigor reaction of some kind from 
the strong, desol scenery, and further, perhaps, that she had been 
treat to my own experi of see the member of the parti in a 
new light--th canadian, be partli a stranger, more vividli than the 
rest of us. but, at the same time, I felt it wa quit possibl that 
she had sens some subtl link between hi person and her own, 
some qualiti that she had hitherto ignor and that the routin of town 
life had kept buri out of sight. the onli thing that seem difficult 
to explain wa the fear she had spoken of, and thi I hope the 
wholesom effect of camp-lif and exercis would sweep away natur 
in the cours of time. 

We made the tour of the island without speaking. It wa all too 
beauti for speech. the tree crowd down to the shore to hear us 
pass. We saw their fine dark heads, bow low with splendid digniti 
to watch us, forget for a moment that the star were caught in 
the needl network of their hair. against the sky in the west, where 
still linger the sunset gold, we saw the wild toss of the horizon, 
shaggi with forest and cliff, grip the heart like the motiv in 
a symphony, and send the sens of beauti all a-shiv through the 
mind--al these surround island stand abov the water like low 
clouds, and like them seem to post along silent into the engulf 
night. We heard the music drip-drip of the paddle, and the littl 
wash of our wave on the shore, and then suddenli we found ourselv at 
the open of the lagoon again, have made the complet circuit of 
our home. 

the reverend timothi had awaken from sleep and wa sing to 
himself; and the sound of hi voic as we glide down the fifti yard 
of enclos water wa pleasant to hear and undeni wholesome. We saw 
the glow of the fire up among the tree on the ridge, and hi shadow 
move about as he threw on more wood. 

“there you are!” he call aloud. “good again! been set the 
night-lines, eh? capital! and your mother’ still fast asleep, joan.” 

hi cheeri laugh float across the water; he had not been in the least 
disturb by our absence, for old camper are not easili alarmed. 

“now, remember,” he went on, after we had told our littl tale of 
travel by the fire, and mrs. maloney had ask for the fourth time 
exactli where her tent wa and whether the door face east or south, 
“everi one take their turn at cook breakfast, and one of the men is 
alway out at sunris to catch it first. hubbard, i’ll toss you which 
you do in the morn and which I do!” He lost the toss. “then i’ll 
catch it,” I said, laugh at hi discomfiture, for I knew he loath 
stir porridge. “and mind you don’t burn it as you did everi bless 
time last year on the volga,” I ad by way of reminder. 

mrs. maloney’ fifth interrupt about the door of her tent, and her 
further point observ that it wa past nine o’clock, set us 
light lantern and put the fire out for safety. 

but befor we separ for the night the clergyman had a time-honour 
littl ritual of hi own to go through that no one had the heart to 
deni him. He alway did this. It wa a relic of hi pulpit habits. 
He glanc briefli from one to the other of us, hi face grave and 
earnest, hi hand lift to the star and hi eye all close and 
pucker up beneath a momentari frown. then he offer up a short, 
almost inaud prayer, thank heaven for our safe arrival, beg 
for good weather, no ill or accidents, plenti of fish, and strong 
sail winds. 

and then, unexpectedly--no one knew whi exactly--h end up with an 
abrupt request that noth from the kingdom of dark should be 
allow to afflict our peace, and no evil thing come near to disturb us 
in the night-time. 

and while he utter these last surpris words, so strang unlik 
hi usual ending, it chanc that I look up and let my eye wander 
round the group assembl about the die fire. and it certainli seem 
to me that sangree’ face underw a sudden and visibl alteration. 
He wa stare at joan, and as he stare the chang ran over it like a 
shadow and wa gone. I start in spite of myself, for someth oddli 
concentrated, potent, collected, had come into the express usual 
so scatter and feeble. but it wa all swift as a pass meteor, and 
when I look a second time hi face wa normal and he wa look 
among the trees. 

and joan, luckily, had not observ him, her head be bow and her 
eye tightli close while her father prayed. 

“the girl ha a vivid imagin indeed,” I thought, half laughing, 
as I lit the lanterns, “if her thought can put a glamour upon mine in 
thi way;” and yet somehow, when we said good-night, I took occas to 
give her a few vigor word of encouragement, and went to her tent 
to make sure I could find it quickli in the night in case anyth 
happened. In her quick way the girl understood and thank me, and 
the last thing I heard as I move off to the men’ quarter wa mrs. 
maloney cri that there were beetl in her tent, and joan’ laughter 
as she went to help her turn them out. 

half an hour later the island wa silent as the grave, but for the 
mourn voic of the wind as it sigh up from the sea. like white 
sentri stood the three tent of the men on one side of the ridge, 
and on the other side, half hidden by some birches, whose leav just 
shiver as the breez caught them, the women’ tents, patch of 
ghostli grey, gather more close togeth for mutual shelter and 
protection. someth like fifti yard of broken ground, grey rock, 
moss and lichen, lay between, and over all lay the curtain of the night 
and the great whisper wind from the forest of scandinavia. 

and the veri last thing, just befor float away on that mighti 
wave that carri one so softli off into the deep of forgetfulness, 
I again heard the voic of john silenc as the train move out of 
victoria station; and by some subtl connect that met me on the veri 
threshold of conscious there rose in my mind simultan the 
memori of the girl’ half-given confidence, and of her distress. As by 
some wizardri of approach dream they seem in that instant to be 
related; but befor I could analys the whi and the wherefore, both 
sank away out of sight again, and I wa off beyond recall. 

“unless you should send for me sooner.” 


II 

whether mrs. maloney’ tent door open south or east I think she 
never discovered, for it is quit certain she alway slept with the 
flap tightli fastened; I onli know that my own littl “five by seven, 
all silk” face due east, becaus next morn the sun, pour in as 
onli the wilder sun know how to pour, woke me early, and a moment 
later, with a short run over soft moss and a fli dive from the 
granit ledge, I wa swim in the most sparkl water imaginable. 

It wa bare four o’clock, and the sun came down a long vista of blue 
island that led out to the open sea and finland. nearer by rose the 
wood dome of our own property, still cap and wreath with smoki 
trail of fast-melt mist, and look as fresh as though it wa the 
morn of mrs. maloney’ sixth day and they had just issued, clean and 
brilliant, from the hand of the great architect. 

In the open space the ground wa drench with dew, and from the sea a 
cool salt wind stole in among the tree and set the branch trembl 
in an atmospher of shimmer silver. the tent shone white where the 
sun caught them in patches. below lay the lagoon, still dream of 
the summer night; in the open the fish were jump busily, send 
music rippl toward the shore; and in the air hung the magic of 
dawn--silent, incommunicable. 

I lit the fire, so that an hour later the clergyman should find good 
ash to stir hi porridg over, and then set forth upon an examin 
of the island, but hardli had I gone a dozen yard when I saw a figur 
stand a littl in front of me where the sunlight fell in a pool 
among the trees. 

It wa joan. she had alreadi been up an hour, she told me, and had 
bath befor the last star had left the sky. I saw at onc that the 
new spirit of thi solitari region had enter into her, banish the 
fear of the night, for her face wa like the face of a happi denizen 
of the wilderness, and her eye stainless and shining. her feet were 
bare, and drop of dew she had shaken from the branch hung in her 
loose-fli hair. obvious she had come into her own. 

“i’v been all over the island,” she announc laughingly, “and there 
are two thing wanting.” 

“you’r a good judge, joan. what are they?” 

“there’ no anim life, and there’ no--water.” 

“they go together,” I said. “anim don’t bother with a rock like thi 
unless there’ a spring on it.” 

and as she led me from place to place, happi and excited, leap 
adroitli from rock to rock, I wa glad to note that my first 
impress were correct. she made no refer to our convers of 
the night before. the new spirit had driven out the old. there wa no 
room in her heart for fear or anxiety, and natur had everyth her 
own way. 

the island, we found, wa some three-quart of a mile from point 
to point, built in a circle, or wide horseshoe, with an open of 
twenti feet at the mouth of the lagoon. pine-tre grew thickli all 
over, but here and there were patch of silver birch, scrub oak, and 
consider coloni of wild raspberri and gooseberri bushes. the two 
end of the horsesho form bare slab of smooth granit run into 
the sea and form danger reef just below the surface, but the 
rest of the island rose in a forty-foot ridg and slope down steepli 
to the sea on either side, be nowher more than a hundr yard wide. 

the outer shore-lin wa much indent with numberless cove and bay 
and sandi beaches, with here and there cave and precipit littl 
cliff against which the sea broke in spray and thunder. but the inner 
shore, the shore of the lagoon, wa low and regular, and so well 
protect by the wall of tree along the ridg that no storm could ever 
send more than a pass rippl along it sandi marges. etern shelter 
reign there. 

On one of the other islands, a few hundr yard away--for the rest of 
the parti slept late thi first morning, and we took to the canoe--w 
discov a spring of fresh water untaint by the brackish flavour of 
the baltic, and have thu solv the most import problem of the 
camp, we next proceed to deal with the second--fish. and in half an 
hour we reel in and turn homewards, for we had no mean of storage, 
and to clean more fish than may be store or eaten in a day is no wise 
occup for experienc campers. 

and as we land toward six o’clock we heard the clergyman sing as 
usual and saw hi wife and sangre shake out their blanket in the 
sun, and dress in a fashion that final dispel all memori of 
street and civilisation. 

“the littl peopl lit the fire for me,” cri maloney, look natur 
and at home in hi ancient flannel suit and break off in the middl 
of hi singing, “so i’v got the porridg going--and thi time it’ 
_not_ burnt.” 

We report the discoveri of water and held up the fish. 

“good! good again!” he cried. “we’ll have the first decent breakfast 
we’v had thi year. sangree’l clean ’em in no time, and the bo’sun’ 
mate----” 

“will fri them to a turn,” laugh the voic of mrs. maloney, appear 
on the scene in a tight blue jersey and sandals, and catch up the 
frying-pan. her husband alway call her the bo’sun’ mate in camp, 
becaus it wa her duty, among others, to pipe all hand to meals. 

“and as for you, joan,” went on the happi man, “you look like the 
spirit of the island, with moss in your hair and wind in your eyes, 
and sun and star mix in your face.” He look at her with delight 
admiration. “here, sangree, take these twelve, there’ a good fellow, 
they’r the biggest; and we’ll have ’em in butter in less time than you 
can say baltic island!” 

I watch the canadian as he slowli move off to the clean pail. 
hi eye were drink in the girl’ beauty, and a wave of passionate, 
almost feverish, joy pass over hi face, express of the ecstasi of 
true worship more than anyth else. perhap he wa think that he 
still had three week to come with that vision alway befor hi eyes; 
perhap he wa think of hi dream in the night. I cannot say. but 
I notic the curiou mingl of yearn and happi in hi eyes, 
and the strength of the impress touch my curiosity. someth in 
hi face held my gaze for a second, someth to do with it intensity. 
that so timid, so gentl a person should conceal so viril a 
passion almost seem to requir explanation. 

but the impress wa momentary, for that first breakfast in camp 
permit no divid attentions, and I dare swear that the porridge, 
the tea, the swedish “flatbread,” and the fri fish flavour with 
point of frizzl bacon, were better than ani meal eaten elsewher 
that day in the whole world. 

the first clear day in a new camp is alway a furious busi one, and 
we soon drop into the routin upon which in larg measur the real 
comfort of everi one depends. about the cooking-fire, greatli improv 
with stone from the shore, we built a high stockad consist of 
upright pole thickli twine with branches, the roof line with moss 
and lichen and weight with rocks, and round the interior we made low 
wooden seat so that we could lie round the fire even in rain and eat 
our meal in peace. paths, too, outlin themselv from tent to tent, 
from the bath place and the land stage, and a fair divis of 
the island wa decid upon between the quarter of the men and the 
women. wood wa stacked, awkward tree and boulder removed, hammock 
slung, and tent strengthened. In a word, camp wa established, and 
duti were assign and accept as though we expect to live on 
thi baltic island for year to come and the smallest detail of the 
commun life wa important. 

moreover, as the camp came into being, thi sens of a commun 
developed, prove that we were a definit whole, and not mere 
separ human be live for a while in tent upon a desert island. 
each fell willingli into the routine. sangree, as by natur selection, 
took upon himself the clean of the fish and the cut of the wood 
into length suffici for a day’ use. and he did it well. the pan 
of water wa never without a fish, clean and scaled, readi to fri 
for whoever wa hungry; the nightli fire never die down for lack of 
materi to throw on without go farther afield to search. 

and timothy, onc reverend, caught the fish and chop down the 
trees. He also assum respons for the condit of the boat, 
and did it so thoroughli that noth in the littl cutter wa ever 
found wanting. and when, for ani reason, hi presenc wa in demand, 
the first place to look for him was--in the boat, and there, too, he 
wa usual found, tinker away with sheets, sails, or rudder and 
sing as he tinkered. 

nor wa the “reading” neglected; for most morn there came a sound 
of drone voic from the white tent by the raspberri bushes, which 
signifi that sangree, the tutor, and whatev other man chanc to be 
in the parti at the time, were hard at it with histori or the classics. 

and while mrs. maloney, also by natur selection, took charg of 
the larder and the kitchen, the mend and gener supervis of 
the rough comforts, she also made herself peculiarli mistress of the 
megaphon which summon to meal and carri her voic easili from one 
end of the island to the other; and in her hour of leisur she daub 
the surround sceneri on to a sketch block with all the honesti 
and devot of her determin but unrecept soul. 

joan, meanwhile, joan, elus creatur of the wilds, becam I know 
not exactli what. she did plenti of work in the camp, yet seem to 
have no veri precis duties. she wa everywher and anywhere. sometim 
she slept in her tent, sometim under the star with a blanket. she 
knew everi inch of the island and kept turn up in place where she 
wa least expected--for ever wander about, read her book in 
shelter corners, make littl fire on sunless day to “worship by 
to the gods,” as she put it, ever find new pool to dive and bath 
in, and swim day and night in the warm and waveless lagoon like a 
fish in a huge tank. she went bare-leg and bare-footed, with her 
hair down and her skirt caught up to the knees, and if ever a human 
be turn into a jolli savag within the compass of a singl week, 
joan maloney wa certainli that human being. she ran wild. 

So completely, too, wa she possess by the strong spirit of the 
place that the littl human fear she had yield to so strang on 
our arriv seem to have been utterli dispossessed. As I hope and 
expected, she made no refer to our convers of the first 
evening. sangre bother her with no special attentions, and after 
all they were veri littl together. hi behaviour wa perfect in that 
respect, and I, for my part, hardli gave the matter anoth thought. 
joan wa ever a prey to vivid fanci of one kind or another, and thi 
wa one of them. merci for the happi of all concerned, it had 
melt away befor the spirit of busy, activ life and deep content 
that reign over the island. everi one wa intens alive, and peac 
wa upon all. 

* * * * * 

meanwhil the effect of the camp-lif began to tell. alway a search 
test of character, it results, sooner or later, are infallible, for 
it act upon the soul as swiftli and sure as the hypo bath upon the 
neg of a photograph. A readjust of the person forc take 
place quickly; some part of the person go to sleep, other wake 
up: but the first sweep chang that the primit life bring about 
is that the artifici portion of the charact shed themselv one 
after anoth like dead skins. attitud and pose that seem genuin 
in the city, drop away. the mind, like the body, grow quickli hard, 
simple, uncomplex. and in a camp as primit and close to natur as 
our was, these effect becam speedili visible. 

some folk, of course, who talk glibli about the simpl life when it 
is safe out of reach, betray themselv in camp by for ever peer 
about for the artifici excit of civilis which they miss. 
some get bore at once; some grow slovenly; some reveal the anim in 
most unexpect fashion; and some, the select few, find themselv in 
veri short order and are happy. 

and, in our littl party, we could flatter ourselv that we all 
belong to the last category, so far as the gener effect wa 
concerned. onli there were certain other chang as well, vari with 
each individual, and all interest to note. 

It wa onli after the first week or two that these chang becam 
marked, although thi is the proper place, I think, to speak of them. 
for, have myself no other duti than to enjoy a well-earn holiday, 
I use to load my cano with blanket and provis and journey forth 
on explor trip among the island of sever day together; and 
it wa on my return from the first of these--when I rediscov the 
party, so to speak--that these chang first present themselv 
vividli to me, and in one particular instanc produc a rather curiou 
impression. 

In a word, then, while everi one had grown wilder, natur wilder, 
sangree, it seem to me, had grown much wilder, and what I can onli 
call unnatur wilder. He made me think of a savage. 

To begin with, he had chang immens in mere physic appearance, 
and the full brown cheeks, the brighter eye of absolut health, and 
the gener air of vigour and robust that had come to replac hi 
customari lassitud and timidity, had work such an improv that I 
hardli knew him for the same man. hi voice, too, wa deeper and hi 
manner bespok for the first time a greater measur of confid in 
himself. He now had some claim to be call nice-looking, or at least 
to a certain air of viril that would not lessen hi valu in the 
eye of the opposit sex. 

all this, of course, wa natur enough, and most welcome. but, 
altogeth apart from thi physic change, which no doubt had also 
been go forward in the rest of us, there wa a subtl note in hi 
person that came to me with a degre of surpris that almost 
amount to shock. 

and two things--a he came down to welcom me and pull up the 
canoe--leap up in my mind unbidden, as though connect in some way 
I could not at the moment divine--first, the curiou judgment form 
of him by joan; and secondly, that fugit express I had caught in 
hi face while maloney wa offer up hi strang prayer for special 
protect from heaven. 

the delicaci of manner and feature--to call it by no milder term--which 
had alway been a distinguish characterist of the man, had been 
replac by someth far more vigor and decided, that yet utterli 
elud analysis. the chang which impress me so oddli wa not easi 
to name. the others--sing maloney, the bustl bo’sun’ mate, and 
joan, that fascin half-bre of undin and salamander--al show 
the effect of a life so close to nature; but in their case the chang 
wa perfectli natur and what wa to be expected, wherea with peter 
sangree, the canadian, it wa someth unusu and unexpected. 

It is imposs to explain how he manag gradual to convey to my 
mind the impress that someth in him had turn savage, yet this, 
more or less, is the impress that he did convey. It wa not that 
he seem realli less civilised, or that hi charact had undergon 
ani definit alteration, but rather that someth in him, hitherto 
dormant, had awaken to life. some quality, latent till now--so 
far, at least, as we were concerned, who, after all, knew him but 
slightly--had stir into activ and risen to the surfac of hi 
being. 

and while, for the moment, thi seem as far as I could get, it wa 
but natur that my mind should continu the intuit process and 
acknowledg that john silence, owe to hi peculiar faculties, and the 
girl, owe to her singularli recept temperament, might each in a 
differ way have divin thi latent qualiti in hi soul, and fear 
it manifest later. 

On look back to thi pain adventure, too, it now seem equal 
natur that the same process, carri to it logic conclusion, 
should have waken some deep instinct in me that, wholli without 
direct from my will, set itself sharpli and persist upon the 
watch from that veri moment. thenceforward the person of sangre 
wa never far from my thoughts, and I wa for ever analys and 
search for the explan that took so long in coming. 

“I declare, hubbard, you’r tan like an aboriginal, and you look 
like one, too,” laugh maloney. 

“and I can return the compliment,” wa my reply, as we all gather 
round a brew of tea to exchang news and compar notes. 

and later, at supper, it amus me to observ that the distinguish 
tutor, onc clergyman, did not eat hi food quit as “nicely” as he did 
at home--h devour it; that mrs. maloney ate more, and, to say the 
least, with less delay, than wa her custom in the select atmospher 
of her english dining-room; and that while joan attack her tin 
plate with genuin avidity, sangree, the canadian, bit and gnaw 
at his, laugh and talk and compliment the cook all the while, 
and make me think with secret amus of a starv anim at it 
first meal. while, from their remark about myself, I judg that I had 
chang and grown wild as much as the rest of them. 

In thi and in a hundr other littl way the chang showed, way 
difficult to defin in detail, but all proving--not the coarsen 
effect of lead the primit life, but, let us say, the more direct 
and unvarnish method that becam prevalent. for all day long we 
were in the bath of the elements--wind, water, sun--and just as the 
bodi becam insens to cold and shed unnecessari clothing, the mind 
grew straightforward and shed mani of the disguis requir by the 
convent of civilisation. 

and in each, accord to tempera and character, there stir the 
life-instinct that were natural, untamed, and, in a sense--savage. 


iii 

So it came about that I stay with our island party, put off 
my second explor trip from day to day, and I think that thi 
far-fetch instinct to watch sangre wa realli the caus of my 
postponement. 

for anoth ten day the life of the camp pursu it even and 
delight way, bless by perfect summer weather, a good harvest 
of fish, fine wind for sailing, and calm, starri nights. maloney’ 
selfish prayer had been favour received. noth came to disturb 
or perplex. there wa not even the prowl of night anim to vex 
the rest of mrs. maloney; for in previou camp it had often been her 
peculiar afflict that she heard the porcupin scratch against 
the canvas, or the squirrel drop fir-con in the earli morn 
with a sound of miniatur thunder upon the roof of her tent. but on 
thi island there wa not even a squirrel or a mouse. I think two toad 
and a small and harmless snake were the onli live creatur that had 
been discov dure the whole of the first fortnight. and these two 
toad in all probabl were not two toads, but one toad. 

then, suddenly, came the terror that chang the whole aspect of the 
place--th devast terror. 

It came, at first, gently, but from the veri start it made me realis 
the unpleas loneli of our situation, our remot isol in 
thi wilder of sea and rock, and how the island in thi tideless 
baltic ocean lay about us like the advanc guard of a vast besieg 
army. it entry, as I say, wa gentle, hardli noticeable, in fact, 
to most of us: singularli undramat it certainli was. but, then, in 
actual life thi is often the way the dread climax move upon us, 
leav the heart undisturb almost to the last minute, and then 
overwhelm it with a sudden rush of horror. for it wa the custom at 
breakfast to listen patient while each in turn relat the trivial 
adventur of the night--how they slept, whether the wind shook their 
tent, whether the spider on the ridg pole had moved, whether they had 
heard the toad, and so forth--and on thi particular morn joan, in 
the middl of a littl pause, made a truli novel announcement: 

“in the night I heard the howl of a dog,” she said, and then flush 
up to the root of her hair when we burst out laughing. for the idea 
of there be a dog on thi forsaken island that wa onli abl to 
support a snake and two toad wa distinctli ludicrous, and I rememb 
maloney, half-way through hi burnt porridge, cap the announc 
by declar that he had heard a “baltic turtle” in the lagoon, and hi 
wife’ express of frantic alarm befor the laughter undeceiv her. 

but the next morn joan repeat the stori with addit and 
convinc detail. 

“sound of whine and growl woke me,” she said, “and I distinctli 
heard snif under my tent, and the scratch of paws.” 

“oh, timothy! can it be a porcupine?” exclaim the bo’sun’ mate with 
distress, forget that sweden wa not canada. 

but the girl’ voic had sound to me in quit anoth key, and 
look up I saw that her father and sangre were stare at her hard. 
they, too, understood that she wa in earnest, and had been struck by 
the seriou note in her voice. 

“rubbish, joan! you are alway dream someth or other wild,” her 
father said a littl impatiently. 

“there’ not an anim of ani size on the whole island,” ad sangre 
with a puzzl expression. He never took hi eye from her face. 

“but there’ noth to prevent one swim over,” I put in briskly, 
for somehow a sens of uneasi that wa not pleasant had woven 
itself into the talk and pauses. “A deer, for instance, might easili 
land in the night and take a look round----” 

“or a bear!” gasp the bo’sun’ mate, with a look so portent that 
we all welcom the laugh. 

but joan did not laugh. instead, she sprang up and call to us to 
follow. 

“there,” she said, point to the ground by her tent on the side 
farthest from her mother’s; “there are the mark close to my head. you 
can see for yourselves.” 

We saw plainly. the moss and lichen--for earth there wa hardli 
any--had been scratch up by paws. An anim about the size of a larg 
dog it must have been, to judg by the marks. We stood and stare in a 
row. 

“close to my head,” repeat the girl, look round at us. her face, 
I noticed, wa veri pale, and her lip seem to quiver for an instant. 
then she gave a sudden gulp--and burst into a flood of tears. 

the whole thing had come about in the brief space of a few minutes, and 
with a curiou sens of inevitableness, moreover, as though it had all 
been care plan from all time and noth could have stop it. 
It had all been rehears before--had actual happen before, as the 
strang feel sometim ha it; it seem like the open movement 
in some omin drama, and that I knew exactli what would happen next. 
someth of great moment wa impending. 

for thi sinist sensat of come disast made itself felt from 
the veri beginning, and an atmospher of gloom and dismay pervad the 
entir camp from that moment forward. 

I drew sangre to one side and move away, while maloney took the 
distress girl into her tent, and hi wife follow them, energet 
and greatli flustered. 

for thus, in undramat fashion, it wa that the terror I have 
spoken of first attempt the invas of our camp, and, trivial and 
unimport though it seemed, everi littl detail of thi open scene 
is photograph upon my mind with merciless accuraci and precision. 
It happen exactli as described. thi wa exactli the languag used. 
I see it written befor me in black and white. I see, too, the face 
of all concern with the sudden ugli signatur of alarm where befor 
had been peace. the terror had stretch out, so to speak, a first 
tent feeler toward us and had touch the heart of each with a 
horrid directness. and from thi moment the camp changed. 

sangre in particular wa visibl upset. He could not bear to see the 
girl distressed, and to hear her actual cri wa almost more than he 
could stand. the feel that he had no right to protect her hurt him 
keenly, and I could see that he wa itch to do someth to help, 
and like him for it. hi express said plainli that he would tear in 
a thousand piec anyth that dare to injur a hair of her head. 

We lit our pipe and stroll over in silenc to the men’ quarters, 
and it wa hi odd canadian express “gee whiz!” that drew my 
attent to a further discovery. 

“the brute’ been scratch round my tent too,” he cried, as he 
point to similar mark by the door and I stoop down to examin 
them. We both stare in amaz for sever minut without speaking. 

“onli I sleep like the dead,” he added, straighten up again, “and so 
heard nothing, I suppose.” 

We trace the paw-mark from the mouth of hi tent in a direct line 
across to the girl’s, but nowher els about the camp wa there a 
sign of the strang visitor. the deer, dog, or whatev it wa that 
had twice favour us with a visit in the night, had confin it 
attent to these two tents. and, after all, there wa realli 
noth out of the way about these visit of an unknown animal, for 
although our own island wa destitut of life, we were in the heart 
of a wilderness, and the mainland and larger island must be swarm 
with all kind of four-foot creatures, and no veri prolong swim 
wa necessari to reach us. In ani other countri it would not have 
caus a moment’ interest--interest of the kind we felt, that is. 
In our canadian camp the bear were for ever grunt about among 
the provis bag at night, porcupin scratch unceasingly, and 
chipmunk scuttl over everything. 

“mi daughter is overtired, and that’ the truth of it,” explain 
maloney present when he rejoin us and had examin in turn the 
other paw-marks. “she’ been overdo it lately, and camp-life, you 
know, alway mean a great excit to her. it’ natur enough. If 
we take no notic she’ll be all right.” He paus to borrow my tobacco 
pouch and fill hi pipe, and the blunder way he fill it and 
spill the preciou weed on the ground visibl beli the calm of hi 
easi language. “you might take her out for a bit of fishing, hubbard, 
like a good chap; she’ hardli up to the long day in the cutter. show 
her some of the other island in your canoe, perhaps. eh?” 

and by lunch-tim the cloud had pass away as suddenly, and as 
suspiciously, as it had come. 

but in the canoe, on our way home, have till then purpos ignor 
the subject uppermost in our minds, she suddenli spoke to me in a way 
that again touch the note of sinist alarm--th note that kept on 
sound and sound until final john silenc came with hi great 
vibrat presenc and reliev it; yes, and even after he came, too, 
for a while. 

“i’m asham to ask it,” she said abruptly, as she steer me home, 
her sleev roll up, her hair blow in the wind, “and asham of 
my silli tear too, becaus I realli can’t make out what caus them; 
but, mr. hubbard, I want you to promis me not to go off for your long 
expeditions--just yet. I beg it of you.” she wa so in earnest that 
she forgot the canoe, and the wind caught it sideway and made us roll 
dangerously. “I have tri hard not to ask this,” she added, bring 
the cano round again, “but I simpli can’t help myself.” 

It wa a good deal to ask, and I suppos my hesit wa plain; for 
she went on befor I could reply, and her beseech express and 
intens of manner impress me veri forcibly. 

“for anoth two week only----” 

“mr. sangre leav in a fortnight,” I said, see at onc what she 
wa drive at, but wonder if it wa best to encourag her or not. 

“if I knew you were to be on the island till then,” she said, her face 
altern pale and blushing, and her voic trembl a little, “I 
should feel so much happier.” 

I look at her steadily, wait for her to finish. 

“and safer,” she ad almost in a whisper; “especially--at night, I 
mean.” 

“safer, joan?” I repeated, think I had never seen her eye so soft 
and tender. she nod her head, keep her gaze fix on my face. 

It wa realli difficult to refuse, whatev my thought and judgment 
may have been, and somehow I understood that she spoke with good 
reason, though for the life of me I could not have put it into words. 

“happier--and safer,” she said gravely, the cano give a danger 
lurch as she lean forward in her seat to catch my answer. perhaps, 
after all, the wisest way wa to grant her request and make light of 
it, eas her anxieti without too much encourag it cause. 

“all right, joan, you queer creature; I promise,” and the instant look 
of relief in her face, and the smile that came back like sunlight to 
her eyes, made me feel that, unknown to myself and the world, I wa 
capabl of consider sacrific after all. 

“but, you know, there’ noth to be afraid of,” I ad sharply; and 
she look up in my face with the smile women use when they know we are 
talk idly, yet do not wish to tell us so. 

“_you_ don’t feel afraid, I know,” she observ quietly. 

“of cours not; whi should i?” 

“so, if you will just humour me thi onc i--i will never ask anyth 
foolish of you again as long as I live,” she said gratefully. 

“you have my promise,” wa all I could find to say. 

she head the nose of the cano for the lagoon lie a quarter of a 
mile ahead, and paddl swiftly; but a minut or two later she paus 
again and stare hard at me with the drip paddl across the thwarts. 

“you’v not heard anyth at night yourself, have you?” she asked. 

“I never hear anyth at night,” I repli shortly, “from the moment I 
lie down till the moment I get up.” 

“that dismal howling, for instance,” she went on, determin to get 
it out, “far away at first and then get closer, and stop just 
outsid the camp?” 

“certainli not.” 

“because, sometim I think I almost dream it.” 

“most like you did,” wa my unsympathet response. 

“and you don’t think father ha heard it either, then?” 

“no. He would have told me if he had.” 

thi seem to reliev her mind a little. “I know mother hasn’t,” she 
added, as if speak to herself, “for she hear nothing--ever.” 

* * * * * 

It wa two night after thi convers that I woke out of deep 
sleep and heard sound of screaming. the voic wa realli horrible, 
break the peac and silenc with it shrill clamour. In less than 
ten second I wa half dress and out of my tent. the scream had 
stop abruptly, but I knew the gener direction, and ran as fast as 
the dark would allow over to the women’ quarters, and on get 
close I heard sound of suppress weeping. It wa joan’ voice. and 
just as I came up I saw mrs. maloney, marvel attired, fumbl 
with a lantern. other voic becam audibl in the same moment behind 
me, and timothi maloney arrived, breathless, less than half dressed, 
and carri anoth lantern that had gone out on the way from be 
bang against a tree. dawn wa just breaking, and a chill wind blew in 
from the sea. heavi black cloud drove low overhead. 

the scene of confus may be better imagin than described. question 
in frighten voic fill the air against thi background of 
suppress weeping. briefly--joan’ silk tent had been torn, and the 
girl wa in a state border upon hysterics. somewhat reassur by 
our noisi presence, however,--for she wa plucki at heart,--sh pull 
herself togeth and tri to explain what had happened; and her broken 
words, told there on the edg of night and morn upon thi wild 
island ridge, were oddli thrill and distressingli convincing. 

“someth touch me and I woke,” she said simply, but in a voic 
still hush and broken with the terror of it, “someth push 
against the tent; I felt it through the canvas. there wa the same 
snif and scratch as before, and I felt the tent give a littl 
as when wind shake it. I heard breathing--veri loud, veri heavi 
breathing--and then came a sudden great tear blow, and the canva 
rip open close to my face.” 

she had instantli dash out through the open flap and scream at 
the top of her voice, think the creatur had actual got into the 
tent. but noth wa visible, she declared, and she heard not the 
faintest sound of an anim make off under cover of the darkness. 
the brief account seem to exercis a paralys effect upon us all 
as we listen to it. I can see the dishevel group to thi day, the 
wind blow the women’ hair, and maloney crane hi head forward to 
listen, and hi wife, open-mouth and gasping, lean against a pine 
tree. 

“come over to the stockad and we’ll get the fire going,” I said; 
“that’ the first thing,” for we were all shake with the cold in 
our scanti garments. and at that moment sangre arriv wrap in a 
blanket and carri hi gun; he wa still drunken with sleep. 

“the dog again,” maloney explain briefly, forestal hi questions; 
“been at joan’ tent. torn it, by gad! thi time. it’ time we did 
something.” He went on mumbl confusedli to himself. 

sangre grip hi gun and look about swiftli in the darkness. I 
saw hi eye flame in the glare of the flicker lanterns. He made a 
movement as though to start out and hunt--and kill. then hi glanc 
fell on the girl crouch on the ground, her face hidden in her 
hands, and there leap into hi featur an express of savag 
anger that transform them. He could have face a dozen lion with a 
walking-stick at that moment, and again I like him for the strength of 
hi anger, hi self-control, and hi hopeless devotion. 

but I stop him go off on a blind and useless chase. 

“come and help me start the fire, sangree,” I said, anxiou also to 
reliev the girl of our presence; and a few minut later the ashes, 
still glow from the night’ fire, had kindl the fresh wood, 
and there wa a blaze that warm us well while it also lit up the 
surround tree within a radiu of twenti yards. 

“I heard nothing,” he whispered; “what in the world do you think it is? 
It sure can’t be onli a dog!” 

“we’ll find that out later,” I said, as the other came up to the 
grate warmth; “the first thing is to make as big a fire as we can.” 

joan wa calmer now, and her mother had put on some warmer, and less 
miraculous, garments. and while they stood talk in low voic 
maloney and I slip off to examin the tent. there wa littl enough 
to see, but that littl wa unmistakable. some anim had scratch up 
the ground at the head of the tent, and with a great blow of a power 
paw--a paw clearli provid with good claws--had struck the silk and 
torn it open. there wa a hole larg enough to pass a fist and arm 
through. 

“it can’t be far away,” maloney said excitedly. “we’ll organis a hunt 
at once; thi veri minute.” 

We hurri back to the fire, maloney talk boister about hi 
propos hunt. “there’ noth like prompt action to dispel alarm,” he 
whisper in my ear; and then turn to the rest of us. 

“we’ll hunt the island from end to end at once,” he said, with 
excitement; “that’ what we’ll do. the beast can’t be far away. and the 
bosun’ mate and joan must come too, becaus they can’t be left alone. 
hubbard, you take the right shore, and you, sangree, the left, and 
i’ll go in the middl with the women. In thi way we can stretch clean 
across the ridge, and noth bigger than a rabbit can possibl escap 
us.” He wa extraordinarili excited, I thought. anyth affect 
joan, of course, stir him prodigiously. “get your gun and we’ll 
start the drive at once,” he cried. He lit anoth lantern and hand 
one each to hi wife and joan, and while I ran to fetch my gun I heard 
him sing to himself with the excit of it all. 

meanwhil the dawn had come on quickly. It made the flicker lantern 
look pale. the wind, too, wa rising, and I heard the tree moan 
overhead and the wave break with increas clamour on the shore. 
In the lagoon the boat dip and splashed, and the spark from the 
fire were carri aloft in a stream and scatter far and wide. 

We made our way to the extrem end of the island, measur our 
distanc carefully, and then began to advance. none of us spoke. 
sangre and I, with cock guns, watch the shore lines, and all 
within easi touch and speak distance. It wa a slow and blunder 
drive, and there were mani fals alarms, but after the best part of 
half an hour we stood on the farther end, have made the complet 
tour, and without put up so much as a squirrel. certainli there wa 
no live creatur on that island but ourselves. 

“_i_ know what it is!” cri maloney, look out over the dim expans 
of grey sea, and speak with the air of a man make a discovery; 
“it’ a dog from one of the farm on the larger islands”--h point 
seaward where the archipelago thickened--“and it’ escap and turn 
wild. our fire and voic attract it, and it’ probabl half starv 
as well as savage, poor brute!” 

No one said anyth in reply, and he began to sing again veri low to 
himself. 

the point where we stood--a huddled, shiver group--fac the wider 
channel that led to the open sea and finland. the grey dawn had broken 
in earnest at last, and we could see the race wave with their angri 
crest of white. the surround island show up as dark mass 
in the distance, and in the east, almost as maloney spoke, the sun 
came up with a rush in a stormi and magnific sky of red and gold. 
against thi splash and gorgeou background black clouds, shape 
like fantast and legendari animals, file past swiftli in a tear 
stream, and to thi day I have onli to close my eye to see again that 
vivid and hurri process in the air. all about us the pine made 
black splash against the sky. It wa an angri sunrise. rain, indeed, 
had alreadi begun to fall in big drops. 

We turned, as by a common instinct, and, without speech, made our way 
back slowli to the stockade, maloney hum snatch of hi songs, 
sangre in front with hi gun, prepar to shoot at a moment’ notice, 
and the women flounder in the rear with myself and the extinguish 
lanterns. 

yet it wa onli a dog! 

really, it wa most singular when one came to reflect soberli upon 
it all. events, say the occultists, have souls, or at least that 
agglomer life due to the emot and thought of all concern 
in them, so that cities, and even whole countries, have great 
astral shape which may becom visibl to the eye of vision; and 
certainli here, the soul of thi drive--thi vain, blundering, futil 
drive--stood somewher between ourselv and--laughed. 

all of us heard that laugh, and all of us tri hard to smother the 
sound, or at least to ignor it. everi one talk at once, loudly, and 
with exagger decision, obvious tri to say someth plausibl 
against heavi odds, strive to explain natur that an anim might 
so easili conceal itself from us, or swim away befor we had time to 
light upon it trail. for we all spoke of that “trail” as though it 
realli existed, and we had more to go upon than the mere mark of 
paw about the tent of joan and the canadian. indeed, but for these, 
and the torn tent, I think it would, of course, have been possibl to 
ignor the exist of thi beast intrud altogether. 

and it wa here, under thi angri dawn, as we stood in the shelter of 
the stockad from the pour rain, weari yet so strang excited--it 
wa here, out of thi confus of voic and explanations, that--veri 
stealthily--th ghost of someth horribl slip in and stood among 
us. It made all our explan seem childish and untrue; the fals 
relat wa instantli exposed. eye exchang quick, anxiou glances, 
questioning, express of dismay. there wa a sens of wonder, of 
poignant distress, and of trepidation. alarm stood wait at our 
elbows. We shivered. 

then, suddenly, as we look into each other’ faces, came the long, 
unwelcom paus in which thi new arriv establish itself in our 
hearts. 

and, without further speech, or attempt at explanation, maloney move 
off abruptli to mix the porridg for an earli breakfast; sangre to 
clean the fish; myself to chop wood and tend the fire; joan and her 
mother to chang their wet garments; and, most signific of all, to 
prepar her mother’ tent for it futur complement of two. 

each went to hi duty, but hurriedly, awkwardly, silently; and thi new 
arrival, thi shape of terror and distress stalked, viewless, by the 
side of each. 

“if onli I could have trace that dog,” I think wa the thought in the 
mind of all. 

* * * * * 

but in camp, where everi one realis how import the individu 
contribut is to the comfort and well-b of all, the mind speedili 
recov tone and pull itself together. 

dure the day, a day of heavi and ceaseless rain, we kept more or less 
to our tents, and though there were sign of mysteri confer 
between the three member of the maloney family, I think that most of 
us slept a good deal and stay alon with hi thoughts. certainly, I 
did, becaus when maloney came to say that hi wife invit us all to a 
special “tea” in her tent, he had to shake me awak befor I realis 
that he wa there at all. 

and by supper-tim we were more or less even-mind again, and almost 
jolly. I onli notic that there wa an undercurr of what is best 
describ as “jumpiness,” and that the merest snap of a twig, or 
plop of a fish in the lagoon, wa suffici to make us start and look 
over our shoulders. paus were rare in our talk, and the fire wa 
never for one instant allow to get low. the wind and rain had ceased, 
but the drip of the branch still kept up an excel imit 
of a downpour. In particular, maloney wa vigil and alert, tell 
us a seri of tale in which the wholesom humor element wa 
especi strong. He lingered, too, behind with me after sangre had 
gone to bed, and while I mix myself a glass of hot swedish punch, he 
did a thing I had never known him do before--h mix one for himself, 
and then ask me to light him over to hi tent. We said noth on 
the way, but I felt that he wa glad of my companionship. 

I return alon to the stockade, and for a long time after that kept 
the fire blazing, and sat up smoke and thinking. I hardli knew why; 
but sleep wa far from me for one thing, and for another, an idea 
wa take form in my mind that requir the comfort of tobacco and 
a bright fire for it growth. I lay against a corner of the stockad 
seat, listen to the wind whisper and to the ceaseless drip-drip 
of the trees. the night, otherwise, wa veri still, and the sea quiet 
as a lake. I rememb that I wa conscious, peculiarli conscious, of 
thi host of desol island crowd about us in the darkness, and 
that we were the one littl spot of human in a rather wonder kind 
of wilderness. 

but this, I think, wa the onli symptom that came to warn me of 
highli strung nerves, and it certainli wa not suffici alarm 
to destroy my peac of mind. one thing, however, did come to disturb 
my peace, for just as I final made readi to go, and had kick the 
ember of the fire into a last effort, I fanci I saw, peer at me 
round the farther end of the stockad wall, a dark and shadowi mass 
that might have been--that strongli resembled, in fact--th bodi of a 
larg animal. two glow eye shone for an instant in the middl of 
it. but the next second I saw that it wa mere a project mass of 
moss and lichen in the wall of our stockade, and the eye were a coupl 
of wander spark from the die ash I had kicked. It wa easi 
enough, too, to imagin I saw an anim move here and there between 
the trees, as I pick my way stealthili to my tent. Of course, the 
shadow trick me. 

and though it wa after one o’clock, maloney’ light wa still burning, 
for I saw hi tent shine white among the pines. 

It was, however, in the short space between conscious and 
sleep--that time when the bodi is low and the voic of the submerg 
region tell sometim true--that the idea which had been all thi 
while matur reach the point of an actual decision, and I suddenli 
realis that I had resolv to send word to dr. silence. for, with 
a sudden wonder that I had hitherto been so blind, the unwelcom 
convict dawn upon me all at onc that some dread thing wa 
lurk about us on thi island, and that the safeti of at least one 
of us wa threaten by someth monstrou and unclean that wa too 
horribl to contemplate. and, again rememb those last word of hi 
as the train move out of the platform, I understood that dr. silenc 
would hold himself in readi to come. 

“unless you should send for me sooner,” he had said. 

* * * * * 

I found myself suddenli wide awake. It is imposs to say what woke 
me, but it wa no gradual process, see that I jump from deep sleep 
to absolut alert in a singl instant. I had evid slept for an 
hour and more, for the night had cleared, star crowd the sky, and 
a pallid half-moon just sink into the sea threw a spectral light 
between the trees. 

I went outsid to sniff the air, and stood upright. A curiou 
impress that someth wa astir in the camp came over me, and when 
I glanc across at sangree’ tent, some twenti feet away, I saw that 
it wa moving. He too, then, wa awak and restless, for I saw the 
canva side bulg thi way and that as he move within. 

then the flap push forward. He wa come out, like myself, to sniff 
the air; and I wa not surprised, for it sweet after the rain wa 
intoxicating. and he came on all fours, just as I had done. I saw a 
head thrust round the edg of the tent. 

and then I saw that it wa not sangre at all. It wa an animal. and 
the same instant I realis someth els too--it wa _the_ animal; 
and it whole present for some unaccount reason wa unutter 
malefic. 

A cri I wa quit unabl to suppress escap me, and the creatur 
turn on the instant and stare at me with bale eyes. I could 
have drop on the spot, for the strength all ran out of my bodi 
with a rush. someth about it touch in me the live terror that 
grip and paralyses. If the mind requir but the tenth of a second 
to form an impression, I must have stood there stockstil for sever 
second while I seiz the rope for support and stared. mani and vivid 
impress flash through my mind, but not one of them result in 
action, becaus I wa in instant dread that the beast ani moment would 
leap in my direct and be upon me. instead, however, after what 
seem a vast period, it slowli turn it eye from my face, utter a 
low whine sound, and came out altogeth into the open. 

then, for the first time, I saw it in it entireti and note two 
things: it wa about the size of a larg dog, but at the same time it 
wa utterli unlik ani anim that I had ever seen. also, that the 
qualiti that had impress me first as be malefic, wa realli onli 
it singular and origin strangeness. foolish as it may sound, and 
imposs as it is for me to adduc proof, I can onli say that the 
anim seem to me then to be--not real. 

but all thi pass through my mind in a flash, almost subconsciously, 
and befor I had time to check my impressions, or even properli verifi 
them; I made an involuntari movement, catch the tight rope in my 
hand so that it twang like a banjo string, and in that instant the 
creatur turn the corner of sangree’ tent and wa gone into the 
darkness. 

then, of course, my sens in some measur return to me, and I 
realis onli one thing: it had been insid hi tent! 

I dash out, reach the door in half a dozen strides, and look in. 
the canadian, thank god! lay upon hi bed of branches. hi arm wa 
stretch outside, across the blankets, the fist tightli clenched, and 
the bodi had an appear of unusu rigid that wa alarming. On 
hi face there wa an express of effort, almost of pain effort, 
so far as the uncertain light permit me to see, and hi sleep seem 
to be veri profound. He looked, I thought, so stiff, so unnatur 
stiff, and in some indefin way, too, he look smaller--shrunken. 

I call to him to wake, but call mani time in vain. then I decid 
to shake him, and had alreadi move forward to do so vigor when 
there came a sound of footstep pad softli behind me, and I felt a 
stream of hot breath burn my neck as I stooped. I turn sharply. the 
tent door wa darken and someth silent swept in. I felt a rough 
and shaggi bodi push past me, and knew that the anim had returned. It 
seem to leap forward between me and sangree--in fact, to leap upon 
sangree, for it dark bodi hid him momentarili from view, and in that 
moment my soul turn sick and coward with a horror that rose from the 
veri dreg and depth of life, and grip my exist at it central 
source. 

the creatur seem somehow to melt away into him, almost as though 
it belong to him and were a part of himself, but in the same 
instant--that instant of extraordinari confus and terror in my 
mind--it seem to pass over and behind him, and, in some utterli 
unaccount fashion, it wa gone! and the canadian woke and sat up 
with a start. 

“quick! you fool!” I cried, in my excitement, “the beast ha been in 
your tent, here at your veri throat while you sleep like the dead. up, 
man! get your gun! onli thi second it disappear over there behind 
your head. quick! or joan----!” 

and somehow the fact that he wa there, wide-awak now, to corrobor 
me, brought the addit convict to my own mind that thi wa no 
animal, but some perplex and dread form of life that drew upon my 
deeper knowledge, that much read had perhap assent to, but that 
had never yet come within actual rang of my senses. 

He wa up in a flash, and out. He wa trembling, and veri white. We 
search hurriedly, feverishly, but found onli the trace of paw-mark 
pass from the door of hi own tent across the moss to the women’s. 
and the sight of the track about mrs. maloney’ tent, where joan now 
slept, set him in a perfect fury. 

“do you know what it is, hubbard, thi beast?” he hiss under hi 
breath at me; “it’ a damn wolf, that’ what it is--a wolf lost among 
the islands, and starv to death--desperate. So help me god, I 
believ it’ that!” 

He talk a lot of rubbish in hi excitement. He declar he would 
sleep by day and sit up everi night until he kill it. again hi rage 
touch my admiration; but I got him away befor he made enough nois 
to wake the whole camp. 

“I have a better plan than that,” I said, watch hi face closely. “I 
don’t think thi is anyth we can deal with. i’m go to send for 
the onli man I know who can help. we’ll go to waxholm thi veri morn 
and get a telegram through.” 

sangre stare at me with a curiou express as the furi die out of 
hi face and a new look of alarm took it place. 

“john silence,” I said, “will know----” 

“you think it’ something--of that sort?” he stammered. 

“I am sure of it.” 

there wa a moment’ pause. “that’ worse, far wors than anyth 
material,” he said, turn visibl paler. He look from my face to 
the sky, and then ad with sudden resolution, “come; the wind’ 
rising. let’ get off at once. from there you can telephon to 
stockholm and get a telegram sent without delay.” 

I sent him down to get the boat ready, and seiz the opportun 
myself to run and wake maloney. He wa sleep veri lightly, and 
sprang up the moment I put my head insid hi tent. I told him briefli 
what I had seen, and he show so littl surpris that I caught myself 
wonder for the first time whether he himself had seen more go on 
than he had deem wise to commun to the rest of us. 

He agre to my plan without a moment’ hesitation, and my last 
word to him were to let hi wife and daughter think that the great 
psychic doctor wa come mere as a chanc visitor, and not with ani 
profession interest. 

so, with frying-pan, provisions, and blanket aboard, sangre and I 
sail out of the lagoon fifteen minut later, and head with a good 
breez for the direct of waxholm and the border of civilisation. 


IV 

although noth john silenc did ever took me, properli speaking, by 
surprise, it wa certainli unexpect to find a letter from stockholm 
wait for me. “I have finish my hungari business,” he wrote, “and 
am here for ten days. Do not hesit to send if you need me. If you 
telephon ani morn from waxholm I can catch the afternoon steamer.” 

My year of intercours with him were full of “coincidences” of thi 
description, and although he never sought to explain them by claim 
ani magic system of commun with my mind, I have never doubt 
that there actual exist some secret telepath method by which he 
knew my circumst and gaug the degre of my need. and that thi 
power wa independ of time in the sens that it saw into the future, 
alway seem to me equal apparent. 

sangre wa as much reliev as I was, and within an hour of sunset 
that veri even we met him on the arriv of the littl coast 
steamer, and carri him off in the dinghi to the camp we had prepar 
on a neighbour island, mean to start for home earli next morning. 

“now,” he said, when supper wa over and we were smoke round the 
fire, “let me hear your story.” He glanc from one to the other, 
smiling. 

“you tell it, mr. hubbard,” sangre interrupt abruptly, and went 
off a littl way to wash the dishes, yet not so far as to be out of 
earshot. and while he splash with the hot water, and scrape the tin 
plate with sand and moss, my voice, unbroken by a singl question from 
dr. silence, ran on for the next half-hour with the best account I 
could give of what had happened. 

My listen lay on the other side of the fire, hi face half hidden 
by a big sombrero; sometim he glanc up questioningli when a 
point need elaboration, but he utter no singl word till I had 
reach the end, and hi manner all through the recit wa grave and 
attentive. overhead, the wash of the wind in the pine branch fill 
in the pauses; the dark settl down over the sea, and the star 
came out in thousands, and by the time I finish the moon had risen to 
flood the scene with silver. yet, by hi face and eyes, I knew quit 
well that the doctor wa listen to someth he had expect to 
hear, even if he had not actual anticip all the details. 

“you did well to send for me,” he said veri low, with a signific 
glanc at me when I finished; “veri well,”--and for one swift second 
hi eye took in sangree,--“for what we have to deal with here is 
noth more than a werewolf--rar enough, I am glad to say, but often 
veri sad, and sometim veri terrible.” 

I jump as though I had been shot, but the next second wa heartili 
asham of my want of control; for thi brief remark, confirm as 
it did my own worst suspicions, did more to convinc me of the graviti 
of the adventur than ani number of question or explanations. It 
seem to draw close the circl about us, shut a door somewher 
that lock us in with the anim and the horror, and turn the key. 
whatev it wa had now to be face and dealt with. 

“no one ha been actual injur so far?” he ask aloud, but in a 
matter-of-fact tone that lent realiti to grim possibilities. 

“good heavens, no!” cri the canadian, throw down hi dish-cloth 
and come forward into the circl of firelight. “sure there can be 
no question of thi poor starv beast injur anybody, can there?” 

hi hair straggl untidili over hi forehead, and there wa a gleam in 
hi eye that wa not all reflect from the fire. hi word made me 
turn sharply. We all laugh a little, short, forc laugh. 

“I trust not, indeed,” dr. silenc said quietly. “but what make you 
think the creatur is starved?” He ask the question with hi eye 
straight on the other’ face. the prompt question explain to me whi 
I had started, and I wait with just a tremor of excit for the 
reply. 

sangre hesit a moment, as though the question took him by 
surprise. but he met the doctor’ gaze unflinchingli across the fire, 
and with complet honesty. 

“really,” he faltered, with a littl shrug of the shoulders, “I can 
hardli tell you. the phrase seem to come out of it own accord. I 
have felt from the begin that it wa in pain and--starved, though 
whi I felt thi never occur to me till you asked.” 

“you realli know veri littl about it, then?” said the other, with a 
sudden gentl in hi voice. 

“no more than that,” sangre replied, look at him with a puzzl 
express that wa unmistak genuine. “in fact, noth at all, 
really,” he added, by way of further explanation. 

“I am glad of that,” I heard the doctor murmur under hi breath, but 
so low that I onli just caught the words, and sangre miss them 
altogether, as evid he wa meant to do. 

“and now,” he cried, get on hi feet and shake himself with a 
characterist gesture, as though to shake out the horror and the 
mystery, “let us leav the problem till to-morrow and enjoy thi wind 
and sea and stars. i’v been live late in the atmospher of mani 
people, and feel that I want to wash and be clean. I propos a swim and 
then bed. who’ll second me?” and two minut later we were all dive 
from the boat into cool, deep water, that reflect a thousand moon as 
the wave broke away from us in countless ripples. 

We slept in blanket under the open sky, sangre and I take the 
outsid places, and were up befor sunris to catch the dawn wind. 
help by thi earli start we were half-way home by noon, and then the 
wind shift to a few point behind us so that we fairli ran. In and 
out among a thousand islands, down narrow channel where we lost the 
wind, out into open space where we had to take in a reef, race along 
under a hot and cloudless sky, we flew through the veri heart of the 
bewild and lone scenery. 

“A real wilderness,” cri dr. silenc from hi seat in the bow where 
he held the jib sheet. hi hat wa off, hi hair tumbl in the wind, 
and hi lean brown face gave him the touch of an oriental. present 
he chang place with sangree, and came down to talk with me by the 
tiller. 

“A wonder region, all thi world of islands,” he said, wave hi 
hand to the sceneri rush past us, “but doesn’t it strike you there’ 
someth lacking?” 

“it’s--hard,” I answered, after a moment’ reflection. “it ha a 
superficial, glitter prettiness, without----” I hesit to find 
the word I wanted. 

john silenc nod hi head with approval. 

“exactly,” he said. “the picturesqu of stage sceneri that is not 
real, not alive. it’ like a landscap by a clever painter, yet without 
true imagination. soulless--that’ the word you wanted.” 

“someth like that,” I answered, watch the gust of wind on the 
sails. “not dead so much, as without soul. that’ it.” 

“of course,” he went on, in a voic calculated, it seem to me, not 
to reach our companion in the bows, “to live long in a place like 
this--long and alone--might bring about a strang result in some men.” 

I suddenli realis he wa talk with a purpos and prick up my 
ears. 

“there’ no life here. these island are mere dead rock push up from 
below the sea--not live land; and there’ noth realli aliv on 
them. even the sea, thi tideless, brackish sea, neither salt water nor 
fresh, is dead. it’ all a pretti imag of life without the real heart 
and soul of life. To a man with too strong desir who came here and 
live close to nature, strang thing might happen.” 

“let her out a bit,” I shout to sangree, who wa come aft. “the 
wind’ gusti and we’v got hardli ani ballast.” 

He went back to the bows, and dr. silenc continued-- 

“here, I mean, a long sojourn would lead to deterioration, to 
degeneration. the place is utterli unsoften by human influences, by 
ani humanis associ of history, good or bad. thi landscap ha 
never awaken into life; it’ still dream in it primit sleep.” 

“in time,” I put in, “you mean a man live here might becom brutal?” 

“the passion would run wild, selfish becom supreme, the instinct 
coarsen and turn savag probably.” 

“but----” 

“in other place just as wild, part of itali for instance, where there 
are other moder influences, it could not happen. the charact 
might grow wild, savag too in a sense, but with a human wild one 
could understand and deal with. but here, in a hard place like this, it 
might be otherwise.” He spoke slowly, weigh hi word carefully. 

I look at him with mani question in my eyes, and a precautionari cri 
to sangre to stay in the fore part of the boat, out of earshot. 

“first of all there would come callous to pain, and indiffer 
to the right of others. then the soul would turn savage, not from 
passion human causes, or with enthusiasm, but by deaden down into 
a kind of cold, primitive, emotionless savagery--bi turning, like the 
landscape, soulless.” 

“and a man with strong desires, you say, might change?” 

“without be awar of it, yes; he might turn savage, hi instinct 
and desir turn animal. and if”--h lower hi voic and turn for 
a moment toward the bows, and then continu in hi most weighti 
manner--“ow to delic health or other predispos causes, hi 
double--y know what I mean, of course--hi ether bodi of desire, or 
astral body, as some term it--that part in which the emotions, passion 
and desir reside--if this, I say, were for some constitut reason 
loos join to hi physic organism, there might well take place an 
occasion projection----” 

sangre came aft with a sudden rush, hi face aflame, but whether with 
wind or sun, or with what he had heard, I cannot say. In my surpris 
I let the tiller slip and the cutter gave a great plung as she came 
sharpli into the wind and flung us all togeth in a heap on the 
bottom. sangre said nothing, but while he scrambl up and made the 
jib sheet fast my companion found a moment to add to hi unfinish 
sentenc the words, too low for ani ear but mine-- 

“entir unknown to himself, however.” 

We right the boat and laughed, and then sangre produc the map 
and explain exactli where we were. far away on the horizon, across 
an open stretch of water, lay a blue cluster of island with our 
crescent-shap home among them and the safe anchorag of the lagoon. 
An hour with thi wind would get us there comfortably, and while dr. 
silenc and sangre fell into conversation, I sat and ponder over the 
strang suggest that had just been put into my mind concern 
the “double,” and the possibl form it might assum when dissoci 
temporarili from the physic body. 

the whole way home these two chatted, and john silenc wa as gentl 
and sympathet as a woman. I did not hear much of their talk, for the 
wind grew occasion to the forc of a hurrican and the sail and 
tiller absorb my attention; but I could see that sangre wa pleas 
and happy, and wa pour out intim revel to hi companion in 
the way that most peopl did--when john silenc wish them to do so. 

but it wa quit suddenly, while I sat all intent upon wind and sails, 
that the true mean of sangree’ remark about the anim flare up in 
me with it full import. for hi admiss that he knew it wa in pain 
and starv wa in realiti noth more or less than a revel of 
hi deeper self. It wa in the natur of a confession. He wa speak 
of someth that he knew positively, someth that wa beyond 
question or argument, someth that had to do directli with himself. 
“poor starv beast” he had call it in word that had “come out of 
their own accord,” and there had not been the slightest evid of ani 
desir to conceal or explain away. He had spoken instinctively--from 
hi heart, and as though about hi own self. 

and half an hour befor sunset we race through the narrow open of 
the lagoon and saw the smoke of the dinner-fir blow here and there 
among the trees, and the figur of joan and the bo’sun’ mate run 
down to meet us at the landing-stage. 


V 

everyth chang from the moment john silenc set foot on that 
island; it wa like the effect produc by call in some big doctor, 
some great arbit of life and death, for consultation. the sens of 
graviti increas a hundredfold. even inanim object took upon 
themselv a subtl alteration, for the set of the adventure--thi 
desert bit of sea with it hundr of uninhabit islands--somehow 
turn sombre. An element that wa mysterious, and in a sens 
disheartening, crept unbidden into the sever of grey rock and dark 
pine forest and took the sparkl from the sunshin and the sea. 

I, at least, wa keenli awar of the change, for my whole be 
shifted, as it were, a degre higher, becom key up and alert. 
the figur from the background of the stage move forward a littl 
into the light--near to the inevit action. In a word thi man’ 
arriv intensifi the whole affair. 

and, look back down the year to the time when all thi happened, 
it is clear to me that he had a pretti sharp idea of the mean of it 
from the veri beginning. how much he knew beforehand by hi strang 
divin powers, it is imposs to say, but from the moment he came 
upon the scene and caught within himself the note of what wa go on 
amongst us, he undoubtedli held the true solut of the puzzl and had 
no need to ask questions. and thi certitud it wa that set him in 
such an atmospher of power and made us all look to him instinctively; 
for he took no tent steps, made no fals moves, and while the rest 
of us flounder he move straight to the climax. He wa inde a true 
divin of souls. 

I can now read into hi behaviour a good deal that puzzl me at the 
time, for though I had dimli guess the solution, I had no idea how 
he would deal with it. and the convers I can reproduc almost 
verbatim, for, accord to my invari habit, I kept full note of 
all he said. 

To mrs. maloney, foolish and dazed; to joan, alarmed, yet plucky; 
and to the clergyman, move by hi daughter’ distress below hi 
usual shallow emotions, he gave the best possibl treatment in the 
best possibl way, yet all so easili and simpli as to make it appear 
natur spontaneous. for he domin the bo’sun’ mate, take the 
measur of her ignor with infinit patience; he key up joan, 
stir her courag and interest to the highest point for her own 
safety; and the reverend timothi he sooth and comforted, while 
obtain hi implicit obedience, by take him into hi confidence, 
and lead him gradual to a comprehens of the issu that wa 
bound to follow. 

and sangree--her hi wisdom wa most wise calculated--h neglect 
outwardli becaus inwardli he wa the object of hi unceas and most 
concentr attention. under the guis of appar indiffer hi 
mind kept the canadian under constant observation. 

there wa a restless feel in the camp that even and none of us 
linger round the fire after supper as usual. sangre and I busi 
ourselv with patch up the torn tent for our guest and with find 
heavi stone to hold the ropes, for dr. silenc insist on have it 
pitch on the highest point of the island ridge, just where it wa 
most rocki and there wa no earth for pegs. the place, moreover, wa 
midway between the men’ and women’ tents, and, of course, command 
the most comprehens view of the camp. 

“so that if your dog comes,” he said simply, “I may be abl to catch 
him as he pass across.” 

the wind had gone down with the sun and an unusu warmth lay over the 
island that made sleep heavy, and in the morn we assembl at a 
late breakfast, rub our eye and yawning. the cool north wind had 
given way to the warm southern air that sometim came up with haze and 
moistur across the baltic, bring with it the relax sensat 
that produc enerv and listlessness. 

and thi may have been the reason whi at first I fail to notic that 
anyth unusu wa about, and whi I wa less alert than normally; for 
it wa not till after breakfast that the silenc of our littl parti 
struck me and I discov that joan had not yet put in an appearance. 
and then, in a flash, the last heavi of sleep vanish and I saw 
that maloney wa white and troubl and hi wife could not hold a plate 
without trembling. 

A desir to ask question wa stop in me by a swift glanc from 
dr. silence, and I suddenli understood in some vagu way that they 
were wait till sangre should have gone. how thi idea came to me I 
cannot determine, but the sound of the intuit wa soon proved, 
for the moment he move off to hi tent, maloney look up at me and 
began to speak in a low voice. 

“you slept through it all,” he half whispered. 

“through what?” I asked, suddenli thrill with the knowledg that 
someth dread had happened. 

“we didn’t wake you for fear of get the whole camp up,” he went on, 
meaning, by the camp, I supposed, sangree. “it wa just befor dawn 
when the scream woke me.” 

“the dog again?” I asked, with a curiou sink of the heart. 

“got right into the tent,” he went on, speak passion but veri 
low, “and woke my wife by scrambl all over her. then she realis 
that joan wa struggl besid her. and, by god! the beast had torn 
her arm; scratch all down the arm she was, and bleeding.” 

“joan injured?” I gasped. 

“mere scratched--thi time,” put in john silence, speak for the 
first time; “suffer more from shock and fright than actual wounds.” 

“isn’t it a merci the doctor wa here,” said mrs. maloney, look as 
if she would never know calm again. “I think we should both have 
been killed.” 

“it ha been a most merci escape,” maloney said, hi pulpit 
voic struggl with hi emotion. “but, of course, we cannot risk 
another--w must strike camp and get away at once----” 

“onli poor mr. sangre must not know what ha happened. He is so 
attach to joan and would be so terribl upset,” ad the bo’sun’ 
mate distractedly, look all about in her terror. 

“it is perhap advis that mr. sangre should not know what ha 
occurred,” dr. silenc said with quiet authority, “but I think, for the 
safeti of all concerned, it will be better not to leav the island just 
now.” He spoke with great decis and maloney look up and follow 
hi word closely. 

“if you will agre to stay here a few day longer, I have no doubt 
we can put an end to the attent of your strang visitor, and 
incident have the opportun of observ a most singular and 
interest phenomenon----” 

“what!” gasp mrs. maloney, “a phenomenon?--y mean that you know 
what it is?” 

“I am quit certain I know what it is,” he repli veri low, for we 
heard the footstep of sangre approaching, “though I am not so certain 
yet as to the best mean of deal with it. but in ani case it is not 
wise to leav precipitately----” 

“oh, timothy, doe he think it’ a devil----?” cri the bo’sun’ mate 
in a voic that even the canadian must have heard. 

“in my opinion,” continu john silence, look across at me and the 
clergyman, “it is a case of modern lycanthropi with other complic 
that may----” He left the sentenc unfinished, for mrs. maloney got up 
with a jump and fled to her tent fear she might hear a wors thing, 
and at that moment sangre turn the corner of the stockad and came 
into view. 

“there are footmark all round the mouth of my tent,” he said with 
excitement. “the anim ha been here again in the night. dr. silence, 
you realli must come and see them for yourself. they’r as plain on the 
moss as track in snow.” 

but later in the day, while sangre went off in the cano to fish 
the pool near the larger islands, and joan still lay, bandag and 
resting, in her tent, dr. silenc call me and the tutor and propos 
a walk to the granit slab at the far end. mrs. maloney sat on 
a stump near her daughter, and busi herself energet with 
altern nurs and painting. 

“we’ll leav you in charge,” the doctor said with a smile that wa 
meant to be encouraging, “and when you want us for lunch, or anything, 
the megaphon will alway bring us back in time.” 

for, though the veri air wa charg with strang emotions, everi one 
talk quietli and natur as with a definit desir to counteract 
unnecessari excitement. 

“i’ll keep watch,” said the plucki bo’sun’ mate, “and meanwhil I find 
comfort in my work.” she wa busi with the sketch she had begun on the 
day after our arrival. “for even a tree,” she ad proudly, point 
to her littl easel, “i a symbol of the divine, and the thought make 
me feel safer.” We glanc for a moment at a daub which wa more like 
the symptom of a diseas than a symbol of the divine--and then took the 
path round the lagoon. 

At the far end we made a littl fire and lay round it in the shadow of 
a big boulder. maloney stop hi hum suddenli and turn to hi 
companion. 

“and what do you make of it all?” he ask abruptly. 

“in the first place,” repli john silence, make himself comfort 
against the rock, “it is of human origin, thi animal; it is undoubt 
lycanthropy.” 

hi word had the effect precis of a bombshell. maloney listen as 
though he had been struck. 

“you puzzl me utterly,” he said, sit up closer and stare at him. 

“perhaps,” repli the other, “but if you’ll listen to me for a few 
moment you may be less puzzl at the end--or more. It depend how 
much you know. let me go further and say that you have underestimated, 
or miscalculated, the effect of thi primit wild life upon all of 
you.” 

“in what way?” ask the clergyman, bristl a trifle. 

“it is strong medicin for ani town-dweller, and for some of you it ha 
been too strong. one of you ha gone wild.” He utter these last word 
with great emphasis. 

“gone savage,” he added, look from one to the other. 

neither of us found anyth to reply. 

“to say that the brute ha awaken in a man is not a mere metaphor 
always,” he went on presently. 

“of cours not!” 

“but, in the sens I mean, may have a veri liter and terribl 
significance,” pursu dr. silence. “ancient instinct that no one 
dream of, least of all their possessor, may leap forth----” 

“atav can hardli explain a roam anim with teeth and claw and 
sanguinari instincts,” interrupt maloney with impatience. 

“the term is of your own choice,” continu the doctor equably, “not 
mine, and it is a good exampl of a word that indic a result while 
it conceal the process; but the explan of thi beast that haunt 
your island and attack your daughter is of far deeper signific 
than mere atavist tendencies, or throw back to anim origin, 
which I suppos is the thought in your mind.” 

“you spoke just now of lycanthropy,” said maloney, look bewild 
and anxiou to keep to plain fact evidently, “I think I have come 
across the word, but really--really--it can have no actual signific 
to-day, can it? these superstit of mediæv time can hardly----” 

He look round at me with hi jolli red face, and the express of 
astonish and dismay on it would have made me shout with laughter at 
ani other time. laughter, however, wa never farther from my mind than 
at thi moment when I listen to dr. silenc as he care suggest 
to the clergyman the veri explan that had gradual been forc 
itself upon my own mind. 

“howev mediæv idea may have exagger the idea is not of much 
import to us now,” he said quietly, “when we are face to face with 
a modern exampl of what, I take it, ha alway been a profound fact. 
for the moment let us leav the name of ani one in particular out of 
the matter and consid certain possibilities.” 

We all agre with that at ani rate. there wa no need to speak of 
sangree, or of ani one else, until we knew a littl more. 

“the fundament fact in thi most curiou case,” he went on, “i that 
the ‘double’ of a man----” 

“you mean the astral body? i’v heard of that, of course,” broke in 
maloney with a snort of triumph. 

“no doubt,” said the other, smiling, “no doubt you have;--that thi 
double, or fluidic bodi of a man, as I wa saying, ha the power under 
certain condit of project itself and becom visibl to others. 
certain train will accomplish this, and certain drug likewise; 
illnesses, too, that ravag the bodi may produc temporarili the result 
that death produc permanently, and let loos thi counterpart of a 
human be and render it visibl to the sight of others. 

“everi one, of course, know thi more or less to-day; but it is not so 
gener known, and probabl believ by none who have not wit 
it, that thi fluidic bodi can, under certain conditions, assum other 
form than human, and that such other form may be determin by the 
domin thought and wish of the owner. for thi double, or astral 
bodi as you call it, is realli the seat of the passions, emot and 
desir in the psychic economy. It is the passion body; and, in 
project itself, it can often assum a form that give express to 
the overmast desir that mould it; for it is compos of such 
tenuou matter that it lend itself readili to the mould by thought 
and wish.” 

“I follow you perfectly,” said maloney, look as if he would much 
rather be chop firewood elsewher and singing. 

“and there are some person so constituted,” the doctor went on with 
increas seriousness, “that the fluid bodi in them is but loos 
associ with the physical, person of poor health as a rule, yet 
often of strong desir and passions; and in these person it is easi 
for the doubl to dissoci itself dure deep sleep from their 
system, and, driven forth by some consum desire, to assum an anim 
form and seek the fulfil of that desire.” 

there, in broad daylight, I saw maloney deliber creep closer to 
the fire and heap the wood on. We gather in to the heat, and to each 
other, and listen to dr. silence’ voic as it mingl with the swish 
and whirr of the wind about us, and the fall of the littl waves. 

“for instance, to take a concret example,” he resumed; “suppos some 
young man, with the delic constitut I have spoken of, form an 
overpow attach to a young woman, yet perceiv that it is not 
welcomed, and is man enough to repress it outward manifestations. 
In such a case, suppos hi doubl be easili projected, the veri 
repress of hi love in the daytim would add to the intens forc of 
hi desir when releas in deep sleep from the control of hi will, 
and hi fluidic bodi might issu forth in monstrou or anim shape and 
becom actual visibl to others. and, if hi devot were dog-lik 
in it fidelity, yet conceal the fire of a fierc passion beneath, 
it might well assum the form of a creatur that seem to be half dog, 
half wolf----” 

“A werewolf, you mean?” cri maloney, pale to the lip as he listened. 

john silenc held up a restrain hand. “A werewolf,” he said, “i a 
true psychic fact of profound significance, howev absurdli it may 
have been exagger by the imagin of a superstiti peasantri 
in the day of unenlightenment, for a werewolf is noth but the 
savage, and possibl sanguinary, instinct of a passion man scour 
the world in hi fluidic body, hi passion body, hi bodi of desire. As 
in the case at hand, he may not know it----” 

“it is not necessarili deliberate, then?” maloney put in quickly, with 
relief. 

“----it is hardli ever deliberate. It is the desir releas in sleep 
from the control of the will find a vent. In all savag race it ha 
been recognis and dreaded, thi phenomenon style ‘wehr wolf,’ but 
to-day it is rare. and it is becom rarer still, for the world grow 
tame and civilised, emot have becom refined, desir lukewarm, and 
few men have savageri enough left in them to gener impuls of such 
intens force, and certainli not to project them in anim form.” 

“bi gad!” exclaim the clergyman breathlessly, and with increas 
excitement, “then I feel I must tell you--what ha been given to me in 
confidence--that sangre ha in him an admixtur of savag blood--of 
red indian ancestry----” 

“let us stick to our supposit of a man as described,” the doctor 
stop him calmly, “and let us imagin that he ha in him thi 
admixtur of savag blood; and further, that he is wholli unawar of 
hi dread physic and psychic infirmity; and that he suddenli 
find himself lead the primit life togeth with the object of 
hi desires; with the result that the strain of the untam wild-man in 
hi blood----” 

“red indian, for instance,” from maloney. 

“red indian, perfectly,” agre the doctor; “the result, I say, that 
thi savag strain in him is awaken and leap into passion life. 
what then?” 

He look hard at timothi maloney, and the clergyman look hard at him. 

“the wild life such as you lead it here on thi island, for instance, 
might quickli awaken hi savag instincts--hi buri instincts--and 
with profoundli disquiet results.” 

“you mean hi subtl body, as you call it, might issu forth 
automat in deep sleep and seek the object of it desire?” I said, 
come to maloney’ aid, who wa find it more and more difficult to 
get words. 

“precisely;--yet the desir of the man remain utterli 
unmalefic--pur and wholesom in everi sense----” 

“ah!” I heard the clergyman gasp. 

“the lover’ desir for union run wild, run savage, tear it way out 
in primitive, untam fashion, I mean,” continu the doctor, strive 
to make himself clear to a mind bound by convent thought and 
knowledge; “for the desir to possess, remember, may easili becom 
importunate, and, embodi in thi anim form of the subtl bodi which 
act as it vehicle, may go forth to tear in piec all that obstructs, 
to reach to the veri heart of the love object and seiz it. _au fond_, 
it is noth more than the aspir for union, as I said--th 
splendid and perfectli clean desir to absorb utterli into itself----” 

He paus a moment and look into maloney’ eyes. 

“to bath in the veri heart’ blood of the one desired,” he ad with 
grave emphasis. 

the fire spurt and crackl and made me start, but maloney found 
relief in a genuin shudder, and I saw him turn hi head and look about 
him from the sea to the trees. the wind drop just at that moment and 
the doctor’ word rang sharpli through the stillness. 

“then it might even kill?” stammer the clergyman present in a 
hush voice, and with a littl forc laugh by way of protest that 
sound quit ghastly. 

“in the last resort it might kill,” repeat dr. silence. then, after 
anoth pause, dure which he wa clearli debat how much or how 
littl it wa wise to give to hi audience, he continued: “and if the 
doubl doe not succeed in get back to it physic body, that 
physic bodi would wake an imbecile--an idiot--or perhap never wake 
at all.” 

maloney sat up and found hi tongue. 

“you mean that if thi fluid anim thing, or whatev it is, should be 
prevent get back, the man might never wake again?” he asked, with 
shake voice. 

“he might be dead,” repli the other calmly. the tremor of a posit 
sensat shiver in the air about us. 

“then isn’t that the best way to cure the fool--th brute----?” 
thunder the clergyman, half rise to hi feet. 

“certainli it would be an easi and undiscover form of murder,” wa 
the stern reply, spoken as calmli as though it were a remark about the 
weather. 

maloney collaps visibly, and I gather the wood over the fire and 
coax up a blaze. 

“the greater part of the man’ life--of hi vital forces--go out with 
thi double,” dr. silenc resumed, after a moment’ consideration, “and 
a consider portion of the actual materi of hi physic body. So 
the physic bodi that remain behind is depleted, not onli of force, 
but of matter. you would see it small, shrunken, drop together, just 
like the bodi of a materialis medium at a séance. moreover, ani mark 
or injuri inflict upon thi doubl will be found exactli reproduc 
by the phenomenon of repercuss upon the shrunken physic bodi lie 
in it trance----” 

“an injuri inflict upon the one you say would be reproduc also on 
the other?” repeat maloney, hi excit grow again. 

“undoubtedly,” repli the other quietly; “for there exist all 
the time a continu connect between the physic bodi and the 
double--a connect of matter, though of exceedingli attenuated, 
possibl of etheric, matter. the wound _travels_, so to speak, from one 
to the other, and if thi connect were broken the result would be 
death.” 

“death,” repeat maloney to himself, “death!” He look anxious at 
our faces, hi thought evid begin to clear. 

“and thi solidity?” he ask presently, after a gener pause; “thi 
tear of tent and flesh; thi howling, and the mark of paws? you 
mean that the double----?” 

“ha suffici materi drawn from the deplet bodi to produc 
physic results? certainly!” the doctor took him up. “although to 
explain at thi moment such problem as the passag of matter through 
matter would be as difficult as to explain how the thought of a mother 
can actual break the bone of the child unborn.” 

dr. silenc point out to sea, and maloney, look wildli about 
him, turn with a violent start. I saw a canoe, with sangre in the 
stern-seat, slowli come into view round the farther point. hi hat 
wa off, and hi tan face for the first time appear to me--to us 
all, I think--a though it were the face of some one else. He look 
like a wild man. then he stood up in the cano to make a cast with the 
rod, and he look for all the world like an indian. I recal the 
express of hi face as I had seen it onc or twice, notabl on that 
occas of the even prayer, and an involuntari shudder ran down my 
spine. 

At that veri instant he turn and saw us where we lay, and hi face 
broke into a smile, so that hi teeth show white in the sun. He 
look in hi element, and exceedingli attractive. He call out 
someth about hi fish, and soon after pass out of sight into the 
lagoon. 

for a time none of us said a word. 

“and the cure?” ventur maloney at length. 

“i not to quench thi savag force,” repli dr. silence, “but to 
steer it better, and to provid other outlets. thi is the solut 
of all these problem of accumul force, for thi forc is the raw 
materi of usefulness, and should be increas and cherished, not 
by separ it from the bodi by death, but by rais it to higher 
channels. the best and quickest cure of all,” he went on, speak veri 
gentli and with a hand upon the clergyman’ arm, “i to lead it toward 
it object, provid that object is not unalter hostile--to let it 
find rest where----” 

He stop abruptly, and the eye of the two men met in a singl glanc 
of comprehension. 

“joan?” maloney exclaimed, under hi breath. 

“joan!” repli john silence. 

* * * * * 

We all went to bed early. the day had been unusu warm, and after 
sunset a curiou hush descend on the island. noth wa audibl but 
that faint, ghostli sing which is insepar from a pine-wood even 
on the stillest day--a low, search sound, as though the wind had 
hair and trail it o’er the world. 

with the sudden cool of the atmospher a sea fog began to form. It 
appear in isol patch over the water, and then these patch 
slid togeth and a white wall advanc upon us. not a breath of air 
stirred; the fir stood like flat metal outlines; the sea becam as 
oil. the whole scene lay as though held motionless by some huge weight 
in the air; and the flame from our fire--th largest we had ever 
made--ros upwards, straight as a church steeple. 

As I follow the rest of our parti tent-wards, have kick the 
ember of the fire into safety, the advanc guard of the fog wa 
creep slowli among the trees, like white arm feel their way. 
mingl with the smoke wa the odour of moss and soil and bark, and 
the peculiar flavour of the baltic, half salt, half brackish, like the 
smell of an estuari at low water. 

It is difficult to say whi it seem to me that thi deep still 
mask an intens activity; perhap in everi mood lie the suggest 
of it opposite, so that I becam awar of the contrast of furiou 
energy, for it wa like move through the deep paus befor a 
thunderstorm, and I trod gentli lest by break a twig or move 
a stone I might set the whole scene into some sort of tumultu 
movement. actually, no doubt, it wa noth more than a result of 
overstrung nerves. 

there wa no more question of undress and go to bed than there 
wa of undress and go to bathe. some sens in me wa alert and 
expectant. I sat in my tent and waited. and at the end of half an hour 
or so my wait wa justified, for the canva suddenli shivered, 
and some one trip over the rope that held it to the earth. john 
silenc came in. 

the effect of hi quiet entri wa singular and prophetic: it wa just 
as though the energi lie behind all thi still had press 
forward to the edg of action. this, no doubt, wa mere the 
quicken of my own mind, and had no other justification; for the 
presenc of john silenc alway suggest the near possibl of 
vigor action, and, as a matter of fact, he came in with noth more 
than a nod and a signific gesture. 

He sat down on a corner of my ground-sheet, and I push the blanket 
over so that he could cover hi legs. He drew the flap of the tent 
after him and settl down, but hardli had he done so when the canva 
shook a second time, and in blunder maloney. 

“sit in the dark?” he said self-consciously, push hi head 
inside, and hang up hi lantern on the ridge-pol nail. “I just 
look in for a smoke. I suppose----” 

He glanc round, caught the eye of dr. silence, and stopped. He 
put hi pipe back into hi pocket and began to hum softly--that 
under-breath hum of a nondescript melodi I knew so well and had 
come to hate. 

dr. silenc lean forward, open the lantern and blew the light out. 
“speak low,” he said, “and don’t strike matches. listen for sound 
and movement about the camp, and be readi to follow me at a moment’ 
notice.” there wa light enough to distinguish our face easily, and I 
saw maloney glanc again hurriedli at both of us. 

“i the camp asleep?” the doctor ask presently, whispering. 

“sangre is,” repli the clergyman, in a voic equal low. “I can’t 
answer for the women; I think they’r sit up.” 

“that’ for the best.” and then he added: “I wish the fog would thin a 
bit and let the moon through; later--w may want it.” 

“it is lift now, I think,” maloney whisper back. “it’ over the 
top of the tree already.” 

I cannot say what it wa in thi commonplac exchang of remark 
that thrilled. probabl maloney’ swift acquiesc in the doctor’ 
mood had someth to do with it; for hi quick obedi certainli 
impress me a good deal. but, even without that slight evidence, 
it wa clear that each recognis the graviti of the occasion, and 
understood that sleep wa imposs and sentri duti wa the order of 
the night. 

“report to me,” repeat john silenc onc again, “the least sound, and 
do noth precipitately.” 

He shift across to the mouth of the tent and rais the flap, 
fasten it against the pole so that he could see out. maloney stop 
hum and began to forc the breath through hi teeth with a kind 
of faint hissing, treat us to a medley of church hymn and popular 
song of the day. 

then the tent trembl as though some one had touch it. 

“that’ the wind rising,” whisper the clergyman, and pull the flap 
open as far as it would go. A waft of cold damp air enter and made us 
shiver, and with it came a sound of the sea as the first wave wash 
it way softli along the shores. 

“it’ got round to the north,” he added, and follow hi voic came 
a long-drawn whisper that rose from the whole island as the tree sent 
forth a sigh response. “the fog’ll move a bit now. I can make out a 
lane across the sea already.” 

“hush!” said dr. silence, for maloney’ voic had risen abov a 
whisper, and we settl down again to anoth long period of watch 
and waiting, broken onli by the occasion rub of shoulder against 
the canva as we shift our positions, and the increas nois of 
wave on the outer coast-lin of the island. and over all whir the 
murmur of wind sweep the top of the tree like a great harp, and 
the faint tap on the tent as drop fell from the branch with a 
sharp ping sound. 

We had sat for someth over an hour in thi way, and maloney and I 
were find it increasingli hard to keep awake, when suddenli dr. 
silenc rose to hi feet and peer out. the next minut he wa gone. 

reliev of the domin presence, the clergyman thrust hi face 
close into mine. “I don’t much care for thi wait game,” he 
whispered, “but silenc wouldn’t hear of my sit up with the others; 
he said it would prevent anyth happen if I did.” 

“he knows,” I answer shortly. 

“no doubt in the world about that,” he whisper back; “it’ thi 
‘double’ business, as he call it, or els it’ obsess as the bibl 
describ it. but it’ bad, whichev it is, and i’v got my winchest 
outsid readi cocked, and I brought thi too.” He shove a pocket bibl 
under my nose. At one time in hi life it had been hi insepar 
companion. 

“one’ useless and the other’ dangerous,” I repli under my breath, 
consciou of a keen desir to laugh, and leav him to choose. “safeti 
lie in follow our leader----” 

“i’m not think of myself,” he interrupt sharply; “only, if 
anyth happen to joan to-night i’m go to shoot first--and pray 
afterwards!” 

maloney put the book back into hi hip-pocket, and peer out of the 
doorway. “what is he up to now, in the devil’ name, I wonder!” he 
added; “go round sangree’ tent and make gestures. how weird he 
look disappear in and out of the fog.” 

“just trust him and wait,” I said quickly, for the doctor wa alreadi 
on hi way back. “remember, he ha the knowledge, and know what he’ 
about. i’v been with him through wors case than this.” 

maloney move back as dr. silenc darken the doorway and stoop to 
enter. 

“hi sleep is veri deep,” he whispered, seat himself by the door 
again. “he’ in a catalept condition, and the doubl may be releas 
ani minut now. but i’v taken step to imprison it in the tent, and it 
can’t get out till I permit it. Be on the watch for sign of movement.” 
then he look hard at maloney. “but no violence, or shooting, 
remember, mr. maloney, unless you want a murder on your hands. anyth 
done to the doubl act by repercuss upon the physic body. you had 
better take out the cartridg at once.” 

hi voic wa stern. the clergyman went out, and I heard him empti 
the magazin of hi rifle. when he return he sat nearer the door than 
before, and from that moment until we left the tent he never onc took 
hi eye from the figur of dr. silence, silhouet there against sky 
and canvas. 

and, meanwhile, the wind came steadili over the sea and open the mist 
into lane and clearings, drive it about like a live thing. 

It must have been well after midnight when a low boom sound drew my 
attention; but at first the sens of hear wa so strain that it 
wa imposs exactli to locat it, and I imagin it wa the thunder 
of big gun far out at sea carri to us by the rise wind. then 
maloney, catch hold of my arm and lean forward, somehow brought 
the true relation, and I realis the next second that it wa onli a 
few feet away. 

“sangree’ tent,” he exclaim in a loud and startl whisper. 

I crane my head round the corner, but at first the effect of the 
fog wa so confus that everi patch of white drive about befor 
the wind look like a move tent and it wa some second befor I 
discov the one patch that held steady. then I saw that it wa 
shake all over, and the sides, flap as much as the tight of 
the rope allowed, were the caus of the boom sound we had heard. 
someth aliv wa tear frantic about inside, bang against 
the stretch canva in a way that made me think of a great moth 
dash against the wall and ceil of a room. the tent bulg and 
rocked. 

“it’ tri to get out, by jupiter!” mutter the clergyman, rise to 
hi feet and turn to the side where the unload rifl lay. I sprang 
up too, hardli know what purpos wa in my mind, but anxiou to be 
prepar for anything. john silence, however, wa befor us both, and 
hi figur slip past and block the doorway of the tent. and there 
wa some qualiti in hi voic next minut when he began to speak that 
brought our mind instantli to a state of calm obedience. 

“first--th women’ tent,” he said low, look sharpli at maloney, 
“and if I need your help, i’ll call.” 

the clergyman need no second bidding. He dive past me and wa out 
in a moment. He wa labour evid under intens excitement. I 
watch him pick hi way silent over the slipperi ground, give 
the move tent a wide berth, and present disappear among the 
float shape of fog. 

dr. silenc turn to me. “you heard those footstep about half an hour 
ago?” he ask significantly. 

“I heard nothing.” 

“they were extraordinarili soft--almost the soundless tread of a wild 
creature. but now, follow me closely,” he added, “for we must wast 
no time if I am to save thi poor man from hi afflict and lead 
hi werewolf doubl to it rest. and, unless I am much mistaken”--h 
peer at me through the darkness, whisper with the utmost 
distinctness--“joan and sangre are absolut made for one another. 
and I think she know it too--just as well as he does.” 

My head swam a littl as I listened, but at the same time someth 
clear in my brain and I saw that he wa right. yet it wa all so 
weird and incredible, so remot from the commonplac fact of life 
as commonplac peopl know them; and more than onc it flash upon 
me that the whole scene--people, words, tents, and all the rest of 
it--wer delus creat by the intens excit of my own mind 
somehow, and that suddenli the sea-fog would clear off and the world 
becom normal again. 

the cold air from the sea stung our cheek sharpli as we left the close 
atmospher of the littl crowd tent. the sigh of the trees, the 
wave break below on the rocks, and the line and patch of mist 
drive about us seem to creat the momentari illus that the whole 
island had broken loos and wa float out to sea like a mighti raft. 

the doctor move just ahead of me, quickli and silently; he wa make 
straight for the canadian’ tent where the side still boom and shook 
as the creatur of sinist life race and tore about impati 
within. A littl distanc from the door he paus and held up a hand to 
stop me. We were, perhaps, a dozen feet away. 

“befor I releas it, you shall see for yourself,” he said, “that the 
realiti of the werewolf is beyond all question. the matter of which 
it is compos is, of course, exceedingli attenuated, but you are 
partial clairvoyant--and even if it is not dens enough for normal 
sight you will see something.” 

He ad a littl more I could not catch. the fact wa that the 
curious strong vibrat atmospher surround hi person somewhat 
confus my senses. It wa the result, of course, of hi intens 
concentr of mind and forces, and pervad the entir camp and all 
the person in it. and as I watch the canva shake and heard it boom 
and flap I heartili welcom it. for it wa also protective. 

At the back of sangree’ tent stood a thin group of pine trees, but 
in front and at the side the ground wa compar clear. the 
flap wa wide open and ani ordinari anim would have been out and 
away without the least trouble. dr. silenc led me up to within a few 
feet, evid care not to advanc beyond a certain limit, and then 
stoop down and signal to me to do the same. and look over hi 
shoulder I saw the interior lit faintli by the spectral light reflect 
from the fog, and the dim blot upon the balsam bough and blanket 
signifi sangree; while over him, and round him, and up and down him, 
flew the dark mass of “something” on four legs, with point muzzl and 
sharp ear plainli visibl against the tent sides, and the occasion 
gleam of fieri eye and white fangs. 

I held my breath and kept utterli still, inwardli and outwardly, 
for fear, I suppose, that the creatur would becom consciou of my 
presence; but the distress I felt went far deeper than the mere sens 
of person safety, or the fact of watch someth so incred 
activ and real. I becam keenli awar of the dread psychic calam 
it involved. the realis that sangre lay confin in that narrow 
space with thi speci of monstrou project of himself--that he wa 
wrap there in the catalept sleep, all unconsci that thi thing 
wa masquerad with hi own life and energies--ad a distress 
touch of horror to the scene. In all the case of john silence--and 
they were mani and often terrible--no other psychic afflict ha 
ever, befor or since, impress me so convincingli with the pathet 
imperman of the human personality, with it fluid nature, and with 
the alarm possibl of it transformations. 

“come,” he whispered, after we had watch for some minut the frantic 
effort to escap from the circl of thought and will that held it 
prisoner, “come a littl farther away while I releas it.” 

We move back a dozen yard or so. It wa like a scene in some 
imposs play, or in some ghastli and oppress nightmar from which 
I should present awak to find the blanket all heap up upon my 
chest. 

By some method undoubtedli mental, but which, in my confus and 
excitement, I fail to understand, the doctor accomplish hi 
purpose, and the next minut I heard him say sharpli under hi breath, 
“it’ out! now, watch!” 

At thi veri moment a sudden gust from the sea blew asid the mist, so 
that a lane open to the sky, and the moon, ghastli and unnatur as 
the effect of stage limelight, drop down in a momentari gleam upon 
the door of sangree’ tent, and I perceiv that someth had move 
forward from the interior dark and stood clearli defin upon the 
threshold. and, at the same moment, the tent ceas it shudder and 
held still. 

there, in the doorway, stood an animal, with neck and muzzl thrust 
forward, it head poke into the night, it whole bodi pois in that 
attitud of intens rigid that preced the spring into freedom, 
the run leap of attack. It seem to be about the size of a calf, 
leaner than a mastiff, yet more squat than a wolf, and I can swear that 
I saw the fur ridg sharpli upon it back. then it upper lip slowli 
lifted, and I saw the white of it teeth. 

sure no human be ever stare as hard as I did in those next few 
minutes. yet, the harder I stare the clearer appear the amaz and 
monstrou apparition. for, after all, it wa sangree--and yet it wa 
not sangree. It wa the head and face of an animal, and yet it wa the 
face of sangree: the face of a wild dog, a wolf, and yet hi face. the 
eye were sharper, narrower, more fiery, yet they were hi eyes--hi 
eye run wild; the teeth were longer, whiter, more pointed--yet they 
were hi teeth, hi teeth grown cruel; the express wa flaming, 
terrible, exultant--yet it wa hi express carri to the border of 
savagery--hi express as I had alreadi surpris it more than once, 
onli domin now, fulli releas from human constraint, with the mad 
yearn of a hungri and importun soul. It wa the soul of sangree, 
the long suppressed, deepli love sangree, express in it singl and 
intens desire--pur utterli and utterli wonderful. 

yet, at the same time, came the feel that it wa all an illusion. 
I suddenli rememb the extraordinari chang the human face can 
undergo in circular insanity, when it chang from melancholia to 
elation; and I recal the effect of hascheesh, which show the human 
counten in the form of the bird or anim to which in charact 
it most approximates; and for a moment I attribut thi mingl of 
sangree’ face with a wolf to some kind of similar delus of the 
senses. I wa mad, deluded, dreaming! the excit of the day, and 
thi dim light of star and bewild mist combin to trick me. I 
had been amazingli impos upon by some fals wizardri of the senses. 
It wa all absurd and fantastic; it would pass. 

and then, sound across thi sea of mental confus like a bell 
through a fog, came the voic of john silenc bring me back to a 
conscious of the realiti of it all-- 

“sangree--in hi double!” 

and when I look again more calmly, I plainli saw that it wa inde 
the face of the canadian, but hi face turn animal, yet mingl with 
the brute express a curious pathet look like the soul seen 
sometim in the yearn eye of a dog,--th face of an anim shot 
with vivid streak of the human. 

the doctor call to him softli under hi breath-- 

“sangree! sangree, you poor afflict creature! Do you know me? can you 
understand what it is you’r do in your ‘bodi of desire’?” 

for the first time sinc it appear the creatur moved. it ear 
twitch and it shift the weight of it bodi on to the hind legs. 
then, lift it head and muzzl to the sky, it open it long jaw 
and gave vent to a dismal and prolong howling. 

but, when I heard that howl rise to heaven, the breath caught and 
strangl in my throat and it seem that my heart miss a beat; for, 
though the sound wa entir animal, it wa at the same time entir 
human. but, more than that, it wa the cri I had so often heard in the 
western state of america where the indian still fight and hunt and 
struggle--it wa the cri of the redskin! 

“the indian blood!” whisper john silence, when I caught hi arm for 
support; “the ancestr cry.” 

and that poignant, beseech cry, that broken human voice, mingl 
with the savag howl of the brute beast, pierc straight to my 
veri heart and touch there someth that no music, no voice, 
passion or tender, of man, woman or child ha ever stir befor 
or sinc for one second into life. It echo away among the fog and 
the tree and lost itself somewher out over the hidden sea. and some 
part of myself--someth that wa far more than the mere act of 
intens listening--w out with it, and for sever minut I lost 
conscious of my surround and felt utterli absorb in the pain 
of anoth stricken fellow-creature. 

again the voic of john silenc recal me to myself. 

“hark!” he said aloud. “hark!” 

hi tone galvanis me afresh. We stood listen side by side. 

far across the island, faintli sound through the tree and 
brushwood, came a similar, answer cry. shrill, yet wonder 
musical, shake the heart with a singular wild sweet that defi 
description, we heard it rise and fall upon the night air. 

“it’ across the lagoon,” dr. silenc cried, but thi time in full 
tone that paid no tribut to caution. “it’ joan! she’ answer him!” 

again the wonder cri rose and fell, and that same instant the anim 
lower it head, and, muzzl to earth, set off on a swift easi canter 
that took it off into the mist and out of our sight like a thing of 
wind and vision. 

the doctor made a quick dash to the door of sangree’ tent, and, 
follow close at hi heels, I peer in and caught a momentari 
glimps of the small, shrunken bodi lie upon the branch but half 
cover by the blankets--th cage from which most of the life, and not 
a littl of the actual corpor substance, had escap into that other 
form of life and energy, the bodi of passion and desire. 

By anoth of those swift, incalcul process which at thi stage 
of my apprenticeship I fail often to grasp, dr. silenc reclos the 
circl about the tent and body. 

“now it cannot return till I permit it,” he said, and the next second 
wa off at full speed into the woods, with myself close behind him. 
I had alreadi had some experi of my companion’ abil to run 
swiftli through a dens wood, and I now had the further proof of hi 
power almost to see in the dark. for, onc we left the open space 
about the tents, the tree seem to absorb all the remain vestig 
of light, and I understood that special sensibl that is said to 
develop in the blind--th sens of obstacles. 

and twice as we ran we heard the sound of that dismal howl draw 
nearer and nearer to the answer faint cri from the point of the 
island whither we were going. 

then, suddenly, the tree fell away, and we emerged, hot and 
breathless, upon the rocki point where the granit slab ran bare into 
the sea. It wa like pass into the clear of open day. and there, 
sharpli defin against sea and sky, stood the figur of a human being. 
It wa joan. 

I at onc saw that there wa someth about her appear that wa 
singular and unusual, but it wa onli when we had move quit close 
that I recognis what caus it. for while the lip wore a smile that 
lit the whole face with a happi I had never seen there before, the 
eye themselv were fix in a steady, sightless stare as though they 
were lifeless and made of glass. 

I made an impuls forward movement, but dr. silenc instantli drag 
me back. 

“no,” he cried, “don’t wake her!” 

“what do you mean?” I repli aloud, struggl in hi grasp. 

“she’ asleep. it’ somnambulistic. the shock might injur her 
permanently.” 

I turn and peer close into hi face. He wa absolut calm. I 
began to understand a littl more, catching, I suppose, someth of 
hi strong thinking. 

“walk in her sleep, you mean?” 

He nodded. “she’ on her way to meet him. from the veri begin he 
must have drawn her--irresistibly.” 

“but the torn tent and the wound flesh?” 

“when she did not sleep deep enough to enter the somnambulist tranc 
he miss her--h went instinct and in all innoc to seek her 
out--with the result, of course, that she woke and wa terrified----” 

“then in their heart of heart they love?” I ask finally. 

john silenc smile hi inscrut smile: “profoundly,” he answered, 
“and as simpli as onli primit soul can love. If onli they both come 
to realis it in their normal wake state hi doubl will ceas these 
nocturn excursions. He will be cured, and at rest.” 

the word had hardli left hi lip when there wa a sound of rustl 
branch on our left, and the veri next instant the dens brushwood 
part where it wa darkest and out rush the swift form of an anim 
at full gallop. the nois of feet wa scarc audible, but in that 
utter still I heard the heavi pant breath and caught the swish 
of the low bush against it sides. It went straight toward joan--and 
as it went the girl lift her head and turn to meet it. and the same 
instant a cano that had been creep silent and unobserv round 
the inner shore of the lagoon, emerg from the shadow and defin 
itself upon the water with a figur at the middl thwart. It wa 
maloney. 

It wa onli afterward I realis that we were invis to him where 
we stood against the dark background of trees; the figur of joan and 
the anim he saw plainly, but not dr. silenc and myself stand just 
beyond them. He stood up in the cano and point with hi right arm. I 
saw someth gleam in hi hand. 

“stand aside, joan girl, or you’ll get hit,” he shouted, hi voic 
ring horribl through the deep stillness, and the same instant a 
pistol-shot crack out with a burst of flame and smoke, and the figur 
of the animal, with one tremend leap into the air, fell back in the 
shadow and disappear like a shape of night and fog. instantly, then, 
joan open her eyes, look in a daze fashion about her, and press 
both hand against her heart, fell with a sharp cri into my arm that 
were just in time to catch her. 

and an answer cri sound across the lagoon--thin, wailing, piteous. 
It came from sangree’ tent. 

“fool!” cri dr. silence, “you’v wound him!” and befor we could 
move or realis quit what it meant, he wa in the cano and half-way 
across the lagoon. 

some kind of similar abus came in a torrent from my lip too--though 
I cannot rememb the actual words--a I curs the man for hi 
disobedi and tri to make the girl comfort on the ground. but 
the clergyman wa more practical. He wa spread hi coat over her 
and dash water on her face. 

“it’ not joan i’v kill at ani rate,” I heard him mutter as she 
turn and open her eye and smile faintli up in hi face. “I swear 
the bullet went straight.” 

joan stare at him; she wa still daze and bewildered, and still 
imagin herself with the companion of her trance. the strang lucid 
of the somnambulist still hung over her brain and mind, though 
outwardli she appear troubl and confused. 

“where ha he gone to? He disappear so suddenly, cri that he wa 
hurt,” she asked, look at her father as though she did not recognis 
him. “and if they’v done anyth to him--they have done it to me 
too--for he is more to me than----” 

her word grew vaguer and vaguer as she return slowli to her normal 
wake state, and now she stop altogether, as though suddenli awar 
that she had been surpris into tell secrets. but all the way back, 
as we carri her care through the trees, the girl smile and 
murmur sangree’ name and ask if he wa injured, until it final 
becam clear to me that the wild soul of the one had call to the 
wild soul of the other and in the secret depth of their be the 
call had been heard and understood. john silenc wa right. In the 
abyss of her heart, too deep at first for recognition, the girl love 
him, and had love him from the veri beginning. onc her normal wake 
conscious recognis the fact they would leap togeth like twin 
flames, and hi afflict would be at an end; hi intens desir would 
be satisfied; he would be cured. 

and in sangree’ tent dr. silenc and I sat up for the remaind of the 
night--thi wonder and haunt night that had shown us such strang 
glimps of a new heaven and a new hell--for the canadian toss upon 
hi balsam bough with high fever in hi blood, and upon each cheek a 
dark and curiou contus showed, throb with sever pain although 
the skin wa not broken and there wa no outward and visibl sign of 
blood. 

“maloney shot straight, you see,” whisper dr. silenc to me after the 
clergyman had gone to hi tent, and had put joan to sleep besid her 
mother, who, by the way, had never onc awakened. “the bullet must have 
pass clean through the face, for both cheek are stained. he’ll wear 
these mark all hi life--smaller, but alway there. they’r the most 
curiou scar in the world, these scar transfer by repercuss 
from an injur double. they’ll remain visibl until just befor hi 
death, and then with the withdraw of the subtl bodi they will 
disappear finally.” 

hi word mingl in my daze mind with the sigh of the troubl 
sleeper and the cri of the wind about the tent. noth seem to 
paralys my power of realis so much as these twin stain of 
mysteri signific upon the face befor me. 

It wa odd, too, how speedili and easili the camp resign itself 
again to sleep and quietness, as though a stage curtain had suddenli 
drop down upon the action and conceal it; and noth contribut 
so vividli to the feel that I had been a spectat of some kind of 
visionari drama as the dramat natur of the chang in the girl’ 
attitude. 

yet, as a matter of fact, the chang had not been so sudden and 
revolutionari as appeared. underneath, in those remot region 
of conscious where the emotions, unknown to their owners, do 
secretli mature, and owe thenc their abrupt revel to some abrupt 
psycholog climax, there can be no doubt that joan’ love for the 
canadian had been grow steadili and irresist all the time. It 
had now rush to the surfac so that she recognis it; that wa all. 

and it ha alway seem to me that the presenc of john silence, 
so potent, so quietli efficacious, produc an effect, if one may 
say so, of a psychic forcing-house, and hasten incalcul the 
bring togeth of these two “wild” lovers. In that sudden awaken 
had occur the veri psycholog climax requir to reveal the 
passion emot accumul below. the deeper knowledg had leap 
across and transfer itself to her ordinari consciousness, and in 
that shock the collis of the person had shaken them to the 
depth and shown her the truth beyond all possibl of doubt. 

“he’ sleep quietli now,” the doctor said, interrupt my 
reflections. “if you will watch alon for a bit i’ll go to maloney’ 
tent and help him to arrang hi thoughts.” He smile in anticip 
of that “arrangement.” “he’ll never quit understand how a wound on the 
doubl can transfer itself to the physic body, but at least I can 
persuad him that the less he talk and ‘explains’ tomorrow, the sooner 
the forc will run their natur cours now to peac and quietness.” 

He went away softly, and with the remov of hi presenc sangree, 
sleep heavily, turn over and groan with the pain of hi broken 
head. 

and it wa in the still hour just befor the dawn, when all the island 
were hushed, the wind and sea still dreaming, and the star visibl 
through clear mists, that a figur crept silent over the ridg and 
reach the door of the tent where I doze besid the sufferer, befor 
I wa awar of it presence. the flap wa cautious lift a few 
inch and in looked--joan. 

that same instant sangre woke and sat up on hi bed of branches. He 
recognis her befor I could say a word, and utter a low cry. It wa 
pain and joy mingled, and thi time all human. and the girl too wa no 
longer walk in her sleep, but fulli awar of what she wa doing. I 
wa onli just abl to prevent him spring from hi blankets. 

“joan, joan!” he cried, and in a flash she answer him, “i’m here--i’m 
with you alway now,” and had push past me into the tent and flung 
herself upon hi breast. 

“I knew you would come to me in the end,” I heard him whisper. 

“it wa all too big for me to understand at first,” she murmured, “and 
for a long time I wa frightened----” 

“but not now!” he cri louder; “you don’t feel afraid now of--of 
anyth that’ in me----” 

“I fear nothing,” she cried, “nothing, nothing!” 

I led her outsid again. she look steadili into my face with eye 
shine and her whole be transformed. In some intuit way, 
surviv probabl from the somnambulism, she knew or guess as much 
as I knew. 

“you must talk tomorrow with john silence,” I said gently, lead her 
toward her own tent. “he understand everything.” 

I left her at the door, and as I went back softli to take up my place 
of sentri again with the canadian, I saw the first streak of dawn 
light up the far rim of the sea behind the distant islands. 

and, as though to emphasis the etern close of comedi to tragedy, 
two small detail rose out of the scene and impress me so vividli 
that I rememb them to thi veri day. for in the tent where I had 
just left joan, all aquiv with her new happiness, there rose plainli 
to my ear the grotesqu sound of the bo’sun’ mate heavili snoring, 
oblivi of all thing in heaven or hell; and from maloney’ tent, so 
still wa the night, where I look across and saw the lantern’ glow, 
there came to me, through the trees, the monoton rise and fall 
of a human voic that wa beyond question the sound of a man pray to 
hi god. 


_print by_ morrison & gibb limit _edinburgh_ 




transcriber’ note: 

punctuat ha been standardised. hyphen and spell have been 
retain as appear in the origin public except as follows: 

page 51 
avail chink and cranni _chang to_ 
avail chink and cranni 

page 56 
look persuasivli from one _chang to_ 
look persuas from one 

page 280 
yet at the same time so strangli _chang to_ 
yet at the same time so strang 





end of the project gutenberg ebook of john silence, physician extraordinary, by 
algernon blackwood 

*** end OF thi project gutenberg ebook john silence, physician *** 

***** thi file should be name 49222-0.txt or 49222-0.zip ***** 
thi and all associ file of variou format will be found in: 
http://www.gutenberg.org/4/9/2/2/49222/ 

produc by the onlin distribut proofread team at 
http://www.pgdp.net (thi file wa produc from imag 
gener made avail by the internet archive/american 
libraries.) 


updat edit will replac the previou one--th old edit will 
be renamed. 

creat the work from print edit not protect by u.s. copyright 
law mean that no one own a unit state copyright in these works, 
so the foundat (and you!) can copi and distribut it in the unit 
state without permiss and without pay copyright 
royalties. special rules, set forth in the gener term of use part 
of thi license, appli to copi and distribut project 
gutenberg-tm electron work to protect the project gutenberg-tm 
concept and trademark. project gutenberg is a regist trademark, 
and may not be use if you charg for the ebooks, unless you receiv 
specif permission. If you do not charg anyth for copi of thi 
ebook, compli with the rule is veri easy. you may use thi ebook 
for nearli ani purpos such as creation of deriv works, reports, 
perform and research. they may be modifi and print and given 
away--y may do practic anyth in the unit state with ebook 
not protect by u.s. copyright law. redistribut is subject to the 
trademark license, especi commerci redistribution. 

start: full licens 

the full project gutenberg licens 
pleas read thi befor you distribut OR use thi work 

To protect the project gutenberg-tm mission of promot the free 
distribut of electron works, by use or distribut thi work 
(or ani other work associ in ani way with the phrase "project 
gutenberg"), you agre to compli with all the term of the full 
project gutenberg-tm licens avail with thi file or onlin at 
www.gutenberg.org/license. 

section 1. gener term of use and redistribut project 
gutenberg-tm electron work 

1.a. By read or use ani part of thi project gutenberg-tm 
electron work, you indic that you have read, understand, agre to 
and accept all the term of thi licens and intellectu properti 
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agre to abid by all 
the term of thi agreement, you must ceas use and return or 
destroy all copi of project gutenberg-tm electron work in your 
possession. If you paid a fee for obtain a copi of or access to a 
project gutenberg-tm electron work and you do not agre to be bound 
by the term of thi agreement, you may obtain a refund from the 
person or entiti to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 
1.e.8. 

1.b. "project gutenberg" is a regist trademark. It may onli be 
use on or associ in ani way with an electron work by peopl who 
agre to be bound by the term of thi agreement. there are a few 
thing that you can do with most project gutenberg-tm electron work 
even without compli with the full term of thi agreement. see 
paragraph 1.c below. there are a lot of thing you can do with project 
gutenberg-tm electron work if you follow the term of thi 
agreement and help preserv free futur access to project gutenberg-tm 
electron works. see paragraph 1.e below. 

1.c. the project gutenberg literari archiv foundat ("the 
foundation" or pglaf), own a compil copyright in the collect 
of project gutenberg-tm electron works. nearli all the individu 
work in the collect are in the public domain in the unit 
states. If an individu work is unprotect by copyright law in the 
unit state and you are locat in the unit states, we do not 
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing, 
display or creat deriv work base on the work as long as 
all refer to project gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope 
that you will support the project gutenberg-tm mission of promot 
free access to electron work by freeli share project gutenberg-tm 
work in complianc with the term of thi agreement for keep the 
project gutenberg-tm name associ with the work. you can easili 
compli with the term of thi agreement by keep thi work in the 
same format with it attach full project gutenberg-tm licens when 
you share it without charg with others. 

1.d. the copyright law of the place where you are locat also govern 
what you can do with thi work. copyright law in most countri are 
in a constant state of change. If you are outsid the unit states, 
check the law of your countri in addit to the term of thi 
agreement befor downloading, copying, displaying, performing, 
distribut or creat deriv work base on thi work or ani 
other project gutenberg-tm work. the foundat make no 
represent concern the copyright statu of ani work in ani 
countri outsid the unit states. 

1.e. unless you have remov all refer to project gutenberg: 

1.e.1. the follow sentence, with activ link to, or other 
immedi access to, the full project gutenberg-tm licens must appear 
promin whenev ani copi of a project gutenberg-tm work (ani work 
on which the phrase "project gutenberg" appears, or with which the 
phrase "project gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, 
performed, viewed, copi or distributed: 

thi ebook is for the use of anyon anywher in the unit state and 
most other part of the world at no cost and with almost no 
restrict whatsoever. you may copi it, give it away or re-us it 
under the term of the project gutenberg licens includ with thi 
ebook or onlin at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not locat in the 
unit states, you'll have to check the law of the countri where you 
are locat befor use thi ebook. 

1.e.2. If an individu project gutenberg-tm electron work is 
deriv from text not protect by u.s. copyright law (doe not 
contain a notic indic that it is post with permiss of the 
copyright holder), the work can be copi and distribut to anyon in 
the unit state without pay ani fee or charges. If you are 
redistribut or provid access to a work with the phrase "project 
gutenberg" associ with or appear on the work, you must compli 
either with the requir of paragraph 1.e.1 through 1.e.7 or 
obtain permiss for the use of the work and the project gutenberg-tm 
trademark as set forth in paragraph 1.e.8 or 1.e.9. 

1.e.3. If an individu project gutenberg-tm electron work is post 
with the permiss of the copyright holder, your use and distribut 
must compli with both paragraph 1.e.1 through 1.e.7 and ani 
addit term impos by the copyright holder. addit term 
will be link to the project gutenberg-tm licens for all work 
post with the permiss of the copyright holder found at the 
begin of thi work. 

1.e.4. Do not unlink or detach or remov the full project gutenberg-tm 
licens term from thi work, or ani file contain a part of thi 
work or ani other work associ with project gutenberg-tm. 

1.e.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribut or redistribut thi 
electron work, or ani part of thi electron work, without 
promin display the sentenc set forth in paragraph 1.e.1 with 
activ link or immedi access to the full term of the project 
gutenberg-tm license. 

1.e.6. you may convert to and distribut thi work in ani binary, 
compressed, mark up, nonproprietari or proprietari form, includ 
ani word process or hypertext form. however, if you provid access 
to or distribut copi of a project gutenberg-tm work in a format 
other than "plain vanilla ascii" or other format use in the offici 
version post on the offici project gutenberg-tm web site 
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no addit cost, fee or expens 
to the user, provid a copy, a mean of export a copy, or a mean 
of obtain a copi upon request, of the work in it origin "plain 
vanilla ascii" or other form. ani altern format must includ the 
full project gutenberg-tm licens as specifi in paragraph 1.e.1. 

1.e.7. Do not charg a fee for access to, viewing, displaying, 
performing, copi or distribut ani project gutenberg-tm work 
unless you compli with paragraph 1.e.8 or 1.e.9. 

1.e.8. you may charg a reason fee for copi of or provid 
access to or distribut project gutenberg-tm electron work 
provid that 

* you pay a royalti fee of 20% of the gross profit you deriv from 
the use of project gutenberg-tm work calcul use the method 
you alreadi use to calcul your applic taxes. the fee is owe 
to the owner of the project gutenberg-tm trademark, but he ha 
agre to donat royalti under thi paragraph to the project 
gutenberg literari archiv foundation. royalti payment must be paid 
within 60 day follow each date on which you prepar (or are 
legal requir to prepare) your period tax returns. royalti 
payment should be clearli mark as such and sent to the project 
gutenberg literari archiv foundat at the address specifi in 
section 4, "inform about donat to the project gutenberg 
literari archiv foundation." 

* you provid a full refund of ani money paid by a user who notifi 
you in write (or by e-mail) within 30 day of receipt that s/he 
doe not agre to the term of the full project gutenberg-tm 
license. you must requir such a user to return or destroy all 
copi of the work possess in a physic medium and discontinu 
all use of and all access to other copi of project gutenberg-tm 
works. 

* you provide, in accord with paragraph 1.f.3, a full refund of 
ani money paid for a work or a replac copy, if a defect in the 
electron work is discov and report to you within 90 day of 
receipt of the work. 

* you compli with all other term of thi agreement for free 
distribut of project gutenberg-tm works. 

1.e.9. If you wish to charg a fee or distribut a project 
gutenberg-tm electron work or group of work on differ term than 
are set forth in thi agreement, you must obtain permiss in write 
from both the project gutenberg literari archiv foundat and the 
project gutenberg trademark llc, the owner of the project gutenberg-tm 
trademark. contact the foundat as set forth in section 3 below. 

1.f. 

1.f.1. project gutenberg volunt and employe expend consider 
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcrib and proofread 
work not protect by u.s. copyright law in creat the project 
gutenberg-tm collection. despit these efforts, project gutenberg-tm 
electron works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may 
contain "defects," such as, but not limit to, incomplete, inaccur 
or corrupt data, transcript errors, a copyright or other 
intellectu properti infringement, a defect or damag disk or 
other medium, a comput virus, or comput code that damag or 
cannot be read by your equipment. 

1.f.2. limit warranty, disclaim OF damag - except for the "right 
of replac or refund" describ in paragraph 1.f.3, the project 
gutenberg literari archiv foundation, the owner of the project 
gutenberg-tm trademark, and ani other parti distribut a project 
gutenberg-tm electron work under thi agreement, disclaim all 
liabil to you for damages, cost and expenses, includ legal 
fees. you agre that you have NO remedi for negligence, strict 
liability, breach OF warranti OR breach OF contract except those 
provid IN paragraph 1.f.3. you agre that the foundation, the 
trademark owner, and ani distributor under thi agreement will not BE 
liabl TO you for actual, direct, indirect, consequential, punit OR 
incident damag even IF you give notic OF the possibl OF such 
damage. 

1.f.3. limit right OF replac OR refund - If you discov a 
defect in thi electron work within 90 day of receiv it, you can 
receiv a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by send a 
written explan to the person you receiv the work from. If you 
receiv the work on a physic medium, you must return the medium 
with your written explanation. the person or entiti that provid you 
with the defect work may elect to provid a replac copi in 
lieu of a refund. If you receiv the work electronically, the person 
or entiti provid it to you may choos to give you a second 
opportun to receiv the work electron in lieu of a refund. If 
the second copi is also defective, you may demand a refund in write 
without further opportun to fix the problem. 

1.f.4. except for the limit right of replac or refund set forth 
in paragraph 1.f.3, thi work is provid to you 'as-is', with NO 
other warranti OF ani kind, express OR implied, includ but not 
limit TO warranti OF merchant OR fit for ani purpose. 

1.f.5. some state do not allow disclaim of certain impli 
warranti or the exclus or limit of certain type of 
damages. If ani disclaim or limit set forth in thi agreement 
violat the law of the state applic to thi agreement, the 
agreement shall be interpret to make the maximum disclaim or 
limit permit by the applic state law. the invalid or 
unenforc of ani provis of thi agreement shall not void the 
remain provisions. 

1.f.6. indemn - you agre to indemnifi and hold the foundation, the 
trademark owner, ani agent or employe of the foundation, anyon 
provid copi of project gutenberg-tm electron work in 
accord with thi agreement, and ani volunt associ with the 
production, promot and distribut of project gutenberg-tm 
electron works, harmless from all liability, cost and expenses, 
includ legal fees, that aris directli or indirectli from ani of 
the follow which you do or caus to occur: (a) distribut of thi 
or ani project gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or 
addit or delet to ani project gutenberg-tm work, and (c) ani 
defect you cause. 

section 2. inform about the mission of project gutenberg-tm 

project gutenberg-tm is synonym with the free distribut of 
electron work in format readabl by the widest varieti of 
comput includ obsolete, old, middle-ag and new computers. It 
exist becaus of the effort of hundr of volunt and donat 
from peopl in all walk of life. 

volunt and financi support to provid volunt with the 
assist they need are critic to reach project gutenberg-tm' 
goal and ensur that the project gutenberg-tm collect will 
remain freeli avail for gener to come. In 2001, the project 
gutenberg literari archiv foundat wa creat to provid a secur 
and perman futur for project gutenberg-tm and futur 
generations. To learn more about the project gutenberg literari 
archiv foundat and how your effort and donat can help, see 
section 3 and 4 and the foundat inform page at 
www.gutenberg.org section 3. inform about the project gutenberg 
literari archiv foundat 

the project gutenberg literari archiv foundat is a non profit 
501(c)(3) educ corpor organ under the law of the 
state of mississippi and grant tax exempt statu by the intern 
revenu service. the foundation' ein or feder tax identif 
number is 64-6221541. contribut to the project gutenberg literari 
archiv foundat are tax deduct to the full extent permit by 
u.s. feder law and your state' laws. 

the foundation' princip offic is in fairbanks, alaska, with the 
mail address: PO box 750175, fairbanks, AK 99775, but it 
volunt and employe are scatter throughout numer 
locations. it busi offic is locat at 809 north 1500 west, salt 
lake city, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. email contact link and up to 
date contact inform can be found at the foundation' web site and 
offici page at www.gutenberg.org/contact 

for addit contact information: 

dr. gregori B. newbi 
chief execut and director 
gbnewby@pglaf.org 

section 4. inform about donat to the project gutenberg 
literari archiv foundat 

project gutenberg-tm depend upon and cannot surviv without wide 
spread public support and donat to carri out it mission of 
increas the number of public domain and licens work that can be 
freeli distribut in machin readabl form access by the widest 
array of equip includ outdat equipment. mani small donat 
($1 to $5,000) are particularli import to maintain tax exempt 
statu with the irs. 

the foundat is commit to compli with the law regul 
chariti and charit donat in all 50 state of the unit 
states. complianc requir are not uniform and it take a 
consider effort, much paperwork and mani fee to meet and keep up 
with these requirements. We do not solicit donat in locat 
where we have not receiv written confirm of compliance. To send 
donat or determin the statu of complianc for ani particular 
state visit www.gutenberg.org/don 

while we cannot and do not solicit contribut from state where we 
have not met the solicit requirements, we know of no prohibit 
against accept unsolicit donat from donor in such state who 
approach us with offer to donate. 

intern donat are grate accepted, but we cannot make 
ani statement concern tax treatment of donat receiv from 
outsid the unit states. u.s. law alon swamp our small staff. 

pleas check the project gutenberg web page for current donat 
method and addresses. donat are accept in a number of other 
way includ checks, onlin payment and credit card donations. To 
donate, pleas visit: www.gutenberg.org/don 

section 5. gener inform about project gutenberg-tm electron works. 

professor michael S. hart wa the origin of the project 
gutenberg-tm concept of a librari of electron work that could be 
freeli share with anyone. for forti years, he produc and 
distribut project gutenberg-tm ebook with onli a loos network of 
volunt support. 

project gutenberg-tm ebook are often creat from sever print 
editions, all of which are confirm as not protect by copyright in 
the u.s. unless a copyright notic is included. thus, we do not 
necessarili keep ebook in complianc with ani particular paper 
edition. 

most peopl start at our web site which ha the main PG search 
facility: www.gutenberg.org 

thi web site includ inform about project gutenberg-tm, 
includ how to make donat to the project gutenberg literari 
archiv foundation, how to help produc our new ebooks, and how to 
subscrib to our email newslett to hear about new ebooks. 

