the project gutenberg ebook, the hous of the vampire, by georg sylvest 
viereck 


thi ebook is for the use of anyon anywher at no cost and with 
almost no restrict whatsoever. you may copi it, give it away or 
re-us it under the term of the project gutenberg licens includ 
with thi ebook or onlin at www.gutenberg.net 





title: the hous of the vampir 


author: georg sylvest viereck 



releas date: novemb 23, 2005 [ebook #17144] 

language: english 


***start OF the project gutenberg ebook the hous OF the vampire*** 


e-text prepar by suzann lybarger, janet blenkinship, brian janes, and 
the project gutenberg onlin distribut proofread team 
(http://www.pgdp.net/) 



the hous OF the vampir 

by 


georg sylvest viereck 

author of 
nineveh and other poem 







new york 
moffat, yard & compani 
1912 
copyright, 1907, by 
moffat, yard & compani 
new york 
publish september, 1907 
reprint october, 1907 
the premier press 
new york 




_to My mother_ 




the hous 

OF the 

vampir 




I 


the freakish littl leader of the orchestra, newli import from sicili 
to new york, toss hi conductor' wand excitedli through the air, 
drown with music thunder the hum of convers and the clatter 
of plates. 

yet neither hi apish demeanour nor the deafen nois that respond 
to everi movement of hi agil bodi detract attent from the figur 
of reginald clark and the young man at hi side as they smilingli wound 
their way to the exit. 

the boy' express wa pleasant, with an inkl of wistfulness, while 
the soft glimmer of hi lucid eye betray the poet and the dreamer. 
the smile of reginald clark wa the smile of a conqueror. A suspicion 
of silver in hi crown of dark hair onli ad digniti to hi bearing, 
while the infinit ramifi line abov the heavy-set mouth spoke at 
onc of subtleti and of strength. without stretch of the imagin one 
might have liken him to a roman cardin of the day of the borgias, 
who had miracul step forth from the time-stain canva and 
slip into twentieth centuri evening-clothes. 

with the affabl of complet self-possess he nod in respons to 
greet from all sides, inclin hi head with special polit to 
a young woman whose sea-blu eye were rivet upon hi featur with a 
look of mingl hate and admiration. 

the woman, disregard hi silent salutation, continu to stare at him 
wild-eyed, as a damn soul in purgatori might look at satan pass in 
regal splendour through the seventi time sevenfold circl of hell. 

reginald clark walk on unconcernedli through the row of gay diners, 
still smiling, affable, calm. but hi companion bethought himself of 
certain rumour he had heard concern ethel brandenbourg' mad love 
for the man from whose featur she could not even now turn her eyes. 
evid her passion wa unreciprocated. It had not alway been so. 
there wa a time in her career, some year ago in paris, when it wa 
whisper that she had secretli marri him and, not much later, 
obtain a divorce. the matter wa never clear up, as both preserv 
an uncompromis silenc upon the subject of their matrimoni 
experience. certain it wa that, for a space, the geniu of reginald 
clark had complet domin her brush, and that, ever sinc he had 
thrown her aside, her pictur were but plagiar of her former 
artist self. 

the caus of the ruptur between them wa a matter onli of surmise; but 
the effect it had on the woman testifi clearli to the remark power 
of reginald clarke. He had enter her life and, behold! the world wa 
transfix on her canvas in myriad hue of transcend radiance; he 
had pass from it, and with him vanish the brillianc of her 
colouring, as at sunset the borrow amber and gold fade from the face 
of the clouds. 

the glamour of clarke' name may have partli explain the secret of hi 
charm, but, even in circl where literari fame is no passport, he 
could, if he chose, exercis an almost terribl fascination. subtl and 
profound, he had ransack the coffer of mediæv dialectician and 
plunder the arsen of the sophists. mani year later, when the 
vultur of misfortun had swoop down upon him, and hi name wa no 
longer mention without a sneer, he wa still rememb in new york 
drawing-room as the man who had brought to perfect the art of 
talking. even to dine with him wa a liber education. 

clarke' marvel convers power wa equal onli by hi 
marvel style. ernest fielding' heart leap in him at the thought 
that henceforth he would be privileg to live under one roof with the 
onli writer of hi gener who could lend to the english languag the 
rich strength and rug music of the elizabethans. 

reginald clark wa a master of mani instruments. milton' mighti organ 
wa no less obedi to hi touch than the littl lute of the 
troubadour. He wa never the same; that wa hi strength. clarke' 
style possess at onc the chisel chast of a greek marbl 
column and the elabor deviltri of the late renaissance. At time hi 
wing word seem to flutter down the page frantic like baroqu 
angels; at other time noth could have more adequ describ hi 
manner than the timeless calm of the gaunt pyramids. 

the two men had reach the street. reginald wrap hi long spring 
coat round him. 

"I shall expect you to-morrow at four," he said. 

the tone of hi voic wa deep and melodious, suggest hidden depth 
and cadences. 

"I shall be punctual." 

the younger man' voic trembl as he spoke. 

"I look forward to your come with much pleasure. I am interest in 
you." 

the glad blood mount to ernest' cheek at prais from the auster 
lip of thi arbit of literari elegance. 

An almost impercept smile crept over the other man' features. 

"I am proud that my work interest you," wa all the boy could say. 

"I think it is quit amazing, but at present," here clark drew out a 
watch set with jewels, "I am afraid I must bid you good-bye." 

He held ernest' hand for a moment in a firm genial grasp, then turn 
away briskly, while the boy remain stand open-mouthed. the crowd 
jostl against him carri him almost off hi feet, but hi eye 
follow far into the night the master figur of reginald clarke, 
toward whom he felt himself drawn with everi fiber of hi bodi and the 
warm enthusiasm of hi gener youth. 




II 


with elast step, inhal the night-air with voluptu delight, 
reginald clark made hi way down broadway, lie stretch out befor 
him, bath in light and pulsat with life. 

hi world-embrac intellect wa power attract by the giant 
city' motley activities. On the street, as in the salon, hi magnet 
power compel recognition, and he step through the midst of the 
crowd as a circassian blade cleav water. 

after walk a block or two, he suddenli halt befor a jeweller' 
shop. array in the window were priceless gem that shone in the glare 
of electricity, like mystic serpent-eyes--green, pomegran and 
water-blue. and as he stood there the dazzl radianc befor him wa 
transform in the prism of hi mind into someth great and veri 
wonder that might, some day, be a poem. 

then hi attent wa divert by a small group of tini girl danc 
on the sidewalk to the huski strain of an old hurdy-gurdy. He join 
the circl of amus spectators, to watch those pink-ribbon bit of 
feminin sway airili to and fro in unison with the tune. one 
especi attract hi notice--a slim olive-colour girl from a land 
where it is alway spring. her whole be translat into music, with 
hair dishevel and feet hardli touch the ground, the girl suggest 
an orange-leaf danc on a sunbeam. the rasp street-organ, 
perchance, brought to her melodi reminisc of some flute-play 
savoyard boy, brown-limb and dark of hair. 

for sever minut reginald clark follow with keen delight each 
delic curv her grace limb described. then--wa it that she grew 
tired, or that the stranger' persist scrutini embarrass her?--th 
music ooz out of her movements. they grew slower, angular, almost 
clumsy. the look of interest in clarke' eye died, but hi whole form 
quivered, as if the rhythm of the music and the danc had mysteri 
enter into hi blood. 

He continu hi stroll, seemingli without aim; in realiti he followed, 
with nervou intensity, the multiform undul of the populace, 
swarm through broadway in either direction. like the giant whose 
strength wa rekindl everi time he touch hi mother, the earth, 
reginald clark seem to draw fresh vital from everi contact with 
life. 

He turn east along fourteenth street, where cheap vaudevil are 
strung togeth as glass-pearl on the throat of a wanton. gaudi 
bill-boards, drench in clamor red, proclaim the tawdri 
attract within. much to the surpris of the doorkeep at a 
particularli evil-look music hall, reginald clark linger in the 
lobby, and final even bought a ticket that entitl him to enter thi 
sordid wilder of décolleté art. street-snipes, a few workingmen, 
dilapid sportsmen, and women whose ruin youth thick layer of 
powder and paint, even in thi artifici light, could not restore, 
constitut the bulk of the audience. reginald clarke, appar 
unconsci of the curiosity, surpris and envi that hi appear 
excited, seat himself at a tabl near the stage, order from the 
solicit waiter onli a cocktail and a programme. the drink he left 
untouched, while hi eye greedili ran down the line of the 
announcement. when he had found what he sought, he lit a cigar, pay 
no attent to the boards, but studi the audienc with cursori 
interest until the appear of betsy, the hyacinth girl. 

when she began to sing, hi mind still wandered. the word of her song 
were crude, but not without a certain lilt that delight the uncultur 
ear, while the girl' voic wa thin to the point of be unpleasant. 
when, however, she came to the burden of the song, clarke' manner 
chang suddenly. lay down hi cigar, he listen with rapt 
attention, eagerli gaze at her. for, as she sang the last line and 
tore the hyacinth-blossom from her hair, there crept into her voic a 
strang poignant, pathet littl thrill, that redeem the execr 
faulti of her singing, and brought the rude audienc under her 
spell. 

clarke, too, wa captiv by that tremour, the infinit sad of 
which suggest the plaint of soul moan low at night, when lust 
prey on creatur mark for it spoil. 

the singer paused. still those lumin eye were upon her. she grew 
nervous. It wa onli with tremend difficulti that she reach the 
refrain. As she sang the open line of the last stanza, an 
inscrut smile curl on clarke' lips. she notic the man' 
relentless gaze and faltered. when the burden came, her sing wa hard 
and cracked: the tremour had gone from her voice. 




iii 


long befor the appoint time ernest walk up and down in front of the 
abod of reginald clarke, a state apartment-hous overlook 
riversid drive. 

misshapen automobil were chase by, carri to the cool river' 
marg the restless and the fever of american life. but the bustl 
and the nois seem to the boy onli auspici omen of the future. 

jack, hi room-mat and dearest friend, had left him a month ago, and, 
for a space, he had felt veri lonely. hi young and delic soul found 
it difficult to grappl with the vagu fear that hi nervou brain 
engendered, when whisper sound seem to float from hidden corners, 
and the stair creak under mysteri feet. 

He need the voic of love kind to call him back from the valley 
of haunt shadows, where hi poet' soul wa wont to linger overlong; 
in hi hour of weak the light caress of a comrad renew hi 
strength and rekindl in hi hand the flame sword of song. 

and at nightfal he would bring the day' harvest to clarke, as a 
worshipp scatter preciou stones, incens and tapestri at the 
feet of a god. 

sure he would be veri happy. and as the heart, at times, lead the 
feet to the goal of it desire, while multicolour dreams, like 
dancing-girls, lull the will to sleep, he suddenli found himself 
step from the elevator-car to reginald clarke' apartment. 

alreadi wa he rais hi hand to strike the electr bell when a sound 
from within made him paus half-way. 

"no, there' no help!" he heard clark say. hi voic had a hard, 
metal clangour. 

A boyish voic answer plaintively. what the word were ernest could 
not distinctli hear, but the suppress sob in them almost brought the 
tear to hi eyes. He instinct knew that thi wa the final of 
some tragedy. 

He withdrew hastily, so as not to be a wit of an interview that wa 
not meant for hi ears. 

reginald clark probabl had good reason for part with hi young 
friend, whom ernest surmis to be abel felton, a talent boy, whom the 
master had taken under hi wings. 

In the apart a momentari silenc had ensued. 

thi wa interrupt by clarke: "it will come again, in a month, in a 
year, in two years." 

"no, no! It is all gone!" sob the boy. 

"nonsense. you are mere nervous. but that is just whi we must part. 
there is no room in one hous for two nervou people." 

"I wa not such a nervou wreck befor I met you." 

"am I to blame for it--for your morbid fancies, your extravagance, the 
slow tread of a nervou disease, perhaps?" 

"who can tell? but I am all confused. I don't know what I am saying. 
everyth is so puzzling--life, friendship, you. I fanci you care 
for my career, and now you end our friendship without a thought!" 

"we must all follow the law of our being." 

"the law are within us and in our control." 

"they are within us and beyond us. It is the physiolog structur of 
our brains, our nerve-cells, that make and mar our lives. 

"our mental companionship wa so beautiful. It wa meant to last." 

"that is the dream of youth. noth lasts. everyth flows--panta rei. 
We are all but sojourn in an inn. friendship, as love, is an 
illusion. life ha noth to take from a man who ha no illusions." 

"it ha noth to give him." 

they said good-bye. 

At the door ernest met abel. 

"where are you going?" he asked. 

"for a littl pleasur trip." 

ernest knew that the boy lied. 

He rememb that abel felton wa at work upon some book, a play or a 
novel. It occur to him to inquir how far he had progress with it. 

abel smile sadly. "I am not write it." 

"not write it?" 

"reginald is." 

"I am afraid I don't understand." 

"never mind. some day you will." 




IV 


"I am so happi you came," reginald clark said, as he conduct ernest 
into hi studio. It wa a large, luxuri furnish room overlook 
the hudson and riversid drive. 

dazzl and bewildered, the boy' eye wander from object to object, 
from pictur to statue. despit seemingli incongru details, the whole 
arrang possess style and distinction. 

A satyr on the mantelpiec whisper obscen secret into the ear of 
saint cecilia. the argent limb of antin brush against the garment 
of mona lisa. and from a corner a littl rococo ladi peer coquettishli 
at the gray imag of an egyptian sphinx. there wa a pictur of napoleon 
face the imag of the crucified. abov all, in the semi-darkness, 
artifici produc by heavi draperies, tower two busts. 

"shakespear and balzac!" ernest exclaim with some surprise. 

"yes," explain reginald, "they are my gods." 

hi gods! sure there wa a key to clarke' character. our god are 
ourselv rais to the highest power. 

clark and shakespeare! 

even to ernest' admir mind it seem almost blasphem to name a 
contemporary, howev esteemed, in one breath with the mighti master of 
song, whose great gaunt shadow, thrown against the background of the 
year ha assum immense, unproportionate, monstrou dimensions. 

yet someth might be said for the comparison. clark undoubtedli wa 
univers broad, and undoubtedli concealed, with no less exquisit 
tast than the elizabethan, hi own person under the splendid 
raiment of hi art. they certainli were affinities. It would not have 
been surpris to him to see the clear calm head of shakespear rise 
from behind hi host. 

perhaps--who knows?--th veri presenc of the bust in hi room had, to 
some extent, subtli and secretli mould reginald clarke' life. A man' 
soul, like the chameleon, take colour from it environment. even 
compar trifles, the number of the hous in which we live, or the 
colour of the wallpap of a room, may determin a destiny. 

the boy' eye were again survey the fantast surround in which 
he found himself; while, from a corner, clarke' eye were watch hi 
everi movement, as if to follow hi thought into the innermost 
labyrinth of the mind. It seem to ernest, under the spell of thi 
pass fancy, as though each vase, each picture, each curio in the 
room, wa reflect in clarke' work. In a long-queued, porcelain 
chines mandarin he distinctli recognis a quaint quatrain in one of 
clarke' most marvel poems. and he could have sworn that the grin of 
the hindu monkey-god on the writing-t reappear in the weird rhythm 
of two stanza whose grotesqu cadenc had haunt him for years. 

At last clark broke the silence. "you like my studio?" he asked. 

the simpl question brought ernest back to reality. 

"like it? why, it' stunning. It set up in me the queerest train of 
thought." 

"i, too, have been in a whimsic mood to-night. fancy, unlik genius, 
is an infecti disease." 

"what is the peculiar form it assum in your case?" 

"I have been wonder whether all the thing that environ us day by day 
are, in a measure, fashion our thought-life. I sometim think that 
even my littl mandarin and thi monkey-idol which, by the way, I 
brought from india, are exert a mysteri but none the less real 
influenc upon my work." 

"great god!" ernest replied, "I have had the ident thought!" 

"how veri strange!" clark exclaimed, with seem surprise. 

"it is said trite but truly, that great mind travel the same roads," 
ernest observed, inwardli pleased. 

"no," the older man subtli remarked, "but they reach the same 
conclus by a differ route." 

"and you attach seriou import to our fancy?" 

"whi not?" 

clark wa gaze abstractedli at the bust of balzac. 

"A man' geniu is commensur with hi abil of absorb from life 
the element essenti to hi artist completion. balzac possess thi 
power in a remark degree. but, strang to say, it wa evil that 
attract him most. He absorb it as a spong absorb water; perhap 
becaus there wa so littl of it in hi own make-up. He must have 
purifi the atmospher around him for miles, by bring all the evil 
that wa float in the air or slumber in men' soul to the point 
of hi pen. 

"and he"--hi eye were rest on shakespeare' featur as a man might 
look upon the face of a brother--"he, too, wa such a nature. In fact, 
he wa the most perfect type of the artist. noth escap hi mind. 
from life and from book he drew hi material, each time reshap it 
with a master-hand. creation is a divin prerogative. re-creation, 
infinit more wonder than mere call into existence, is the 
prerog of the poet. shakespear took hi colour from mani 
palettes. that is whi he is so great, and whi hi work is incred 
greater than he. It alon explain hi uniqu achievement. who wa he? 
what educ did he have, what opportunities? none. and yet we find in 
hi work the wisdom of bacon, sir walter raleigh' fanci and 
discoveries, marlowe' verbal thunder and the mysteri loveli of 
mr. w.h." 

ernest listened, entranc by the sound of clarke' melliflu voice. 
He was, indeed, a master of the spoken word, and possess a miracul 
power of give to the wildest fanci an air of vraisemblance. 




V 


"yes," said walkham, the sculptor, "it' a most curiou thing." 

"what is?" ask ernest, who had been dream over the sphinx that wa 
look at him from it corner with the sarcast smile of five thousand 
years. 

"how our dream of yesterday stare at us like stranger to-day." 

"on the contrary," remark reginald, "it would be strang if they were 
still to know us. In fact, it would be unnatural. the sky abov us and 
the earth underfoot are in perpetu motion. each atom of our physic 
natur is vibrat with unimagin rapidity. chang is ident with 
life." 

"it sometim seems," said the sculptor, "a if thought evapor like 
water." 

"whi not, under favor conditions?" 

"but where do they go? sure they cannot perish utterly?" 

"yes, that is the question. or, rather, it is not a question. noth 
is ever lost in the spiritu universe." 

"but what," inquir ernest, "i the particular reason for your 
reflection?" 

"it is this," the sculptor replied; "I had a strike motiv and lost 
it." 

"do you remember," he continued, speak to reginald, "the narcissu I 
wa work on the last time when you call at my studio?" 

"yes; it wa a strike thing and impress me veri much, though I 
cannot recal it at the moment." 

"well, it wa a commission. An eccentr young millionair had offer 
me eight thousand dollar for it. I had an absolut origin 
conception. but I cannot execut it. it' as if a breez had carri it 
away." 

"that is veri regrettable." 

"well, I should say so," repli the sculptor. 

ernest smiled. for everybodi knew of walkham' domest troubles. have 
twice figur in the divorc court, he wa at present defray the 
expens of three households. 

the sculptor had meanwhil seat himself at reginald' writing-table, 
unintent scan a typewritten page that wa lie befor him. 
like all artists, someth of a madman and someth of a child, he at 
first glanc over it content distractedly, then with an interest so 
intens that he wa no longer awar of the improprieti of hi action. 

"bi jove!" he cried. "what is this?" 

"it' an epic of the french revolution," reginald replied, not without 
surprise. 

"but, man, do you know that I have discov my motiv in it?" 

"what do you mean?" ask ernest, look first at reginald and then at 
walkham, whose saniti he began to doubt. 

"listen!" 

and the sculptor read, trembl with emotion, a long passag whose 
measur cadenc delight ernest' ear, without, however, enlighten 
hi mind as to the purport of walkham' cryptic remark. 

reginald said nothing, but the gleam in hi eye show that thi time, 
at least, hi interest wa alert. 

walkham saw the hopeless of make clear hi mean without an 
explanation. 

"I forget you haven't a sculptor' mind. I am so constitut that, with 
me, all impress are immedi translat into the sens of form. I 
do not hear music; I see it rise with dome and spires, with paint 
window and arabesques. the scent of the rose is to me tangible. I can 
almost feel it with my hand. So your prose suggest to me, by it 
rhythmic flow, someth which, at first indefinite, crystallis 
final into my lost concept of narcissus." 

"it is extraordinary," murmur reginald. "I had not dream of it." 

"so you do not think it rather fantastic?" remark ernest, 
circumscrib hi true meaning. 

"no, it is quit possible. perhap hi narcissu wa engag the 
sub-consci strata of my mind while I wa write thi passage. and 
sure it would be strang if the undercurr of our mind were not 
reflect in our style." 

"do you mean, then, that a subtl psychologist ought to be abl to read 
beneath and between our lines, not onli what we express, but also what 
we leav unexpressed?" 

"undoubtedly." 

"even if, while we are writing, we are unconsci of our state of mind? 
that would open a new field to psychology." 

"onli to those that have the key, that can read the hidden symbols. It 
is to me a matter-of-cours that everi mind-mov below or abov the 
threshold of conscious must, of a necessity, leav it imprint 
faintli or clearly, as the case may be, upon our activities." 

"thi may explain whi book that seem intoler dull to the majority, 
delight the heart of the few," ernest interjected. 

"yes, to the few that possess the key. I distinctli rememb how an 
uncl of mine onc laid down a discuss on higher mathemat and 
blush fear when hi innoc wife look over hi shoulder. the 
man who had written it wa a roué." 

"then the seemingli most harmless book may secretli possess the power 
of scatter in young mind the seed of corruption," walkham remarked. 

"if they happen to understand," clark observ thoughtfully. "I can 
veri well conceiv of a lecher text-book of the calculus, or of a 
reporter' stori of a picnic in which burnt, under the surface, 
undiscoverable, save to the initiate, the tragic passion of tristram and 
iseult." 




VI 


sever week had elaps sinc the convers in reginald clarke' 
studio. the spring wa now well advanc and had sprinkl the meadow 
with flowers, and the bookshelv of the review with fiction. the 
latter ernest turn to good account, but from the flower no poem 
blossom forth. In write about other men' books, he almost forgot 
that the springtid had brought to him no bouquet of song. onli now and 
then, like a rippl of water, disquietud troubl hi soul. 

the strang person of the master of the hous had envelop the 
lad' thought with an impenetr maze. the day befor jack had come 
on a fli visit from harvard, but even he wa unabl to free ernest' 
soul from the obsess of reginald clarke. 

ernest wa lazili stretch himself on a couch, wave the smoke of 
hi cigarett to reginald, who wa write at hi desk. 

"your friend jack is delightful," reginald remarked, look up from hi 
papers. "and hi ebon-colour hair contrast prettili with the gold in 
yours. I should imagin that you are temperament antipodes." 

"so we are; but friendship bridg the chasm between." 

"how long have you known him?" 

"we have been chum ever sinc our sophomor year." 

"what attract you in him?" 

"it is no simpl matter to defin exactli one' like and dislikes. even 
a tini protoplasm anim appear to be highli complex under the 
microscope. how can we hope to analyse, with ani degre of certitude, 
our souls, especi when, under the influenc of feeling, we see as 
through a glass darkly." 

"it is true that person feel colour our spectacl and distort 
the perspective. still, we should not shrink from self-analysis. We must 
learn to see clearli into our own heart if we would give vital to 
our work. indiscret is the better part of literature, and it 
behoov us to hound down each delic elus shadow of emotion, and 
convert it into copy." 

"it is becaus I am so self-analyt that I realis the complex of 
my nature, and am at a loss to defin my emotions. conflict forc 
sway us hither and thither without neutralis each other. physicolog 
isn't physics. there were mani thing to attract me to jack. He wa 
subtler, more sympathetic, more feminine, perhaps, than the rest of my 
college-mates." 

"that I have noticed. In fact, hi lash are those of a girl. you still 
care for him veri much?" 

"it isn't a matter of caring. We are two be that live one life." 

"A sort of psychic siames twins?" 

"almost. why, the matter is veri simple. our heart root in the same 
soil; the same book have nourish us, the same great wind have shaken 
our being, and the same sunshin call forth the beauti blossom of 
friendship." 

"he struck me, if you will pardon my say so, as a rather commonplac 
companion." 

"there is in him a hidden sweetness, and a depth of feel which onli 
intim contact reveals. He is now take hi post-gradu cours at 
harvard, and for well-nigh two month we have not met; yet so mani 
invis thread of common experi unit us that we could meet after 
year and still be near each other." 

"you are veri young," reginald replied. 

"what do you mean?" 

"ah--nev mind." 

"so you do not believ that two heart may ever beat as one?" 

"no, that is an auditori delusion. not even two clock beat in unison. 
there is alway a discrepancy, infinitesimal, perhaps, but a discrep 
nevertheless." 

A sharp ring of the bell interrupt the conversation. A moment later a 
curli head peep through the door. 

"hello, ernest! how are you, old man?" the intrud cried, with a laugh 
in hi voice. then, notic clarke, he shook hand with the great man 
unceremoniously, with the nonchal of the healthi young anim bred 
in the atmospher of an american college. 

hi touch seem to thrill clarke, who breath heavili and then step 
to the window, as if to conceal the flush of vital on hi cheek. 

It wa a breath of springtid that jack had brought with him. youth is a 
princ charming. To shrivel vein the pressur of hi hand impart a 
spark of animation, and middl age unfold it petal in hi presence, 
as a sunflow gaze at late noon onc more upon it lord. 

"I have come to take ernest away from you," said jack. "he look a 
trifl paler than usual, and a day' outing will stir the red corpuscl 
in hi blood." 

"I have no doubt that you will take veri good care of him," reginald 
replied. 

"where shall we go?" ernest asked, absent-mindedly. 

but he did not hear the answer, for reginald' sceptic had more 
deepli impress him than he care to confess to himself. 




vii 


the two boy had bath their soul in the sea-breeze, and their eye in 
light. 

the tide of pleasure-lov human jostl against them had carri 
their feet to the "lion palace." from there, seat at tabl and 
quench their thirst with high-balls, they watch the feverish 
palpit of the city' life-blood pulsat in the vein of coney 
island, to which they had drift from brighton beach. 

ernest blew thought ring of smoke into the air. 

"do you notic the feroci look in the mien of the averag frequent 
of thi island resort?" he said to jack, whose eyes, follow the 
impuls of hi more robust youth, were examin specimen of feminin 
flotsam on the wave of the crowd. 

"it is," he continued, speak to himself for want of an audience, 
"the american who is in for have a 'good time.' and he is go to get 
it. like a huntsman, he follow the scent of happiness; but I warrant 
that alway it elud him. perhap hi mad race is onli the epitom of 
humanity' vain pursuit of pleasure, the etern cri that is never 
answered." 

but jack wa not listening. there are time in the life of everi man 
when a petticoat is more attract to him than all the philosophi of 
the world. 

ernest wa a littl hurt, and it wa not without some silent 
remonstr that he acquiesc when jack invit to their tabl two 
creatur that onc were women. 

"why?" 

"but they are interesting." 

"I cannot find so." 

they both had seen better times--of course. then money loss came, with 
work in shop or factory, and the voic of the tempter in the commerci 
wilderness. 

one, a frail nervou littl creature, who had instinct chosen a 
seat at ernest' side, kept prattl in hi ear, readi to tell the 
stori of her life to ani one who wa will to treat her to a drink. 
someth in her demeanour interest him. 

"and then I had a stroke of luck. the manag of a vaudevil wa my 
friend and decid to give me a trial. He thought I had a voice. they 
call me betsy, the hyacinth girl. At first it seem as if peopl 
like to hear me. but I suppos that wa becaus I wa new. after a 
month or two they discharg me." 

"and why?" 

"I suppos I wa just use up, that' all." 

"frightful!" 

"I never had much of a voice--and the tobacco smoke--and the wine--i 
love wine." 

she gulp down her glass. 

"and do you like your present occupation?" 

"whi not? Am I not young? Am I not pretty?" 

thi she said not parrotwise, but with a simpl coquettish that wa 
all her own. 

On the way to the steamer a few moment later, ernest asked, 
half-reproachfully: "jack--and you realli enjoy thi conversation?" 

"didn't you?" 

"do you mean this?" 

"why, yes; she was--veri agreeable." 

ernest frowned. 

"we'r twenty, ernest. and then, you see, it' like a cours in 
sociology. susie--" 

"susie, wa that her name?" 

"yes." 

"so she had a name?" 

"of course." 

"she shouldn't. It should be a number." 

"they may not be pillar of society; still, they'r human." 

"yes," said ernest, "that is the most horribl part of it." 




viii 


the moon wa shine brightly. 

swift and sure the prow of the night-boat part the silveri foam. 

the smell of young flesh. peal of laughter. A breathless pianola. the 
trip of dancing-feet. voic husk with drink and voic soft with 
love. the shrill accent of vulgarity. hustl waiters. shop-girls. 
bourgeoi couples. tire famili of four and upward. sleep children. 
A boy sell candy. the cri of babies. 

the two friend were sit on the upper deck, muffl in their long 
rain-coats. 

In the distanc the empir citi rose radiant from the mist. 

"say, ernest, you should spout some poetri as of old. are your lip 
stricken mute, or are you still think of coney island?" 

"oh, no, the swift wind ha taken it away. I am clean, I am pure. life 
ha pass me. It ha kiss me, but it ha left no trace." 

He look upon the face of hi friend. their hand met. they felt, with 
keen enjoyment, the beauti of the night, of their friendship, and of the 
citi beyond. 

then ernest' lip move softly, musically, twitch with a strang 
ascet passion that trembl in hi voic as he began: 

_"huge steel-rib monster rise into the air 
her babylonian towers, while on high, 
like gilt-scal serpents, glide the swift train by, 
or, underfoot, creep to their secret lair. 
A thousand light are jewel in her hair, 
the sea her girdle, and her crown the sky; 
her life-blood throbs, the fever puls fly. 
immense, defiant, breathless she stand there. 

"and ever listen in the ceaseless din, 
wait for him, her lover, who shall come, 
whose sing lip shall boldli claim their own, 
and render sonant what in her wa dumb, 
the splendour, and the madness, and the sin, 
her dream in iron and her thought of stone."_ 

He paused. the boat glide on. for a long time neither spoke a word. 

after a while jack broke the silence: "and are you dream of becom 
the lyric mouth of the city, of give utter to all it yearnings, 
it 'dream in iron and it thought of stone'?" 

"no," repli ernest, simply, "not yet. It is strang to what 
impress the brain will respond. In clarke' house, in the midst of 
inspir things, inspir fail me. but while I wa with that girl 
an idea came to me--an idea, big, real." 

"will it deal with her?" 

ernest smiled: "oh, no. she person ha noth to do with it. At 
least not directly. It wa the commot of blood and--brain. the 
air--th change. I don't know what." 

"what will it be?" ask jack, with interest all alert. 

"A play, a wonder play. and it heroin will be a princess, a littl 
princess, with a yellow veil." 

"what of the plot?" 

"that I shall not tell you to-day. In fact, I shall not breath a word 
to ani one. It will take you all by surprise--and the public by storm." 

"so it will be playable?" 

"if I am not veri much mistaken, you will see it on broadway within a 
year. and," he ad graciously, "I will let you have two box-seat for 
the first night." 

they both chuckl at the thought, and their heart leap within them. 

"I hope you will finish it soon," jack observ after a while. "you 
haven't done much of late." 

"A similar reflect wa on my mind when you came yesterday. that 
account for the low spirit in which you found me." 

"ah, indeed," jack replied, measur ernest with a look of wonder. "but 
now your face is aglow. It seem that the blood rush to your head 
swifter at the call of an idea than at the kiss of a girl." 

"thank god!" ernest remark with a sigh of relief. "mighti forc 
within me are fashion the limpid thought. passion may grip us by the 
throat momentarily; upon our back we may feel the lash of desir and 
bath our soul in flame of mani hues; but the joy of activ is the 
ultim passion." 




IX 


It seemed, indeed, as if work wa to ernest what the sting of pleasur 
is to the averag human animal. the inter-play of hi mental forc gave 
him the sensuou satisfact of a woman' embrace. hi eye sparkled. 
hi muscl tightened. the joy of creation wa upon him. 

often veri materi reasons, like stone weight tie to the wing of a 
bird, stay the flight of hi imagination. magazin were wait for 
hi copy, and he wa not in the posit to let them wait. they suppli 
hi bread and butter. 

between the bread and butter, however, the play wa grow scene by 
scene. In the lone hour of the night he spun upon the loom of hi fanci 
a brilliant weft of swift desire--heavy, perfumed, oriental--interwoven 
with bit of gruesom tenderness. the thread of hi own life intertwin 
with the thread of the story. all genuin art is autobiography. It is 
not, however, necessarili a revel of the artist' actual self, but 
of a myriad of potenti selves. ah, our own potenti selves! they are 
sometim beautiful, often horrible, and alway fascinating. they loom 
to heaven none too high for our reach; they stray to yawn hell 
beneath our veri feet. 

the man who encompass heaven and hell is a perfect man. but there are 
mani heaven and more hells. the artist snatch fire from both. sure 
the assassin feel no more intens the lust of murder than the poet 
who depict it in glow words. the thing he write are as real to him 
as the thing that he lives. but in hi realm the poet is supreme. hi 
hand may be red with blood or white with leprosy: he still remain 
king. woe to him, however, if he transcend the limit of hi kingdom 
and translat into action the secret of hi dreams. the throng that 
befor applaud him will stone hi quiver bodi or nail to the cross 
hi delic hand and feet. 

sometim day pass befor ernest could concentr hi mind upon hi 
play. then the fever seiz him again, and he strung pearl on pearl, 
line on line, without entrust a word to paper. even to discuss hi 
work befor it had receiv the final brush-strok would have seem 
indec to him. 

reginald, too, seem to be in a turmoil of work. ernest had littl 
chanc to speak to him. and to drop even a hint of hi plan between the 
cours at breakfast would have been desecration. 

sunset follow sunset, night follow night. the stripl april had 
made room for the ladi may. the play wa almost complet in ernest' 
mind, and he thought, with a littl shudder, of the physic travail of 
the actual writing. He felt that the transcript from brain to paper 
would demand all hi powers. for, of late, hi thought seem strang 
evanescent; they seem to run away from him whenev he attempt to 
seiz them. 

the day wa glad with sunshine, and he decid to take a long walk in 
the solitud of the palisades, to steadi hand and nerv for the final 
task. 

He told reginald of hi intention, but met with littl response. 
reginald' face wa wan and bore the peculiar pallor of one who had 
work late at night. 

"you must be fright busy?" ernest asked, with genuin concern. 

"so I am," reginald replied. "I alway work in a white heat. I am 
restless, nervous, feverish, and can find no peac until I have given 
utter to all that clamour after birth." 

"what is it that is so engag your mind, the epic of the french 
revolution?" 

"oh, no. I should never have undertaken that. I haven't done a stroke of 
work on it for sever weeks. In fact, ever sinc walkham called, I 
simpli couldn't. It seem as if a rough hand had in some way destroy 
the web of my thought. poetri in the write is like red hot glass 
befor the master-blow ha fashion it into bird and tree and 
strang fantast shapes. A draught, caus by the open of a door may 
distort it. but at present I am engag upon more import work. I am 
model a vessel not of fine-spun glass, but of molten gold." 

"you make me exceedingli anxiou to know what you have in store for us. 
It seem to me you have reach a point where even you can no longer 
surpass yourself." 

reginald smiled. "your prais is too generous, yet it warm like 
sunshine. I will confess that my concept is unique. It combin with 
the ripe of my techniqu the fresh of a second spring." 

ernest wa bubbl with anticip delights. hi soul respond to 
reginald' touch as a harp to the winds. "when," he cried, "shall we be 
privileg to see it?" 

reginald' eye were alreadi stray back to hi write table. "if the 
god are propitious," he remarked, "I shall complet it to-night. 
to-morrow is my reception, and I have half promis to read it then." 

"perhap I shall be in the posit soon to let you see my play." 

"let us hope so," reginald repli absent-mindedly. the egot of the 
artist had onc more chain him to hi work. 




X 


that night a brilliant crowd had gather in reginald clarke' house. 
from the studio and the adjoin salon aros a continu murmur of 
well-tun voices. On bare white throat jewel shone as if in each a 
soul were imprisoned, and voluptu rustl the silk that clung to 
the fair slim form of it bearer in an undul caress. subtl 
perfum eman from the hair and the hand of syren women, 
commingl with the soft plump scent of their flesh. fragrant tapers, 
burn in preciou crystal globul stain with exquisit colours, 
sprinkl their shimmer light over the fashion assemblag and 
lent a fals radianc to the face of the men, while in the hair and the 
jewel of the women each ray seem to danc like an imp with it mate. 

A seat like a throne, cover with fur of tropic beast of prey, stood 
in one corner of the room in the full glare of the light, wait for 
the monarch to come. abov were arrang with artist _raffinement_ 
weird orient draperies, resembl a crimson canopi in the total 
effect. chatter visitor were stand in groups, or had seat 
themselv on the divan and curiously-fashion chair that were 
scatter in seem disord throughout the salon. there were critic 
and writer and men of the world. everybodi who wa anybodi and a littl 
bigger than somebodi els wa hold court in hi own small circl of 
enthusiast admirers. the bohemian element wa subdued, but not 
entir lacking. the magic of reginald clarke' name made state dame 
blind to the presenc of some individu whom they would have pass on 
the street without recognition. 

ernest survey thi gorgeou assembl with the absent look of a 
sleep-walker. not that hi sensuou soul wa unsuscept to the 
atmospher of cultur and corrupt that permeat the whole, nor to 
the dazzl colour effect that tantalis while they delight the 
eye. but to-night they shrivel into insignific befor the 
splendour of hi inner vision. A radiant dreamland palace, hi play, had 
risen from the night of inchoat thought. It wa wonderful, it wa real, 
and need for it complet onli the detail of actual construction. 
and now the charact were hover in the recess of hi brain, were 
yearn to leav that many-wind labyrinth to becom real be of 
paper and ink. He would probabl have tarri overlong in thi fanci 
mansion, had not the reappear of an unexpect guest broken hi 
reverie. 

"jack!" he exclaim in surprise, "I thought you a hundr mile away 
from here." 

"that show that you no longer care for me," jack play answered. 
"when our friendship wa young, you alway had a presenti of my 
presence." 

"ah, perhap I had. but tell me, where do you hail from?" 

"clark call me up on the telephone--long-distance, you know. I 
suppos it wa meant as a surpris for you. and you certainli look 
surprised--not even pleasantly. I am realli head-over-heel at work. 
but you know how it is. sometim a littl imp whisper into my ear 
dare me to do a thing which I know is foolish. but what of it? My leg 
are strong enough not to permit my folli to overtak me." 

"it wa certainli good of you to come. In fact, you make me veri glad. I 
feel that I need you to-night--i don't know why. the feel came 
suddenly--suddenli as you. I onli know I need you. how long can you 
stay?" 

"I must leav you to-morrow morning. I have to hustl somewhat. you know 
my examin are take place in a day or two and i'v got to cram up 
a lot of things." 

"still," remark ernest, "your visit will repay you for the loss of 
time. clark will read to us to-night hi masterpiece." 

"what is it?" 

"I don't know. I onli know it' the real thing. it' worth all the 
wisdom bald-head professor may administ to you in concentr 
dose at five thousand a year." 

"come now," jack could not help saying, "i your memori give way? 
don't you rememb your own day in college--especi the mathemat 
examinations? you know that your mark came alway pretti near the 
absolut zero." 

"jack," cri ernest in honest indignation, "not the last time. the last 
time I didn't flunk." 

"no, becaus your sonnet on cartesian geometri rous even the 
math-fiend to compassion. and don't you rememb professor squeeler, 
whose heart seem to leap with delight whenev he could tell you that, 
in spite of incess toil on your part, he had again flunk you in 
physic with fifty-nin and a half per cent.?" 

"and he wouldn't rais the mark to sixty! god forgiv him,--i cannot." 

here their exchang of reminisc wa interrupted. there wa a stir. 
the littl potent of convers hasten to their seats, befor 
their minion had wholli desert them. 

the king wa move to hi throne! 

assuredli reginald clark had the bear of a king. leisur he took 
hi seat under the canopy. 

A hush fell on the audience; not a fan stir as he slowli unfold hi 
manuscript. 




XI 


the music of reginald clarke' inton captiv everi ear. 
voluptuously, in measur cadence, it rose and fell; now full and strong 
like the sound of an organ, now soft and clear like the tinkl of 
bells. hi voic detract by it veri tune from what he said. 
the power spell charm even ernest' accustom ear. the first page 
grace glide from reginald' hand to the carpet befor the boy 
dimli realis that he wa intim familiar with everi word that fell 
from reginald' lips. when the second page slip with seem 
careless from the reader' hand, a sudden shudder ran through the 
boy' frame. It wa as if an ici hand had grip hi heart. there could 
be no doubt of it. thi wa more than mere coincidence. It wa 
plagiarism. He want to cri out. but the room swam befor hi eyes. 
sure he must be dreaming. It wa a dream. the face of the audience, 
the lights, reginald, jack--al phantasmagoria of a dream. 

perhap he had been ill for a long time. perhap clark wa read the 
play for him. He did not rememb have written it. but he probabl had 
fallen sick after it completion. what strang prank our memori will 
play us! but no! He wa not dreaming, and he had not been ill. 

He could endur the horribl uncertainti no longer. hi overstrung 
nerv must find relax in some way or break with a twang. He turn 
to hi friend who wa listen with rapt attention. 

"jack, jack!" he whispered. 

"what is it?" 

"that is my play!" 

"you mean that you inspir it?" 

"no, I have written it, or rather, wa go to write it." 

"wake up, ernest! you are mad!" 

"no, in all seriousness. It is mine. I told you--don't you 
remember--when we return from coney island--that I wa write a 
play." 

"ah, but not thi play." 

"yes, thi play. I conceiv it, I practic wrote it." 

"the more' the piti that clark had preconceiv it." 

"but it is mine!" 

"did you tell him a word about it?" 

"no, to be sure." 

"did you leav the manuscript in your room?" 

"I had, in fact, not written a line of it. no, I had not begun the 
actual writing." 

"whi should a man of clarke' reput plagiaris your plays, written 
or unwritten?" 

"I can see no reason. but--" 

"tut, tut." 

for alreadi thi whisper convers had elicit a look like a stab 
from a ladi befor them. 

ernest held fast to the edg of a chair. He must cling to some reality, 
or els drift rudderless in a dim sea of vagu apprehensions. 

Or wa jack right? 

wa hi mind give way? no! no! no! there must be a monstrou secret 
somewhere, but what matter? did anyth matter? He had call on hi 
mate like a ship lost in the fog. for the first time he had not 
responded. He had not understood. the bitter of tear rose to the 
boy' eyes. 

abov it all, melodiously, eb and flow the rich accent of reginald 
clarke. 

ernest listen to the word of hi own play come from the older man' 
mouth. the horribl fascin of the scene held him entranced. He saw 
the creation of hi mind pass in review befor him, as a man might look 
upon the face of hi doubl grin at him from behind a door in the 
hideou hour of night. 

they were all there! the mad king. the subtle-wit courtiers. the 
sombre-heart prince. the queen-moth who had love a jester better 
than her royal mate, and the fruit of their shame alliance, the 
princess marigold, a creatur woven of sunshin and sin. 

swiftli the action progressed. shadow of impend death darken the 
hous of the king. In the horribl agoni of the rack the old jester 
confessed. strip of hi cap and bells, crown with a wreath of 
blood, he look so pathet funni that the princess marigold could 
not help laugh between her tears. 

the queen stood there all trembl and pale. without a complaint she 
saw her lover die. the executioner' sword smote the old man' head 
straight from the trunk. It roll at the feet of the king, who toss 
it to marigold. the littl princess kiss it and cover the grin 
horror with her yellow veil. 

the last word die away. 

there wa no applause. onli silence. all were stricken with the dread 
that men feel in the hous of god or hi aw presenc in genius. 

but the boy lay back in hi chair. the cold sweat had gather on hi 
brow and hi templ throbbed. natur had merci clog hi head 
with blood. the rush of it drown the cri voic of the nerves, 
deaden for a while both conscious and pain. 




xii 


somehow the night had passed--somehow in bitterness, in anguish. but it 
had passed. 

ernest' lip were parch and sleepless had left it trace in the 
black ring under the eyes, when the next morn he confront reginald 
in the studio. 

reginald wa sit at the writing-t in hi most characterist 
pose, support hi head with hi hand and look with clear pierc 
eye searchingli at the boy. 

"yes," he observed, "it' a most curiou psychic phenomenon." 

"you cannot imagin how real it all seem to me." 

the boy spoke painfully, dazed, as if struck by a blow. 

"even now it is as if someth ha gone from me, some struggl 
thought that I cannot--cannot remember." 

reginald regard him as a physic experiment might look upon the 
subject of a particularli baffl mental disease. 

"you must not think, my boy, that I bear you ani malic for your 
extraordinari delusion. befor jack went away he gave me an exact 
account of all that ha happened. diver incid recur to him from 
which it appear that, at variou time in the past, you have been on 
the verg of a nervou collapse." 

A nervou collapse! what wa the use of thi term but a euphem for 
insanity? 

"do not despair, dear child," reginald caressingli remarked. "your 
disord is not hopeless, not incurable. such crise come to everi man 
who writes. It is the tribut we pay to the lord of song. the 
minnesing of the past wrote with hi heart' blood; but we modern dip 
our pen into the sap of our nerves. We analys life, love art--and the 
dissect knife that we use on other men' soul final turn against 
ourselves. 

"but what shall a man do? shall he sacrific art to hygien and 
surrend the one attribut that make him chiefest of creat things? 
animals, too, think. some walk on two legs. but introspect 
differenti man from the rest. shall we yield up the sweet 
conscious of self that we deriv from the analysi of our emotion, 
for the content of the bull that rumin in the shade of a tree or 
the health stupid of a mule?" 

"assuredli not." 

"but what shall a man do?" 

"ah, that I cannot tell. mathemat offer definit problem that admit 
of a definit solution. life state it problem with less exact and 
offer for each a differ solution. one and one are two to-day and 
to-morrow. psychic values, on each manipulation, will yield a 
differ result. still, your case is quit clear. you have overwork 
yourself in the past, mental and emotionally. you have sown unrest, 
and must not be surpris if neurasthenia is the harvest thereof." 

"do you think--that I should go to some sanitarium?" the boy falteringli 
asked. 

"god forbid! Go to the seashore, somewher where you can sleep and play. 
take your bodi along, but leav your brain behind--at least do not 
take more of it with you than is necessary. the summer season in 
atlant citi ha just begun. there, as everywher in american society, 
you will be much more welcom if you come without brains." 

reginald' half-bant tone reassur ernest a little. timidli he 
dare approach onc more the strang event that had wrought such havoc 
with hi nervou equilibrium. 

"how do you account for my strang obsession--on might almost call it a 
mania?" 

"if it could be account for it would not be strange." 

"can you suggest no possibl explanation?" 

"perhap a stray leaf on my desk a few indic of the plot, a 
remark--who knows? perhap thought-matt is float in the air. 
perhaps--but we had better not talk of it now. It would needlessli 
excit you." 

"you are right," answer ernest gloomily, "let us not talk of it. but 
whatev may be said, it is a marvel play." 

"you flatter me. there is noth in it that you may not be abl to do 
equal well--som day." 

"ah, no," the boy replied, look up to reginald with admiration. "you 
are the master." 




xiii 


lazili ernest stretch hi limb on the beach of atlant city. the 
sea, that purger of sick souls, had wash away the fever and the fret 
of the last few days. the wind wa in hi hair and the spray wa in hi 
breath, while the ray of the sun kiss hi bare arm and legs. He 
roll over in the glitter sand in the sheer joy of living. 

now and then a wavelet stole far into the beach, as if to caress him, 
but pine away ere it could reach it goal. It wa as if the enamour 
sea wa stretch out it arm to him. who knows, perhap through the 
clear water some green-ey nymph, or a young sea-god with the tang of 
the sea in hi hair, wa peer amor at the boy' red mouth. the 
peopl of the deep love the red warm blood of human kind. It is alway 
the young that they lure to their wateri haunts, never the shrivel 
limb that totter shiver to the grave. 

such fanci came to ernest as he lay on the shore in hi bath 
attire, happy, thoughtless,--animal. 

the sun and the sea seem to him two lover vy for hi favor. the 
sudden chang of environ had brought complet relax and had 
quiet hi rebellious, assert soul. He wa no longer a solitari unit 
but one with wind and water, herb and beach and shell. almost 
voluptu hi hand toy with the hot sand that glide caressingli 
through hi finger and buri hi breast and shoulder under it 
glitter burden. 

A summer girl who pass lower her eye coquettishly. He watch her 
without stirring. even to open hi mouth or to smile would have seem 
too much exertion. 

thu he lay for hours. when at length noon drew nigh, it cost him a 
great effort of will to shake off hi drowsi mood and exchang hi airi 
costum for the convent habila of the dining-room. 

He had taken lodg in a fashion hotel. An unusu stroke of good 
luck, hack-work that paid outrag well, had made it possibl for 
him to idl for a time without a thought of the unpleas necess of 
make money. 

one singl articl to which he sign hi name onli with reluct had 
brought to him more gear than a seri of golden sonnets. 

"surely," he thought, "the social revolut ought to begin from above. 
what right ha the bricklay to grumbl when he receiv for a week' 
work almost more than I for a song?" 

thu soliloquising, he reach the dining-room. the scene that unfold 
itself befor him wa typical--th tabl over-loaded, the women 
over-dressed. 

the luncheon wa alreadi in full cours when he came. He mumbl an 
apolog and seat himself on the onli remain chair next to a youth 
who remind him of a well-dress dummy. with slight weari hi eye 
wander in all direct for more congeni face when they were 
arrest by a ladi on the opposit side of the table. she wa clad in a 
silk robe with curious embroid net-work that reveal a nervou 
and delic throat. the rich effect of the net-work wa reliev by the 
studi simplic with which her heavi chestnut-color hair wa 
gather in a singl knot. her face wa turn away from him, but there 
wa someth in the carriag of her head that struck him as familiar. 
when at last she look him in the face, the glass almost fell from hi 
hand: it wa ethel brandenbourg. she seem to notic hi embarrass 
and smiled. when she open her lip to speak, he knew by the haunt 
sweet of the voic that he wa not mistaken. 

"tell me," she said wistfully, "you have forgotten me? they all have." 

He hasten to assur her that he had not forgotten her. He recollect 
now that he had first been introduc to her in walkham' hous some 
year ago, when a mere colleg boy, he had been privileg to attend one 
of that master' famou receptions. she had look quit resolut and 
veri happi then, not at all like the woman who had stare so strang 
at reginald in the broadway restaurant. 

He regard thi encount as veri fortunate. He knew so much of her 
person histori that it almost seem to him as if they had been 
intim for years. she, too, felt on familiar ground with him. neither 
as much as whisper the name of reginald clarke. yet it wa he, and the 
knowledg of what he wa to them, that link their soul with a common 
bond. 




xiv 


It wa the third day after their meeting. hour by hour their intimaci 
had increased. ethel wa sit in a larg wicker-chair. she restlessli 
finger her parasol, mechan describ magic circl in the sand. 
ernest lay at her feet. with hi knee clasp between hi hands, he 
gaze into her eyes. 

"whi are you tri so hard to make love to me?" the woman asked, with 
the half-amus smile with which the eve near thirti receiv the homag 
of a boy. there is an element of insincer in that smile, but it is a 
weapon of defenc against love' artillery. 

sometimes, indeed, the plead in the boy' eye and the cri of the 
blood pierc the woman' smile superiority. she listens, love and 
loses. 

ethel brandenbourg wa listening, but the idea of love had not yet 
enter into her mind. her interest in ernest wa due in part to hi 
youth and the trembl in hi voic when he spoke of love. but what 
probabl attract her most power wa the fact that he intim 
knew the man who still held her woman' heart in the hollow of hi hand. 
It wa half in play, therefore, that she had ask him that question. 

whi did he make love to her? He did not know. perhap it wa the 
irresist desir to be pet which young poet share with 
domest cats. but what should he tell her? polit platitud were 
out of place between them. 

besid he knew the penalti of all tender entanglements. women treat 
love as if it were an extrem tenuou wire that can be drawn out 
indefinitely. thi is a veri expens process. It cost us the most 
precious, the onli irretriev thing in the universe--time. and to him 
time wa song; for money he did not care. the lord had hallow hi lip 
with rhythmic speech; onli in the interv of hi sing might he 
listen to the voic of hi heart--strangest of all watches, that tell 
the time not by minut and hours, but by the come and go of love. 

the woman besid him seem to read hi thoughts. 

"child, child," she said, "whi will you toy with love? like jehovah, he 
is a jealou god, and noth but the whole heart can placat him. woe 
to the woman who take a poet for a lover. I admit it is fascinating, 
but it is play _va banque_. In fact, it is fatal. art or love will 
come to harm. No man can minist equal to both. A genuin poet is 
incap of love a woman." 

"pshaw! you exaggerate. Of course, there is a measur of truth in what 
you say, but it is onli one side of the truth, and the truth, you know, 
is alway janus-faced. In fact, it often ha more than two faces. I can 
assur you that I have care deepli for the women to whom my love-poetri 
wa written. and you will not deni that it is genuine." 

"god forbid! onli you have been use the wrong preposition. you should 
have said that it wa written at them." 

ernest stare at her in child-lik wonder. 

"bi jove! you are too devilishli clever!" he exclaimed. 

after a littl silenc he said not without hesitation: "and do you appli 
your theori to all artists, or onli to us maker of rhyme?" 

"to all," she replied. 

He look at her questioningly. 

"yes," she said, with a new sad in her voice, "i, too, have paid the 
price." 

"you mean?" 

"I loved." 

"and art?" 

"that wa the sacrifice." 

"perhap you have chosen the better part," ernest said without 
conviction. 

"no," she replied, "mi tribut wa brought in vain." 

thi she said calmly, but ernest knew that her word were of tragic 
import. 

"you love him still?" he observ simply. 

ethel made no reply. sad cloud her face like a veil or like a grey 
mist over the face of the waters. her eye went out to the sea, 
follow the sombr flight of the sea-mews. 

In that moment he could have taken her in hi arm and kiss her with 
infinit tenderness. 

but tender between man and woman is like a match in a 
powder-magazine. the least provocation, and an amor explos will 
ensue, tumbl down the card-hous of platon affection. If he 
yield to the impuls of the moment, the wine of the springtid would 
set their blood afire, and from the flame within us there is no escape. 

"come, come," she said, "you do not love me." 

He protested. 

"ah!" she cri triumphantly, "how mani sonnet would you give for me? 
If you were a usur in gold instead of in rhyme, I would ask how mani 
dollars. but it is unjust to pay in a coin that we valu little. To a 
man starv in gold mines, a piec of bread weigh more than all the 
treasur of the earth. To you, I warrant your poem are the standard of 
appreciation. how mani would you give for me? one, two, three?" 

"more." 

"becaus you think love would repay you with compound interest," she 
observ merrily. 

He laughed. 

and when love turn to laughter the danger is pass for the moment. 




XV 


thu three week pass without appar chang in their relations. 
ernest possess a person magnet that, alway eman from him, 
wa felt most deepli when withdrawn. He wa at all time involuntarili 
exert hi power, which she ever resisted, alway on the alert, alway 
ward off. 

when at last pressur of work made hi immedi departur for new york 
imperative, he had not appar gain the least ground. but ethel 
knew in her heart that she wa fascinated, if not in love. the person 
fascin wa supplement by a motherli feel toward ernest that, 
sensuou in essence, wa in itself not far remov from love. she 
struggl brave and with extern success against her emotions, never 
lose sight of the fact that twenti and thirti are fifty. 

increasingli awar of her own weakness, she constantli attempt to 
lead the convers into imperson channels, speak prefer of 
hi work. 

"tell me," she said, neglig fan herself, "what new inspir 
have you drawn from your stay at the seaside?" 

"why," he exclaim enthusiastically, "volum and volum of it. I 
shall write the great novel of my life after I am onc more quietli 
instal at riversid drive." 

"the great american novel?" she rejoined. 

"perhaps." 

"who will be your hero--clarke?" 

there wa a slight touch of malic in her words, or rather in the paus 
between the penultim word and the last. ernest detect it presence, 
and knew that her love for reginald wa dead. stiff and cold it lay in 
her heart' chamber--besid how mani others?--al embox in the coffin 
of memory. 

"no," he repli after a while, a littl piqu by her suggestion, 
"clark is not the hero. what make you think that he cast a spell on 
everyth I do?" 

"dear child," she replied, "I know him. He cannot fail to impress hi 
power person upon all with whom he come in contact, to the 
injuri of their intellectu independence. moreover, he is so brilliant 
and say everyth so much better than anybodi else, that by hi veri 
splendor he discourag effort in others. At best hi influenc will 
shape your develop accord to the tenet of hi mind--curious, 
subtl and corrupted. you will becom mental distorted, like one of 
those hunchback japanes trees, infinit wrinkl and infinit 
grotesque, whose law of growth are not determin by nature, but by the 
diseas imagin of the east." 

"I am no weakling," ernest asserted, "and your pictur of clark is 
altogeth out of perspective. hi splendid success are to me a sourc 
of constant inspiration. We have some thing in common, but I realis 
that it is along entir differ line that success will come to me. 
He ha never sought to influenc me, in fact, I never receiv the 
smallest suggest from him." here the princess marigold seem to peer 
at him through the veil of the past, but he wave her aside. "a for my 
story," he continued, "you need not go so far out of your way to find 
the lead character?" 

"who can it be?" ethel remarked, with a merri twinkle, "you?" 

"ethel," he said sulkingly, "be serious. you know that it is you." 

"I am immens flattered," she replied. "really, noth pleas me 
better than to be immortalis in print, sinc I have littl hope 
nowaday of perpetu my name by virtu of pencil or brush. I have 
been put into novel befor and am consum with curios to hear the 
plot of yours." 

"if you don't mind, I had rather not tell you just yet," ernest said. 
"it' go to be call leontina--that' you. but all depend on the 
treatment. you know it doesn't matter much what you say so long as you 
say it well. that' what counts. At ani rate, ani indic of the plot 
at thi stage would be decidedli inadequate." 

"I think you are right," she ventured. "bi all mean choos your own 
time to tell me. let' talk of someth else. have you written 
anyth sinc your delight book of vers last spring? sure now is 
your sing season. By the time we are thirti the spring of pure lyric 
passion are usual exhausted." 

ethel' inquiri somehow startl him. In truth, he could find no 
satisfactori answer. A remark rel to hi play--clarke' play--ros 
to the threshold of hi lips, but he almost bit hi tongu as soon as he 
realis that the strang delus which had possess him that night 
still domin the undercurr of hi cerebration. no, he had 
accomplish but littl dure the last few months--at least, by way of 
creativ literature. So he repli that he had made money. "that is 
something," he said. "besides, who can turn out a masterpiec everi 
week? An artist' brain is not a machine, and in the respit from 
creativ work I have gather strength for the future. but," he added, 
slightli annoyed, "you are not listening." 

hi exclam brought her back from the train of thought that hi 
word had suggested. for in hi reason she had recognis the same 
argument that she had hourli repeat to herself in defenc of her 
inact when she wa live under the bane influenc of reginald 
clarke. yes, baneful; for the first time she dare to confess it to 
herself. In a flash the truth dawn upon her that it wa not her love 
alone, but someth else, someth irresist and veri mysterious, 
that had dri up the well of creation in her. could it be that the same 
power wa now exert it influenc upon the struggl soul of thi 
talent boy? rack her brain as she might, she could not definit 
formul her apprehens and a troubl look came into her eyes. 

"ethel," the boy repeated, impatiently, "whi are you not listening? Do 
you realis that I must leav you in half an hour?" 

she look at him with deep tenderness. someth like a tear lent a 
soft radianc to her larg child-lik eyes. 

ernest saw it and wa profoundli moved. In that moment he love her 
passionately. 

"foolish boy," she said softly; then, lower her voic to a whisper: 
"you may kiss me befor you go." 

hi lip gentli touch hers, but she took hi head between her hand 
and press her mouth upon hi in a long kiss. 

ernest drew back a littl awkwardly. He had not been kiss like thi 
before. 

"poet though you are," ethel whispered, "you have not yet learn to 
kiss." 

she wa deepli agit when she notic that hi hand wa fumbl for 
the watch in hi vest-pocket. she suddenli releas him, and said, a 
littl hurt: "no, you must not miss your train. Go by all means." 

vainli ernest remonstr with her. 

"go to him," she said, and again, "go to him." 

with a heavi heart the boy obeyed. He wave hi hat to her onc more 
from below, and then rapidli disappear in the crowd. for a moment 
strang misgiv cramp her heart, and someth within her call 
out to him: "do not go! Do not return to that house." but no sound 
issu from her lips. worldli wisdom had seal them, had stifl the 
inner voice. and soon the boy' golden head wa swallow up in the 
distance. 




xvi 


while the train sped to new york, ethel brandenbourg wa the one object 
engag ernest' mind. He still felt the pressur of her lip upon his, 
and hi nostril dilat at the thought of the fragranc of her hair 
brush against hi forehead. 

but the moment hi foot touch the ferry-boat that wa to take him to 
manhattan, the past three week were, for the time be at least, 
complet obliter from hi memory. all hi other interest that he 
had suppress in her compani becaus she had no part in them, came 
rush back to him. He anticip with delight hi meet with 
reginald clarke. the person attract of the man had never seem 
so power to ernest as when he had not heard from him for some time. 
reginald' letter were alway brief. "profession writers," he wa 
wont to say, "cannot afford to put fine feel into their privat 
correspondence. they must turn it into copy." He long to sit with the 
master in the studio when the last ray of the daylight were tremul 
fall through the stain window, and to discuss far into the 
darken night philosophi young and old. He long for reginald' 
voice, hi littl mannerisms, the veri perfum of hi rooms. 

there also wa a delug of letter like to await him in hi apartment. 
for in hi hurri departur he had purpos left hi friend in the 
dark as to hi whereabouts. onli to jack he had drop a littl note 
the day after hi meet with ethel. 

He earnestli hope to find reginald at home, though it wa well nigh ten 
o'clock in the evening, and he curs the "rapid transit" for it 
inabl to annihil space and time. It is inde disconcert to 
think how mani months, if not years, of our earthli sojourn the dweller 
in citi spend in transport convey that must be set down as a 
dead loss in the ledger of life. A nervou impati against thing 
materi overcam ernest in the subway. It is ever the mere stupid 
obstacl of matter that weight down the wing of the soul and prevent 
it from soar upward to the sun. 

when at last he had reach the house, he learn from the hall-boy that 
clark had gone out. ruffl in temper he enter hi room and went 
over hi mail. there were letter from editor with commiss that he 
could not afford to reject. everywher newspap and magazin open 
their yawn mouth to swallow up what time he had. He realis at onc 
that he would have to postpon the write of hi novel for sever 
weeks, if not longer. 

among the letter wa one from jack. It bore the postmark of a littl 
place in the adirondack where he wa stay with hi parents. ernest 
open the missiv not without hesitation. On read and reread it 
the fine line on hi forehead, that would some day deepen into 
wrinkles, becam quit pronounc and a look of displeasur darken hi 
face. someth wa wrong with jack, a slight chang that defi 
analysis. their soul were out of tune. It might onli be a pass 
disturbance; perhap it wa hi own fault. It pain him, nevertheless. 
somehow it seem of late that jack wa no longer abl to follow the 
vagari of hi mind. onli one person in the world possess a similar 
mental vision, onli one seem to understand what he said and what he 
left unsaid. reginald clarke, be a man and poet, read in hi soul as 
in an open book. ethel might have understood, had not love, like a 
cloud, laid itself between her eye and the page. 

It wa with exult that ernest heard near midnight the click of 
reginald' key in the door. He found him unchanged, completely, 
radiantli himself. reginald possess the psychic power of undress 
the soul, of see it befor him in primal nakedness. although no word 
wa said of ethel brandenbourg except the mere mention of her presenc 
in atlant city, ernest intuit knew that reginald wa awar of the 
transform that absenc had wrought in him. In the presenc of thi 
man he could be absolut himself, without shame or fear of 
mis-understanding; and by a strang metamorphosis, all hi affect 
for ethel and jack went out for the time be to reginald clarke. 




xvii 


the next day ernest wrote a letter of more or less superfici 
tender to ethel. she had wound hi pride by prove victori in 
the end over hi passion and hers; besides, he wa in the throe of 
work. when after the third day no answer came, he wa inclin to feel 
aggrieved. It wa plain now that she had not care for him in the least, 
but had simpli play with him for lack of anoth toy. A flush of shame 
rose to hi cheek at the thought. He began to analys hi own emotions, 
and stunned, if not stabbed, hi passion step by step. work wa call 
to him. It wa that which gave life it meaning, not the love of a 
season. how far away, how unreal, she now seem to him. yes, she wa 
right, he had not care deeply; and hi novel, too, would be written 
onli _at_ her. It wa the heroin of hi stori that absorb hi 
interest, not the live prototype. 

onc in a convers with reginald he touch upon the subject. 
reginald held that modern tast no longer permit even the 
photograph to portray life as it is, but insist upon an individu 
visualisation. "no man," he remarked, "wa ever translat bodili into 
fiction. In contradict to life, art is a process of artifici 
selection." 

bear in mind thi motive, ernest went to work to mould from the 
materi in hand a new ethel, more real than life. unfortun he 
found littl time to devot to hi novel. It wa onli when, after a good 
day' work, a pile of copi for a magazin lay on hi desk, that he could 
think of concentr hi mind upon "leontina." the result wa that 
when he went to bed hi imagin wa busi with the plan of hi book, 
and the creatur of hi own brain laid their finger on hi eyelid so 
that he could not sleep. 

when at last sheer weari overcam him, hi mind wa still at work, 
not in orderli sequenc but along trail monstrou and grotesque. 
hobgoblin seem to steal through the hall, and leer incubi 
oppress hi soul with terribl burdens. In the morn he awok 
unrested. the tan vanish from hi face and littl line appear in 
the corner of hi mouth. It wa as if hi nervou vital were sap 
from him in some unaccount way. He becam excited, hysterical. often 
at night when he wrote hi pot-boil for the magazines, fear stood 
behind hi seat, and onli the buzz of the elev outsid brought 
him back to himself. 

In one of hi morbid mood he wrote a sonnet which he show to reginald 
after the latter' return from a short trip out of town. reginald read 
it, look at the boy with a curious, lurk expression. 

_O gentl sleep, turn not thi face away, 
but place thi finger on my brow, and take 
all burthen from me and all dream that ache; 
upon mine eye a cool balsam lay, 
see I am aweari of the day. 
but, lo! thi lip are ashen and they quake. 
what spectral vision see thou that can shake 
thi sweet composure, and thi heart dismay? 
perhap some murderer' cruel eye agleam 
Is fix upon me, or some monstrou dream 
might bring such fear guilt upon the head 
Of my unvigil soul as would arous 
the borgian snake from her envenom bed, 
Or startl nero in hi golden house._ 

"good stuff," reginald remarked, lay down the manuscript; "when did 
you write it?" 

"the night when you were out of town," ernest rejoined. 

"I see," reginald replied. 

there wa someth startl in hi inton that at onc arous 
ernest' attention. 

"what do you see?" he ask quickly. 

"nothing," reginald replied, with immov calm, "onli that your state 
of nerv is still far from satisfactory." 




xviii 


after ernest' departur ethel brandenbourg' heart wa sway hither 
and thither in a hurrican of conflict feelings. befor she had time 
to gain an emot equilibrium, hi letter had hurl her back into 
chaos. A fals ring somewher in ernest' words, reecho with an 
ever-increas volum of sound, stifl the voic of love. hi jewel 
sentenc glittered, but left her cold. they lack that spontan 
which render even simpl and hackeney phrase wonder and unique. 
ethel clearli realis that her hold upon the boy' imagin had been 
a fleet midsumm night' charm, and that a word from reginald' lip 
had broken the potenc of her spell. she almost saw the shadow of 
reginald' visag hover over ernest' letter and leer at her from 
between the line in sinist triumph. final reason came and 
whisper to her that it wa extrem unwis to give her heart into the 
keep of a boy. hi love, she knew, would have been exacting, 
irrit at times. He would have ask her to sympathis with everi 
phase of hi life, and would have expect activ interest on her part 
in much that she had done with long ago. thus, untruth would have stolen 
into her life and embitt it. when mate are unequal, love must paint 
it cheek and, in certain mood at least, hide it face under a mask. 
it lip may be honeyed, but it bring fret and sorrow in it train. 

these thing she told herself over and over again while she pen a 
cool and calcul answer to ernest' letter. she rewrot it mani 
times, and everi time it becam more difficult to reply. At last she put 
her letter asid for a few days, and when it fell again into her hand it 
seem so unnatur and strain that she destroy it. 

thu sever week had passed, and ernest no longer exclus occupi 
her mind when, one day earli in september, while glanc over a 
magazine, she came upon hi name in the tabl of contents. onc more 
she saw the boy' wist face befor her, and a trembl someth 
stir in her heart. her hand shook as she cut the pages, and a mist of 
tear cloud her vision as she attempt to read hi poem. It wa a 
piec of sombr brilliance. like black-drap monk half craze with 
mystic devotion, the poet' thought flit across the page. It wa the 
wail of a soul that feel reason slip from it and behold mad 
rise over it life like a great pale moon. A strang unrest eman 
from it and took possess of her. and again, with an insight that wa 
prophetic, she distinctli recognis behind the vagu fear that had 
haunt the poet the figur of reginald clarke. 

A half-forgotten dream, struggl to consciousness, stagger her by 
it vividness. she saw clark as she had seen him in day gone by, 
grotesqu transform into a slimi sea-thing, whose hungri mouth shut 
suck upon her and whose thousand tentacl encircl her form. she 
close her eye in horror at the reminiscence. and in that moment it 
becam clear to her that she must take into her hand the salvat of 
ernest field from the clutch of the malign power that had 
mysteri envelop hi life. 




xix 


the summer wa brief, and alreadi by the middl of septemb mani had 
return to the pleasur of urban life. ethel wa among the 
first-comers; for, after her resolv to enter the life of the young poet 
onc more, it would have been imposs for her to stay away from the 
citi much longer. her plan wa all ready. befor attempt to see 
ernest she would go to meet reginald and implor him to free the boy 
from hi hideou spell. An element of curios unconsci enter 
her determination. when, year ago, she and clark had parted, the man 
had seemed, for once, greatli disturb and had promised, in hi 
agitation, that some day he would commun to her what would 
exoner him in her eyes. she had answer that all word between them 
were purposeless, and that she hope never to see hi face again. the 
experi that the year had brought to her, instead of elucid 
the mysteri of reginald' personality, had, on the contrary, made hi 
behaviour appear more and more unaccountable. she had more than onc 
caught herself wish to meet him again and to analys dispassion 
the puzzl influenc he had exert upon her. and she could at last 
view him dispassionately; there wa triumph in that. she wa dimli awar 
that someth had pass from her, someth by which he had held her, 
and without which hi magnet wa unabl to play upon her. 

So when walkham sent her an invit to one of hi artist "at homes" 
she accepted, in the hope of meet reginald. It wa hi frequent 
of walkham' hous that had for sever year effect bar her 
foot from cross the threshold. It wa with a veri strang feel she 
greet the mani familiar face at walkham' now; and when, toward ten 
o'clock, reginald entered, polit bow in answer to the welcom from 
all sides, her heart beat in her like a drum. but she calm herself, 
and, catch hi eye, so arrang it that earli in the even they 
met in an alcov of the drawing-room. 

"it wa inevitable," reginald said. "I expect it." 

"yes," she replied, "we were bound to meet." 

like a great rush of water, memori came back to her. He wa still 
horribl fascin as of old--onli she wa no longer suscept to 
hi fascination. He had chang somewhat in those years. the line about 
hi mouth had grown harder and a steel-lik look had come into hi eyes. 
onli for a moment, as he look at her, a flash of tender seem to 
come back to them. then he said, with a touch of sadness: "whi should 
the first word between us be a lie?" 

ethel made no answer. 

reginald look at her half in wonder and said: "and is your love for 
the boy so great that it overcam your hate of me?" 

ah, he knew! she winced. 

"he ha told you?" 

"not a word." 

there wa someth superhuman in hi power of penetration. whi should 
she wear a mask befor him, when hi eyes, like the eye of god, pierc 
to the core of her being? 

"no," she replied, "it is not love, but compass for him." 

"compassion?" 

"yes, compass for your victim." 

"you mean?" 

"reginald!" 

"I am all ear." 

"I implor you." 

"speak." 

"you have ruin one life." 

He rais hi eyebrow derogatively. 

"yes," she continu fiercely, "ruin it! Is not that enough?" 

"I have never wil ruin ani one' life." 

"you have ruin mine." 

"wilfully?" 

"how els shall I explain your conduct?" 

"I warn you." 

"warning, indeed! the warn that the snake give to the sparrow 
helpless under it gaze." 

"ah, but who tell you that the snake is to blame? Is it not rather the 
occult power that prescrib with blood on brazen scroll the law of our 
being?" 

"thi is no solac to the sparrow. but whatev may be said, let us drop 
the past. let us consid the present. I beg of you, leav thi boy--let 
him develop without your attempt to stifl the life in him or 
impress upon it the stamp of your alien mind." 

"ethel," he protested, "you are unjust. If you knew--" then an idea 
seem to take hold of him. He look at her curiously. 

"what if I knew?" she asked. 

"you shall know," he said, simply. "are you strong?" 

"strong to withstand anyth at your hand. there is noth that you 
can give me, noth that you can take away." 

"no," he remarked, "nothing. yes, you have changed. still, when I look 
upon you, the ghost of the past seem to rise like live things." 

"we both have changed. We meet now upon equal grounds. you are no 
longer the idol I made of you." 

"don't you think that to the idol thi might be a relief, not a 
humiliation? It is a terribl tortur to sit in state with lip 
etern shut. sometim there come over the most retic of us a 
desir to break through the etern loneli that surround the soul. 
It is thi feel that prompt madmen to tear off their cloth and 
exhibit their naked in the market-place. it' mad on my part, or 
a whim, or I don't know what; but it pleas me that you should know the 
truth." 

"you promis me long ago that I should." 

"to-day I will redeem my promise, and I will tell you anoth thing that 
you will find hard to believe." 

"and that is?" 

"that I love you." 

ethel smile a littl sceptically. "you have love often." 

"no," he replied. "loved, serious loved, I have, onli once." 




XX 


they were sit in a littl italian restaur where they had often, 
in the old days, linger late into the night over a glass of lacrimæ 
christi. but no pale ghost of the past rose from the wine. onli a 
wriggl something, with serpent eyes, that sent cold shiver down her 
spine and held her speechless and entranced. 

when their order had been fill and the waiter had post himself at a 
respect distance, reginald began--at first leisurely, a man of the 
world. but as he proceed a strang exult seem to possess him 
and from hi eye leap the flame of the mystic. 

"you must pardon me," he commenced, "if I monopolis the conversation, 
but the revel I have to make are of such a natur that I may well 
claim your attention. I will start with my earliest childhood. you 
rememb the pictur of me that wa taken when I wa five?" 

she remembered, indeed. each detail of hi life wa deepli engraven on 
her mind. 

"at that time," he continued, "I wa not held to be particularli bright. 
the reason wa that my mind, be pre-emin and extraordinarili 
receptive, need a stimulu from without. the moment I wa sent to 
school, however, a curiou metamorphosi took place in me. I may say 
that I becam at onc the most brilliant boy in my class. you know that 
to thi day I have alway been the most strike figur in ani circl in 
which I have ever moved." 

ethel nod assent. silent watch the speaker, she saw a gleam of 
the truth from afar, but still veri distant and veri dim. 

reginald lift the glass against the light and gulp it contents. 
then in a lower voic he recommenced: "like the chameleon, I have the 
power of absorb the colour of my environment." 

"do you mean that you have the power of absorb the special virtu 
of other people?" she interjected. 

"that is exactli what I mean." 

"oh!" she cried, for in a heart-beat mani thing had becom clear to 
her. for the first time she realised, still vagu but with increas 
vividness, the hidden caus of her ruin and, still more plainly, the 
horribl danger of ernest fielding. 

He notic her agitation, and a look of psycholog curios came 
into hi eyes. 

"ah, but that is not all," he observed, smilingly. "that is nothing. We 
all possess that faculti in a degree. the secret of my strength is my 
abil to reject everi element that is harm or inessenti to the 
complet of my self. thi did not come to me easily, nor without a 
struggle. but now, look back upon my life, mani thing becom 
transpar that were obscur even to me at the time. I can now follow 
the fine-spun thread in the intric web of my fate, and discov in 
the wilder of mesh a design, aw and grandli planned." 

hi voic shook with conviction, as he utter these words. there wa 
someth strang gruesom in thi man. It wa thu that she had 
pictur to herself the high-priest of some terribl and mysteri 
religion, demand a human sacrific to appeas the hunger of hi god. 
she wa fascin by the spell of hi personality, and listen with a 
feel not far remov from awe. but reginald suddenli chang hi tone 
and proceed in a more convers manner. 

"the first friend I ever care for wa a boy marvel endow for 
the studi of mathematics. At the time of our first meet at school, I 
wa unabl to solv even the simplest algebra problem. but we had 
been togeth onli for half a month, when we exchang parts. It wa I 
who wa the mathemat geniu now, wherea he becam hopelessli dull 
and stutter through hi recit onli with a struggl that brought 
the tear to hi eyes. then I discard him. heartless, you say? I have 
come to know better. have you ever tast a bottl of wine that had been 
uncork for a long time? If you have, you have probabl found it 
flat--th essenc wa gone, evaporated. thu it is when we care for 
people. probably--no, assuredly--ther is some principl prison in 
their souls, or in the wind of their brains, which, when escaped, 
leav them insipid, unprofit and devoid of interest to us. 
sometim thi essence--not necessarili the finest element in a man' or 
a woman' nature, but soul-stuff that we lack--disappears. In fact, it 
invari disappears. It may be that it ha been transform in the 
process of their growth; it may also be that it ha utterli vanish 
by some inadvertence, or that we ourselv have absorb it." 

"then we throw them away?" ethel asked, pale, but dry-eyed. A shudder 
pass through her bodi and she clinch her glass nervously. At that 
moment reginald resembl a verit princ of darkness, sinist and 
beautiful, paint by the hand of a modern master. then, for a space, he 
again becam the man of the world. smile and self-possessed, he fill 
the glasses, took a long sip of the wine and resum hi narrative. 

"that boy wa follow by others. I absorb mani useless thing and 
some that were evil. I realis that I must direct my absorpt 
propensities. thi I did. I selected, select well. and all the time 
the terribl power of which I wa onli half consciou grew within me." 

"it is inde a terribl power," she cried; "all the more terribl for 
it subtlety. had I not myself been it victim, I should not now find it 
possibl to believ in it." 

"the invis hand that smite in the dark is certainli more fear 
than a visibl foe. It is also more merciful. think how much you would 
have suffer had you been consciou of your loss." 

"still it seem even now to me that it cannot have been an utter, 
irrepar loss. there is no action without reaction. even i--even 
we--must have receiv from you some compens for what you have 
taken away." 

"in the ordinari process of life the law of action and reaction is 
inde potent. but no law is without exception. think of radium, for 
instance, with it constant and seemingli inexhaust outflow of 
energy. It is a difficult thing to imagine, but our scientif men have 
accept it as a fact. whi should we find it more difficult to conceiv 
of a tremend and infinit absorpt element? I feel sure that it 
must somewher exist. but everi phenomenon in the physic world find 
it counterpart in the psychic universe. there are radium-soul that 
radiat without loss of energy, but also without increase. and there are 
souls, the revers of radium, with unlimit absorpt capacities." 

"vampire-souls," she observed, with a shudder, and her face blanched. 

"no," he said, "don't say that." and then he suddenli seem to grow in 
stature. hi face wa ablaze, like the face of a god. 

"in everi age," he replied, with solemnity, "there are giant who attain 
to a great which by natur growth no men could ever have reached. 
but in their youth a vision came to them, which they set out to seek. 
they take the stone of fanci to build them a palac in the kingdom of 
truth, project into realiti dreams, monstrou and impossible. often 
they fail and, tumbl from their airi heights, end a quixot career. 
some succeed. they are the chosen. carpenter' son they are, who have 
laid down the law of a world for millenium to come; or simpl 
corsicans, befor whose eagl eye have quak the kingdom of the earth. 
but to accomplish their mission they need a will of iron and the wit of 
a hundr men. and from the iron they take the strength, and from a 
hundr men' brain they absorb their wisdom. divin missionaries, they 
appear in all depart of life. In their hand is gather to-day the 
gold of the world. mighti potent of peac and war, they unlock new 
sea and from distant contin lift the bars. single-handed, they 
accomplish what nation dare not hope; with titan stride they scale 
the star and succeed where million fail. In art they live, the maker 
of new periods, the dreamer of new styles. they make themselv the 
vocal sun-glass of god. homer and shakespeare, hugo and balzac--they 
concentr the dispers ray of a thousand lesser luminari in one 
sing flame that, like a giant torch, light up humanity' path." 

she gaze at him, open-mouthed. the light had gone from hi visage. He 
paused, exhausted, but even then he look the incarn of a forc no 
less terrible, no less grand. she grasp the immens of hi 
conception, but her woman' soul rebel at the horribl injustic to 
those whose light is extinguished, as her had been, to feed an alien 
flame. and then, for a moment, she saw the pale face of ernest stare 
at her out of the wine. 

"cruel," she sobbed, "how cruel!" 

"what matter?" he asked. "their strength is taken from them, but the 
spirit of humanity, as embodi in us, triumphantli march on." 




xxi 


reginald' revel were follow by a long silence, interrupt onli 
by the offici of the waiter. the spell onc broken, they 
exchang a number of more or less irrelev observations. ethel' mind 
returned, again and again, to the word he had not spoken. He had said 
noth of the immedi bear of hi monstrou power upon her own 
life and that of ernest fielding. 

At last, somewhat timidly, she approach the subject. 

"you said you love me," she remarked. 

"I did." 

"but why, then--" 

"I could not help it." 

"did you ever make the slightest attempt?" 

"in the horribl night hour I struggl against it. I even implor you 
to leav me." 

"ah, but I love you!" 

"you would not be warned, you would not listen. you stay with me, and 
slowly, surely, the creativ urg went out of your life." 

"but what on earth could you find in my poor art to attract you? what 
were my pictur to you?" 

"I need them, I need you. It wa a certain something, a rich colour 
effect, perhaps. and then, under your veri eyes, the colour that 
vanish from your canvas reappear in my prose. My style becam more 
luxuri than it had been, while you tortur your soul in the vain 
attempt of call back to your brush what wa irretriev lost." 

"whi did you not tell me?" 

"you would have laugh in my face, and I could not have endur your 
laugh. besides, I alway hoped, until it wa too late, that I might yet 
check the mysteri power within me. soon, however, I becam awar that 
it wa beyond my control. the unknown god, whose instrument I am, had 
wise made it stronger than me." 

"but why," retort ethel, "wa it necessari to discard me, like a 
cast-off garment, like a wanton who ha lost the power to please?" 

her frame shook with the rememb emot of that moment, when year 
ago he had polit told her that she wa noth to him. 

"the law of being," reginald replied, almost sadly, "the law of my 
being. I should have piti you, but the etern reproach of your 
suffer onli provok my anger. I care less for you everi day, and 
when I had absorb all of you that my growth required, you were to me 
as one dead, as a stranger you were. there wa between us no further 
commun of interest; henceforth, I knew, our live must move in 
total differ spheres. you rememb that day when we said good-bye?" 

"you mean that day when I lay befor you on my knees," she correct 
him. 

"that day I buri my last dream of person happiness. I would have 
gladli rais you from the floor, but love wa utterli gone. If I am 
tender to-day than I am wont to be, it is becaus you mean so much to 
me as the symbol of my renunciation. when I realis that I could not 
even save the thing I love from myself, I becam harden and cruel to 
others. not that I know no kindli feeling, but no qualm of conscienc 
lay their prostrat form across my path. there is noth in life for 
me but my mission." 

hi face wa bath in ecstasy. the pupil were luminous, larg and 
threatening. He had the look of a madman or a prophet. 

after a while ethel remarked: "but you have grown into one of the 
master-figur of the age. whi not be content with that? Is there no 
limit to your ambition?" 

reginald smiled: "ambition! shakespear stop when he had reach hi 
full growth, when he had exhaust the capac of hi contemporaries. I 
am not yet readi to lay down my pen and rest." 

"and will you alway continu in thi crimin course, a murder of 
other lives?" 

He look her calmli in the face. "I do not know." 

"are you the slave of your unknown god?" 

"we are all slaves, wire-pul marionettes: you, ernest, I. there is 
no freedom on the face of the earth nor above. the tiger that tear a 
lamb is not free, I am not free, you are not free. all that happen must 
happen; no word that is said is said in vain, in vain is rais no 
hand." 

"then," ethel retorted, eagerly, "if I attempt to wrest your victim 
from you, I should also be the tool of your god?" 

"assuredly. but I am hi chosen." 

"can you--can you not set him free?" 

"I need him--a littl longer. then he is yours." 

"but can you not, if I beg you again on my knees, at least loosen hi 
chain befor he is utterli ruined?" 

"it is beyond my power. If I could not rescu you, whom I loved, what in 
heaven or on earth can save him from hi fate? besides, he will not be 
utterli ruined. It is onli a part of him that I absorb. In hi soul are 
chord that I have not touched. they may vibrat one day, when he ha 
gather new strength. you, too, would have spare yourself much pain 
had you striven to attain success in differ fields--not where I had 
garner the harvest of a lifetime. It is onli a portion of hi talent 
that I take from him. the rest I cannot harm. whi should he buri that 
remainder?" 

hi eye stray through the window to the firmament, as if to say that 
word could no more bend hi indomit will than alter the changeless 
cours of the stars. 

ethel had half-forgotten the wrong she herself had suffer at hi 
hands. He could not be measur by ordinari standards, thi dazzl 
madman, whose diseas will-pow had assum such uncanni proportions. 
but here a young life wa at stake. In her mind' eye she saw reginald 
crush between hi relentless hand the delic soul of ernest fielding, 
as a magnific carnivor flower might close it gloriou petal upon 
a fly. 

love, all conquer love, well up in her. she would fight for ernest 
as a tiger cat fight for it young. she would place herself in the way 
of the aw forc that had shatter her own aspirations, and save, at 
ani cost, the brilliant boy who did not love her. 




xxii 


the last ray of the late afternoon sun fell slant through ernest' 
window. He wa lie on hi couch, in a leaden, death-lik slumber that, 
for the moment at least, wa not even perturb by the presenc of 
reginald clarke. 

the latter wa stand at the boy' bedside, calm, unmov as ever. the 
excit of hi convers with ethel had left no trace on the 
chisel contour of hi forehead. smilingli fasten an orchid of an 
indefin purpl tint in hi even coat, radiant, buoyant with life, 
he look down upon the sleeper. then he pass hi hand over ernest' 
forehead, as if to wipe off bead of sweat. At the touch of hi hand the 
boy stir uneasily. when it wa not withdrawn hi counten twitch 
in pain. He moan as men moan under the influenc of some anæsthetic, 
without possess the power to break through the narrow partit that 
separ them from death on the one side and from conscious on the 
other. At last a sigh struggl to hi seemingli paralys lips, then 
another. final the babbl becam articulate. 

"for god' sake," he cried, in hi sleep, "take that hand away!" 

and all at onc the benign smile on reginald' featur wa chang 
to a look of savag fierceness. He no longer resembl the man of 
culture, but a disappointed, snarl beast of prey. He took hi hand 
from ernest' forehead and retir cautious through the half-open 
door. 

hardli had he disappear when ernest awoke. for a moment he look 
around, like a hunt animal, then sigh with relief and buri hi 
head in hi hand. At that moment a knock at the door wa heard, and 
reginald re-entered, calm as before. 

"I declare," he exclaimed, "you have certainli been sleep the sleep 
of the just." 

"it isn't laziness," ernest replied, look up rather pleas at the 
interruption. "but i'v a split headache." 

"perhap those nap are not good for your health." 

"probably. but of late I have frequent found it necessari to exact 
from the day-hour the sleep which the night refus me. I suppos it is 
all due to indigestion, as you have suggested. the stomach is the sourc 
of all evil." 

"it is also the sourc of all good. the greek made it the seat of the 
soul. I have alway claim that the most import item in a great 
poet' biographi is an exact reproduct of hi menu." 

"true, a man who eat a heavi beefsteak for breakfast in the morn is 
incap of write a sonnet in the afternoon." 

"yes," reginald added, "we are what we eat and what our forefath have 
eaten befor us. I ascrib the stale of american poetri to the 
griddle-cak of our puritan ancestors. I am sorri we cannot go deeper 
into the subject at present. but I have an invit to dinner where I 
shall study, experimentally, the influenc of french sauc on my 
versification." 

"good-bye." 

"au revoir." and, with a wave of the hand, reginald left the room. 

when the door had close behind him, ernest' thought took a more 
seriou turn. the tone of light banter in which the preced 
convers had taken place had been assum on hi part. for the last 
few week evil dream had tortur hi sleep and cast their shadow upon 
hi wake hours. they had ever increas in reality, in intens and 
in hideousness. even now he could see the long, taper finger that 
everi night were grope in the wind of hi brain. It wa a 
well-formed, manicur hand that seem to reach under hi skull, 
care feel it way through the myriad convolut where thought 
resides. 

and, oh, the agoni of it all! A human mind is not a thing of stone, but 
alive, horribl aliv to pain. what wa it those finger sought, what 
mysteri treasures, what jewel hidden in the under-lay of hi 
consciousness? hi brain wa like a human gold-mine, quak under the 
blow of the pick and the tread of the miner. the miner! ah, the miner! 
ceaselessly, thoroughly, relentlessly, he open vein after vein and 
wrest untold rich from the quiver ground; but each vein wa a 
live vein and each nugget of gold a thought! 

No wonder the boy wa a nervou wreck. whenev a tremul nascent idea 
wa formul itself, the dream-hand clutch it and took it away, 
brutal sever the fine thread that bind thought to thought. and 
when the morn came, how hi head ached! It wa not an acut pain, but 
dull, heavy, incessant. 

these sensations, ernest frequent told himself, were morbid fancies. 
but then, the monomaniac who imagin that hi arm have been mangl or 
cut from hi body, might as well be without arms. mind can annihil 
obstacles. It can also creat them. psycholog wa no unfamiliar ground 
to ernest, and it wa not difficult for him to seek in some casual 
suggest an explan for hi delusion, the fix notion that 
haunt him day and night. but he also realiz that to explain a 
phenomenon is not to explain it away. the man who analys hi emot 
cannot wholli escap them, and the shadow of fear--primal, inexplic 
fear--may darken at moment of weak the life of the subtlest 
psychologist and the clearest thinker. 

He had never spoken to reginald of hi terribl nightmares. come on 
the heel of the fanci that he, ernest, had written "the princess with 
the yellow veil," a fanci that, by the way, had again possess him of 
late, thi new delus would certainli arous suspicion as to hi 
saniti in reginald' mind. He would probabl send him to a sanitarium; 
he certainli would not keep him in the house. benefic itself in all 
other things, hi host wa not to be trifl with in ani matter that 
interf with hi work. He would act swiftli and without mercy. 

for the first time in mani day ernest thought of abel felton. poor boy! 
what had becom of him after he had been turn from the house? He would 
not wait for ani one to tell him to pack hi bundle. but then, that wa 
impossible; reginald wa fond of him. 

suddenli ernest' medit were interrupt by a nois at the outer 
door. A key wa turn in the lock. It must be he--but whi so soon? what 
could have brought him back at thi hour? He open the door and went 
out into the hall to see what had happened. the figur that he beheld 
wa certainli not the person expected, but a woman, from whose shoulder 
a theatre-cloak fell in grace folds,--prob a visitor for 
reginald. ernest wa about to withdraw discreetly, when the electr 
light that wa burn in the hallway fell upon her face and illumin 
it. 

then inde surpris overcam him. "ethel," he cried, "i it you?" 




xxiii 


ernest conduct ethel brandenbourg to hi room and help her to remov 
her cloak. 

while he wa place the garment upon the back of a chair, she slip a 
littl key into her hand-bag. He look at her with a question in hi 
eyes. 

"yes," she replied, "I kept the key; but I had not dream that I would 
ever again cross thi threshold." 

meanwhil it had grown quit dark. the reflect of the street lantern 
without dimli lit the room, and through the twilight fantast shadow 
seem to dance. 

the perfum of her hair pervad the room and fill the boy' heart 
with romance. tender long suppress call with a thousand voices. 
the hour, the strang and unexpected of her visit, perhap even 
a boy' pardon vanity, rous passion from it slumber and onc 
again wrought in ernest' soul the miracl of love. hi arm encircl 
her neck and hi lip stammer blind, sweet, crazi and caress 
things. 

"turn on the light," she pleaded. 

"you were not alway so cruel." 

"no matter, I have not come to speak of love." 

"why, then, have you come?" 

ernest felt a littl awkward, disappointed, as he utter these words. 

what could have induc her to come to hi rooms? He loosen hi hold 
on her and did as she asked. 

how pale she look in the light, how beautiful! surely, she had 
sorrow for him; but whi had she not answer hi letter? yes, why? 

"your letter?" she smile a littl sadly. "sure you did not expect me 
to answer that?" 

"whi not?" He had again approach her and hi lip were close to hers. 
"whi not? I have yearn for you. I love you." 

hi breath intox her; it wa like a subtl perfume. still she did 
not yield. 

"you love me now--you did not love me then. the music of your word wa 
cold--machine-made, strain and superficial. I shall not answer, I told 
myself: in hi heart he ha forgotten you. I did not then realis that a 
danger forc had possess your life and crush in your mind everi 
imag but it own." 

"I don't understand." 

"do you think I would have come here if it were a light matter? no, I 
tell you, it is a matter of life and death to you, at least as an 
artist." 

"what do you mean by that?" 

"have you done a stroke of work sinc I last saw you?" 

"yes, let me see, surely, magazin articl and a poem." 

"that is not what I want to know. have you accomplish anyth big? 
have you grown sinc thi summer? how about your novel?" 

"i--i have almost finish it in my mind, but I have found no chanc to 
begin with the actual writing. I wa sick of late, veri sick." 

No doubt of it! hi face wa pinch and pale, and the line about the 
mouth were curious contorted, like those of a man suffer from a 
pain intern disease. 

"tell me," she ventured, "do you ever miss anything?" 

"do you mean--ar there thieves?" 

"thieves! against thiev one can protect oneself." 

He stare at her wildly, half-frightened, in anticip of some 
dread revelation. hi dream! hi dream! that hand! could it be more 
than a dream? god! hi lip quivered. 

ethel observ hi agit and continu more quietly, but with the 
same insistence: "have you ever had ideas, plan that you began without 
have strength to complet them? have you had glimps of vocal vision 
that seem to vanish no sooner than seen? did it ever seem to you as if 
some mysteri and superior will brutal interf with the work 
of your brain?" 

did it seem so to him! He himself could not have state more plainli 
the experi of the last few months. each word fell from her lip like 
the blow of a hammer. shivering, he put hi arm around her, seek 
solace, not love. thi time she did not repuls him and, trustingly, as 
a child confid to hi mother, he depict to her the suffer that 
harrow hi life and made it a hell. 

As she listened, indign cloud her forehead, while rise tear of 
anger and of love weigh down her lashes. she could bear the piti 
sight no longer. 

"child," she cried, "do you know who your tormentor is?" 

and like a flash the truth pass from her to him. A sudden intim 
told him what her word had still concealed. 

"don't! for christ' sake, do not pronounc hi name!" he sobbed. "do 
not breath it. I could not endur it. I should go mad." 




xxiv 


veri quietly, with difficulti restrain her own emot so as not to 
excit him further, ethel had relat to ernest the stori of her 
remark interview with reginald clarke. In the long silenc that 
ensued, the wing of hi soul brush against her for the first time, 
and love by a thousand tender chain of common suffer weld their 
be into one. 

caressingli the ivori of her finger pass through the gold of hi hair 
and over hi brow, as if to banish the demon-ey that stare at him 
across the hideou space of the past. In a rush a thousand incid 
came back to him, mute wit of a damn truth. hi play, the 
dream that torment him, hi own inabl to concentr hi mind 
upon hi novel which hitherto he had ascrib to nervou disease--all, 
pile fact on fact, becam one monstrou monument of reginald clarke' 
crime. At last ernest understood the part word of abel felton and 
the look in ethel' eye on the night when he had first link hi fate 
with the other man's. walkham' experience, too, and reginald' remark 
on the bust of shakespear and balzac unmistak point toward the 
new and horribl spectr that ethel' revel had rais in place of 
hi host. 

and then, again, the other reginald appeared, crown with the lyric 
wreath. from hi lip golden cadenc fell, sweeter than the smell of 
mani flower or the sound of a silver bell. He wa onc more the divin 
master, whose godlik featur bore no trace of malic and who had 
rais him to a place veri near hi heart. 

"no," he cried, "it is impossible. it' all a dream, a horribl 
nightmare." 

"but he ha himself confess it," she interjected. 

"perhap he ha spoken in symbols. We all absorb to some extent other 
men' ideas, without rob them and wreck their thought-life. 
reginald may be unscrupul in the use of hi power of impress upon 
other the stamp of hi master-mind. So wa shakespeare. no, no, no! 
you are mistaken; we were both delud for the moment by hi picturesqu 
account of a common, not even a discreditable, fact. He may himself have 
play with the idea, but sure he cannot have been serious." 

"and your own experience, and abel felton' and mine--can they, too, be 
dismiss with a shrug of the shoulder?" 

"but, come to think of it, the whole theori seem absurd. It is 
unscientific. It is not even a case of mesmerism. If he had said that he 
hypnotis hi victims, the matter would assum a total differ 
aspect. I admit that someth is wrong somewhere, and that the home of 
reginald clark is no health abod for me. but you must also rememb 
that probabl we are both unstrung to the point of hysteria." 

but to ethel hi word carri no conviction. 

"you are still under hi spell," she cried, anxiously. 

A littl shaken in hi confidence, ernest resumed: "reginald is utterli 
incap of such an action, even grant that he possess the 
terribl power of which you speak. A man of hi splendid resources, a 
literari mida at whose veri touch everi word turn into gold, is under 
no necess to prey on the thought of others. circumstances, I admit, 
are suspicious. but in the light of common day thi fanci theori 
shrivel into nothing. ani court of law would reject our evid as 
madness. It is too utterli fantastic, utterli alien to ani human 
experience." 

"i it though?" ethel repli with peculiar intonation. 

"why, what do you mean?" 

"surely," she answered, "you must know that in the legend of everi 
nation we read of men and women who were call vampires. they are 
beings, not alway wholli evil, whom everi night some mysteri impuls 
lead to steal into unguard bedchambers, to suck the blood of the 
sleeper and then, have wax strong on the life of their victims, 
cautious to retreat. thenc come it that their lip are veri red. It 
is even said that they can find no rest in the grave, but return to 
their former haunt long after they are believ to be dead. those whom 
they visit, however, pine away for no appar reason. the physician 
shake their wise head and speak of consumption. but sometimes, ancient 
chronicl assur us, the people' suspicion were aroused, and under 
the leadership of a good priest they went in solemn process to the 
grave of the person suspected. and on open the tomb it wa found 
that their coffin had rot away and the flower in their hair were 
black. but their bodi were white and whole; through no empti socket 
crept the vermin, and their suck lip were still moist with a littl 
blood." 

ernest wa carri away in spite of himself by her account, which 
vividli resembl hi own experience. still he would not give in. 

"all thi is impressive. I admit it is veri impressive. but you yourself 
speak of such stori as legends. they are unfound upon ani tangibl 
fact, and you cannot expect a man school in modern scienc to admit, 
as have ani possibl bear upon hi life, the crude belief of the 
middl ages!" 

"whi not?" she responded. "our scientist have prove true the wildest 
theori of mediæv scholars. the transmut of metal seem to-day 
no longer an idl speculation, and radium ha transform into potenti 
realiti the dream of perpetu motion. the fundament notion of 
mathemat are be undermined. one school of philosoph claim that 
the number of angl in a triangl is equal to more than two right 
angles; anoth propound that it is less. even great scientist who 
have studi the soul of natur are turn to spiritism. the world is 
overcom the shallow sceptic of the nineteenth century. life ha 
becom onc more wonder and veri mysterious. but it also seem that, 
with the miracl of the old days, their terrors, their nightmar and 
their monster have come back in a modern guise." 

ernest becam even more thoughtful. "yes," he observed, "there is 
someth in what you say." then, pace the room nervously, he 
exclaimed: "and still I find it imposs to believ your explanation. 
reginald a vampire! It seem so ludicrous. If you had told me that such 
creatur exist somewhere, far away, I might have discuss the matter; 
but in thi great city, in the shadow of the flatiron building--no!" 

she repli with warmth: "yet they exist--alway have existed. not onli 
in the middl ages, but at all time and in all regions. there is no 
nation but ha some record of them, in one form or another. and don't 
you think if we find a thought, no matter how absurd it may seem to us, 
that ha ever occupi the mind of men--if we find, I say, such a 
perenni recurr thought, are we not justifi in assum that it 
must have some basi in the actual experi of mankind?" 

ernest' brow becam veri clouded, and infinit number of hidden 
prematur wrinkl began to show. how wan he look and how frail! He 
wa as one lost in a labyrinth in which he saw no light, convinc 
against hi will, or rather, against hi scientif conviction, that she 
wa not wholli mistaken. 

"still," he observ triumphantly, "your vampir suck blood; but 
reginald, if vampir he be, prey upon the soul. how can a man suck 
from anoth man' brain a thing as intangible, as quintessenti as 
thought?" 

"ah," she replied, "you forget, thought is more real than blood!" 




xxv 


onli three hour had pass sinc ethel had startl ernest from hi 
sombr reveries, but within thi brief space their love had matur as 
if each hour had been a year. the pallor had vanish from hi cheek 
and the restiv from hi eyes. the intox of her presenc had 
rekindl the light of hi counten and given him strength to combat 
the mighti forc embodi in reginald clarke. the child in him had made 
room for the man. He would not hear of surrend without a struggle, 
and ethel felt sure she might leav hi fate in hi own hand. love had 
lent him a coat of mail. He wa warned, and would not succumb. still she 
made one more attempt to persuad him to leav the hous at onc with 
her. 

"I must go now," she said. "will you not come with me, after all? I am 
so afraid to think of you still here." 

"no, dear," he replied. "I shall not desert my post. I must solv the 
riddl of thi man' life; and if, indeed, he is the thing he seem to 
be, I shall attempt to wrest from him what he ha stolen from me. I 
speak of my unwritten novel." 

"do not attempt to oppos him openly. you cannot resist him." 

"be assur that I shall be on my guard. I have in the last few hour 
live through so much that make life worth living, that I would not 
wantonli expos myself to ani danger. still, I cannot go without 
certainty--cannot, if there is some truth in our fears, leav the best 
of me behind." 

"what are you plan to do?" 

"mi play--i am sure now that it is mine--i cannot take from him; that is 
irretriev lost. He ha read it to hi circl and prepar for it 
publication. and, no matter how firmli convinc you or I may be of hi 
strang power, no one would believ our testimony. they would pronounc 
us mad. perhap we _are_ mad!" 

"no; we are not mad; but it is mad for you to stay here," she asserted. 

"I shall not stay here one minut longer than is absolut essential. 
within a week I shall have conclus proof of hi guilt or innocence." 

"how will you go about it?" 

"hi write table--" 

"ah!" 

"yes, perhap I can discov some note, some indication, some proof--" 

"it' a danger game." 

"I have everyth to gain." 

"I wish I could stay here with you," she said. "have you no friend, no 
one whom you could trust in thi delic matter?" 

"why, yes--jack." 

A shadow pass over her face. 

"do you know," she said, "I have a feel that you care more for him 
than for me?" 

"nonsense," he said, "he is my friend, you, you--immeasur more." 

"are you still as intim with him as when I first met you?" 

"not quite; of late a troubl something, like a thin veil, seem to 
have pass between us. but he will come when I call him. He will not 
fail me in my hour of need." 

"when can he be here?" 

"in two or three days." 

"meanwhil be veri careful. abov all, lock your door at night." 

"I will not onli lock, but barricad it. I shall tri with all my power 
to elucid thi mysteri without, however, expos myself to needless 
risks." 

"I will go, then. kiss me good-bye." 

"may I not take you to the car?" 

"you had better not." 

At the door she turn back onc more. "write me everi day, or call me 
up on the telephone." 

He straighten himself, as if to convinc her of hi strength. yet when 
at last the door had close behind her, hi courag forsook him for a 
moment. and, if he had not been asham to appear a weakl befor the 
woman he loved, who know if ani power on earth could have kept him in 
that hous where from everi corner a secret seem to lurk! 

there wa a misgiving, too, in the woman' heart as she left the boy 
behind,--a prey to the occult power that, seek express in multipl 
activities, ha made and unmad emperors, prophet and poets. 

As she step into a street car she saw from afar, as in a vision, the 
face of reginald clarke. It seem veri white and hungry. there wa no 
human kind in it--onli a threat and a sneer. 




xxvi 


for over an hour ernest pace up and down hi room, wildli excit by 
ethel' revelations. It requir an immens amount of self-control for 
him to pen the follow line to jack: "I need you. come." 

after he had entrust the letter to the hall-boy, a reaction set in and 
he wa abl to consid the matter, if not with equanimity, at least 
with a degre of calmness. the strangest thing to him wa that he could 
not bring himself to hate reginald, of whose evil influenc upon hi 
life he wa now firmli convinced. here wa anoth shatter idol; but 
one--lik the fragment of a great god-fac in the desert--intens 
fascinating, even in it ruin. then yield to a natur impulse, 
ernest look over hi photograph and at onc laid hold upon the 
auster imag of hi master and friend. no--it wa preposterous; there 
wa no evil in thi man. there wa no trace of malic in thi face, the 
face of a prophet or an inspir madman, a poet. and yet, as he 
scrutinis the pictur close a curiou transform seem to take 
place in the features; a sli littl line appear insinuatingli about 
reginald' well-form mouth, and the seren calm of hi jupiter-head 
seem to turn into the sneak smile of a thief. nevertheless, ernest wa 
not afraid. hi anxieti had at last assum definit shape; it wa 
possibl now to be on hi guard. It is onli invisible, incomprehens 
fear, crouch upon us from the night, that drive sensit natur to 
the verg of mad and transform stern warrior into cowards. 

ernest realis the necess of postpon the propos investig 
of reginald' paper until the morning, as it wa now near eleven, and 
he expect to hear at ani moment the sound of hi feet at the door. 
befor retir he took a number of precautions. care he lock the 
door to hi bedroom and place a chair in front of it. To make doubli 
sure, he fasten the handl to an exquisit chines vase, a gift of 
reginald's, that at the least attempt to forc an entranc from without 
would come down with a crash. 

then, although sleep seem out of the question, he went to bed. He had 
hardli touch the pillow when a leaden weight seem to fall upon hi 
eyes. the day' commot had been too much for hi delic frame. By 
forc of habit he pull the cover over hi ear and fell asleep. 

all night he slept heavily, and the morn wa far advanc when a 
knock at the door that, at first, seem to come across an immeasur 
distance, brought him back to himself. It wa reginald' manserv 
announc that breakfast wa waiting. 

ernest got up and rub hi eyes. the barricad at the door at onc 
brought back to hi mind with startl clear the event of the 
previou evening. 

everyth wa as he had left it. evid no one had attempt to 
enter the room while he slept. He could not help smile at the 
arrang which remind him of hi childhood, when he had sought by 
similar mean secur from burglar and bogeys. and in the broad 
daylight ethel' tale of vampir seem onc more imposs and 
absurd. still, he had abund evid of reginald' strang influence, 
and wa determin to know the truth befor nightfall. her words, that 
thought is more real than blood, kept ring in hi ears. If such wa 
the case, he would find evid of reginald' intellectu burglaries, 
and possibl be abl to regain a part of hi lost self that had been 
snatch from him by the relentless dream-hand. 

but under no circumst could he face reginald in hi present state 
of mind. He wa convinc that if in the fleet vision of a moment the 
other man' true natur should reveal itself to him, he would be so 
terribl afraid as to shriek like a maniac. So he dress particularli 
slowli in the hope of avoid an encount with hi host. but fate 
thwart thi hope. reginald, too, linger that morn unusu long 
over hi coffee. He wa just take hi last sip when ernest enter the 
room. hi behaviour wa of an almost bourgeoi kindness. benevol 
fairli beam from hi face. but to the boy' eye it had assum a new 
and sinist expression. 

"you are late thi morning, ernest," he remark in hi mildest manner. 
"have you been about town, or write poetry? both occup are 
equal unhealthy." As he said thi he watch the young man with the 
inscrut smile that at moment wa wont to curl upon hi lips. ernest 
had onc liken it to the smile of mona lisa, but now he detect in it 
the suaviti of the hypocrit and the leer of the criminal. 

He could not endur it; he could not look upon that face ani longer. hi 
feet almost gave way under him, cold sweat gather on hi brow, and he 
sank on a chair trembl and studious avoid the other man' gaze. 

At last reginald rose to go. It seem imposs to accus thi 
splendid imperson of vigor manhood of cun and underhand 
methods, of plagiar and of theft. As he stood there he resembl 
more than anyth a beauti tiger-cat, a wonder thing of strength 
and will-power, indomit and insatiate. yet who could tell whether 
thi strength wa not, after all, parasitic. If ethel' suspicion were 
justified, then, indeed, more had been taken from him than he could ever 
realise. for in that case it wa hi life-blood that circl in those 
vein and the fire of hi intellect that set those lip aflame! 




xxvii 


reginald clark had hardli left the room when ernest hastili rose from 
hi seat. while it wa like that he would remain in undisturb 
possess of the apart the whole morning, the stake at hand wa too 
great to permit of delay. 

palpit and a littl uncertain, he enter the studio where, 
scarc a year ago, reginald clark had bidden him welcome. noth had 
chang there sinc then; onli in ernest' mind the room had assum an 
aspect of evil. the antin wa there and the faun and the christ-head. 
but their juxtaposit to-day partook of the natur of the blasphemous. 
the statu of shakespear and balzac seem to frown from their 
pedest as hi finger were run through reginald' papers. He 
brush against a semblanc of napoleon that wa stand on the 
writing-table, so that it toppl over and made a nois that weirdli 
re-echo in the silenc of the room. At that moment a curiou famili 
resembl between shakespeare, balzac, napoleon--and reginald, 
forcibl impress itself upon hi mind. It wa the indisput 
someth that mark those who are chosen to give ultim express to 
some gigant world-purpose. In balzac' face it wa diffus with 
kindliness, in that of napoleon sheer brutal predominated. the imag 
of one who wa said to be the richest man of the world also rose befor 
hi eyes. perhap it wa onli the play of hi fever imagination, but 
he could have sworn that thi man' features, too, bore the mark of 
those unoriginal, great absorpt mind who, for better or for worse, 
are born to rob and rule. they seem to him monster that know neither 
justic nor pity, onli the law of their being, the law of growth. 

common weapon would not avail against such forces. be one, they were 
stronger than armies; nor could they be overcom in singl combat. 
stealth, trickery, the outfit of the knave, were legitim weapon in 
such a fight. In thi case the end justifi the means, even if the 
latter includ burglary. 

after a brief and fruitless search of the desk, he attempt to forc 
open a secret drawer, the presenc of which he had one day accident 
discovered. He tri a number of key to no account, and wa think of 
give up hi research for the day until he had procur a skeleton 
key, when at last the lock gave way. 

the drawer disclos a larg file of manuscript. ernest paus for a 
moment to draw breath. the paper rustl under hi nervou fingers. and 
there--at last--hi eye lit upon a bulki bundl that bore thi legend: 
"_leontina_, A novel." 

It wa true, then--all, hi dream, reginald' confession. and the hous 
that had open it door so kindli to him wa the hous of a vampire! 

final curios overcam hi burn indignation. He attempt to 
read. the letter seem to danc befor hi eyes--hi hand trembled. 

At last he succeeded. the word that had first roll over like drunken 
soldier now march befor hi vision in orderli sequence. He wa 
delighted, then stunned. thi wa inde authent literature, there 
could be no doubt about it. and it wa his. He wa still a poet, a great 
poet. He drew a deep breath. sudden joy trembl in hi heart. thi 
stori set down by a foreign hand had grown chapter by chapter in hi 
brain. 

there were some slight changes--slight deviat from the origin 
plan. A defter hand than hi had retouch it here and there, but for 
all that it remain hi veri own. It did not belong to that thief. the 
blood well to hi cheek as he utter thi word that, appli to 
reginald, seem almost sacrilegious. 

He had nearli reach the last chapter when he heard step in the 
hallway. hurriedli he restor the manuscript to it place, close the 
drawer and left the room on tiptoe. 

It wa reginald. but he did not come alone. someon wa speak to him. 
the voic seem familiar. ernest could not make out what it said. He 
listen intent and--wa it possible? jack? sure he could not yet 
have come in respons to hi note! what mysteri power, what dim 
presenti of hi friend' plight had led him hither? but whi did he 
linger so long in reginald' room, instead of hasten to greet him? 
cautious he drew nearer. thi time he caught jack' words: 

"it would be veri conveni and pleasant. still, some way, I feel that 
it is not right for me, of all men, to take hi place here." 

"that need not concern you," reginald deliber replied; "the dear 
boy express the desir to leav me within a fortnight. I think he will 
go to some privat sanitarium. hi nerv are fright overstrained." 

"thi seem hardli surpris after the terribl attack he had when you 
read your play." 

"that idea ha sinc then develop into a monomania." 

"I am aw sorri for him. I care for him much, perhap too much. but 
I alway fear that he would come to such an end. Of late hi letter 
have been strang unbalanced." 

"you will find him veri much changed. In fact, he is no longer the 
same." 

"no," said jack, "he is no longer the friend I loved." 

ernest clutch for the wall. hi face wa contort with intens agony. 
each word wa like a nail driven into hi flesh. crucifi upon the 
cross of hi own affect by the hand he loved, all white and trembl 
he stood there. tear rush to hi eyes, but he could not weep. 
dry-ey he reach hi room and threw himself upon hi bed. thu he 
lay--uncomfort and alone. 




xxviii 


terribl as wa hi loneliness, a meet with jack would have been more 
terrible. and, after all, it wa true, a gulf had open between them. 

ethel alon could bring solac to hi soul. there wa a great void in 
hi heart which onli she could fill. He hunger for the touch of her 
hand. He long for her presenc strongly, as a wanton lust for 
pleasur and as sad men crave death. 

noiselessli he stole to the door so as not to arous the attent of 
the other two men, whose everi whisper pierc hi heart like a dagger. 
when he came to ethel' home, he found that she had gone out for a 
breath of air. the servant usher him into the parlor, and there he 
waited, waited, wait for her. 

greatli calm by hi walk, he turn the detail of clarke' 
convers over in hi mind, and the convict grew upon him that 
the friend of hi boyhood wa not to blame for hi cours of action. 
reginald probabl had encircl jack' soul with hi demoniac 
influenc and singl him out for anoth victim. that must never be. It 
wa hi turn to save now. He would warn hi friend of the danger that 
threaten him, even if hi word should be spoken into the wind. for 
reginald, with an ingenu almost satanic, had alreadi suggest that 
the delus of former day had develop into a monomania, and ani 
attempt on hi part to warn jack would onli seem to confirm thi theory. 
In that case onli one way wa left open. He must plead with reginald 
himself, confront at all risk that snatcher of souls. to-night he would 
not fall asleep. He would keep hi vigil. and if reginald should 
approach hi room, if in some way he felt the dire presence, he must 
speak out, threaten if need be, to save hi friend from ruin. He had 
fulli determin upon thi cours when a cri of joy from ethel, who had 
just return from her walk, interrupt hi reverie. but her glad 
chang to anxieti when she saw how pale he was. ernest recount to 
her the happen of the day, from the discoveri of hi novel in 
reginald' desk to the convers which he had accident overheard. 
He notic that her featur brighten as he drew near the end of hi 
tale. 

"wa your novel finished?" she suddenli asked. 

"I think so." 

"then you are out of danger. He will want noth els of you. but you 
should have taken it with you." 

"I had onli suffici presenc of mind to slip it back into the drawer. 
to-morrow I shall simpli demand it." 

"you will do noth of the kind. It is in hi handwriting, and you have 
no legal proof that it is yours. you must take it away secretly. and he 
will not dare to reclaim it." 

"and jack?" 

she had quit forgotten jack. women are invari selfish for those 
they love. 

"you must warn him," she replied. 

"he would laugh at me. however, I must speak to reginald." 

"it is of no avail to speak to him. At least, you must not do so befor 
you have obtain the manuscript. It would unnecessarili jeopardis our 
plans." 

"and after?" 

"after, perhaps. but you must not expos yourself to ani danger." 

"no, dear," he said, and kiss her; "what danger is there, provid I 
keep my wit about me? He steal upon men onli in their sleep and in the 
dark." 

"be careful, nevertheless." 

"I shall. In fact, I think he is not at home at thi moment. If I go now 
I may be abl to get hold of the manuscript and hide it befor he 
returns." 

"I cannot but trembl to think of you in that house." 

"you shall have no more reason to trembl in a day or two." 

"shall I see you to-morrow?" 

"I don't think so. I must go over my paper and thing so as to be readi 
at ani moment to leav the house." 

"and then?" 

"then--" 

He took her in hi arm and look long and deepli into her eyes. 

"yes," she replied--"at least, perhaps." 

then he turn to go, resolut and happy. how strang he had matur 
sinc the summer! her heart swell with the conscious that it wa 
her love that had effect thi transformation. 

"a I cannot expect you to-morrow, I shall probabl go to the opera, but 
I shall be at home befor midnight. will you call me up then? A word 
from you will put me at eas for the night, even if it come over the 
telephone." 

"I will call you up. We modern have an advantag over the ancient in 
thi respect: the twentieth-centuri pyramu can speak to thisb even if 
innumer wall sever hi bodi from hers." 

"A quaint conceit! but let us hope that our love-stori will end less 
tragically," she said, tenderli caress hi hair. "oh, we shall be 
happy, you and i," she added, after a while. "the iron finger of fate 
that lay so heavili on our live is now withdrawn. almost withdrawn. 
yes, almost. onli almost." 

and then a sudden fear overcam her. 

"no," she cried, "do not go, do not go! stay with me; stay here. I feel 
so frightened. I don't know what come over me. I am afraid--afraid for 
you." 

"no, dear," he rejoined, "you need not be afraid. In your heart you 
don't want me to desert a friend, and, besides, leav the best part of 
my artist life in reginald' clutch." 

"whi should you expos yourself to god know what danger for a friend 
who is readi to betray you?" 

"you forget friendship is a gift. If it exact payment in ani form, it 
is no longer either friendship or a gift. and you yourself have assur 
me that I have noth to fear from reginald. I have noth to give to 
him." 

she ralli under hi word and had regain her self-possess when 
the door close behind him. He walk a few block veri briskly. then 
hi pace slackened. her word had unsettl him a little, and when he 
reach home he did not at onc resum hi explor of reginald' 
papers. He had hardli lit a cigarett when, at an unusu earli hour, 
he heard reginald' key in the lock. 

quickli he turn the light out and in the semi-darkness, lit up by an 
electr lantern below, barricad the door as on the previou night. 
then he went to bed without find sleep. 

suprem silenc reign over the house. even the elev had ceas to 
run. ernest' brain wa all ear. He heard reginald walk up and down 
in the studio. not the smallest movement escap hi attention. thu 
hour passed. when the clock struck twelve, he wa still walk up and 
down, down and up, up and down. 

one o'clock. 

still the measur beat of hi footfal had not ceased. there wa 
someth hypnot in the regular tread. natur at last exact it toll 
from the boy. He fell asleep. 

hardli had he close hi eye when again that horribl nightmare--no 
longer a nightmare--tor him. again he felt the point delic 
finger care feel their way along the innumer tangl 
thread of nerve-matt that lead to the innermost recess of self.... 

A subconsci someth strove to arous him, and he felt the finger 
softli withdrawn. 

He could have sworn that he heard the scurri of feet in the room. 
bath in perspir he made a leap for the electr light. 

but there wa no sign of ani human presence. the barricad at the door 
wa undisturbed. but fear like a great wind fill the wing of hi 
soul. 

yet there wa nothing, noth to warrant hi convict that reginald 
clark had been with him onli a few moment ago, pli hi horribl 
trade. the larg mirror abov the fireplac onli show him hi own 
face, white, excited,--th face of a madman. 




xxix 


the next morning' mail brought a letter from ethel, a few line of 
encourag and affection. yes, she wa right; it would not do for him 
to stay under one roof with reginald ani longer. He must onli obtain the 
manuscript and, if possible, surpris him in the attempt to exercis hi 
mysteri and crimin power. then he would be in the posit to 
dictat term and to demand jack' safeti as the price of hi silence. 

reginald, however, had closet himself that day in hi studio busili 
writing. onli the clatter of hi typewrit announc hi presenc in 
the house. there wa no chanc for convers or for obtain the 
preciou manuscript of "leontina." 

meanwhil ernest wa look over hi paper and prepar everyth 
for a quick departure. glanc over old letter and notes, he becam 
readili interest and hardli notic the passag of the hours. 

when the night came he onli partli undress and threw himself upon the 
bed. It wa now ten. At twelv he had promis ethel to speak to her 
over the telephone. He wa determin not to sleep at all that night. At 
last he would discov whether or not on the previou and other night 
reginald had secretli enter hi room. 

when one hour had pass without incident, hi attent relax a 
little. hi eye were gradual close when suddenli someth seem 
to stir at the door. the chines vase came rattl to the floor. 

At onc ernest sprang up. hi face had blanch with terror. It wa 
whiter than the linen in which they wrap the dead. but hi soul wa 
resolute. 

He touch a button and the electr light illumin the whole 
chamber. there wa no nook for even a shadow to hide. yet there wa no 
one to be seen. from without the door came no sound. suddenli someth 
soft touch hi foot. He gather all hi will power so as not to 
break out into a frenzi shriek. then he laughed, not a hearti laugh, 
to be sure. A tini nose and a tail grace curl were brush 
against him. the sourc of the disturb wa a littl maltes cat, hi 
favourite, that by some chanc had remain in hi room. after it essay 
at midnight gymnast the anim quiet down and lay pur at the 
foot of hi bed. 

the presenc of a live thing wa a certain comfort, and the reservoir 
of hi strength wa well nigh exhausted. 

He dimli rememb hi promis to ethel, but hi lid droop with 
sheer weariness. perhap an hour pass in thi way, when suddenli hi 
blood congeal with dread. 

He felt the presenc of the hand of reginald 
clarke--unmistakably--grop in hi brain as if search for someth 
that had still escap him. 

He tri to move, to cri out, but hi limb were paralysed. when, by a 
superhuman effort, he at last succeed in shake off the numb that 
held him enchained, he awok just in time to see a figure, that of a 
man, disappear in the wall that separ reginald' apart from 
hi room.... 

thi time it wa no delus of the senses. He heard someth like a 
secret door softli close behind retreat steps. A sudden fierc 
anger seiz him. He wa oblivi of the danger of the terribl power 
of the older man, oblivi of the love he had onc born him, oblivi 
of everyth save the sens of outrag human and outrag right. 

the law permit us to shoot a burglar who goe through our pocket at 
night. must he toler the ravag of thi a thousand time more 
dastardli and danger spiritu thief? wa reginald to enjoy the fruit 
of other men' labour unpunished? wa he to continu grow into the 
mightiest literari factor of the centuri by prey upon hi betters? 
abel, walkham, ethel, he, jack, were they all to be victim of thi 
insati monster? 

wa thi forc resistless as it wa relentless? 

no, a thousand times, no! 

He dash himself against the wall at the place where the shadow of 
reginald clark had disappeared. In do so he touch upon a secret 
spring. the wall gave way noiselessly. speechless with rage he cross 
the next room and the one adjoin it, and stood in reginald' studio. 
the room wa brilliantli lighted, and reginald, still dressed, wa 
seat at hi writing-t scribbl note upon littl scrap of paper 
in hi accustom manner. 

At ernest' approach he look up without evinc the least sign of 
terror or surprise. calmly, almost majestically, he fold hi arm over 
hi breast, but there wa a menac glitter in hi eye as he 
confront hi victim. 




xxx 


silent the two men face each other. then ernest hissed: 

"thief!" 

reginald shrug hi shoulders. 

"vampire!" 

"so ethel ha infect you with her absurd fancies! poor boy! I am 
afraid.... I have been want to tell you for some time.... but I 
think... We have reach the part of our road!" 

"and that you dare to tell me!" 

the more he raged, the calmer reginald seem to become. 

"really," he said, "I fail to understand.... I must ask you to leav my 
room!" 

"you fail to understand? you cad!" ernest cried. He step to the 
writing-t and open the secret drawer with a blow. A bundl of 
manuscript fell on the floor with a strang rustl noise. then, 
seiz hi own story, he hurl it upon the table. and behold--th last 
page bore correct in ink that could have been made onli a few 
minut ago! 

reginald smiled. "have you come to play havoc with my manuscripts?" he 
remarked. 

"your manuscripts? reginald clarke, you are an impud impostor! you 
have written no word that is your own. you are an embezzl of the mind, 
strut through life in borrow and stolen plumes!" 

and at onc the mask fell from reginald' face. 

"whi stolen?" he coolli said, with a slight touch of irritation. "I 
absorb. I appropriate. that is the most ani artist can say for himself. 
god creates; man moulds. He give us the colours; we mix them." 

"that is not the question. I charg you with have wil and 
crimin interf in my life; I charg you with have rob me of 
what wa mine; I charg you with be utterli vile and rapacious, a 
hypocrit and a parasite!" 

"foolish boy," reginald rejoin austerely. "it is through me that the 
best in you shall survive, even as the obscur elizabethan live in him 
of avon. shakespear absorb what wa great in littl men--a great 
that otherwis would have perished--and gave it a setting, a life." 

"A thief may plead the same. I understand you better. It is your 
inordin vaniti that prompt you to abus your monstrou power." 

"you err. self-lov ha never enter into my actions. I am careless of 
person fame. look at me, boy! As I stand befor you I am homer, I am 
shakespear ... I am everi cosmic manifest in art. men have doubt 
in each incarn my individu existence. historian have more to 
tell of the meanest athenian scribbler or elizabethan poetast than of 
me. the radianc of my work obscur my veri self. I care not. I have a 
mission. I am a servant of the lord. I am the vessel that bear the 
host!" 

He stood up at full length, the personif of grandeur and power. A 
tremend forc trembl in hi veri finger tips. He wa like a 
gigant dynamo, charg with the might of ten thousand magnet storm 
that shake the earth in it orbit and lash myriad of planet through 
infin of space.... 

under ordinari circumst ernest or ani other man would have quail 
befor him. but the boy in that epic moment had grown out of hi 
stature. He felt the sword of vengeanc in hi hands; to him wa 
intrust the caus of abel and of walkham, of ethel and of jack. hi 
wa the struggl of the individu soul against the same blind and cruel 
fate that in the past had fashion the ichthyosauru and the mastodon. 

"bi what right," he cried, "do you assum that you are the literari 
messiah? who appoint you? what divin power ha made you the steward 
of my mite and of their whom you have robbed?" 

"I am a light-bearer. I tread the high hill of mankind.... I point the 
way to the future. I light up the abyss of the past. were not my 
statur gigantic, how could I hold the torch in all men' sight? the 
veri soul that I tread underfoot realise, as their die gaze follow 
me, the possibl with which the futur is big.... etern secure, 
I carri the essenc of what is cosmic ... of what is divine.... I am 
homer ... goeth ... shakespeare.... I am an embodi of the same 
forc of which alexander, cæsar, confuciu and the christo were also 
embodiments.... none so strong as to resist me." 

A sudden mad overcam ernest at thi boast. He must strike now or 
never. He must rid human of thi danger maniac--thi demon of 
strength. with a power ten time intensified, he rais a heavi chair so 
as to hurl it at reginald' head and crush it. 

reginald stood there calmly, a smile upon hi lips.... primal cruelti 
rose from the depth of hi nature.... still he smiled, turn hi 
lumin gaze upon the boy ... and, behold ... ernest' hand began to 
shake ... the chair fell from hi grasp.... He tri to call for help, 
but no sound issu from hi lips.... utterli paralys he 
confront ... the force.... 

minutes--etern passed. 

and still those eye were fix upon him. 

but thi wa no longer reginald! 

It wa all brain ... onli brain ... a tremend brain-machin ... 
infinit complex ... infinit strong. not more than a mile away 
ethel endeavour to call to him through the night. the telephon rang, 
once, twice, thrice, insistingly. but ernest heard it not. someth 
drag him ... drag the nerv from hi bodi dragged, dragged, 
dragged.... It wa an irresist suction ... pitiless ... passionless 
... immense. 

sparks, blue, crimson and violet, seem to play around the live 
battery. It reach the finest fibr of hi mind.... slowli ... everi 
trace of mental disappeared.... first the will ... then feel ... 
judgment ... memori ... fear even.... all that wa store in hi 
brain-cel came forth to be absorb by that mighti engine.... 

the princess with the yellow veil appear ... flit across the room 
and melt away. she wa follow by childhood memori ... girls' 
heads, boys' faces.... He saw hi dead mother wave her arm to him.... 
An express of death-agoni distort the placid features.... then, 
throw a kiss to him, she, too, disappeared. pictur on pictur 
followed.... word of love that he had spoken ... sins, virtues, 
magnanimities, meannesses, terror ... mathemat formula even, and 
snatch of songs. leontina came and wa swallow up.... no, it wa 
ethel who wa tri to speak to him ... tri to warn.... she wave 
her hand in frantic despair.... she wa gone.... A pale face ... dark, 
dishevel hair.... jack.... how he had changed! He wa in the circl 
of the vampire' transform might. "jack," he cried. sure jack had 
someth to explain ... someth to tell him ... some word that if 
spoken would bring rest to hi soul. He saw the word rise to the boy' 
lips, but befor he had time to utter them hi imag also had vanished. 
and reginald ... reginald, too, wa gone.... there wa onli the mighti 
brain ... pant ... whirling.... then there wa nothing.... the 
annihil of ernest field wa complete. 

vacantli he stare at the walls, at the room and at hi master. the 
latter wa wipe the sweat from hi forehead. He breath deeply.... 
the flush of youth spread over hi features.... hi eye sparkl with a 
new and danger brilliancy.... He took the thing that had onc been 
ernest field by the hand and led it to it room. 




xxxi 


with the first flush of the morn ethel appear at the door of the 
hous on riversid drive. she had not heard from ernest, and had been 
unabl to obtain connect with him at the telephone. anxieti had 
hasten her steps. she brush against jack, who wa also direct hi 
step to the abod of reginald clarke. 

At the same time someth that resembl ernest field pass from 
the hous of the vampire. It wa a dull and brutish thing, hideous 
transformed, without a vestig of mind. 

"mr. fielding," cri ethel, besid herself with fear as she saw him 
descending. 

"ernest!" jack gasped, no less startl at the chang in hi friend' 
appearance. 

ernest' head follow the sourc of the sound, but no spark of 
recognit illumin the dead of hi eyes. without a present and 
without a past ... blindli ... a gibber idiot ... he stumbl down 
the stairs. 



***end OF the project gutenberg ebook the hous OF the vampire*** 


******* thi file should be name 17144-8.txt or 17144-8.zip ******* 


thi and all associ file of variou format will be found in: 
http://www.gutenberg.org/dirs/1/7/1/4/17144 



updat edit will replac the previou one--th old edit 
will be renamed. 

creat the work from public domain print edit mean that no 
one own a unit state copyright in these works, so the foundat 
(and you!) can copi and distribut it in the unit state without 
permiss and without pay copyright royalties. special rules, 
set forth in the gener term of use part of thi license, appli to 
copi and distribut project gutenberg-tm electron work to 
protect the project gutenberg-tm concept and trademark. project 
gutenberg is a regist trademark, and may not be use if you 
charg for the ebooks, unless you receiv specif permission. If you 
do not charg anyth for copi of thi ebook, compli with the 
rule is veri easy. you may use thi ebook for nearli ani purpos 
such as creation of deriv works, reports, perform and 
research. they may be modifi and print and given away--y may do 
practic anyth with public domain ebooks. redistribut is 
subject to the trademark license, especi commerci 
redistribution. 



*** start: full licens *** 

the full project gutenberg licens 
pleas read thi befor you distribut OR use thi work 

To protect the project gutenberg-tm mission of promot the free 
distribut of electron works, by use or distribut thi work 
(or ani other work associ in ani way with the phrase "project 
gutenberg"), you agre to compli with all the term of the full project 
gutenberg-tm licens (avail with thi file or onlin at 
http://gutenberg.net/license). 


section 1. gener term of use and redistribut project gutenberg-tm 
electron work 

1.a. By read or use ani part of thi project gutenberg-tm 
electron work, you indic that you have read, understand, agre to 
and accept all the term of thi licens and intellectu properti 
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agre to abid by all 
the term of thi agreement, you must ceas use and return or destroy 
all copi of project gutenberg-tm electron work in your possession. 
If you paid a fee for obtain a copi of or access to a project 
gutenberg-tm electron work and you do not agre to be bound by the 
term of thi agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or 
entiti to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.e.8. 

1.b. "project gutenberg" is a regist trademark. It may onli be 
use on or associ in ani way with an electron work by peopl who 
agre to be bound by the term of thi agreement. there are a few 
thing that you can do with most project gutenberg-tm electron work 
even without compli with the full term of thi agreement. see 
paragraph 1.c below. there are a lot of thing you can do with project 
gutenberg-tm electron work if you follow the term of thi agreement 
and help preserv free futur access to project gutenberg-tm electron 
works. see paragraph 1.e below. 

1.c. the project gutenberg literari archiv foundat ("the foundation" 
or pglaf), own a compil copyright in the collect of project 
gutenberg-tm electron works. nearli all the individu work in the 
collect are in the public domain in the unit states. If an 
individu work is in the public domain in the unit state and you are 
locat in the unit states, we do not claim a right to prevent you from 
copying, distributing, performing, display or creat deriv 
work base on the work as long as all refer to project gutenberg 
are removed. Of course, we hope that you will support the project 
gutenberg-tm mission of promot free access to electron work by 
freeli share project gutenberg-tm work in complianc with the term of 
thi agreement for keep the project gutenberg-tm name associ with 
the work. you can easili compli with the term of thi agreement by 
keep thi work in the same format with it attach full project 
gutenberg-tm licens when you share it without charg with others. 

1.d. the copyright law of the place where you are locat also govern 
what you can do with thi work. copyright law in most countri are in 
a constant state of change. If you are outsid the unit states, check 
the law of your countri in addit to the term of thi agreement 
befor downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distribut or 
creat deriv work base on thi work or ani other project 
gutenberg-tm work. the foundat make no represent concern 
the copyright statu of ani work in ani countri outsid the unit 
states. 

1.e. unless you have remov all refer to project gutenberg: 

1.e.1. the follow sentence, with activ link to, or other immedi 
access to, the full project gutenberg-tm licens must appear promin 
whenev ani copi of a project gutenberg-tm work (ani work on which the 
phrase "project gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "project 
gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed, 
copi or distributed: 

thi ebook is for the use of anyon anywher at no cost and with 
almost no restrict whatsoever. you may copi it, give it away or 
re-us it under the term of the project gutenberg licens includ 
with thi ebook or onlin at www.gutenberg.net 

1.e.2. If an individu project gutenberg-tm electron work is deriv 
from the public domain (doe not contain a notic indic that it is 
post with permiss of the copyright holder), the work can be copi 
and distribut to anyon in the unit state without pay ani fee 
or charges. If you are redistribut or provid access to a work 
with the phrase "project gutenberg" associ with or appear on the 
work, you must compli either with the requir of paragraph 1.e.1 
through 1.e.7 or obtain permiss for the use of the work and the 
project gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraph 1.e.8 or 
1.e.9. 

1.e.3. If an individu project gutenberg-tm electron work is post 
with the permiss of the copyright holder, your use and distribut 
must compli with both paragraph 1.e.1 through 1.e.7 and ani addit 
term impos by the copyright holder. addit term will be link 
to the project gutenberg-tm licens for all work post with the 
permiss of the copyright holder found at the begin of thi work. 

1.e.4. Do not unlink or detach or remov the full project gutenberg-tm 
licens term from thi work, or ani file contain a part of thi 
work or ani other work associ with project gutenberg-tm. 

1.e.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribut or redistribut thi 
electron work, or ani part of thi electron work, without 
promin display the sentenc set forth in paragraph 1.e.1 with 
activ link or immedi access to the full term of the project 
gutenberg-tm license. 

1.e.6. you may convert to and distribut thi work in ani binary, 
compressed, mark up, nonproprietari or proprietari form, includ ani 
word process or hypertext form. however, if you provid access to or 
distribut copi of a project gutenberg-tm work in a format other than 
"plain vanilla ascii" or other format use in the offici version 
post on the offici project gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net), 
you must, at no addit cost, fee or expens to the user, provid a 
copy, a mean of export a copy, or a mean of obtain a copi upon 
request, of the work in it origin "plain vanilla ascii" or other 
form. ani altern format must includ the full project gutenberg-tm 
licens as specifi in paragraph 1.e.1. 

1.e.7. Do not charg a fee for access to, viewing, displaying, 
performing, copi or distribut ani project gutenberg-tm work 
unless you compli with paragraph 1.e.8 or 1.e.9. 

1.e.8. you may charg a reason fee for copi of or provid 
access to or distribut project gutenberg-tm electron work provid 
that 

- you pay a royalti fee of 20% of the gross profit you deriv from 
the use of project gutenberg-tm work calcul use the method 
you alreadi use to calcul your applic taxes. the fee is 
owe to the owner of the project gutenberg-tm trademark, but he 
ha agre to donat royalti under thi paragraph to the 
project gutenberg literari archiv foundation. royalti payment 
must be paid within 60 day follow each date on which you 
prepar (or are legal requir to prepare) your period tax 
returns. royalti payment should be clearli mark as such and 
sent to the project gutenberg literari archiv foundat at the 
address specifi in section 4, "inform about donat to 
the project gutenberg literari archiv foundation." 

- you provid a full refund of ani money paid by a user who notifi 
you in write (or by e-mail) within 30 day of receipt that s/he 
doe not agre to the term of the full project gutenberg-tm 
license. you must requir such a user to return or 
destroy all copi of the work possess in a physic medium 
and discontinu all use of and all access to other copi of 
project gutenberg-tm works. 

- you provide, in accord with paragraph 1.f.3, a full refund of ani 
money paid for a work or a replac copy, if a defect in the 
electron work is discov and report to you within 90 day 
of receipt of the work. 

- you compli with all other term of thi agreement for free 
distribut of project gutenberg-tm works. 

1.e.9. If you wish to charg a fee or distribut a project gutenberg-tm 
electron work or group of work on differ term than are set 
forth in thi agreement, you must obtain permiss in write from 
both the project gutenberg literari archiv foundat and michael 
hart, the owner of the project gutenberg-tm trademark. contact the 
foundat as set forth in section 3 below. 

1.f. 

1.f.1. project gutenberg volunt and employe expend consider 
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcrib and proofread 
public domain work in creat the project gutenberg-tm 
collection. despit these efforts, project gutenberg-tm electron 
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain 
"defects," such as, but not limit to, incomplete, inaccur or 
corrupt data, transcript errors, a copyright or other intellectu 
properti infringement, a defect or damag disk or other medium, a 
comput virus, or comput code that damag or cannot be read by 
your equipment. 

1.f.2. limit warranty, disclaim OF damag - except for the "right 
of replac or refund" describ in paragraph 1.f.3, the project 
gutenberg literari archiv foundation, the owner of the project 
gutenberg-tm trademark, and ani other parti distribut a project 
gutenberg-tm electron work under thi agreement, disclaim all 
liabil to you for damages, cost and expenses, includ legal 
fees. you agre that you have NO remedi for negligence, strict 
liability, breach OF warranti OR breach OF contract except those 
provid IN paragraph f3. you agre that the foundation, the 
trademark owner, and ani distributor under thi agreement will not BE 
liabl TO you for actual, direct, indirect, consequential, punit OR 
incident damag even IF you give notic OF the possibl OF such 
damage. 

1.f.3. limit right OF replac OR refund - If you discov a 
defect in thi electron work within 90 day of receiv it, you can 
receiv a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by send a 
written explan to the person you receiv the work from. If you 
receiv the work on a physic medium, you must return the medium with 
your written explanation. the person or entiti that provid you with 
the defect work may elect to provid a replac copi in lieu of a 
refund. If you receiv the work electronically, the person or entiti 
provid it to you may choos to give you a second opportun to 
receiv the work electron in lieu of a refund. If the second copi 
is also defective, you may demand a refund in write without further 
opportun to fix the problem. 

1.f.4. except for the limit right of replac or refund set forth 
in paragraph 1.f.3, thi work is provid to you 'as-is', with NO other 
warranti OF ani kind, express OR implied, includ but not limit TO 
warranti OF merchant OR fit for ani purpose. 

1.f.5. some state do not allow disclaim of certain impli 
warranti or the exclus or limit of certain type of damages. 
If ani disclaim or limit set forth in thi agreement violat the 
law of the state applic to thi agreement, the agreement shall be 
interpret to make the maximum disclaim or limit permit by 
the applic state law. the invalid or unenforc of ani 
provis of thi agreement shall not void the remain provisions. 

1.f.6. indemn - you agre to indemnifi and hold the foundation, the 
trademark owner, ani agent or employe of the foundation, anyon 
provid copi of project gutenberg-tm electron work in accord 
with thi agreement, and ani volunt associ with the production, 
promot and distribut of project gutenberg-tm electron works, 
harmless from all liability, cost and expenses, includ legal fees, 
that aris directli or indirectli from ani of the follow which you do 
or caus to occur: (a) distribut of thi or ani project gutenberg-tm 
work, (b) alteration, modification, or addit or delet to ani 
project gutenberg-tm work, and (c) ani defect you cause. 


section 2. inform about the mission of project gutenberg-tm 

project gutenberg-tm is synonym with the free distribut of 
electron work in format readabl by the widest varieti of comput 
includ obsolete, old, middle-ag and new computers. It exist 
becaus of the effort of hundr of volunt and donat from 
peopl in all walk of life. 

volunt and financi support to provid volunt with the 
assist they need, is critic to reach project gutenberg-tm' 
goal and ensur that the project gutenberg-tm collect will 
remain freeli avail for gener to come. In 2001, the project 
gutenberg literari archiv foundat wa creat to provid a secur 
and perman futur for project gutenberg-tm and futur generations. 
To learn more about the project gutenberg literari archiv foundat 
and how your effort and donat can help, see section 3 and 4 
and the foundat web page at http://www.gutenberg.net/fundraising/pglaf. 


section 3. inform about the project gutenberg literari archiv 
foundat 

the project gutenberg literari archiv foundat is a non profit 
501(c)(3) educ corpor organ under the law of the 
state of mississippi and grant tax exempt statu by the intern 
revenu service. the foundation' ein or feder tax identif 
number is 64-6221541. contribut to the project gutenberg 
literari archiv foundat are tax deduct to the full extent 
permit by u.s. feder law and your state' laws. 

the foundation' princip offic is locat at 4557 melan dr. S. 
fairbanks, ak, 99712., but it volunt and employe are scatter 
throughout numer locations. it busi offic is locat at 
809 north 1500 west, salt lake city, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email 
business@pglaf.org. email contact link and up to date contact 
inform can be found at the foundation' web site and offici 
page at http://www.gutenberg.net/about/contact 

for addit contact information: 
dr. gregori B. newbi 
chief execut and director 
gbnewby@pglaf.org 

section 4. inform about donat to the project gutenberg 
literari archiv foundat 

project gutenberg-tm depend upon and cannot surviv without wide 
spread public support and donat to carri out it mission of 
increas the number of public domain and licens work that can be 
freeli distribut in machin readabl form access by the widest 
array of equip includ outdat equipment. mani small donat 
($1 to $5,000) are particularli import to maintain tax exempt 
statu with the irs. 

the foundat is commit to compli with the law regul 
chariti and charit donat in all 50 state of the unit 
states. complianc requir are not uniform and it take a 
consider effort, much paperwork and mani fee to meet and keep up 
with these requirements. We do not solicit donat in locat 
where we have not receiv written confirm of compliance. To 
send donat or determin the statu of complianc for ani 
particular state visit http://www.gutenberg.net/fundraising/don 

while we cannot and do not solicit contribut from state where we 
have not met the solicit requirements, we know of no prohibit 
against accept unsolicit donat from donor in such state who 
approach us with offer to donate. 

intern donat are grate accepted, but we cannot make 
ani statement concern tax treatment of donat receiv from 
outsid the unit states. u.s. law alon swamp our small staff. 

pleas check the project gutenberg web page for current donat 
method and addresses. donat are accept in a number of other 
way includ includ checks, onlin payment and credit card 
donations. To donate, pleas visit: 
http://www.gutenberg.net/fundraising/don 


section 5. gener inform about project gutenberg-tm electron 
works. 

professor michael S. hart is the origin of the project gutenberg-tm 
concept of a librari of electron work that could be freeli share 
with anyone. for thirti years, he produc and distribut project 
gutenberg-tm ebook with onli a loos network of volunt support. 

project gutenberg-tm ebook are often creat from sever print 
editions, all of which are confirm as public domain in the u.s. 
unless a copyright notic is included. thus, we do not necessarili 
keep ebook in complianc with ani particular paper edition. 

most peopl start at our web site which ha the main PG search facility: 

http://www.gutenberg.net 

thi web site includ inform about project gutenberg-tm, 
includ how to make donat to the project gutenberg literari 
archiv foundation, how to help produc our new ebooks, and how to 
subscrib to our email newslett to hear about new ebooks. 
