the project gutenberg ebook of curious, if true, by elizabeth gaskel 

thi ebook is for the use of anyon anywher at no cost and with 
almost no restrict whatsoever. you may copi it, give it away or 
re-us it under the term of the project gutenberg licens includ 
with thi ebook or onlin at www.gutenberg.net 


title: curious, if true 
strang tale 

author: elizabeth gaskel 

releas date: march 21, 2008 [ebook #24879] 

language: english 


*** start OF thi project gutenberg ebook curious, IF true *** 




produc by delphin lettau and the onlin distribut 
proofread team at http://www.pgdp.net 






curious, IF true 


strang tale 



mr gaskel 




content 


the old nurse' stori 1 

the poor clare 26 

loi the witch 88 

the grey woman 187 

curious, if true 249 




the old nurse' stori 


you know, my dears, that your mother wa an orphan, and an onli child; 
and I daresay you have heard that your grandfath wa a clergyman up 
in westmoreland, where I come from. I wa just a girl in the villag 
school, when, one day, your grandmoth came in to ask the mistress if 
there wa ani scholar there who would do for a nurse-maid; and mighti 
proud I was, I can tell ye, when the mistress call me up, and spoke 
of me be a good girl at my needle, and a steady, honest girl, and 
one whose parent were veri respectable, though they might be poor. I 
thought I should like noth better than to serv the pretti young 
lady, who wa blush as deep as I was, as she spoke of the come 
baby, and what I should have to do with it. however, I see you don't 
care so much for thi part of my story, as for what you think is to 
come, so i'll tell you at once. I wa engag and settl at the 
parsonag befor miss rosamond (that wa the baby, who is now your 
mother) wa born. To be sure, I had littl enough to do with her when 
she came, for she wa never out of her mother' arms, and slept by her 
all night long; and proud enough wa I sometim when missi trust 
her to me. there never wa such a babi befor or since, though you'v 
all of you been fine enough in your turns; but for sweet, win ways, 
you'v none of you come up to your mother. she took after her mother, 
who wa a real ladi born; a miss furnivall, a grand-daught of lord 
furnivall's, in northumberland. I believ she had neither brother nor 
sister, and had been brought up in my lord' famili till she had 
marri your grandfather, who wa just a curate, son to a shopkeep in 
carlisle--but a clever, fine gentleman as ever was--and one who wa a 
right-down hard worker in hi parish, which wa veri wide, and 
scatter all abroad over the westmoreland fells. when your mother, 
littl miss rosamond, wa about four or five year old, both her 
parent die in a fortnight--on after the other. ah! that wa a sad 
time. My pretti young mistress and me wa look for anoth baby, 
when my master came home from one of hi long rides, wet and tired, and 
took the fever he die of; and then she never held up her head again, 
but just live to see her dead baby, and have it laid on her breast, 
befor she sigh away her life. My mistress had ask me, on her 
death-bed, never to leav miss rosamond; but if she had never spoken a 
word, I would have gone with the littl child to the end of the world. 

the next thing, and befor we had well still our sobs, the executor 
and guardian came to settl the affairs. they were my poor young 
mistress' own cousin, lord furnivall, and mr. esthwaite, my master' 
brother, a shopkeep in manchester; not so well to do then as he wa 
afterwards, and with a larg famili rise about him. well! I don't 
know if it were their settling, or becaus of a letter my mistress 
wrote on her death-b to her cousin, my lord; but somehow it wa 
settl that miss rosamond and me were to go to furnival manor house, 
in northumberland, and my lord spoke as if it had been her mother' 
wish that she should live with hi family, and as if he had no 
objections, for that one or two more or less could make no differ 
in so grand a household. so, though that wa not the way in which I 
should have wish the come of my bright and pretti pet to have been 
look at--who wa like a sunbeam in ani family, be it never so 
grand--i wa well pleas that all the folk in the dale should stare 
and admire, when they heard I wa go to be young lady' maid at my 
lord furnivall' at furnival manor. 

but I made a mistak in think we were to go and live where my lord 
did. It turn out that the famili had left furnival manor hous fifti 
year or more. I could not hear that my poor young mistress had never 
been there, though she had been brought up in the family; and I wa 
sorri for that, for I should have like miss rosamond' youth to have 
pass where her mother' had been. 

My lord' gentleman, from whom I ask as mani question as I durst, 
said that the manor hous wa at the foot of the cumberland fells, and 
a veri grand place; that an old miss furnivall, a great-aunt of my 
lord's, live there, with onli a few servants; but that it wa a veri 
healthi place, and my lord had thought that it would suit miss rosamond 
veri well for a few years, and that her be there might perhap amus 
hi old aunt. 

I wa bidden by my lord to have miss rosamond' thing readi by a 
certain day. He wa a stern, proud man, as they say all the lord 
furnival were; and he never spoke a word more than wa necessary. folk 
did say he had love my young mistress; but that, becaus she knew that 
hi father would object, she would never listen to him, and marri mr. 
esthwaite; but I don't know. He never married, at ani rate. but he 
never took much notic of miss rosamond; which I thought he might have 
done if he had care for her dead mother. He sent hi gentleman with us 
to the manor house, tell him to join him at newcastl that same 
evening; so there wa no great length of time for him to make us known 
to all the stranger befor he, too, shook us off; and we were left, 
two lone young thing (I wa not eighteen) in the great old manor 
house. It seem like yesterday that we drove there. We had left our own 
dear parsonag veri early, and we had both cri as if our heart would 
break, though we were travel in my lord' carriage, which I thought 
so much of once. and now it wa long past noon on a septemb day, and 
we stop to chang hors for the last time at a littl smoki town, 
all full of collier and miners. miss rosamond had fallen asleep, but 
mr. henri told me to waken her, that she might see the park and the 
manor hous as we drove up. I thought it rather a pity; but I did what 
he bade me, for fear he should complain of me to my lord. We had left 
all sign of a town, or even a village, and were then insid the gate 
of a larg wild park--not like the park here in the south, but with 
rocks, and the nois of run water, and gnarl thorn-trees, and old 
oaks, all white and peel with age. 

the road went up about two miles, and then we saw a great and state 
house, with mani tree close around it, so close that in some place 
their branch drag against the wall when the wind blew; and some 
hung broken down; for no one seem to take much charg of the 
place;--to lop the wood, or to keep the moss-cov carriage-way in 
order. onli in front of the hous all wa clear. the great oval drive 
wa without a weed; and neither tree nor creeper wa allow to grow 
over the long, many-window front; at both side of which a wing 
protected, which were each the end of other side fronts; for the 
house, although it wa so desolate, wa even grander than I expected. 
behind it rose the fells; which seem unenclos and bare enough; and 
on the left hand of the house, as you stood face it, wa a little, 
old-fashion flower-garden, as I found out afterwards. A door open 
out upon it from the west front; it had been scoop out of the thick, 
dark wood for some old ladi furnivall; but the branch of the great 
forest-tre had grown and overshadow it again, and there were veri 
few flower that would live there at that time. 

when we drove up to the great front entrance, and went into the hall, I 
thought we would be lost--it wa so large, and vast and grand. there 
wa a chandeli all of bronze, hung down from the middl of the 
ceiling; and I had never seen one before, and look at it all in 
amaze. then, at one end of the hall, wa a great fire-place, as larg 
as the side of the hous in my country, with massi andiron and dog 
to hold the wood; and by it were heavy, old-fashion sofas. At the 
opposit end of the hall, to the left as you went in--on the western 
side--wa an organ built into the wall, and so larg that it fill up 
the best part of that end. beyond it, on the same side, wa a door; and 
opposite, on each side of the fire-place, were also door lead to 
the east front; but those I never went through as long as I stay in 
the house, so I can't tell you what lay beyond. 

the afternoon wa close in, and the hall, which had no fire light 
in it, look dark and gloomy, but we did not stay there a moment. the 
old servant, who had open the door for us, bow to mr. henry, and 
took us in through the door at the further side of the great organ, and 
led us through sever smaller hall and passag into the west 
drawing-room, where he said that miss furnival wa sitting. poor 
littl miss rosamond held veri tight to me, as if she were scare and 
lost in that great place; and as for myself, I wa not much better. the 
west drawing-room wa veri cheerful-looking, with a warm fire in it, 
and plenti of good, comfort furnitur about. miss furnival wa an 
old ladi not far from eighty, I should think, but I do not know. she 
wa thin and tall, and had a face as full of fine wrinkl as if they 
had been drawn all over it with a needle' point. her eye were veri 
watchful, to make up, I suppose, for her be so deaf as to be oblig 
to use a trumpet. sit with her, work at the same great piec of 
tapestry, wa mrs. stark, her maid and companion, and almost as old as 
she was. she had live with miss furnival ever sinc they both were 
young, and now she seem more like a friend than a servant; she look 
so cold, and grey, and stony, as if she had never love or care for 
ani one; and I don't suppos she did care for ani one, except her 
mistress; and, owe to the great deaf of the latter, mrs. stark 
treat her veri much as if she were a child. mr. henri gave some 
messag from my lord, and then he bow good-bi to us all,--tak no 
notic of my sweet littl miss rosamond' outstretch hand--and left 
us stand there, be look at by the two old ladi through their 
spectacles. 

I wa right glad when they rung for the old footman who had shown us in 
at first, and told him to take us to our rooms. So we went out of that 
great drawing-room and into anoth sitting-room, and out of that, and 
then up a great flight of stairs, and along a broad gallery--which wa 
someth like a library, have book all down one side, and window 
and writing-t all down the other--til we came to our rooms, which 
I wa not sorri to hear were just over the kitchens; for I began to 
think I should be lost in that wilder of a house. there wa an old 
nursery, that had been use for all the littl lord and ladi long 
ago, with a pleasant fire burn in the grate, and the kettl boil 
on the hob, and tea-th spread out on the table; and out of that 
room wa the night-nursery, with a littl crib for miss rosamond close 
to my bed. and old jame call up dorothy, hi wife, to bid us 
welcome; and both he and she were so hospit and kind, that 
by-and-bi miss rosamond and me felt quit at home; and by the time tea 
wa over, she wa sit on dorothy' knee, and chatter away as 
fast as her littl tongu could go. I soon found out that dorothi wa 
from westmoreland, and that bound her and me together, as it were; and 
I would never wish to meet with kinder peopl than were old jame and 
hi wife. jame had live pretti nearli all hi life in my lord' 
family, and thought there wa no one so grand as they. He even look 
down a littl on hi wife; because, till he had marri her, she had 
never live in ani but a farmer' household. but he wa veri fond of 
her, as well he might be. they had one servant under them, to do all 
the rough work. agn they call her; and she and me, and jame and 
dorothy, with miss furnival and mrs. stark, made up the family; alway 
rememb my sweet littl miss rosamond! I use to wonder what they 
had done befor she came, they thought so much of her now. kitchen and 
drawing-room, it wa all the same. the hard, sad miss furnivall, and 
the cold mrs. stark, look pleas when she came flutter in like a 
bird, play and prank hither and thither, with a continu murmur, 
and pretti prattl of gladness. I am sure, they were sorri mani a time 
when she flit away into the kitchen, though they were too proud to 
ask her to stay with them, and were a littl surpris at her taste; 
though to be sure, as mrs. stark said, it wa not to be wonder at, 
rememb what stock her father had come of. the great, old rambl 
hous wa a famou place for littl miss rosamond. she made expedit 
all over it, with me at her heels; all, except the east wing, which wa 
never opened, and whither we never thought of going. but in the western 
and northern part wa mani a pleasant room; full of thing that were 
curios to us, though they might not have been to peopl who had 
seen more. the window were darken by the sweep bough of the 
trees, and the ivi which had overgrown them; but, in the green gloom, 
we could manag to see old china jar and carv ivori boxes, and great 
heavi books, and, abov all, the old pictures! 

once, I remember, my darl would have dorothi go with us to tell us 
who they all were; for they were all portrait of some of my lord' 
family, though dorothi could not tell us the name of everi one. We had 
gone through most of the rooms, when we came to the old state 
drawing-room over the hall, and there wa a pictur of miss furnivall; 
or, as she wa call in those days, miss grace, for she wa the 
younger sister. such a beauti she must have been! but with such a set, 
proud look, and such scorn look out of her handsom eyes, with her 
eyebrow just a littl raised, as if she wonder how anyon could have 
the impertin to look at her, and her lip curl at us, as we stood 
there gazing. she had a dress on, the like of which I had never seen 
before, but it wa all the fashion when she wa young; a hat of some 
soft white stuff like beaver, pull a littl over her brows, and a 
beauti plume of feather sweep round it on one side; and her gown 
of blue satin wa open in front to a quilt white stomacher. 

'well, to be sure!' said I, when I had gaze my fill. 'flesh is grass, 
they do say; but who would have thought that miss furnival had been 
such an out-and-out beauty, to see her now.' 

'yes,' said dorothy. 'folk chang sadly. but if what my master' 
father use to say wa true, miss furnivall, the elder sister, wa 
handsom than miss grace. her pictur is here somewhere; but, if I 
show it you, you must never let on, even to james, that you have seen 
it. can the littl ladi hold her tongue, think you?' ask she. 

I wa not so sure, for she wa such a littl sweet, bold, open-spoken 
child, so I set her to hide herself; and then I help dorothi to turn 
a great picture, that lean with it face toward the wall, and wa 
not hung up as the other were. To be sure, it beat miss grace for 
beauty; and, I think, for scorn pride, too, though in that matter it 
might be hard to choose. I could have look at it an hour, but dorothi 
seem half frighten at have shown it to me, and hurri it back 
again, and bade me run and find miss rosamond, for that there were some 
ugli place about the house, where she should like ill for the child to 
go. I wa a brave, high-spirit girl, and thought littl of what the 
old woman said, for I like hide-and-seek as well as ani child in the 
parish; so off I ran to find my littl one. 

As winter drew on, and the day grew shorter, I wa sometim almost 
certain that I heard a nois as if someon wa play on the great 
organ in the hall. I did not hear it everi evening; but, certainly, I 
did veri often, usual when I wa sit with miss rosamond, after I 
had put her to bed, and keep quit still and silent in the bedroom. 
then I use to hear it boom and swell away in the distance. the 
first night, when I went down to my supper, I ask dorothi who had 
been play music, and jame said veri shortli that I wa a gowk to 
take the wind sough among the tree for music; but I saw dorothi 
look at him veri fearfully, and bessy, the kitchen-maid, said someth 
beneath her breath, and went quit white. I saw they did not like my 
question, so I held my peac till I wa with dorothi alone, when I knew 
I could get a good deal out of her. so, the next day, I watch my 
time, and I coax and ask her who it wa that play the organ; for 
I knew that it wa the organ and not the wind well enough, for all I 
had kept silenc befor james. but dorothi had had her lesson, i'll 
warrant, and never a word could I get from her. So then I tri bessy, 
though I had alway held my head rather abov her, as I wa even to 
jame and dorothy, and she wa littl better than their servant. So she 
said I must never, never tell; and if ever I told, I wa never to say 
_she_ had told me; but it wa a veri strang noise, and she had heard 
it mani a time, but most of all on winter nights, and befor storms; 
and folk did say it wa the old lord play on the great organ in the 
hall, just as he use to do when he wa alive; but who the old lord 
was, or whi he played, and whi he play on stormi winter even in 
particular, she either could not or would not tell me. well! I told you 
I had a brave heart; and I thought it wa rather pleasant to have that 
grand music roll about the house, let who would be the player; for 
now it rose abov the great gust of wind, and wail and triumph 
just like a live creature, and then it fell to a soft most 
complete, onli it wa alway music, and tunes, so it wa nonsens to 
call it the wind. I thought at first, that it might be miss furnival 
who played, unknown to bessy; but one day, when I wa in the hall by 
myself, I open the organ and peep all about it and around it, as I 
had done to the organ in crosthwait church onc before, and I saw it 
wa all broken and destroy inside, though it look so brave and 
fine; and then, though it wa noon-day, my flesh began to creep a 
little, and I shut it up, and run away pretti quickli to my own bright 
nursery; and I did not like hear the music for some time after that, 
ani more than jame and dorothi did. all thi time miss rosamond wa 
make herself more and more beloved. the old ladi like her to dine 
with them at their earli dinner. jame stood behind miss furnivall' 
chair, and I behind miss rosamond' all in state; and after dinner, she 
would play about in a corner of the great drawing-room as still as ani 
mouse, while miss furnival slept, and I had my dinner in the kitchen. 
but she wa glad enough to come to me in the nurseri afterwards; for, 
as she said, miss furnival wa so sad, and mrs. stark so dull; but she 
and I were merri enough; and by-and-by, I got not to care for that 
weird roll music, which did one no harm, if we did not know where it 
came from. 

that winter wa veri cold. In the middl of octob the frost began, 
and last many, mani weeks. I rememb one day, at dinner, miss 
furnival lift up her sad, heavi eyes, and said to mrs. stark, 'I am 
afraid we shall have a terribl winter,' in a strang kind of mean 
way. but mrs. stark pretend not to hear, and talk veri loud of 
someth else. My littl ladi and I did not care for the frost; not 
we! As long as it wa dry, we climb up the steep brow behind the 
house, and went up on the fells, which were bleak and bare enough, and 
there we ran race in the fresh, sharp air; and onc we came down by a 
new path, that took us past the two old gnarl holly-trees, which grew 
about half-way down by the east side of the house. but the day grew 
shorter and shorter, and the old lord, if it wa he, play away, more 
and more stormili and sadly, on the great organ. one sunday 
afternoon--it must have been toward the end of november--i ask 
dorothi to take charg of littl missi when she came out of the 
drawing-room, after miss furnival had had her nap; for it wa too cold 
to take her with me to church, and yet I want to go. and dorothi wa 
glad enough to promise, and wa so fond of the child, that all seem 
well; and bessi and I set off veri briskly, though the sky hung heavi 
and black over the white earth, as if the night had never fulli gone 
away, and the air, though still, wa veri bite and keen. 

'we shall have a fall of snow,' said bessi to me. and sure enough, even 
while we were in church, it came down thick, in great larg flakes,--so 
thick, it almost darken the windows. It had stop snow befor we 
came out, but it lay soft, thick and deep beneath our feet, as we 
tramp home. befor we got to the hall, the moon rose, and I think it 
wa lighter then--what with the moon, and what with the white dazzl 
snow--than it had been when we went to church, between two and three 
o'clock. I have not told you that miss furnival and mrs. stark never 
went to church; they use to read the prayer together, in their quiet, 
gloomi way; they seem to feel the sunday veri long without their 
tapestry-work to be busi at. So when I went to dorothi in the kitchen, 
to fetch miss rosamond and take her upstair with me, I did not much 
wonder when the old woman told me that the ladi had kept the child 
with them, and that she had never come to the kitchen, as I had bidden 
her, when she wa tire of behav pretti in the drawing-room. So I 
took off my thing and went to find her, and bring her to her supper in 
the nursery. but when I went into the best drawing-room, there sat the 
two old ladies, veri still and quiet, drop out a word now and then, 
but look as if noth so bright and merri as miss rosamond had ever 
been near them. still I thought she might be hide from me; it wa one 
of her pretti ways,--and that she had persuad them to look as if they 
knew noth about her; so I went softli peep under thi sofa, and 
behind that chair, make believ I wa sadli frighten at not find 
her. 

'what' the matter, hester?' said mrs. stark, sharply. I don't know if 
miss furnival had seen me, for, as I told you, she wa veri deaf, and 
she sat quit still, idli stare into the fire, with her hopeless 
face. 'i'm onli look for my littl rosi posy,' repli I, still 
think that the child wa there, and near me, though I could not see 
her. 

'miss rosamond is not here,' said mrs. stark. 'she went away, more than 
an hour ago, to find dorothy.' and she, too, turn and went on look 
into the fire. 

My heart sank at this, and I began to wish I had never left my darling. 
I went back to dorothi and told her. jame wa gone out for the day, 
but she, and me, and bessi took lights, and went up into the nurseri 
first; and then we roam over the great, larg house, call and 
entreat miss rosamond to come out of her hiding-place, and not 
frighten us to death in that way. but there wa no answer; no sound. 

'oh!' said I, at last, 'can she have got into the east wing and hidden 
there?' 

but dorothi said it wa not possible, for that she herself had never 
been in there; that the door were alway locked, and my lord' steward 
had the keys, she believed; at ani rate, neither she nor jame had ever 
seen them: so I said I would go back, and see if, after all, she wa 
not hidden in the drawing-room, unknown to the old ladies; and if I 
found her there, I said, I would whip her well for the fright she had 
given me; but I never meant to do it. well, I went back to the west 
drawing-room, and I told mrs. stark we could not find her anywhere, and 
ask for leav to look all about the furnitur there, for I thought 
now that she might have fallen asleep in some warm, hidden corner; but 
no! we looked--miss furnival got up and looked, trembl all 
over--and she wa nowher there; then we set off again, everi one in 
the house, and look in all the place we had search before, but we 
could not find her. miss furnival shiver and shook so much, that 
mrs. stark took her back into the warm drawing-room; but not befor 
they had made me promis to bring her to them when she wa found. 
well-a-day! I began to think she never would be found, when I bethought 
me to look into the great front court, all cover with snow. I wa 
upstair when I look out; but, it wa such clear moonlight, I could 
see, quit plain, two littl footprints, which might be trace from the 
hall-door and round the corner of the east wing. I don't know how I got 
down, but I tug open the great stiff hall-door, and, throw the 
skirt of my gown over my head for a cloak, I ran out. I turn the east 
corner, and there a black shadow fell on the snow; but when I came 
again into the moonlight, there were the littl foot-mark go up--up 
to the fells. It wa bitter cold; so cold, that the air almost took the 
skin off my face as I ran; but I ran on cri to think how my poor 
littl darl must be perish and frightened. I wa within sight of 
the holly-trees, when I saw a shepherd come down the hill, bear 
someth in hi arm wrap in hi maud. He shout to me, and ask 
me if I had lost a bairn; and, when I could not speak for crying, he 
bore toward me, and I saw my wee bairnie, lie still, and white, and 
stiff in hi arms, as if she had been dead. He told me he had been up 
the fell to gather in hi sheep, befor the deep cold of night came 
on, and that under the holly-tre (black mark on the hill-side, where 
no other bush wa for mile around) he had found my littl lady--mi 
lamb--mi queen--mi darling--stiff and cold in the terribl sleep which 
is frost-begotten. oh! the joy and the tear of have her in my arm 
onc again! for I would not let him carri her; but took her, maud and 
all, into my own arms, and held her near my own warm neck and heart, 
and felt the life steal slowli back again into her littl gentl 
limbs. but she wa still insens when we reach the hall, and I had 
no breath for speech. We went in by the kitchen-door. 

'bring me the warming-pan,' said I; and I carri her upstair and 
began undress her by the nurseri fire, which bessi had kept up. I 
call my littl lammi all the sweet and play name I could think 
of,--even while my eye were blind by my tears; and at last, oh! at 
length she open her larg blue eyes. then I put her into her warm 
bed, and sent dorothi down to tell miss furnival that all wa well; 
and I made up my mind to sit by my darling' bedsid the live-long 
night. she fell away into a soft sleep as soon as her pretti head had 
touch the pillow, and I watch by her till morn light; when she 
waken up bright and clear--or so I thought at first--and, my dears, 
so I think now. 

she said, that she had fanci that she should like to go to dorothy, 
for that both the old ladi were asleep, and it wa veri dull in the 
drawing-room; and that, as she wa go through the west lobby, she 
saw the snow through the high window falling--falling--soft and steady; 
but she want to see it lie pretti and white on the ground; so she 
made her way into the great hall; and then, go to the window, she 
saw it bright and soft upon the drive; but while she stood there, she 
saw a littl girl, not so old as she was, 'but so pretty,' said my 
darling, 'and thi littl girl beckon to me to come out; and oh, she 
wa so pretti and so sweet, I could not choos but go.' and then thi 
other littl girl had taken her by the hand, and side by side the two 
had gone round the east corner. 

'now you are a naughti littl girl, and tell stories,' said I. 'what 
would your good mamma, that is in heaven, and never told a stori in her 
life, say to her littl rosamond, if she heard her--and I daresay she 
does--tel stories!' 

'indeed, hester,' sob out my child, 'i'm tell you true. inde I 
am.' 

'don't tell me!' said I, veri stern. 'I track you by your foot-mark 
through the snow; there were onli your to be seen: and if you had had 
a littl girl to go hand-in-hand with you up the hill, don't you think 
the footprint would have gone along with yours?' 

'I can't help it, dear, dear hester,' said she, crying, 'if they did 
not; I never look at her feet, but she held my hand fast and tight in 
her littl one, and it wa very, veri cold. she took me up the 
fell-path, up to the holly-trees; and there I saw a ladi weep and 
crying; but when she saw me, she hush her weeping, and smile veri 
proud and grand, and took me on her knee, and began to lull me to 
sleep; and that' all, hester--but that is true; and my dear mamma 
know it is,' said she, crying. So I thought the child wa in a fever, 
and pretend to believ her, as she went over her story--ov and over 
again, and alway the same. At last dorothi knock at the door with 
miss rosamond' breakfast; and she told me the old ladi were down in 
the eat parlour, and that they want to speak to me. they had both 
been into the night-nurseri the even before, but it wa after miss 
rosamond wa asleep; so they had onli look at her--not ask me ani 
questions. 

'I shall catch it,' thought I to myself, as I went along the north 
gallery. 'and yet,' I thought, take courage, 'it wa in their charg 
I left her; and it' they that' to blame for let her steal away 
unknown and unwatched.' So I went in boldly, and told my story. I told 
it all to miss furnivall, shout it close to her ear; but when I came 
to the mention of the other littl girl out in the snow, coax and 
tempt her out, and will her up to the grand and beauti ladi by 
the holly-tree, she threw her arm up--her old and wither arms--and 
cri aloud, 'oh! heaven forgive! have mercy!' 

mrs. stark took hold of her; roughli enough, I thought; but she wa 
past mrs. stark' management, and spoke to me, in a kind of wild 
warn and authority. 

'hester! keep her from that child! It will lure her to her death! that 
evil child! tell her it is a wicked, naughti child.' then, mrs. stark 
hurri me out of the room; where, indeed, I wa glad enough to go; but 
miss furnival kept shriek out, 'oh, have mercy! wilt thou never 
forgive! It is mani a long year ago----' 

I wa veri uneasi in my mind after that. I durst never leav miss 
rosamond, night or day, for fear lest she might slip off again, after 
some fanci or other; and all the more, becaus I thought I could make 
out that miss furnival wa crazy, from their odd way about her; and I 
wa afraid lest someth of the same kind (which might be in the 
family, you know) hung over my darling. and the great frost never 
ceas all thi time; and, whenev it wa a more stormi night than 
usual, between the gusts, and through the wind, we heard the old lord 
play on the great organ. but, old lord, or not, wherev miss 
rosamond went, there I followed; for my love for her, pretty, helpless 
orphan, wa stronger than my fear for the grand and terribl sound. 
besides, it rest with me to keep her cheer and merry, as beseem 
her age. So we play together, and wander together, here and there, 
and everywhere; for I never dare to lose sight of her again in that 
larg and rambl house. and so it happened, that one afternoon, not 
long befor christmas-day, we were play togeth on the 
billiard-t in the great hall (not that we knew the right way of 
playing, but she like to roll the smooth ivori ball with her pretti 
hands, and I like to do whatev she did); and, by-and-by, without our 
notic it, it grew dusk indoors, though it wa still light in the 
open air, and I wa think of take her back into the nursery, when, 
all of a sudden, she cri out, 

'look, hester! look! there is my poor littl girl out in the snow!' 

I turn toward the long narrow windows, and there, sure enough, I saw 
a littl girl, less than my miss rosamond--dress all unfit to be 
out-of-door such a bitter night--crying, and beat against the 
window-panes, as if she want to be let in. she seem to sob and 
wail, till miss rosamond could bear it no longer, and wa fli to the 
door to open it, when, all of a sudden, and close upon us, the great 
organ peal out so loud and thundering, it fairli made me tremble; and 
all the more, when I rememb me that, even in the still of that 
dead-cold weather, I had heard no sound of littl batter hand upon 
the windowglass, although the phantom child had seem to put forth all 
it force; and, although I had seen it wail and cry, no faintest touch 
of sound had fallen upon my ears. whether I rememb all thi at the 
veri moment, I do not know; the great organ sound had so stun me 
into terror; but thi I know, I caught up miss rosamond befor she got 
the hall-door opened, and clutch her, and carri her away, kick 
and screaming, into the large, bright kitchen, where dorothi and agn 
were busi with their mince-pies. 

'what is the matter with my sweet one?' cri dorothy, as I bore in 
miss rosamond, who wa sob as if her heart would break. 

'she won't let me open the door for my littl girl to come in; and 
she'll die if she is out on the fell all night. cruel, naughti 
hester,' she said, slap me; but she might have struck harder, for I 
had seen a look of ghastli terror on dorothy' face, which made my veri 
blood run cold. 

'shut the back-kitchen door fast, and bolt it well,' said she to agnes. 
she said no more; she gave me raisin and almond to quiet miss 
rosamond; but she sob about the littl girl in the snow, and would 
not touch ani of the good things. I wa thank when she cri herself 
to sleep in bed. then I stole down to the kitchen, and told dorothi I 
had made up my mind. I would carri my darl back to my father' hous 
in applethwaite; where, if we live humbly, we live at peace. I said I 
had been frighten enough with the old lord' organ-playing; but now 
that I had seen for myself thi littl moan child, all deck out as 
no child in the neighbourhood could be, beat and batter to get 
in, yet alway without ani sound or noise--with the dark wound on it 
right shoulder; and that miss rosamond had known it again for the 
phantom that had nearli lure her to her death (which dorothi knew wa 
true); I would stand it no longer. 

I saw dorothi chang colour onc or twice. when I had done, she told me 
she did not think I could take miss rosamond with me, for that she wa 
my lord' ward, and I had no right over her; and she ask me would I 
leav the child that I wa so fond of just for sound and sight that 
could do me no harm; and that they had all had to get use to in their 
turns? I wa all in a hot, trembl passion; and I said it wa veri 
well for her to talk; that knew what these sight and nois betokened, 
and that had, perhaps, had someth to do with the spectr child while 
it wa alive. and I taunt her so, that she told me all she knew at 
last; and then I wish I had never been told, for it onli made me more 
afraid than ever. 

she said she had heard the tale from old neighbour that were aliv 
when she wa first married; when folk use to come to the hall 
sometimes, befor it had got such a bad name on the countri side: it 
might not be true, or it might, what she had been told. 

the old lord wa miss furnivall' father--miss grace, as dorothi call 
her, for miss maud wa the elder, and miss furnival by rights. the 
old lord wa eaten up with pride. such a proud man wa never seen or 
heard of; and hi daughter were like him. No one wa good enough to 
wed them, although they had choic enough; for they were the great 
beauti of their day, as I had seen by their portraits, where they 
hung in the state drawing-room. but, as the old say is, 'pride will 
have a fall;' and these two haughti beauti fell in love with the same 
man, and he no better than a foreign musician, whom their father had 
down from london to play music with him at the manor house. for, abov 
all things, next to hi pride, the old lord love music. He could play 
on nearli everi instrument that ever wa heard of, and it wa a strang 
thing it did not soften him; but he wa a fierc dour old man, and had 
broken hi poor wife' heart with hi cruelty, they said. He wa mad 
after music, and would pay ani money for it. So he got thi foreign 
to come; who made such beauti music, that they said the veri bird 
on the tree stop their sing to listen. and, by degrees, thi 
foreign gentleman got such a hold over the old lord, that noth would 
serv him but that he must come everi year; and it wa he that had the 
great organ brought from holland, and built up in the hall, where it 
stood now. He taught the old lord to play on it; but mani and mani a 
time, when lord furnival wa think of noth but hi fine organ, 
and hi finer music, the dark foreign wa walk abroad in the wood 
with one of the young ladies; now miss maude, and then miss grace. 

miss maud won the day and carri off the prize, such as it was; and 
he and she were married, all unknown to ani one; and befor he made hi 
next yearli visit, she had been confin of a littl girl at a 
farm-hous on the moors, while her father and miss grace thought she 
wa away at doncast races. but though she wa a wife and a mother, 
she wa not a bit softened, but as haughti and as passion as ever; 
and perhap more so, for she wa jealou of miss grace, to whom her 
foreign husband paid a deal of court--bi way of blind her--a he 
told hi wife. but miss grace triumph over miss maude, and miss maud 
grew fiercer and fiercer, both with her husband and with her sister; 
and the former--who could easili shake off what wa disagreeable, and 
hide himself in foreign countries--w away a month befor hi usual 
time that summer, and half-threaten that he would never come back 
again. meanwhile, the littl girl wa left at the farm-house, and her 
mother use to have her hors saddl and gallop wildli over the hill 
to see her onc everi week, at the veri least; for where she love she 
loved, and where she hate she hated. and the old lord went on 
playing--play on hi organ; and the servant thought the sweet music 
he made had sooth down hi aw temper, of which (dorothi said) some 
terribl tale could be told. He grew infirm too, and had to walk with 
a crutch; and hi son--that wa the present lord furnivall' 
father--wa with the armi in america, and the other son at sea; so miss 
maud had it pretti much her own way, and she and miss grace grew 
colder and bitter to each other everi day; till at last they hardli 
ever spoke, except when the old lord wa by. the foreign musician came 
again the next summer, but it wa for the last time; for they led him 
such a life with their jealousi and their passions, that he grew weary, 
and went away, and never wa heard of again. and miss maude, who had 
alway meant to have her marriag acknowledg when her father should 
be dead, wa left now a desert wife, whom nobodi knew to have been 
married, with a child that she dare not own, although she love it to 
distraction; live with a father whom she feared, and a sister whom 
she hated. when the next summer pass over, and the dark foreign 
never came, both miss maud and miss grace grew gloomi and sad; they 
had a haggard look about them, though they look handsom as ever. 
but, by-and-by, maud brightened; for her father grew more and more 
infirm, and more than ever carri away by hi music; and she and miss 
grace live almost entir apart, have separ rooms, the one on 
the west side, miss maud on the east--thos veri room which were now 
shut up. So she thought she might have her littl girl with her, and no 
one need ever know except those who dare not speak about it, and were 
bound to believ that it was, as she said, a cottager' child she had 
taken a fanci to. all this, dorothi said, wa pretti well known; but 
what came afterward no one knew, except miss grace and mrs. stark, who 
wa even then her maid, and much more of a friend to her than ever her 
sister had been. but the servant supposed, from word that were 
dropped, that miss maud had triumph over miss grace, and told her 
that all the time the dark foreign had been mock her with 
pretend love--h wa her own husband. the colour left miss grace' 
cheek and lip that veri day for ever, and she wa heard to say mani a 
time that sooner or later she would have her revenge; and mrs. stark 
wa for ever spi about the east rooms. 

one fear night, just after the new year had come in, when the snow 
wa lie thick and deep; and the flake were still falling--fast 
enough to blind ani one who might be out and abroad--ther wa a great 
and violent nois heard, and the old lord' voic abov all, curs 
and swear awfully, and the cri of a littl child, and the proud 
defianc of a fierc woman, and the sound of a blow, and a dead 
stillness, and moan and wail die away on the hill-side! then the 
old lord summon all hi servants, and told them, with terribl oaths, 
and word more terrible, that hi daughter had disgrac herself, and 
that he had turn her out of doors--her, and her child--and that if 
ever they gave her help, or food, or shelter, he pray that they might 
never enter heaven. and, all the while, miss grace stood by him, white 
and still as ani stone; and, when he had ended, she heav a great 
sigh, as much as to say her work wa done, and her end wa 
accomplished. but the old lord never touch hi organ again, and die 
within the year; and no wonder! for, on the morrow of that wild and 
fear night, the shepherds, come down the fell side, found miss 
maud sitting, all crazi and smiling, under the holly-trees, nurs a 
dead child, with a terribl mark on it right shoulder. 'but that wa 
not what kill it,' said dorothy: 'it wa the frost and the cold. 
everi wild creatur wa in it hole, and everi beast in it fold, while 
the child and it mother were turn out to wander on the fells! and 
now you know all! and I wonder if you are less frighten now?' 

I wa more frighten than ever; but I said I wa not. I wish miss 
rosamond and myself well out of that dread hous for ever; but I 
would not leav her, and I dare not take her away. but oh, how I 
watch her, and guard her! We bolt the doors, and shut the 
window-shutt fast, an hour or more befor dark, rather than leav 
them open five minut too late. but my littl ladi still heard the 
weird child cri and mourning; and not all we could do or say could 
keep her from want to go to her, and let her in from the cruel wind 
and the snow. all thi time I kept away from miss furnival and mrs. 
stark, as much as ever I could; for I fear them--i knew no good could 
be about them, with their grey, hard faces, and their dreami eyes, 
look back into the ghastli year that were gone. but, even in my 
fear, I had a kind of piti for miss furnivall, at least. those gone 
down to the pit can hardli have a more hopeless look than that which 
wa ever on her face. At last I even got so sorri for her--who never 
said a word but what wa quit forc from her--that I pray for her; 
and I taught miss rosamond to pray for one who had done a deadli sin; 
but often when she came to those words, she would listen, and start up 
from her knees, and say, 'I hear my littl girl plain and cri 
veri sad--oh, let her in, or she will die!' 

one night--just after new year' day had come at last, and the long 
winter had taken a turn, as I hoped--i heard the west drawing-room bell 
ring three times, which wa the signal for me. I would not leav miss 
rosamond alone, for all she wa asleep--for the old lord had been 
play wilder than ever--and I fear lest my darl should waken to 
hear the spectr child; see her, I knew she could not. I had fasten 
the window too well for that. So I took her out of her bed, and 
wrap her up in such outer cloth as were most handy, and carri 
her down to the drawing-room, where the old ladi sat at their 
tapestry-work as usual. they look up when I came in, and mrs. stark 
asked, quit astounded, 'whi did I bring miss rosamond there, out of 
her warm bed?' I had begun to whisper, 'becaus I wa afraid of her 
be tempt out while I wa away, by the wild child in the snow,' 
when she stop me short (with a glanc at miss furnivall), and said 
miss furnival want me to undo some work she had done wrong, and 
which neither of them could see to unpick. So I laid my pretti dear on 
the sofa, and sat down on a stool by them, and harden my heart 
against them, as I heard the wind rise and howling. 

miss rosamond slept on sound, for all the wind blew so miss furnival 
said never a word, nor look round when the gust shook the windows. 
all at onc she start up to her full height, and put up one hand, as 
if to bid us to listen. 

'I hear voices!' said she. 'I hear terribl screams--i hear my father' 
voice!' 

just at that moment my darl waken with a sudden start: 'mi littl 
girl is crying, oh, how she is crying!' and she tri to get up and go 
to her, but she got her feet entangl in the blanket, and I caught her 
up; for my flesh had begun to creep at these noises, which they heard 
while we could catch no sound. In a minut or two the nois came, and 
gather fast, and fill our ears; we, too, heard voic and screams, 
and no longer heard the winter' wind that rage abroad. mrs. stark 
look at me, and I at her, but we dare not speak. suddenli miss 
furnival went toward the door, out into the ante-room, through the 
west lobby, and open the door into the great hall. mrs. stark 
followed, and I durst not be left, though my heart almost stop 
beat for fear. I wrap my darl tight in my arms, and went out 
with them. In the hall the scream were louder than ever; they seem 
to come from the east wing--near and nearer--clos on the other side 
of the locked-up doors--clos behind them. then I notic that the 
great bronz chandeli seem all alight, though the hall wa dim, and 
that a fire wa blaze in the vast hearth-place, though it gave no 
heat; and I shudder up with terror, and fold my darl closer to 
me. but as I did so the east door shook, and she, suddenli struggl 
to get free from me, cried, 'hester! I must go. My littl girl is 
there! I hear her; she is coming! hester, I must go!' 

I held her tight with all my strength; with a set will, I held her. If 
I had died, my hand would have grasp her still, I wa so resolv in 
my mind. miss furnival stood listening, and paid no regard to my 
darling, who had got down to the ground, and whom I, upon my knee now, 
wa hold with both my arm clasp round her neck; she still 
strive and cri to get free. 

all at once, the east door gave way with a thunder crash, as if torn 
open in a violent passion, and there came into that broad and 
mysteri light, the figur of a tall old man, with grey hair and 
gleam eyes. He drove befor him, with mani a relentless gestur of 
abhorrence, a stern and beauti woman, with a littl child cling 
to her dress. 

'oh, hester! hester!' cri miss rosamond; 'it' the lady! the ladi 
below the holly-trees; and my littl girl is with her. hester! hester! 
let me go to her; they are draw me to them. I feel them--i feel 
them. I must go!' 

again she wa almost convuls by her effort to get away; but I held 
her tighter and tighter, till I fear I should do her a hurt; but 
rather that than let her go toward those terribl phantoms. they 
pass along toward the great hall-door, where the wind howl and 
raven for their prey; but befor they reach that, the ladi turned; 
and I could see that she defi the old man with a fierc and proud 
defiance; but then she quailed--and then she threw up her arm wildli 
and piteous to save her child--her littl child--from a blow from hi 
uplift crutch. 

and miss rosamond wa torn as by a power stronger than mine and writh 
in my arms, and sob (for by thi time the poor darl wa grow 
faint). 

'they want me to go with them on to the fells--they are draw me to 
them. oh, my littl girl! I would come, but cruel, wick hester hold 
me veri tight.' but when she saw the uplift crutch, she swoon away, 
and I thank god for it. just at thi moment--when the tall old man, 
hi hair stream as in the blast of a furnace, wa go to strike 
the littl shrink child--miss furnivall, the old woman by my side, 
cri out, 'oh father! father! spare the littl innoc child!' but 
just then I saw--w all saw--anoth phantom shape itself, and grow 
clear out of the blue and misti light that fill the hall; we had not 
seen her till now, for it wa anoth ladi who stood by the old man, 
with a look of relentless hate and triumphant scorn. that figur wa 
veri beauti to look upon, with a soft, white hat drawn down over the 
proud brows, and a red and curl lip. It wa dress in an open robe 
of blue satin. I had seen that figur before. It wa the like of 
miss furnival in her youth; and the terribl phantom move on, 
regardless of old miss furnivall' wild entreaty,--and the uplift 
crutch fell on the right shoulder of the littl child, and the younger 
sister look on, stony, and deadli serene. but at that moment, the dim 
lights, and the fire that gave no heat, went out of themselves, and 
miss furnival lay at our feet stricken down by the palsy--death-stricken. 

yes! she wa carri to her bed that night never to rise again. she lay 
with her face to the wall, mutter low, but mutter always: 'alas! 
alas! what is done in youth can never be undon in age! what is done in 
youth can never be undon in age!' 




the poor clare 

chapter 1 


decemb 12th, 1747.--mi life ha been strang bound up with 
extraordinari incidents, some of which occur befor I had ani 
connect with the princip actor in them, or, indeed, befor I even 
knew of their existence. I suppose, most old men are, like me, more 
given to look back upon their own career with a kind of fond 
interest and affection remembrance, than to watch the 
events--though these may have far more interest for the 
multitude--immedi pass befor their eyes. If thi should be the 
case with the gener of old people, how much more so with me!... If 
I am to enter upon that strang stori connect with poor lucy, I must 
begin a long way back. I myself onli came to the knowledg of her 
famili histori after I knew her; but, to make the tale clear to ani one 
else, I must arrang event in the order in which they occurred--not 
that in which I becam acquaint with them. 

there is a great old hall in the north-east of lancashire, in a part 
they call the trough of bolland, adjoin that other district name 
craven. starkey manor-hous is rather like a number of room cluster 
round a grey, massive, old keep than a regularly-built hall. indeed, I 
suppos that the hous onli consist of the great tower in the centre, 
in the day when the scot made their raid terribl as far south as 
this; and that after the stuart came in, and there wa a littl more 
secur of properti in those parts, the starkey of that time ad 
the lower building, which runs, two stori high, all round the base of 
the keep. there ha been a grand garden laid out in my days, on the 
southern slope near the house; but when I first knew the place, the 
kitchen-garden at the farm wa the onli piec of cultiv ground 
belong to it. the deer use to come within sight of the drawing-room 
windows, and might have brows quit close up to the hous if they had 
not been too wild and shy. starkey manor-hous itself stood on a 
project or peninsula of high land, jut out from the abrupt hill 
that form the side of the trough of bolland. these hill were rocki 
and bleak enough toward their summit; lower down they were cloth 
with tangl copsewood and green depth of fern, out of which a grey 
giant of an ancient forest-tre would tower here and there, throw up 
it ghastli white branches, as if in imprecation, to the sky. these 
trees, they told me, were the remnant of that forest which exist in 
the day of the heptarchy, and were even then note as landmarks. No 
wonder that their upper and more expos branch were leafless, and 
that the dead bark had peel away, from sapless old age. 

not far from the hous there were a few cottages, appar of the 
same date as the keep, probabl built for some retain of the family, 
who sought shelter--they and their famili and their small flock and 
herds--at the hand of their feudal lord. some of them had pretti much 
fallen to decay. they were built in a strang fashion. strong beam had 
been sunk firm in the ground at the requisit distance, and their other 
end had been fasten together, two and two, so as to form the shape 
of one of those round waggon-head gipsy-tents, onli veri much 
larger. the space between were fill with mud, stones, osiers, 
rubbish, mortar--anyth to keep out the weather. the fire were made 
in the centr of these rude dwellings, a hole in the roof form the 
onli chimney. No highland hut or irish cabin could be of rougher 
construction. 

the owner of thi property, at the begin of the present century, 
wa a mr. patrick byrn starkey. hi famili had kept to the old faith, 
and were staunch roman catholics, esteem it even a sin to marri ani 
one of protest descent, howev will he or she might have been to 
embrac the romish religion. mr. patrick starkey' father had been a 
follow of jame the second; and, dure the disastr irish campaign 
of that monarch, he had fallen in love with an irish beauty, a miss 
byrne, as zealou for her religion and for the stuart as himself. He 
had return to ireland after hi escap to france, and marri her, 
bear her back to the court at st. germains. but some licenc on the 
part of the disorderli gentlemen who surround king jame in hi 
exile, had insult hi beauti wife, and disgust him; so he 
remov from st. germain to antwerp, whence, in a few years' time, he 
quietli return to starkey manor-house--som of hi lancashir 
neighbour have lent their good offic to reconcil him to the 
power that were. He wa as firm a roman cathol as ever, and as 
staunch an advoc for the stuart and the divin right of kings; but 
hi religion almost amount to asceticism, and the conduct of those 
with whom he had been brought in such close contact at st. germain 
would littl bear the inspect of a stern moralist. So he gave hi 
allegi where he could not give hi esteem, and learn to respect 
sincer the upright and moral charact of one whom he yet regard 
as an usurper. king william' govern had littl need to fear such a 
one. So he returned, as I have said, with a sober heart and 
impoverish fortunes, to hi ancestr house, which had fallen sadli 
to ruin while the owner had been a courtier, a soldier, and an exile. 
the road into the trough of bolland were littl more than cart-ruts; 
indeed, the way up to the hous lay along a plough field befor you 
came to the deer-park. madam, as the country-folk use to call mrs. 
starkey, rode on a pillion behind her husband, hold on to him with a 
light hand by hi leather riding-belt. littl master (he that wa 
afterward squir patrick byrn starkey) wa held on to hi poni by a 
serving-man. A woman past middl age walked, with a firm and strong 
step, by the cart that held much of the baggage; and, high up on the 
mail and boxes, sat a girl of dazzl beauty, perch lightli on the 
topmost trunk, and sway herself fearlessli to and fro, as the cart 
rock and shook in the heavi road of late autumn. the girl wore the 
antwerp faille, or black spanish mantl over her head, and altogeth 
her appear wa such that the old cottager, who describ the 
process to me mani year after, said that all the country-folk took 
her for a foreigner. some dogs, and the boy who held them in charge, 
made up the company. they rode silent along, look with grave, 
seriou eye at the people, who came out of the scatter cottag to 
bow or curtsi to the real squire, 'come back at last,' and gaze after 
the littl process with gape wonder, not deaden by the sound of 
the foreign languag in which the few necessari word that pass among 
them were spoken. one lad, call from hi stare by the squir to 
come and help about the cart, accompani them to the manor-house. He 
said that when the ladi had descend from her pillion, the middle-ag 
woman whom I have describ as walk while the other rode, step 
quickli forward, and take madam starkey (who wa of a slight and 
delic figure) in her arms, she lift her over the threshold, and 
set her down in her husband' house, at the same time utter a 
passion and outlandish blessing. the squir stood by, smile 
grave at first; but when the word of bless were pronounced, he 
took off hi fine feather hat, and bent hi head. the girl with the 
black mantl step onward into the shadow of the dark hall, and 
kiss the lady' hand; and that wa all the lad could tell to the 
group that gather round him on hi return, eager to hear everything, 
and to know how much the squir had given him for hi services. 

from all I could gather, the manor-house, at the time of the squire' 
return, wa in the most dilapid state. the stout grey wall 
remain firm and entire; but the inner chamber had been use for all 
kind of purposes. the great withdrawing-room had been a barn; the 
state tapestry-chamb had held wool, and so on. but, by-and-by, they 
were clear out; and if the squir had no money to spend on new 
furniture, he and hi wife had the knack of make the best of the old. 
He wa no despic joiner; she had a kind of grace in whatev she 
did, and impart an air of eleg picturesqu to whatev she 
touched. besides, they had brought mani rare thing from the continent; 
perhap I should rather say, thing that were rare in that part of 
england--carvings, and crosses, and beauti pictures. and then, 
again, wood wa plenti in the trough of bolland, and great log-fir 
danc and glitter in all the dark, old rooms, and gave a look of 
home and comfort to everything. 

whi do I tell you all this? I have littl to do with the squir and 
madam starkey; and yet I dwell upon them, as if I were unwil to 
come to the real peopl with whom my life wa so strang mix up. 
madam had been nurs in ireland by the veri woman who lift her in 
her arms, and welcom her to her husband' home in lancashire. 
except for the short period of her own marri life, bridget 
fitzgerald had never left her nursling. her marriage--to one abov her 
in rank--had been unhappy. her husband had died, and left her in even 
greater poverti than that in which she wa when he had first met with 
her. she had one child, the beauti daughter who came ride on the 
waggon-load of furnitur that wa brought to the manor-house. madam 
starkey had taken her again into her servic when she becam a widow. 
she and her daughter had follow 'the mistress' in all her fortunes; 
they had live at st. germain and at antwerp, and were now come to her 
home in lancashire. As soon as bridget had arriv there, the squir 
gave her a cottag of her own, and took more pain in furnish it for 
her than he did in anyth els out of hi own house. It wa onli 
nomin her residence. she wa constantli up at the great house; 
indeed, it wa but a short cut across the wood from her own home to 
the home of her nursling. her daughter mary, in like manner, move from 
one hous to the other at her own will. madam love both mother and 
child dearly. they had great influenc over her, and, through her, over 
her husband. whatev bridget or mari will wa sure to come to pass. 
they were not disliked; for, though wild and passionate, they were also 
gener by nature. but the other servant were afraid of them, as 
be in secret the rule spirit of the household. the squir had 
lost hi interest in all secular things; madam wa gentle, 
affectionate, and yielding. both husband and wife were tenderli 
attach to each other and to their boy; but they grew more and more to 
shun the troubl of decis on ani point; and henc it wa that 
bridget could exert such despot power. but if everi one els yield 
to her 'magic of a superior mind,' her daughter not unfrequ 
rebelled. she and her mother were too much alik to agree. there were 
wild quarrel between them, and wilder reconciliations. there were 
time when, in the heat of passion, they could have stab each other. 
At all other time they both--bridget especially--would have willingli 
laid down their live for one another. bridget' love for her child lay 
veri deep--deep than that daughter ever knew; or I should think she 
would never have weari of home as she did, and pray her mistress to 
obtain for her some situation--a waiting-maid--beyond the seas, in 
that more cheer continent life, among the scene of which so mani 
of her happiest year had been spent. she thought, as youth thinks, 
that life would last for ever, and that two or three year were but a 
small portion of it to pass away from her mother, whose onli child she 
was. bridget thought differently, but wa too proud ever to show what 
she felt. If her child wish to leav her, why--sh should go. but 
peopl said bridget becam ten year older in the cours of two month 
at thi time. she took it that mari want to leav her. the truth was, 
that mari want for a time to leav the place, and to seek some 
change, and would thank have taken her mother with her. indeed, 
when madam starkey had gotten her a situat with some grand ladi 
abroad, and the time drew near for her to go, it wa mari who clung to 
her mother with passion embrace, and, with flood of tears, declar 
that she would never leav her; and it wa bridget, who at last 
loosen her arms, and, grave and tearless herself, bade her keep her 
word, and go forth into the wide world. sob aloud, and look back 
continually, mari went away. bridget wa still as death, scarc 
draw her breath, or close her stoni eyes; till at last she turn 
back into her cottage, and heav a ponder old settl against the 
door. there she sat, motionless, over the grey ash of her 
extinguish fire, deaf to madam' sweet voice, as she beg leav to 
enter and comfort her nurse. deaf, stony, and motionless, she sat for 
more than twenti hours; till, for the third time, madam came across the 
snowi path from the great house, carri with her a young spaniel, 
which had been mary' pet up at the hall, and which had not ceas all 
night long to seek for it absent mistress, and to whine and moan after 
her. with tear madam told thi story, through the close door--tear 
excit by the terribl look of anguish, so steady, so immovable--so 
the same to-day as it wa yesterday--on her nurse' face. the littl 
creatur in her arm began to utter it piteou cry, as it shiver 
with the cold. bridget stirred; she moved--sh listened. again that 
long whine; she thought it wa for her daughter; and what she had 
deni to her nursl and mistress she grant to the dumb creatur 
that mari had cherished. she open the door, and took the dog from 
madam' arms. then madam came in, and kiss and comfort the old 
woman, who took but littl notic of her or anything. and send up 
master patrick to the hall for fire and food, the sweet young ladi 
never left her nurs all that night. next day, the squir himself came 
down, carri a beauti foreign picture: our ladi of the holi heart, 
the papist call it. It is a pictur of the virgin, her heart pierc 
with arrows, each arrow repres one of her great woes. that 
pictur hung in bridget' cottag when I first saw her; I have that 
pictur now. 

year went on. mari wa still abroad. bridget wa still and stern, 
instead of activ and passionate. the littl dog, mignon, wa inde 
her darling. I have heard that she talk to it continually; although, 
to most people, she wa so silent. the squir and madam treat her 
with the greatest consideration, and well they might; for to them she 
wa as devot and faith as ever. mari wrote pretti often, and 
seem satisfi with her life. but at length the letter ceased--i 
hardli know whether befor or after a great and terribl sorrow came 
upon the hous of the starkeys. the squir sicken of a putrid fever; 
and madam caught it in nurs him, and died. you may be sure, bridget 
let no other woman tend her but herself; and in the veri arm that had 
receiv her at her birth, that sweet young woman laid her head down, 
and gave up her breath. the squir recovered, in a fashion. He wa 
never strong--h had never the heart to smile again. He fast and 
pray more than ever; and peopl did say that he tri to cut off the 
entail, and leav all the properti away to found a monasteri abroad, of 
which he pray that some day littl squir patrick might be the 
reverend father. but he could not do this, for the strict of the 
entail and the law against the papists. So he could onli appoint 
gentlemen of hi own faith as guardian to hi son, with mani charg 
about the lad' soul, and a few about the land, and the way it wa to 
be held while he wa a minor. Of course, bridget wa not forgotten. He 
sent for her as he lay on hi death-bed, and ask her if she would 
rather have a sum down, or have a small annuiti settl upon her. she 
said at onc she would have a sum down; for she thought of her 
daughter, and how she could bequeath the money to her, wherea an 
annuiti would have die with her. So the squir left her her cottag 
for life, and a fair sum of money. and then he died, with as readi and 
will a heart as, I suppose, ever ani gentleman took out of thi 
world with him. the young squir wa carri off by hi guardians, and 
bridget wa left alone. 

I have said that she had not heard from mari for some time. In her last 
letter, she had told of travel about with her mistress, who wa the 
english wife of some great foreign officer, and had spoken of her 
chanc of make a good marriage, without name the gentleman' name, 
keep it rather back as a pleasant surpris to her mother; hi 
station and fortun being, as I had afterward reason to know, far 
superior to anyth she had a right to expect. then came a long 
silence; and madam wa dead, and the squir wa dead; and bridget' 
heart wa gnaw by anxiety, and she knew not whom to ask for news of 
her child. she could not write, and the squir had manag her 
commun with her daughter. she walk off to hurst; and got a 
good priest there--on whom she had known at antwerp--to write for her. 
but no answer came. It wa like cri into the aw still of 
night. 

one day, bridget wa miss by those neighbour who had been accustom 
to mark her goings-out and comings-in. she had never been sociabl with 
ani of them; but the sight of her had becom a part of their daili 
lives, and slow wonder aros in their minds, as morn after morn 
came, and her house-door remain closed, her window dead from ani 
glitter, or light of fire within. At length, some one tri the door; 
it wa locked. two or three laid their head together, befor dare to 
look in through the blank, unshutt window. but, at last, they 
summon up courage; and then saw that bridget' absenc from their 
littl world wa not the result of accid or death, but of 
premeditation. such small articl of furnitur as could be secur 
from the effect of time and damp by be pack up, were stow away 
in boxes. the pictur of the madonna wa taken down, and gone. In a 
word, bridget had stolen away from her home, and left no trace whither 
she wa departed. I knew afterwards, that she and her littl dog had 
wander off on the long search for her lost daughter. she wa too 
illiter to have faith in letters, even had she had the mean of 
write and send many. but she had faith in her own strong love, and 
believ that her passion instinct would guid her to her child. 
besides, foreign travel wa no new thing to her, and she could speak 
enough of french to explain the object of her journey, and had, 
moreover, the advantag of being, from her faith, a welcom object of 
charit hospit at mani a distant convent. but the countri 
peopl round starkey manor-hous knew noth of all this. they 
wonder what had becom of her, in a torpid, lazi fashion, and then 
left off think of her altogether. sever year passed. both 
manor-hous and cottag were deserted. the young squir live far away 
under the direct of hi guardians. there were inroad of wool and 
corn into the sitting-room of the hall; and there wa some low talk, 
from time to time, among the hind and countri people, whether it would 
not be as well to break into old bridget' cottage, and save such of 
her good as were left from the moth and rust which must be make sad 
havoc. but thi idea wa alway quench by the recollect of her 
strong charact and passion anger; and tale of her master 
spirit, and vehement forc of will, were whisper about, till the veri 
thought of offend her, by touch ani articl of hers, becam 
invest with a kind of horror: it wa believ that, dead or alive, 
she would not fail to aveng it. 

suddenli she came home; with as littl nois or note of prepar as 
she had departed. one day, some one notic a thin, blue curl of smoke, 
ascend from her chimney. her door stood open to the noon-day sun; 
and, ere mani hour had elapsed, some one had seen an old 
travel-and-sorrow-stain woman dip her pitcher in the well; and 
said, that the dark, solemn eye that look up at him were more like 
bridget fitzgerald' than ani one else' in thi world; and yet, if it 
were she, she look as if she had been scorch in the flame of hell, 
so brown, and scared, and fierc a creatur did she seem. by-and-bi 
mani saw her; and those who met her eye onc care not to be caught 
look at her again. she had got into the habit of perpetu talk 
to herself; nay, more, answer herself, and vari her tone 
accord to the side she took at the moment. It wa no wonder that 
those who dare to listen outsid her door at night, believ that she 
held convers with some spirit; in short, she wa unconsci earn 
for herself the dread reput of a witch. 

her littl dog, which had wander half over the contin with her, 
wa her onli companion; a dumb remembranc of happier days. onc he 
wa ill; and she carri him more than three miles, to ask about hi 
manag from one who had been groom to the last squire, and had then 
been note for hi skill in all diseas of animals. whatev thi man 
did, the dog recovered; and they who heard her thanks, intermingl 
with bless (that were rather promis of good fortun than 
prayers), look grave at hi good luck when, next year, hi ewe 
twinned, and hi meadow-grass wa heavi and thick. 

now it so happen that, about the year seventeen hundr and eleven, 
one of the guardian of the young squire, a certain sir philip tempest, 
bethought him of the good shoot there must be on hi ward' 
property; and, in consequence, he brought down four or five gentlemen, 
of hi friends, to stay for a week or two at the hall. from all 
accounts, they royster and spent pretti freely. I never heard ani of 
their name but one, and that wa squir gisborne's. He wa hardli a 
middle-ag man then; he had been much abroad, and there, I believe, he 
had known sir philip tempest, and done him some service. He wa a 
dare and dissolut fellow in those days: careless and fearless, and 
one who would rather be in a quarrel than out of it. He had hi fit of 
ill-temp beside, when he would spare neither man nor beast. 
otherwise, those who knew him well, use to say he had a good heart, 
when he wa neither drunk, nor angry, nor in ani way vexed. He had 
alter much when I came to know him. 

one day, the gentlemen had all been out shooting, and with but littl 
success, I believe; anyhow, mr. gisborn had had none, and wa in a 
black humour accordingly. He wa come home, have hi gun loaded, 
sportsman-like, when littl mignon cross hi path, just as he turn 
out of the wood by bridget' cottage. partli for wantonness, partli to 
vent hi spleen upon some live creature, mr. gisborn took hi gun, 
and fired--h had better have never fire gun again, than aim that 
unlucki shot. He hit mignon; and at the creature' sudden cry, bridget 
came out, and saw at a glanc what had been done. she took mignon up in 
her arms, and look hard at the wound; the poor dog look at her with 
hi glaze eyes, and tri to wag hi tail and lick her hand, all 
cover with blood. mr. gisborn spoke in a kind of sullen penitence: 

'you should have kept the dog out of my way--a littl poach 
varmint.' 

At thi veri moment, mignon stretch out hi legs, and stiffen in 
her arms--her lost mary' dog, who had wander and sorrow with her 
for years. she walk right into mr. gisborne' path, and fix hi 
unwilling, sullen look with her dark and terribl eye. 

'those never throve that did me harm,' said she. 'i'm alon in the 
world, and helpless; the more do the saint in heaven hear my prayers. 
hear me, ye bless ones! hear me while I ask for sorrow on thi bad, 
cruel man. He ha kill the onli creatur that love me--th dumb 
beast that I loved. bring down heavi sorrow on hi head for it, O ye 
saints! He thought that I wa helpless, becaus he saw me lone and 
poor; but are not the armi of heaven for the like of me?' 

'come, come,' said he, half-remorseful, but not one whit afraid. 
'here' a crown to buy thee anoth dog. take it, and leav off 
cursing! I care none for thi threats.' 

'don't you?' said she, come a step closer, and chang her 
imprecatori cri for a whisper which made the gamekeeper' lad, 
follow mr. gisborne, creep all over. 'you shall live to see the 
creatur you love best, and who alon love you--ay, a human creature, 
but as innoc and fond as my poor, dead darling--y shall see thi 
creature, for whom death would be too happy, becom a terror and a 
loath to all, for thi blood' sake. hear me, O holi saints, who 
never fail them that have no other help!' 

she threw up her right hand, fill with poor mignon' life-drops; they 
spirted, one or two of them, on hi shooting-dress,--an omin sight 
to the follower. but the master onli laugh a little, forced, scorn 
laugh, and went on to the hall. befor he got there, however, he took 
out a gold piece, and bade the boy carri it to the old woman on hi 
return to the village. the lad wa 'afeard,' as he told me in after 
years; he came to the cottage, and hover about, not dare to enter. 
He peep through the window at last; and by the flicker wood-flame, 
he saw bridget kneel befor the pictur of our ladi of the holi 
heart, with dead mignon lie between her and the madonna. she wa 
pray wildly, as her outstretch arm betokened. the lad shrank away 
in redoubl terror; and content himself with slip the gold-piec 
under the ill-fit door. the next day it wa thrown out upon the 
midden; and there it lay, no one dare to touch it. 

meanwhil mr. gisborne, half curious, half uneasy, thought to lessen 
hi uncomfort feel by ask sir philip who bridget was? He 
could onli describ her--h did not know her name. sir philip wa 
equal at a loss. but an old servant of the starkeys, who had resum 
hi liveri at the hall on thi occasion--a scoundrel whom bridget had 
save from dismiss more than onc dure her palmi days--said:-- 

'it will be the old witch, that hi worship means. she need a ducking, 
if ever woman did, doe that bridget fitzgerald.' 

'fitzgerald!' said both the gentlemen at once. but sir philip wa the 
first to continue: 

'I must have no talk of duck her, dickon. why, she must be the veri 
woman poor starkey bade me have a care of; but when I came here last 
she wa gone, no one knew where. i'll go and see her tomorrow. but mind 
you, sirrah, if ani harm come to her, or ani more talk of her be a 
witch--i'v a pack of hound at home, who can follow the scent of a 
lie knave as well as ever they follow a dog-fox; so take care how 
you talk about duck a faith old servant of your dead master's.' 

'had she ever a daughter?' ask mr. gisborne, after a while. 

'I don't know--yes! i'v a notion she had; a kind of waiting-woman to 
madam starkey.' 

'pleas your worship,' said humbl dickon, 'mistress bridget had a 
daughter--on mistress mary--who went abroad, and ha never been heard 
on since; and folk do say that ha craze her mother.' 

mr. gisborn shade hi eye with hi hand. 

'I could wish she had not curs me,' he muttered. 'she may have 
power--no one els could.' after a while, he said aloud, no one 
understand rightli what he meant, 'tush! it' impossible!'--and 
call for claret; and he and the other gentlemen set to to a 
drinking-bout. 




chapter 2 


I now come to the time in which I myself wa mix up with the peopl 
that I have been write about. and to make you understand how I becam 
connect with them, I must give you some littl account of myself. My 
father wa the younger son of a devonshir gentleman of moder 
property; my eldest uncl succeed to the estat of hi forefathers, 
my second becam an emin attorney in london, and my father took 
orders. like most poor clergymen, he had a larg family; and I have no 
doubt wa glad enough when my london uncle, who wa a bachelor, offer 
to take charg of me, and bring me up to be hi successor in business. 

In thi way I came to live in london, in my uncle' house, not far from 
gray' inn, and to be treat and esteem as hi son, and to labour 
with him in hi office. I wa veri fond of the old gentleman. He wa 
the confidenti agent of mani countri squires, and had attain to hi 
present posit as much by knowledg of human natur as by knowledg 
of law; though he wa learn enough in the latter. He use to say hi 
busi wa law, hi pleasur heraldry. from hi intim acquaint 
with famili history, and all the tragic cours of life therein 
involved, to hear him talk, at leisur times, about ani coat of arm 
that came across hi path wa as good as a play or a romance. mani 
case of disput property, depend on a love of genealogy, were 
brought to him, as to a great author on such points. If the lawyer 
who came to consult him wa young, he would take no fee, onli give him 
a long lectur on the import of attend to heraldry; if the 
lawyer wa of matur age and good standing, he would mulct him pretti 
well, and abus him to me afterward as neglig of one great branch 
of the profession. hi hous wa in a state new street call ormond 
street, and in it he had a handsom library; but all the book treat 
of thing that were past; none of them plan or look forward into 
the future. I work away--partli for the sake of my famili at home, 
partli becaus my uncl had realli taught me to enjoy the kind of 
practic in which he himself took such delight. I suspect I work too 
hard; at ani rate, in seventeen hundr and eighteen I wa far from 
well, and my good uncl wa disturb by my ill looks. 

one day, he rang the bell twice into the clerk' room at the dingi 
offic in gray' inn lane. It wa the summon for me, and I went into 
hi privat room just as a gentleman--whom I knew well enough by sight 
as an irish lawyer of more reput than he deserved--wa leaving. 

My uncl wa slowli rub hi hand togeth and considering. I wa 
there two or three minut befor he spoke. then he told me that I must 
pack up my portmanteau that veri afternoon, and start that night by 
post-hors for west chester. I should get there, if all went well, at 
the end of five days' time, and must then wait for a packet to cross 
over to dublin; from thenc I must proceed to a certain town name 
kildoon, and in that neighbourhood I wa to remain, make certain 
inquiri as to the exist of ani descend of the younger branch 
of a famili to whom some valuabl estat had descend in the femal 
line. the irish lawyer whom I had seen wa weari of the case, and would 
willingli have given up the property, without further ado, to a man who 
appear to claim them; but on lay hi tabl and tree befor my 
uncle, the latter had foreseen so mani possibl prior claimants, that 
the lawyer had beg him to undertak the manag of the whole 
business. In hi youth, my uncl would have like noth better than 
go over to ireland himself, and ferret out everi scrap of paper 
or parchment, and everi word of tradit respect the family. As it 
was, old and gouty, he deput me. 

accordingly, I went to kildoon. I suspect I had someth of my uncle' 
delight in follow up a genealog scent, for I veri soon found 
out, when on the spot, that mr. rooney, the irish lawyer, would have 
got both himself and the first claimant into a terribl scrape, if he 
had pronounc hi opinion that the estat ought to be given up to 
him. there were three poor irish fellows, each nearer of kin to the 
last possessor; but, a gener before, there wa a still nearer 
relation, who had never been account for, nor hi exist ever 
discov by the lawyers, I ventur to think, till I rout him out 
from the memori of some of the old depend of the family. what had 
becom of him? I travel backward and forwards; I cross over to 
france, and came back again with a slight clue, which end in my 
discov that, wild and dissip himself, he had left one child, a 
son, of yet wors charact than hi father; that thi same hugh 
fitzgerald had marri a veri beauti serving-woman of the byrnes--a 
person below him in hereditari rank, but abov him in character; that 
he had die soon after hi marriage, leav one child, whether a boy 
or a girl I could not learn, and that the mother had return to live 
in the famili of the byrnes. now, the chief of thi latter famili wa 
serv in the duke of berwick' regiment, and it wa long befor I 
could hear from him; it wa more than a year befor I got a short, 
haughti letter--i fanci he had a soldier' contempt for a civilian, an 
irishman' hatr for an englishman, an exil jacobite' jealousi of 
one who prosper and live tranquilli under the govern he look 
upon as an usurpation. 'bridget fitzgerald,' he said, 'had been 
faith to the fortun of hi sister--had follow her abroad, and to 
england when mrs. starkey had thought fit to return. both her sister 
and her husband were dead; he knew noth of bridget fitzgerald at the 
present time: probabl sir philip tempest, hi nephew' guardian, might 
be abl to give me some information.' I have not given the littl 
contemptu terms; the way in which faith servic wa meant to 
impli more than it said--al that ha noth to do with my story. sir 
philip, when appli to, told me that he paid an annuiti regularli to 
an old woman name fitzgerald, live at coldholm (the villag near 
starkey manor-house). whether she had ani descend he could not say. 

one bleak march evening, I came in sight of the place describ at the 
begin of my story. I could hardli understand the rude dialect in 
which the direct to old bridget' hous wa given. 

'yo' see yon furleets,' all run together, gave me no idea that I wa to 
guid myself by the distant light that shone in the window of the 
hall, occupi for the time by a farmer who held the post of steward, 
while the squire, now four or five and twenty, wa make the grand 
tour. however, at last, I reach bridget' cottage--a low, moss-grown 
place; the pale that had onc surround it were broken and gone; 
and the underwood of the forest came up to the walls, and must have 
darken the windows. It wa about seven o'clock--not late to my london 
notions--but, after knock for some time at the door and receiv no 
reply, I wa driven to conjectur that the occup of the hous wa 
gone to bed. So I betook myself to the nearest church I had seen, three 
mile back on the road I had come, sure that close to that I should 
find an inn of some kind; and earli the next morn I set off back to 
coldholme, by a field-path which my host assur me I should find a 
shorter cut than the road I had taken the night before. It wa a cold, 
sharp morning; my feet left print in the sprinkl of hoar-frost that 
cover the ground; nevertheless, I saw an old woman, whom I 
instinct suspect to be the object of my search, in a shelter 
covert on one side of my path. I linger and watch her. she must 
have been consider abov the middl size in her prime, for when she 
rais herself from the stoop posit in which I first saw her, 
there wa someth fine and command in the erect of her figure. 
she droop again in a minut or two, and seem look for someth 
on the ground, as, with bent head, she turn off from the spot where I 
gaze upon her, and wa lost to my sight. I fanci I miss my way, and 
made a round in spite of the landlord' directions; for by the time I 
had reach bridget' cottag she wa there, with no semblanc of 
hurri walk or discomposur of ani kind. the door wa slightli ajar. I 
knocked, and the majest figur stood befor me, silent await the 
explan of my errand. her teeth were all gone, so the nose and chin 
were brought near together; the grey eyebrow were straight, and almost 
hung over her deep, cavern eyes, and the thick white hair lay in 
silveri mass over the low, wide, wrinkl forehead. for a moment, I 
stood uncertain how to shape my answer to the solemn question of her 
silence. 

'your name is bridget fitzgerald, I believe?' she bow her head in 
assent. 

'I have someth to say to you. may I come in? I am unwil to keep 
you standing.' 

'you cannot tire me,' she said, and at first she seem inclin to 
deni me the shelter of her roof. but the next moment--sh had search 
the veri soul in me with her eye dure that instant--sh led me in, 
and drop the shadow hood of her grey, drape cloak, which had 
previous hid part of the charact of her countenance. the cottag 
wa rude and bare enough. but befor that pictur of the virgin, of 
which I have made mention, there stood a littl cup fill with fresh 
primroses. while she paid her rever to the madonna, I understood 
whi she had been out seek through the clump of green in the 
shelter copse. then she turn round, and bade me be seated. the 
express of her face, which all thi time I wa studying, wa not 
bad, as the stori of my last night' landlord had led me to expect; 
it wa a wild, stern, fierce, indomit countenance, seam and 
scar by agoni of solitari weeping; but it wa neither cun nor 
malignant. 

'mi name is bridget fitzgerald,' said she, by way of open our 
conversation. 

'and your husband wa hugh fitzgerald, of knock-mahon, near kildoon, in 
ireland?' 

A faint light came into the dark gloom of her eyes. 

'he was.' 

'may I ask if you had ani children by him?' 

the light in her eye grew quick and red. she tri to speak, I could 
see; but someth rose in her throat, and choke her, and until she 
could speak calmly, she would fain not speak at all befor a stranger. 
In a minut or so she said: 

'I had a daughter--on mari fitzgerald,'--then her strong natur 
master her strong will, and she cri out, with a trembling, wail 
cry: 'oh, man! what of her?--what of her?' 

she rose from her seat, and came and clutch at my arm, and look in 
my eyes. there she read, as I suppose, my utter ignor of what had 
becom of her child; for she went blindli back to her chair, and sat 
rock herself and softli moaning, as if I were not there; I not 
dare to speak to the lone and aw woman. after a littl pause, she 
knelt down befor the pictur of our ladi of the holi heart, and spoke 
to her by all the fanci and poetic name of the litany. 

'O rose of sharon! O tower of david! O star of the sea! have you no 
comfort for my sore heart? Am I for ever to hope? grant me at least 
despair!'--and so on she went, heedless of my presence. her prayer 
grew wilder and wilder, till they seem to me to touch on the border 
of mad and blasphemy. almost involuntarily, I spoke as if to stop 
her. 

'have you ani reason to think that your daughter is dead?' 

she rose from her knees, and came and stood befor me. 

'mari fitzgerald is dead,' said she. 'I shall never see her again in 
the flesh. No tongu ever told me. but I know she is dead. I have 
yearn so to see her, and my heart' will is fear and strong: it 
would have drawn her to me befor now, if she had been a wander on 
the other side of the world. I wonder often it ha not drawn her out of 
the grave to come and stand befor me, and hear me tell her how I love 
her. for, sir, we part unfriends.' 

I knew noth but the dri particular need for my lawyer' quest, 
but I could not help feel for the desol woman; and she must have 
read the unusu sympathi with her wist eyes. 

'yes, sir, we did. she never knew how I love her; and we part 
unfriends; and I fear me that I wish her voyag might not turn out 
well, onli meaning,--o, bless virgin! you know I onli meant that she 
should come home to her mother' arm as to the happiest place on 
earth; but my wish are terrible--their power goe beyond my 
thought--and there is no hope for me, if my word brought mari harm.' 

'but,' I said, 'you do not know that she is dead. even now, you hope 
she might be alive. listen to me,' and I told her the tale I have 
alreadi told you, give it all in the driest manner, for I want to 
recal the clear sens that I felt almost sure she had possess in her 
younger days, and by keep up her attent to details, restrain the 
vagu wild of her grief. 

she listen with deep attention, put from time to time such 
question as convinc me I had to do with no common intelligence, 
howev dim and shorn by solitud and mysteri sorrow. then she 
took up her tale; and in few brief words, told me of her wander 
abroad in vain search after her daughter; sometim in the wake of 
armies, sometim in camp, sometim in city. the lady, whose 
waiting-woman mari had gone to be, had die soon after the date of her 
last letter home; her husband, the foreign officer, had been serv in 
hungary, whither bridget had follow him, but too late to find him. 
vagu rumour reach her that mari had made a great marriage; and thi 
sting of doubt wa added,--wheth the mother might not be close to her 
child under her new name, and even hear of her everi day, and yet 
never recognis the lost one under the appel she then bore. At 
length the thought took possess of her, that it wa possibl that 
all thi time mari might be at home at coldholme, in the trough of 
bolland, in lancashire, in england; and home came bridget, in that vain 
hope, to her desol hearth, and empti cottage. here she had thought 
it safest to remain; if mari wa in life, it wa here she would seek 
for her mother. 

I note down one or two particular out of bridget' narr that I 
thought might be of use to me; for I wa stimul to further search 
in a strang and extraordinari manner. It seem as if it were 
impress upon me, that I must take up the quest where bridget had laid 
it down; and thi for no reason that had previous influenc me (such 
as my uncle' anxieti on the subject, my own reput as a lawyer, 
and so on), but from some strang power which had taken possess of 
my will onli that veri morning, and which forc it in the direct it 
chose. 

'I will go,' said I. 'I will spare noth in the search. trust to me. 
I will learn all that can be learnt. you shall know all that money, or 
pains, or wit can discover. It is true she may be long dead: but she 
may have left a child.' 

'A child!' she cried, as if for the first time thi idea had struck her 
mind. 'hear him, bless virgin! he say she may have left a child. and 
you have never told me, though I have pray so for a sign, wake or 
sleeping!' 

'nay,' said I, 'I know noth but what you tell me. you say you heard 
of her marriage.' 

but she caught noth of what I said. she wa pray to the virgin in 
a kind of ecstacy, which seem to render her unconsci of my veri 
presence. 

from coldholm I went to sir philip tempest's. the wife of the foreign 
offic had been a cousin of hi father's, and from him I thought I 
might gain some particular as to the exist of the count de la tour 
d'auvergne, and where I could find him; for I knew question _de vive 
voix_ aid the flag recollection, and I wa determin to lose no 
chanc for want of trouble. but sir philip had gone abroad, and it 
would be some time befor I could receiv an answer. So I follow my 
uncle' advice, to whom I had mention how weari I felt, both in 
bodi and mind, by my will-o'-the-wisp search. He immedi told me to 
go to harrogate, there to await sir philip' reply. I should be near to 
one of the place connect with my search, coldholme; not far from sir 
philip tempest, in case he returned, and I wish to ask him ani 
further questions; and, in conclusion, my uncl bade me tri to forget 
all about my busi for a time. 

thi wa far easier said than done. I have seen a child on a common 
blown along by a high wind, without power of stand still and 
resist the tempestu force. I wa somewhat in the same predica 
as regard my mental state. someth resistless seem to urg my 
thought on, through everi possibl cours by which there wa a chanc 
of attain to my object. I did not see the sweep moor when I 
walk out: when I held a book in my hand, and read the words, their 
sens did not penetr to my brain. If I slept, I went on with the 
same ideas, alway flow in the same direction. thi could not last 
long without have a bad effect on the body. I had an illness, which, 
although I wa rack with pain, wa a posit relief to me, as it 
compel me to live in the present suffering, and not in the visionari 
research I had been continu make before. My kind uncl came to 
nurs me; and after the immedi danger wa over, my life seem to 
slip away in delici languor for two or three months. I did not 
ask--so much did I dread fall into the old channel of 
thought--wheth ani repli had been receiv to my letter to sir 
philip. I turn my whole imagin right away from all that subject. 
My uncl remain with me until nigh summer, and then return to hi 
busi in london; leav me perfectli well, although not complet 
strong. I wa to follow him in a fortnight; when, as he said, 'we would 
look over letters, and talk about sever things.' I knew what thi 
littl speech allud to, and shrank from the train of thought it 
suggested, which wa so intim connect with my first feel of 
illness. however, I had a fortnight more to roam on those invigor 
yorkshir moors. 

In those days, there wa one large, rambl inn at harrogate, close to 
the medicin spring; but it wa alreadi becom too small for the 
accommod of the influx of visitors, and mani lodg round about, 
in the farm-hous of the district. It wa so earli in the season, that 
I had the inn pretti much to myself; and, indeed, felt rather like a 
visitor in a privat house, so intim had the landlord and landladi 
becom with me dure my long illness. she would chide me for be out 
so late on the moors, or for have been too long without food, quit 
in a motherli way; while he consult me about vintag and wines, and 
taught me mani a yorkshir wrinkl about horses. In my walk I met 
other stranger from time to time. even befor my uncl had left me, I 
had noticed, with half-torpid curiosity, a young ladi of veri strike 
appearance, who went about alway accompani by an elderli companion, 
hardli a gentlewoman, but with someth in her look that prepossess 
me in her favour. the younger ladi alway put her veil down when ani 
one approached; so it had been onli onc or twice, when I had come upon 
her at a sudden turn in the path, that I had even had a glimps of her 
face. I am not sure if it wa beautiful, though in after-lif I grew to 
think it so. but it wa at thi time over-shadow by a sad that 
never varied: a pale, quiet, resign look of intens suffering, that 
irresist attract me, not with love, but with a sens of infinit 
compass for one so young yet so hopelessli unhappy. the companion 
wore someth of the same look: quiet, melancholy, hopeless, yet 
resigned. I ask my landlord who they were. He said they were call 
clarke, and wish to be consid as mother and daughter; but that, 
for hi part, he did not believ that to be their right name, or that 
there wa ani such relationship between them. they had been in the 
neighbourhood of harrog for some time, lodg in a remot 
farm-house. the peopl there would tell noth about them; say that 
they paid handsomely, and never did ani harm; so whi should they be 
speak of ani strang thing that might happen? that, as the landlord 
shrewdli observed, show there wa someth out of the common way: he 
had heard that the elderli woman wa a cousin of the farmer' where 
they lodged, and so the regard exist between relat might help to 
keep them quiet. 

'what did he think, then, wa the reason for their extrem seclusion?' 
ask I. 

'nay, he could not tell, not he. He had heard that the young lady, for 
all as quiet as she seemed, play strang prank at times.' He shook 
hi head when I ask him for more particulars, and refus to give 
them, which made me doubt if he knew any, for he wa in gener a 
talk and commun man. In default of other interests, after 
my uncl left, I set myself to watch these two people. I hover about 
their walks, drawn toward them with a strang fascination, which wa 
not diminish by their evid annoy at so frequent meet me. 
one day, I had the sudden good fortun to be at hand when they were 
alarm by the attack of a bull, which, in those unenclos graze 
districts, wa a particularli danger occurrence. I have other and 
more import thing to relate, than to tell of the accid which 
gave me an opportun of rescu them; it is enough to say, that thi 
event wa the begin of an acquaintance, reluctantli acquiesc in 
by them, but eagerli prosecut by me. I can hardli tell when intens 
curios becam merg in love, but in less than ten day after my 
uncle' departur I wa passion enamour of mrs. lucy, as her 
attend call her; carefully--for thi I note well--avoid ani 
address which appear as if there wa an equal of station between 
them. I notic also that mrs. clarke, the elderli woman, after her 
first reluct to allow me to pay them ani attent had been 
overcome, wa cheer by my evid attach to the young girl; it 
seem to lighten her heavi burden of care, and she evid favour 
my visit to the farm-hous where they lodged. It wa not so with lucy. 
A more attract person I never saw, in spite of her depress of 
manner, and shrink avoid of me. I felt sure at once, that 
whatev wa the sourc of her grief, it rose from no fault of her own. 
It wa difficult to draw her into conversation; but when at times, for 
a moment or two, I beguil her into talk, I could see a rare 
intellig in her face, and a grave, trust look in the soft, grey 
eye that were rais for a minut to mine. I made everi excus I 
possibl could for go there. I sought wild flower for lucy' sake; 
I plan walk for lucy' sake; I watch the heaven by night, in 
hope that some unusu beauti of sky would justifi me in tempt mrs. 
clark and luci forth upon the moors, to gaze at the great purpl dome 
above. 

It seem to me that luci wa awar of my love; but that, for some 
motiv which I could not guess, she would fain have repel me; but 
then again I saw, or fanci I saw, that her heart spoke in my favour, 
and that there wa a struggl go on in her mind, which at time (I 
love so dearly) I could have beg her to spare herself, even though 
the happi of my whole life should have been the sacrifice; for her 
complexion grew paler, her aspect of sorrow more hopeless, her delic 
frame yet slighter. dure thi period I had written, I should say, to 
my uncle, to beg to be allow to prolong my stay at harrogate, not 
give ani reason; but such wa hi tender toward me, that in a 
few day I heard from him, give me a will permission, and onli 
charg me to take care of myself, and not use too much exert 
dure the hot weather. 

one sultri even I drew near the farm. the window of their parlour 
were open, and I heard voic when I turn the corner of the house, as 
I pass the first window (there were two window in their littl 
ground-floor room). I saw luci distinctly; but when I had knock at 
their door--th house-door stood alway ajar--sh wa gone, and I saw 
onli mrs. clarke, turn over the work-th lie on the table, in a 
nervou and purposeless manner. I felt by instinct that a convers 
of some import wa come on, in which I should be expect to say 
what wa my object in pay these frequent visits. I wa glad of the 
opportunity. My uncl had sever time allud to the pleasant 
possibl of my bring home a young wife, to cheer and adorn the 
old hous in ormond street. He wa rich, and I wa to succeed him, and 
had, as I knew, a fair reput for so young a lawyer. So on my side 
I saw no obstacle. It wa true that luci wa shroud in mystery; her 
name (I wa convinc it wa not clarke), birth, parentage, and 
previou life were unknown to me. but I wa sure of her good and 
sweet innocence, and although I knew that there must be someth 
pain to be told, to account for her mourn sadness, yet I wa 
will to bear my share in her grief, whatev it might be. 

mrs. clark began, as if it wa a relief to her to plung into the 
subject. 

'we have thought, sir--at least I have thought--that you know veri 
littl of us, nor we of you, indeed; not enough to warrant the intim 
acquaint we have fallen into. I beg your pardon, sir,' she went on, 
nervously; 'I am but a plain kind of woman, and I mean to use no 
rudeness; but I must say straight out that i--we--think it would be 
better for you not to come so often to see us. she is veri unprotected, 
and----' 

'whi should I not come to see you, dear madam?' ask I, eagerly, glad 
of the opportun of explain myself. 'I come, I own, becaus I have 
learnt to love mistress lucy, and wish to teach her to love me.' 

mistress clark shook her head, and sighed. 

'don't, sir--neith love her, nor, for the sake of all you hold 
sacred, teach her to love you! If I am too late, and you love her 
already, forget her,--forget these last few weeks. O! I should never 
have allow you to come!' she went on, passionately; 'but what am I to 
do? We are forsaken by all, except the great god, and even He permit a 
strang and evil power to afflict us--what am I to do? where is it to 
end?' she wrung her hand in her distress; then she turn to me: 'go 
away, sir; go away, befor you learn to care ani more for her. I ask it 
for your own sake--i implore. you have been good and kind to us, and we 
shall alway recollect you with gratitude; but go away now, and never 
come back to cross our fatal path!' 

'indeed, madam,' said I, 'I shall do no such thing. you urg it for my 
own sake. I have no fear, so urged--nor wish, except to hear more--all. 
I cannot have seen mistress luci in all the intimaci of thi last 
fortnight, without acknowledg her good and innocence; and 
without seeing--pardon me, madam--that for some reason you are two veri 
lone women, in some mysteri sorrow and distress. now, though I am 
not power myself, yet I have friend who are so wise and kind, that 
they may be said to possess power. tell me some particulars. whi are 
you in grief--what is your secret--whi are you here? I declar solemnli 
that noth you have said ha daunt me in my wish to becom lucy' 
husband; nor will I shrink from ani difficulti that, as such an 
aspirant, I may have to encounter. you say you are friendless--whi cast 
away an honest friend? I will tell you of peopl to whom you may write, 
and who will answer ani question as to my charact and prospects. I 
do not shun inquiry.' 

she shook her head again. 'you had better go away, sir. you know 
noth about us.' 

'I know your names,' said I, 'and I have heard you allud to the part 
of the countri from which you came, which I happen to know as a wild 
and lone place. there are so few peopl live in it that, if I chose 
to go there, I could easili ascertain all about you; but I would rather 
hear it from yourself.' you see I want to piqu her into tell me 
someth definite. 

'you do not know our true names, sir,' said she, hastily. 

'well, I may have conjectur as much. but tell me, then, I conjur 
you. give me your reason for distrust my willing to stand by 
what I have said with regard to mistress lucy.' 

'oh, what can I do?' exclaim she. 'if I am turn away a true friend 
as he says?--stay!' come to a sudden decision--'i will tell you 
something--i cannot tell you all--you would not believ it. but, 
perhaps, I can tell you enough to prevent your go on in your 
hopeless attachment. I am not lucy' mother.' 

'so I conjectured,' I said. 'go on.' 

'I do not even know whether she is the legitim or illegitim child 
of her father. but he is cruelli turn against her; and her mother is 
long dead; and, for a terribl reason, she ha no other creatur to 
keep constant to her but me. she--onli two year ago--such a darl 
and such a pride in her father' house! why, sir, there is a mysteri 
that might happen in connect with her ani moment; and then you would 
go away like all the rest; and, when you next heard her name, you would 
loath her. others, who have love her longer, have done so befor now. 
My poor child, whom neither god nor man ha merci upon--or, surely, she 
would die!' 

the good woman wa stop by her crying. I confess, I wa a littl 
stun by her last words; but onli for a moment. At ani rate, till I 
knew definit what wa thi mysteri stain upon one so simpl and 
pure, as luci seemed, I would not desert her, and so I said; and she 
made answer: 

'if you are dare in your heart to think harm of my child, sir, after 
know her as you have done, you are no good man yourself; but I am so 
foolish and helpless in my great sorrow, that I would fain hope to find 
a friend in you. I cannot help trust that, although you may no 
longer feel toward her as a lover, you will have piti upon us; and 
perhaps, by your learning, you can tell us where to go for aid.' 

'I implor you to tell me what thi mysteri is,' I cried, almost 
madden by thi suspense. 

'I cannot,' said she, solemnly. 'I am under a deep vow of secrecy. If 
you are to be told, it must be by her.' she left the room, and I 
remain to ponder over thi strang interview. I mechan turn 
over the few books, and with eye that saw noth at the time, 
examin the token of lucy' frequent presenc in that room. 

when I got home at night, I rememb how all these trifl spoke of a 
pure and tender heart and innoc life. mistress clark returned; she 
had been cri sadly. 

'yes,' said she, 'it is as I feared: she love you so much that she is 
will to run the fear risk of tell you all herself--sh 
acknowledg it is but a poor chance; but your sympathi will be a balm, 
if you give it. to-morrow, come here at ten in the morning; and as you 
hope for piti in your hour of agony, repress all show of fear or 
repugn you may feel toward one so grievous afflicted.' 

I half smiled. 'have no fear,' I said. It seem too absurd to imagin 
my feel dislik to lucy. 

'her father love her well,' said she, gravely, 'yet he drove her out 
like some monstrou thing.' 

just at thi moment came a peal of ring laughter from the garden. It 
wa lucy' voice; it sound as if she were stand just on one side 
of the open casement--and as though she were suddenli stir to 
merriment--merri verg on boisterousness, by the do or 
say of some other person. I can scarc say why, but the sound 
jar on me inexpressibly. she knew the subject of our conversation, 
and must have been at least awar of the state of agit her friend 
wa in: she herself usual so gentl and quiet. I half rose to go to 
the window, and satisfi my instinct curios as to what had 
provok thi burst of ill-tim laughter; but mrs. clark threw her 
whole weight and power upon the hand with which she press and kept me 
down. 

'for god' sake!' she said, white and trembl all over, 'sit still; 
be quiet. oh! be patient. to-morrow you will know all. leav us, for we 
are all sore afflicted. Do not seek to know more about us.' 

again that laugh--so music in sound, yet so discord to my heart. 
she held me tight--tighter; without posit violenc I could not have 
risen. I wa sit with my back to the window, but I felt a shadow 
pass between the sun' warmth and me, and a strang shudder ran through 
my frame. In a minut or two she releas me. 

'go,' repeat she. 'be warned, I ask you onc more. I do not think you 
can stand thi knowledg that you seek. If I had had my own way, luci 
should never have yielded, and promis to tell you all. who know what 
may come of it?' 

'I am firm in my wish to know all. I return at ten to-morrow morning, 
and then expect to see mistress luci herself.' 

I turn away; have my own suspicions, I confess, as to mistress 
clarke' sanity. 

conjectur as to the mean of her hints, and uncomfort thought 
connect with that strang laughter, fill my mind. I could hardli 
sleep. I rose early; and long befor the hour I had appointed, I wa on 
the path over the common that led to the old farm-hous where they 
lodged. I suppos that luci had pass no better a night than I; for 
there she wa also, slowli pace with her even step, her eye bent 
down, her whole look most saintli and pure. she start when I came 
close to her, and grew paler as I remind her of my appointment, and 
spoke with someth of the impati of obstacl that, see her 
onc more, had call up afresh in my mind. all strang and terribl 
hints, and giddi merriment were forgotten. My heart gave forth word of 
fire, and my tongu utter them. her colour went and came, as she 
listened; but, when I had end my passion speeches, she lift her 
soft eye to me, and said: 

'but you know that you have someth to learn about me yet. I onli 
want to say this: I shall not think less of you--less well of you, I 
mean--if you, too, fall away from me when you know all. stop!' said 
she, as if fear anoth burst of mad words. 'listen to me. My father 
is a man of great wealth. I never knew my mother; she must have die 
when I wa veri young. when first I rememb anything, I wa live in 
a great, lone house, with my dear and faith mistress clarke. My 
father, even, wa not there; he was--h is--a soldier, and hi duti 
lie abroad. but he came, from time to time, and everi time I think he 
love me more and more. He brought me rariti from foreign lands, 
which prove to me now how much he must have thought of me dure hi 
absences. I can sit down and measur the depth of hi lost love now, by 
such standard as these. I never thought whether he love me or not, 
then; it wa so natural, that it wa like the air I breathed. yet he 
wa an angri man at times, even then; but never with me. He wa veri 
reckless, too; and, onc or twice, I heard a whisper among the servant 
that a doom wa over him, and that he knew it, and tri to drown hi 
knowledg in wild activity, and even sometimes, sir, in wine. So I grew 
up in thi grand mansion, in that lone place. everyth around me 
seem at my disposal, and I think everi one love me; I am sure love 
them. till about two year ago--i rememb it well--mi father had come 
to england, to us; and he seem so proud and so pleas with me and 
all I had done. and one day hi tongu seem loosen with wine, and 
he told me much that I had not known till then,--how dearli he had 
love my mother, yet how hi wil usag had caus her death; and 
then he went on to say how he love me better than ani creatur on 
earth, and how, some day, he hope to take me to foreign places, for 
that he could hardli bear these long absenc from hi onli child. then 
he seem to chang suddenly, and said, in a strange, wild way, that I 
wa not to believ what he said; that there wa mani a thing he love 
better--hi horse--hi dog--i know not what. 

'and 'twa onli the next morn that, when I came into hi room to ask 
hi bless as wa my wont, he receiv me with fierc and angri 
words. 'whi had i,' so he asked, 'been delight myself in such wanton 
mischief--danc over the tender plant in the flower-beds, all set 
with the famou dutch bulb he had brought from holland?' I had never 
been out of door that morning, sir, and I could not conceiv what he 
meant, and so I said; and then he swore at me for a liar, and said I 
wa of no true blood, for he had seen me do all that mischief 
himself--with hi own eyes. what could I say? He would not listen to 
me, and even my tear seem onli to irrit him. that day wa the 
begin of my great sorrows. not long after, he reproach me for my 
undu familiarity--al unbecom a gentlewoman--with hi grooms. I had 
been in the stable-yard, laugh and talking, he said. now, sir, I am 
someth of a coward by nature, and I had alway dread horses; 
besid that, my father' servants--thos whom he brought with him from 
foreign parts--wer wild fellows, whom I had alway avoided, and to 
whom I had never spoken, except as a ladi must need from time to time 
speak to her father' people. yet my father call me by name of which 
I hardli know the meaning, but my heart told me they were such as shame 
ani modest woman; and from that day he turn quit against me;--nay, 
sir, not mani week after that, he came in with a riding-whip in hi 
hand; and, accus me harshli of evil doings, of which I knew no more 
than you, sir, he wa about to strike me, and I, all in bewild 
tears, wa readi to take hi stripe as great kind compar to hi 
harder words, when suddenli he stop hi arm mid-way, gasp and 
staggered, cri out, 'the curse--th curse!' I look up in terror. 
In the great mirror opposit I saw myself, and, right behind, anoth 
wicked, fear self, so like me that my soul seem to quiver within 
me, as though not know to which similitud of bodi it belonged. My 
father saw my doubl at the same moment, either in it dread 
reality, whatev that might be, or in the scarc less terribl 
reflect in the mirror; but what came of it at that moment I cannot 
say, for I suddenli swoon away; and when I came to myself I wa lie 
in my bed, and my faith clark sit by me. I wa in my bed for 
days; and even while I lay there my doubl wa seen by all, flit 
about the hous and gardens, alway about some mischiev or 
detest work. what wonder that everi one shrank from me in 
dread--that my father drove me forth at length, when the disgrac of 
which I wa the caus wa past hi patienc to bear. mistress clark 
came with me; and here we tri to live such a life of pieti and prayer 
as may in time set me free from the curse.' 

all the time she had been speaking, I had been weigh her stori in my 
mind. I had hitherto put case of witchcraft on one side, as mere 
superstitions; and my uncl and I had had mani an argument, he 
support himself by the opinion of hi good friend sir matthew hale. 
yet thi sound like the tale of one bewitched; or wa it mere the 
effect of a life of extrem seclus tell on the nerv of a 
sensit girl? My sceptic inclin me to the latter belief, and 
when she paus I said: 

'I fanci that some physician could have disabus your father of hi 
belief in visions----' 

just at that instant, stand as I wa opposit to her in the full and 
perfect morn light, I saw behind her anoth figure--a ghastli 
resemblance, complet in likeness, so far as form and featur and 
minutest touch of dress could go, but with a loathsom demon soul 
look out of the grey eyes, that were in turn mock and 
voluptuous. My heart stood still within me; everi hair rose up erect; 
my flesh crept with horror. I could not see the grave and tender 
lucy--mi eye were fascin by the creatur beyond. I know not why, 
but I put out my hand to clutch it; I grasp noth but empti air, 
and my whole blood curdl to ice. for a moment I could not see; then 
my sight came back, and I saw luci stand befor me, alone, deathli 
pale, and, I could have fancied, almost, shrunk in size. 

'it ha been near me?' she said, as if ask a question. 

the sound seem taken out of her voice; it wa huski as the note on 
an old harpsichord when the string have ceas to vibrate. she read 
her answer in my face, I suppose, for I could not speak. her look wa 
one of intens fear, but that die away into an aspect of most humbl 
patience. At length she seem to forc herself to face behind and 
around her: she saw the purpl moors, the blue distant hills, quiver 
in the sunlight, but noth else. 

'will you take me home?' she said, meekly. 

I took her by the hand, and led her silent through the bud 
heather--w dare not speak; for we could not tell but that the dread 
creatur wa listening, although unseen,--but that IT might appear and 
push us asunder. I never love her more fondli than now when--and that 
wa the unspeak misery--th idea of her wa becom so 
inextric blend with the shudder thought of it. she seem to 
understand what I must be feeling. she let go my hand, which she had 
kept clasp until then, when we reach the garden gate, and went 
forward to meet her anxiou friend, who wa stand by the window 
look for her. I could not enter the house: I need silence, 
society, leisure, change--i knew not what--to shake off the sensat 
of that creature' presence. yet I linger about the garden--i hardli 
know why; I partli suppose, becaus I fear to encount the 
resembl again on the solitari common, where it had vanished, and 
partli from a feel of inexpress compass for lucy. In a few 
minut mistress clark came forth and join me. We walk some pace 
in silence. 

'you know all now,' said she, solemnly. 

'I saw it,' said I, below my breath. 

'and you shrink from us, now,' she said, with a hopeless which 
stir up all that wa brave or good in me. 

'not a whit,' said I. 'human flesh shrink from encount with the 
power of darkness: and, for some reason unknown to me, the pure and 
holi luci is their victim.' 

'the sin of the father shall be visit upon the children,' she said. 

'who is her father?' ask I. 'know as much as I do, I may sure 
know more--know all. tell me, I entreat you, madam, all that you can 
conjectur respect thi demoniac persecut of one so good.' 

'I will; but not now. I must go to luci now. come thi afternoon, I 
will see you alone; and oh, sir! I will trust that you may yet find 
some way to help us in our sore trouble!' 

I wa miser exhaust by the swoon affright which had taken 
possess of me. when I reach the inn, I stagger in like one 
overcom by wine. I went to my own privat room. It wa some time 
befor I saw that the weekli post had come in, and brought me my 
letters. there wa one from my uncle, one from my home in devonshire, 
and one, re-direct over the first address, seal with a great coat 
of arms. It wa from sir philip tempest: my letter of inquiri 
respect mari fitzgerald had reach him at liège, where it so 
happen that the count de la tour d'auvergn wa quarter at the veri 
time. He rememb hi wife' beauti attendant; she had had high 
word with the deceas countess, respect her intercours with an 
english gentleman of good standing, who wa also in the foreign 
service. the countess augur evil of hi intentions; while mary, proud 
and vehement, assert that he would soon marri her, and resent her 
mistress' warn as an insult. the consequ was, that she had 
left madam de la tour d'auvergne' service, and, as the count 
believed, had gone to live with the englishman; whether he had marri 
her, or not, he could not say. 'but,' ad sir philip tempest, 'you 
may easili hear what particular you wish to know respect mari 
fitzgerald from the englishman himself, if, as I suspect, he is no 
other than my neighbour and former acquaintance, mr. gisborne, of 
skipford hall, in the west riding. I am led to the belief that he is no 
other by sever small particulars, none of which are in themselv 
conclusive, but which, taken together, make a mass of presumpt 
evidence. As far as I could make out from the count' foreign 
pronunciation, gisborn wa the name of the englishman: I know that 
gisborn of skipford wa abroad and in the foreign servic at that 
time--h wa a like fellow enough for such an exploit, and, abov 
all, certain express recur to my mind which he use in refer to 
old bridget fitzgerald, of coldholme, whom he onc encount while 
stay with me at starkey manor-house. I rememb that the meet 
seem to have produc some extraordinari effect upon hi mind, as 
though he had suddenli discov some connect which she might have 
had with hi previou life. I beg you to let me know if I can be of ani 
further servic to you. your uncl onc render me a good turn, and I 
will gladli repay it, so far as in me lies, to hi nephew.' 

I wa now appar close on the discoveri which I had striven so mani 
month to attain. but success had lost it zest. I put my letter down, 
and seem to forget them all in think of the morn I had pass 
that veri day. noth wa real but the unreal presence, which had come 
like an evil blast across my bodili eyes, and burnt itself down upon my 
brain. dinner came, and went away untouched. earli in the afternoon I 
walk to the farm-house. I found mistress clark alone, and I wa glad 
and relieved. she wa evid prepar to tell me all I might wish to 
hear. 

'you ask me for mistress lucy' true name; it is gisborne,' she 
began. 

'not gisborn of skipford?' I exclaimed, breathless with anticipation. 

'the same,' said she, quietly, not regard my manner. 'her father is 
a man of note; although, be a roman catholic, he cannot take that 
rank in thi countri to which hi station entitl him. the consequ 
is that he live much abroad--ha been a soldier, I am told.' 

'and lucy' mother?' I asked. 

she shook her head. 'I never knew her,' said she. 'luci wa about three 
year old when I wa engag to take charg of her. her mother wa 
dead.' 

'but you know her name?--y can tell if it wa mari fitzgerald?' 

she look astonished. 'that wa her name. but, sir, how came you to be 
so well acquaint with it? It wa a mysteri to the whole household at 
skipford court. she wa some beauti young woman whom he lure away 
from her protector while he wa abroad. I have heard said he practis 
some terribl deceit upon her, and when she came to know it, she wa 
neither to have nor to hold, but rush off from hi veri arms, and 
threw herself into a rapid stream and wa drowned. It stung him deep 
with remorse, but I use to think the remembr of the mother' cruel 
death made him love the child yet dearer.' 

I told her, as briefli as might be, of my research after the 
descend and heir of the fitzgerald of kildoon, and added--someth 
of my old lawyer spirit return into me for the moment--that I had no 
doubt but that we should prove luci to be by right possess of larg 
estat in ireland. 

No flush came over her grey face; no light into her eyes. 'and what is 
all the wealth in the whole world to that poor girl?' she said. 'it 
will not free her from the ghastli bewitch which persecut her. As 
for money, what a piti thing it is; it cannot touch her.' 

'no more can the evil creatur harm her,' I said. 'her holi natur 
dwell apart, and cannot be defil or stain by all the devilish art 
in the whole world.' 

'true! but it is a cruel fate to know that all shrink from her, sooner 
or later, as from one possessed--accursed.' 

'how came it to pass?' I asked. 

'nay, I know not. old rumour there are, that were bruit through the 
household at skipford.' 

'tell me,' I demanded. 

'they came from servants, who would fain account for everything. they 
say that, mani year ago, mr. gisborn kill a dog belong to an old 
witch at coldholme; that she cursed, with a dread and mysteri 
curse, the creature, whatev it might be, that he should love best; 
and that it struck so deepli into hi heart that for year he kept 
himself aloof from ani temptat to love aught. but who could help 
love lucy?' 

'you never heard the witch' name?' I gasped. 

'yes--they call her bridget; they said he would never go near the 
spot again for terror of her. yet he wa a brave man!' 

'listen,' said I, take hold of her arm, the better to arrest her full 
attention; 'if what I suspect hold true, that man stole bridget' onli 
child--th veri mari fitzgerald who wa lucy' mother; if so, bridget 
curs him in ignor of the deeper wrong he had done her. To thi 
hour she yearn after her lost child, and question the saint whether 
she be live or not. the root of that curs lie deeper than she 
knows: she unwittingli ban him for a deeper guilt than that of 
kill a dumb beast. the sin of the father are inde visit upon 
the children.' 

'but,' said mistress clarke, eagerly, 'she would never let evil rest on 
her own grandchild? surely, sir, if what you say be true, there are 
hope for lucy. let us go--go at once, and tell thi fear woman all 
that you suspect, and beseech her to take off the spell she ha put 
upon her innoc grandchild.' 

It seem to me, indeed, that someth like thi wa the best cours 
we could pursue. but first it wa necessari to ascertain more than what 
mere rumour or careless hearsay could tell. My thought turn to my 
uncle--h could advis me wisely--h ought to know all. I resolv to 
go to him without delay; but I did not choos to tell mistress clark 
of all the visionari plan that flit through my mind. I simpli 
declar my intent of proceed straight to london on lucy' 
affairs. I bade her believ that my interest on the young lady' behalf 
wa greater than ever, and that my whole time should be given up to her 
cause. I saw that mistress clark distrust me, becaus my mind wa 
too full of thought for my word to flow freely. she sigh and shook 
her head, and said, 'well, it is all right!' in such a tone that it wa 
an impli reproach. but I wa firm and constant in my heart, and I 
took confid from that. 

I rode to london. I rode long day drawn out into the love summer 
nights: I could not rest. I reach london. I told my uncl all, though 
in the stir of the great citi the horror had fade away, and I could 
hardli imagin that he would believ the account I gave him of the 
fear doubl of luci which I had seen on the lone moor-side. but my 
uncl had live mani years, and learnt mani things; and, in the deep 
secret of famili histori that had been confid to him, he had heard 
of case of innoc peopl bewitch and taken possess of by evil 
spirit yet more fear than lucy's. for, as he said, to judg from 
all I told him, that resembl had no power over her--sh wa too 
pure and good to be taint by it evil, haunt presence. It had, in 
all probability, so my uncl conceived, tri to suggest wick 
thought and to tempt to wick actions; but she, in her saintli 
maidenhood, had pass on undefil by evil thought or deed. It could 
not touch her soul: but true, it set her apart from all sweet love or 
common human intercourse. My uncl threw himself with an energi more 
like six-and-twenti than sixti into the consider of the whole 
case. He undertook the prove lucy' descent, and volunt to go 
and find out mr. gisborne, and obtain, firstly, the legal proof of her 
descent from the fitzgerald of kildoon, and, secondly, to tri and hear 
all that he could respect the work of the curse, and whether ani 
and what mean had been taken to exorcis that terribl appearance. for 
he told me of instanc where, by prayer and long fasting, the evil 
possessor had been driven forth with howl and mani cri from the 
bodi which it had come to inhabit; he spoke of those strang new 
england case which had happen not so long before; of mr. defoe, who 
had written a book, wherein he had name mani mode of subdu 
apparitions, and send them back whenc they came; and, lastly, he 
spoke low of dread way of compel witch to undo their 
witchcraft. but I could not endur to hear of those tortur and 
burnings. I said that bridget wa rather a wild and savag woman than a 
malign witch; and, abov all, that luci wa of her kith and kin; and 
that, in put her to the trial, by water or by fire, we should be 
torturing--it might be to the death--th ancestress of her we sought to 
redeem. 

My uncl thought awhile, and then said, that in thi last matter I wa 
right--at ani rate, it should not be tried, with hi consent, till all 
other mode of remedi had failed; and he assent to my propos that I 
should go myself and see bridget, and tell her all. 

In accord with this, I went down onc more to the waysid inn near 
coldholme. It wa late at night when I arriv there; and, while I 
supped, I inquir of the landlord more particular as to bridget' 
ways. solitari and savag had been her life for mani years. wild and 
despot were her word and manner to those few peopl who came across 
her path. the country-folk did her imperi bidding, becaus they 
fear to disobey. If they pleas her, they prospered; if, on the 
contrary, they neglect or travers her behests, misfortune, small or 
great, fell on them and theirs. It wa not detest so much as an 
indefin terror that she excited. 

In the morn I went to see her. she wa stand on the green outsid 
her cottage, and receiv me with the sullen grandeur of a throneless 
queen. I read in her face that she recognis me, and that I wa not 
unwelcome; but she stood silent till I had open my errand. 

'I have news of your daughter,' said I, resolv to speak straight to 
all that I knew she felt of love, and not to spare her. 'she is dead!' 

the stern figur scarc trembled, but her hand sought the support of 
the door-post. 

'I knew that she wa dead,' said she, deep and low, and then wa silent 
for an instant. 'mi tear that should have flow for her were burnt up 
long year ago. young man, tell me about her.' 

'not yet,' said I, have a strang power given me of confront one, 
whom, nevertheless, in my secret soul I dreaded. 

'you had onc a littl dog,' I continued. the word call out in her 
more show of emot than the intellig of her daughter' death. she 
broke in upon my speech: 

'I had! It wa hers--th last thing I had of hers--and it wa shot for 
wantonness! It die in my arms. the man who kill that dog rue it to 
thi day. for that dumb beast' blood, hi best-belov stand 
accursed.' 

her eye distended, as if she were in a tranc and saw the work of 
her curse. again I spoke: 

'o, woman!' I said, 'that best-beloved, stand accurs befor men, 
is your dead daughter' child.' 

the life, the energy, the passion came back to the eye with which she 
pierc through me, to see if I spoke truth; then, without anoth 
question or word, she threw herself on the ground with fear 
vehemence, and clutch at the innoc daisi with convuls hands. 

'bone of my bone! flesh of my flesh! have I curs thee--and art thou 
accursed?' 

So she moaned, as she lay prostrat in her great agony. I stood aghast 
at my own work. she did not hear my broken sentences; she ask no 
more, but the dumb confirm which my sad look had given that one 
fact, that her curs rest on her own daughter' child. the fear grew 
on me lest she should die in her strife of bodi and soul; and then 
might not luci remain under the spell as long as she lived? 

even at thi moment, I saw luci come through the woodland path that 
led to bridget' cottage; mistress clark wa with her: I felt at my 
heart that it wa she, by the balmi peac which the look of her sent 
over me, as she slowli advanced, a glad surpris shine out of her 
soft quiet eyes. that wa as her gaze met mine. As her look fell on 
the woman lie stiff, convuls on the earth, they becam full of 
tender pity; and she came forward to tri and lift her up. seat 
herself on the turf, she took bridget' head into her lap; and, with 
gentl touches, she arrang the dishevel grey hair stream thick 
and wild from beneath her mutch. 

'god help her!' murmur lucy. 'how she suffers!' 

At her desir we sought for water; but when we returned, bridget had 
recov her wander senses, and wa kneel with clasp hand 
befor lucy, gaze at that sweet sad face as though her troubl 
natur drank in health and peac from everi moment' contemplation. A 
faint ting on lucy' pale cheek show me that she wa awar of our 
return; otherwis it appear as if she wa consciou of her influenc 
for good over the passion and troubl woman kneel befor her, 
and would not willingli avert her grave and love eye from that 
wrinkl and careworn countenance. 

suddenly--in the twinkl of an eye--th creatur appeared, there, 
behind lucy; fear the same as to outward semblance, but kneel 
exactli as bridget knelt, and clasp her hand in jest mimicri as 
bridget clasp her in her ecstasi that wa deepen into a prayer. 
mistress clark cri out--bridget aros slowly, her gaze fix on the 
creatur beyond: draw her breath with a hiss sound, never move 
her terribl eyes, that were steadi as stone, she made a dart at the 
phantom, and caught, as I had done, a mere hand of empti air. We saw 
no more of the creature--it vanish as suddenli as it came, but 
bridget look slowli on, as if watch some reced form. luci sat 
still, white, trembling, drooping--i think she would have swoon if I 
had not been there to uphold her. while I wa attend to her, bridget 
pass us, without a word to ani one, and, enter her cottage, she 
bar herself in, and left us without. 

all our endeavour were now direct to get luci back to the hous 
where she had tarri the night before. mistress clark told me that, 
not hear from me (some letter must have miscarried), she had grown 
impati and despairing, and had urg luci to the enterpris of 
come to seek her grandmother; not tell her, indeed, of the dread 
reput she possessed, or how we suspect her of have so 
fear blight that innoc girl; but, at the same time, hope 
much from the mysteri stir of blood, which mistress clark 
trust in for the remov of the curse. they had come, by a differ 
rout from that which I had taken, to a villag inn not far from 
coldholme, onli the night before. thi wa the first interview between 
ancestress and descendant. 

all through the sultri noon I wander along the tangl wood-path of 
the old neglect forest, think where to turn for remedi in a matter 
so complic and mysterious. meet a countryman, I ask my way to 
the nearest clergyman, and went, hope to obtain some counsel from 
him. but he prove to be a coars and common-mind man, give no time 
or attent to the intricaci of a case, but dash out a strong 
opinion involv immedi action. for instance, as soon as I name 
bridget fitzgerald, he exclaimed: 

'the coldholm witch! the irish papist! i'd have had her duck long 
sinc but for that other papist, sir philip tempest. He ha had to 
threaten honest folk about here over and over again, or they'd have had 
her up befor the justic for her black doings. and it' the law of 
the land that witch should be burnt! ay, and of scripture, too, sir! 
yet you see a papist, if he' a rich squire, can overrul both law and 
scripture. i'd carri a fagot myself to rid the countri of her!' 

such a one could give me no help. I rather drew back what I had alreadi 
said; and tri to make the parson forget it, by treat him to 
sever pot of beer, in the villag inn, to which we had adjourn for 
our confer at hi suggestion. I left him as soon as I could, and 
return to coldholme, shape my way past desert starkey 
manor-house, and come upon it by the back. At that side were the 
oblong remain of the old moat, the water of which lay placid and 
motionless under the crimson ray of the set sun; with the 
forest-tre lie straight along each side, and their deep-green 
foliag mirror to black in the burnish surfac of the moat 
below--and the broken sun-dial at the end nearest the hall--and the 
heron, stand on one leg at the water' edge, lazili look down for 
fish--th lone and desol hous scarc need the broken windows, 
the weed on the door-sill, the broken shutter softli flap to and 
fro in the twilight breeze, to fill up the pictur of desert and 
decay. I linger about the place until the grow dark warn me 
on. and then I pass along the path, cut by the order of the last 
ladi of starkey manor-house, that led me to bridget' cottage. I 
resolv at onc to see her; and, in spite of close doors--it might be 
of resolv will--sh should see me. So I knock at her door, gently, 
loudly, fiercely. I shook it so vehement that at length the old 
hing gave way, and with a crash it fell inwards, leav me suddenli 
face to face with bridget--i, red, heated, agit with my so 
long-baffl efforts--she, stiff as ani stone, stand right face 
me, her eye dilat with terror, her ashen lip trembling, but her 
bodi motionless. In her hand she held her crucifix, as if by that holi 
symbol she sought to oppos my entrance. At sight of me, her whole 
frame relaxed, and she sank back upon a chair. some mighti tension had 
given way. still her eye look fear into the gloom of the outer 
air, made more opaqu by the glimmer of the lamp inside, which she had 
place befor the pictur of the virgin. 

'i she there?' ask bridget, hoarsely. 

'no! who? I am alone. you rememb me.' 

'yes,' repli she, still terror-stricken. 'but she--that creature--ha 
been look in upon me through that window all day long. I close it 
up with my shawl; and then I saw her feet below the door, as long as it 
wa light, and I knew she heard my veri breathing--nay, worse, my veri 
prayers; and I could not pray, for her listen choke the word ere 
they rose to my lip. tell me, who is she?--what mean that doubl girl 
I saw thi morning? one had a look of my dead mary; but the other 
curdl my blood, and yet it wa the same!' 

she had taken hold of my arm, as if to secur herself some human 
companionship. she shook all over with the slight, never-ceas tremor 
of intens terror. I told her my tale, as I have told it you, spare 
none of the details. 

how mistress clark had inform me that the resembl had driven 
luci forth from her father' house--how I had disbelieved, until, with 
mine own eyes, I had seen anoth luci stand behind my lucy, the 
same in form and feature, but with the demon-soul look out of the 
eyes. I told her all, I say, believ that she--whos curs wa 
work so upon the life of her innoc grandchild--wa the onli 
person who could find the remedi and the redemption. when I had done, 
she sat silent for mani minutes. 

'you love mary' child?' she asked. 

'I do, in spite of the fear work of the curse--i love her. yet I 
shrink from her ever sinc that day on the moor-side. and men must 
shrink from one so accompanied; friend and lover must stand afar off. 
oh, bridget fitzgerald! loosen the curse! set her free!' 

'where is she?' 

I eagerli caught at the idea that her presenc wa needed, in order 
that, by some strang prayer or exorcism, the spell might be reversed. 

'I will go and bring her to you,' I exclaimed. but bridget tighten 
her hold upon my arm. 

'not so,' said she, in a low, hoars voice. 'it would kill me to see 
her again as I saw her thi morning. and I must live till I have work 
my work. leav me!' said she, suddenly, and again take up the cross. 
'I defi the demon I have call up. leav me to wrestl with it!' 

she stood up, as if in an ecstasi of inspiration, from which all fear 
wa banished. I lingered--why, I can hardli tell--until onc more she 
bade me begone. As I went along the forest way, I look back, and saw 
her plant the cross in the empti threshold, where the door had been. 

the next morn luci and I went to seek her, to bid her join her 
prayer with ours. the cottag stood open and wide to our gaze. No 
human be wa there: the cross remain on the threshold, but bridget 
wa gone. 




chapter 3 


what wa to be done next? wa the question that I ask myself. As for 
lucy, she would fain have submit to the doom that lay upon her. her 
gentl and piety, under the pressur of so horribl a life, seem 
over-pass to me. she never complained. mrs. clark complain more 
than ever. As for me, I wa more in love with the real luci than ever; 
but I shrunk from the fals similitud with an intens proport 
to my love. I found out by instinct that mrs. clark had occasion 
temptat to leav lucy. the good lady' nerv were shaken, and, 
from what she said, I could almost have conclud that the object of 
the doubl wa to drive away from luci thi last and almost earliest 
friend. At times, I could scarc bear to own it, but I myself felt 
inclin to turn recreant; and I would accus luci of be too 
patient--too resigned. one after another, she won the littl children 
of coldholme. (mrs. clark and she had resolv to stay there, for wa 
it not as good a place as ani other to such as they? and did not all 
our faint hope rest on bridget--nev seen or heard of now, but still 
we trust to come back, or give some token?) so, as I say, one after 
another, the littl children came about my lucy, won by her soft tones, 
and her gentl smiles, and kind actions. alas! one after anoth they 
fell away, and shrunk from her path with blanch terror; and we too 
sure guess the reason why. It wa the last drop. I could bear it no 
longer. I resolv no more to linger around the spot, but to go back to 
my uncle, and among the learn divin of the citi of london, seek for 
some power wherebi to annul the curse. 

My uncle, meanwhile, had obtain all the requisit testimoni 
relat to lucy' descent and birth, from the irish lawyers, and from 
mr. gisborne. the latter gentleman had written from abroad (he wa 
again serv in the austrian army), a letter altern passion 
self-reproach and stoical repellent. It wa evid that when he 
thought of mary--h short life--how he had wrong her, and of her 
violent death, he could hardli find word sever enough for hi own 
conduct; and from thi point of view, the curs that bridget had laid 
upon him and hi wa regard by him as a prophet doom, to the 
utter of which she wa move by a higher power, work for the 
fulfil of a deeper vengeanc than for the death of the poor dog. 
but then, again, when he came to speak of hi daughter, the repugn 
which the conduct of the demoniac creatur had produc in hi mind, 
wa but ill disguis under a show of profound indiffer as to 
lucy' fate. one almost felt as if he would have been as content to put 
her out of existence, as he would have been to destroy some disgust 
reptil that had invad hi chamber or hi couch. 

the great fitzgerald properti wa lucy's; and that wa all--wa 
nothing. 

My uncl and I sat in the gloom of a london novemb evening, in our 
hous in ormond street. _i_ wa out of health, and felt as if I were in 
an inextric coil of misery. luci and I wrote to each other, but 
that wa little; and we dare not see each other for dread of the 
fear third, who had more than onc taken her place at our meetings. 
My uncl had, on the day I speak of, bidden prayer to be put up, on 
the ensu sabbath, in mani a church and meeting-hous in london, for 
one grievous torment by an evil spirit. He had faith in prayers--i 
had none; I wa fast lose faith in all things. So we sat--h tri 
to interest me in the old talk of other days, I oppress by one 
thought--when our old servant, anthony, open the door, and, without 
speaking, show in a veri gentlemanli and prepossess man, who had 
someth remark about hi dress, betray hi profess to be 
that of the roman cathol priesthood. He glanc at my uncl first, 
then at me. It wa to me he bowed. 'I did not give my name,' said he, 
'becaus you would hardli have recognis it; unless, sir, when in the 
north, you heard of father bernard, the chaplain at stoney hurst?' 

I rememb afterward that I had heard of him, but at the time I had 
utterli forgotten it; so I profess myself a complet stranger to him; 
while my ever-hospit uncle, although hate a papist as much as it 
wa in hi natur to hate anything, place a chair for the visitor, and 
bade anthoni bring glass and a fresh jug of claret. 

father bernard receiv thi courtesi with the grace eas and 
pleasant acknowledg which belong to the man of the world. then he 
turn to scan me with hi keen glance. after some slight conversation, 
enter into on hi part, I am certain, with an intent of 
discov on what term of confid I stood with my uncle, he 
paused, and said gravely: 

'I am sent here with a messag to you, sir, from a woman to whom you 
have shown kindness, and who is one of my penitents, in antwerp--on 
bridget fitzgerald.' 

'bridget fitzgerald!' exclaim I. 'in antwerp? tell me, sir, all that 
you can about her.' 

'there is much to be said,' he replied. 'but may I inquir if thi 
gentleman--if your uncl is acquaint with the particular of which 
you and I stand informed?' 

'all that I know, he knows,' said I, eagerli lay my hand on my 
uncle' arm, as he made a motion as if to quit the room. 

'then I have to speak befor two gentlemen who, howev they may differ 
from me in faith, are yet fulli impress with the fact, that there are 
evil power go about continu to take cogniz of our evil 
thoughts; and, if their master give them power, to bring them into 
overt action. such is my theori of the natur of that sin, of which I 
dare not disbelieve--a some sceptic would have us do--th sin of 
witchcraft. Of thi deadli sin, you and I are awar bridget fitzgerald 
ha been guilty. sinc you saw her last, mani prayer have been offer 
in our churches, mani mass sung, mani penanc undergone, in order 
that, if god and the holi saint so will it, her sin might be blot 
out. but it ha not been so willed.' 

'explain to me,' said I, 'who you are, and how you come connect with 
bridget. whi is she at antwerp? I pray you, sir, tell me more. If I am 
impatient, excus me; I am ill and feverish, and in consequ 
bewildered.' 

there wa someth to me inexpress sooth in the tone of voic 
with which he began to narrate, as it were from the beginning, hi 
acquaint with bridget. 

'I had known mr. and mrs. starkey dure their resid abroad, and so 
it fell out natur that, when I came as chaplain to the sherburn 
at stoney hurst, our acquaint wa renewed; and thu I becam the 
confessor of the whole family, isol as they were from the offic 
of the church, sherburn be their nearest neighbour who profess 
the true faith. Of course, you are awar that fact reveal in 
confess are seal as in the grave; but I learnt enough of bridget' 
charact to be convinc that I had to do with no common woman; one 
power for good as for evil. I believ that I wa abl to give her 
spiritu assist from time to time, and that she look upon me as 
a servant of that holi church, which ha such wonder power of move 
men' hearts, and reliev them of the burden of their sins. I have 
known her cross the moor on the wildest night of storm, to confess 
and be absolved; and then she would return, calm and subdued, to her 
daili work about her mistress, no one wit where she had been dure 
the hour that most pass in sleep upon their beds. after her 
daughter' departure--aft mary' mysteri disappearance--i had to 
impos mani a long penance, in order to wash away the sin of impati 
repin that wa fast lead her into the deeper guilt of blasphemy. 
she set out on that long journey of which you have possibl heard--that 
fruitless journey in search of mary--and dure her absence, my 
superior order my return to my former duti at antwerp, and for 
mani year I heard no more of bridget. 

'not mani month ago, as I wa pass homeward in the evening, along 
one of the street near st. jacques, lead into the meer straet, I 
saw a woman sit crouch up under the shrine of the holi mother of 
sorrows. her hood wa drawn over her head, so that the shadow caus by 
the light of the lamp abov fell deep over her face; her hand were 
clasp round her knees. It wa evid that she wa some one in 
hopeless trouble, and as such it wa my duti to stop and speak. I 
natur address her first in flemish, believ her to be one of 
the lower class of inhabitants. she shook her head, but did not look 
up. then I tri french, and she repli in that language, but speak 
it so indifferently, that I wa sure she wa either english or irish, 
and consequ spoke to her in my own nativ tongue. she recognis 
my voice; and, start up, caught at my robes, drag me befor the 
bless shrine, and throw herself down, and forc me, as much by 
her evid desir as by her action, to kneel besid her, she 
exclaimed: 

'"o holi virgin! you will never hearken to me again, but hear him; for 
you know him of old, that he doe your bidding, and strive to heal 
broken hearts. hear him!" 

'she turn to me. 

'"she will hear you, if you will onli pray. she never hear me: she and 
all the saint in heaven cannot hear my prayers, for the evil one 
carri them off, as he carri that first away. O, father bernard, 
pray for me!" 

'I pray for one in sore distress, of what natur I could not say; but 
the holi virgin would know. bridget held me fast, gasp with 
eager at the sound of my words. when I had ended, I rose, and, 
make the sign of the cross over her, I wa go to bless her in the 
name of the holi church, when she shrank away like some terrifi 
creature, and said: 

'"i am guilti of deadli sin, and am not shriven." 

'"arise, my daughter," said I, "and come with me." and I led the way 
into one of the confession of st. jacques. 

'she knelt; I listened. No word came. the evil power had stricken her 
dumb, as I heard afterward they had mani a time before, when she 
approach confession. 

'she wa too poor to pay for the necessari form of exorcism; and 
hitherto those priest to whom she had address herself were either so 
ignor of the mean of her broken french, or her irish-english, or 
els esteem her to be one crazed--as, indeed, her wild and excit 
manner might easili have led ani one to think--that they had neglect 
the sole mean of loosen her tongue, so that she might confess her 
deadli sin, and after due penance, obtain absolution. but I knew 
bridget of old, and felt that she wa a penit sent to me. I went 
through those holi offic appoint by our church for the relief of 
such a case. I wa the more bound to do this, as I found that she had 
come to antwerp for the sole purpos of discov me, and make 
confess to me. Of the natur of that fear confess I am 
forbidden to speak. much of it you know; possibl all. 

'it now remain for her to free herself from mortal guilt, and to set 
other free from the consequ thereof. No prayer, no masses, will 
ever do it, although they may strengthen her with that strength by 
which alon act of deepest love and purest self-devot may be 
performed. her word of passion, and cri for revenge--h unholi 
prayer could never reach the ear of the holi saints! other power 
intercept them, and wrought so that the curs thrown up to heaven 
have fallen on her own flesh and blood; and so, through her veri 
strength of love, have bruis and crush her heart. henceforward her 
former self must be buried,--yea, buri quick, if need be,--but never 
more to make sign, or utter cri on earth! she ha becom a poor clare, 
in order that, by perpetu penanc and constant servic of others, she 
may at length so act as to obtain final absolut and rest for her 
soul. until then, the innoc must suffer. It is to plead for the 
innoc that I come to you; not in the name of the witch, bridget 
fitzgerald, but of the penit and servant of all men, the poor clare, 
sister magdalen.' 

'sir,' said I, 'I listen to your request with respect; onli I may tell 
you it is not need to urg me to do all that I can on behalf of one, 
love for whom is part of my veri life. If for a time I have absent 
myself from her, it is to think and work for her redemption. I, a 
member of the english church--mi uncle, a puritan--pray morn and 
night for her by name: the congreg of london, on the next 
sabbath, will pray for one unknown, that she may be set free from the 
power of darkness. moreover, I must tell you, sir, that those evil 
one touch not the great calm of her soul. she live her own pure and 
love life, unharm and untainted, though all men fall off from her. 
I would I could have her faith!' 

My uncl now spoke. 

'nephew,' said he, 'it seem to me that thi gentleman, although 
profess what I consid an erron creed, ha touch upon the 
right point in exhort bridget to act of love and mercy, wherebi to 
wipe out her sin of hate and vengeance. let us strive after our 
fashion, by almsgiv and visit of the needi and fatherless, to 
make our prayer acceptable. meanwhile, I myself will go down into the 
north, and take charg of the maiden. I am too old to be daunt by man 
or demon. I will bring her to thi hous as to a home; and let the 
doubl come if it will! A compani of godli divin shall give it the 
meeting, and we will tri issue.' 

the kindli brave old man! but father bernard sat on musing. 

'all hate,' said he, 'cannot be quench in her heart; all christian 
forgiv cannot have enter into her soul, or the demon would have 
lost it power. you said, I think, that her grandchild wa still 
tormented?' 

'still tormented!' I replied, sadly, think of mistress clarke' last 
letter. 

He rose to go. We afterward heard that the occas of hi come to 
london wa a secret polit mission on behalf of the jacobites. 
nevertheless, he wa a good and a wise man. 

month and month pass away without ani change. luci entreat my 
uncl to leav her where she was,--dreading, as I learnt, lest if she 
came, with her fear companion, to dwell in the same hous with me, 
that my love could not stand the repeat shock to which I should be 
doomed. and thi she thought from no distrust of the strength of my 
affection, but from a kind of piti sympathi for the terror to the 
nerv which she observ that the demoniac visit caus in all. 

I wa restless and miserable. I devot myself to good works; but I 
perform them from no spirit of love, but sole from the hope of 
reward and payment, and so the reward wa never granted. At length, I 
ask my uncle' leav to travel; and I went forth, a wanderer, with no 
distinct end than that of mani anoth wanderer--to get away from 
myself. A strang impuls led me to antwerp, in spite of the war and 
commot then rage in the low countries--or rather, perhaps, the 
veri crave to becom interest in someth external, led me into 
the thick of the struggl then go on with the austrians. the citi 
of flander were all full at that time of civil disturb and 
rebellions, onli kept down by force, and the presenc of an austrian 
garrison in everi place. 

I arriv in antwerp, and made inquiri for father bernard. He wa away 
in the countri for a day or two. then I ask my way to the convent of 
poor clares; but, be healthi and prosperous, I could onli see the 
dim, pent-up, grey walls, shut close in by narrow streets, in the 
lowest part of the town. My landlord told me, that had I been stricken 
by some loathsom disease, or in desper case of ani kind, the poor 
clare would have taken me, and tend me. He spoke of them as an order 
of merci of the strictest kind, dress scantili in the coarsest 
materials, go barefoot, live on what the inhabit of antwerp 
chose to bestow, and share even those fragment and crumb with the 
poor and helpless that swarm all around; receiv no letter or 
commun with the outer world; utterli dead to everyth but the 
allevi of suffering. He smile at my inquir whether I could get 
speech of one of them; and told me that they were even forbidden to 
speak for the purpos of beg their daili food; while yet they 
lived, and fed other upon what wa given in charity. 

'but,' exclaim I, 'suppos all men forgot them! would they quietli 
lie down and die, without make sign of their extremity?' 

'if such were their rule, the poor clare would willingli do it; but 
their founder appoint a remedi for such extrem case as you suggest. 
they have a bell--'ti but a small one, as I have heard, and ha yet 
never been rung in the memori of man: when the poor clare have been 
without food for twenty-four hours, they may ring thi bell, and then 
trust to our good peopl of antwerp for rush to the rescu of the 
poor clares, who have taken such bless care of us in all our 
straits.' 

It seem to me that such rescu would be late in the day; but I did 
not say what I thought. I rather turn the conversation, by ask my 
landlord if he knew, or had ever heard, anyth of a certain sister 
magdalen. 

'yes,' said he, rather under hi breath; 'new will creep out, even 
from a convent of poor clares. sister magdalen is either a great sinner 
or a great saint. she doe more, as I have heard, than all the other 
nun put together; yet, when last month they would fain have made her 
mother-superior, she beg rather that they would place her below all 
the rest, and make her the meanest servant of all.' 

'you never saw her?' ask I. 

'never,' he replied. 

I wa weari of wait for father bernard, and yet I linger in 
antwerp. the polit state of thing becam wors than ever, 
increas to it height by the scarciti of food consequ on mani 
defici harvests. I saw group of fierce, squalid men, at everi 
corner of the street, glare out with wolfish eye at my sleek skin 
and handsom clothes. 

At last father bernard returned. We had a long conversation, in which 
he told me that, curious enough, mr. gisborne, lucy' father, wa 
serv in one of the austrian regiments, then in garrison at antwerp. 
I ask father bernard if he would make us acquainted; which he 
consent to do. but, a day or two afterwards, he told me that, on 
hear my name, mr. gisborn had declin respond to ani advanc 
on my part, say he had abjur hi country, and hate hi 
countrymen. 

probabl he recollect my name in connect with that of hi daughter 
lucy. anyhow, it wa clear enough that I had no chanc of make hi 
acquaintance. father bernard confirm me in my suspicion of the 
hidden fermentation, for some come evil, work among the 'blouses' 
of antwerp, and he would fain have had me depart from out the city; but 
I rather crave the excit of danger, and stubbornli refus to 
leave. 

one day, when I wa walk with him in the place verte, he bow to an 
austrian officer, who wa cross toward the cathedral. 

'that is mr. gisborne,' said he, as soon as the gentleman wa past. 

I turn to look at the tall, slight figur of the officer. He carri 
himself in a state manner, although he wa past middl age, and from 
hi years, might have had some excus for a slight stoop. As I look 
at the man, he turn round, hi eye met mine, and I saw hi face. 
deepli lined, sallow, and scath wa that countenance; scar by 
passion as well as by the fortun of war. 'twa but a moment our eye 
met. We each turn round, and went on our separ way. 

but hi whole appear wa not one to be easili forgotten; the 
thorough appoint of the dress, and evid thought bestow on it, 
made but an incongru whole with the dark, gloomi express of hi 
countenance. becaus he wa lucy' father, I sought instinct to 
meet him everywhere. At last he must have becom awar of my 
pertinacity, for he gave me a haughti scowl whenev I pass him. In 
one of these encounters, however, I chanc to be of some servic to 
him. He wa turn the corner of a street, and came suddenli on one of 
the group of discont fleme of whom I have spoken. some word 
were exchanged, when my gentleman out with hi sword, and with a slight 
but skil cut drew blood from one of those who had insult him, as 
he fancied, though I wa too far off to hear the words. they would all 
have fallen upon him had I not rush forward and rais the cry, then 
well known in antwerp, of rally, to the austrian soldier who were 
perpetu patrol the streets, and who came in number to the 
rescue. I think that neither mr. gisborn nor the mutin group of 
plebeian owe me much gratitud for my interference. He had plant 
himself against a wall, in a skil attitud of fence, readi with hi 
bright glanc rapier to do battl with all the heavy, fierce, unarm 
men, some six or seven in number. but when hi own soldier came up, he 
sheath hi sword; and, give some careless word of command, sent 
them away again, and continu hi saunter all alon down the street, 
the workmen snarl in hi rear, and more than half-inclin to fall 
on me for my cri for rescue. I care not if they did, my life seem so 
dreari a burden just then; and, perhaps, it wa thi dare loiter 
among them that prevent their attack me. instead, they suffer me 
to fall into convers with them; and I heard some of their 
grievances. sore and heavi to be born were they, and no wonder the 
suffer were savag and desperate. 

the man whom gisborn had wound across hi face would fain have got 
out of me the name of hi aggressor, but I refus to tell it. anoth 
of the group heard hi inquiry, and made answer: 

'I know the man. He is one gisborne, aide-de-camp to the 
general-commandant. I know him well.' 

He began to tell some stori in connect with gisborn in a low and 
mutter voice; and while he wa relat a tale, which I saw excit 
their evil blood, and which they evid wish me not to hear, I 
saunter away and back to my lodgings. 

that night antwerp wa in open revolt. the inhabit rose in 
rebellion against their austrian masters. the austrians, hold the 
gate of the city, remain at first pretti quiet in the citadel; only, 
from time to time, the boom of a great cannon swept sullenli over the 
town. but, if they expect the disturb to die away, and spend 
itself in a few hours' fury, they were mistaken. In a day or two, the 
rioter held possess of the princip municip buildings. then the 
austrian pour forth in bright flame array, calm and smiling, as 
they march to the post assigned, as if the fierc mob were no more 
to them than the swarm of buzz summer flies. their practis 
manoeuvres, their well-aim shot, told with terribl effect; but in 
the place of one slain rioter, three sprang up of hi blood to aveng 
hi loss. but a deadli foe, a ghastli alli of the austrians, wa at 
work. food, scarc and dear for months, wa now hardli to be obtain 
at ani price. desper effort were be made to bring provis 
into the city, for the rioter had friend without. close to the citi 
port nearest to the scheldt, a great struggl took place. I wa there, 
help the rioters, whose caus I had adopted. We had a savag 
encount with the austrians. number fell on both sides; I saw them 
lie bleed for a moment; then a volley of smoke obscur them; and 
when it clear away, they were dead--trampl upon or smothered, 
press down and hidden by the freshly-wound whom those last gun had 
brought low. and then a grey-rob and grey-veil figur came right 
across the flash guns, and stoop over some one, whose life-blood 
wa eb away; sometim it wa to give him drink from can which 
they carri slung at their sides, sometim I saw the cross held abov 
a die man, and rapid prayer were be uttered, unheard by men in 
that hellish din and clangour, but listen to by one above. I saw all 
thi as in a dream: the realiti of that stern time wa battl and 
carnage. but I knew that these grey figures, their bare feet all wet 
with blood, and their face hidden by their veils, were the poor 
clares--s forth now becaus dire agoni wa abroad and immin 
danger at hand. therefore, they left their cloister shelter, and came 
into that thick and evil mêlée. 

close to me--driven past me by the struggl of mani fighters--cam the 
antwerp burgess with the scarce-h scar upon hi face; and in an 
instant more, he wa thrown by the press upon the austrian offic 
gisborne, and ere either had recov the shock, the burgess had 
recognis hi opponent. 

'ha! the englishman gisborne!' he cried, and threw himself upon him 
with redoubl fury. He had struck him hard--th englishman wa down; 
when out of the smoke came a dark-grey figure, and threw herself right 
under the uplift flash sword. the burgess' arm stood arrested. 
neither austrian nor anversoi willingli harm the poor clares. 

'leav him to me!' said a low stern voice. 'he is mine enemy--min for 
mani years.' 

those word were the last I heard. I myself wa struck down by a 
bullet. I rememb noth more for days. when I came to myself, I wa 
at the extrem of weakness, and wa crave for food to recruit my 
strength. My landlord sat watch me. he, too, look pinch and 
shrunken; he had heard of my wound state, and sought me out. yes! the 
struggl still continued, but the famin wa sore; and some, he had 
heard, had die for lack of food. the tear stood in hi eye as he 
spoke. but soon he shook off hi weakness, and hi natur cheer 
returned. father bernard had been to see me--no one else. (who should, 
indeed?) father bernard would come back that afternoon--h had 
promised. but father bernard never came, although I wa up and dressed, 
and look eagerli for him. 

My landlord brought me a meal which he had cook himself: of what it 
wa compos he would not say, but it wa most excellent, and with 
everi mouth I seem to gain strength. the good man sat look at 
my evid enjoy with a happi smile of sympathy; but, as my 
appetit becam satisfied, I began to detect a certain wist in 
hi eyes, as if crave for the food I had so nearli devoured--for, 
indeed, at that time I wa hardli awar of the extent of the famine. 
suddenly, there wa a sound of mani rush feet past our window. My 
landlord open one of the side of it, the better to learn what wa 
go on. then we heard a faint, cracked, tinkl bell, come shrill 
upon clear and distinct from all other sounds. 'holi mother!' exclaim 
my landlord, 'the poor clares!' 

He snatch up the fragment of my meal, and cram them into my 
hands, bid me follow. down-stair he ran, clutch at more food, 
as the women of hi hous eagerli held it out to him; and in a moment 
we were in the street, move along with the great current, all tend 
toward the convent of the poor clares. and still, as if pierc our 
ear with it inarticul cry, came the shrill tinkl of the bell. In 
that strang crowd were old men trembl and sobbing, as they carri 
their littl pittanc of food; women with the tear run down their 
cheeks, who had snatch up what provis they had in the vessel in 
which they stood, so that the burden of these wa in mani case much 
greater than that which they contained; children, with flush faces, 
grasp tight the morsel of bitten cake or bread, in their eager 
to carri it safe to the help of the poor clares; strong men--yea, both 
anversoi and austrians--press onward with set teeth, and no word 
spoken; and over all, and through all, came that sharp tinkle--that cri 
for help in extremity. 

We met the first torrent of peopl return with blanch and piteou 
faces: they were issu out of the convent to make way for the 
offer of others. 'haste, haste!' said they. 

'A poor clare is dying! A poor clare is dead for hunger! god forgiv 
us, and our city!' 

We press on. the stream bore us along where it would. We were carri 
through refectories, bare and crumbless; into cell over whose door 
the conventu name of the occup wa written. thu it wa that I, 
with others, wa forc into sister magdalen' cell. On her couch lay 
gisborne, pale unto death, but not dead. By hi side wa a cup of 
water, and a small morsel of mouldi bread, which he had push out of 
hi reach, and could not move to obtain. over against hi bed were 
these words, copi in the english version: 'therefore, if thine enemi 
hunger, feed him; if he thirst, give him drink.' 

some of us gave him of our food, and left him eat greedily, like 
some famish wild animal. for now it wa no longer the sharp tinkle, 
but that one solemn toll, which in all christian countri tell of the 
pass of the spirit out of earthli life into eternity; and again a 
murmur gather and grew, as of mani peopl speak with awe breath, 
'A poor clare is dying! a poor clare is dead!' 

born along onc more by the motion of the crowd, we were carri into 
the chapel belong to the poor clares. On a bier befor the high 
altar, lay a woman--lay sister magdalen--lay bridget fitzgerald. By her 
side stood father bernard, in hi robe of office, and hold the 
crucifix on high while he pronounc the solemn absolut of the 
church, as to one who had newli confess herself of deadli sin. I 
push on with passion force, till I stood close to the die woman, 
as she receiv extrem unction amid the breathless and awe hush of 
the multitud around. her eye were glazing, her limb were stiffening; 
but when the rite wa over and finished, she rais her gaunt figur 
slowli up, and her eye brighten to a strang intens of joy, as, 
with the gestur of her finger and the trance-lik gleam of her eye, 
she seem like one who watch the disappear of some loath and 
fear creature. 

'she is freed from the curse!' said she, as she fell back dead. 

* * * * * 

now, of all our parti who had first listen to my ladi ludlow, mr. 
preston wa the onli one who had not told us something, either of 
information, tradition, history, or legend. We natur turn to him; 
but we did not like ask him directli for hi contribution, for he 
wa a grave, reserved, and silent man. 

He understood us, however, and, rous himself as it were, he said: 

'I know you wish me to tell you, in my turn, of someth which I have 
learnt or heard dure my life. I could tell you someth of my own 
life, and of a life dearer still to my memory; but I have shrunk from 
narrat anyth so pure personal. yet, shrink as I will, no other 
but those sad recollect will present themselv to my mind. I call 
them sad when I think of the end of it all. howev I am not go to 
moralize. If my dear brother' life and death doe not speak for 
itself, no word of mine will teach you what may be learnt from it.' 




loi the witch 

chapter 1 


In the year 1691, loi barclay stood on a littl wooden pier, steadi 
herself on the stabl land, in much the same manner as, eight or nine 
week ago, she had tri to steadi herself on the deck of the rock 
ship which had carri her across from old to new england. It seem as 
strang now to be on solid earth as it had been, not long ago, to be 
rock by the sea, both by day and by night; and the aspect of the land 
wa equal strange. the forest which show in the distanc all 
round, and which, in truth, were not veri far from the wooden hous 
form the town of boston, were of differ shade of green, and 
different, too, in shape of outlin to those which loi barclay knew 
well in her old home in warwickshire. her heart sank a littl as she 
stood alone, wait for the captain of the good ship redemption, the 
kind rough old sailor, who wa her onli known friend in thi unknown 
continent. captain holderness wa busy, however, as she saw, and it 
would probabl be some time befor he would be readi to attend, to her; 
so loi sat down on one of the cask that lay about, and wrap her 
grey duffl cloak tight around her, and shelter herself under her 
hood, as well as might be, from the pierc wind, which seem to 
follow those whom it had tyrann over at sea with a dog wish of 
still torment them on land. veri patient did loi sit there, 
although she wa weary, and shiver with cold; for the day wa sever 
for may, and the redemption, with store of necessari and comfort for 
the puritan colonist of new england, wa the earliest ship that had 
ventur across the seas. 

how could loi help think of the past, and specul on the 
future, as she sat on boston pier, at thi breathing-tim of her life? 
In the dim sea-mist which she gaze upon with ach eye (filled, 
against her will, with tears, from time to time), there rose the littl 
villag church of barford (not three mile from warwick--y may see it 
yet), where her father had preach ever sinc 1661, long befor she 
wa born. He and her mother both lay dead in barford churchyard; and 
the old low grey church could hardli come befor her vision without her 
see the old parsonag too, the cottag cover with austrian roses, 
and yellow jessamine, where she had been born, sole child of parent 
alreadi long past the prime of youth. she saw the path, not a hundr 
yard long, from the parsonag to the vestri door: that path which her 
father trod daily; for the vestri wa hi study, and the sanctum, where 
he pore over the ponder tome of the father, and compar their 
precept with those of the author of the anglican church of that 
day--th day of the later stuarts; for barford parsonag at that time 
scarc exceed in size and digniti the cottag by which it wa 
surrounded: it onli contain three room on a floor, and wa but two 
stori high. On the first, or ground floor, were the parlour, kitchen, 
and back or work kitchen; up-stairs, mr. and mrs. barclay' room, 
that belong to lois, and the maid-servant' room. If a guest came, 
loi left her own chamber, and share old clemence' bed. but those 
day were over. never more should loi see father or mother on earth; 
they slept, calm and still, in barford churchyard, careless of what 
becam of their orphan child, as far as earthli manifest of care 
or love went. and clemenc lay there too, bound down in her grassi bed 
by with of the briar-rose, which loi had train over those three 
preciou grave befor leav england for ever. 

there were some who would fain have kept her there; one who swore in 
hi heart a great oath unto the lord that he would seek her sooner or 
later, if she wa still upon the earth. but he wa the rich heir and 
onli son of the miller lucy, whose mill stood by the avon-sid in the 
grassi barford meadows, and hi father look higher for him than the 
penniless daughter of parson barclay (so low were clergymen esteem in 
those days!); and the veri suspicion of hugh lucy' attach to loi 
barclay made hi parent think it more prudent not to offer the orphan 
a home, although none other of the parishion had the means, even if 
they had the will, to do so. 

So loi swallow her tear down till the time came for crying, and 
act upon her mother' words: 

'lois, thi father is dead of thi terribl fever, and I am dying. nay, 
it is so, though I am easier from pain for these few hours, the lord be 
praised! the cruel men of the commonwealth have left thee veri 
friendless. thi father' onli brother wa shot down at edgehill. I, 
too, have a brother, though thou hast never heard me speak of him, for 
he wa a schismatic; and thi father and he had words, and he left for 
that new countri beyond the seas, without ever say farewel to us. 
but ralph wa a kind lad until he took up these new-fangl notions, 
and for the old days' sake he will take thee in, and love thee as a 
child, and place thee among hi children. blood is thicker than water. 
write to him as soon as I am gone--for lois, I am going--and I bless 
the lord that ha letten me join my husband again so soon.' such wa 
the selfish of conjug love; she thought littl of lois' 
desol in comparison with her rejoic over her speedi reunion 
with her dead husband! 'write to thine uncle, ralph hickson, salem, new 
england (put it down, child, on thi tablets), and say that I, henrietta 
barclay, charg him, for the sake of all he hold dear in heaven or on 
earth,--for hi salvation' sake, as well as for the sake of the old 
home at lester-bridge,--for the sake of the father and mother that gave 
us birth, as well as for the sake of the six littl children who lie 
dead between him and me,--that he take thee into hi home as if thou 
wert hi own flesh and blood, as inde thou art. He ha a wife and 
children of hi own, and no one need fear have thee, my lois, my 
darling, my baby, among hi household. oh, lois, would that thou wert 
die with me! the thought of thee make death sore!' loi comfort 
her mother more than herself, poor child, by promis to obey her die 
wish to the letter, and by express hope she dare not feel of her 
uncle' kindness. 

'promis me'--th die woman' breath came harder and harder--'that 
thou wilt go at once. the money our good will bring--th letter thi 
father wrote to captain holdernesse, hi old schoolfellow--th knowest 
all I would say--mi lois, god bless thee!' 

solemnli did loi promise; strictli she kept her word. It wa all the 
more easy, for hugh luci met her, and told her, in one great burst of 
love, of hi passion attachment, hi vehement struggl with hi 
father, hi impot at present, hi hope and resolv for the future. 
and, intermingl with all this, came such outrag threat and 
express of uncontrol vehemence, that loi felt that in barford 
she must not linger to be a caus of desper quarrel between father 
and son, while her absenc might soften down matters, so that either 
the rich old miller might relent, or--and her heart ach to think of 
the other possibility--hugh' love might cool, and the dear play-fellow 
of her childhood learn to forget. If not--if hugh were to be trust in 
one tith of what he said--god might permit him to fulfil hi resolv 
of come to seek her out befor mani year were over. It wa all in 
god' hands, and that wa best, thought loi barclay. 

she wa rous out of her tranc of recollect by captain 
holdernesse, who, have done all that wa necessari in the way of 
order and direct to hi mate, now came up to her, and, prais 
her for her quiet patience, told her that he would now take her to the 
widow smith's, a decent kind of house, where he and mani other sailor 
of the better order were in the habit of lodging, dure their stay on 
the new england shores. widow smith, he said, had a parlour for herself 
and her daughters, in which loi might sit, while he went about the 
busi that, as he had told her, would detain him in boston for a day 
or two, befor he could accompani her to her uncle' at salem. all thi 
had been to a certain degre arrang on ship-board; but captain 
holdernesse, for want of anyth els that he could think of to talk 
about, recapitul it as he and loi walk along. It wa hi way of 
show sympathi with the emot that made her grey eye full of 
tears, as she start up from the pier at the sound of hi voice. In 
hi heart he said, 'poor wench! poor wench! it' a strang land to her, 
and they are all strang folks, and, I reckon, she will be feel 
desolate. i'll tri and cheer her up.' So he talk on about hard facts, 
connect with the life that lay befor her, until they reach widow 
smith's; and perhap loi wa more brighten by thi style of 
conversation, and the new idea it present to her, than she would 
have been by the tenderest woman' sympathy. 

'they are a queer set, these new englanders,' said captain holdernesse. 
'they are rare chap for praying; down on their knee at everi turn of 
their life. folk are none so busi in a new country, els they would 
have to pray like me, with a "yo-hoy!" on each side of my prayers, and 
a rope cut like fire through my hand. yon pilot wa for call us 
all to thanksgiv for a good voyage, and lucki escap from the 
pirates; but I said I alway put up my thank on dri land, after I had 
got my ship into harbour. the french colonists, too, are vow 
vengeanc for the expedit against canada, and the peopl here are 
rage like heathens--at least, as like as godli folk can be--for the 
loss of their charter. all that is the news the pilot told me; for, for 
all he want us to be thanksgiv instead of cast the lead, he wa 
as down in the mouth as could be about the state of the country. but 
here we are at widow smith's! now, cheer up, and show the godli a 
pretti smile warwickshir lass!' 

anybodi would have smile at widow smith' greeting. she wa a comely, 
motherli woman, dress in the primmest fashion in vogu twenti year 
before, in england, among the class to which she belonged. but, 
somehow, her pleasant face gave the lie to her dress; were it as brown 
and sober-colour as could be, folk rememb it bright and cheerful, 
becaus it wa a part of widow smith herself. 

she kiss loi on both cheeks, befor she rightli understood who the 
stranger maiden was, onli becaus she wa a stranger, and look sad 
and forlorn; and then she kiss her again, becaus captain holderness 
commend her to the widow' good offices. and so she led loi by the 
hand into her rough, substanti log-house, over the door of which hung 
a great bough of a tree, by way of sign of entertain for man and 
horse. yet not all men were receiv by widow smith. To some she could 
be as cold and reserv as need be, deaf to all inquiri save 
one--wher els they could find accommodation? To thi question she 
would give a readi answer, and speed the unwelcom guest on hi way. 
widow smith wa guid in these matter by instinct: one glanc at a 
man' face told her whether or not she chose to have him as an inmat 
of the same hous as her daughters; and her prompt of decis in 
these matter gave her manner a kind of author which no one like to 
disobey, especi as she had stalwart neighbour within call to back 
her, if her assum deaf in the first instance, and her voic and 
gestur in the second, were not enough to give the would-b guest hi 
dismissal. widow smith chose her custom mere by their physic 
aspect; not one whit with regard to their appar worldli 
circumstances. those who had been stay at her hous once, alway 
came again, for she had the knack of make everi one beneath her roof 
comfort and at hi ease. her daughters, prudenc and hester, had 
somewhat of their mother' gifts, but not in such perfection. they 
reason a littl upon a stranger' appearance, instead of know at 
the first moment whether they like him or no; they notic the 
indic of hi clothes, the qualiti and cut thereof, as tell 
somewhat of hi station in society; they were more reserved, they 
hesit more than their mother; they had not her prompt authority, 
her happi power. their bread wa not so light, their cream went 
sometim to sleep when it should have been turn into butter, their 
ham were not alway 'just like the ham of the old country,' as their 
mother' were invari pronounc to be; yet they were good, orderly, 
kindli girls, and rose and greet loi with a friendli shake of the 
hand, as their mother, with her arm round the stranger' waist, led her 
into the privat room which she call her parlour. the aspect of thi 
room wa strang in the english girl' eyes. the log of which the 
hous wa built, show here and there through the mud plaster, 
although befor both plaster and log were hung the skin of mani 
curiou animals,--skin present to the widow by mani a trader of her 
acquaintance, just as her sailor guest brought her anoth descript 
of gift--shells, string of wampum-beads, sea-birds' eggs, and present 
from the old country. the room wa more like a small museum of natur 
histori of these day than a parlour; and it had a strange, peculiar, 
but not unpleas smell about it, neutral in some degre by the 
smoke from the enorm trunk of pinewood which smoulder on the 
hearth. 

the instant their mother told them that captain holderness wa in the 
outer room, the girl began put away their spinning-wheel and 
knitting-needles, and prepar for a meal of some kind; what meal, 
lois, sit there and unconsci watching, could hardli tell. 
first, dough wa set to rise for cakes; then came out of a corner 
cupboard--a present from england--an enorm squar bottl of a 
cordial call golden wasser; next, a mill for grind chocolate--a 
rare unusu treat anywher at that time; then a great cheshir cheese. 
three venison steak were cut readi for broiling, fat cold pork slice 
up and treacl pour over it, a great pie someth like a mince-pie, 
but which the daughter spoke of with honour as the 'punken-pie,' fresh 
and salt fish brandered, oyster cook in variou ways. loi wonder 
where would be the end of the provis for hospit receiv the 
stranger from the old country. At length everyth wa place on the 
table, the hot food smoking; but all wa cool, not to say cold, befor 
elder hawkin (an old neighbour of much reput and standing, who had 
been invit in by widow smith to hear the news) had finish hi 
grace, into which wa embodi thanksgiv for the past and prayer 
for the futur live of everi individu present, adapt to their 
sever cases, as far as the elder could guess at them from 
appearances. thi grace might not have end so soon as it did, had it 
not been for the somewhat impati drum of hi knife-handl on the 
tabl with which captain holderness accompani the latter half of the 
elder' words. 

when they first sat down to their meal, all were too hungri for much 
talking; but as their appetit diminish their curios increased, 
and there wa much to be told and heard on both sides. with all the 
english intellig loi was, of course, well acquainted; but she 
listen with natur attent to all that wa said about the new 
country, and the new peopl among whom she had come to live. her father 
had been a jacobite, as the adher of the stuart were begin at 
thi time to be called. hi father, again, had been a follow of 
archbishop laud; so loi had hitherto heard littl of the conversation, 
and seen littl of the way of the puritans. elder hawkin wa one of 
the strictest of the strict, and evid hi presenc kept the two 
daughter of the hous consider in awe. but the widow herself wa a 
privileg person; her known good of heart (the effect of which 
had been experienc by many) gave her the liberti of speech which wa 
tacitli deni to many, under penalti of be esteem ungodli if they 
infring certain convent limits. and captain holderness and hi 
mate spoke out their minds, let who would be present. So that on thi 
first land in new england, loi was, as it were, gentli let down 
into the midst of the puritan peculiarities, and yet they were 
suffici to make her feel veri lone and strange. 

the first subject of convers wa the present state of the 
colony--loi soon found out that, although at the begin she wa not 
a littl perplex by the frequent refer to name of place which 
she natur associ with the old country. widow smith wa 
speaking: 'in the counti of essex the folk are order to keep four 
scouts, or compani of minute-men; six person in each company; to be 
on the look-out for the wild indians, who are for ever stir about 
in the woods, stealthi brute as they are! I am sure, I got such a 
fright the first harvest-tim after I came over to new england, I go on 
dreaming, now near twenti year after lothrop' business, of paint 
indians, with their shaven scalp and their war-streaks, lurk behind 
the trees, and come nearer and nearer with their noiseless steps.' 

'yes,' broke in one of her daughters; 'and, mother, don't you rememb 
how hannah benson told us how her husband had cut down everi tree near 
hi hous at deerbrook, in order that no one might come near him, under 
cover; and how one even she wa a-sit in the twilight, when all 
her famili were gone to bed, and her husband gone off to plymouth on 
business, and she saw a log of wood, just like a trunk of a fell 
tree, lie in the shadow, and thought noth of it, till, on look 
again a while after, she fanci it wa come a bit nearer to the house, 
and how her heart turn sick with fright, and how she dare not stir 
at first, but shut her eye while she count a hundred, and look 
again, and the shadow wa deeper, but she could see that the log wa 
nearer; so she ran in and bolt the door, and went up to where her 
eldest lad lay. It wa elijah, and he wa but sixteen then; but he rose 
up at hi mother' words, and took hi father' long duck-gun down, and 
he tri the loading, and spoke for the first time to put up a prayer 
that god would give hi aim good guidance, and went to a window that 
gave a view upon the side where the log lay, and fired, and no one 
dare to look what came of it, but all the household read the 
scriptures, and pray the whole night long, till morn came and 
show a long stream of blood lie on the grass close by the log, 
which the full sunlight show to be no log at all, but just a red 
indian cover with bark, and paint most skilfully, with hi 
war-knif by hi side.' 

all were breathless with listening, though to most the story, or such 
like it, were familiar. then anoth took up the tale of horror: 

'and the pirat have been down at marblehead sinc you were here, 
captain holdernesse. 'twa onli the last winter they landed,--french 
papist pirates; and the peopl kept close within their houses, for they 
knew not what would come of it; and they drag folk ashore. there wa 
one woman among those folk--prison from some vessel, doubtless--and 
the pirat took them by forc to the inland marsh; and the marblehead 
folk kept still and quiet, everi gun loaded, and everi ear on the 
watch, for who knew but what the wild sea-robb might take a turn on 
land next; and, in the dead of the night, they heard a woman' loud and 
piti outcri from the marsh, 'lord jesu! have merci on me! save me 
from the power of man, O lord jesu!' and the blood of all who heard the 
cri ran cold with terror, till old nanc hickson, who had been 
stone-deaf and bedridden for years, stood up in the midst of the folk 
all gather togeth in her grandson' house, and said, that as they, 
the dweller in marblehead, had not had brave heart or faith enough to 
go and succour the helpless, that cri of a die woman should be in 
their ears, and in their children' ears, till the end of the world. 
and nanc drop down dead as soon as she had made an end of speaking, 
and the pirat set sail from marblehead at morn dawn; but the folk 
there hear the cri still, shrill and pitiful, from the wast marshes, 
"lord jesu! have merci on me! save me from the power of man, O lord 
jesu!"' 

'and by token,' said elder hawkins' deep bass voice, speak with the 
strong nasal twang of the puritan (who, say butler, 

"blasphem custard through the nose"), 

'godli mr. noy ordain a fast at marblehead, and preach a 
soul-stir discours on the words; "inasmuch as ye did it not unto 
one of the least of these, my brethren, ye did it not unto me." but it 
ha been born in upon me at times, whether the whole vision of the 
pirat and the cri of the woman wa not a devic of satan' to sift 
the marblehead folk, and see what fruit their doctrin bore, and so to 
condemn them in the sight of the lord. If it were so, the enemi had a 
great triumph, for assuredli it wa no part of christian men to leav a 
helpless woman unaid in her sore distress.' 

'but, elder,' said widow smith, 'it wa no vision; they were real 
live men who went ashore, men who broke down branch and left their 
footmark on the ground.' 

'a for that matter, satan hath mani powers, and if it be the day when 
he is permit to go about like a roar lion, he will not stick at 
trifles, but make hi work complete. I tell you, mani men are spiritu 
enemi in visibl forms, permit to roam about the wast place of 
the earth. I myself believ that these red indian are inde the evil 
creatur of whom we read in holi scripture; and there is no doubt that 
they are in leagu with those abomin papists, the french peopl in 
canada. I have heard tell, that the french pay the indian so much gold 
for everi dozen scalp off englishmen' heads.' 

'pretti cheer talk this,' said captain holderness to lois, 
perceiv her blanch cheek and terror-stricken mien. 'thou art 
think that thou hadst better have stay at barford, i'll answer for 
it, wench. but the devil is not so black as he is painted.' 

'ho! there again!' said elder hawkins. 'the devil is painted, it hath 
been said so from old times; and are not these indian painted, even 
like unto their father?' 

'but is it all true?' ask lois, aside, of captain holdernesse, 
let the elder hold forth unheed by her, though listen to, 
however, with the utmost rever by the two daughter of the house. 

'mi wench,' said the old sailor, 'thou hast come to a countri where 
there are mani perils, both from land and from sea. the indian hate 
the white men. whether other white men' (mean the french away to the 
north) 'have hound on the savages, or whether the english have taken 
their land and hunting-ground without due recompense, and so rais 
the cruel vengeanc of the wild creatures--who knows? but it is true 
that it is not safe to go far into the woods, for fear of the lurk 
paint savages; nor ha it been safe to build a dwell far from a 
settlement; and it take a brave heart to make a journey from one town 
to another, and folk do say the indian creatur rise up out of the 
veri ground to waylay the english; and then offer affirm they are all 
in leagu with satan to affright the christian out of the heathen 
countri over which he ha reign so long. then, again, the seashor is 
infest by pirates, the scum of all nations: they land, and plunder, 
and ravage, and burn, and destroy. folk get affright of the real 
dangers, and in their fright imagine, perchance, danger that are not. 
but who knows? holi scriptur speak of witch and wizards, and of the 
power of the evil one in desert places; and even in the old countri we 
have heard tell of those who have sold their soul for ever for the 
littl power they get for a few year on earth.' 

By thi time the whole tabl wa silent, listen to the captain; it 
wa just one of those chanc silenc that sometim occur, without ani 
appar reason, and often without ani appar consequence. but all 
present had reason, befor mani month had-pass over, to rememb the 
word which loi spoke in answer, although her voic wa low, and she 
onli thought, in the interest of the moment, of be heard by her old 
friend the captain. 

'they are fear creatures, the witches! and yet I am sorri for the 
poor old women, whilst I dread them. We had one in barford, when I wa 
a littl child. No one knew whenc she came, but she settl herself 
down in a mud hut by the common side; and there she lived, she and her 
cat.' (at the mention of the cat, elder hawkin shook hi head long and 
gloomily.) 'no one knew how she lived, if it were not on nettl and 
scrap of oatmeal and such-lik food given her more for fear than for 
pity. she went double, alway talk and mutter to herself. folk 
said she snare bird and rabbits, in the thicket that came down to her 
hovel. how it came to pass I cannot say, but mani a one fell sick in 
the village, and much cattl die one spring, when I wa near four 
year old. I never heard much about it, for my father said it wa ill 
talk about such things; I onli know I got a sick fright one 
afternoon, when the maid had gone out for milk and had taken me with 
her, and we were pass a meadow where the avon, circling, make a 
deep round pool, and there wa a crowd of folk, all still--and a still, 
breathless crowd make the heart beat wors than a shouting, noisi one. 
they were all gaze toward the water, and the maid held me up in her 
arm to see the sight abov the shoulder of the people; and I saw old 
hannah in the water, her grey hair all stream down her shoulders, 
and her face bloodi and black with the stone and the mud they had been 
throw at her, and her cat tie round her neck. I hid my face, I 
know, as soon as I saw the fearsom sight, for her eye met mine as 
they were glare with fury--poor, helpless, bait creature!--and she 
caught the sight of me, and cri out, "parson' wench, parson' wench, 
yonder, in thi nurse' arms, thi dad hath never tri for to save me, 
and none shall save thee when thou art brought up for a witch." oh! the 
word rang in my ears, when I wa drop asleep, for year after. I 
use to dream that I wa in that pond, all men hate me with their 
eye becaus I wa a witch; and, at times, her black cat use to seem 
live again, and say over those dread words.' 

loi stopped: the two daughter look at her excit with a kind of 
shrink surprise, for the tear were in her eyes. elder hawkin shook 
hi head, and mutter text from scripture; but cheer widow smith, 
not like the gloomi turn of the conversation, tri to give it a 
lighter cast by saying, 'and I don't doubt but what the parson' bonni 
lass ha bewitch mani a one since, with her dimpl and her pleasant 
ways--eh, captain holdernesse? it' you must tell us tale of thi 
young lass' do in england.' 

'ay, ay,' said the captain, 'there' one under her charm in 
warwickshir who will never get the better of it, i'm thinking.' 

elder hawkin rose to speak; he stood lean on hi hands, which were 
place on the table: 'brethren,' said he, 'I must upbraid you if ye 
speak lightly; charm and witchcraft are evil things. I trust thi 
maiden hath had noth to do with them, even in thought. but my mind 
misgiv me at her story. the hellish witch might have power from satan 
to infect her mind, she be yet a child, with the deadli sin. instead 
of vain talking, I call upon you all to join with me in prayer for thi 
stranger in our land, that her heart may be purg from all iniquity. 
let us pray.' 

'come, there' no harm in that,' said the captain; 'but, elder hawkins, 
when you are at work, just pray for us all, for I am afeard there be 
some of us need purg from iniqu a good deal more than loi 
barclay, and a prayer for a man never doe mischief.' 

captain holderness had busi in boston which detain him there for 
a coupl of days, and dure that time loi remain with the widow 
smith, see what wa to be seen of the new land that contain her 
futur home. the letter of her die mother wa sent off to salem, 
meanwhile, by a lad go thither, in order to prepar her uncl ralph 
hickson for hi niece' coming, as soon as captain holderness could 
find leisur to take her; for he consid her given into hi own 
person charge, until he could consign her to her uncle' care. when 
the time came for go to salem, loi felt veri sad at leav the 
kindli woman under whose roof she had been staying, and look back as 
long as she could see anyth of widow smith' dwelling. she wa 
pack into a rough kind of countri cart, which just held her and 
captain holdernesse, besid the driver. there wa a basket of 
provis under their feet, and behind them hung a bag of provend 
for the horse; for it wa a good day' journey to salem, and the road 
wa reput so danger that it wa ill tarri a minut longer than 
necessari for refreshment. english road were bad enough at that period 
and for long after, but in america the way wa simpli the clear 
ground of the forest; the stump of the fell tree still remain in 
the direct line, form obstacles, which it requir the most care 
drive to avoid; and in the hollows, where the ground wa swampy, the 
pulpi natur of it wa obviat by log of wood laid across the boggi 
part. the deep green forest, tangl into heavi dark even thu 
earli in the year, came within a few yard of the road all the way, 
though effort were regularli made by the inhabit of the 
neighbour settlement to keep a certain space clear on each side, 
for fear of the lurk indians, who might otherwis come upon them 
unawares. the cri of strang birds, the unwont colour of some of 
them, all suggest to the imagin or unaccustom travel the 
idea of war-whoop and paint deadli enemies. but at last they drew 
near to salem, which rival boston in size in those days, and boast 
the name of one or two streets, although to an english eye they look 
rather more like irregularli built houses, cluster round the 
meeting-house, or rather one of the meeting-houses, for a second wa in 
process of building. the whole place wa surround with two circl of 
stockades; between the two were the garden and graze ground for 
those who dread their cattl stray into the woods, and the 
consequ danger of reclaim them. 

the lad who drove them flog hi spent hors into a trot, as they 
went through salem to ralph hickson' house. It wa evening, the 
leisur time for the inhabitants, and their children were at play 
befor the houses. loi wa struck by the beauti of one wee toddl 
child, and turn to look after it; it caught it littl foot in a 
stump of wood, and fell with a cri that brought the mother out in 
affright. As she ran out, her eye caught lois' anxiou gaze, although 
the nois of the heavi wheel drown the sound of her word of inquiri 
as to the natur of the hurt the child had received. nor had loi time 
to think long upon the matter, for the instant after, the hors wa 
pull up at the door of a good, square, substanti wooden house, 
plaster over into a creami white, perhap as handsom a hous as ani 
in salem; and there she wa told by the driver that her uncle, ralph 
hickson, lived. In the flurri of the moment she did not notice, but 
captain holderness did, that no one came out at the unwont sound of 
wheels, to receiv and welcom her. she wa lift down by the old 
sailor, and led into a larg room, almost like the hall of some english 
manor-hous as to size. A tall, gaunt young man of three or four and 
twenty, sat on a bench by one of the windows, read a great folio by 
the fade light of day. He did not rise when they came in, but look 
at them with surprise, no gleam of intellig come into hi stern, 
dark face. there wa no woman in the house-place. captain holderness 
paus a moment, and then said: 

'i thi hous ralph hickson's?' 

'it is,' said the young man, in a slow, deep voice. but he ad no 
word further. 

'thi is hi niece, loi barclay,' said the captain, take the girl' 
arm, and push her forwards. the young man look at her steadili and 
grave for a minute; then rose, and care mark the page in the 
folio which hitherto had lain open upon hi knee, said, still in the 
same heavy, indiffer manner, 'I will call my mother, she will know.' 

He open a door which look into a warm bright kitchen, ruddi with 
the light of the fire over which three women were appar engag 
in cook something, while a fourth, an old indian woman, of a 
greenish-brown colour, shrivel up and bent with appar age, move 
backward and forwards, evid fetch the other the articl they 
required. 

'mother,' said the young man; and have arrest her attention, he 
point over hi shoulder to the newly-arriv strangers, and return 
to the studi of hi book, from time to time, however, furtiv 
examin loi from beneath hi dark shaggi eyebrows. 

A tall, larg made woman, past middl life, came in from the kitchen, 
and stood reconnoitr the strangers. 

captain holderness spoke. 

'thi is loi barclay, master ralph hickson' niece.' 

'I know noth of her,' said the mistress of the house, in a deep 
voice, almost as masculin as her son's. 

'master hickson receiv hi sister' letter, did he not? I sent it off 
myself by a lad name elia wellcome, who left boston for thi place 
yester morning.' 

'ralph hickson ha receiv no such letter. He lie bedridden in the 
chamber beyond. ani letter for him must come through my hands; 
wherefor I can affirm with certainti that no such letter ha been 
deliv here. hi sister barclay, she that wa henrietta hickson, and 
whose husband took the oath to charl stuart, and stuck by hi live 
when all godli men left theirs----' 

lois, who had thought her heart wa dead and cold a minut befor at 
the ungraci recept she had met with, felt word come up into her 
mouth at the impli insult to her father, and spoke out, to her own 
and the captain' astonishment: 

'they might be godli men who left their church on that day of which 
you speak, madam; but they alon were not the godli men, and no one ha 
a right to limit true godli for mere opinion' sake.' 

'well said, lass,' spoke out the captain, look round upon her with a 
kind of admir wonder, and pat her on the back. 

loi and her aunt gaze into each other' eye unflinchingly, for a 
minut or two of silence; but the girl felt her colour come and 
going, while the elder woman' never varied; and the eye of the young 
maiden were fill fast with tears, while those of grate hickson kept 
on their stare, dri and unwavering. 

'mother!' said the young man, rise up with a quicker motion than ani 
one had yet use in thi house, 'it is ill speak of such matter 
when my cousin come first among us. the lord may give her grace 
hereafter, but she ha travel from boston citi to-day, and she and 
thi seafar man must need rest and food.' 

He did not attend to see the effect of hi words, but sat down again, 
and seem to be absorb in hi book in an instant. perhap he knew 
that hi word wa law with hi grim mother, for he had hardli ceas 
speak befor she had point to a wooden settle; and smooth the 
line on her countenance, she said, 'what manasseh say is true. sit 
down here, while I bid faith and natte get food ready; and meanwhil I 
will go tell my husband, that one who call herself hi sister' child 
is come over to pay him a visit.' 

she went to the door lead into the kitchen, and gave some direct 
to the elder girl, whom loi now knew to be the daughter of the house. 
faith stood impassive, while her mother spoke, scarc care to look 
at the newly-arriv strangers. she wa like her brother manasseh in 
complexion, but had handsom features, and large, mysterious-look 
eyes, as loi saw, when onc she lift them up, and took in, as it 
were, the aspect of the sea-captain and her cousin with one swift 
search look. about the stiff, tall, angular mother, and the scarc 
less pliant figur of the daughter, a girl of twelv year old, or 
thereabouts, play all manner of impish antics, unheed by them, as 
if it were her accustom habit to peep about, now under their arms, 
now at thi side, now at that, make grimac all the while at loi 
and captain holdernesse, who sat face the door, weary, and somewhat 
dishearten by their reception. the captain pull out tobacco, and 
began to chew it by way of consolation; but in a moment or two, hi 
usual elast of spirit came to hi rescue, and he said in a low 
voic to lois: 

'that scoundrel elias, I will give it him! If the letter had but been 
delivered, thou wouldst have had a differ kind of welcome; but as 
soon as I have had some victuals, I will go out and find the lad, and 
bring back the letter, and that will make all right, my wench. nay, 
don't be downhearted, for I cannot stand women' tears. thou'rt just 
worn out with the shake and the want of food.' 

loi brush away her tears, and look round to tri and divert her 
thought by fix them on present object, she caught her cousin 
manasseh' deep-set eye furtiv watch her. It wa with no 
unfriendli gaze, yet it made loi uncomfortable, particularli as he did 
not withdraw hi look after he must have seen that she observ him. 
she wa glad when her aunt call her into an inner room to see her 
uncle, and she escap from the steadi observ of her gloomy, silent 
cousin. 

ralph hickson wa much older than hi wife, and hi ill made him 
look older still. He had never had the forc of charact that grace, 
hi spouse, possessed, and age and sick had now render him almost 
childish at times. but hi natur wa affectionate, and stretch out 
hi trembl arm from where he lay bedridden, he gave loi an 
unhesit welcome, never wait for the confirm of the miss 
letter befor he acknowledg her to be hi niece. 

'oh! 'ti kind in thee to come all across the sea to make acquaint 
with thine uncle; kind in sister barclay to spare thee!' 

loi had to tell him that there wa no one live to miss her at home 
in england; that in fact she had no home in england, no father nor 
mother left upon earth; and that she had been bidden by her mother' 
last word to seek him out, and ask him for a home. her word came up, 
half choke from a heavi heart, and hi dull wit could not take 
their mean in without sever repetitions; and then he cri like a 
child, rather at hi own loss of a sister, whom he had not seen for 
more than twenti years, than at that of the orphan' stand befor 
him, tri hard not to cry, but to start brave in thi new strang 
home. what most of all help loi in her self-restraint wa her aunt' 
unsympathet look. born and bred in new england, grace hickson had a 
kind of jealou dislik to her husband' english relations, which had 
increas sinc of late year hi weaken mind yearn after them, and 
he forgot the good reason he had had for hi self-exile, and moan 
over the decis which had led to it as the great mistak of hi life. 
'come,' said she, 'it strike me that, in all thi sorrow for the loss 
of one who die full of years, ye are forget in whose hand life 
and death are!' 

true words, but ill-spoken at that time. loi look up at her with a 
scarc disguis indignation; which increas as she heard the 
contemptu tone in which her aunt went on talk to ralph hickson, 
even while she wa arrang hi bed with a regard to hi greater 
comfort. 

'one would think thou wert a godless man, by the moan thou art alway 
make over spilt milk; and truth is, thou art but childish in thine 
old age. when we were wed, thou left all thing to the lord; I would 
never have marri thee else. nay, lass,' said she, catch the 
express on lois' face, 'thou art never go to browbeat me with 
thine angri looks. I do my duti as I read it, and there is never a man 
in salem that dare speak a word to grace hickson about either her work 
or her faith. godli mr. cotton mather hath said, that even he might 
learn of me; and I would advis thee rather to humbl thyself, and see 
if the lord may not convert thee from thi ways, sinc he ha sent thee 
to dwell, as it were, in zion, where the preciou dew fall daili on 
aaron' beard.' 

loi felt asham and sorri to find that her aunt had so truli 
interpret the momentari express of her features; she blame 
herself a littl for the feel that had caus that expression, 
tri to think how much her aunt might have been troubl with 
someth befor the unexpect irrupt of the strangers, and again 
hope that the remembr of thi littl misunderstand would soon 
pass away. So she endeavour to reassur herself, and not to give way 
to her uncle' tender trembl pressur of her hand, as, at her aunt' 
bidding, she wish him good night, and return into the outer, or 
'keeping'-room, where all the famili were now assembled, readi for the 
meal of flour cake and venison-steak which nattee, the indian 
servant, wa bring in from the kitchen. No one seem to have been 
speak to captain holderness while loi had been away. manasseh sat 
quiet and silent where he did, with the book open upon hi knee, hi 
eye thought fix on vacancy, as if he saw a vision, or dream 
dreams. faith stood by the table, lazili direct natte in her 
preparations; and prudenc loll against the door-frame, between 
kitchen and keeping-room, play trick on the old indian woman as she 
pass backward and forwards, till natte appear to be in a strong 
state of express irritation, which he tri in vain to repress, as 
whenev she show ani sign of it, prudenc onli seem excit to 
greater mischief. when all wa ready, manasseh lift hi right hand, 
and 'ask a blessing,' as it wa termed; but the grace becam a long 
prayer for abstract spiritu blessings, for strength to combat satan, 
and to quench hi fieri darts, and at length assumed, so loi thought, 
a pure person character, as if the young man had forgotten the 
occasion, and even the peopl present, but wa search into the 
natur of the diseas that beset hi own sick soul, and spread them 
out befor the lord. He wa brought back by a pluck at the coat from 
prudence; he open hi shut eyes, cast an angri glanc at the child, 
who made a face at him for sole reply, and then he sat down, and they 
all fell to. grace hickson would have thought her hospit sadli at 
fault, if she had allow captain holderness to go out in search of a 
bed. skin were spread for him on the floor of the keeping-room; a 
bible, and a squar bottl of spirit were place on the table, to 
suppli hi want dure the night; and in spite of all the care and 
troubles, temptations, or sin of the member of that household, they 
were all asleep befor the town clock struck ten. 

In the morning, the captain' first care wa to go out in search of the 
boy elias, and the miss letter. He met him bring it with an easi 
conscience, for, thought elias, a few hour sooner or later will make 
no difference; to-night or the morrow morn will be all the same. but 
he wa startl into a sens of wrong-do by a sound box on the ear, 
from the veri man who had charg him to deliv it speedily, and whom 
he believ to be at that veri moment in boston city. 

the letter delivered, all possibl proof be given that loi had a 
right to claim a home from her nearest relations, captain holderness 
thought it best to take leave. 

'thou'lt take to them, lass, maybe, when there is no one here to make 
thee think on the old country. nay, nay! part is hard work at all 
times, and best get hard work done out of hand. keep up thine heart, my 
wench, and i'll come back and see thee next spring, if we are all 
spare till then; and who know what fine young miller mayn't come with 
me? don't go and get wed to a pray puritan, meanwhile. there, 
there--i'm off! god bless thee!' 

and loi wa left alon in new england. 




chapter 2 


It wa hard up-hil work for loi to win herself a place in thi 
family. her aunt wa a woman of narrow, strong affections. her love for 
her husband, if ever she had any, wa burnt out and dead long ago. what 
she did for him she did from duty; but duti wa not strong enough to 
restrain that littl member the tongue; and lois' heart often bled at 
the continu flow of contemptu reproof which grace constantli 
address to her husband, even while she wa spare no pain or 
troubl to minist to hi bodili eas and comfort. It wa more as a 
relief to herself that she spoke in thi way, than with ani desir that 
her speech should affect him; and he wa too deaden by ill to 
feel hurt by them; or, it may be, the constant repetit of her 
sarcasm had made him indifferent; at ani rate, so that he had hi food 
and hi state of bodili warmth attend to, he veri seldom seem to 
care much for anyth else. even hi first flow of affect toward 
loi wa soon exhausted; he care for her becaus she arrang hi 
pillow well and skilfully, and becaus she could prepar new and 
dainti kind of food for hi sick appetite, but no longer for her as 
hi dead sister' child. still he did care for her, and loi wa too 
glad of thi littl hoard of affect to examin how or whi it wa 
given. To him she could give pleasure, but appar to no one els in 
that household. her aunt look askanc at her for mani reasons: the 
first come of loi to salem wa inopportune, the express of 
disapprob on her face on that even still linger and rankl 
in grace' memory, earli prejudices, and feelings, and prepossess 
of the english girl were all on the side of what would now be call 
church and state, what wa then esteem in that countri a 
superstiti observ of the direct of a popish rubric, and a 
servil regard for the famili of an oppress and irreligi king. 
nor is it to be suppos that loi did not feel, and feel acutely, the 
want of sympathi that all those with whom she wa now live manifest 
toward the old hereditari loyalti (religi as well as polit 
loyalty) in which she had been brought up. with her aunt and manasseh 
it wa more than want of sympathy; it wa positive, activ antipathi to 
all the idea loi held most dear. the veri allusion, howev 
incident made, to the littl old grey church at barford, where her 
father had preach so long,--th occasion refer to the troubl 
in which her own countri had been distract when she left,--and the 
adherence, in which she had been brought up, to the notion that the 
king could do no wrong, seem to irrit manasseh past endurance. He 
would get up from hi reading, hi constant employ when at home, 
and walk angrili about the room after loi had said anyth of thi 
kind, mutter to himself; and onc he had even stop befor her, 
and in a passion tone bade her not talk so like a fool. now thi wa 
veri differ to hi mother' sarcastic, contemptu way of treat 
all poor lois' littl loyal speeches. grace would lead her on--at 
least she did at first, till experi made loi wiser--to express her 
thought on such subjects, till, just when the girl' heart wa 
opening, her aunt would turn round upon her with some bitter sneer that 
rous all the evil feel in lois' disposit by it sting. now 
manasseh seemed, through all hi anger, to be so realli griev by what 
he consid her error, that he went much nearer to convinc her 
that there might be two side to a question. onli thi wa a view, that 
it appear like treacheri to her dead father' memori to entertain. 

somehow, loi felt instinct that manasseh wa realli friendli 
toward her. He wa littl in the house; there wa farming, and some 
kind of mercantil busi to be transact by him, as real head of 
the house; and as the season drew on, he went shoot and hunt in 
the surround forests, with a dare which caus hi mother to warn 
and reprov him in private, although to the neighbour she boast 
larg of her son' courag and disregard of danger. loi did not 
often walk out for the mere sake of walking, there wa gener some 
household errand to be transact when ani of the women of the famili 
went abroad; but onc or twice she had caught glimps of the dreary, 
dark wood, hem in the clear land on all sides,--th great wood 
with it perpetu movement of branch and bough, and it solemn wail, 
that came into the veri street of salem when certain wind blew, 
bear the sound of the pine-tre clear upon the ear that had 
leisur to listen. and from all accounts, thi old forest, girdl 
round the settlement, wa full of dread and mysteri beasts, and 
still more to be dread indians, steal in and out among the 
shadows, intent on bloodi scheme against the christian people; 
panther-streaked, shaven indians, in leagu by their own confession, as 
well as by the popular belief, with evil powers. 

nattee, the old indian servant, would occasion make lois' blood 
run cold as she and faith and prudenc listen to the wild stori she 
told them of the wizard of her race. It wa often in the kitchen, in 
the darken evening, while some cook process wa go on, that 
the old indian crone, sit on her haunch by the bright red wood 
ember which sent up no flame, but a lurid light revers the shadow 
of all the face around, told her weird stori while they were 
await the rise of the dough, perchance, out of which the household 
bread had to be made. there ran through these stori alway a ghastly, 
unexpress suggest of some human sacrific be need to complet 
the success of ani incant to the evil one; and the poor old 
creature, herself believ and shudder as she narrat her tale in 
broken english, took a strange, unconsci pleasur in her power over 
her hearers--young girl of the oppress race, which had brought her 
down into a state littl differ from slavery, and reduc her peopl 
to outcast on the hunting-ground which had belong to her fathers. 
after such tales, it requir no small effort on lois' part to go out, 
at her aunt' command, into the common pastur round the town, and 
bring the cattl home at night. who knew but what the double-head 
snake might start up from each blackberry-bush--that wicked, cunning, 
accurs creatur in the servic of the indian wizards, that had such 
power over all those white maiden who met the eye place at either 
end of hi long, sinuous, creep body, so that loath him, loath the 
indian race as they would, off they must go into the forest to seek but 
some indian man, and must beg to be taken into hi wigwam, abjur 
faith and race for ever? Or there were spells--so natte said--hidden 
about the ground by the wizards, which chang that person' natur who 
found them; so that, gentl and love as they might have been before, 
thereaft they took no pleasur but in the cruel torment of others, 
and had a strang power given to them of caus such torment at their 
will. onc nattee, speak low to lois, who wa alon with her in the 
kitchen, whisper out her terrifi belief that such a spell had 
prudenc found; and when the indian show her arm to lois, all 
pinch and black and blue by the impish child, the english girl began 
to be afraid of her cousin as of one possessed. but it wa not natte 
alone, nor young imagin girl alone, that believ in these 
stories. We can afford to smile at them now; but our english ancestor 
entertain superstit of much the same charact at the same 
period, and with less excuse, as the circumst surround them 
were better known, and consequ more explic by common sens 
than the real mysteri of the deep, untrodden forest of new england. 
the gravest divin not onli believ stori similar to that of the 
double-head serpent, and other tale of witchcraft, but they made 
such narrat the subject of preach and prayer; and as cowardic 
make us all cruel, men who were blameless in mani of the relat of 
life, and even praiseworthi in some, became, from superstition, cruel 
persecutor about thi time, show no merci toward ani one whom they 
believ to be in leagu with the evil one. 

faith wa the person with whom the english girl wa the most intim 
associ in her uncle' house. the two were about the same age, and 
certain household employ were share between them. they took it in 
turn to call in the cows, to make up the butter which had been churn 
by hosea, a stiff old out-door servant, in whom grace hickson place 
great confidence; and each lassi had her great spinning-wheel for 
wool, and her lesser for flax, befor a month had elaps after lois' 
coming. faith wa a grave, silent person, never merry, sometim veri 
sad, though loi wa a long time in even guess why. she would tri in 
her sweet, simpl fashion to cheer her cousin up, when the latter wa 
depressed, by tell her old stori of english way and life. 
occasionally, faith seem to care to listen, occasion she did not 
heed one word, but dream on. whether of the past or of the future, 
who could tell? 

stern old minist came in to pay their pastor visits. On such 
occasions, grace hickson would put on clean apron and clean cap, and 
make them more welcom than she wa ever seen to do no one else, 
bring out the best provis of her store, and set of all 
befor them. also, the great bibl wa brought forth, and hosea and 
natte summon from their work to listen while the minist read a 
chapter, and, as he read, expound it at consider length. after 
thi all knelt, while he, standing, lift up hi right hand, and 
pray for all possibl combin of christian men, for all possibl 
case of spiritu need; and lastly, take the individu befor him, 
he would put up a veri person supplic for each, accord to hi 
notion of their wants. At first loi wonder at the aptitud of one or 
two prayer of thi descript to the outward circumst of each 
case; but when she perceiv that her aunt had usual a pretti long 
confidenti convers with the minist in the earli part of hi 
visit, she becam awar that he receiv both hi impress and hi 
knowledg through the medium of 'that godli woman, grace hickson;' and 
I am afraid she paid less regard to the prayer 'for the maiden from 
anoth land, who hath brought the error of that land as a seed with 
her, even across the great ocean, and who is let even now the 
littl seed shoot up into an evil tree, in which all unclean creatur 
may find shelter.' 

'I like the prayer of our church better,' said lois, one day to faith. 
'no clergyman in england can pray hi own words, and therefor it is 
that he cannot judg of other so as to fit hi prayer to what he 
esteem to be their case, as mr. tappau did thi morning.' 

'I hate mr. tappau!' said faith, shortly, a passion flash of light 
come out of her dark, heavi eyes. 

'whi so cousin? It seem to me as if he were a good man, although I 
like not hi prayers.' 

faith onli repeat her words, 'I hate him.' 

loi wa sorri for thi strong bad feeling; instinct sorry, for 
she wa love herself, delight in be loved, and felt a jar run 
through her at everi sign of want of love in others. but she did not 
know what to say, and wa silent at the time. faith, too, went on 
turn her wheel with vehemence, but spoke never a word until her 
thread snapped, and then she push the wheel away hastili and left the 
room. 

then prudenc crept softli up to lois' side. thi strang child seem 
to be toss about by vari moods: to-day she wa caress and 
communicative, to-morrow she might be deceitful, mocking, and so 
indiffer to the pain or sorrow of other that you could call her 
almost inhuman. 

'so thou dost not like pastor tappau' prayers?' she whispered. 

loi wa sorri to have been overheard, but she neither would nor could 
take back her words. 

'I like them not so well as the prayer I use to hear at home.' 

'mother say thi home wa with the ungodly. nay, don't look at me 
so--it wa not I that said it. i'm none so fond of pray myself, nor 
of pastor tappau for that matter. but faith cannot abid him, and I 
know why. shall I tell thee, cousin lois?' 

'no! faith did not tell me, and she wa the right person to give her 
own reasons.' 

'ask her where young mr. nolan is gone to, and thou wilt hear. I have 
seen faith cri by the hour togeth about mr. nolan.' 

'hush, child, hush!' said lois, for she heard faith' approach step, 
and fear lest she should overhear what they were saying. 

the truth wa that, a year or two before, there had been a great 
struggl in salem village, a great divis in the religi body, and 
pastor tappau had been the leader of the more violent, and, ultimately, 
the success party. In consequ of this, the less popular 
minister, mr. nolan, had had to leav the place. and him faith hickson 
love with all the strength of her passion heart, although he never 
wa awar of the attach he had excited, and her own famili were too 
regardless of manifest of mere feel to ever observ the sign 
of ani emot on her part. but the old indian servant natte saw and 
observ them all. she knew, as well as if she had been told the 
reason, whi faith had lost all care about father or mother, brother and 
sister, about household work and daili occupation, nay, about the 
observ of religion as well. natte read the mean of the deep 
smoulder of faith' dislik to pastor tappau aright; the indian 
woman understood whi the girl (whom alon of all the white peopl she 
loved) avoid the old minister,--would hide in the wood-stack sooner 
than be call in to listen to hi exhort and prayers. with 
savage, untutor people, it is not 'love me, love my dog,' they are 
often jealou of the creatur beloved; but it is, 'whom thou hatest I 
will hate;' and nattee' feel toward pastor tappau wa even an 
exagger of the mute unspoken hatr of faith. 

for a long time, the caus of her cousin' dislik and avoid of the 
minist wa a mysteri to lois; but the name of nolan remain in her 
memori whether she would or no, and it wa more from girlish interest 
in a suspect love affair, than from ani indiffer and heartless 
curiosity, that she could not help piec togeth littl speech and 
actions, with faith' interest in the absent banish minister, for an 
explanatori clue, till not a doubt remain in her mind. and thi 
without ani further commun with prudence, for loi declin 
hear ani more on the subject from her, and so gave deep offence. 

faith grew sadder and duller as the autumn drew on. she lost her 
appetite, her brown complexion becam sallow and colourless, her dark 
eye look hollow and wild. the first of novemb wa near at hand. 
lois, in her instinctive, well-intent effort to bring some life 
and cheer into the monoton household, had been tell faith 
of mani english customs, silli enough, no doubt, and which scarc 
light up a flicker of interest in the american girl' mind. the 
cousin were lie awak in their bed in the great unplast room, 
which wa in part store-room, in part bedroom. loi wa full of 
sympathi for faith that night. for long she had listen to her 
cousin' heavy, irrepress sighs, in silence. faith sigh becaus 
her grief wa of too old a date for violent emot or crying. loi 
listen without speak in the dark, quiet night hours, for a long, 
long time. she kept quit still, becaus she thought such vent for 
sorrow might reliev her cousin' weari heart. but when at length, 
instead of lie motionless, faith seem to be grow restless even 
to convuls motion of her limbs, loi began to speak, to talk about 
england, and the dear old way at home, without excit much attent 
on faith' part, until at length she fell upon the subject of 
hallow-e'en, and told about custom then and long afterward practis 
in england, and that have scarc yet die out in scotland. As she 
told of trick she had often played, of the appl eaten face a 
mirror, of the drip sheet, of the basin of water, of the nut 
burn side by side, and mani other such innoc way of divination, 
by which laughing, trembl english maiden sought to see the form of 
their futur husbands, if husband they were to have, then faith 
listen breathlessly, ask short, eager questions, as if some ray of 
hope had enter into her gloomi heart. loi went on speaking, tell 
her of all the stori that would confirm the truth of the second sight 
vouchsaf to all seeker in the accustom methods, half believing, 
half incredul herself, but desiring, abov all things, to cheer up 
poor faith. 

suddenly, prudenc rose up from her truckle-b in the dim corner of 
the room. they had not thought that she wa awake, but she had been 
listen long. 

'cousin loi may go out and meet satan by the brook-sid if she will, 
but if thou goest, faith, I will tell mother--ay, and I will tell 
pastor tappau, too. hold thi stories, cousin lois, I am afeard of my 
veri life. I would rather never be wed at all, than feel the touch of 
the creatur that would take the appl out of my hand, as I held it 
over my left shoulder.' the excit girl gave a loud scream of terror 
at the imag her fanci had conjur up. faith and loi sprang out 
toward her, fli across the moonlit room in their white nightgowns. 
At the same instant, summon by the same cry, grace hickson came to 
her child. 

'hush! hush!' said faith, authoritatively. 

'what is it, my wench?' ask grace. while lois, feel as if she had 
done all the mischief, kept silence. 

'take her away, take her away!' scream prudence. 'look over her 
shoulder--h left shoulder--th evil one is there now, I see him 
stretch over for the half-bitten apple.' 

'what is thi she says?' said grace, austerely. 

'she is dreaming,' said faith; 'prudence, hold thi tongue.' and she 
pinch the child severely, while loi more tenderli tri to sooth 
the alarm she felt that she had conjur up. 

'be quiet, prudence,' said she, 'and go to sleep. I will stay by thee 
till thou hast gone off into slumber.' 

'no, go! go away,' sob prudence, who wa realli terrifi at first, 
but wa now assum more alarm: than she felt, if from the pleasur 
she receiv at perceiv herself the centr of attention. 'faith 
shall stay by me, not you, wick english witch!' 

So faith sat by her sister; and grace, displeas and perplexed, 
withdrew to her own bed, purpos to inquir more into the matter in 
the morning. loi onli hope it might all be forgotten by that time, 
and resolv never to talk again of such things. but an event happen 
in the remain hour of the night to chang the current of affairs. 
while grace had been absent from her room, her husband had had anoth 
paralyt stroke: whether he, too, had been alarm by that eldritch 
scream no one could ever know. By the faint light of the rush candl 
burn at the bedside, hi wife perceiv that a great chang had 
taken place in hi aspect on her return: the irregular breath came 
almost like snorts--th end wa draw near. the famili were roused, 
and all help given that either the doctor or experi could suggest. 
but befor the late novemb morn light, all wa end for ralph 
hickson. 

the whole of the ensu day, they sat or move in darken rooms, and 
spoke few words, and those below their breath. manasseh kept at home, 
regret hi father, no doubt, but show littl emotion. faith wa 
the child that bewail her loss most grievously; she had a warm heart, 
hidden away somewher under her moodi exterior, and her father had 
shown her far more passiv kind than ever her mother had done, for 
grace made distinct favourit of manasseh, her onli son, and prudence, 
her youngest child. loi wa about as unhappi as ani of them, for she 
had felt strongli drawn toward her uncl as her kindest friend, and 
the sens of hi loss renew the old sorrow she had experienc at her 
own parents' death. but she had no time and no place to cri in. On her 
devolv mani of the cares, which it would have seem indecor in 
the nearer rel to interest themselv in enough to take an activ 
part: the chang requir in their dress, the household prepar 
for the sad feast of the funeral--loi had to arrang all under her 
aunt' stern direction. 

but a day or two afterwards--th last day befor the funeral--sh went 
into the yard to fetch in some fagot for the oven; it wa a solemn, 
beautiful, starlit evening, and some sudden sens of desol in the 
midst of the vast univers thu reveal touch lois' heart, and she 
sat down behind the woodstack, and cri veri plenti tears. 

she wa startl by manasseh, who suddenli turn the corner of the 
stack, and stood befor her. 

'loi crying!' 

'onli a little,' she said, rise up, and gather her bundl of 
fagots, for she dread be question by her grim, impass cousin. 
To her surprise, he laid hi hand on her arm, and said: 

'stop one minute. whi art thou crying, cousin?' 

'I don't know,' she said, just like a child question in like manner; 
and she wa again on the point of weeping. 

'mi father wa veri kind to thee, lois; I do not wonder that thou 
grievest after him. but the lord who taketh away can restor tenfold. I 
will be as kind as my father--yea, kinder. thi is not a time to talk 
of marriag and give in marriage. but after we have buri our dead, 
I wish to speak to thee.' 

loi did not cri now, but she shrank with affright. what did her cousin 
mean? she would far rather that he had been angri with her for 
unreason grieving, for folly. 

she avoid him carefully--a care as she could, without seem 
to dread him--for the next few days. sometim she thought it must have 
been a bad dream; for if there had been no english lover in the case, 
no other man in the whole world, she could never have thought of 
manasseh as her husband; indeed, till now, there had been noth in 
hi word or action to suggest such an idea. now it had been 
suggested, there wa no tell how much she loath him. He might be 
good, and pious--h doubtless was--but hi dark fix eyes, move so 
slowli and heavily, hi lank black hair, hi grey coars skin, all made 
her dislik him now--al hi person ugli and ungainli struck 
on her sens with a jar, sinc those few word spoken behind the 
haystack. 

she knew that sooner or later the time must come for further discuss 
of thi subject; but, like a coward, she tri to put it off, by 
cling to her aunt' apron-string, for she wa sure that grace 
hickson had far differ view for her onli son. as, indeed, she had, 
for she wa an ambitious, as well as a religi woman; and by an earli 
purchas of land in salem village, the hickson had becom wealthi 
people, without ani great exert of their own; partly, also, by the 
silent process of accumulation, for they had never care to chang 
their manner of live from the time when it had been suitabl to a far 
smaller incom than that which they at present enjoyed. So much for 
worldli circumstances. As for their worldli character, it stood as 
high. No one could say a word against ani of their habit or actions. 
the righteous and godli were patent to everi one' eyes. So 
grace hickson thought herself entitl to pick and choos among the 
maidens, befor she should meet with one fit to be manasseh' wife. 
none in salem came up to her imaginari standard. she had it in her mind 
even at thi veri time--so soon after her husband' death--to go to 
boston, and take counsel with the lead minist there, with worthi 
mr. cotton mather at their head, and see if they could tell her of a 
well-favour and godli young maiden in their congreg worthi of 
be the wife of her son. but, besid good look and godliness, the 
wench must have good birth, and good wealth, or grace hickson would 
have put her contemptu on one side. when onc thi paragon wa 
found, the minist had approved, grace anticip no difficulti on 
her son' part. So loi wa right in feel that her aunt would 
dislik ani speech of marriag between manasseh and herself. 

but the girl wa brought to bay one day in thi wise. manasseh had 
ridden forth on some business, which everi one said would occupi him 
the whole day; but, meet the man with whom he had to transact hi 
affairs, he return earlier than ani one expected. He miss loi from 
the keeping-room where hi sister were spinning, almost immediately. 
hi mother sat by at her knitting--h could see natte in the kitchen 
through the open door. He wa too reserv to ask where loi was, but 
he quietli sought till he found her--in the great loft, alreadi pile 
with winter store of fruit and vegetables. her aunt had sent her there 
to examin the appl one by one, and pick out such as were unsound, 
for immedi use. she wa stoop down, and intent upon thi work, 
and wa hardli awar of hi approach, until she lift up her head and 
saw him stand close befor her. she drop the appl she wa 
holding, went a littl paler than her wont, and face him in silence. 

'lois,' he said, 'thou rememberest the word that I spoke while we yet 
mourn over my father. I think that I am call to marriag now, as 
the head of thi household. and I have seen no maiden so pleasant in my 
sight as thou art, lois!' He tri to take her hand. but she put it 
behind her with a childish shake of her head, and, half-crying, said: 

'please, cousin manasseh, do not say thi to me. I dare say you ought 
to be married, be the head of the household now; but I don't want to 
be married. I would rather not.' 

'that is well spoken,' repli he, frown a little, nevertheless. 'I 
should not like to take to wife an over-forward maiden, readi to jump 
at wedlock. besides, the congreg might talk, if we were to be 
marri too soon after my father' death. We have, perchance, said 
enough, even now. but I wish thee to have thi mind set at eas as to 
thi futur well-doing. thou wilt have leisur to think of it, and to 
bring thi mind more fulli round to it.' again he held out hi hand. 
thi time she took hold of it with a free, frank gesture. 

'I owe you somewhat for your kind to me ever sinc I came, cousin 
manasseh; and I have no way of pay you but by tell you truli I 
can love you as a dear friend, if you will let me, but never as a 
wife.' 

He flung her hand away, but did not take hi eye off her face, though 
hi glanc wa lower and gloomy. He mutter someth which she did 
not quit hear, and so she went on brave although she kept trembl 
a little, and had much ado to keep from crying. 

'pleas let me tell you all. there wa a young man in barford--nay, 
manasseh, I cannot speak if you are so angry; it is hard work to tell 
you ani how--h said that he want to marri me; but I wa poor, and 
hi father would have none of it, and I do not want to marri ani one; 
but if I did, it would be--' her voic dropped, and her blush told 
the rest. manasseh stood look at her with sullen, hollow eyes, that 
had a glitter touch of wilder in them, and then he said: 

'it is born in upon me--verili I see it as in a vision--that thou must 
be my spouse, and no other man's. thou canst not escap what is 
foredoomed. month ago, when I set myself to read the old godli book 
in which my soul use to delight until thi coming, I saw no letter of 
printers' ink mark on the page, but I saw a gold and ruddi type of 
some unknown language, the mean whereof wa whisper into my soul; 
it was, "marri lois! marri lois!" and when my father died, I knew it 
wa the begin of the end. It is the lord' will, lois, and thou 
canst not escap from it.' and again he would have taken her hand and 
drawn her toward him. but thi time she elud him with readi 
movement. 

'I do not acknowledg it be the lord' will, manasseh,' said she. 'it 
is not "born in upon me," as you puritan call it, that I am to be 
your wife. I am none so set upon wedlock as to take you, even though 
there be no other chanc for me. for I do not care for you as I ought 
to care for my husband. but I could have care for you veri much as a 
cousin--a a kind cousin.' 

she stop speaking; she could not choos the right word with which 
to speak to him of her gratitud and friendliness, which yet could 
never be ani feel nearer and dearer, no more than two parallel line 
can ever meet. 

but he wa so convinced, by what he consid the spirit of prophecy, 
that loi wa to be hi wife, that he felt rather more indign at 
what he consid to be her resist to the preordain decree, than 
realli anxiou as to the result. again he tri to convinc her that 
neither he nor she had ani choic in the matter, by saying: 

'the voic said unto me "marri lois," and I said, "I will, lord."' 

'but,' loi replied, 'the voice, as you call it, ha never spoken such 
a word to me.' 

'lois,' he answered, solemnly, 'it will speak. and then wilt thou obey, 
even as samuel did?' 

'no, inde I cannot!' she answered, briskly. 'I may take a dream to be 
truth, and hear my own fancies, if I think about them too long. but I 
cannot marri ani one from obedience.' 

'lois, lois, thou art as yet unregenerate; but I have seen thee in a 
vision as one of the elect, robe in white. As yet thi faith is too 
weak for thee to obey meekly, but it shall not alway be so. I will 
pray that thou mayest see thi preordain course. meanwhile, I will 
smooth away all worldli obstacles.' 

'cousin manasseh! cousin manasseh!' cri loi after him, as he wa 
leav the room, 'come back. I cannot put it in strong enough words. 
manasseh, there is no power in heaven or earth that can make me love 
thee enough to marri thee, or to wed thee without such love. and thi I 
say solemnly, becaus it is better that thi should end at once.' 

for a moment he wa staggered; then he lift up hi hands, and said, 

'god forgiv thee thi blasphemy! rememb hazael, who said, "i thi 
servant a dog, that he should do thi great thing?" and went straight 
and did it, becaus hi evil cours were fix and appoint for him 
from befor the foundat of the world. and shall not thi path be 
laid out among the godli as it hath been foretold to me?' 

He went away; and for a minut or two loi felt as if hi word must 
come true, and that, struggl as she would, hate her doom as she would, 
she must becom hi wife; and, under the circumstances, mani a girl 
would have succumb to her appar fate. isol from all previou 
connections, hear no word from england, live in the heavy, 
monoton routin of a famili with one man for head, and thi man 
esteem a hero by most of those around him, simpli becaus he wa the 
onli man in the family,--thes fact alon would have form strong 
presumpt that most girl would have yield to the offer of such a 
one. but, besid this, there wa much to tell upon the imagin in 
those days, in that place, and time. It wa preval believ that 
there were manifest of spiritu influence--of the direct 
influenc both of good and bad spirits--constantli to be perceiv in 
the cours of men' lives. lot were drawn, as guidanc from the lord; 
the bibl wa opened, and the leav allow to fall apart, and the 
first text the eye fell upon wa suppos to be appoint from abov a 
direction. sound were heard that could not be account for; they were 
made by the evil spirit not yet banish from the desert place of 
which they had so long held possession. sights, inexplic and 
mysterious, were dimli seen--satan, in some shape, seek whom he 
might devour. and at the begin of the long winter season, such 
whisper tales, such old temptat and hauntings, and devilish 
terrors, were suppos to be peculiarli rife. salem was, as it were, 
snow up, and left to prey upon itself. the long, dark evenings, the 
dimly-light rooms, the creak passages, where heterogen 
articl were pile away out of reach of the keen-pierc frost, and 
where occasionally, in the dead of night, a sound wa heard, as of some 
heavi fall body, when, next morning, everyth appear to be in 
it right place--so accustom are we to measur nois by comparison 
with themselves, and not with the absolut still of the 
night-season--th white mist, come nearer and nearer to the window 
everi even in strang shapes, like phantoms,--al these, and mani 
other circumstances, such as the distant fall of mighti tree in the 
mysteri forest girdl them round, the faint whoop and cri of some 
indian seek hi camp, and unwittingli nearer to the white men' 
settlement than either he or they would have like could they have 
chosen, the hungri yell of the wild beast approach the 
cattle-pens,--thes were the thing which made that winter life in 
salem, in the memor time of 1691-2, seem strange, and haunted, and 
terrif to many: peculiarli weird and aw to the english girl in her 
first year' sojourn in america. 

and now imagin loi work upon perpetu by manasseh' convict 
that it wa decre that she should be hi wife, and you will see that 
she wa not without courag and spirit to resist as she did, steadily, 
firmly, and yet sweetly. take one instanc out of many, when her nerv 
were subject to a shock, slight in relat it is true, but then 
rememb that she had been all day, and for mani days, shut up within 
doors, in a dull light, that at mid-day wa almost dark with a 
long-continu snow-storm. even wa come on, and the wood fire wa 
more cheer than ani of the human be surround it; the 
monoton whirr of the smaller spinning-wheel had been go on all 
day, and the store of flax down stair wa nearli exhausted, when grace 
hickson bade loi fetch down some more from the store-room, befor the 
light so entir wane away that it could not be found without a 
candle, and a candl it would be danger to carri into that apart 
full of combust materials, especi at thi time of hard frost, 
when everi drop of water wa lock up and bound in ici hardness. So 
loi went, half-shrink from the long passag that led to the stair 
lead up into the storeroom, for it wa in thi passag that the 
strang night sound were heard, which everi one had begun to notice, 
and speak about in lower tones. she sang, however, as she went, 'to 
keep her courag up'--sang, however, in a subdu voice, the even 
hymn she had so often sung in barford church: 

'glori to thee, my god, thi night--' 

and so it was, I suppose, that she never heard the breath or motion 
of ani creatur near her till, just as she wa load herself with 
flax to carri down, she heard some one--it wa manasseh--say close to 
her ear: 

'ha the voic spoken yet? speak, lois! ha the voic spoken yet to 
thee--that speaketh to me day and night, "marri lois?"' 

she start and turn a littl sick, but spoke almost directli in a 
brave, clear manner: 

'no! cousin manasseh. and it never will.' 

'then I must wait yet longer,' he replied, hoarsely, as if to himself. 
'but all submission--al submission.' 

At last a break came upon the monotoni of the long, dark winter. the 
parishion onc more rais the discuss whether--th parish 
extend as it did--it wa not absolut necessari for pastor tappau 
to have help. thi question had been moot onc before; and then 
pastor tappau had acquiesc in the necessity, and all had gone on 
smoothli for some month after the appoint of hi assistant, until 
a feel had sprung up on the part of the elder minister, which might 
have been call jealousi of the younger, if so godli a man as pastor 
tappau could have been suppos to entertain so evil a passion. howev 
that might be, two parti were speedili formed, the younger and more 
ardent be in favour of mr. nolan, the elder and more 
persistent--and, at the time, the more numerous--cling to the old 
grey-headed, dogmat mr. tappau, who had marri them, baptiz their 
children, and wa to them liter as a 'pillar of the church.' So mr. 
nolan left salem, carri away with him, possibly, more heart than 
that of faith hickson's; but certainli she had never been the same 
creatur since. 

but now--christmas, 1691--one or two of the older member of the 
congreg be dead, and some who were younger men have come to 
settl in salem--mr. tappau be also older, and, some charit 
supposed, wiser--a fresh effort had been made, and mr. nolan wa 
return to labour in ground appar smooth over. loi had taken 
a keen interest in all the proceed for faith' sake,--far more than 
the latter did for herself, ani spectat would have said. faith' 
wheel never went faster or slower, her thread never broke, her colour 
never came, her eye were never uplift with sudden interest, all the 
time these discuss respect mr. nolan' return were go on. but 
lois, after the hint given by prudence, had found a clue to mani a sigh 
and look of despair sorrow, even without the help of nattee' 
improvis songs, in which, under strang allegories, the helpless love 
of her favourit wa told to ear heedless of all meaning, except those 
of the tender-heart and sympathet lois. occasionally, she heard a 
strang chant of the old indian woman's--half in her own language, half 
in broken english--dron over some simmer pipkin, from which the 
smell was, to say the least, unearthly. once, on perceiv thi odour 
in the keeping-room, grace hickson suddenli exclaimed: 

'natte is at her heathen way again; we shall have some mischief 
unless she is stayed.' 

but faith, move quicker than ordinary, said someth about put a 
stop to it, and so forestal her mother' evid intent of go 
into the kitchen. faith shut the door between the two rooms, and 
enter upon some remonstr with nattee; but no one could hear the 
word used. faith and natte seem more bound togeth by love and 
common interest, than ani other two among the self-contain 
individu compris thi household. loi sometim felt as if her 
presenc as a third interrupt some confidenti talk between her 
cousin and the old servant. and yet she wa fond of faith, and could 
almost think that faith like her more than she did either mother, 
brother, or sister; for the first two were indiffer as to ani 
unspoken feelings, while prudenc delight in discov them onli to 
make an amus to herself out of them. 

one day loi wa sit by herself at her sew table, while faith 
and natte were hold one of the secret conclav from which loi 
felt herself to be tacitli excluded, when the outer door opened, and a 
tall, pale young man, in the strict profession habit of a minister, 
entered. loi sprang up with a smile and a look of welcom for faith' 
sake, for thi must be the mr. nolan whose name had been on the tongu 
of everi one for days, and who was, as loi knew, expect to arriv 
the day before. 

He seem half surpris at the glad alacr with which he wa 
receiv by thi stranger: possibl he had not heard of the english 
girl, who wa an inmat in the hous where formerli he had seen onli 
grave, solemn, rigid, or heavi faces, and had been receiv with a 
stiff form of welcome, veri differ from the blushing, smiling, 
dimpl look that innoc met him with the greet almost of an 
old acquaintance. loi have place a chair for him, hasten out to 
call faith, never doubt but that the feel which her cousin 
entertain for the young pastor wa mutual, although it might be 
unrecognis in it full depth by either. 

'faith!' said she, bright and breathless. 'guess--no,' check herself 
to an assum unconsci of ani particular import like to be 
affix to her words, 'mr. nolan, the new pastor, is in the 
keeping-room. He ha ask for my aunt and manasseh. My aunt is gone to 
the prayer meet at pastor tappau's, and manasseh is away.' loi went 
on speak to give faith time, for the girl had becom deadli white at 
the intelligence, while, at the same time, her eye met the keen, 
cun eye of the old indian with a peculiar look of half-wond 
awe, while nattee' look express triumphant satisfaction. 

'go,' said lois, smooth faith' hair, and kiss the white, cold 
cheek, 'or he will wonder whi no one come to see him, and perhap 
think he is not welcome.' faith went without anoth word into the 
keeping-room, and shut the door of communication. natte and loi were 
left together. loi felt as happi as if some piec of good fortun had 
befallen herself. for the time, her grow dread of manasseh' wild, 
omin persist in hi suit, her aunt' coldness, her own 
loneliness, were all forgotten, and she could almost have danc with 
joy. natte laugh aloud, and talk and chuckl to herself: 'old 
indian woman great mystery. old indian woman sent hither and thither; 
go where she is told, where she hear with her ears. but old indian 
woman'--and here she drew herself up, and the express of her face 
quit changed--'know how to call, and then white man must come; and old 
indian have spoken never a word, and white man have hear noth with 
hi ears.' so, the old crone muttered. 

all thi time, thing were go on veri differ in the 
keeping-room to what loi imagined. faith sat stiller even than usual; 
her eye downcast, her word few. A quick observ might have notic a 
certain tremul about her hands, and an occasion twitch 
throughout all her frame. but pastor nolan wa not a keen observ upon 
thi occasion; he wa absorb with hi own littl wonder and 
perplexities. hi wonder wa that of a carnal man--who that pretti 
stranger might be, who had seemed, on hi first coming, so glad to see 
him, but had vanish instantly, appar not to reappear. and, 
indeed, I am not sure if hi perplex wa not that of a carnal man 
rather than that of a godli minister, for thi wa hi dilemma. It wa 
the custom of salem (a we have alreadi seen) for the minister, on 
enter a household for the visit which, among other peopl and in 
other times, would have been term a 'morn call,' to put up a 
prayer for the etern welfar of the famili under whose roof-tre he 
was. now thi prayer wa expect to be adapt to the individu 
character, joys, sorrows, wants, and fail of everi member present; 
and here wa he, a young pastor, alon with a young woman, and he 
thought--vain thoughts, perhaps, but still veri natural--that the 
impli guess at her character, involv in the minut supplic 
abov described, would be veri awkward in a tête-à-têt prayer; so, 
whether it wa hi wonder or hi perplexity, I do not know, but he did 
not contribut much to the convers for some time, and at last, by 
a sudden burst of courag and impromptu hit, he cut the gordian knot by 
make the usual propos for prayer, and ad to it a request that 
the household might be summoned. In came lois, quiet and decorous; in 
came nattee, all one impassive, stiff piec of wood,--no look of 
intellig or trace of giggl near her countenance. solemnli 
recal each wander thought, pastor nolan knelt in the midst of 
these three to pray. He wa a good and truli religi man, whose name 
here is the onli thing disguised, and play hi part brave in the 
aw trial to which he wa afterward subjected; and if at the time, 
befor he went through hi fieri persecutions, the human fanci which 
beset all young heart came across his, we at thi day know that these 
fanci are no sin. but now he pray in earnest, pray so heartili for 
himself, with such a sens of hi own spiritu need and spiritu 
failings, that each one of hi hearer feel as if a prayer and a 
supplic had gone up for each of them. even natte mutter the few 
word she knew of the lord' prayer; gibberish though the disjoint 
noun and verb might be, the poor creatur said them becaus she wa 
stir to unwont reverence. As for lois, she rose up comfort and 
strengthened, as no special prayer of pastor tappau had ever made her 
feel. but faith wa sobbing, sob aloud, almost hysterically, and 
made no effort to rise, but lay on her outstretch arm spread out 
upon the settle. loi and pastor nolan look at each other for an 
instant. then loi said: 

'sir, you must go. My cousin ha not been strong for some time, and 
doubtless she need more quiet than she ha had to-day.' 

pastor nolan bowed, and left the house; but in a moment he returned. 
half open the door, but without entering, he said: 

'I come back to ask, if perchanc I may call thi even to inquir 
how young mistress hickson find herself?' 

but faith did not hear this; she wa sob louder than ever. 

'whi did you send him away, lois? I should have been better directly, 
and it is so long sinc I have seen him.' 

she had her face hidden as she utter these words, and loi could not 
hear them distinctly. she bent her head down by her cousin' on the 
settle, mean to ask her to repeat what she had said. but in the 
irrit of the moment, and prompt possibl by some incipi 
jealousy, faith push loi away so violent that the latter wa hurt 
against the hard, sharp corner of the wooden settle. tear came into 
her eyes; not so much becaus her cheek wa bruised, as becaus of the 
surpris pain she felt at thi repuls from the cousin toward whom 
she wa feel so warmli and kindly. just for the moment, loi wa as 
angri as ani child could have been; but some of the word of pastor 
nolan' prayer yet rang in her ears, and she thought it would be a 
shame if she did not let them sink into her heart. she dare not, 
however, stoop again to caress faith, but stood quietli by her, 
sorrow waiting, until a step at the outer door caus faith to 
rise quickly, and rush into the kitchen, leav loi to bear the brunt 
of the new-comer. It wa manasseh, return from hunting. He had been 
two day away, in compani with other young men belong to salem. It 
wa almost the onli occup which could draw him out of hi seclud 
habits. He stop suddenli at the door on see lois, and alone, for 
she had avoid him of late in everi possibl way. 

'where is my mother?' 

'at a prayer meet at pastor tappau's. she ha taken prudence. faith 
ha left the room thi minute. I will call her.' and loi wa go 
toward the kitchen, when he place himself between her and the door. 

'lois,' said he, 'the time is go by, and I cannot wait much longer. 
the vision come thick upon me, and my sight grow clearer and clearer. 
onli thi last night, camp out in the woods, I saw in my soul, 
between sleep and waking, the spirit come and offer thee two lots, 
and the colour of the one wa white, like a bride's, and the other wa 
black and red, which is, be interpreted, a violent death. and when 
thou didst choos the latter the spirit said unto me, 'come!' and I 
came, and did as I wa bidden. I put it on thee with mine own hands, as 
it is preordained, if thou wilt not hearken unto the voic and be my 
wife. and when the black and red dress fell to the ground, thou wert 
even as a corps three day old. now, be advised, lois, in time. lois, 
my cousin, I have seen it in a vision, and my soul cleaveth unto 
thee--i would fain spare thee.' 

He wa realli in earnest--in passion earnest; whatev hi visions, 
as he call them, might be, he believ in them, and thi belief gave 
someth of unselfish to hi love for lois. thi she felt at thi 
moment, if she had never done so before, and it seem like a contrast 
to the repuls she had just met with from hi sister. He had drawn near 
her, and now he took hold of her hand, repeat in hi wild, pathetic, 
dreami way: 

'and the voic said unto me, "marri lois!"' and loi wa more inclin 
to sooth and reason with him than she had ever been before, sinc the 
first time of hi speak to her on the subject,--when grace 
hickson--and prudenc enter the room from the passage. they had 
return from the prayer meet by the back way, which had prevent 
the sound of their approach from be heard. 

but manasseh did not stir or look round; he kept hi eye fix on 
lois, as if to note the effect of hi words. grace came hastili 
forwards, and lift up her strong right arm, smote their join hand 
in twain, in spite of the fervour of manasseh' grasp. 

'what mean this?' said she, address herself more to loi than to 
her son, anger flash out of her deep-set eyes. 

loi wait for manasseh to speak. He seemed, but a few minut before, 
to be more gentl and less threaten than he had been of late on thi 
subject, and she did not wish to irrit him. but he did not speak, 
and her aunt stood angrili wait for an answer. 

'at ani rate,' thought lois, 'it will put an end to the thought in hi 
mind when my aunt speak out about it.' 

'mi cousin seek me in marriage,' said lois. 

'thee!' and grace struck out in the direct of her niec with a 
gestur of suprem contempt. but now manasseh spoke forth: 

'yea! it is preordained. the voic ha said it, and the spirit ha 
brought her to me as my bride.' 

'spirit! an evil spirit then. A good spirit would have chosen out for 
thee a godli maiden of thine own people, and not a prelatist and a 
stranger like thi girl. A pretti return, mistress lois, for all our 
kindness.' 

'indeed, aunt hickson, I have done all I could--cousin manasseh know 
it--to show him I can be none of his. I have told him,' said she, 
blushing, but determin to say the whole out at once, 'that I am all 
but troth-plight to a young man of our own villag at home; and, even 
put all that on one side, I wish not for marriag at present.' 

'wish rather for convers and regeneration. marriag is an unseemli 
word in the mouth of a maiden. As for manasseh, I will take reason with 
him in private; and, meanwhile, if thou hast spoken truly, throw not 
thyself in hi path, as I have notic thou hast done but too often of 
late.' 

lois' heart burnt within her at thi unjust accusation, for she knew 
how much she had dread and avoid her cousin, and she almost look 
to him to give evid that her aunt' last word were not true. but, 
instead, he recur to hi one fix idea, and said: 

'mother, listen! If I wed not lois, both she and I die within the year. 
I care not for life; befor this, as you know, I have sought for death' 
(grace shuddered, and wa for a moment subdu by some recollect of 
past horror); 'but if loi were my wife I should live, and she would be 
spare from what is the other lot. that whole vision grow clearer to 
me day by day. yet, when I tri to know whether I am one of the elect, 
all is dark. the mysteri of free-wil and fore-knowledg is a mysteri 
of satan' devising, not of god's.' 

'alas, my son! satan is abroad among the brethren even now; but let the 
old vex topic rest. sooner than fret thyself again, thou shalt have 
loi to be thi wife, though my heart wa set far differ for thee.' 

'no, manasseh,' said lois. 'I love you well as a cousin, but wife of 
your I can never be. aunt hickson, it is not well to delud him so. I 
say, if ever I marri man, I am troth-plight to one in england.' 

'tush, child! I am your guardian in my dead husband' place. thou 
thinkest thyself so great a prize that I would clutch at thee whether 
or no, I doubt not. I valu thee not, save as a medicin for manasseh, 
if hi mind get disturb again, as I have note sign of late.' 

this, then, wa the secret explan of much that had alarm her in 
her cousin' manner: and if loi had been a physician of modern times, 
she might have trace somewhat of the same tempera in hi sister 
as well--in prudence' lack of natur feel and impish delight in 
mischief, in faith' vehem of unrequit love. but as yet loi did 
not know, ani more than faith, that the attach of the latter to mr. 
nolan wa not mere unreturned, but even unperceived, by the young 
minister. 

He came, it is true--cam often to the house, sat long with the family, 
and watch them narrowly, but took no especi notic of faith. loi 
perceiv this, and griev over it; natte perceiv it, and wa 
indign at it, long befor faith slowli acknowledg it to herself, 
and went to natte the indian woman, rather than to loi her cousin, 
for sympathi and counsel. 

'he care not for me,' said faith. 'he care more for lois' littl 
finger than for my whole body,' the girl moan out in the bitter pain 
of jealousy. 

'hush thee, hush thee, prairi bird! how can he build a nest, when the 
old bird ha got all the moss and the feathers? wait till the indian 
ha found mean to send the old bird fli far away.' thi wa the 
mysteri comfort natte gave. 

grace hickson took some kind of charg over manasseh that reliev loi 
of much of her distress at hi strang behaviour. yet at time he 
escap from hi mother' watchfulness, and in such opportun he 
would alway seek lois, entreat her, as of old, to marri 
him--sometim plead hi love for her, often speak wildli of 
hi vision and the voic which he heard foretel a terribl 
futurity. 

We have now to do with event which were take place in salem, beyond 
the narrow circl of the hickson family; but as they onli concern us in 
as far as they bore down in their consequ on the futur of those 
who form part of it, I shall go over the narr veri briefly. the 
town of salem had lost by death, within a veri short time preced the 
commenc of my story, nearli all it vener men and lead 
citizens--men of ripe wisdom and sound counsel. the peopl had hardli 
yet recov from the shock of their loss, as one by one the 
patriarch of the primit littl commun had rapidli follow each 
other to the grave. they had been belov as fathers, and look up to 
as judg in the land. the first bad effect of their loss wa seen in 
the heat dissens which sprang up between pastor tappau and the 
candid nolan. It had been appar heal over; but mr. nolan had 
not been mani week in salem, after hi second coming, befor the 
strife broke out afresh, and alien mani for life who had till then 
been bound togeth by the tie of friendship or relationship. even in 
the hickson famili someth of thi feel soon sprang up; grace 
be a vehement partisan of the elder pastor' more gloomi doctrines, 
while faith wa a passionate, if a powerless, advoc of mr. nolan. 
manasseh' grow absorpt in hi own fancies, and imagin gift of 
prophecy, make him compar indiffer to all outward events, 
did not tend to either the fulfil of hi visions, or the 
elucid of the dark mysteri doctrin over which he had ponder 
too long for the health either of hi mind or body; while prudenc 
delight in irrit everi one by her advocaci of the view of 
think to which they were most opposed, and retail everi gossip 
stori to the person most like to disbelieve, and be indign at what 
she told, with an assum unconsci of ani such effect to be 
produced. there wa much talk of the congreg difficulti and 
dissens be carri up to the gener court, and each parti 
natur hope that, if such were the cours of events, the oppos 
pastor and that portion of the congreg which adher to him might 
be worst in the struggle. 

such wa the state of thing in the township when, one day toward the 
end of the month of february, grace hickson return from the weekli 
prayer meeting; which it wa her custom to attend at pastor tappau' 
house, in a state of extrem excitement. On her entranc into her own 
hous she sat down, rock her bodi backward and forwards, and 
pray to herself: both faith and loi stop their spinning, in 
wonder at her agitation, befor either of them ventur to address her. 
At length faith rose, and spoke: 

'mother, what is it? hath anyth happen of an evil nature?' 

the brave, stern, old woman' face wa blenched, and her eye were 
almost set in horror, as she prayed; the great drop run down her 
cheeks. 

It seem almost as if she had to make a struggl to recov her sens 
of the present home accustom life, befor she could find word to 
answer: 

'evil nature! daughters, satan is abroad,--i close to us. I have thi 
veri hour seen him afflict two innoc children, as of old he troubl 
those who were possess by him in judea. hester and abigail tappau 
have been contort and convuls by him and hi servant into such 
shape as I am afeard to think on; and when their father, godli mr. 
tappau, began to exhort and to pray, their howl were like the wild 
beast of the field. satan is of a truth let loos amongst us. the 
girl kept call upon him as if he were even then present among us. 
abigail screech out that he stood at my veri back in the guis of a 
black man; and truly, as I turn round at her words, I saw a creatur 
like a shadow vanishing, and turn all of a cold sweat. who know 
where he is now? faith, lay straw across on the door-sill.' 

'but if he be alreadi enter in,' ask prudence, 'may not that make 
it difficult for him to depart?' 

her mother, take no notic of her question, went on rock herself, 
and praying, till again she broke out into narration: 

'reverend mr. tappau says, that onli last night he heard a sound as of 
a heavi bodi drag all through the hous by some strong power; onc 
it wa thrown against hi bedroom door, and would, doubtless, have 
broken it in, if he had not pray fervent and aloud at that veri 
time; and a shriek went up at hi prayer that made hi hair stand on 
end; and thi morn all the crockeri in the hous wa found broken 
and pile up in the middl of the kitchen floor; and pastor tappau 
says, that as soon as he began to ask a bless on the morning' meal, 
abigail and hester cri out, as if some one wa pinch them. lord, 
have merci upon us all! satan is of a truth let loose.' 

'they sound like the old stori I use to hear in barford,' said lois, 
breathless with affright. 

faith seem less alarmed; but then her dislik to pastor tappau wa so 
great, that she could hardli sympathis with ani misfortun that 
befel him or hi family. 

toward even mr. nolan came in. In general, so high did parti spirit 
run, grace hickson onli toler hi visits, find herself often 
engag at such hours, and be too much abstract in thought to show 
him the readi hospit which wa one of her most promin virtues. 
but to-day, both as bring the latest intellig of the new horror 
sprung up in salem, and as be one of the church milit (or what 
the puritan consid as equival to the church militant) against 
satan, he wa welcom by her in an unusu manner. 

He seem oppress with the occurr of the day: at first it 
appear to be almost a relief to him to sit still, and cogit upon 
them, and hi host were becom almost impati for him to say 
someth more than mere monosyllables, when he began: 

'such a day as this, I pray that I may never see again. It is as if the 
devil whom our lord banish into the herd of swine, had been 
permit to come again upon the earth. and I would it were onli the 
lost spirit who were torment us; but I much fear, that certain of 
those whom we have esteem as god' peopl have sold their soul to 
satan, for the sake of a littl of hi evil power, wherebi they may 
afflict other for a time. elder sherringham hath lost thi veri day a 
good and valuabl horse, wherewith he use to drive hi famili to 
meeting, hi wife be bedridden.' 

'perchance,' said lois, 'the hors die of some natur disease.' 

'true,' said pastor nolan; 'but I wa go on to say, that as he 
enter into hi house, full of dolour at the loss of hi beast, a 
mous ran in befor him so sudden that it almost trip him up, though 
an instant befor there wa no such thing to be seen; and he caught at 
it with hi shoe and hit it, and it cri out like a human creatur in 
pain, and straight ran up the chimney, care noth for the hot flame 
and smoke.' 

manasseh listen greedili to all thi story, and when it wa end he 
smote upon hi breast, and pray aloud for deliver from the power 
of the evil one; and he continu went on pray at interv 
through the evening, with everi mark of abject terror on hi face and 
in hi manner--he, the bravest, most dare hunter in all the 
settlement. indeed, all the famili huddl togeth in silent fear, 
scarc find ani interest in the usual household occupations. faith 
and loi sat with arm entwined, as in day befor the former had 
becom jealou of the latter; prudenc ask low, fear question of 
her mother and of the pastor as to the creatur that were abroad, and 
the way in which they afflict others; and when grace besought the 
minist to pray for her and her household, he made a long and 
passion supplic that none of that littl flock might ever so 
far fall away into hopeless perdit as to be guilti of the sin 
without forgiveness--th sin of witchcraft. 




chapter 3 


'the sin of witchcraft.' We read about it, we look on it from the 
outside; but we can hardli realiz the terror it induced. everi 
impuls or unaccustom action, everi littl nervou affection, everi 
ach or pain wa noticed, not mere by those around the sufferer, but 
by the person himself, whoever he might be, that wa acting, or be 
act upon, in ani but the most simpl and ordinari manner. He or she 
(for it wa most frequent a woman or girl that wa the suppos 
subject) felt a desir for some unusu kind of food--som unusu 
motion or rest her hand twitched, her foot wa asleep, or her leg had 
the cramp; and the dread question immedi suggest itself, 'i 
ani one possess an evil power over me, by the help of satan?' and 
perhap they went on to think, 'it is bad enough to feel that my bodi 
can be made to suffer through the power of some unknown evil-wish to 
me, but what if satan give them still further power, and they can 
touch my soul, and inspir me with loath thought lead me into 
crime which at present I abhor?' and so on, till the veri dread of 
what might happen, and the constant dwell of the thoughts, even with 
horror, upon certain possibilities, or what were esteem such, realli 
brought about the corrupt of imagin at least, which at first 
they had shudder at. moreover, there wa a sort of uncertainti as to 
who might be infected--not unlik the overpow dread of the plague, 
which made some shrink from their best-belov with irrepress fear. 
the brother or sister, who wa the dearest friend of their childhood 
and youth, might now be bound in some mysteri deadli pact with evil 
spirit of the most horribl kind--who could tell? and in such a case 
it becam a duty, a sacr duty, to give up the earthli bodi which had 
been onc so loved, but which wa now the habit of a soul corrupt 
and horribl in it evil inclinations. possibly, terror of death might 
bring on confess and repentance, and purification. Or if it did not, 
whi away with the evil creature, the witch, out of the world, down to 
the kingdom of the master, whose bid wa done on earth in all 
manner of corrupt and tortur of god' creatures! there were other 
who, to these more simple, if more ignorant, feel of horror at 
witch and witchcraft, ad the desire, consciou or unconscious, of 
reveng on those whose conduct had been in ani way displeas to them. 
where evid take a supernatur character, there is no disprov 
it. thi argument come up: 'you have onli the natur powers; I have 
supernatural. you admit the exist of the supernatur by the 
condemn of thi veri crime of witchcraft. you hardli know the 
limit of the natur powers; how then can you defin the supernatural? 
I say that in the dead of night, when my bodi seem to all present to 
be lie in quiet sleep, I was, in the most complet and wake 
consciousness, present in my bodi at an assembl of witch and wizard 
with satan at their head; that I wa by them tortur in my body, 
becaus my soul would not acknowledg him as it king; and that I 
wit such and such deeds. what the natur of the appear wa 
that took the semblanc of myself, sleep quietli in my bed, I know 
not; but admitting, as you do, the possibl of witchcraft, you 
cannot disprov my evidence.' thi evid might be given truli or 
falsely, as the person wit believ it or not; but everi one 
must see what immens and terribl power wa abroad for revenge. then, 
again, the accus themselv minist to the horribl panic abroad. 
some, in dread of death, confess from cowardic to the imaginari 
crime of which they were accused, and of which they were promis a 
pardon on confession. some, weak and terrified, came honestli to 
believ in their own guilt, through the diseas of imagin which 
were sure to be engend at such a time as this. 

loi sat spin with faith. both were silent, ponder over the 
stori that were abroad. loi spoke first. 

'oh, faith! thi countri is wors than ever england was, even in the 
day of master matthew hopkins, the witch-finder. I grow frighten of 
everi one, I think. I even get afeard sometim of nattee!' 

faith colour a little. then she asked, 

'why? what should make you distrust the indian woman?' 

'oh! I am asham of my fear as soon as it aris in my mind. but, you 
know, her look and colour were strang to me when first I came; and she 
is not a christen woman; and they tell stori of indian wizards; and 
I know not what the mixtur are which she is sometim stir over 
the fire, nor the mean of the strang chant she sing to herself. 
and onc I met her in the dusk, just close by pastor tappau' house, in 
compani with hota, hi servant--it wa just befor we heard of the sore 
disturb in hi house--and I have wonder if she had aught to do 
with it.' 

faith sat veri still, as if thinking. At last she said: 

'if natte ha power beyond what you and I have, she will not use them 
for evil; at least not evil to those whom she loves.' 

'that comfort me but little,' said lois. 'if she ha power beyond 
what she ought to have, I dread her, though I have done her no evil; 
nay, though I could almost say she bore me a kindli feeling. but such 
power are onli given by the evil one; and the proof thereof is, that, 
as you imply, natte would use them on those who offend her.' 

'and whi should she not?' ask faith, lift her eyes, and flash 
heavi fire out of them at the question. 

'because,' said lois, not see faith' glance, 'we are told to pray 
for them that despit use us, and to do good to them that 
persecut us. but poor natte is not a christen woman. I would that 
mr. nolan would baptiz her; it would, maybe, take her out of the power 
of satan' temptations.' 

'are you never tempted?' ask faith, half scornfully; 'and yet I doubt 
not you were well baptized!' 

'true,' said lois, sadly; 'I often do veri wrong, but, perhaps, I might 
have done worse, if the holi form had not been observed.' 

they were again silent for a time. 

'lois,' said faith, 'I did not mean ani offence. but do you never feel 
as if you would give up all that futur life, of which the parson 
talk, and which seem so vagu and so distant, for a few year of real, 
vivid blessed to begin to-morrow--thi hour, thi minute? oh! I 
could think of happi for which I would willingli give up all those 
misti chanc of heaven----' 

'faith, faith!' cri lois, in terror, hold her hand befor her 
cousin' mouth, and look around in fright. 'hush! you know not who 
may be listening; you are put yourself in hi power.' 

but faith push her hand away, and said, 'lois, I believ in him no 
more than I believ in heaven. both may exist, but they are so far away 
that I defi them. why, all thi ado about mr. tappau' house--promis 
me never to tell live creature, and I will tell you a secret.' 

'no!' said lois, terrified. 'I dread all secrets. I will hear none. I 
will do all that I can for you, cousin faith, in ani way; but just at 
thi time, I strive to keep my life and thought within the strictest 
bound of godli simplicity, and I dread pledg myself to aught that 
is hidden and secret.' 

'a you will, cowardli girl, full of terrors, which, if you had 
listen to me, might have been lessened, if not entir done away 
with.' and faith would not utter anoth word, though loi tri meekli 
to entic her into convers on some other subject. 

the rumour of witchcraft wa like the echo of thunder among the hills. 
It had broken out in mr. tappau' house, and hi two littl daughter 
were the first suppos to be bewitched; but round about, from everi 
quarter of the town, came in account of suffer by witchcraft. there 
wa hardli a famili without one of these suppos victims. then aros a 
growl and menac of vengeanc from mani a household--menac deepened, 
not daunt by the terror and mysteri of the suffer that gave rise 
to them. 

At length a day wa appoint when, after solemn fast and prayer, 
mr. tappau invit the neighbour minist and all godli peopl to 
assembl at hi house, and unit with him in devot a day to solemn 
religi services, and to supplic for the deliver of hi 
children, and those similarli afflicted, from the power of the evil 
one. all salem pour out toward the hous of the minister. there wa 
a look of excit on all their faces; eager and horror were 
depict on many, while stern resolution, amount to determin 
cruelty, if the occas arose, wa seen on others. 

In the midst of the prayer, hester tappau, the younger girl, fell into 
convulsions; fit after fit came on, and her scream mingl with the 
shriek and cri of the assembl congregation. In the first pause, 
when the child wa partial recovered, when the peopl stood around 
exhaust and breathless, her father, the pastor tappau, lift hi 
right hand, and adjur her, in the name of the trinity, to say who 
torment her. there wa a dead silence; not a creatur stir of all 
those hundreds. hester turn wearili and uneasily, and moan out the 
name of hota, her father' indian servant. hota wa present, appar 
as much interest as ani one; indeed, she had been busi herself 
much in bring remedi to the suffer child. but now she stood 
aghast, transfixed, while her name wa caught up and shout out in 
tone of reprob and hatr by all the crowd around her. anoth 
moment and they would have fallen upon the trembl creatur and torn 
her limb from limb--pale, dusky, shiver hota, half guilty-look 
from her veri bewilderment. but pastor tappau, that gaunt, grey man, 
lift himself to hi utmost height, sign to them to go back, to 
keep still while he address them; and then he told them, that instant 
vengeanc wa not just, deliber punishment; that there would be need 
of conviction, perchanc of confession--h hope for some redress for 
hi suffer children from her revelations, if she were brought to 
confession. they must leav the culprit in hi hands, and in those of 
hi brother ministers, that they might wrestl with satan befor 
deliv her up to the civil power. He spoke well, for he spoke from 
the heart of a father see hi children expos to dread and 
mysteri suffering, and firmli believ that he now held the clue in 
hi hand which should ultim releas them and their 
fellow-sufferers. and the congreg moan themselv into 
unsatisfi submission, and listen to hi long, passion prayer, 
which he uplift even while the hapless hota stood there, guard and 
bound by two men, who glare at her like bloodhound readi to slip, 
even while the prayer end in the word of the merci saviour. 

loi sicken and shudder at the whole scene; and thi wa no 
intellectu shudder at the folli and superstit of the people, 
but tender moral shudder at the sight of guilt which she believ 
in, and at the evid of men' hatr and abhorrence, which, when 
shown even to the guilty, troubl and distress her merci heart. 
she follow her aunt and cousin out into the open air, with downcast 
eye and pale face. grace hickson wa go home with a feel of 
triumphant relief at the detect of the guilti one. faith alon 
seem uneasi and disturb beyond her wont, for manasseh receiv the 
whole transact as the fulfil of a prophecy, and prudenc wa 
excit by the novel scene into a state of discord high spirits. 

'I am quit as old as hester tappau,' said she; 'her birthday is in 
septemb and mine in october.' 

'what ha that to do with it?' said faith, sharply. 

'nothing, onli she seem such a littl thing for all those grave 
minist to be pray for, and so mani folk come from a 
distance--som from boston they said--al for her sake, as it were. 
why, didst thou see, it wa godli mr. henwick that held her head when 
he wriggl so, and old madam holbrook had herself help upon a chair 
to see the better. I wonder how long I might wriggle, befor great and 
godli folk would take so much notic of me? but, I suppose, that come 
of be a pastor' daughter. she'll be so set up there'l be no 
speak to her now. faith! thinkest thou that hota realli had 
bewitch her? she gave me corn-cakes, the last time I wa at pastor 
tappau's, just like ani other woman, only, perchance, a trifl more 
good-natured; and to think of her be a witch after all!' 

but faith seem in a hurri to reach home, paid no attent to 
prudence' talking. loi hasten on with faith, for manasseh wa 
walk alongsid of hi mother, and she kept steadi to her plan of 
avoid him, even though she press her compani upon faith, who had 
seem of late desir of avoid her. 

that even the news spread through salem, that hota had confess her 
sin--had acknowledg that she wa a witch. natte wa the first to 
hear the intelligence. she broke into the room where the girl were 
sit with grace hickson, solemnli do nothing, becaus of the 
great prayer-meet in the morning, and cri out, 'mercy, mercy, 
mistress, everybody! take care of poor indian nattee, who never do 
wrong, but for mistress and the family! hota one bad wick witch, she 
say so herself; oh, me! oh me!' and stoop over faith, she said 
someth in a low, miser tone of voice, of which loi onli heard 
the word 'torture.' but faith heard all, and turn veri pale, half 
accompanied, half led natte back to her kitchen. 

presently, grace hickson came in. she had been out to see a neighbour; 
it will not do to say that so godli a woman had been gossiping; and, 
indeed, the subject of the convers she had held wa of too seriou 
and moment a natur for me to employ a light word to design it. 
there wa all the listen to and repeat of small detail and 
rumours, in which the speaker have no concern, that constitut 
gossiping; but in thi instance, all trivial fact and speech might 
be consid to bear such dread significance, and might have so 
ghastli an ending, that such whisper were occasion rais to a 
tragic importance. everi fragment of intellig that relat to mr. 
tappau' household wa eagerli snatch at; how hi dog howl all one 
long night through, and could not be stilled; how hi cow suddenli 
fail in her milk onli two month after she had calved; how hi memori 
had forsaken him one morning, for a minut or two, in repeat the 
lord' prayer, and he had even omit a claus thereof in hi sudden 
perturbation; and how all these forerunn of hi children' strang 
ill might now be interpret and understood--thi had form the 
stapl of the convers between grace hickson and her friends. there 
had arisen a disput among them at last, as to how far these 
subject to the power of the evil one were to be consid as a 
judgment upon pastor tappau for some sin on hi part; and if so, what? 
It wa not an unpleas discussion, although there wa consider 
differ of opinion; for as none of the speaker had had their 
famili so troubled, it wa rather a proof that they had none of them 
commit ani sin. In the midst of thi talk, one, enter in from the 
street, brought the news that hota had confess all--had own to 
sign a certain littl red book which satan had present to her--had 
been present at impiou sacraments--had ridden through the air to 
newburi falls--and, in fact, had assent to all the question which 
the elder and magistrates, care read over the confess of 
the witch who had formerli been tri in england, in order that they 
might not omit a singl inquiry, had ask of her. more she had own 
to, but thing of inferior importance, and partak more of the natur 
of earthli trick than of spiritu power. she had spoken of care 
adjust strings, by which all the crockeri in pastor tappau' hous 
could be pull down or disturbed; but of such intellig 
malpractic the gossip of salem took littl heed. one of them said 
that such an action show satan' prompting, but they all prefer to 
listen to the grander guilt of the blasphem sacrament and 
supernatur rides. the narrat end with say that hota wa to be 
hung the next morning, in spite of her confession, even although her 
life had been promis to her if she acknowledg her sin; for it wa 
well to make an exampl of the first-discov witch, and it wa also 
well that she wa an indian, a heathen, whose life would be no great 
loss to the community. grace hickson on thi spoke out. It wa well 
that witch should perish off the face of the earth, indian or 
english, heathen or, worse, a baptiz christian who had betray the 
lord, even as juda did, and had gone over to satan. for her part, she 
wish that the first-discov witch had been a member of a godli 
english household, that it might be seen of all men that religi folk 
were will to cut off the right hand, and pluck out the right eye, if 
taint with thi devilish sin. she spoke sternli and well. the last 
comer said, that her word might be brought to the proof, for it had 
been whisper that hota had name others, and some from the most 
religi famili of salem, whom she had seen among the unholi 
communic at the sacrament of the evil one. and grace repli that 
she would answer for it, all godli folk would stand the proof, and 
quench all natur affect rather than that such a sin should grow 
and spread among them. she herself had a weak bodili dread of 
wit the violent death even of an animal; but she would not let 
that deter her from stand amidst those who cast the accurs 
creatur out from among them on the morrow morning. 

contrari to her wont, grace hickson told her famili much of thi 
conversation. It wa a sign of her excit on the subject that she 
thu spoke, and the excit spread in differ form through her 
family. faith wa flush and restless, wander between the 
keeping-room and the kitchen, and question her mother particularli 
as to the more extraordinari part of hota' confession, as if she 
wish to satisfi herself that the indian witch had realli done those 
horribl and mysteri deeds. 

loi shiver and trembl with affright at the narration, and the idea 
that such thing were possible. occasion she found herself 
wander off into sympathet thought for the woman who wa to die, 
abhor of all men, and unpardon by god, to whom she had been so 
fear a traitor, and who wa now, at thi veri time--when loi sat 
among her kindr by the warm and cheer firelight, anticip mani 
peaceful, perchanc happy, morrows--solitary, shivering, 
panic-stricken, guilty, with none to stand by her and exhort her, shut 
up in dark between the cold wall of the town prison. but loi 
almost shrank from sympathis with so loathsom an accomplic of 
satan, and pray for forgiv for her charit thought; and yet, 
again, she rememb the tender spirit of the saviour, and allow 
herself to fall into pity, till at last her sens of right and wrong 
becam so bewild that she could onli leav all to god' disposal, 
and just ask that He would take all creatur and all event into hi 
hands. 

prudenc wa as bright as if she were listen to some merri 
story--curi as to more than her mother would tell her--seem to 
have no particular terror of witch or witchcraft, and yet to be 
especi desir to accompani her mother the next morn to the 
hanging. loi shrank from the cruel, eager face of the young girl as 
she beg her mother to allow her to go. even grace wa disturb and 
perplex by her daughter' pertinacity. 

'no!' said she. 'ask me no more. thou shalt not go. such sight are not 
for the young. I go, and I sicken at the thought of it. but I go to 
show that I, a christian woman, take god' part against the devil's. 
thou shalt not go, I tell thee. I could whip thee for think of it.' 

'manasseh say hota wa well whip by pastor tappau ere she wa 
brought to confession,' said prudence, as if anxiou to chang the 
subject of discussion. 

manasseh lift up hi head from the great folio bible, brought by hi 
father from england, which he wa studying. He had not heard what 
prudenc said, but he look up at the sound of hi name. all present 
were startl at hi wild eyes, hi bloodless face. but he wa 
evid annoy at the express of their countenances. 

'whi look ye at me in that manner?' ask he. and hi manner wa 
anxiou and agitated. hi mother made hast to speak: 

'it wa but that prudenc said someth that thou hast told her--that 
pastor tappau defil hi hand by whip the witch hota. what evil 
thought ha got hold of thee? talk to us, and crack not thi skull 
against the learn of man.' 

'it is not the learn of man that I study: it is the word of god. I 
would fain know more of the natur of thi sin of witchcraft, and 
whether it be, indeed, the unpardon sin against the holi ghost. At 
time I feel a creep influenc come over me, prompt all evil 
thought and unheard-of deeds, and I question within myself, "i not 
thi the power of witchcraft?" and I sicken, and loath all that I do 
or say, and yet some evil creatur hath the masteri over me, and I must 
need do and say what I loath and dread. whi wonder you, mother, that 
I, of all men, strive to learn the exact natur of witchcraft, and for 
that end studi the word of god? have you not seen me when I was, as it 
were, possess with a devil?' 

He spoke calmly, sadly, but as under deep conviction. hi mother rose 
to comfort him. 

'mi son,' she said, 'no one ever saw thee do deeds, or heard thee utter 
words, which ani one could say were prompt by devils. We have seen 
thee, poor lad, with thi wit gone astray for a time, but all thi 
thought sought rather god' will in forbidden places, than lost the 
clue to them for one moment in hanker after the power of darkness. 
those day are long past; a futur lie befor thee. think not of 
witch or of be subject to the power of witchcraft. I did evil to 
speak of it befor thee. let loi come and sit by thee, and talk to 
thee.' 

loi went to her cousin, griev at heart for hi depress state of 
mind, anxiou to sooth and comfort him, and yet recoil more than 
ever from the idea of ultim becom hi wife--an idea to which 
she saw her aunt reconcil herself unconsci day by day, as she 
perceiv the english girl' power of sooth and comfort her 
cousin, even by the veri tone of her sweet coo voice. 

He took lois' hand. 

'let me hold it. It doe me good,' said he. 'ah, lois, when I am by you 
I forget all my troubles--wil the day never come when you will listen 
to the voic that speak to me continually?' 

'I never hear it, cousin manasseh,' she said, softly; 'but do not think 
of the voices. tell me of the land you hope to enclos from the 
forest--what manner of tree grow on it?' 

thus, by simpl question on practic affairs, she led him back, in 
her unconsci wisdom, to the subject on which he had alway shown 
strong practic sense. He talk on these with all due discret till 
the hour for famili prayer came round, which wa earli in those days. 
It wa manasseh' place to conduct it, as head of the family; a post 
which hi mother had alway been anxiou to assign to him sinc her 
husband' death. He pray extempore; and to-night hi supplic 
wander off into wild, unconnect fragment of prayer, which all 
those kneel around began, each accord to her anxieti for the 
speaker, to think would never end. minut elapsed, and grew to 
quarter of an hour, and hi word onli becam more emphat and 
wilder, pray for himself alone, and lay bare the recess of hi 
heart. At length hi mother rose, and took loi by the hand, for she 
had faith in lois' power over her son, as be akin to that which the 
shepherd david, play on hi harp, had over king saul sit on hi 
throne. she drew her toward him, where he knelt face into the 
circle, with hi eye upturned, and the tranc agoni of hi face 
depict the struggl of the troubl soul within. 

'here is lois,' said grace, almost tenderly; 'she would fain go to her 
chamber.' (down the girl' face the tear were streaming.) 'rise, and 
finish thi prayer in thi closet.' 

but at lois' approach he sprang to hi feet,--sprang aside. 

'take her away, mother! lead me not into temptation. she bring me evil 
and sin thoughts. she overshadow me, even in the presenc of my 
god. she is no angel of light, or she would not do this. she troubl 
me with the sound of a voic bid me marri her, even when I am at my 
prayers. avaunt! take her away!' 

He would have struck at loi if she had not shrunk back, dismay and 
affrighted. hi mother, although equal dismayed, wa not affrighted. 
she had seen him thu before; and understood the manag of hi 
paroxysm. 

'go, lois! the sight of thee irrit him, as onc that of faith did. 
leav him to me.' 

and loi rush away to her room, and threw herself on her bed, like a 
panting, hunt creature. faith came after her slowli and heavily. 

'lois,' said she, 'wilt thou do me a favour? It is not much to ask. 
wilt thou aris befor daylight, and bear thi letter from me to pastor 
nolan' lodgings? I would have done it myself, but mother ha bidden me 
to come to her, and I may be detain until the time when hota is to be 
hung; and the letter tell of matter pertain to life and death. 
seek out pastor nolan wherev he may be, and have speech of him after 
he ha read the letter.' 

'cannot natte take it?' ask lois. 

'no!' faith answered, fiercely. 'whi should she?' 

but loi did not reply. A quick suspicion dart through faith' mind, 
sudden as lightning. It had never enter there before. 

'speak, lois. I read thi thoughts. thou wouldst fain not be the bearer 
of thi letter?' 

'I will take it,' said lois, meekly. 'it concern life and death, you 
say?' 

'yes!' said faith, in quit a differ tone of voice. but, after a 
paus of thought, she added: 'then, as soon as the hous is still, I 
will write what I have to say, and leav it here, on thi chest; and 
thou wilt promis me to take it befor the day is fulli up, while there 
is yet time for action.' 

'yes! I promise,' said lois. and faith knew enough of her to feel sure 
that the deed would be done, howev reluctantly. 

the letter wa written--laid on the chest; and, ere day dawned, loi 
wa astir, faith watch her from between her half-clos 
eyelids--eyelid that had never been fulli close in sleep the livelong 
night. the instant lois, cloak and hooded, left the room, faith 
sprang up, and prepar to go to her mother, whom she heard alreadi 
stirring. nearli everi one in salem wa awak and up on thi aw 
morning, though few were out of doors, as loi pass along the 
streets. here wa the hastili erect gallows, the black shadow of 
which fell across the street with ghastli significance; now she had to 
pass the iron-bar gaol, through the unglaz window of which she 
heard the fear cri of a woman, and the sound of mani footsteps. On 
she sped, sick almost to faintness, to the widow woman' where mr. 
nolan lodged. He wa alreadi up and abroad, gone, hi hostess believed, 
to the gaol. thither lois, repeat the word 'for life and for 
death!' wa forc to go. retrac her steps, she wa thank to see 
him come out of those dismal portals, render more dismal for be in 
heavi shadow, just as she approached. what hi errand had been she knew 
not; but he look grave and sad, as she put faith' letter into hi 
hands, and stood befor him quietli waiting, until he should read it, 
and deliv the expect answer. but, instead of open it, he held it 
in hi hand, appar absorb in thought. At last he spoke aloud, 
but more to himself than to her: 

'mi god! and is she then to die in thi fear delirium? It must 
be--can be--onli delirium, that prompt such wild and horribl 
confessions. mistress barclay, I come from the presenc of the indian 
woman appoint to die. It seems, she consid herself betray last 
even by her sentenc not be respited, even after she had made 
confess of sin enough to bring down fire from heaven; and, it seem 
to me, the passionate, impot anger of thi helpless creatur ha 
turn to madness, for she appal me by the addit revel she 
ha made to the keeper dure the night--to me thi morning. I could 
almost fanci that she thinks, by deepen the guilt she confesses, to 
escap thi last dread punish of all, as if, were a tith of what 
she say true, one could suffer such a sinner to live. yet to send her 
to death in such a state of mad terror! what is to be done?' 

'yet scriptur say that we are not to suffer witch in the land,' 
said lois, slowly. 

'true; I would but ask for a respit till the prayer of god' peopl 
had gone up for hi mercy. some would pray for her, poor wretch as she 
is. you would, mistress barclay, I am sure?' but he said it in a 
question tone. 

'I have been pray for her in the night mani a time,' said lois, in a 
low voice. 'I pray for her in my heart at thi moment; I suppose; they 
are bidden to put her out of the land, but I would not have her 
entir god-forsaken. but, sir, you have not read my cousin' letter. 
and she bade me bring back an answer with much urgency.' 

still he delayed. He wa think of the dread confess he came 
from hearing. If it were true, the beauti earth wa a pollut 
place, and he almost wish to die, to escap from such pollution, into 
the white innoc of those who stood in the presenc of god. 

suddenli hi eye fell on lois' pure, grave face, upturn and 
watch his. faith in earthli good came over hi soul in that 
instant, 'and he bless her unaware.' 

He put hi hand on her shoulder, with an action half paternal--although 
the differ in their age wa not abov a dozen years--and, bend 
a littl toward her, whispered, half to himself, 'mistress barclay, 
you have done me good.' 

'i!' said lois, half affrighted--'i done you good! how?' 

'bi be what you are. but, perhaps, I should rather thank god, who 
sent you at the veri moment when my soul wa so disquieted.' 

At thi instant, they were awar of faith stand in front of them, 
with a counten of thunder. her angri look made loi feel guilty. 
she had not enough urg the pastor to read hi letter, she thought; 
and it wa indign at thi delay in what she had been commiss 
to do with the urgenc of life or death, that made her cousin lower at 
her so from beneath her straight black brows. loi explain how she 
had not found mr. nolan at hi lodgings, and had had to follow him to 
the door of the gaol. but faith replied, with obdur contempt: 

'spare thi breath, cousin lois. It is easi see on what pleasant 
matter thou and the pastor nolan were talking. I marvel not at thi 
forgetfulness. My mind is changed. give me back my letter, sir; it wa 
about a poor matter--an old woman' life. and what is that compar to 
a young girl' love?' 

loi heard but for an instant; did not understand that her cousin, in 
her jealou anger, could suspect the exist of such a feel as 
love between her and mr. nolan. No imagin as to it possibl 
had ever enter her mind; she had respect him, almost rever 
him--nay, had like him as the probabl husband of faith. At the 
thought that her cousin could believ her guilti of such treachery, her 
grave eye dilated, and fix themselv on the flame counten of 
faith. that serious, unprotest manner of perfect innoc must have 
told on her accuser, had it not been that, at the same instant, the 
latter caught sight of the crimson and disturb counten of the 
pastor, who felt the veil rent off the unconsci secret of hi heart. 
faith snatch her letter out of hi hands, and said: 

'let the witch hang! what care I? she ha done harm enough with her 
charm and her sorceri on pastor tappau' girls. let her die, and let 
all other witch look to themselves; for there be mani kind of 
witchcraft abroad. cousin lois, thou wilt like best to stop with pastor 
nolan, or I would pray thee to come back with me to breakfast.' 

loi wa not to be daunt by jealou sarcasm. she held out her hand to 
pastor nolan, determin to take no heed of her cousin' mad words, but 
to bid him farewel in her accustom manner. He hesit befor 
take it, and when he did, it wa with a convuls squeez that 
almost made her start. faith wait and watch all, with set lip and 
veng eyes. she bade no farewell; she spake no word; but grasp 
loi tightli by the back of the arm, she almost drove her befor her 
down the street till they reach their home. 

the arrang for the morn wa this: grace hickson and her son 
manasseh were to be present at the hang of the first witch execut 
in salem, as piou and godli head of a family. all the other member 
were strictli forbidden to stir out, until such time as the low-tol 
bell announc that all wa over in thi world for hota, the indian 
witch. when the execut wa ended, there wa to be a solemn 
prayer-meet of all the inhabit of salem; minist had come from 
a distanc to aid by the efficaci of their prayer in these effort to 
purg the land of the devil and hi servants. there wa reason to think 
that the great old meeting-hous would be crowded, and when faith and 
loi reach home, grace hickson wa give her direct to prudence, 
urg her to be readi for an earli start to that place. the stern old 
woman wa troubl in her mind at the anticip of the sight she wa 
to see, befor mani minut were over, and spoke in a more hurri and 
incoher manner than wa her wont. she wa dress in her sunday 
best; but her face wa veri grey and colourless, and she seem afraid 
to ceas speak about household affairs, for fear she should have 
time to think. manasseh stood by her, perfectly, rigidli still; he also 
wa in hi sunday clothes. hi face, too, wa paler than it wont, but 
it wore a kind of absent, rapt expression, almost like that of a man 
who see a vision. As faith entered, still hold loi in her fierc 
grasp, manasseh start and smiled; but still dreamily. hi manner wa 
so peculiar, that even hi mother stay her talk to observ him 
more closely; he wa in that state of excit which usual end in 
what hi mother and certain of her friend esteem a prophet 
revelation. He began to speak, at first veri low, and then hi voic 
increas in power: 

'how beauti is the land of beulah, far over the sea, beyond the 
mountains! thither the angel carri her, lie back in their arm like 
one fainting. they shall kiss away the black circl of death, and lay 
her down at the feet of the lamb. I hear her plead there for those 
on earth who consent to her death. O lois! pray also for me, pray for 
me, miserable!' 

when he utter hi cousin' name all their eye turn toward her. It 
wa to her that hi vision related! she stood among them, amazed, 
awe-stricken, but not like one affright or dismayed. she wa the 
first to speak: 

'dear friends, do not think of me; hi word may or may not be true. I 
am in god' hand all the same, whether he have the gift of propheci or 
not. besides, hear you not that I end where all would fain end? think 
of him, and of hi needs. such time as these alway leav him 
exhaust and weary, when he come out of them.' 

and she busi herself in care for hi refreshment, aid her aunt' 
trembl hand to set befor him the requisit food, as he now sat 
tire and bewildered, gather togeth with difficulti hi scatter 
senses. 

prudenc did all she could to assist and speed their departure. but 
faith stood apart, watch in silenc with her passionate, angri eyes. 

As soon as they had set out on their solemn, fatal errand, faith left 
the room. she had not tast food or touch drink. indeed, they all 
felt sick at heart. the moment her sister had gone up stairs, prudenc 
sprang to the settl on which loi had thrown down her cloak and hood: 

'lend me your muffl and mantle, cousin lois. I never yet saw a woman 
hanged, and I see not whi I should not go. I will stand on the edg of 
the crowd; no one will know me, and I will be home long befor my 
mother.' 

'no!' said lois, 'that may not be. My aunt would be sore displeased. I 
wonder at you, prudence, seek to wit such a sight.' and as she 
spoke she held fast her cloak, which prudenc vehement struggl for. 

faith returned, brought back possibl by the sound of the struggle. she 
smiled--a deadli smile. 

'give it up, prudence. strive no more with her. she ha bought success 
in thi world, and we are but her slaves.' 

'oh, faith!' said lois, relinquish her hold of the cloak, and 
turn round with passion reproach in her look and voice, 'what 
have I done that you should speak so of me; you, that have love as I 
think one love a sister?' 

prudenc did not lose her opportunity, but hastili array herself in 
the mantle, which wa too larg for her, and which she had, therefore, 
consid as well adapt for concealment; but, as she went toward 
the door, her feet becam entangl in the unusu length, and she 
fell, bruis her arm pretti sharply. 

'take care, anoth time, how you meddl with a witch' things,' said 
faith, as one scarc believ her own words, but at enmiti with all 
the world in her bitter jealousi of heart. prudenc rub her arm and 
look stealthili at lois. 

'witch lois! witch lois!' said she at last, softly, pull a childish 
face of spite at her. 

'oh, hush, prudence! Do not bandi such terribl words. let me look at 
thine arm. I am sorri for thi hurt, onli glad that it ha kept thee 
from disobey thi mother.' 

'away, away!' said prudence, spring from her. 'I am afeard of her in 
veri truth, faith. keep between me and the witch, or I will throw a 
stool at her.' 

faith smiled--it wa a bad and wick smile--but she did not stir to 
calm the fear she had call up in her young sister. just at thi 
moment, the bell began to toll. hota, the indian witch, wa dead. loi 
cover her face with her hands. even faith went a deadlier pale than 
she had been, and said, sighing, 'poor hota! but death is best.' 

prudenc alon seem unmov by ani thought connect with the 
solemn, monoton sound. her onli consider was, that now she 
might go out into the street and see the sights, and hear the news, and 
escap from the terror which she felt at the presenc of her cousin. 
she flew up stair to find her own mantle, ran down again, and past 
lois, befor the english girl had finish her prayer, and wa speedili 
mingl among the crowd go to the meetinghouse. there also faith and 
loi came in due cours of time, but separately, not together. faith so 
evid avoid lois, that she, humbl and grieved, could not forc 
her compani upon her cousin, but loiter a littl behind,--th quiet 
tear steal down her face, shed for the mani caus that had 
occur thi morning. 

the meeting-hous wa full to suffocation; and, as it sometim happen 
on such occasions, the greatest crowd wa close about the doors, from 
the fact that few saw, on their first entrance, where there might be 
possibl space into which they could wedg themselves. yet they were 
impati of ani arriv from the outside, and push and hustl 
faith, and after her lois, till the two were forc on to a conspicu 
place in the veri centr of the building, where there wa no chanc of 
a seat, but still space to stand in. sever stood around, the pulpit 
be in the middle, and alreadi occupi by two minist in geneva 
band and gowns, while other ministers, similarli attired, stood 
hold on to it, almost as if they were give support instead of 
receiv it. grace hickson and her son sat decor in their own 
pew, therebi show that they had arriv earli from the execution. 
you might almost have trace out the number of those who had been at 
the hang of the indian witch, by the express of their 
countenances. they were awestricken into terribl repose; while the 
crowd pour in, still pour in, of those who had not attend the 
execution, look all restless, and excited, and fierce. A buzz went 
round the meeting, that the stranger minist who stood along with 
pastor tappau in the pulpit wa no other than dr. cotton mather 
himself, come all the way from boston to assist in purg salem of 
witches. 

and now pastor tappau began hi prayer, extempore, as wa the custom. 
hi word were wild and incoherent, as might be expect from a man who 
had just been consent to the bloodi death of one who was, but a few 
day ago, a member of hi own family; violent and passionate, as wa to 
be look for in the father of children, whom he believ to suffer so 
fear from the crime he would denounc befor the lord. He sat down 
at length from pure exhaustion. then dr. cotton mather stood forward: 
he did not utter more than a few word of prayer, calm in comparison 
with what had gone before, and then he went on to address the great 
crowd befor him in a quiet, argument way, but arrang what he 
had to say with someth of the same kind of skill which antoni use 
in hi speech to the roman after cæsar' murder. some of dr. mather' 
word have been preserv to us, as he afterward wrote them down in 
one of hi works. speak of those 'unbeliev sadducees' who doubt 
the exist of such a crime, he said: 'instead of their apish shout 
and jeer at bless scripture, and histori which have such undoubt 
confirm as that no man that ha breed enough to regard the 
common law of human societi will offer to doubt of them, it becom us 
rather to ador the good of god, who from the mouth of babe and 
suckl ha ordain truth, and by the mean of the sore-afflict 
children of your godli pastor, ha reveal the fact that the devil 
have with most horrid oper broken in upon your neighbourhood. let 
us beseech him that their power may be restrained, and that they go not 
so far in their evil machin as they did but four year ago in the 
citi of boston, where I wa the humbl means, under god, of loos 
from the power of satan the four children of that religi and bless 
man, mr. goodwin. these four babe of grace were bewitch by an irish 
witch; there is no end to the narrat of the torment they had to 
submit to. At one time they would bark like dogs, at anoth purr like 
cats; yea, they would fli like geese, and be carri with an incred 
swiftness, have but just their toe now and then upon the ground, 
sometim not onc in twenti feet, and their arm wave like those of a 
bird. yet at other times, by the hellish devic of the woman who had 
bewitch them, they could not stir without limping, for, by mean of 
an invis chain, she hamper their limbs, or, sometimes, by mean 
of a noose, almost choke them. one in especi wa subject by thi 
woman of satan to such heat as of an oven, that I myself have seen the 
sweat drop from off her, while all around were moder cold and well 
at ease. but not to troubl you with more of my stories, I will go on 
to prove that it wa satan himself that held power over her. for a veri 
remark thing it was, that she wa not permit by that evil spirit 
to read ani godli or religi book, speak the truth as it is in 
jesus. she could read popish book well enough, while both sight and 
speech seem to fail her when I gave her the assembly' catechism. 
again, she wa fond of that prelat book of common prayer, which is 
but the roman mass-book in an english and ungodli shape. In the midst 
of her sufferings, if one put the prayer-book into her hand it 
reliev her. yet mark you, she could never be brought to read the 
lord' prayer, whatev book she met with it in, prove therebi 
distinctli that she wa in leagu with the devil. I took her into my 
own house, that I, even as dr. martin luther did, might wrestl with 
the devil and have my fling at him. but when I call my household to 
prayer, the devil that possess her caus her to whistle, and sing, 
and yell in a discord and hellish fashion.' 

At thi veri instant, a shrill, clear whistl pierc all ears. dr. 
mather stop for a moment: 

'satan is among you!' he cried. 'look to yourselves!' and he pray 
with fervour, as if against a present and threaten enemy; but no one 
heed him. whenc came that ominous, unearthli whistle? everi man 
watch hi neighbour. again the whistle, out of their veri midst! and 
then a bustl in a corner of the building, three or four peopl 
stirring, without ani caus immedi percept to those at a 
distance, the movement spread, and, directli after, a passag even in 
that dens mass of peopl wa clear for two men, who bore forward 
prudenc hickson, lie rigid as a log of wood, in the convuls 
posit of one who suffer from an epilept fit. they laid her down 
among the minist who were gather round the pulpit. her mother came 
to her, send up a wail cri at the sight of her distort child. 
dr. mather came down from the pulpit and stood over her, exorcis the 
devil in possession, as one accustom to such scenes. the crowd 
press forward in mute horror. At length, her rigid of form and 
featur gave way, and she wa terribl convulsed--torn by the devil, as 
they call it. by-and-bi the violenc of the attack wa over, and the 
spectat began to breath onc more, though still the former horror 
brood over them, and they listen as if for the sudden omin 
whistl again, and glanc fear around, as if satan were at their 
back pick out hi next victim. 

meanwhile, dr. mather, pastor tappau, and one or two other were 
exhort prudenc to reveal, if she could, the name of the person, the 
witch, who, by influenc over satan, had subject the child to such 
tortur as that which they had just witnessed. they bade her speak in 
the name of the lord. she whisper a name in the low voic of 
exhaustion. none of the congreg could hear what it was. but the 
pastor tappau, when he heard it, drew back in dismay, while dr. mather, 
know not to whom the name belonged, cri out, in a clear, cold 
voice, 

'know ye one loi barclay; for it is she who hath bewitch thi poor 
child?' 

the answer wa given rather by action than by word, although a low 
murmur went up from many. but all fell back, as far as fall back in 
such a crowd wa possible, from loi barclay, where she stood,--and 
look on her with surpris and horror. A space of some feet, where no 
possibl of space had seem to be not a minut before, left loi 
stand alone, with everi eye fix upon her in hatr and dread. she 
stood like one speechless, tongue-tied, as if in a dream. she a witch! 
accurs as witch were in the sight of god and man! her smooth, 
healthi face becam contract into shrivel and pallor, but she utter 
not a word, onli look at dr. mather with her dilated, terrifi eyes. 

some one said, 'she is of the household of grace hickson, a god-fear 
woman.' loi did not know if the word were in her favour or not. she 
did not think about them, even; they told less on her than on ani 
person present. she a witch! and the silver glitter avon, and the 
drown woman she had seen in her childhood at barford,--at home in 
england,--wer befor her, and her eye fell befor her doom. there wa 
some commotion--som rustl of papers; the magistr of the town 
were draw near the pulpit and consult with the ministers. dr. 
mather spoke again: 

'the indian woman, who wa hung thi morning, name certain people, 
whom she depos to have seen at the horribl meet for the 
worship of satan; but there is no name of loi barclay down upon the 
paper, although we are stricken at the sight of the name of some----' 

An interruption--a consultation. again dr. mather spoke: 

'bring the accus witch, loi barclay, near to thi poor suffer 
child of christ.' 

they rush forward to forc loi to the place where prudenc lay. but 
loi walk forward of herself. 

'prudence,' she said, in such a sweet, touch voice, that, long 
afterwards, those who heard it that day, spoke of it to their children, 
'have I ever said an unkind word to you, much less done you an ill 
turn? speak, dear child. you did not know what you said just now, did 
you?' 

but prudenc writh away from her approach, and scream out, as if 
stricken with fresh agony. 

'take her away! take her away! witch lois, witch lois, who threw me 
down onli thi morning, and turn my arm black and blue.' and she 
bare her arm, as if in confirm of her words. It wa sore 
bruised. 

'I wa not near you, prudence!' said lois, sadly. but that wa onli 
reckon fresh evid of her diabol power. 

lois' brain began to get bewildered. witch lois! she a witch, abhor 
of all men! yet she would tri to think, and make one more effort. 

'aunt hickson,' she said, and grace came forwards--'am I a witch, aunt 
hickson?' she asked; for her aunt, stern, harsh, unlov as she might 
be, wa truth itself, and loi thought--so near to delirium had she 
come--if her aunt condemn her, it wa possibl she might inde be a 
witch. 

grace hickson face her unwillingly. 

'it is a stain upon our famili for ever,' wa the thought in her mind. 

'it is for god to judg whether thou art a witch, or not. not for me.' 

'alas, alas!' moan lois; for she had look at faith, and learnt that 
no good word wa to be expect from her gloomi face and avert eyes. 
the meeting-hous wa full of eager voices, repressed, out of rever 
for the place, into tone of earnest murmur that seem to fill the 
air with gather sound of anger, and those who had at first fallen 
back from the place where loi stood were now press forward and 
round about her, readi to seiz the young friendless girl, and bear her 
off to prison. those who might have been, who ought to have been, her 
friends, were either avers or indiffer to her; though onli prudenc 
made ani open outcri upon her. that evil child cri out perpetu 
that loi had cast a devilish spell upon her, and bade them keep the 
witch away from her; and, indeed, prudenc wa strang convuls when 
onc or twice lois' perplex and wist eye were turn in her 
direction. here and there girls, women utter strang cries, and 
appar suffer from the same kind of convuls fit as that which 
had attack prudence, were centr of a group of agit friends, who 
mutter much and savag of witchcraft, and the list which had been 
taken down onli the night befor from hota' own lips. they demand to 
have it made public, and object to the slow form of the law. others, 
not so much or so immedi interest in the sufferers, were 
kneel around, and pray aloud for themselv and their own safety, 
until the excit should be so much quell as to enabl dr. cotton 
mather to be again heard in prayer and exhortation. 

and where wa manasseh? what said he? you must remember, that the stir 
of the outcry, the accusation, the appeal of the accused, all seem 
to go on at onc amid the buzz and din of the peopl who had come to 
worship god, but remain to judg and upbraid their fellow-creature. 
till now loi had onli caught a glimps of manasseh, who wa appar 
tri to push forwards, but whom hi mother wa hold back with word 
and action, as loi knew she would hold him back; for it wa not for 
the first time that she wa made awar how care her aunt had 
alway shroud hi decent reput among hi fellow-citizen from 
the least suspicion of hi season of excit and incipi 
insanity. On such days, when he himself imagin that he heard 
prophet voices, and saw prophet visions, hi mother would do much 
to prevent ani besid hi own famili from see him; and now lois, by 
a process swifter than reasoning, felt certain, from her one look at 
hi face, when she saw it, colourless and deform by intens of 
expression, among a number of other all simpli ruddi and angry, that 
he wa in such a state that hi mother would in vain do her utmost to 
prevent hi make himself conspicuous. whatev forc or argument 
grace used, it wa of no avail. In anoth moment he wa by lois' 
side, stammer with excitement, and give vagu testimony, which 
would have been of littl valu in a calm court of justice, and wa 
onli oil to the smoulder fire of that audience. 

'away with her to gaol!' 'seek out the witches!' 'the sin ha spread 
into all households!' 'satan is in the veri midst of us!' 'strike and 
spare not!' In vain dr. cotton mather rais hi voic in loud prayers, 
in which he assum the guilt of the accus girl; no one listened, all 
were anxiou to secur lois, as if they fear she would vanish from 
befor their veri eyes; she, white, trembling, stand quit still in 
the tight grasp of strange, fierc men, her dilat eye onli wander 
a littl now and then in search of some piti face--som piti face 
that among all those hundr wa not to be found. while some fetch 
cord to bind her, and others, by low questions, suggest new 
accus to the distemp brain of prudence, manasseh obtain a 
hear onc more. address dr. cotton mather, he said, evid 
anxiou to make clear some new argument that had just suggest itself 
to him: 'sir, in thi matter, be she witch or not, the end ha been 
foreshown to me by the spirit of prophecy. now, reverend sir, if the 
event be known to the spirit, it must have been foredoom in the 
council of god. If so, whi punish her for do that in which she had 
no free will?' 

'young man,' said dr. mather, bend down from the pulpit and look 
veri sever upon manasseh, 'take care! you are trench on 
blasphemy.' 

'I do not care. I say it again. either loi barclay is a witch, or she 
is not. If she is, it ha been foredoom for her, for I have seen a 
vision of her death as a condemn witch for mani month past--and the 
voic ha told me there wa but one escap for her, lois--th voic you 
know--' In hi excit he began to wander a little, but it wa 
touch to see how consciou he wa that by give way he would lose 
the thread of the logic argument by which he hope to prove that loi 
ought not to be punished, and with what an effort he wrench hi 
imagin away from the old ideas, and strove to concentr all hi 
mind upon the plea that, if loi wa a witch, it had been shown him by 
prophecy; and if there wa propheci there must be foreknowledge; if 
foreknowledge, foredoom; if foredoom, no exercis of free will, and, 
therefore, that loi wa not justli amen to punishment. 

On he went, plung into heresy, care not--grow more and more 
passion everi instant, but direct hi passion into keen argument, 
desper sarcasm, instead of allow it to excit hi imagination. 
even dr. mather felt himself on the point of be worst in the veri 
presenc of thi congregation, who, but a short half-hour ago, look 
upon him as all but infallible. keep a good heart, cotton mather! your 
opponent' eye begin to glare and flicker with a terribl yet 
uncertain light--hi speech grow less coherent, and hi argument are 
mix up with wild glimps at wilder revel made to himself 
alone. He ha touch on the limits,--h ha enter the border of 
blasphemy, and with an aw cri of horror and reprob the 
congreg rise up, as one man, against the blasphemer. dr. mather 
smile a grim smile, and the peopl were readi to stone manasseh, who 
went on, regardless, talk and raving. 

'stay, stay!' said grace hickson--al the decent famili shame which 
prompt her to conceal the mysteri misfortun of her onli son from 
public knowledg done away with by the sens of the immedi danger to 
hi life. 'touch him not. He know not what he is saying. the fit is 
upon him. I tell you the truth befor god. My son, my onli son, is 
mad.' 

they stood aghast at the intelligence. the grave young citizen, who had 
silent taken hi part in life close by them in their daili lives--not 
mix much with them, it wa true, but look up to, perhaps, all the 
more--th student of abstrus book on theology, fit to convers with 
the most learn minist that ever came about those parts--wa he the 
same with the man now pour out wild word to loi the witch, as if 
he and she were the onli two present! A solut of it all occur to 
them. He wa anoth victim. great wa the power of satan! through the 
art of the devil, that white statu of a girl had master the soul of 
manasseh hickson. So the word spread from mouth to mouth. and grace 
heard it. It seem a heal balsam for her shame. with wilful, 
dishonest blindness, she would not see--not even in her secret heart 
would she acknowledge, that manasseh had been strange, and moody, and 
violent long befor the english girl had reach salem. she even found 
some speciou reason for hi attempt at suicid long ago. He wa 
recov from a fever--and though toler well in health, the 
delirium had not final left him. but sinc loi came, how headstrong 
he had been at times! how unreasonable! how moody! what a strang 
delus wa that which he wa under, of be bidden by some voic to 
marri her! how he follow her about, and clung to her, as under some 
compuls of affection! and over all reign the idea that, if he were 
inde suffer from be bewitched, he wa not mad, and might again 
assum the honour posit he had held in the congreg and in 
the town, when the spell by which he wa held wa destroyed. So grace 
yield to the notion herself, and encourag it in others, that loi 
barclay had bewitch both manasseh and prudence. and the consequ 
of thi belief was, that loi wa to be tried, with littl chanc in 
her favour, to see whether she wa a witch or no; and if a witch, 
whether she would confess, implic others, repent, and live a life of 
bitter shame, avoid by all men, and cruelli treat by most; or die 
impenitent, hardened, deni her crime upon the gallows. 

and so they drag loi away from the congreg of christian to 
the gaol, to await her trial. I say 'drag her,' because, although 
she wa docil enough to have follow them whither they would, she wa 
now so faint as to requir extran force--poor lois! who should have 
been carri and tend lovingli in her state of exhaustion, but, 
instead, wa so detest by the multitude, who look upon her as an 
accomplic of satan in all hi evil doings, that they care no more how 
they treat her than a careless boy mind how he handl the toad that 
he is go to throw over the wall. 

when loi came to her full senses, she found herself lie on a short 
hard bed in a dark squar room, which she at onc knew must be a part 
of the citi gaol. It wa about eight feet square, it had stone wall on 
everi side, and a grate open high abov her head, let in all 
the light and air that could enter through about a squar foot of 
aperture. It wa so lonely, so dark to that poor girl, when she came 
slowli and pain out of her long faint. she did so want human help 
in that struggl which alway superven after a swoon; when the effort 
is to clutch at life, and the effort seem too much for the will. she 
did not at first understand where she was; did not understand how she 
came to be there, nor did she care to understand. her physic instinct 
wa to lie still and let the hurri puls have time to calm. So she 
shut her eye onc more. slowly, slowli the recollect of the scene 
in the meeting-hous shape itself into a kind of pictur befor her. 
she saw within her eyelids, as it were, that sea of loath face all 
turn toward her, as toward someth unclean and hateful. and you 
must remember, you who in the nineteenth centuri read thi account, 
that witchcraft wa a real terribl sin to her, loi barclay, two 
hundr year ago. the look on their faces, stamp on heart and brain, 
excit in her a sort of strang sympathy. could it, oh god!--could it 
be true, that satan had obtain the terrif power over her and her 
will, of which she had heard and read? could she inde be possess by 
a demon and be inde a witch, and yet till now have been unconsci 
of it? and her excit imagin recalled, with singular vividness, 
all she had ever heard on the subject--th horribl midnight sacrament, 
the veri presenc and power of satan. then rememb everi angri 
thought against her neighbour, against the impertin of prudence, 
against the overbear author of her aunt, against the persev 
crazi suit of manasseh, the indignation--onli that morning, but such 
age off in real time--at faith' injustice; oh, could such evil 
thought have had devilish power given to them by the father of evil, 
and, all unconsci to herself, have gone forth as activ curs 
into the world? and so, on the idea went career wildli through the 
poor girl' brain--th girl thrown inward upon herself. At length, the 
sting of her imagin forc her to start up impatiently. what wa 
this? A weight of iron on her legs--a weight state afterwards, by the 
gaoler of salem prison, to have been 'not more than eight pounds.' It 
wa well for loi it wa a tangibl ill, bring her back from the 
wild illimit desert in which her imagin wa wandering. she 
took hold of the iron, and saw her torn stocking,--h bruis ankle, 
and began to cri pitifully, out of strang compass with herself. 
they feared, then, that even in that cell she would find a way to 
escape. why, the utter, ridicul imposs of the thing convinc 
her of her own innocence, and ignor of all supernatur power; and 
the heavi iron brought her strang round from the delus that 
seem to be gather about her. 

no! she never could fli out of that deep dungeon; there wa no escape, 
natur or supernatural, for her, unless by man' mercy. and what wa 
man' merci in such time of panic? loi knew that it wa nothing; 
instinct more than reason taught her, that panic call out cowardice, 
and cowardic cruelty. yet she cried, cri freely, and for the first 
time, when she found herself iron and chained. It seem so cruel, so 
much as if her fellow-creatur had realli learnt to hate and dread 
her--her, who had had a few angri thoughts, which god forgive! but 
whose thought had never gone into words, far less into actions. why, 
even now she could love all the household at home, if they would but 
let her; yes, even yet, though she felt that it wa the open accus 
of prudenc and the withheld justif of her aunt and faith that 
had brought her to her present strait. would they ever come and see 
her? would kinder thought of her,--who had share their daili bread 
for month and months,--br them to see her, and ask her whether it 
were realli she who had brought on the ill of prudence, the 
derang of manasseh' mind? 

No one came. bread and water were push in by some one, who hastili 
lock and unlock the door, and care not to see if he put them 
within hi prisoner' reach, or perhap thought that physic fact 
matter littl to a witch. It wa long befor loi could reach them; 
and she had someth of the natur hunger of youth left in her still, 
which prompt her, lie her length on the floor, to weari herself 
with effort to obtain the bread. after she had eaten some of it, the 
day began to wane, and she thought she would lay her down and tri to 
sleep. but befor she did so, the gaoler heard her sing the even 
hymn: 

glori to thee, my god, thi night, 
for all the bless of the light. 

and a dull thought came into hi dull mind, that she wa thank for 
few blessings, if she could tune up her voic to sing prais after 
thi day of what, if she were a witch, wa shame detect in 
abomin practices, and if not--. well, hi mind stop short at 
thi point in hi wonder contemplation. loi knelt down and said the 
lord' prayer, paus just a littl befor one clause, that she might 
be sure that in her heart of heart she did forgive. then she look at 
her ankle, and the tear came into her eye onc again, but not so much 
becaus she wa hurt, as becaus men must have hate her so bitterli 
befor they could have treat her thus. then she lay down, and fell 
asleep. 

the next day, she wa led befor mr. hathorn and mr. curwin, justic 
of salem, to be accus legal and publicli of witchcraft. other were 
with her, under the same charge. and when the prison were brought 
in, they were cri out at by the abhorr crowd. the two tappaus, 
prudence, and one or two other girl of the same age were there, in the 
charact of victim of the spell of the accused. the prison were 
place about seven or eight feet from the justic and the accus 
between the justic and them; the former were then order to stand 
right befor the justices. all thi loi did at their bidding, with 
someth of the wonder docil of a child, but not with ani hope 
of soften the hard, stoni look of detest that wa on all the 
counten around her, save those that were distort by more 
passion anger. then an offic wa bidden to hold each of her hands, 
and justic hathorn bade her keep her eye continu fix on him, 
for thi reason--which, however, wa not told to her--lest, if she 
look on prudence, the girl might either fall into a fit, or cri out 
that she wa suddenli and violent hurt. If ani heart could have been 
touch of that cruel multitude, they would have felt some compass 
for the sweet young face of the english girl, tri so meekli to do 
all that she wa ordered, her face quit white, yet so full of sad 
gentleness, her grey eyes, a littl dilat by the veri solemn of 
her position, fix with the intent look of innoc maidenhood on the 
stern face of justic hathorn. and thu they stood in silence, one 
breathless minute. then they were bidden to say the lord' prayer. loi 
went through it as if alon in her cell; but, as she had done alon in 
her cell the night before, she made a littl pause, befor the prayer 
to be forgiven as she forgave. and at thi instant of hesitation--a if 
they had been on the watch for it--they all cri out upon her for a 
witch, and when the clamour end the justic bade prudenc hickson 
come forwards. then loi turn a littl to one side, wish to see at 
least one familiar face; but when her eye fell upon prudence, the girl 
stood stock-still, and answer no questions, nor spoke a word, and the 
justic declar that she wa struck dumb by witchcraft. then some 
behind took prudenc under the arms, and would have forc her forward 
to touch lois, possibl esteem that as a cure for her be 
bewitched. but prudenc had hardli been made to take three step befor 
she struggl out of their arms, and fell down writh as in a fit, 
call out with shrieks, and entreat loi to help her, and save her 
from her torment. then all the girl began 'to tumbl down like swine' 
(to use the word of an eye-witness) and to cri out upon loi and her 
fellow-prisoners. these last were now order to stand with their hand 
stretch out, it be imagin that if the bodi of the witch were 
arrang in the form of a cross they would lose their evil power. 
by-and-bi loi felt her strength going, from the unwont fatigu of 
such a position, which she had born patient until the pain and 
weari had forc both tear and sweat down her face, and she ask 
in a low, plaintiv voice, if she might not rest her head for a few 
moment against the wooden partition. but justic hathorn told her she 
had strength enough to torment others, and should have strength enough 
to stand. she sigh a little, and bore on, the clamour against her and 
the other accus increas everi moment; the onli way she could keep 
herself from utterli lose conscious wa by distract herself 
from present pain and danger, and say to herself vers of the 
psalm as she could rememb them, express of trust in god. At 
length she wa order back to gaol, and dimli understood that she and 
other were sentenc to be hang for witchcraft. mani peopl now 
look eagerli at lois, to see if she would weep at thi doom. If she 
had had strength to cry, it might--it wa just possibl that it 
might--hav been consid a plea in her favour, for witch could not 
shed tears, but she wa too exhaust and dead. all she want wa to 
lie down onc more on her prison-bed, out of the reach of men' cri 
of abhorrence, and out of shot of their cruel eyes. So they led her 
back to prison, speechless and tearless. 

but rest gave her back her power of thought and suffering. wa it, 
indeed, true that she wa to die? she, loi barclay, onli eighteen, so 
well, so young, so full of love and hope as she had been, till but 
these littl day past! what would they think of it at home--real, dear 
home at barford, in england? there they had love her; there she had 
gone about, sing and rejoic all the day long in the pleasant 
meadow by the avon side. oh, whi did father and mother die, and leav 
her their bid to come here to thi cruel new england shore, where 
no one had want her, no one had care for her, and where now they 
were go to put her to a shame death as a witch? and there would 
be no one to send kindli messag by to those she should never see 
more. never more! young luci wa living, and joyful--prob think 
of her, and of hi declar intent of come to fetch her home to be 
hi wife thi veri spring. possibl he had forgotten her; no one knew. 
A week before, she would have been indign at her own distrust in 
think for a minut that he could forget. now, she doubt all men' 
good for a time; for those around her were deadly, and cruel, and 
relentless. 

then she turn round, and beat herself with angri blow (to speak in 
images), for ever doubt her lover. oh! if she were but with him! oh! 
if she might but be with him! He would not let her die; but would hide 
her in hi bosom from the wrath of thi people, and carri her back to 
the old home at barford. and he might even now be sail on the wide 
blue sea, come nearer, nearer everi moment, and yet be too late after 
all. 

So the thought chase each other through her head all that feverish 
night, till she clung almost deliri to life, and wildli pray 
that she might not die; at least, not just yet, and she so young! 

pastor tappau and certain elder rous her up from a heavi sleep, late 
on the morn of the follow day. all night long she had trembl 
and cried, till morn had come peer in through the squar grate 
up above. It sooth her, and she fell asleep, to be awakened, as I 
have said, by pastor tappau. 

'arise!' said he, scrupl to touch her, from hi superstiti idea 
of her evil powers. 'it is noonday.' 

'where am i?' said she, bewild at thi unusu wakening, and the 
array of sever face all gaze upon her with reprobation. 

'you are in salem gaol, condemn for a witch.' 

'alas! I had forgotten for an instant,' said she, drop her head 
upon her breast. 

'she ha been out on a devilish ride all night long, doubtless, and is 
weari and perplex thi morning,' whisper one, in so low a voic 
that he did not think she could hear; but she lift up her eyes, and 
look at him, with mute reproach. 

'we are come' said pastor tappau, 'to exhort you to confess your great 
and manifold sin.' 

'mi great and manifold sin!' repeat loi to herself, shake her 
head. 

'yea, your sin of witchcraft. If you will confess, there may yet be 
balm in gilead.' 

one of the elders, struck with piti at the young girl' wan, shrunken 
look, said, that if she confessed, and repented, and did penance, 
possibl her life might yet be spared. 

A sudden flash of light came into her sunk, dull eye. might she yet 
live? wa it yet in her power? 

why, no one knew how soon ralph luci might be here, to take her away 
for ever into the peac of a new home! life! oh, then, all hope wa not 
over--perhap she might still live, and not die. yet the truth came 
onc more out of her lips, almost without ani exercis of her will. 

'I am not a witch,' she said. 

then pastor tappau blindfold her, all unresisting, but with languid 
wonder in her heart as to what wa to come next. she heard peopl enter 
the dungeon softly, and heard whisper voices; then her hand were 
lift up and made to touch some one near, and in an instant she heard 
a nois of struggling, and the well-known voic of prudenc shriek 
out in one of her hyster fits, and scream to be taken away and 
out of that place. It seem to loi as if some of her judg must have 
doubt of her guilt, and demand yet anoth test. she sat down 
heavili on her bed, think she must be in a horribl dream, so 
compass about with danger and enemi did she seem. those in the 
dungeon--and by the oppress of the air she perceiv that they were 
many--kept on eager talk in low voices. she did not tri to make out 
the sens of the fragment of sentenc that reach her dull brain, 
till, all at once, a word or two made her understand they were 
discuss the desir of appli the whip or the tortur to 
make her confess, and reveal by what mean the spell she had cast upon 
those whom she had bewitch could be dissolved. A thrill of affright 
ran through her; and she cri out, beseechingly: 

'I beg you, sirs, for god' merci sake, that you do not use such aw 
means. I may say anything--nay, I may accus ani one if I am subject 
to such torment as I have heard tell about. for I am but a young girl, 
and not veri brave, or veri good, as some are.' 

It touch the heart of one or two to see her stand there; the 
tear stream down from below the coars handkerchief tightli bound 
over her eyes; the clank chain fasten the heavi weight to the 
slight ankle; the two hand held togeth as if to keep down a 
convuls motion. 

'look!' said one of these. 'she is weeping. they say no witch can weep 
tears.' 

but anoth scof at thi test, and bade the first rememb how those 
of her own family, the hickson even, bore wit against her. 

onc more she wa bidden to confess. the charges, esteem by all men 
(a they said) to have been proven against her, were read over to her, 
with all the testimoni born against her in proof thereof. they told 
her that, consid the godli famili to which she belonged, it had 
been decid by the magistr and minist of salem that he should 
have her life spared, if she would own her guilt, make reparation, and 
submit to penance; but that if not, she, and other convict of 
witchcraft along with her, were to be hung in salem market-plac on the 
next thursday morn (thursday be market day). and when they had 
thu spoken, they wait silent for her answer. It wa a minut or 
two befor she spoke. she had sat down again upon the bed meanwhile, 
for inde she wa veri weak. she asked, 'may I have thi handkerchief 
unbound from my eyes, for indeed, sirs, it hurt me?' 

the occas for which she wa blindfold be over, the bandag wa 
taken off, and she wa allow to see. she look piti at the 
stern face around her, in grim suspens as to what her answer would 
be. then she spoke: 

'sirs, I must choos death with a quiet conscience, rather than life to 
be gain by a lie. I am not a witch. I know not hardli what you mean 
when you say I am. I have done many, mani thing veri wrong in my life; 
but I think god will forgiv me them for my saviour' sake.' 

'take not hi name on your wick lips,' said pastor tappau, enrag at 
her resolut of not confessing, and scarc abl to keep himself 
from strike her. she saw the desir he had, and shrank away in timid 
fear. then justic hathorn solemnli read the legal condemn of loi 
barclay to death by hanging, as a convict witch. she murmur 
someth which nobodi heard fully, but which sound like a prayer for 
piti and compass on her tender year and friendless estate. then 
they left her to all the horror of that solitary, loathsom dungeon, 
and the strang terror of approach death. 

outsid the prison walls, the dread of the witches, and the excit 
against witchcraft, grew with fear rapidity. number of women, and 
men, too, were accused, no matter what their station of life and their 
former charact had been. On the other side, it is alleg that 
upward of fifti person were grievous vex by the devil, and those 
to whom he had impart of hi power for vile and wick 
considerations. how much of malice, distinct, unmistak person 
malice, wa mix up with these accusations, no one can now tell. the 
dire statist of thi time tell us, that fifty-f escap death by 
confess themselv guilty, one hundr and fifti were in prison, 
more than two hundr accused, and upward of twenti suffer death, 
among whom wa the minist I have call nolan, who wa tradit 
esteem to have suffer through hatr of hi co-pastor. one old man, 
scorn the accusation, and refus to plead at hi trial, was, 
accord to the law, press to death for hi contumacy. nay, even 
dog were accus of witchcraft, suffer the legal penalties, and are 
record among the subject of capit punishment. one young man found 
mean to effect hi mother' escap from confinement, fled with her on 
horseback, and secret her in the blueberri swamp, not far from 
taplay' brook, in the great pasture; he conceal her here in a wigwam 
which he built for her shelter, provid her with food and clothing, 
and comfort and sustain her until after the delus had pass 
away. the poor creatur must, however, have suffer dreadfully, for 
one of her arm wa fractur in the all but desper effort of 
get her out of prison. 

but there wa no one to tri and save lois. grace hickson would fain 
have ignor her altogether. such a taint did witchcraft bring upon a 
whole family, that gener of blameless life were not at that day 
esteem suffici to wash it out. besides, you must rememb that 
grace, along with most peopl of her time, believ most firmli in the 
realiti of the crime of witchcraft. poor, forsaken lois, believ in it 
herself, and it ad to her terror, for the gaoler, in an unusu 
commun mood, told her that nearli everi cell wa now full of 
witches; and it wa possibl he might have to put one, if more came, in 
with her. loi knew that she wa no witch herself; but not the less did 
she believ that the crime wa abroad, and larg share in by 
evil-mind person who had chosen to give up their soul to satan; and 
she shudder with terror at what the gaoler said, and would have ask 
him to spare her thi companionship if it were possible. but, somehow, 
her sens were leav her, and she could not rememb the right word 
in which to form her request, until he had left the place. 

the onli person who yearn after lois--who would have befriend her 
if he could--wa manasseh: poor, mad manasseh. but he wa so wild and 
outrag in hi talk, that it wa all hi mother could do to keep hi 
state conceal from public observation. she had for thi purpos given 
him a sleep potion; and, while he lay heavi and inert under the 
influenc of the poppy-tea, hi mother bound him with cord to the 
ponderous, antiqu bed in which he slept. she look broken-heart 
while she did thi office, and thu acknowledg the degrad of her 
first-born--him of whom she had ever been so proud. 

late that evening, grace hickson stood in lois' cell, hood and 
cloak up to her eyes. loi wa sit quit still, play idli with 
a bit of string which one of the magistr had drop out of hi 
pocket that morning. her aunt wa stand by her for an instant or two 
in silence, befor loi seem awar of her presence. suddenli she 
look up, and utter a littl cry, shrink away from the dark 
figure. then, as if her cri had loosen grace' tongue, she began: 

'loi barclay, did I ever do you ani harm?' grace did not know how 
often her want of loving-kind had pierc the tender heart of the 
stranger under her roof; nor did loi rememb it against her now. 
instead, lois' memori wa fill with grate thought of how much 
that might have been left undone, by a less conscienti person, her 
aunt had done for her, and she half stretch out her arm as to a 
friend in that desol place, while she answered: 

'oh no, no you were veri good! veri kind!' 

but grace stood immovable. 

'I did you no harm, although I never rightli knew whi you came to us.' 

'I wa sent by my mother on her death-bed,' moan lois, cover her 
face. It grew darker everi instant. her aunt stood, still and silent. 

'did ani of mine ever wrong you?' she asked, after a time. 

'no, no; never, till prudenc said--oh, aunt, do you think I am a 
witch?' and now loi wa stand up, hold by grace' cloak, and 
tri to read her face. grace drew herself, ever so little, away from 
the girl, whom she dreaded, and yet sought to propitiate. 

'wiser than I, godlier than I, have said it. but oh, lois, lois! he wa 
my first-born. loos him from the demon, for the sake of him whose name 
I dare not name in thi terribl building, fill with them who have 
renounc the hope of their baptism; loos manasseh from hi aw 
state, if ever I or mine did you a kindness!' 

'you ask me for christ' sake,' said lois. 'I can name that holi 
name--for oh, aunt! indeed, and in holi truth, I am no witch; and yet I 
am to die--to be hanged! aunt, do not let them kill me! I am so young, 
and I never did ani one ani harm that I know of.' 

'hush! for veri shame! thi afternoon I have bound my first-born with 
strong cords, to keep him from do himself or us a mischief--h is so 
frenzied. loi barclay, look here!' and grace knelt down at her niece' 
feet, and join her hand as if in prayer--'i am a proud woman, god 
forgiv me! and I never thought to kneel to ani save to him. and now I 
kneel at your feet, to pray you to releas my children, more especi 
my son manasseh, from the spell you have put upon them. lois, hearken 
to me, and I will pray to the almighti for you, if yet there may be 
mercy.' 

'I cannot do it; I never did you or your ani wrong. how can I undo it? 
how can i?' and she wrung her hand in intens of convict of the 
inutil of aught she could do. 

here grace got up, slowly, stiffly, and sternly. she stood aloof from 
the chain girl, in the remot corner of the prison cell near the 
door, readi to make her escap as soon as she had curs the witch, who 
would not, or could not, undo the evil she had wrought. grace lift up 
her right hand, and held it up on high, as she doom loi to be 
accurs for ever, for her deadli sin, and her want of merci even at 
thi final hour. and, lastly, she summon her to meet her at the 
judgment-seat, and answer for thi deadli injuri done to both soul and 
bodi of those who had taken her in, and receiv her when she came to 
them an orphan and a stranger. 

until thi last summons, loi had stood as one who hear her sentenc 
and can say noth against it, for she know all would be in vain. but 
she rais her head when she heard her aunt speak of the judgment-seat, 
and at the end of grace' speech she, too, lift up her right hand, as 
if solemnli pledg herself by that action, and replied: 

'aunt! I will meet you there. and there you will know my innoc of 
thi deadli thing. god have merci on you and yours!' 

her calm voic madden grace, and make a gestur as if she pluck 
up a hand of dust of the floor, and threw it at lois, she cried: 

'witch! witch! ask merci for thyself--i need not your prayers. witches' 
prayer are read backwards. I spit at thee, and defi thee!' and so she 
went away. 

loi sat moan that whole night through. 'god comfort me! god 
strengthen me!' wa all she could rememb to say. she just felt that 
want, noth more,--al other fear and want seem dead within her. 
and when the gaoler brought in her breakfast the next morning, he 
report her as 'gone silly;' for, indeed, she did not seem to know 
him, but kept rock herself to and fro, and whisper softli to 
herself, smile a littl from time to time. 

but god did comfort her, and strengthen her too late on that wednesday 
afternoon, they thrust anoth 'witch' into her cell, bid the two, 
with opprobri words, keep compani together. the new comer fell 
prostrat with the push given her from without; and lois, not 
recogn anyth but an old rag woman lie helpless on her face 
on the ground, lift her up; and lo! it wa nattee--dirty, filthi 
indeed, mud-pelted, stone-bruised, beaten, and all astray in her wit 
with the treatment she had receiv from the mob outside. loi held her 
in her arms, and softli wipe the old brown wrinkl face with her 
apron, cri over it, as she had hardli yet cri over her own 
sorrows. for hour she tend the old indian woman--tend her bodili 
woes; and as the poor scatter sens of the savag creatur came 
slowli back, loi gather her infinit dread of the morrow, when she 
too, as well as lois, wa to be led out to die, in face of all that 
infuri crowd. loi sought in her own mind for some sourc of 
comfort for the old woman, who shook like one in the shake palsi at 
the dread of death--and such a death. 

when all wa quiet through the prison, in the deep dead midnight, the 
gaoler outsid the door heard loi telling, as if to a young child, the 
marvel and sorrow stori of one who die on the cross for us and 
for our sakes. As long as she spoke, the indian woman' terror seem 
lulled; but the instant she paused, for weariness, natte cri out 
afresh, as if some wild beast were follow her close through the 
dens forest in which she had dwelt in her youth. and then loi went 
on, say all the bless word she could remember, and comfort the 
helpless indian woman with the sens of the presenc of a heavenli 
friend. and in comfort her, loi wa comforted; in strengthen 
her, loi wa strengthened. 

the morn came, and the summon to come forth and die came. they who 
enter the cell found loi asleep, her face rest on the slumber 
old woman, whose head she still held in her lap. she did not seem 
clearli to recogn where she was, when she awakened; the 'silly' look 
had return to her wan face; all she appear to know was, that 
somehow or another, through some peril or another, she had to protect 
the poor indian woman. she smile faintli when she saw the bright light 
of the april day; and put her arm round nattee, and tri to keep the 
indian quiet with hushing, sooth word of broken meaning, and holi 
fragment of the psalms. natte tighten her hold upon loi as they 
drew near the gallows, and the outrag crowd below began to hoot and 
yell. loi redoubl her effort to calm and encourag nattee, 
appar unconsci that ani of the opprobrium, the hootings, the 
stones, the mud, wa direct toward her herself. but when they took 
natte from her arms, and led her out to suffer first, loi seem all 
at onc to recov her sens of the present terror. she gaze wildli 
around, stretch out her arm as if to some person in the distance, 
who wa yet visibl to her, and cri out onc with a voic that 
thrill through all who heard it, 'mother!' directli afterwards, the 
bodi of loi the witch swung in the air, and everi one stood, with 
hush breath, with a sudden wonder, like a fear of deadli crime, 
fallen upon them. 

the still and the silenc were broken by one craze and mad, who 
came rush up the step of the ladder, and caught lois' bodi in hi 
arms, and kiss her lip with wild passion. and then, as if it were 
true what the peopl believed, that he wa possess by a demon, he 
sprang down, and rush through the crowd, out of the bound of the 
city, and into the dark dens forest, and manasseh hickson wa no more 
seen of christian man. 

the peopl of salem had awaken from their fright delus befor 
the autumn, when captain holderness and ralph luci came to find out 
lois, and bring her home to peac barford, in the pleasant countri 
of england. instead, they led them to the grassi grave where she lay at 
rest, done to death by mistaken men. ralph luci shook the dust off hi 
feet in quit salem, with a heavy, heavi heart; and live a bachelor 
all hi life long for her sake. 

long year afterwards, captain holderness sought him out, to tell him 
some news that he thought might interest the grave miller of the 
avonside. captain holderness told him that in the previou year, it 
wa then 1713, the sentenc of excommun against the witch of 
salem wa ordered, in godli sacrament meet of the church, to be 
eras and blot out, and that those who met togeth for thi 
purpos 'humbl request the merci god would pardon whatsoev sin, 
error, or mistak wa in the applic of justice, through our 
merci high priest, who knoweth how to have compass on the 
ignorant, and those that are out of the way.' He also said that 
prudenc hickson--now woman grown--had made a most touch and pungent 
declar of sorrow and repent befor the whole church, for the 
fals and mistaken testimoni she had given in sever instances, among 
which she particularli mention that of her cousin loi barclay. To 
all which ralph luci onli answered: 

'no repent of their can bring her back to life.' 

then captain holderness took out a paper, and read the follow 
humbl and solemn declar of regret on the part of those who sign 
it, among whom grace hickson wa one: 

'we, whose name are undersigned, being, in the year 1692, call 
to serv as juror in court of salem, on trial of mani who were by 
some suspect guilti of do act of witchcraft upon the bodi 
of sundri persons; we confess that we ourselv were not capabl to 
understand, nor abl to withstand, the mysteri delus of the 
power of darkness, and princ of the air, but were, for want of 
knowledg in ourselves, and better inform from others, 
prevail with to take up with such evid against the accused, 
as, on further consideration, and better information, we justli 
fear wa insuffici for the touch the live of ani (deut. 
xvii. 6), wherebi we fear we have been instrumental, with others, 
though ignorantli and unwittingly, to bring upon ourselv and thi 
peopl of the lord the guilt of innoc blood; which sin, the lord 
saith in scripture, he would not pardon (2 kings, xxiv. 4), that 
is, we suppose, in regard of hi tempor judgments. We do, 
therefore, signifi to all in gener (and to the surviv 
suffer in special) our deep sens of, and sorrow for, our 
errors, in act on such evid to the condemn of ani person; 
and do herebi declare, that we justli fear that we were sadli 
delud and mistaken, for which we are much disquiet and 
distress in our minds, and do therefor humbl beg forgiveness, 
first of god for christ' sake, for thi our error; and pray that 
god would not imput the guilt of it to ourselv nor others; and 
we also pray that we may be consid candidli and aright by the 
live sufferers, as be then under the power of a strong and 
gener delusion, utterli unacquaint with, and not experienc 
in, matter of that nature. 

'we do heartili ask forgiv of you all, whom we have justli 
offended; and do declare, accord to our present minds, we would 
none of us do such thing again on such ground for the whole 
world; pray you to accept of thi in way of satisfact for our 
offence, and that you would bless the inherit of the lord, that 
he may be entreat for the land. 

'foreman, thoma fisk, &c.' 

To the read of thi paper ralph luci made no repli save this, even 
more gloomili than before: 

'all their repent will avail noth to my lois, nor will it bring 
back her life.' 

then captain holderness spoke onc more, and said that on the day of 
the gener fast, appoint to be held all through new england, when 
the meeting-hous were crowded, an old, old man with white hair had 
stood up in the place in which he wa accustom to worship, and had 
hand up into the pulpit a written confession, which he had onc or 
twice essay to read for himself, acknowledg hi great and grievou 
error in the matter of the witch of salem, and pray for the 
forgiv of god and of hi people, end with an entreati that all 
then present would join with him in prayer that hi past conduct might 
not bring down the displeasur of the most high upon hi country, hi 
family, or himself. that old man, who wa no other than justic sewall, 
remain stand all the time that hi confess wa read; and at the 
end he said, 'the good and graciou god be pleas to save new england 
and me and my family.' and then it came out that, for year past, judg 
sewal had set apart a day for humili and prayer, to keep fresh in 
hi mind a sens of repent and sorrow for the part he had born in 
these trials, and that thi solemn anniversari he wa pledg to keep 
as long as he lived, to show hi feel of deep humiliation. 

ralph lucy' voic trembl as he spoke: 

'all thi will not bring my loi to life again, or give me back the 
hope of my youth.' 

but--a captain holderness shook hi head (for what word could he say, 
or how disput what wa so evid true?)--ralph added, 'what is the 
day, know you, that thi justic ha set apart?' 

'the twenty-ninth of april.' 

'then on that day will I, here at barford in england, join my prayer as 
long as I live with the repent judge, that hi sin may be blot 
out and no more had in remembrance. she would have will it so.' 




the grey woman 

portion 1 


there is a mill by the neckar-side, to which mani peopl resort for 
coffee, accord to the fashion which is almost nation in germany. 
there is noth particularli attract in the situat of thi mill; 
it is on the mannheim (the flat and unromantic) side of heidelberg. the 
river turn the mill-wheel with a plenteou gush sound; the 
out-build and the dwelling-hous of the miller form a well-kept 
dusti quadrangle. again, further from the river, there is a garden full 
of willows, and arbours, and flower-b not well kept, but veri 
profus in flower and luxuri creepers, knot and loop the 
arbour together. In each of these arbour is a stationari tabl of 
white paint wood, and light moveabl chair of the same colour and 
material. 

I went to drink coffe there with some friend in 184--. the state 
old miller came out to greet us, as some of the parti were known to him 
of old. He wa of a grand build of a man, and hi loud music voice, 
with it tone friendli and familiar, hi roll laugh of welcome, went 
well with the keen bright eye, the fine cloth of hi coat, and the 
gener look of substanc about the place. poultri of all kind 
abound in the mill-yard, where there were ampl mean of livelihood 
for them strew on the ground; but not content with this, the miller 
took out hand of corn from the sacks, and threw liber to the 
cock and hen that ran almost under hi feet in their eagerness. and 
all the time he wa do this, as it were habitually, he wa talk 
to us, and ever and anon call to hi daughter and the serving-maids, 
to bid them hasten the coffe we had ordered. He follow us to an 
arbour, and saw us serv to hi satisfact with the best of 
everyth we could ask for; and then left us to go round to the 
differ arbour and see that each parti wa properli attend to; 
and, as he went, thi great, prosperous, happy-look man whistl 
softli one of the most plaintiv air I ever heard. 

'hi famili have held thi mill ever sinc the old palatin days; or 
rather, I should say, have possess the ground ever sinc then, for 
two success mill of their have been burnt down by the french. If 
you want to see scherer in a passion, just talk to him of the 
possibl of a french invasion.' 

but at thi moment, still whistl that mourn air, we saw the 
miller go down the step that led from the somewhat rais garden 
into the mill-yard; and so I seem to have lost my chanc of put 
him in a passion. 

We had nearli finish our coffee, and our 'kucken,' and our cinnamon 
cake, when heavi splash fell on our thick leafi covering; quicker and 
quicker they came, come through the tender leav as if they were 
tear them asunder; all the peopl in the garden were hurri under 
shelter, or seek for their carriag stand outside. Up the step 
the miller came hastening, with a crimson umbrella, fit to cover everi 
one left in the garden, and follow by hi daughter, and one or two 
maidens, each bear an umbrella. 

'come into the house--com in, I say. It is a summer-storm, and will 
flood the place for an hour or two, till the river carri it away. 
here, here.' 

and we follow him back into hi own house. We went into the kitchen 
first. such an array of bright copper and tin vessel I never saw; and 
all the wooden thing were as thoroughli scoured. the red tile floor 
wa spotless when we went in, but in two minut it wa all over slop 
and dirt with the tread of mani feet; for the kitchen wa filled, and 
still the worthi miller kept bring in more peopl under hi great 
crimson umbrella. He even call the dog in, and made them lie down 
under the tables. 

hi daughter said someth to him in german, and he shook hi head 
merrili at her. everybodi laughed. 

'what did she say?' I asked. 

'she told him to bring the duck in next; but inde if more peopl 
come we shall be suffocated. what with the thunderi weather, and the 
stove, and all these steam clothes, I realli think we must ask leav 
to pass on. perhap we might go in and see frau scherer.' 

My friend ask the daughter of the hous for permiss to go into an 
inner chamber and see her mother. It wa granted, and we went into a 
sort of saloon, over-look the neckar; veri small, veri bright, and 
veri close. the floor wa slipperi with polish; long narrow piec of 
looking-glass against the wall reflect the perpetu motion of the 
river opposite; a white porcelain stove, with some old-fashion 
ornament of brass about it; a sofa, cover with utrecht velvet, a 
tabl befor it, and a piec of worsted-work carpet under it; a vase 
of artifici flowers; and, lastly, an alcov with a bed in it, on 
which lay the paralys wife of the good miller, knit busily, 
form the furniture. I spoke as if thi wa all that wa to be seen in 
the room; but, sit quietly, while my friend kept up a brisk 
convers in a languag which I but half understood, my eye wa 
caught by a pictur in a dark corner of the room, and I got up to 
examin it more nearly. 

It wa that of a young girl of extrem beauty; evid of middl 
rank. there wa a sensit refin in her face, as if she almost 
shrank from the gaze which, of necessity, the painter must have fix 
upon her. It wa not over-wel painted, but I felt that it must have 
been a good likeness, from thi strong impress of peculiar charact 
which I have tri to describe. from the dress, I should guess it to 
have been paint in the latter half of the last century. and I 
afterward heard that I wa right. 

there wa a littl paus in the conversation. 

'will you ask frau scherer who thi is?' 

My friend repeat my question, and receiv a long repli in german. 
then she turn round and translat it to me. 

'it is the like of a great-aunt of her husband's.' (mi friend wa 
stand by me, and look at the pictur with sympathet curiosity.) 
'see! here is the name on the open page of thi bible, "anna scherer, 
1778." frau scherer say there is a tradit in the famili that thi 
pretti girl, with her complexion of lili and roses, lost her colour 
so entir through fright, that she wa known by the name of the grey 
woman. she speak as if thi anna scherer live in some state of 
life-long terror. but she doe not know details; refer me to her 
husband for them. she think he ha some paper which were written by 
the origin of that pictur for her daughter, who die in thi veri 
hous not long after our friend there wa married. We can ask herr 
scherer for the whole stori if you like.' 

'oh yes, pray do!' said I. and, as our host came in at thi moment to 
ask how we were faring, and to tell us that he had sent to heidelberg 
for carriag to convey us home, see no chanc of the heavi rain 
abating, my friend, after thank him, pass on to my request. 

'ah!' said he, hi face changing, 'the aunt anna had a sad history. It 
wa all owe to one of those hellish frenchmen; and her daughter 
suffer for it--th cousin ursula, as we all call her when I wa a 
child. To be sure, the good cousin ursula wa hi child as well. the 
sin of the father are visit on their children. the ladi would like 
to know all about it, would she? well, there are papers--a kind of 
apolog the aunt anna wrote for put an end to her daughter' 
engagement--or rather fact which she revealed, that prevent cousin 
ursula from marri the man she loved; and so she would never have ani 
other good fellow, els I have heard say my father would have been 
thank to have made her hi wife.' all thi time he wa rummag in 
the drawer of an old-fashion bureau, and now he turn round, with a 
bundl of yellow mss. in hi hand, which he gave to my friend, saying, 
'take it home, take it home, and if you care to make out our crab 
german writing, you may keep it as long as you like, and read it at 
your leisure. onli I must have it back again when you have done with 
it, that' all.' 

and so we becam possess of the manuscript of the follow letter, 
which it wa our employment, dure mani a long even that ensu 
winter, to translate, and in some part to abbreviate. the letter began 
with some refer to the pain which she had alreadi inflict upon 
her daughter by some unexplain opposit to a project of marriage; 
but I doubt if, without the clue with which the good miller had 
furnish us, we could have made out even thi much from the 
passionate, broken sentenc that made us fanci that some scene between 
the mother and daughter--and possibl a third person--had occur just 
befor the mother had begun to write. 

* * * * * 

'thou dost not love thi child, mother! thou dost not care if her heart 
is broken!' ah, god! and these word of my heart-belov ursula ring in 
my ear as if the sound of them would fill them when I lie a-dying. and 
her poor tear-stain face come between me and everyth else. child! 
heart do not break; life is veri tough as well as veri terrible. but I 
will not decid for thee. I will tell thee all; and thou shalt bear the 
burden of choice. I may be wrong; I have littl wit left, and never had 
much, I think; but an instinct serv me in place of judgement, and 
that instinct tell me that thou and thi henri must never be married. 
yet I may be in error. I would fain make my child happy. lay thi paper 
befor the good priest schriesheim; if, after read it, thou hast 
doubt which make thee uncertain. onli I will tell thee all now, on 
condit that no spoken word ever pass between us on the subject. It 
would kill me to be questioned. I should have to see all present again. 

My father held, as thou knowest, the mill on the neckar, where thi 
new-found uncle, scherer, now lives. thou rememberest the surpris with 
which we were receiv there last vintag twelvemonth. how thi uncl 
disbeliev me when I said that I wa hi sister anna, whom he had long 
believ to be dead, and how I had to lead thee underneath the picture, 
paint of me long ago, and point out, featur by feature, the like 
between it and thee; and how, as I spoke, I recal first to my own 
mind, and then by speech to his, the detail of the time when it wa 
painted; the merri word that pass between us then, a happi boy and 
girl; the posit of the articl of furnitur in the room; our 
father' habits; the cherry-tree, now cut down, that shade the window 
of my bedroom, through which my brother wa wont to squeez himself, in 
order to spring on to the topmost bough that would bear hi weight; and 
thenc would pass me back hi cap laden with fruit to where I sat on 
the window-sill, too sick with fright for him to care much for eat 
the cherries. 

and at length fritz gave way, and believ me to be hi sister anna, 
even as though I were risen from the dead. and thou rememberest how he 
fetch in hi wife, and told her that I wa not dead, but wa come 
back to the old home onc more, chang as I was. and she would scarc 
believ him, and scan me with a cold, distrust eye, till at 
length--for I knew her of old as babett müller--i said that I wa 
well-to-do, and need not to seek out friend for what they had to 
give. and then she asked--not me, but her husband--whi I had kept 
silent so long, lead all--father, brother, everi one that love me 
in my own dear home--to esteem me dead. and then thine uncl (thou 
rememberest?) said he care not to know more than I care to tell; that 
I wa hi anna, found again, to be a bless to him in hi old age, as 
I had been in hi boyhood. I thank him in my heart for hi trust; for 
were the need for tell all less than it seem to me now I could not 
speak of my past life. but she, who wa my sister-in-law still, held 
back her welcome, and, for want of that, I did not go to live in 
heidelberg as I had plan beforehand, in order to be near my brother 
fritz, but content myself with hi promis to be a father to my 
ursula when I should die and leav thi weari world. 

that babett müller was, as I may say, the caus of all my life' 
suffering. she wa a baker' daughter in heidelberg--a great beauty, as 
peopl said, and, indeed, as I could see for myself I, too--thou sawest 
my picture--wa reckon a beauty, and I believ I wa so. babett 
müller look upon me as a rival. she like to be admired, and had no 
one much to love her. I had sever peopl to love me--thi grandfather, 
fritz, the old servant kätchen, karl, the head apprentic at the 
mill--and I fear admir and notice, and the be stare at as 
the 'schöne müllerin,' whenev I went to make my purchas in 
heidelberg. 

those were happy, peac days. I had kätchen to help me in the 
housework, and whatev we did pleas my brave old father, who wa 
alway gentl and indulg toward us women, though he wa stern 
enough with the apprentic in the mill. karl, the oldest of these, wa 
hi favourite; and I can see now that my father wish him to marri me, 
and that karl himself wa desir to do so. but karl wa rough-spoken, 
and passionate--not with me, but with the others--and I shrank from him 
in a way which, I fear, gave him pain. and then came thi uncl fritz' 
marriage; and babett wa brought to the mill to be it mistress. not 
that I care much for give up my post, for, in spite of my father' 
great kindness, I alway fear that I did not manag well for so larg 
a famili (with the men, and a girl under kätchen, we sat down eleven 
each night to supper). but when babett began to find fault with 
kätchen, I wa unhappi at the blame that fell on faith servants; and 
by-and-bi I began to see that babett wa eg on karl to make more 
open love to me, and, as she onc said, to get done with it, and take 
me off to a home of my own. My father wa grow old, and did not 
perceiv all my daili discomfort. the more karl advanced, the more I 
dislik him. He wa good in the main, but I had no notion of be 
married, and could not bear ani one who talk to me about it. 

thing were in thi way when I had an invit to go to carlsruh to 
visit a schoolfellow, of whom I had been veri fond. babett wa all for 
my going; I don't think I want to leav home, and yet I had been veri 
fond of sophi rupprecht. but I wa alway shi among strangers. somehow 
the affair wa settl for me, but not until both fritz and my father 
had made inquiri as to the charact and posit of the rupprechts. 
they learn that the father had held some kind of inferior posit 
about the grand-duke' court, and wa now dead, leav a widow, a 
nobl lady, and two daughters, the elder of whom wa sophie, my friend. 
madam rupprecht wa not rich, but more than respectable--genteel. when 
thi wa ascertained, my father made no opposit to my going; babett 
forward it by all the mean in her power, and even my dear fritz had 
hi word to say in it favour. onli kätchen wa against it--kätchen and 
karl. the opposit of karl did more to send me to carlsruh than 
anything. for I could have object to go; but when he took upon 
himself to ask what wa the good of go a-gadding, visit stranger 
of whom no one knew anything, I yield to circumstances--to the 
pull of sophi and the push of babette. I wa silent vexed, I 
remember, at babette' inspect of my clothes; at the way in which 
she settl that thi gown wa too old-fashioned, or that too common, 
to go with me on my visit to a nobl lady; and at the way in which she 
took upon herself to spend the money my father had given me to buy what 
wa requisit for the occasion. and yet I blame myself, for everi one 
els thought her so kind for do all this; and she herself meant 
kindly, too. 

At last I quit the mill by the neckar-side. It wa a long day' 
journey, and fritz went with me to carlsruhe. the rupprecht live on 
the third floor of a hous a littl behind one of the princip 
streets, in a cramped-up court, to which we gain admitt through a 
doorway in the street. I rememb how pinch their room look after 
the larg space we had at the mill, and yet they had an air of grandeur 
about them which wa new to me, and which gave me pleasure, fade as 
some of it was. madam rupprecht wa too formal a ladi for me; I wa 
never at my eas with her; but sophi wa all that I had recollect 
her at school: kind, affectionate, and onli rather too readi with her 
express of admir and regard. the littl sister kept out of our 
way; and that wa all we needed, in the first enthusiast renew of 
our earli friendship. the one great object of madam rupprecht' life 
wa to retain her posit in society; and as her mean were much 
diminish sinc her husband' death, there wa not much comfort, 
though there wa a great deal of show, in their way of living; just the 
opposit of what it wa at my father' house. I believ that my come 
wa not too much desir by madam rupprecht, as I brought with me 
anoth mouth to be fed; but sophi had spent a year or more in 
entreat for permiss to invit me, and her mother, have onc 
consented, wa too well bred not to give me a state welcome. 

the life in carlsruh wa veri differ from what it wa at home. the 
hour were later, the coffe wa weaker in the morning, the pottag wa 
weaker, the boil beef less reliev by other diet, the dress finer, 
the even engag constant. I did not find these visit pleasant. 
We might not knit, which would have reliev the tedium a little; but 
we sat in a circle, talk together, onli interrupt occasion by 
a gentleman, who, break out of the knot of men who stood near the 
door, talk eagerli together, stole across the room on tiptoe, hi 
hat under hi arm, and, bring hi feet togeth in the posit we 
call the first at the dancing-school, made a low bow to the ladi he 
wa go to address. the first time I saw these manner I could not 
help smiling; but madam rupprecht saw me, and spoke to me next morn 
rather severely, tell me that, of course, in my countri breed I 
could have seen noth of court manners, or french fashions, but that 
that wa no reason for my laugh at them. Of cours I tri never to 
smile again in company. thi visit to carlsruh took place in '89, just 
when everi one wa full of the event take place at paris; and yet at 
carlsruh french fashion were more talk of than french politics. 
madam rupprecht, especially, thought a great deal of all french 
people. and thi again wa quit differ to us at home. fritz could 
hardli bear the name of a frenchman; and it had nearli been an obstacl 
to my visit to sophi that her mother prefer be call madam to 
her proper titl of frau. 

one night I wa sit next to sophie, and long for the time when 
we might have supper and go home, so as to be abl to speak together, a 
thing forbidden by madam rupprecht' rule of etiquette, which 
strictli prohibit ani but the most necessari convers pass 
between member of the same famili when in society. I wa sitting, I 
say, scarc keep back my inclin to yawn, when two gentlemen 
came in, one of whom wa evid a stranger to the whole party, from 
the formal manner in which the host led him up, and present him to 
the hostess. I thought I had never seen ani one so handsom or so 
elegant. hi hair wa powdered, of course, but one could see from hi 
complexion that it wa fair in it natur state. hi featur were as 
delic as a girl's, and set off by two littl 'mouches,' as we call 
patch in those days, one at the left corner of hi mouth, the other 
prolonging, as it were, the right eye. hi dress wa blue and silver. I 
wa so lost in admir of thi beauti young man, that I wa as 
much surpris as if the angel gabriel had spoken to me, when the ladi 
of the hous brought him forward to present him to me. she call him 
monsieur de la tourelle, and he began to speak to me in french; but 
though I understood him perfectly, I dare not trust myself to repli to 
him in that language. then he tri german, speak it with a kind of 
soft lisp that I thought charming. but, befor the end of the evening, 
I becam a littl tire of the affect soft and effeminaci of hi 
manners, and the exagger compliment he paid me, which had the 
effect of make all the compani turn round and look at me. madam 
rupprecht was, however, pleas with the precis thing that displeas 
me. she like either sophi or me to creat a sensation; of cours she 
would have prefer that it should have been her daughter, but her 
daughter' friend wa next best. As we went away, I heard madam 
rupprecht and monsieur de la tourel reciproc civil speech with 
might and main, from which I found out that the french gentleman wa 
come to call on us the next day. I do not know whether I wa more 
glad or frightened, for I had been kept upon stilt of good manner all 
the evening. but still I wa flatter when madam rupprecht spoke as 
if she had invit him, becaus he had shown pleasur in my society, 
and even more gratifi by sophie' ungrudg delight at the evid 
interest I had excit in so fine and agreeabl a gentleman. yet, with 
all this, they had hard work to keep me from run out of the salon 
the next day, when we heard hi voic inquir at the gate on the 
stair for madam rupprecht. they had made me put on my sunday gown, 
and they themselv were dress as for a reception. 

when he wa gone away, madam rupprecht congratul me on the 
conquest I had made; for, indeed, he had scarc spoken to anyon 
else, beyond what mere civil required, and had almost invit 
himself to come in the even to bring some new song, which wa all 
the fashion in paris, he said. madam rupprecht had been out all 
morning, as she told me, to glean inform about monsieur de la 
tourelle. He wa a propriétaire, had a small château on the vosg 
mountains; he own land there, but had a larg incom from some 
sourc quit independ of thi property. altogether, he wa a good 
match, as she emphat observed. she never seem to think that I 
could refus him after thi account of hi wealth, nor do I believ she 
would have allow sophi a choice, even had he been as old and ugli as 
he wa young and handsome. I do not quit know--so mani event have 
come to pass sinc then, and blur the clear of my 
recollections--if I love him or not. He wa veri much devot to me; 
he almost frighten me by the excess of hi demonstr of love. 
and he wa veri charm to everybodi around me, who all spoke of him 
as the most fascin of men, and of me as the most fortun of 
girls. and yet I never felt quit at my eas with him. I wa alway 
reliev when hi visit were over, although I miss hi presenc when 
he did not come. He prolong hi visit to the friend with whom he wa 
stay at carlsruhe, on purpos to woo me. He load me with presents, 
which I wa unwil to take, onli madam rupprecht seem to consid 
me an affect prude if I refus them. mani of these present 
consist of articl of valuabl old jewellery, evid belong to 
hi family; by accept these I doubl the tie which were form 
around me by circumst even more than by my own consent. In those 
day we did not write letter to absent friend as frequent as is 
done now, and I had been unwil to name him in the few letter that 
I wrote home. At length, however, I learn from madam rupprecht that 
she had written to my father to announc the splendid conquest I had 
made, and to request hi presenc at my betrothal. I start with 
astonishment. I had not realiz that affair had gone so far as this. 
but when she ask me, in a stern, offend manner, what I had meant by 
my conduct if I did not intend to marri monsieur de la tourelle--i had 
receiv hi visits, hi presents, all hi variou advanc without 
show ani unwilling or repugnance--(and it wa all true; I had 
shown no repugnance, though I did not wish to be marri to him,--at 
least, not so soon)--what could I do but hang my head, and silent 
consent to the rapid enunci of the onli cours which now remain 
for me if I would not be esteem a heartless coquett all the rest of 
my days? 

there wa some difficulty, which I afterward learnt that my 
sister-in-law had obviated, about my betroth take place from home. 
My father, and fritz especially, were for have me return to the mill, 
and there be betrothed, and from thenc be married. but the rupprecht 
and monsieur de la tourel were equal urgent on the other side; and 
babett wa unwil to have the troubl of the commot at the mill; 
and also, I think, a littl dislik the idea of the contrast of my 
grander marriag with her own. 

So my father and fritz came over to the betrothal. they were to stay at 
an inn in carlsruh for a fortnight, at the end of which time the 
marriag wa to take place. monsieur de la tourel told me he had 
busi at home, which would oblig him to be absent dure the 
interv between the two events; and I wa veri glad of it, for I did 
not think that he valu my father and my brother as I could have 
wish him to do. He wa veri polit to them; put on all the soft, 
grand manner, which he had rather drop with me; and compliment us 
all round, begin with my father and madam rupprecht, and end 
with littl alwina. but he a littl scof at the old-fashion church 
ceremoni which my father insist on; and I fanci fritz must have 
taken some of hi compliment as satire, for I saw certain sign of 
manner by which I knew that my futur husband, for all hi civil words, 
had irrit and annoy my brother. but all the money arrang 
were liber in the extreme, and more than satisfied, almost surprised, 
my father. even fritz lift up hi eyebrow and whistled. I alon did 
not care about anything. I wa bewitched,--in a dream,--a kind of 
despair. I had got into a net through my own timid and weakness, and 
I did not see how to get out of it. I clung to my own home-peopl that 
fortnight as I had never done before. their voices, their way were all 
so pleasant and familiar to me, after the constraint in which I had 
been living. I might speak and do as I like without be correct by 
madam rupprecht, or reprov in a delicate, complimentari way by 
monsieur de la tourelle. one day I said to my father that I did not 
want to be married, that I would rather go back to the dear old mill; 
but he seem to feel thi speech of mine as a derelict of duti as 
great as if I had commit perjury; as if, after the ceremoni of 
betrothal, no one had ani right over me but my futur husband. and yet 
he ask me some solemn questions; but my answer were not such as to 
do me ani good. 

'dost thou know ani fault or crime in thi man that should prevent 
god' bless from rest on thi marriag with him? dost thou feel 
avers or repugn to him in ani way?' 

and to all thi what could I say? I could onli stammer out that I did 
not think I love him enough; and my poor old father saw in thi 
reluct onli the fanci of a silli girl who did not know her own 
mind, but who had now gone too far to recede. 

So we were married, in the court chapel, a privileg which madam 
rupprecht had use no end of effort to obtain for us, and which she 
must have thought wa to secur us all possibl happiness, both at the 
time and in recollect afterwards. 

We were married; and after two day spent in festiv at carlsruhe, 
among all our new fashion friend there, I bade good-bi for ever to 
my dear old father. I had beg my husband to take me by way of 
heidelberg to hi old castl in the vosges; but I found an amount of 
determination, under that effemin appear and manner, for which I 
wa not prepared, and he refus my first request so decidedli that I 
dare not urg it. 'henceforth, anna,' said he, 'you will move in a 
differ sphere of life; and though it is possibl that you may have 
the power of show favour to your relat from time to time, yet 
much or familiar intercours will be undesirable, and is what I cannot 
allow.' I felt almost afraid, after thi formal speech, of ask my 
father and fritz to come and see me; but, when the agoni of bid 
them farewel overcam all my prudence, I did beg them to pay me a 
visit ere long. but they shook their heads, and spoke of busi at 
home, of differ kind of life, of my be a frenchwoman now. onli 
my father broke out at last with a blessing, and said, 'if my child is 
unhappy--which god forbid--let her rememb that her father' hous is 
ever open to her.' I wa on the point of cri out, 'oh! take me back 
then now, my father! oh, my father!' when I felt, rather than saw, my 
husband present near me. He look on with a slightli contemptu air; 
and, take my hand in his, he led me weep away, say that short 
farewel were alway the best when they were inevitable. 

It took us two day to reach hi château in the vosges, for the road 
were bad and the way difficult to ascertain. noth could be more 
devot than he wa all the time of the journey. It seem as if he 
were tri in everi way to make up for the separ which everi hour 
made me feel the more complet between my present and my former life. I 
seem as if I were onli now waken up to a full sens of what 
marriag was, and I dare say I wa not a cheer companion on the 
tediou journey. At length, jealousi of my regret for my father and 
brother got the better of M. de la tourelle, and he becam so much 
displeas with me that I thought my heart would break with the sens 
of desolation. So it wa in no cheer frame of mind that we 
approach le rochers, and I thought that perhap it wa becaus I wa 
so unhappi that the place look so dreary. On one side, the château 
look like a raw new building, hastili run up for some immedi 
purpose, without ani growth of tree or underwood near it, onli the 
remain of the stone use for building, not yet clear away from the 
immedi neighbourhood, although weed and lichen had been suffer 
to grow near and over the heap of rubbish; on the other, were the 
great rock from which the place took it name, and rise close 
against them, as if almost a natur formation, wa the old castle, 
whose build date mani centuri back. 

It wa not larg nor grand, but it wa strong and picturesque, and I 
use to wish that we live in it rather than in the smart, 
half-furnish apart in the new edifice, which had been hastili got 
readi for my reception. incongru as the two part were, they were 
join into a whole by mean of intric passag and unexpect 
doors, the exact posit of which I never fulli understood. M. de la 
tourel led me to a suit of room set apart for me, and formal 
instal me in them, as in a domain of which I wa sovereign. He 
apologis for the hasti prepar which wa all he had been abl to 
make for me, but promised, befor I asked, or even thought of 
complaining, that they should be made as luxuri as heart could wish 
befor mani week had elapsed. but when, in the gloom of an autumn 
evening, I caught my own face and figur reflect in all the mirrors, 
which show onli a mysteri background in the dim light of the mani 
candl which fail to illumin the great proport of the 
half-furnish salon, I clung to M. de la tourelle, and beg to be 
taken to the room he had occupi befor hi marriage, he seem angri 
with me, although he affect to laugh, and so decidedli put asid the 
notion of my have ani other room but these, that I trembl in 
silenc at the fantast figur and shape which my imagin call 
up as peopl the background of those gloomi mirrors. there wa my 
boudoir, a littl less dreary--mi bedroom, with it grand and tarnish 
furniture, which I commonli made into my sitting-room, lock up the 
variou door which led into the boudoir, the salon, the passages--al 
but one, through which M. de la tourel alway enter from hi own 
apart in the older part of the castle. but thi prefer of mine 
for occupi my bedroom annoy M. de la tourelle, I am sure, though 
he did not care to express hi displeasure. He would alway allur me 
back into the salon, which I dislik more and more from it complet 
separ from the rest of the build by the long passag into which 
all the door of my apart opened. thi passag wa close by heavi 
door and portières, through which I could not hear a sound from the 
other part of the house, and, of course, the servant could not hear 
ani movement or cri of mine unless expressli summoned. To a girl 
brought up as I had been in a household where everi individu live 
all day in the sight of everi other member of the family, never want 
either cheer word or the sens of silent companionship, thi grand 
isol of mine wa veri formidable; and the more so, becaus M. de 
la tourelle, as land proprietor, sportsman, and what not, wa 
gener out of door the greater part of everi day, and sometim for 
two or three day at a time. I had no pride to keep me from associ 
with the domestics; it would have been natur to me in mani way to 
have sought them out for a word of sympathi in those dreari day when I 
wa left so entir to myself, had they been like our kindli german 
servants. but I dislik them, one and all; I could not tell why. some 
were civil, but there wa a familiar in their civil which 
repel me; other were rude, and treat me more as if I were an 
intrud than their master' chosen wife; and yet of the two set I 
like these last the best. 

the princip male servant belong to thi latter class. I wa veri 
much afraid of him, he had such an air of suspici surli about 
him in all he did for me; and yet M. de la tourel spoke of him as 
most valuabl and faithful. indeed, it sometim struck me that 
lefebvr rule hi master in some things; and thi I could not make 
out. for, while M. de la tourel behav toward me as if I were some 
preciou toy or idol, to be cherished, and fostered, and petted, and 
indulged, I soon found out how littl I, or, apparently, ani one else, 
could bend the terribl will of the man who had on first acquaint 
appear to me too effemin and languid to exert hi will in the 
slightest particular. I had learnt to know hi face better now; and to 
see that some vehement depth of feeling, the caus of which I could not 
fathom, made hi grey eye glitter with pale light, and hi lip 
contract, and hi delic cheek whiten on certain occasions. but all 
had been so open and abov board at home, that I had no experi to 
help me to unravel ani mysteri among those who live under the same 
roof. I understood that I had made what madam rupprecht and her set 
would have call a great marriage, becaus I live in château with 
mani servants, bound ostens to obey me as a mistress. I understood 
that M. de la tourel wa fond enough of me in hi way--proud of my 
beauty, I dare say (for he often enough spoke about it to me)--but he 
wa also jealous, and suspicious, and uninfluenc by my wishes, unless 
they talli with hi own. I felt at thi time as if I could have been 
fond of him too, if he would have let me; but I wa timid from my 
childhood, and befor long my dread of hi displeasur (come down 
like thunder into the midst of hi love, for such slight caus as a 
hesit in reply, a wrong word, or a sigh for my father), conquer 
my humor inclin to love one who wa so handsome, so 
accomplished, so indulg and devoted. but if I could not pleas him 
when inde I love him, you may imagin how often I did wrong when I 
wa so much afraid of him as to quietli avoid hi compani for fear of 
hi outburst of passion. one thing I rememb noticing, that the more 
M. de la tourel wa displeas with me, the more lefebvr seem to 
chuckle; and when I wa restor to favour, sometim on as sudden an 
impuls as that which occas my disgrace, lefebvr would look 
askanc at me with hi cold, malici eyes, and onc or twice at such 
time he spoke most disrespect to M. de la tourelle. 

I have almost forgotten to say that, in the earli day of my life at 
le rochers, M. de la tourelle, in contemptu indulg piti at my 
weak in dislik the dreari grandeur of the salon, wrote up to the 
millin in pari from whom my corbeil de mariag had come, to desir 
her to look out for me a maid of middl age, experienc in the 
toilette, and with so much refin that she might on occas serv 
as companion to me. 




portion 2 


A norman woman, amant by name, wa sent to le rocher by the pari 
milliner, to becom my maid. she wa tall and handsome, though upward 
of forty, and somewhat gaunt. but, on first see her, I like her; 
she wa neither rude nor familiar in her manners, and had a pleasant 
look of straightforward about her that I had miss in all the 
inhabit of the château, and had foolishli set down in my own mind 
as a nation want. amant wa direct by M. de la tourel to sit in 
my boudoir, and to be alway within call. He also gave her mani 
instruct as to her duti in matter which, perhaps, strictli 
belong to my depart of management. but I wa young and 
inexperienced, and thank to be spare ani responsibility. 

I daresay it wa true what M. de la tourel said--befor mani week 
had elapsed--that, for a great lady, a ladi of a castle, I becam sadli 
too familiar with my norman waiting-maid. but you know that by birth we 
were not veri far apart in rank: amant wa the daughter of a norman 
farmer, I of a german miller; and besid that, my life wa so lonely! 
It almost seem as if I could not pleas my husband. He had written 
for some one capabl of be my companion at times, and now he wa 
jealou of my free regard for her--angri becaus I could sometim 
laugh at her origin tune and amus proverbs, while when with him I 
wa too much frighten to smile. 

from time to time famili from a distanc of some leagu drove 
through the bad road in their heavi carriag to pay us a visit, and 
there wa an occasion talk of our go to pari when public affair 
should be a littl more settled. these littl event and plan were the 
onli variat in my life for the first twelv months, if I except the 
altern in M. de la tourelle' temper, hi unreason anger, and 
hi passion fondness. 

perhap one of the reason that made me take pleasur and comfort in 
amante' societi was, that wherea I wa afraid of everybodi (I do not 
think I wa half as much afraid of thing as of persons), amant fear 
no one. she would quietli beard lefebvre, and he respect her all the 
more for it; she had a knack of put question to M. de la tourelle, 
which respect inform him that she had detect the weak point, 
but forebor to press him too close upon it out of defer to hi 
posit as her master. and with all her shrewd to others, she had 
quit tender way with me; all the more so at thi time becaus she 
knew, what I had not yet ventur to tell M. de la tourelle, that 
by-and-bi I might becom a mother--that wonder object of mysteri 
interest to singl women, who no longer hope to enjoy such blessed 
themselves. 

It wa onc more autumn; late in october. but I wa reconcil to my 
habitation; the wall of the new part of the build no longer look 
bare and desolate; the _débris_ had been so far clear away by M. de 
la tourelle' desir as to make me a littl flower-garden, in which I 
tri to cultiv those plant that I rememb as grow at home. 
amant and I had move the furnitur in the rooms, and adjust it to 
our liking; my husband had order mani an articl from time to time 
that he thought would give me pleasure, and I wa becom tame to my 
appar imprison in a certain part of the great building, the 
whole of which I had never yet explored. It wa october, as I say, onc 
more. the day were lovely, though short in duration, and M. de la 
tourel had occasion, so he said, to go to that distant estat the 
superintend of which so frequent took him away from home. He took 
lefebvr with him, and possibl some more of the lacqueys; he often 
did. and my spirit rose a littl at the thought of hi absence; and 
then the new sensat that he wa the father of my unborn babe came 
over me, and I tri to invest him with thi fresh character. I tri 
to believ that it wa hi passion love for me that made him so 
jealou and tyrannical, imposing, as he did, restrict on my veri 
intercours with my dear father, from whom I wa so entir separated, 
as far as person intercours wa concerned. 

I had, it is true, let myself go into a sorrow review of all the 
troubl which lay hidden beneath the seem luxuri of my life. I knew 
that no one care for me except my husband and amante; for it wa clear 
enough to see that I, as hi wife, and also as a _parvenue_, wa not 
popular among the few neighbour who surround us; and as for the 
servants; the women were all hard and impudent-looking, treat me 
with a semblanc of respect that had more of mockeri than realiti in 
it; while the men had a lurk kind of fierc about them, 
sometim display even to M. de la tourelle, who on hi part, it must 
be confessed, wa often sever even to cruelti in hi manag of 
them. My husband love me, I said to myself, but I said it almost in 
the form of a question. hi love wa shown fitfully, and more in way 
calcul to pleas himself than to pleas me. I felt that for no wish 
of mine would he deviat one tittl from ani predetermin cours of 
action. I had learnt the inflex of those thin delic lips; I 
knew how anger would turn hi fair complexion to deadli white, and 
bring the cruel light into hi pale blue eyes. the love I bore to ani 
one seem to be a reason for hi hate them, and so I went on piti 
myself one long dreari afternoon dure that absenc of hi of which I 
have spoken, onli sometim rememb to check myself in my 
murmur by think of the new unseen link between us, and then 
cri afresh to think how wick I was. oh, how well I rememb that 
long octob evening! amant came in from time to time, talk away to 
cheer me--talk about dress and paris, and I hardli know what, but 
from time to time look at me keenli with her friendli dark eyes, and 
with seriou interest, too, though all her word were about frivolity. 
At length she heap the fire with wood, drew the heavi silken curtain 
close; for I had been anxiou hitherto to keep them open, so that I 
might see the pale moon mount the skies, as I use to see her--th 
same moon--ris from behind the kaiser stuhl at heidelberg; but the 
sight made me cry, so amant shut it out. she dictat to me as a nurs 
doe to a child. 

'now, madam must have the littl kitten to keep her company,' she 
said, 'while I go and ask marthon for a cup of coffee.' I rememb that 
speech, and the way it rous me, for I did not like amant to think I 
want amus by a kitten. It might be my petulance, but thi 
speech--such as she might have made to a child--annoy me, and I said 
that I had reason for my low of spirits--mean that they were not 
of so imaginari a natur that I could be divert from them by the 
gambol of a kitten. so, though I did not choos to tell her all, I 
told her a part; and as I spoke, I began to suspect that the good 
creatur knew much of what I withheld, and that the littl speech about 
the kitten wa more thought kind than it had seem at first. I 
said that it wa so long sinc I had heard from my father; that he wa 
an old man, and so mani thing might happen--i might never see him 
again--and I so seldom heard from him or my brother. It wa a more 
complet and total separ than I had ever anticip when I 
married, and someth of my home and of my life previou to my 
marriag I told the good amante; for I had not been brought up as a 
great lady, and the sympathi of ani human be wa preciou to me. 

amant listen with interest, and in return told me some of the event 
and sorrow of her own life. then, rememb her purpose, she set out 
in search of the coffee, which ought to have been brought to me an hour 
before; but, in my husband' absence, my wish were but seldom 
attend to, and I never dare to give orders. 

present she returned, bring the coffe and a great larg cake. 

'see!' said she, set it down. 'look at my plunder. madam must eat. 
those who eat alway laugh. and, besides, I have a littl news that 
will pleas madame.' then she told me that, lie on a tabl in the 
great kitchen, wa a bundl of letters, come by the courier from 
strasburg that veri afternoon: then, fresh from her convers with 
me, she had hastili unti the string that bound them, but had onli 
just trace out one that she thought wa from germany, when a 
servant-man came in, and, with the start he gave her, she drop the 
letters, which he pick up, swear at her for have unti and 
disarrang them. she told him that she believ there wa a letter 
there for her mistress; but he onli swore the more, saying, that if 
there wa it wa no busi of hers, or of hi either, for that he had 
the strictest order alway to take all letter that arriv dure hi 
master' absenc into the privat sitting-room of the latter--a room 
into which I had never entered, although it open out of my husband' 
dressing-room. 

I ask amant if she had not conquer and brought me thi letter. no, 
indeed, she replied, it wa almost as much as her life wa worth to 
live among such a set of servants: it wa onli a month ago that jacqu 
had stab valentin for some jest talk. had I never miss 
valentin--that handsom young lad who carri up the wood into my 
salon? poor fellow! he lie dead and cold now, and they said in the 
villag he had put an end to himself, but those of the household knew 
better. oh! I need not be afraid; jacqu wa gone, no one knew where; 
but with such peopl it wa not safe to upbraid or insist. monsieur 
would be at home the next day, and it would not be long to wait. 

but I felt as if I could not exist till the next day, without the 
letter. It might be to say that my father wa ill, dying--h might cri 
for hi daughter from hi death-bed! In short, there wa no end to the 
thought and fanci that haunt me. It wa of no use for amant to 
say that, after all, she might be mistaken--that she did not read 
write well--that she had but a glimps of the address; I let my 
coffe cool, my food all becam distasteful, and I wrung my hand with 
impati to get at the letter, and have some news of my dear one at 
home. all the time, amant kept her imperturb good temper, first 
reasoning, then scolding. At last she said, as if weari out, that if 
I would consent to make a good supper, she would see what could be done 
as to our go to monsieur' room in search of the letter, after the 
servant were all gone to bed. We agre to go togeth when all wa 
still, and look over the letters; there could be no harm in that; and 
yet, somehow, we were such coward we dare not do it openli and in the 
face of the household. 

present my supper came up--partridges, bread, fruits, and cream. how 
well I rememb that supper! We put the untouch cake away in a sort 
of buffet, and pour the cold coffe out of the window, in order that 
the servant might not take offenc at the appar fanci of 
send down for food I could not eat. I wa so anxiou for all to be 
in bed, that I told the footman who serv that he need not wait to 
take away the plate and dishes, but might go to bed. long after I 
thought the hous wa quiet, amante, in her caution, made me wait. It 
wa past eleven befor we set out, with cat-lik step and veil 
light, along the passages, to go to my husband' room and steal my own 
letter, if it wa inde there; a fact about which amant had becom 
veri uncertain in the progress of our discussion. 

To make you understand my story, I must now tri to explain to you the 
plan of the château. It had been at one time a fortifi place of some 
strength, perch on the summit of a rock, which project from the 
side of the mountain. but addit had been made to the old build 
(which must have born a strong resembl to the castl overhang 
the rhine), and these new build were place so as to command a 
magnific view, be on the steepest side of the rock, from which 
the mountain fell away, as it were, leav the great plain of franc 
in full survey. the ground-plan wa someth of the shape of three 
side of an oblong; my apart in the modern edific occupi the 
narrow end, and had thi grand prospect. the front of the castl wa 
old, and ran parallel to the road far below. In thi were contain the 
offic and public room of variou descriptions, into which I never 
penetrated. the back wing (consid the new building, in which my 
apart were, as the centre) consist of mani rooms, of a dark and 
gloomi character, as the mountain-sid shut out much of the sun, and 
heavi pine wood came down within a few yard of the windows. yet on 
thi side--on a project plateau of the rock--mi husband had form 
the flower-garden of which I have spoken; for he wa a great cultiv 
of flower in hi leisur moments. 

now my bedroom wa the corner room of the new build on the part 
next to the mountains. henc I could have let myself down into the 
flower-garden by my hand on the window-sil on one side, without 
danger of hurt myself; while the window at right angl with these 
look sheer down a descent of a hundr feet at least. go still 
farther along thi wing, you came to the old building; in fact, these 
two fragment of the ancient castl had formerli been attach by some 
such connect apart as my husband had rebuilt. these room 
belong to M. de la tourelle. hi bedroom open into mine, hi 
dressing-room lay beyond; and that wa pretti nearli all I knew, for 
the servants, as well as he himself, had a knack of turn me back, 
under some pretence, if ever they found me walk about alone, as I 
wa inclin to do, when first I came, from a sort of curios to see 
the whole of the place of which I found myself mistress. M. de la 
tourel never encourag me to go out alone, either in a carriag or 
for a walk, say alway that the road were unsaf in those disturb 
times; indeed, I have sometim fanci sinc that the flower-garden, 
to which the onli access from the castl wa through hi rooms, wa 
design in order to give me exercis and employ under hi own eye. 

but to return to that night. I knew, as I have said, that M. de la 
tourelle' privat room open out of hi dressing-room, and thi out 
of hi bedroom, which again open into mine, the corner-room. but 
there were other door into all these rooms, and these door led into a 
long gallery, light by windows, look into the inner court. I do 
not rememb our consult much about it; we went through my room into 
my husband' apart through the dressing-room, but the door of 
commun into hi studi wa locked, so there wa noth for it 
but to turn back and go by the galleri to the other door. I recollect 
notic one or two thing in these rooms, then seen by me for the 
first time. I rememb the sweet perfum that hung in the air, the 
scent bottl of silver that deck hi toilet-table, and the whole 
apparatu for bath and dressing, more luxuri even than those 
which he had provid for me. but the room itself wa less splendid in 
it proport than mine. In truth, the new build end at the 
entranc to my husband' dressing-room. there were deep window recess 
in wall eight or nine feet thick, and even the partit between the 
chamber were three feet deep; but over all these door or window 
there fell thick, heavi draperies, so that I should think no one could 
have heard in one room what pass in another. We went back into my 
room, and out into the gallery. We had to shade our candle, from a fear 
that possess us, I don't know why, lest some of the servant in the 
opposit wing might trace our progress toward the part of the castl 
unus by ani one except my husband. somehow, I had alway the feel 
that all the domestics, except amante, were spi upon me, and that I 
wa trammel in a web of observ and unspoken limit 
extend over all my actions. 

there wa a light in the upper room; we paused, and amant would have 
again retreated, but I wa chafe under the delays. what wa the harm 
of my seek my father' unopen letter to me in my husband' study? 
I, gener the coward, now blame amant for her unusu timidity. 
but the truth was, she had far more reason for suspicion as to the 
proceed of that terribl household than I had ever known of. I 
urg her on, I press on myself; we came to the door, locked, but 
with the key in it; we turn it, we entered; the letter lay on the 
table, their white oblong catch the light in an instant, and 
reveal themselv to my eager eyes, hunger after the word of 
love from my peaceful, distant home. but just as I press forward to 
examin the letters, the candl which amant held, caught in some 
draught, went out, and we were in darkness. amant propos that we 
should carri the letter back to my salon, collect them as well as 
we could in the dark, and return all but the expect one for me; 
but I beg her to return to my room, where I kept tinder and flint, 
and to strike a fresh light; and I remain alon in the room, of which 
I could onli just distinguish the size, and the princip articl of 
furniture: a larg table, with a deep, overhang cloth, in the 
middle, escritoir and other heavi articl against the walls; all 
thi I could see as I stood there, my hand on the tabl close by the 
letters, my face toward the window, which, both from the dark of 
the wood grow high up the mountain-sid and the faint light of the 
declin moon, seem onli like an oblong of paler purpler black than 
the shadowi room. how much I rememb from my one instantan 
glanc befor the candl went out, how much I saw as my eye becam 
accustom to the darkness, I do not know, but even now, in my dreams, 
come up that room of horror, distinct in it profound shadow. amant 
could hardli have been gone a minut befor I felt an addit gloom 
befor the window, and heard soft movement outside--soft, but 
resolute, and continu until the end wa accomplished, and the window 
raised. 

In mortal terror of peopl forc an entranc at such an hour, and in 
such a manner as to leav no doubt of their purpose, I would have 
turn to fli when first I heard the noise, onli that I fear by ani 
quick motion to catch their attention, as I also ran the danger of 
do by open the door, which wa all but close and to whose 
handl I wa unaccustomed. again, quick as lightning, I bethought me 
of the hiding-plac between the lock door to my husband' 
dressing-room and the portièr which cover it; but I gave that up, I 
felt as if I could not reach it without scream or fainting. So I 
sank down softly, and crept under the table, hidden as I hoped, by the 
great, deep table-cover, with it heavi fringe. I had not recov my 
swoon sens fully, and wa tri to reassur myself as to my be 
in a place of compar safety, for, abov all things, I dread the 
betray of fainting, and struggl hard for such courag as I might 
attain by deaden myself to the danger I wa in by inflict intens 
pain on myself. you have often ask me the reason of that mark on my 
hand; it wa there, in my agony, I bit out a piec of flesh with my 
relentless teeth, thank for the pain, which help to numb my 
terror. I say, I wa but just conceal within I heard the window 
lifted, and one after anoth step over the sill, and stood by me so 
close that I could have touch their feet. then they laugh and 
whispered; my brain swam so that I could not tell the mean of their 
words, but I heard my husband' laughter among the rest--low, hissing, 
scornful--a he kick someth heavi that they had drag in over 
the floor, and which lay near me; so near, that my husband' kick, in 
touch it, touch me too. I don't know why--i can't tell how--but 
some feeling, and not curiosity, prompt me to put out my hand, ever 
so softly, ever so little, and feel in the dark for what lay 
spurn besid me. I stole my grope palm upon the clench and chilli 
hand of a corpse! 

strang to say, thi rous me to instant vivid of thought. till 
thi moment I had almost forgotten amante; now I plan with feverish 
rapid how I could give her a warn not to return; or rather, I 
should say, I tri to plan, for all my project were utterli futile, 
as I might have seen from the first. I could onli hope she would hear 
the voic of those who were now busi in tri to kindl a light, 
swear aw oath at the mislaid articl which would have enabl 
them to strike fire. I heard her step outsid come nearer and nearer; 
I saw from my hiding-plac the line of light beneath the door more and 
more distinctly; close to it her footstep paused; the men inside--at 
the time I thought they had been onli two, but I found out afterward 
there were three--paus in their endeavours, and were quit still, as 
breathless as myself, I suppose. then she slowli push the door open 
with gentl motion, to save her flicker candl from be again 
extinguished. for a moment all wa still. then I heard my husband say, 
as he advanc toward her (he wore riding-boots, the shape of which I 
knew well, as I could see them in the light): 

'amante, may I ask what bring you here into my privat room?' 

He stood between her and the dead bodi of a man, from which ghastli 
heap I shrank away as it almost touch me, so close were we all 
together. I could not tell whether she saw it or not; I could give her 
no warning, nor make ani dumb utter of sign to bid her what to 
say--if, indeed, I knew myself what would be best for her to say. 

her voic wa quit chang when she spoke; quit hoarse, and veri low; 
yet it wa steadi enough as she said, what wa the truth, that she had 
come to look for a letter which she believ had arriv for me from 
germany. good, brave amante! not a word about me. M. de la tourel 
answer with a grim blasphemi and a fear threat. He would have no 
one pri into hi premises; madam should have her letters, if there 
were any, when he chose to give them to her, if, indeed, he thought it 
well to give them to her at all. As for amante, thi wa her first 
warning, but it wa also her last; and, take the candl out of her 
hand, he turn her out of the room, hi companion discreetli make a 
screen, so as to throw the corps into deep shadow. I heard the key 
turn in the door after her--if I had ever had ani thought of escap it 
wa gone now. I onli hope that whatev wa to befal me might soon be 
over, for the tension of nerv wa grow more than I could bear. the 
instant she could be suppos to be out of hearing, two voic began 
speak in the most angri term to my husband, upbraid him for not 
have detain her, gag her--nay, one wa for kill her, say 
he had seen her eye fall on the face of the dead man, whom he now 
kick in hi passion. though the form of their speech wa as if they 
were speak to equals, yet in their tone there wa someth of fear. 
I am sure my husband wa their superior, or captain, or somewhat. He 
repli to them almost as if he were scof at them, say it wa 
such an expenditur of labour have to do with fools; that, ten to 
one, the woman wa onli tell the simpl truth, and that she wa 
frighten enough by discov her master in hi room to be thank 
to escap and return to her mistress, to whom he could easili explain 
on the morrow how he happen to return in the dead of night. but hi 
companion fell to curs me, and say that sinc M. de la tourel 
had been marri he wa fit for noth but to dress himself fine and 
scent himself with perfume; that, as for me, they could have got him 
twenti girl prettier, and with far more spirit in them. He quietli 
answer that I suit him, and that wa enough. all thi time they 
were do something--i could not see what--to the corpse; sometim 
they were too busi rifl the dead body, I believe, to talk; again 
they let it fall with a heavy, resistless thud, and took to 
quarrelling. they taunt my husband with angri vehemence, enrag at 
hi scof and scorn replies, hi mock laughter. yes, hold 
up hi poor dead victim, the better to strip him of whatev he wore 
that wa valuable, I heard my husband laugh just as he had done when 
exchang reparte in the littl salon of the rupprecht at 
carlsruhe. I hate and dread him from that moment. At length, as if 
to make an end of the subject, he said, with cool determin in hi 
voice: 

'now, my good friends, what is the use of all thi talking, when you 
know in your heart that, if I suspect my wife of know more than I 
chose of my affairs, she would not outliv the day? rememb victorine. 
becaus she mere joke about my affair in an imprud manner, and 
reject my advic to keep a prudent tongue--to see what she liked, but 
ask noth and say nothing--sh ha gone a long journey--long than 
to paris.' 

'but thi one is differ to her; we knew all that madam victorin 
knew, she wa such a chatterbox; but thi one may find out a vast deal, 
and never breath a word about it, she is so sly. some fine day we may 
have the countri raised, and the gendarm down upon us from strasburg, 
and all owe to your pretti doll, with her cun way of come over 
you.' 

I think thi rous M. de la tourel a littl from hi contemptu 
indifference, for he ground an oath through hi teeth, and said, 'feel! 
thi dagger is sharp, henri. If my wife breath a word, and I am such 
a fool as not to have stop her mouth effectu befor she can 
bring down gendarm upon us, just let that good steel find it way to 
my heart. let her guess but one tittle, let her have but one slight 
suspicion that I am not a "grand propriétaire," much less imagin that 
I am a chief of chauffeurs, and she follow victorin on the long 
journey beyond pari that veri day.' 

'she'll outwit you yet; or I never judg women well. those still 
silent one are the devil. she'll be off dure some of your absences, 
have pick out some secret that will break us all on the wheel.' 

'bah!' said hi voice; and then in a minut he added, 'let her go if 
she will. but, where she goes, I will follow; so don't cri befor 
you'r hurt.' 

By thi time, they had nearli strip the body; and the convers 
turn on what they should do with it. I learnt that the dead man wa 
the sieur de poissy, a neighbour gentleman, whom I had often heard 
of as hunt with my husband. I had never seen him, but they spoke as 
if he had come upon them while they were rob some cologn merchant, 
tortur him after the cruel practic of the chauffeurs, by roast 
the feet of their victim in order to compel them to reveal ani hidden 
circumst connect with their wealth, of which the chauffeur 
afterward made use; and thi sieur de poissi come down upon them, 
and recognis M. de la tourelle, they had kill him, and brought him 
thither after nightfall. I heard him whom I call my husband, laugh 
hi littl light laugh as he spoke of the way in which the dead bodi 
had been strap befor one of the riders, in such a way that it 
appear to ani passer-bi as if, in truth, the murder were tenderli 
support some sick person. He repeat some mock repli of doubl 
meaning, which he himself had given to some one who made inquiry. He 
enjoy the play upon words, softli applaud hi own wit. and all the 
time the poor helpless outstretch arm of the dead lay close to hi 
dainti boot! then anoth stoop (mi heart stop beating), and 
pick up a letter lie on the ground--a letter that had drop out 
of M. de poissy' pocket--a letter from hi wife, full of tender word 
of endear and pretti babbl of love. thi wa read aloud, with 
coars ribald comment on everi sentence, each tri to outdo the 
previou speaker. when they came to some pretti word about a sweet 
maurice, their littl child away with it mother on some visit, they 
laugh at M. de la tourelle, and told him that he would be hear 
such woman' drivel some day. Up to that moment, I think, I had 
onli fear him, but hi unnatural, half-feroci repli made me hate 
even more than I dread him. but now they grew weari of their savag 
merriment; the jewel and watch had been apprised, the money and paper 
examined; and appar there wa some necess for the bodi be 
inter quietli and befor daybreak. they had not dare to leav him 
where he wa slain for fear lest peopl should come and recognis him, 
and rais the hue and cri upon them. for they all along spoke as if it 
wa their constant endeavour to keep the immedi neighbourhood of le 
rocher in the most orderli and tranquil condition, so as never to give 
caus for visit from the gendarmes. they disput a littl as to 
whether they should make their way into the castl larder through the 
gallery, and satisfi their hunger befor the hasti interment, or 
afterwards. I listen with eager feverish interest as soon as thi 
mean of their speech reach my hot and troubl brain, for at the 
time the word they utter seem onli to stamp themselv with 
terribl forc on my memory, so that I could hardli keep from repeat 
them aloud like a dull, miserable, unconsci echo; but my brain wa 
numb to the sens of what they said, unless I myself were named, and 
then, I suppose, some instinct of self-preserv stir within me, 
and quicken my sense. and how I strain my ears, and nerv my hand 
and limbs, begin to twitch with convuls movements, which I 
fear might betray me! I gather everi word they spoke, not know 
which propos to wish for, but feel that whatev wa final 
decid upon, my onli chanc of escap wa draw near. I onc fear 
lest my husband should go to hi bedroom befor I had had that one 
chance, in which case he would most like have perceiv my absence. 
He said that hi hand were soil (I shuddered, for it might be with 
life-blood), and he would go and cleans them; but some bitter jest 
turn hi purpose, and he left the room with the other two--left it by 
the galleri door. left me alon in the dark with the stiffen corpse! 

now, now wa my time, if ever; and yet I could not move. It wa not my 
cramp and stiffen joint that crippl me, it wa the sensat of 
that dead man' close presence. I almost fancied--i almost fanci 
still--i heard the arm nearest to me move; lift itself up, as if onc 
more imploring, and fall in dead despair. At that fancy--if fanci it 
were--i scream aloud in mad terror, and the sound of my own strang 
voic broke the spell. I drew myself to the side of the tabl farthest 
from the corpse, with as much slow caution as if I realli could have 
fear the clutch of that poor dead arm, powerless for evermore. I 
softli rais myself up, and stood sick and trembling, hold by the 
table, too dizzi to know what to do next. I nearli fainted, when a low 
voic spoke--when amante, from the outsid of the door, whispered, 
'madame!' the faith creatur had been on the watch, had heard my 
scream, and have seen the three ruffian troop along the galleri down 
the stairs, and across the court to the offic in the other wing of 
the castle, she had stolen to the door of the room in which I was. the 
sound of her voic gave me strength; I walk straight toward it, as 
one benight on a dreari moor, suddenli perceiv the small steadi 
light which tell of human dwellings, take heart, and steer straight 
onward. where I was, where that voic was, I knew not; but go to it I 
must, or die. the door onc opened--i know not by which of us--i fell 
upon her neck, grasp her tight, till my hand ach with the tension 
of their hold. yet she never utter a word. onli she took me up in her 
vigor arms, and bore me to my room, and laid me on my bed. I do not 
know more; as soon as I wa place there I lost sense; I came to myself 
with a horribl dread lest my husband wa by me, with a belief that he 
wa in the room, in hiding, wait to hear my first words, watch 
for the least sign of the terribl knowledg I possess to murder me. 
I dare not breath quicker, I measur and time each heavi 
inspiration; I did not speak, nor move, nor even open my eyes, for long 
after I wa in my full, my miser senses. I heard some one tread 
softli about the room, as if with a purpose, not as if for curiosity, 
or mere to beguil the time; some one pass in and out of the salon; 
and I still lay quiet, feel as if death were inevitable, but wish 
that the agoni of death were past. again faint stole over me; but 
just as I wa sink into the horribl feel of nothingness, I heard 
amante' voic close to me, saying: 

'drink this, madame, and let us begone. all is ready.' 

I let her put her arm under my head and rais me, and pour someth 
down my throat. all the time she kept talk in a quiet, measur 
voice, unlik her own, so dri and authoritative; she told me that a 
suit of her cloth lay readi for me, that she herself wa as much 
disguis as the circumst permit her to be, that what 
provis I had left from my supper were stow away in her pockets, 
and so she went on, dwell on littl detail of the most commonplac 
description, but never allud for an instant to the fear caus whi 
flight wa necessary. I made no inquiri as to how she knew, or what she 
knew. I never ask her either then or afterwards, I could not bear 
it--w kept our dread secret close. but I suppos she must have been 
in the dressing-room adjoining, and heard all. 

In fact, I dare not speak even to her, as if there were anyth 
beyond the most common event in life in our prepar thu to leav the 
hous of blood by stealth in the dead of night. she gave me 
directions--short condens directions, without reasons--just as you do 
to a child; and like a child I obey her. she went often to the door 
and listened; and often, too, she went to the window, and look 
anxious out. for me, I saw noth but her, and I dare not let my 
eye wander from her for a minute; and I heard noth in the deep 
midnight silenc but her soft movements, and the heavi beat of my 
own heart. At last she took my hand, and led me in the dark, through 
the salon, onc more into the terribl gallery, where across the black 
dark the window admit pale sheet ghost of light upon the 
floor. cling to her I went; unquestioning--for she wa human 
sympathi to me after the isol of my unspeak terror. On we 
went, turn to the left instead of to the right, past my suit of 
sitting-room where the gild wa red with blood, into that unknown 
wing of the castl that front the main road lie parallel far below. 
she guid me along the basement passag to which we had now 
descended, until we came to a littl open door, through which the air 
blew chill and cold, bring for the first time a sensat of life to 
me. the door led into a kind of cellar, through which we grope our way 
to an open like window, but which, instead of be glazed, wa onli 
fenc with iron bars, two of which were loose, as amant evid 
knew, for she took them out with the eas of one who had perform the 
action often before, and then help me to follow her out into the 
free, open air. 

We stole round the end of the building, and on turn the corner--sh 
first--i felt her hold on me tighten for an instant, and the next step 
I, too, heard distant voices, and the blow of a spade upon the heavi 
soil, for the night wa veri warm and still. 

We had not spoken a word; we did not speak now. touch wa safer and as 
expressive. she turn down toward the high road; I followed. I did 
not know the path; we stumbl again and again, and I wa much bruised; 
so doubtless wa she; but bodili pain did me good. At last, we were on 
the plainer path of the high road. 

I had such faith in her that I did not ventur to speak, even when she 
paused, as wonder to which hand she should turn. but now, for the 
first time, she spoke: 

'which way did you come when he brought you here first?' 

I pointed, I could not speak. 

We turn in the opposit direction; still go along the high road. 
In about an hour, we struck up to the mountainside, scrambl far up 
befor we even dare to rest; far up and away again befor day had 
fulli dawned. then we look about for some place of rest and 
concealment: and now we dare to speak in whispers. amant told me that 
she had lock the door of commun between hi bedroom and mine, 
and, as in a dream, I wa awar that she had also lock and brought 
away the key of the door between the latter and the salon. 

'he will have been too busi thi night to think much about you--h will 
suppos you are asleep--i shall be the first to be missed; but they 
will onli just now be discov our loss.' 

I rememb those last word of her made me pray to go on; I felt as if 
we were lose preciou time in think either of rest or concealment; 
but she hardli repli to me, so busi wa she in seek out some 
hiding-place. At length, give it up in despair, we proceed onward 
a littl way; the mountain-sid slope downward rapidly, and in the 
full morn light we saw ourselv in a narrow valley, made by a 
stream which forc it way along it. about a mile lower down there 
rose the pale blue smoke of a village, a mill-wheel wa lash up the 
water close at hand, though out of sight. keep under the cover of 
everi shelter tree or bush, we work our way down past the mill, 
down to a one-arch bridge, which doubtless form part of the road 
between the villag and the mill. 

'thi will do,' said she; and we crept under the space, and climb a 
littl way up the rough stonework, we seat ourselv on a project 
ledge, and crouch in the deep damp shadow. amant sat a littl abov 
me, and made me lay my head on her lap. then she fed me, and took some 
food herself; and open out her great dark cloak, she cover up 
everi light-colour speck about us; and thu we sat, shiver and 
shuddering, yet feel a kind of rest through it all, simpli from the 
fact that motion wa no longer imperative, and that dure the daylight 
our onli chanc of safeti wa to be still. but the damp shadow in which 
we were sit wa blighting, from the circumst of the sunlight 
never penetr there; and I dread lest, befor night and the time 
for exert again came on, I should feel ill creep all over me. 
To add to our discomfort, it had rain the whole day long, and the 
stream, fed by a thousand littl mountain brooklets, began to swell 
into a torrent, rush over the stone with a perpetu and dizzi 
noise. 

everi now and then I wa waken from the pain doze into which I 
continu fell, by a sound of horses' feet over our head: sometim 
lumber heavili as if drag a burden, sometim rattl and 
galloping; and with the sharper cri of men' voic come cut 
through the roar of the waters. At length, day fell. We had to drop 
into the stream, which came abov our knee as we wade to the bank. 
there we stood, stiff and shivering. even amante' courag seem to 
fail. 

'we must pass thi night in shelter, somehow,' said she. for inde the 
rain wa come down pitilessly. I said nothing. I thought that sure 
the end must be death in some shape; and I onli hope that to death 
might not be ad the terror of the cruelti of men. In a minut or so 
she had resolv on her cours of action. We went up the stream to the 
mill. the familiar sounds, the scent of the wheat, the flour whiten 
the walls--al remind me of home, and it seem to me as if I must 
struggl out of thi nightmar and waken, and find myself onc more a 
happi girl by the neckar side. they were long in unbar the door at 
which amant had knocked: at length, an old feebl voic inquir who 
wa there, and what wa sought? amant answer shelter from the storm 
for two women; but the old woman replied, with suspici hesitation, 
that she wa sure it wa a man who wa ask for shelter, and that she 
could not let us in. but at length she satisfi herself, and unbar 
the heavi door, and admit us. she wa not an unkindli woman; but her 
thought all travel in one circle, and that was, that her master, 
the miller, had told her on no account to let ani man into the place 
dure hi absence, and that she did not know if he would not think two 
women as bad; and yet that as we were not men, no one could say she had 
disobey him, for it wa a shame to let a dog be out such a night as 
this. amante, with readi wit, told her to let no one know that we had 
taken shelter there that night, and that then her master could not 
blame her; and while she wa thu enjoin secreci as the wisest 
course, with a view to far other peopl than the miller, she wa 
hastili help me to take off my wet clothes, and spread them, as 
well as the brown mantl that had cover us both, befor the great 
stove which warm the room with the effectu heat that the old 
woman' fail vital required. all thi time the poor creatur wa 
discuss with herself as to whether she had disobey orders, in a 
kind of garrul way that made me fear much for her capabl of 
retain anyth secret if she wa questioned. by-and-by, she 
wander away to an unnecessari revel of her master' whereabouts: 
gone to help in the search for hi landlord, the sieur de poissy, who 
live at the chateau just above, and who had not return from hi 
chase the day before; so the intend imagin he might have met with 
some accident, and had summon the neighbour to beat the forest and 
the hill-side. she told us much besides, give us to understand that 
she would fain meet with a place as housekeep where there were more 
servant and less to do, as her life here wa veri lone and dull, 
especi sinc her master' son had gone away--gon to the wars. she 
then took her supper, which wa evid apport out to her with a 
spare hand, as, even if the idea had come into her head, she had not 
enough to offer us any. fortunately, warmth wa all that we required, 
and that, thank to amante' cares, wa return to our chill 
bodies. after supper, the old woman grew drowsy; but she seem 
uncomfort at the idea of go to sleep and leav us still in the 
house. indeed, she gave us pretti broad hint as to the proprieti of 
our go onc more out into the bleak and stormi night; but we beg 
to be allow to stay under shelter of some kind; and, at last, a 
bright idea came over her, and she bade us mount by a ladder to a kind 
of loft, which went half over the lofti mill-kitchen in which we were 
sitting. We obey her--what els could we do?--and found ourselv in 
a spaciou floor, without ani safeguard or wall, boarding, or railing, 
to keep us from fall over into the kitchen in case we went too near 
the edge. It was, in fact, the store-room or garret for the household. 
there wa bed pile up, box and chests, mill sacks, the winter 
store of appl and nuts, bundl of old clothes, broken furniture, and 
mani other things. No sooner were we up there, than the old woman 
drag the ladder, by which we had ascended, away with a chuckle, as 
if she wa now secur that we could do no mischief, and sat herself 
down again onc more, to doze and await her master' return. We pull 
out some bedding, and gladli laid ourselv down in our dri cloth 
and in some warmth, hope to have the sleep we so much need to 
refresh us and prepar us for the next day. but I could not sleep, and 
I wa aware, from her breathing, that amant wa equal wakeful. We 
could both see through the crevic between the board that form the 
floor into the kitchen below, veri partial light by the common 
lamp that hung against the wall near the stove on the opposit side to 
that on which we were. 




portion 3 


far on in the night there were voic outsid reach us in our 
hiding-place; an angri knock at the door, and we saw through the 
chink the old woman rous herself up to go and open it for her master, 
who came in, evid half drunk. To my sick horror, he wa follow 
by lefebvre, appar as sober and wili as ever. they were talk 
togeth as they came in, disput about something; but the miller 
stop the convers to swear at the old woman for have fallen 
asleep, and, with tipsi anger, and even with blows, drove the poor old 
creatur out of the kitchen to bed. then he and lefebvr went on 
talking--about the sieur de poissy' disappearance. It seem that 
lefebvr had been out all day, along with other of my husband' men, 
ostens assist in the search; in all probabl tri to blind 
the sieur de poissy' follow by put them on a wrong scent, and 
also, I fancied, from one or two of lefebvre' sli questions, combin 
the hidden purpos of discov us. 

although the miller wa tenant and vassal to the sieur de poissy, he 
seem to me to be much more in leagu with the peopl of M. de la 
tourelle. He wa evid aware, in part, of the life which lefebvr 
and the other led; although, again, I do not suppos he knew or 
imagin one-half of their crimes; and also, I think, he wa serious 
interest in discov the fate of hi master, littl suspect 
lefebvr of murder or violence. He kept talk himself, and let 
out all sort of thought and opinions; watch by the keen eye of 
lefebvr gleam out below hi shaggi eyebrows. It wa evid not 
the cue of the latter to let out that hi master' wife had escap 
from that vile and terribl den; but though he never breath a word 
relat to us, not the less wa I certain he wa thirst for our 
blood, and lie in wait for us at everi turn of events. present he 
got up and took hi leave; and the miller bolt him out, and stumbl 
off to bed. then we fell asleep, and slept sound and long. 

the next morning, when I awoke, I saw amante, half raised, rest on 
one hand, and eagerli gazing, with strain eyes, into the kitchen 
below. I look too, and both heard and saw the miller and two of hi 
men eagerli and loudli talk about the old woman, who had not 
appear as usual to make the fire in the stove, and prepar her 
master' breakfast, and who now, late on in the morning, had been found 
dead in her bed; whether from the effect of her master' blow the 
night before, or from natur causes, who can tell? the miller' 
conscienc upbraid him a little, I should say, for he wa eagerli 
declar hi valu for hi housekeeper, and repeat how often she 
had spoken of the happi life she led with him. the men might have their 
doubts, but they did not wish to offend the miller, and all agre that 
the necessari step should be taken for a speedi funeral. and so they 
went out, leav us in our loft, but so much alone, that, for the 
first time almost, we ventur to speak freely, though still in hush 
voice, paus to listen continually. amant took a more cheer view 
of the whole occurr than I did. she said that, had the old woman 
lived, we should have had to depart that morning, and that thi quiet 
departur would have been the best thing we could have had to hope for, 
as, in all probability, the housekeep would have told her master of 
us and of our resting-place, and thi fact would, sooner or later, have 
been brought to the knowledg of those from whom we most desir to 
keep it concealed; but that now we had time to rest, and a shelter to 
rest in, dure the first hot pursuit, which we knew to a fatal 
certainti wa be carri on. the remnant of our food, and the 
stored-up fruit, would suppli us with provision; the onli thing to be 
fear was, that someth might be requir from the loft, and the 
miller or someon els mount up in search of it. but even then, with a 
littl arrang of box and chests, one part might be so kept in 
shadow that we might yet escap observation. all thi comfort me a 
little; but, I asked, how were we ever to escape? the ladder wa taken 
away, which wa our onli mean of descent. but amant repli that she 
could make a suffici ladder of the rope lie coil among other 
things, to drop us down the ten feet or so--with the advantag of it 
be portable, so that we might carri it away, and thu avoid all 
betray of the fact that ani one had ever been hidden in the loft. 

dure the two day that interven befor we did escape, amant made 
good use of her time. she look into everi box and chest dure the 
man' absenc at hi mill; and find in one box an old suit of man' 
clothes, which had probabl belong to the miller' absent son, she 
put them on to see if they would fit her; and, when she found that they 
did, she cut her own hair to the short of a man's, made me clip her 
black eyebrow as close as though they had been shaved, and by cut 
up old cork into piec such as would go into her cheeks, she alter 
both the shape of her face and her voic to a degre which I should not 
have believ possible. 

all thi time I lay like one stunned; my bodi resting, and renew it 
strength, but I myself in an almost idiot state--els sure I could 
not have taken the stupid interest which I rememb I did in all 
amante' energet prepar for disguise. I absolut recollect 
onc the feel of a smile come over my stiff face as some new 
exercis of her clever prove a success. 

but toward the second day, she requir me, too, to exert myself; and 
then all my heavi despair returned. I let her dye my fair hair and 
complexion with the decay shell of the stored-up walnuts, I let her 
blacken my teeth, and even voluntarili broke a front tooth the better 
to effect my disguise. but through it all I had no hope of evad my 
terribl husband. the third night the funer wa over, the drink 
ended, the guest gone; the miller put to bed by hi men, be too 
drunk to help himself. they stop a littl while in the kitchen, 
talk and laugh about the new housekeep like to come; and 
they, too, went off, shutting, but not lock the door. everyth 
favour us. amant had tri her ladder on one of the two previou 
nights, and could, by a dexter throw from beneath, unfasten it from 
the hook to which it wa fixed, when it had serv it office; she made 
up a bundl of worthless old cloth in order that we might the better 
preserv our charact of a travel pedlar and hi wife; she 
stuf a hump on her back, she thicken my figure, she left her own 
cloth deep down beneath a heap of other in the chest from which she 
had taken the man' dress which she wore; and with a few franc in her 
pocket--th sole money we had either of us had about us when we 
escaped--w let ourselv down the ladder, unhook it, and pass into 
the cold dark of night again. 

We had discuss the rout which it would be well for us to take while 
we lay perdu in our loft. amant had told me then that her reason for 
inquiring, when we first left le rochers, by which way I had first 
been brought to it, wa to avoid the pursuit which she wa sure would 
first be made in the direct of germany; but that now she thought we 
might return to that district of countri where my german fashion of 
speak french would excit least observation. I thought that amant 
herself had someth peculiar in her accent, which I had heard M. de 
la tourel sneer at as norman patois; but I said not a word beyond 
agre to her propos that we should bend our step toward germany. 
onc there, we should, I thought, be safe. alas! I forgot the unruli 
time that wa overspread all europe, overturn all law, and all 
the protect which law gives. 

how we wandered--not dare to ask our way--how we lived, how we 
struggl through mani a danger and still more terror of danger, I 
shall not tell you now. I will onli relat two of our adventur befor 
we reach frankfort. the first, although fatal to an innoc lady, 
wa yet, I believe, the caus of my safety; the second I shall tell 
you, that you may understand whi I did not return to my former home, as 
I had hope to do when we lay in the miller' loft, and I first becam 
capabl of grope after an idea of what my futur life might be. I 
cannot tell you how much in these doubt and wander I becam 
attach to amante. I have sometim fear since, lest I care for her 
onli becaus she wa so necessari to my own safety; but, no! it wa not 
so; or not so only, or principally. she said onc that she wa fli 
for her own life as well as for mine; but we dare not speak much on 
our danger, or on the horror that had gone before. We plan a littl 
what wa to be our futur course; but even for that we did not look 
forward long; how could we, when everi day we scarc knew if we 
should see the sun go down? for amant knew or conjectur far more 
than I did of the atroc of the gang to which M. de la tourel 
belonged; and everi now and then, just as we seem to be sink into 
the calm of security, we fell upon trace of a pursuit after us in all 
directions. onc I remember--w must have been nearli three week 
wearili walk through unfrequ ways, day after day, not dare to 
make inquiri as to our whereabouts, nor yet to seem purposeless in our 
wanderings--w came to a kind of lone roadsid farrier' and 
blacksmith's. I wa so tired, that amant declar that, come what 
might, we would stay there all night; and accordingli she enter the 
house, and boldli announc herself as a travel tailor, readi to do 
ani odd job of work that might be required, for a night' lodg and 
food for herself and wife. she had adopt thi plan onc or twice 
before, and with good success; for her father had been a tailor in 
rouen, and as a girl she had often help him with hi work, and knew 
the tailors' slang and habits, down to the particular whistl and cri 
which in franc tell so much to those of a trade. At thi 
blacksmith's, as at most other solitari hous far away from a town, 
there wa not onli a store of men' cloth laid by as want mend 
when the housewif could afford time, but there wa a natur crave 
after news from a distance, such news as a wander tailor is bound to 
furnish. the earli novemb afternoon wa close into evening, as we 
sat down, she cross-leg on the great tabl in the blacksmith' 
kitchen, drawn close to the window, I close behind her, sew at 
anoth part of the same garment, and from time to time well scold by 
my seem husband. all at onc she turn round to speak to me. It wa 
onli one word, 'courage!' I had seen nothing; I sat out of the light; 
but I turn sick for an instant, and then I brace myself up into a 
strang strength of endur to go through I knew not what. 

the blacksmith' forg wa in a shed besid the house, and front the 
road. I heard the hammer stop pli their continu rhythmic beat. 
she had seen whi they ceased. A rider had come up to the forg and 
dismounted, lead hi hors in to be re-shod. the broad red light of 
the forge-fir had reveal the face of the rider to amante, and she 
apprehend the consequ that realli ensued. 

the rider, after some word with the blacksmith, wa usher in by him 
into the house-plac where we sat. 

'here, good wife, a cup of wine and some galett for thi gentleman.' 

'anything, anything, madame, that I can eat and drink in my hand while 
my hors is be shod. I am in haste, and must get on to forbach 
to-night.' 

the blacksmith' wife light her lamp; amant had ask her for it 
five minut before. how thank we were that she had not more 
speedili compli with our request! As it was, we sat in dusk shadow, 
pretend to stitch away, but scarc abl to see. the lamp wa 
place on the stove, near which my husband, for it wa he, stood and 
warm himself. by-and-bi he turn round, and look all over the room, 
take us in with about the same degre of interest as the inanim 
furniture. amante, cross-legged, front him, stoop over her work, 
whistl softli all the while. He turn again to the stove, 
impati rub hi hands. He had finish hi wine and galette, 
and want to be off. 

'I am in haste, my good woman. ask thi husband to get on more quickly. 
I will pay him doubl if he make haste.' 

the woman went out to do hi bidding; and he onc more turn round to 
face us. amant went on to the second part of the tune. He took it up, 
whistl a second for an instant or so, and then the blacksmith' wife 
re-entering, he move toward her, as if to receiv her answer the more 
speedily. 

'one moment, monsieur--onli one moment. there wa a nail out of the 
off-foresho which my husband is replacing; it would delay monsieur 
again if that shoe also came off.' 

'madam is right,' said he, 'but my hast is urgent. If madam knew my 
reasons, she would pardon my impatience. onc a happi husband, now a 
desert and betray man, I pursu a wife on whom I lavish all my 
love, but who ha abus my confidence, and fled from my house, 
doubtless to some paramour; carri off with her all the jewel and 
money on which she could lay her hands. It is possibl madam may have 
heard or seen someth of her; she wa accompani in her flight by a 
base, proflig woman from paris, whom I, unhappi man, had myself 
engag for my wife' waiting-maid, littl dream what corrupt I 
wa bring into my house!' 

'i it possible?' said the good woman, throw up her hands. 

amant went on whistl a littl lower, out of respect to the 
conversation. 

'however, I am trace the wick fugitives; I am on their track' (and 
the handsome, effemin face look as feroci as ani demon's). 
'they will not escap me; but everi minut is a minut of miseri to me, 
till I meet my wife. madam ha sympathy, ha she not?' 

He drew hi face into a hard, unnatur smile, and then both went out 
to the forge, as if onc more to hasten the blacksmith over hi work. 

amant stop her whistl for one instant. 

'go on as you are, without chang of an eyelid even; in a few minut 
he will be gone, and it will be over!' 

It wa a necessari caution, for I wa on the point of give way, and 
throw myself weakli upon her neck. We went on; she whistl and 
stitching, I make semblanc to sew. and it wa well we did so; for 
almost directli he came back for hi whip, which he had laid down and 
forgotten; and again I felt one of those sharp, quick-scan glances, 
sent all round the room, and take in all. 

then we heard him ride away; and then, it had been long too dark to see 
well, I drop my work, and gave way to my trembl and shuddering. 
the blacksmith' wife returned. she wa a good creature. amant told 
her I wa cold and weary, and she insist on my stop my work, and 
go to sit near the stove; hastening, at the same time, her 
prepar for supper, which, in honour of us, and of monsieur' 
liber payment, wa to be a littl less frugal than ordinary. It wa 
well for me that she made me tast a littl of the cider-soup she wa 
preparing, or I could not have held up, in spite of amante' warn 
look, and the remembr of her frequent exhort to act 
resolut up to the charact we had assumed, whatev befell. To 
cover my agitation, amant stop her whistling, and began to talk; 
and, by the time the blacksmith came in, she and the good woman of the 
hous were in full flow. He began at onc upon the handsom gentleman, 
who had paid him so well; all hi sympathi wa with him, and both he 
and hi wife onli wish he might overtak hi wick wife, and punish 
her as she deserved. and then the convers took a turn, not 
uncommon to those whose live are quiet and monotonous; everi one 
seem to vie with each other in tell about some horror; and the 
savag and mysteri band of robber call the chauffeurs, who 
infest all the road lead to the rhine, with schinderhann at 
their head, furnish mani a tale which made the veri marrow of my 
bone run cold, and quench even amante' power of talking. her eye 
grew larg and wild, her cheek blanched, and for onc she sought by 
her look help from me. the new call upon me rous me. I rose and 
said, with their permiss my husband and I would seek our bed, for 
that we had travel far and were earli risers. I ad that we would 
get up betimes, and finish our piec of work. the blacksmith said we 
should be earli bird if we rose befor him; and the good wife second 
my propos with kindli bustle. one other such stori as those they had 
been relating, and I do believ amant would have fainted. 

As it was, a night' rest set her up; we aros and finish our work 
betimes, and share the plenti breakfast of the family. then we had 
to set forth again; onli know that to forbach we must not go, yet 
believing, as wa inde the case, that forbach lay between us and that 
germani to which we were direct our course. two day more we 
wander on, make a round, I suspect, and return upon the road to 
forbach, a leagu or two nearer to that town than the blacksmith' 
house. but as we never made inquiri I hardli knew where we were, when 
we came one night to a small town, with a good larg rambl inn in 
the veri centr of the princip street. We had begun to feel as if 
there were more safeti in town than in the loneli of the country. 
As we had part with a ring of mine not mani day befor to a 
travel jeweller, who wa too glad to purchas it far below it real 
valu to make mani inquiri as to how it came into the possess of a 
poor work tailor, such as amant seem to be, we resolv to stay 
at thi inn all night, and gather such particular and inform as 
we could by which to direct our onward course. 

We took our supper in the darkest corner of the salle-à-manger, have 
previous bargain for a small bedroom across the court, and over the 
stables. We need food sorely; but we hurri on our meal from dread 
of ani one enter that public room who might recogn us. just in 
the middl of our meal, the public dilig drove lumber up under 
the _porte-cochère_, and disgorg it passengers. most of them turn 
into the room where we sat, cower and fearful, for the door wa 
opposit to the porter' lodge, and both open on to the wide-cov 
entranc from the street. among the passeng came in a young, 
fair-hair lady, attend by an elderli french maid. the poor young 
creatur toss her head, and shrank away from the common room, full of 
evil smell and promiscu company, and demanded, in german french, to 
be taken to some privat apartment. We heard that she and her maid had 
come in the coupé, and, probabl from pride, poor young lady! she had 
avoid all associ with her fellow-passengers, therebi excit 
their dislik and ridicule. all these littl piec of hearsay had a 
signific to us afterwards, though, at the time, the onli remark 
made that bore upon the futur wa amante' whisper to me that the 
young lady' hair wa exactli the colour of mine, which she had cut off 
and burnt in the stove in the miller' kitchen in one of her descent 
from our hiding-plac in the loft. 

As soon as we could, we struck round in the shadow, leav the 
boister and merri fellow-passeng to their supper. We cross the 
court, borrow a lantern from the ostler, and scrambl up the rude 
step to our chamber abov the stable. there wa no door into it; the 
entranc wa the hole into which the ladder fitted. the window look 
into the court. We were tire and soon fell asleep. I wa waken by a 
nois in the stabl below. one instant of listening, and I waken 
amante, place my hand on her mouth, to prevent ani exclam in her 
half-rous state. We heard my husband speak about hi hors to the 
ostler. It wa hi voice. I am sure of it. amant said so too. We durst 
not move to rise and satisfi ourselves. for five minut or so he went 
on give directions. then he left the stable, and, softli steal to 
our window, we saw him cross the court and re-ent the inn. We 
consult as to what we should do. We fear to excit remark or 
suspicion by descend and leav our chamber, or els immedi 
escap wa our strongest idea. then the ostler left the stable, lock 
the door on the outside. 

'we must tri and drop through the window--if, indeed, it is well to go 
at all,' said amante. 

with reflect came wisdom. We should excit suspicion by leav 
without pay our bill. We were on foot, and might easili be pursued. 
So we sat on our bed' edge, talk and shivering, while from across 
the court the laughter rang merrily, and the compani slowli dispers 
one by one, their light flit past the window as they went 
upstair and settl each one to hi rest. 

We crept into our bed, hold each other tight, and listen to everi 
sound, as if we thought we were tracked, and might meet our death at 
ani moment. In the dead of night, just at the profound still 
preced the turn into anoth day, we heard a soft, cautiou step 
cross the yard. the key into the stabl wa turned--som one came 
into the stable--w felt rather than heard him there. A hors start a 
little, and made a restless movement with hi feet, then whinni 
recognition. He who had enter made two or three low sound to the 
animal, and then led him into the court. amant sprang to the window 
with the noiseless activ of a cat. she look out, but dare not 
speak a word. We heard the great door into the street open--a paus for 
mounting, and the horse' footstep were lost in distance. 

then amant came back to me. 'it wa he! he is gone!' said she, and 
onc more we lay down, trembl and shaking. 

thi time we fell sound asleep. We slept long and late. We were waken 
by mani hurri feet, and mani confus voices; all the world seem 
awak and astir. We rose and dress ourselves, and come down we 
look around among the crowd collect in the court-yard, in order to 
assur ourselv _he_ wa not there befor we left the shelter of the 
stable. 

the instant we were seen, two or three peopl rush to us. 

'have you heard?--do you know?--that poor young lady--oh, come and 
see!' and so we were hurried, almost in spite of ourselves, across the 
court, and up the great open stair of the main build of the inn, 
into a bed-chamber, where lay the beauti young german lady, so full 
of grace pride the night before, now white and still in death. By 
her stood the french maid, cri and gesticulating. 

'oh, madame! if you had but suffer me to stay with you! oh! the 
baron, what will he say?' and so she went on. her state had but just 
been discovered; it had been suppos that she wa fatigued, and wa 
sleep late, until a few minut before. the surgeon of the town had 
been sent for, and the landlord of the inn wa tri vainli to enforc 
order until he came, and, from time to time, drink littl cup of 
brandy, and offer them to the guests, who were all assembl there, 
pretti much as the servant were do in the court-yard. 

At last the surgeon came. all fell back, and hung on the word that 
were to fall from hi lips. 

'see!' said the landlord. 'thi ladi came last night by the dilig 
with her maid. doubtless, a great lady, for she must have a privat 
sitting-room--' 

'she wa madam the baro de roeder,' said the french maid. 

--'and wa difficult to pleas in the matter of supper, and a 
sleeping-room. she went to bed well, though fatigued. her maid left 
her--' 

'I beg to be allow to sleep in her room, as we were in a strang 
inn, of the charact of which we knew nothing; but she would not let 
me, my mistress wa such a great lady.' 

--'and slept with my servants,' continu the landlord. 'thi morn 
we thought madam wa still slumbering; but when eight, nine, ten, and 
near eleven o'clock came, I bade her maid use my pass-key, and enter 
her room----' 

'the door wa not locked, onli closed. and here she wa found--dead is 
she not, monsieur?--with her face down on her pillow, and her beauti 
hair all scatter wild; she never would let me tie it up, say it 
made her head ache. such hair!' said the waiting-maid, lift up a 
long golden tress, and let it fall again. 

I rememb amante' word the night before, and crept close up to 
her. 

meanwhile, the doctor wa examin the bodi underneath the 
bed-clothes, which the landlord, until now, had not allow to be 
disarranged. the surgeon drew out hi hand, all bath and stain with 
blood; and hold up a short, sharp knife, with a piec of paper 
fasten round it. 

'here ha been foul play,' he said. 'the deceas ladi ha been 
murdered. thi dagger wa aim straight at her heart.' then put on 
hi spectacles, he read the write on the bloodi paper, dim and 
horribl obscur as it was: 

numéro un. 
ainsi le chauffeur se vengent. 

'let us go!' said I to amante. 'oh, let us leav thi horribl place!' 

'wait a little,' said she. 'onli a few minut more. It will be 
better.' 

immedi the voic of all proclaim their suspicion of the 
cavali who had arriv last the night before. He had, they said, made 
so mani inquiri about the young lady, whose supercili conduct all 
in the _salle-à-manger_ had been discuss on hi entrance. they were 
talk about her as we left the room; he must have come in directli 
afterwards, and not until he had learnt all about her, had he spoken of 
the busi which necessit hi departur at dawn of day, and made 
hi arrang with both landlord and ostler for the possess of 
the key of the stabl and _porte-cochère_. In short, there wa no 
doubt as to the murderer, even befor the arriv of the legal 
functionari who had been sent for by the surgeon; but the word on the 
paper chill everi one with terror. le chauffeurs, who were they? No 
one knew, some of the gang might even then be in the room overhearing, 
and note down fresh object for vengeance. In germany, I had heard 
littl of thi terribl gang, and I had paid no greater heed to the 
stori relat onc or twice about them in carlsruh than one doe to 
tale about ogres. but here in their veri haunts, I learnt the full 
amount of the terror they inspired. No one would be legal respons 
for ani evid crimin the murderer. the public prosecutor shrank 
from the duti of hi office. what do I say? neither amant nor I, 
know far more of the actual guilt of the man who had kill that 
poor sleep young lady, durst breath a word. We appear to be 
wholli ignor of everything: we, who might have told so much. but how 
could we? we were broken down with terrif anxieti and fatigue, with 
the knowledg that we, abov all, were doom victims; and that the 
blood, heavili drip from the bed-cloth on to the floor, wa 
drip thu out of the poor dead body, because, when living, she had 
been mistaken for me. 

At length amant went up to the landlord, and ask permiss to leav 
hi inn, do all openli and humbly, so as to excit neither ill-wil 
nor suspicion. indeed, suspicion wa otherwis directed, and he 
willingli gave us leav to depart. A few day afterward we were across 
the rhine, in germany, make our way toward frankfort, but still 
keep our disguises, and amant still work at her trade. 

On the way, we met a young man, a wander journeyman from heidelberg. 
I knew him, although I did not choos that he should know me. I ask 
him, as carelessli as I could, how the old miller wa now? He told me 
he wa dead. thi realiz of the worst apprehens caus by hi 
long silenc shock me inexpressibly. It seem as though everi prop 
gave way from under me. I had been talk to amant onli that veri day 
of the safeti and comfort of the home that await her in my father' 
house; of the gratitud which the old man would feel toward her; and 
how there, in that peac dwelling, far away from the terribl land 
of france, she should find eas and secur for all the rest of her 
life. all thi I thought I had to promise, and even yet more had I 
look for, for myself. I look to the unburden of my heart and 
conscienc by tell all I knew to my best and wisest friend. I look 
to hi love as a sure guidanc as well as a comfort stay, and, 
behold, he wa gone away from me for ever! 

I had left the room hastili on hear of thi sad news from the 
heidelberger. presently, amant followed. 

'poor madame,' said she, consol me to the best of her ability. and 
then she told me by degre what more she had learn respect my 
home, about which she knew almost as much as I did, from my frequent 
talk on the subject both at le rocher and on the dreary, dole 
road we had come along. she had continu the convers after I 
left, by ask about my brother and hi wife. Of course, they live on 
at the mill, but the man said (with what truth I know not, but I 
believ it firmli at the time) that babett had complet got the 
upper hand of my brother, who onli saw through her eye and heard with 
her ears. that there had been much heidelberg gossip of late day about 
her sudden intimaci with a grand french gentleman who had appear at 
the mill--a relation, by marriage--married, in fact, to the miller' 
sister, who, by all accounts, had behav abomin and ungratefully. 
but that wa no reason for babette' extrem and sudden intimaci with 
him, go about everywher with the french gentleman; and sinc he 
left (a the heidelberg said he knew for a fact) correspond with 
him constantly. yet her husband saw no harm in it all, seemingly; 
though, to be sure, he wa so out of spirits, what with hi father' 
death and the news of hi sister' infamy, that he hardli knew how to 
hold up hi head. 

'now,' said amante, 'all thi prove that M. de la tourel ha 
suspect that you would go back to the nest in which you were reared, 
and that he ha been there, and found that you have not yet returned; 
but probabl he still imagin that you will do so, and ha accordingli 
engag your sister-in-law as a kind of informant. madam ha said that 
her sister-in-law bore her no extrem good-will; and the defamatori 
stori he ha got the start of us in spreading, will not tend to 
increas the favour in which your sister-in-law hold you. No doubt the 
assassin wa retrac hi step when we met him near forbach, and 
have heard of the poor german lady, with her french maid, and her 
pretti blond complexion, he follow her. If madam will still be 
guid by me--and, my child, I beg of you still to trust me,' said 
amante, break out of her respect formal into the way of 
talk more natur to those who had share and escap from common 
dangers--mor natural, too, where the speaker wa consciou of a power 
of protect which the other did not possess--'w will go on to 
frankfort, and lose ourselves, for a time, at least, in the number of 
peopl who throng a great town; and you have told me that frankfort is 
a great town. We will still be husband and wife; we will take a small 
lodging, and you shall house-keep and live in-doors. I, as the rougher 
and the more alert, will continu my father' trade, and seek work at 
the tailors' shops.' 

I could think of no better plan, so we follow thi out. In a back 
street at frankfort we found two furnish room to let on a sixth 
story. the one we enter had no light from day; a dingi lamp swung 
perpetu from the ceiling, and from that, or from the open door 
lead into the bedroom beyond, came our onli light. the bedroom wa 
more cheerful, but veri small. such as it was, it almost exceed our 
possibl means. the money from the sale of my ring wa almost 
exhausted, and amant wa a stranger in the place, speak onli 
french, moreover, and the good german were hate the french peopl 
right heartily. however, we succeed better than our hopes, and even 
laid by a littl against the time of my confinement. I never stir 
abroad, and saw no one, and amante' want of knowledg of german kept 
her in a state of compar isolation. 

At length my child wa born--mi poor wors than fatherless child. It 
wa a girl, as I had pray for. I had fear lest a boy might have 
someth of the tiger natur of it father, but a girl seem all my 
own. and yet not all my own, for the faith amante' delight and 
glori in the babe almost exceed mine; in outward show it certainli 
did. 

We had not been abl to afford ani attend beyond what a 
neighbour sage-femm could give, and she came frequently, bring 
in with her a littl store of gossip, and wonder tale cull out of 
her own experience, everi time. one day she began to tell me about a 
great ladi in whose servic her daughter had live as scullion, or some 
such thing. such a beauti lady! with such a handsom husband. but 
grief come to the palac as well as to the garret, and whi or 
wherefor no one knew, but somehow the baron de roeder must have 
incur the vengeanc of the terribl chauffeurs; for not mani month 
ago, as madam wa go to see her relat in alsace, she wa 
stab dead as she lay in bed at some hotel on the road. had I not 
seen it in the _gazette_? had I not heard? why, she had been told that 
as far off as lyon there were placard offer a heavi reward on the 
part of the baron de roeder for inform respect the murder of 
hi wife. but no one could help him, for all who could bear evid 
were in such terror of the chauffeurs; there were hundr of them she 
had been told, rich and poor, great gentlemen and peasants, all leagu 
togeth by most fright oath to hunt to the death ani one who bore 
wit against them; so that even they who surviv the tortur to 
which the chauffeur subject mani of the peopl whom they plundered, 
dare not to recognis them again, would not dare, even did they see 
them at the bar of a court of justice; for, if one were condemned, were 
there not hundr sworn to aveng hi death? 

I told all thi to amante, and we began to fear that if M. de la 
tourelle, or lefebvre, or ani of the gang at le rochers, had seen 
these placards, they would know that the poor ladi stab by the 
former wa the baro de roeder, and that they would set forth again 
in search of me. 

thi fresh apprehens told on my health and imped my recovery. We 
had so littl money we could not call in a physician, at least, not one 
in establish practice. but amant found out a young doctor for whom, 
indeed, she had sometim worked; and offer to pay him in kind, she 
brought him to see me, her sick wife. He wa veri gentl and 
thoughtful, though, like ourselves, veri poor. but he gave much time 
and consider to the case, say onc to amant that he saw my 
constitut had experienc some sever shock from which it wa 
probabl that my nerv would never entir recover. by-and-bi I shall 
name thi doctor, and then you will know, better than I can describe, 
hi character. 

I grew strong in time--stronger, at least. I wa abl to work a littl 
at home, and to sun myself and my babi at the garret-window in the 
roof. It wa all the air I dare to take. I constantli wore the 
disguis I had first set out with; as constantli had I renew the 
disfigur dye which chang my hair and complexion. but the perpetu 
state of terror in which I had been dure the whole month succeed 
my escap from le rocher made me loath the idea of ever again 
walk in the open daylight, expos to the sight and recognit of 
everi passer-by. In vain amant reasoned--in vain the doctor urged. 
docil in everi other thing, in thi I wa obstinate. I would not stir 
out. one day amant return from her work, full of news--som of it 
good, some such as to caus us apprehension. the good news wa this; 
the master for whom she work as journeyman wa go to send her with 
some other to a great hous at the other side of frankfort, where 
there were to be privat theatricals, and where mani new dress and 
much alter of old one would be required. the tailor employ 
were all to stay at thi hous until the day of represent wa 
over, as it wa at some distanc from the town, and no one could tell 
when their work would be ended. but the pay wa to be proportion 
good. 

the other thing she had to say wa this: she had that day met the 
travel jewel to whom she and I had sold my ring. It wa rather a 
peculiar one, given to me by my husband; we had felt at the time that 
it might be the mean of trace us, but we were penniless and 
starving, and what els could we do? she had seen that thi frenchman 
had recognis her at the same instant that she did him, and she 
thought at the same time that there wa a gleam of more than common 
intellig on hi face as he did so. thi idea had been confirm by 
hi follow her for some way on the other side of the street; but she 
had evad him with her better knowledg of the town, and the 
increas dark of the night. still it wa well that she wa go 
to such a distanc from our dwell on the next day; and she had 
brought me in a stock of provisions, beg me to keep within doors, 
with a strang kind of fear oblivion of the fact that I had never 
set foot beyond the threshold of the hous sinc I had first enter 
it--scarc ever ventur down the stairs. but, although my poor, my 
dear, veri faith amant wa like one possess that last night, she 
spoke continu of the dead, which is a bad sign for the living. she 
kiss you--yes! it wa you, my daughter, my darling, whom I bore 
beneath my bosom away from the fear castl of your father--i call 
him so for the first time, I must call him so onc again befor I have 
done--amant kiss you, sweet baby, bless littl comforter, as if 
she never could leav off. and then she went away, alive. 

two days, three day pass away. that third even I wa sit 
within my bolt doors--you asleep on your pillow by my side--when a 
step came up the stair, and I knew it must be for me; for our were the 
top-most rooms. some one knocked; I held my veri breath. but some one 
spoke, and I knew it wa the good doctor voss. then I crept to the 
door, and answered. 

'are you alone?' ask I. 

'yes,' said he, in a still lower voice. 'let me in.' I let him in, and 
he wa as alert as I in bolt and bar the door. then he came and 
whisper to me hi dole tale. He had come from the hospit in the 
opposit quarter of the town, the hospit which he visited; he should 
have been with me sooner, but he had fear lest he should be watched. 
He had come from amante' death-bed. her fear of the jewel were too 
well founded. she had left the hous where she wa employ that 
morning, to transact some errand connect with her work in the town; 
she must have been followed, and dog on her way back through 
solitari wood-paths, for some of the wood-rang belong to the 
great hous had found her lie there, stab to death, but not dead; 
with the poniard again plung through the fatal writing, onc more; 
but thi time with the word 'un' underlined, so as to show that the 
assassin wa awar of hi preciou mistake. 

numéro _un_. 
ainsi le chauffeur se vengent. 

they had carri her to the house, and given her restor till she 
had recov the feebl use of her speech. but, oh, faithful, dear 
friend and sister! even then she rememb me, and refus to tell 
(what no one els among her fellow workmen knew), where she live or 
with whom. life wa eb away fast, and they had no resourc but to 
carri her to the nearest hospital, where, of course, the fact of her 
sex wa made known. fortun both for her and for me, the doctor in 
attend wa the veri doctor voss whom we alreadi knew. To him, while 
await her confessor, she told enough to enabl him to understand the 
posit in which I wa left; befor the priest had heard half her tale 
amant wa dead. 

doctor voss told me he had made all sort of _détours_, and wait 
thus, late at night, for fear of be watch and followed. but I do 
not think he was. At ani rate, as I afterward learnt from him, the 
baron roeder, on hear of the similitud of thi murder with that of 
hi wife in everi particular, made such a search after the assassins, 
that, although they were not discovered, they were compel to take to 
flight for the time. 

I can hardli tell you now by what argument dr. voss, at first mere 
my benefactor, spare me a portion of hi small modicum, at length 
persuad me to becom hi wife. hi wife he call it, I call it; 
for we went through the religi ceremoni too much slight at the 
time, and as we were both lutherans, and M. de la tourel had 
pretend to be of the reform religion, a divorc from the latter 
would have been easili procur by german law both ecclesiast and 
legal, could we have summon so fear a man into ani court. 

the good doctor took me and my child by stealth to hi modest dwelling; 
and there I live in the same deep refinement, never see the full 
light of day, although when the dye had onc pass away from my face 
my husband did not wish me to renew it. there wa no need; my yellow 
hair wa grey, my complexion wa ashen-coloured, no creatur could have 
recogn the fresh-coloured, bright-hair young woman of eighteen 
month before. the few peopl whom I saw knew me onli as madam voss; a 
widow much older than himself, whom dr. voss had secretli married. they 
call me the grey woman. 

He made me give you hi surname. till now you have known no other 
father--whil he live you need no father' love. onc only, onli 
onc more, did the old terror come upon me. for some reason which I 
forget, I broke through my usual custom, and went to the window of my 
room for some purpose, either to shut or to open it. look out into 
the street for an instant, I wa fascin by the sight of M. de la 
tourelle, gay, young, eleg as ever, walk along on the opposit 
side of the street. the nois I had made with the window caus him to 
look up; he saw me, an old grey woman, and he did not recogn me! yet 
it wa not three year sinc we had parted, and hi eye were keen and 
dread like those of the lynx. 

I told M. voss, on hi return home, and he tri to cheer me, but the 
shock of see M. de la tourel had been too terribl for me. I wa 
ill for long month afterwards. 

onc again I saw him. dead. He and lefebvr were at last caught; hunt 
down by the baron de roeder in some of their crimes. dr. voss had heard 
of their arrest; their condemnation, their death; but he never said a 
word to me, until one day he bade me show him that I love him by my 
obedi and my trust. He took me a long carriag journey, where to I 
know not, for we never spoke of that day again; I wa led through a 
prison, into a close court-yard, where, decent drape in the last 
robe of death, conceal the mark of decapitation, lay M. de la 
tourelle, and two or three others, whom I had known at le rochers. 

after that convict dr. voss tri to persuad me to return to a more 
natur mode of life, and to go out more. but although I sometim 
compli with hi wish, yet the old terror wa ever strong upon me, and 
he, see what an effort it was, gave up urg me at last. 

you know all the rest. how we both mourn bitterli the loss of that 
dear husband and father--for such I will call him ever--and as such you 
must consid him, my child, after thi one revel is over. 

whi ha it been made, you ask. for thi reason, my child. the lover, 
whom you have onli known as M. lebrun, a french artist, told me but 
yesterday hi real name, drop becaus the blood-thirsti republican 
might consid it as too aristocratic. It is mauric de poissy. 




curious, IF true 

(extract from A letter from richard whittingham, esq.) 


you were formerli so much amus at my pride in my descent from that 
sister of calvin's, who marri a whittingham, dean of durham, that I 
doubt if you will be abl to enter into the regard for my distinguish 
relat that ha led me to france, in order to examin regist and 
archives, which, I thought, might enabl me to discov collater 
descend of the great reformer, with whom I might call cousins. I 
shall not tell you of my troubl and adventur in thi research; you 
are not worthi to hear of them; but someth so curiou befel me one 
even last august, that if I had not been perfectli certain I wa 
wide awake, I might have taken it for a dream. 

for the purpos I have named, it wa necessari that I should make tour 
my head-quart for a time. I had trace descend of the calvin 
famili out of normandi into the centr of france; but I found it wa 
necessari to have a kind of permiss from the bishop of the dioces 
befor I could see certain famili papers, which had fallen into the 
possess of the church; and, as I had sever english friend at 
tours, I await the answer to my request to monseigneur de----, at 
that town. I wa readi to accept ani invitation; but I receiv veri 
few; and wa sometim a littl at a loss what to do with my evenings. 
the _tabl d'hôte_ wa at five o'clock; I did not wish to go to the 
expens of a privat sitting-room, dislik the dinneri atmospher of 
the _sall à manger_, could not play either at pool or billiards, and 
the aspect of my fellow guest wa unprepossess enough to make me 
unwil to enter into ani _tête-à-tête_ gambl with them. So I 
usual rose from tabl early, and tri to make the most of the 
remain light of the august even in walk briskli off to 
explor the surround country; the middl of the day wa too hot for 
thi purpose, and better employ in loung on a bench in the 
boulevards, lazili listen to the distant band, and notic with 
equal lazi the face and figur of the women who pass by. 

one thursday evening, the 18th of august it was, I think, I had gone 
further than usual in my walk, and I found that it wa later than I had 
imagin when I paus to turn back. I fanci I could make a round; I 
had enough notion of the direct in which I was, to see that by 
turn up a narrow straight lane to my left I should shorten my way 
back to tours. and so I believ I should have done, could I have found 
an outlet at the right place, but field-path are almost unknown in 
that part of france, and my lane, stiff and straight as ani street, and 
mark into terribl vanish perspect by the regular row of 
poplar on each side, seem interminable. Of cours night came on, and 
I wa in darkness. In england I might have had a chanc of see a 
light in some cottag onli a field or two off, and ask my way from 
the inhabitants; but here I could see no such welcom sight; indeed, I 
believ french peasant go to bed with the summer daylight, so if there 
were ani habit in the neighbourhood I never saw them. At last--i 
believ I must have walk two hour in the darkness,--i saw the duski 
outlin of a wood on one side of the weari lane, and, impati 
careless of all forest law and penalti for trespassers, I made my 
way to it, think that if the worst came to the worst, I could find 
some covert--som shelter where I could lie down and rest, until the 
morn light gave me a chanc of find my way back to tours. but the 
plantation, on the outskirt of what appear to me a dens wood, wa 
of young trees, too close plant to be more than slender stem 
grow up to a good height, with scanti foliag on their summits. On I 
went toward the thicker forest, and onc there I slacken my pace, 
and began to look about me for a good lair. I wa as dainti as 
lochiel' grandchild, who made hi grandsir indign at the luxuri of 
hi pillow of snow: thi brake wa too full of brambles, that felt damp 
with dew; there wa no hurry, sinc I had given up all hope of pass 
the night between four walls; and I went leisur grope about, and 
trust that there were no wolv to be poke up out of their summer 
drowsi by my stick, when all at onc I saw a château befor me, not 
a quarter of a mile off, at the end of what seem to be an ancient 
avenu (now overgrown and irregular), which I happen to be crossing, 
when I look to my right, and saw the welcom sight. large, stately, 
and dark wa it outlin against the duski night-sky; there were 
pepper-box and tourel and what-not fantast go up into the 
dim starlight. and more to the purpos still, though I could not see 
the detail of the build that I wa now facing, it wa plain enough 
that there were light in mani windows, as if some great entertain 
wa go on. 

'they are hospit people, at ani rate,' thought I. 'perhap they 
will give me a bed. I don't suppos french propriétair have trap and 
hors quit as plenti as english gentlemen; but they are evid 
have a larg party, and some of their guest may be from tours, and 
will give me a cast back to the lion d'or. I am not proud, and I am 
dog-tired. I am not abov hang on behind, if need be.' 

so, put a littl brisk and spirit into my walk, I went up to 
the door, which wa stand open, most hospitably, and show a larg 
light hall, all hung round with spoil of the chase, armour, &c., the 
detail of which I had not time to notice, for the instant I stood on 
the threshold a huge porter appeared, in a strange, old-fashion 
dress, a kind of liveri which well befit the gener appear of 
the house. He ask me, in french (so curious pronounc that I 
thought I had hit upon a new kind of patois), my name, and whenc I 
came. I thought he would not be much the wiser, still it wa but civil 
to give it befor I made my request for assistance; so, in reply, I 
said: 

'mi name is whittingham--richard whittingham, an english gentleman, 
stay at ----.' To my infinit surprise, a light of pleas 
intellig came over the giant' face; he made me a low bow, and said 
(still in the same curiou dialect) that I wa welcome, that I wa long 
expected. 

'long expected!' what could the fellow mean? had I stumbl on a nest 
of relat by john calvin' side, who had heard of my genealog 
inquiries, and were gratifi and interest by them? but I wa too 
much pleas to be under shelter for the night to think it necessari to 
account for my agreeabl recept befor I enjoy it. just as he wa 
open the great heavi _battants_ of the door that led from the hall 
to the interior, he turn round and said: 

'appar monsieur le géanquilleur is not come with you.' 

'no! I am all alone; I have lost my way,'--and I wa go on with my 
explanation, when he, as if quit indiffer to it, led the way up a 
great stone staircase, as wide as mani rooms, and have on each 
landing-plac massiv iron wickets, in a heavi framework; these the 
porter unlock with the solemn slow of age. indeed, a strange, 
mysteri awe of the centuri that had pass away sinc thi château 
wa built, came over me as I wait for the turn of the ponder 
key in the ancient locks. I could almost have fanci that I heard a 
mighti rush murmur (like the ceaseless sound of a distant sea, 
eb and flow for ever and for ever), come forth from the great 
vacant galleri that open out on each side of the broad staircase, 
and were to be dimli perceiv in the dark abov us. It wa as if 
the voic of gener of men yet echo and eddi in the silent 
air. It wa strange, too, that my friend the porter go befor me, 
ponder infirm, with hi feebl old hand strive in vain to keep 
the tall flambeau he held steadili befor him,--strange, I say, that he 
wa the onli domest I saw in the vast hall and passages, or met with 
on the grand staircase. At length we stood befor the gild door that 
led into the saloon where the family--or it might be the company, so 
great wa the buzz of voices--wa assembled. I would have remonstr 
when I found he wa go to introduc me, dusti and travel-smeared, in 
a morn costum that wa not even my best, into thi grand _salon_, 
with nobodi knew how mani ladi and gentlemen assembled; but the 
obstin old man wa evid bent upon take me straight to hi 
master, and paid no heed to my words. 

the door flew open, and I wa usher into a saloon curious full of 
pale light, which did not culmin on ani spot, nor proceed from ani 
centre, nor flicker with ani motion of the air, but fill everi nook 
and corner, make all thing delici distinct; differ from our 
light of ga or candle, as is the differ between a clear southern 
atmospher and that of our misti england. 

At the first moment, my arriv excit no attention, the apart wa 
so full of people, all intent on their own conversation. but my friend 
the porter went up to a handsom ladi of middl age, richli attir in 
that antiqu manner which fashion ha brought round again of late 
years, and, wait first in an attitud of deep respect till her 
attent fell upon him, told her my name and someth about me, as 
far as I could guess from the gestur of the one and the sudden glanc 
of the eye of the other. 

she immedi came toward me with the most friendli action of 
greeting, even befor she had advanc near enough to speak. then,--and 
wa it not strange?--h word and accent were that of the commonest 
peasant of the country. yet she herself look highbred, and would have 
been dignifi had she been a shade less restless, had her counten 
worn a littl less live and inquisit expression. I had been poke 
a good deal about the old part of tours, and had had to understand the 
dialect of the peopl who dwelt in the marché au vendredi and similar 
places, or I realli should not have understood my handsom hostess, as 
she offer to present me to her husband, a henpecked, gentlemanli man, 
who wa more quaintli attir than she in the veri extrem of that 
style of dress. I thought to myself that in france, as in england, it 
is the provinci who carri fashion to such an excess as to becom 
ridiculous. 

however, he spoke (still in the _patois_) of hi pleasur in make my 
acquaintance, and led me to a strang uneasi easy-chair, much of a 
piec with the rest of the furniture, which might have taken it place 
without ani anachron by the side of that in the hôtel cluny. then 
again began the clatter of french voices, which my arriv had for an 
instant interrupted, and I had leisur to look about me. opposit to me 
sat a veri sweet-look lady, who must have been a great beauti in her 
youth, I should think, and would be charm in old age, from the 
sweet of her countenance. she was, however, extrem fat, and on 
see her feet laid up befor her on a cushion, I at onc perceiv 
that they were so swollen as to render her incap of walking, which 
probabl brought on her excess _embonpoint_. her hand were plump 
and small, but rather coarse-grain in texture, not quit so clean as 
they might have been, and altogeth not so aristocratic-look as the 
charm face. her dress wa of superb black velvet, ermine-trimmed, 
with diamond thrown all abroad over it. 

not far from her stood the least littl man I had ever seen; of such 
admir proport no one could call him a dwarf, becaus with that 
word we usual associ someth of deformity; but yet with an elfin 
look of shrewd, hard, worldli wisdom in hi face that mar the 
impress which hi delic regular littl featur would otherwis 
have conveyed. indeed, I do not think he wa quit of equal rank with 
the rest of the company, for hi dress wa inappropri to the 
occas (and he appar wa an invited, while I wa an involuntari 
guest); and one or two of hi gestur and action were more like the 
trick of an uneduc rustic than anyth else. To explain what I 
mean: hi boot had evid seen much service, and had been 
re-topped, re-heeled, re-sol to the extent of cobbler' powers. whi 
should he have come in them if they were not hi best--hi onli pair? 
and what can be more ungenteel than poverty? then again he had an 
uneasi trick of put hi hand up to hi throat, as if he expect to 
find someth the matter with it; and he had the awkward habit--which 
I do not think he could have copi from dr. johnson, becaus most 
probabl he had never heard of him--of tri alway to retrac hi 
step on the exact board on which he had trodden to arriv at ani 
particular part of the room. besides, to settl the question, I onc 
heard him address as monsieur poucet, without ani aristocrat 'de' 
for a prefix; and nearli everi one els in the room wa a marquis, at 
ani rate. 

I say, 'nearli everi one;' for some strang peopl had the entrée; 
unless, indeed, they were, like me, benighted. one of the guest I 
should have taken for a servant, but for the extraordinari influenc he 
seem to have over the man I took for hi master, and who never did 
anyth without, apparently, be urg thereto by thi follower. the 
master, magnific dressed, but ill at eas in hi cloth as if 
they had been made for some one else, wa a weak-looking, handsom man, 
continu saunter about, and I almost guess an object of 
suspicion to some of the gentlemen present, which, perhaps, drove him 
on the companionship of hi follower, who wa dress someth in the 
style of an ambassador' chasseur; yet it wa not a chasseur' dress 
after all; it wa someth more thoroughli old-world; boot half way 
up hi ridicul small legs, which clatter as he walk along, as 
if they were too larg for hi littl feet; and a great quantiti of 
grey fur, as trim to coat, court mantle, boots, cap--everything. 
you know the way in which certain counten remind you perpetu 
of some animal, be it bird or beast! well, thi chasseur (a I will 
call him for want of a better name) wa exceedingli like the great 
tom-cat that you have seen so often in my chambers, and laugh at 
almost as often for hi uncanni graviti of demeanour. grey whisker ha 
my tom--grey whisker had the chasseur: grey hair overshadow the upper 
lip of my tom--grey mustachio hid that of the chasseur. the pupil of 
tom' eye dilat and contract as I had thought cats' pupil onli could 
do, until I saw those of the chasseur. To be sure, canni as tom is, the 
chasseur had the advantag in the more intellig expression. He 
seem to have obtain most complet sway over hi master or patron, 
whose look he watched, and whose step he followed, with a kind of 
distrust interest that puzzl me greatly. 

there were sever other group in the more distant part of the saloon, 
all of the state old school, all grand and noble, I conjectur from 
their bearing. they seem perfectli well acquaint with each other, 
as if they were in the habit of meeting. but I wa interrupt in my 
observ by the tini littl gentleman on the opposit side of the 
room come across to take a place besid me. It is no difficult matter 
to a frenchman to slide into conversation, and so grace did my 
pigmi friend keep up the charact of the nation, that we were almost 
confidenti befor ten minut had elapsed. 

now I wa quit awar that the welcom which all had extend to me, 
from the porter up to the vivaci ladi and meek lord of the castle, 
wa intend for some other person. but it requir either a degre of 
moral courage, of which I cannot boast, or the self-reli and 
convers power of a bolder and clever man than I, to undec 
peopl who had fallen into so fortun a mistak for me. yet the 
littl man by my side insinu himself so much into my confidence, 
that I had half a mind to tell him of my exact situation, and to turn 
him into a friend and an ally. 

'madam is percept grow older,' said he, in the midst of my 
perplexity, glanc at our hostess. 

'madam is still a veri fine woman,' repli I. 

'now, is it not strange,' continu he, lower hi voice, 'how women 
almost invari prais the absent, or departed, as if they were 
angel of light while as for the present, or the living'--her he 
shrug up hi littl shoulders, and made an express pause. 'would 
you believ it! madam is alway prais her late husband to 
monsieur' face; till, in fact, we guest are quit perplex how to 
look: for, you know, the late M. de retz' charact wa quit 
notorious,--everybodi ha heard of him.' all the world of touraine, 
thought I, but I made an assent noise. 

At thi instant, monsieur our host came up to me, and with a civil look 
of tender interest (such as some peopl put on when they inquir after 
your mother, about whom they do not care one straw), ask if I had 
heard late how my cat was? 'how my cat was!' what could the man mean? 
My cat! could he mean the tailless tom, born in the isl of man, and 
now suppos to be keep guard against the incurs of rat and 
mice into my chamber in london? tom is, as you know, on pretti good 
term with some of my friends, use their leg for rubbing-post 
without scruple, and highli esteem by them for hi graviti of 
demeanour, and wise manner of wink hi eyes. but could hi fame have 
reach across the channel? however, an answer must be return to the 
inquiry, as monsieur' face wa bent down to mine with a look of polit 
anxiety; so I, in my turn, assum an express of gratitude, and 
assur him that, to the best of my belief, my cat wa in remark 
good health. 

'and the climat agre with her?' 

'perfectly,' said I, in a maze of wonder at thi deep solicitud in a 
tailless cat who had lost one foot and half an ear in some cruel trap. 
My host smile a sweet smile, and, address a few word to my littl 
neighbour, pass on. 

'how wearisom those aristocrat are!' quoth my neighbour, with a 
slight sneer. 'monsieur' convers rare extend to more than two 
sentenc to ani one. By that time hi faculti are exhausted, and he 
need the refresh of silence. you and I, monsieur, are, at ani 
rate, indebt to our own wit for our rise in the world!' 

here again I wa bewildered! As you know, I am rather proud of my 
descent from famili which, if not nobl themselves, are alli to 
nobility,--and as to my 'rise in the world'--if I had risen, it would 
have been rather for balloon-lik qualiti than for mother-wit, to 
be unencumb with heavi ballast either in my head or my pockets. 
however, it wa my cue to agree: so I smile again. 

'for my part,' said he, 'if a man doe not stick at trifles, if he 
know how to judici add to, or withhold facts, and is not 
sentiment in hi parad of humanity, he is sure to do well; sure to 
affix a _de_ or _von_ to hi name, and end hi day in comfort. there 
is an exampl of what I am saying'--and he glanc furtiv at the 
weak-look master of the sharp, intellig servant, whom I have 
call the chasseur. 

'monsieur le marqui would never have been anyth but a miller' son, 
if it had not been for the talent of hi servant. Of cours you know 
hi antecedents?' 

I wa go to make some remark on the chang in the order of the 
peerag sinc the day of loui xvi.--going, in fact, to be veri 
sensibl and historical--when there wa a slight commot among the 
peopl at the other end of the room. lacquey in quaint liveri must 
have come in from behind the tapestry, I suppos (for I never saw them 
enter, though I sate right opposit to the doors), and were hand 
about the slight beverag and slighter viand which are consid 
suffici refreshments, but which look rather meagr to my hungri 
appetite. these footmen were stand solemnli opposit to a 
lady,--beautiful, splendid as the dawn, but--sound asleep in a 
magnific settee. A gentleman who show so much irrit at her 
ill-tim slumbers, that I think he must have been her husband, wa 
tri to awaken her with action not far remov from shakings. all in 
vain; she wa quit unconsci of hi annoyance, or the smile of the 
company, or the automat solemn of the wait footman, or the 
perplex anxieti of monsieur and madame. 

My littl friend sat down with a sneer, as if hi curios wa 
quench in contempt. 

'moralist would make an infin of wise remark on that scene,' said 
he. 'in the first place, note the ridicul posit into which their 
superstiti rever for rank and titl put all these people. 
becaus monsieur is a reign princ over some minut principality, 
the exact situat of which no one ha as yet discovered, no one must 
ventur to take their glass of eau sucré till madam la princess 
awakens; and, judg from past experience, those poor lacquey may 
have to stand for a centuri befor that happens. next--alway speak 
as a moralist, you will observe--not how difficult it is to break off 
bad habit acquir in youth!' 

just then the princ succeeded, by what mean I did not see, in awak 
the beauti sleeper. but at first she did not rememb where she was, 
and look up at her husband with love eyes, she smile and said: 

'i it you, my prince?' 

but he wa too consciou of the suppress amus of the spectat 
and hi own consequ annoyance, to be reciproc tender, and turn 
away with some littl french expression, best render into english by 
'pooh, pooh, my dear!' 

after I had had a glass of delici wine of some unknown quality, my 
courag wa in rather better plight than before, and I told my cynic 
littl neighbour--whom I must say I wa begin to dislike--that I 
had lost my way in the wood, and had arriv at the château quit by 
mistake. 

He seem mightili amus at my story; said that the same thing had 
happen to himself more than once; and told me that I had better luck 
than he had on one of these occasions, when, from hi account, he must 
have been in consider danger of hi life. He end hi stori by 
make me admir hi boots, which he said he still wore, patch though 
they were, and all their excel qualiti lost by patching, becaus 
they were of such a first-rat make for long pedestrian excursions. 
'though, indeed,' he wound up by saying, 'the new fashion of railroad 
would seem to supersed the necess for thi descript of boots.' 

when I consult him as to whether I ought to make myself known to my 
host and hostess as a benight traveller, instead of the guest whom 
they had taken me for, he exclaimed, 'bi no means! I hate such 
squeamish morality.' and he seem much offend by my innoc 
question, as if it seem by implic to condemn someth in 
himself. He wa offend and silent; and just at thi moment I caught 
the sweet, attract eye of the ladi opposite--that ladi whom I name 
at first as be no longer in the bloom of youth, but as be 
somewhat infirm about the feet, which were support on a rais 
cushion befor her. her look seem to say, 'come here, and let us 
have some convers together;' and, with a bow of silent excus to 
my littl companion, I went across to the lame old lady. she 
acknowledg my come with the prettiest gestur of thank possible; 
and, half apologetically, said, 'it is a littl dull to be unabl to 
move about on such even as this; but it is a just punish to me 
for my earli vanities. My poor feet, that were by natur so small, are 
now take their reveng for my cruelti in forc them into such 
littl slipper ... besides, monsieur,' with a pleasant smile, 'I 
thought it wa possibl you might be weari of the malici say of 
your littl neighbour. He ha not born the best charact in hi 
youth, and such men are sure to be cynic in their old age.' 

'who is he?' ask I, with english abruptness. 

'hi name is poucet, and hi father was, I believe, a woodcutter, or 
charcoal burner, or someth of the sort. they do tell sad stori of 
conniv at murder, ingratitude, and obtain money on fals 
pretences--but you will think me as bad as he if I go on with my 
slanders. rather let us admir the love ladi come up toward us, 
with the rose in her hand--i never see her without roses, they are so 
close connect with her past history, as you are doubtless aware. 
ah, beauty!' said my companion to the ladi draw near to us, 'it is 
like you to come to me, now that I can no longer go to you.' then 
turn to me, and grace draw me into the conversation, she 
said, 'you must know that, although we never met until we were both 
married, we have been almost like sister ever since. there have been 
so mani point of resembl in our circumstances, and I think I may 
say in our characters. We had each two elder sisters--min were but 
half-sisters, though--who were not so kind to us as they might have 
been.' 

'but have been sorri for it since,' put in the other lady. 

'sinc we have marri princes,' continu the same lady, with an arch 
smile that had noth of unkind in it, 'for we both have marri 
far abov our origin station in life; we are both unpunctu in our 
habits, and, in consequ of thi fail of ours, we have both had 
to suffer mortif and pain.' 

'and both are charming,' said a whisper close behind me. 'mi lord the 
marquis, say it--say, "and both are charming."' 

'and both are charming,' wa spoken aloud by anoth voice. I turned, 
and saw the wili cat-lik chasseur, prompt hi master to make civil 
speeches. 

the ladi bow with that kind of haughti acknowledg which show 
that compliment from such a sourc are distasteful. but our trio of 
convers wa broken up, and I wa sorri for it. the marqui look 
as if he had been stir up to make that one speech, and hope that he 
would not be expect to say more; while behind him stood the chasseur, 
half impertin and half servil in hi way and attitudes. the 
ladies, who were real ladies, seem to be sorri for the awkward of 
the marquis, and address some trifl question to him, adapt 
themselv to the subject on which he could have no troubl in 
answering. the chasseur, meanwhile, wa talk to himself in a 
growl tone of voice. I had fallen a littl into the background at 
thi interrupt in a convers which promis to be so pleasant, 
and I could not help hear hi words. 

'really, De caraba grow more stupid everi day. I have a great mind to 
throw off hi boots, and leav him to hi fate. I wa intend for a 
court, and to a court I will go, and make my own fortun as I have made 
his. the emperor will appreci my talents.' 

and such are the habit of the french, or such hi forget of 
good manner in hi anger, that he spat right and left on the 
parquet floor. 

just then a veri ugly, veri pleasant-look man, came toward the two 
ladi to whom I had late been speaking, lead up to them a 
delicate, fair woman, dress all in the softest white, as if she were 
_voué au blanc_. I do not think there wa a bit of colour about her. I 
thought I heard her making, as she came along, a littl nois of 
pleasure, not exactli like the sing of a tea-kettle, nor yet like 
the coo of a dove, but remind me of each sound. 

'madam de mioumiou wa anxiou to see you,' said he, address the 
ladi with the roses, 'so I have brought her across to give you a 
pleasure!' what an honest, good face! but oh! how ugly! and yet I like 
hi ugli better than most persons' beauty. there wa a look of 
pathet acknowledg of hi ugliness, and a deprec of your too 
hasti judgement, in hi counten that wa posit winning. the 
soft, white ladi kept glanc at my neighbour the chasseur, as if they 
had had some former acquaintance, which puzzl me veri much, as they 
were of such differ rank. however, their nerv were evid 
strung to the same tune, for at a sound behind the tapestry, which wa 
more like the scutter of rat and mice than anyth else, both 
madam de mioumiou and the chasseur start with the most eager look of 
anxieti on their countenances, and by their restless movements--madame' 
panting, and the fieri dilat of hi eyes--on might see that 
commonplac sound affect them both in a manner veri differ to the 
rest of the company. the ugli husband of the love ladi with the rose 
now address himself to me. 

'we are much disappointed,' he said, 'in find that monsieur is not 
accompani by hi countryman--l grand jean d'angleterre; I cannot 
pronounc hi name rightly'--and he look at me to help him out. 

'le grand jean d'angleterre!' now who wa le grand jean d'angleterre? 
john bull? john russell? john bright? 

'jean--jean'--continu the gentleman, see my embarrassment. 'ah, 
these terribl english names--"jean de géanquilleur!"' 

I wa as wise as ever. and yet the name struck me as familiar, but 
slightli disguised. I repeat it to myself. It wa mighti like john 
the giant-killer, onli hi friend alway call that worthi 'jack'. I 
said the name aloud. 

'ah, that is it!' said he. 'but whi ha he not accompani you to our 
littl reunion to-night?' 

I had been rather puzzl onc or twice before, but thi seriou 
question ad consider to my perplexity. jack the giant-kil had 
once, it is true, been rather an intim friend of mine, as far as 
(printer's) ink and paper can keep up a friendship, but I had not heard 
hi name mention for years; and for aught I knew he lay enchant 
with king arthur' knights, who lie entranc until the blast of the 
trumpet of four mighti king shall call them to help at england' 
need. but the question had been ask in seriou earnest by that 
gentleman, whom I more wish to think well of me than I did ani other 
person in the room. So I answer respect that it wa long sinc I 
had heard anyth of my countryman; but that I wa sure it would have 
given him as much pleasur as it wa do myself to have been present 
at such an agreeabl gather of friends. He bowed, and then the lame 
ladi took up the word. 

'to-night is the night when, of all the year, thi great old forest 
surround the castl is said to be haunt by the phantom of a littl 
peasant girl who onc live hereabouts; the tradit is that she wa 
devour by a wolf. In former day I have seen her on thi night out of 
yonder window at the end of the gallery. will you, ma belle, take 
monsieur to see the view outsid by the moonlight (you may possibl see 
the phantom-child); and leav me to a littl _tête-à-tête_ with your 
husband?' 

with a gentl movement the ladi with the rose compli with the 
other' request, and we went to a great window, look down on the 
forest, in which I had lost my way. the top of the far-spread and 
leafi tree lay motionless beneath us in the pale, wan light, which 
show object almost as distinct in form, though not in colour, as by 
day. We look down on the countless avenues, which seem to converg 
from all quarter to the great old castle; and suddenli across one, 
quit near to us, there pass the figur of a littl girl, with the 
'capuchon' on, that take the place of a peasant girl' bonnet in 
france. she had a basket on one arm, and by her, on the side to which 
her head wa turned, there went a wolf. I could almost have said it wa 
lick her hand, as if in penit love, if either penit or love 
had ever been a qualiti of wolves,--but though not of living, perhap 
it may be of phantom wolves. 

'there, we have seen her!' exclaim my beauti companion. 'though so 
long dead, her simpl stori of household good and trust 
simplic still linger in the heart of all who have ever heard of 
her; and the country-peopl about here say that see that 
phantom-child on thi anniversari bring good luck for the year. let us 
hope that we shall share in the traditionari good fortune. ah! here is 
madam de retz--sh retain the name of her first husband, you know, as 
he wa of higher rank than the present.' We were join by our hostess. 

'if monsieur is fond of the beauti of natur and art,' said she, 
perceiv that I had been look at the view from the great window, 
'he will perhap take pleasur in see the picture.' here she sighed, 
with a littl affect of grief. 'you know the pictur I allud to,' 
address my companion, who bow assent, and smile a littl 
maliciously, as I follow the lead of madame. 

I went after her to the other end of the saloon, note by the way with 
what keen curios she caught up what wa pass either in word or 
action on each side of her. when we stood opposit to the end wall, I 
perceiv a full-length pictur of a handsome, peculiar-look man, 
with--in spite of hi good looks--a veri fierc and scowl 
expression. My hostess clasp her hand togeth as her arm hung down 
in front, and sigh onc more. then, half in soliloquy, she said: 

'he wa the love of my youth; hi stern yet manli charact first 
touch thi heart of mine. when--when shall I ceas to deplor hi 
loss!' 

not be acquaint with her enough to answer thi question (if, 
indeed, it were not suffici answer by the fact of her second 
marriage), I felt awkward; and, by way of say something, I remarked: 

'the counten strike me as resembl someth I have seen 
before--in an engrav from an histor picture, I think; only, it 
is there the princip figur in a group: he is hold a ladi by her 
hair, and threaten her with hi scimitar, while two cavali are 
rush up the stairs, appar onli just in time to save her life.' 

'alas, alas!' said she, 'you too accur describ a miser 
passag in my life, which ha often been repres in a fals light. 
the best of husbands'--her she sobbed, and becam slightli 
inarticul with her grief--'wil sometim be displeased. I wa young 
and curious, he wa justli angri with my disobedience--mi brother were 
too hasty--th consequ is, I becam a widow!' 

after due respect for her tears, I ventur to suggest some commonplac 
consolation. she turn round sharply:-- 

'no, monsieur: my onli comfort is that I have never forgiven the 
brother who interf so cruelly, in such an uncalled-for manner, 
between my dear husband and myself. To quot my friend monsieur 
sganarelle--"c sont petit chose qui sont de temp en temp 
nécessair dan l'amitié; et cinq ou six coup d'épée entr gen qui 
s'aiment ne font que ragaillardir l'affection." you observ the 
colour is not quit what it should be?' 

'in thi light the beard is of rather a peculiar tint,' said I. 

'yes: the painter did not do it justice. It wa most lovely, and gave 
him such a distinguish air, quit differ from the common herd. 
stay, I will show you the exact colour, if you will come near thi 
flambeau!' and go near the light, she took off a bracelet of hair, 
with a magnific clasp of pearls. It wa peculiar, certainly. I did 
not know what to say. 'hi preciou love beard!' said she. 'and the 
pearl go so well with the delic blue!' 

her husband, who had come up to us, and wait till her eye fell upon 
him befor ventur to speak, now said, 'it is strang monsieur ogr 
is not yet arrived!' 

'not at all strange,' said she, tartly. 'he wa alway veri stupid, and 
constantli fall into mistakes, in which he come wors off; and it is 
veri well he does, for he is credul and cowardli fellow. not at all 
strange! If you will'--turn to her husband, so that I hardli heard 
her words, until I caught--'then everybodi would have their rights, and 
we should have no more trouble. Is it not, monsieur?' address me. 

'if I were in england, I should imagin madam wa speak of the 
reform bill, or the millennium,--but I am in ignorance.' 

and just as I spoke, the great folding-door were thrown open wide, and 
everi one start to their feet to greet a littl old lady, lean on 
a thin black wand--and-- 

'madam la féemarraine,' wa announc by a choru of sweet shrill 
voices. 

and in a moment I wa lie in the grass close by a hollow oak-tree, 
with the slant glori of the dawn day shine full in my face, and 
thousand of littl bird and delic insect pipe and warbl out 
their welcom to the ruddi splendour. 






end of the project gutenberg ebook of curious, if true, by elizabeth gaskel 

*** end OF thi project gutenberg ebook curious, IF true *** 

***** thi file should be name 24879-8.txt or 24879-8.zip ***** 
thi and all associ file of variou format will be found in: 
http://www.gutenberg.org/2/4/8/7/24879/ 

produc by delphin lettau and the onlin distribut 
proofread team at http://www.pgdp.net 


updat edit will replac the previou one--th old edit 
will be renamed. 

creat the work from public domain print edit mean that no 
one own a unit state copyright in these works, so the foundat 
(and you!) can copi and distribut it in the unit state without 
permiss and without pay copyright royalties. special rules, 
set forth in the gener term of use part of thi license, appli to 
copi and distribut project gutenberg-tm electron work to 
protect the project gutenberg-tm concept and trademark. project 
gutenberg is a regist trademark, and may not be use if you 
charg for the ebooks, unless you receiv specif permission. If you 
do not charg anyth for copi of thi ebook, compli with the 
rule is veri easy. you may use thi ebook for nearli ani purpos 
such as creation of deriv works, reports, perform and 
research. they may be modifi and print and given away--y may do 
practic anyth with public domain ebooks. redistribut is 
subject to the trademark license, especi commerci 
redistribution. 



*** start: full licens *** 

the full project gutenberg licens 
pleas read thi befor you distribut OR use thi work 

To protect the project gutenberg-tm mission of promot the free 
distribut of electron works, by use or distribut thi work 
(or ani other work associ in ani way with the phrase "project 
gutenberg"), you agre to compli with all the term of the full project 
gutenberg-tm licens (avail with thi file or onlin at 
http://gutenberg.net/license). 


section 1. gener term of use and redistribut project gutenberg-tm 
electron work 

1.a. By read or use ani part of thi project gutenberg-tm 
electron work, you indic that you have read, understand, agre to 
and accept all the term of thi licens and intellectu properti 
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agre to abid by all 
the term of thi agreement, you must ceas use and return or destroy 
all copi of project gutenberg-tm electron work in your possession. 
If you paid a fee for obtain a copi of or access to a project 
gutenberg-tm electron work and you do not agre to be bound by the 
term of thi agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or 
entiti to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.e.8. 

1.b. "project gutenberg" is a regist trademark. It may onli be 
use on or associ in ani way with an electron work by peopl who 
agre to be bound by the term of thi agreement. there are a few 
thing that you can do with most project gutenberg-tm electron work 
even without compli with the full term of thi agreement. see 
paragraph 1.c below. there are a lot of thing you can do with project 
gutenberg-tm electron work if you follow the term of thi agreement 
and help preserv free futur access to project gutenberg-tm electron 
works. see paragraph 1.e below. 

1.c. the project gutenberg literari archiv foundat ("the foundation" 
or pglaf), own a compil copyright in the collect of project 
gutenberg-tm electron works. nearli all the individu work in the 
collect are in the public domain in the unit states. If an 
individu work is in the public domain in the unit state and you are 
locat in the unit states, we do not claim a right to prevent you from 
copying, distributing, performing, display or creat deriv 
work base on the work as long as all refer to project gutenberg 
are removed. Of course, we hope that you will support the project 
gutenberg-tm mission of promot free access to electron work by 
freeli share project gutenberg-tm work in complianc with the term of 
thi agreement for keep the project gutenberg-tm name associ with 
the work. you can easili compli with the term of thi agreement by 
keep thi work in the same format with it attach full project 
gutenberg-tm licens when you share it without charg with others. 

1.d. the copyright law of the place where you are locat also govern 
what you can do with thi work. copyright law in most countri are in 
a constant state of change. If you are outsid the unit states, check 
the law of your countri in addit to the term of thi agreement 
befor downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distribut or 
creat deriv work base on thi work or ani other project 
gutenberg-tm work. the foundat make no represent concern 
the copyright statu of ani work in ani countri outsid the unit 
states. 

1.e. unless you have remov all refer to project gutenberg: 

1.e.1. the follow sentence, with activ link to, or other immedi 
access to, the full project gutenberg-tm licens must appear promin 
whenev ani copi of a project gutenberg-tm work (ani work on which the 
phrase "project gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "project 
gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed, 
copi or distributed: 

thi ebook is for the use of anyon anywher at no cost and with 
almost no restrict whatsoever. you may copi it, give it away or 
re-us it under the term of the project gutenberg licens includ 
with thi ebook or onlin at www.gutenberg.net 

1.e.2. If an individu project gutenberg-tm electron work is deriv 
from the public domain (doe not contain a notic indic that it is 
post with permiss of the copyright holder), the work can be copi 
and distribut to anyon in the unit state without pay ani fee 
or charges. If you are redistribut or provid access to a work 
with the phrase "project gutenberg" associ with or appear on the 
work, you must compli either with the requir of paragraph 1.e.1 
through 1.e.7 or obtain permiss for the use of the work and the 
project gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraph 1.e.8 or 
1.e.9. 

1.e.3. If an individu project gutenberg-tm electron work is post 
with the permiss of the copyright holder, your use and distribut 
must compli with both paragraph 1.e.1 through 1.e.7 and ani addit 
term impos by the copyright holder. addit term will be link 
to the project gutenberg-tm licens for all work post with the 
permiss of the copyright holder found at the begin of thi work. 

1.e.4. Do not unlink or detach or remov the full project gutenberg-tm 
licens term from thi work, or ani file contain a part of thi 
work or ani other work associ with project gutenberg-tm. 

1.e.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribut or redistribut thi 
electron work, or ani part of thi electron work, without 
promin display the sentenc set forth in paragraph 1.e.1 with 
activ link or immedi access to the full term of the project 
gutenberg-tm license. 

1.e.6. you may convert to and distribut thi work in ani binary, 
compressed, mark up, nonproprietari or proprietari form, includ ani 
word process or hypertext form. however, if you provid access to or 
distribut copi of a project gutenberg-tm work in a format other than 
"plain vanilla ascii" or other format use in the offici version 
post on the offici project gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net), 
you must, at no addit cost, fee or expens to the user, provid a 
copy, a mean of export a copy, or a mean of obtain a copi upon 
request, of the work in it origin "plain vanilla ascii" or other 
form. ani altern format must includ the full project gutenberg-tm 
licens as specifi in paragraph 1.e.1. 

1.e.7. Do not charg a fee for access to, viewing, displaying, 
performing, copi or distribut ani project gutenberg-tm work 
unless you compli with paragraph 1.e.8 or 1.e.9. 

1.e.8. you may charg a reason fee for copi of or provid 
access to or distribut project gutenberg-tm electron work provid 
that 

- you pay a royalti fee of 20% of the gross profit you deriv from 
the use of project gutenberg-tm work calcul use the method 
you alreadi use to calcul your applic taxes. the fee is 
owe to the owner of the project gutenberg-tm trademark, but he 
ha agre to donat royalti under thi paragraph to the 
project gutenberg literari archiv foundation. royalti payment 
must be paid within 60 day follow each date on which you 
prepar (or are legal requir to prepare) your period tax 
returns. royalti payment should be clearli mark as such and 
sent to the project gutenberg literari archiv foundat at the 
address specifi in section 4, "inform about donat to 
the project gutenberg literari archiv foundation." 

- you provid a full refund of ani money paid by a user who notifi 
you in write (or by e-mail) within 30 day of receipt that s/he 
doe not agre to the term of the full project gutenberg-tm 
license. you must requir such a user to return or 
destroy all copi of the work possess in a physic medium 
and discontinu all use of and all access to other copi of 
project gutenberg-tm works. 

- you provide, in accord with paragraph 1.f.3, a full refund of ani 
money paid for a work or a replac copy, if a defect in the 
electron work is discov and report to you within 90 day 
of receipt of the work. 

- you compli with all other term of thi agreement for free 
distribut of project gutenberg-tm works. 

1.e.9. If you wish to charg a fee or distribut a project gutenberg-tm 
electron work or group of work on differ term than are set 
forth in thi agreement, you must obtain permiss in write from 
both the project gutenberg literari archiv foundat and michael 
hart, the owner of the project gutenberg-tm trademark. contact the 
foundat as set forth in section 3 below. 

1.f. 

1.f.1. project gutenberg volunt and employe expend consider 
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcrib and proofread 
public domain work in creat the project gutenberg-tm 
collection. despit these efforts, project gutenberg-tm electron 
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain 
"defects," such as, but not limit to, incomplete, inaccur or 
corrupt data, transcript errors, a copyright or other intellectu 
properti infringement, a defect or damag disk or other medium, a 
comput virus, or comput code that damag or cannot be read by 
your equipment. 

1.f.2. limit warranty, disclaim OF damag - except for the "right 
of replac or refund" describ in paragraph 1.f.3, the project 
gutenberg literari archiv foundation, the owner of the project 
gutenberg-tm trademark, and ani other parti distribut a project 
gutenberg-tm electron work under thi agreement, disclaim all 
liabil to you for damages, cost and expenses, includ legal 
fees. you agre that you have NO remedi for negligence, strict 
liability, breach OF warranti OR breach OF contract except those 
provid IN paragraph f3. you agre that the foundation, the 
trademark owner, and ani distributor under thi agreement will not BE 
liabl TO you for actual, direct, indirect, consequential, punit OR 
incident damag even IF you give notic OF the possibl OF such 
damage. 

1.f.3. limit right OF replac OR refund - If you discov a 
defect in thi electron work within 90 day of receiv it, you can 
receiv a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by send a 
written explan to the person you receiv the work from. If you 
receiv the work on a physic medium, you must return the medium with 
your written explanation. the person or entiti that provid you with 
the defect work may elect to provid a replac copi in lieu of a 
refund. If you receiv the work electronically, the person or entiti 
provid it to you may choos to give you a second opportun to 
receiv the work electron in lieu of a refund. If the second copi 
is also defective, you may demand a refund in write without further 
opportun to fix the problem. 

1.f.4. except for the limit right of replac or refund set forth 
in paragraph 1.f.3, thi work is provid to you 'as-is' with NO other 
warranti OF ani kind, express OR implied, includ but not limit TO 
warranti OF merchant OR fit for ani purpose. 

1.f.5. some state do not allow disclaim of certain impli 
warranti or the exclus or limit of certain type of damages. 
If ani disclaim or limit set forth in thi agreement violat the 
law of the state applic to thi agreement, the agreement shall be 
interpret to make the maximum disclaim or limit permit by 
the applic state law. the invalid or unenforc of ani 
provis of thi agreement shall not void the remain provisions. 

1.f.6. indemn - you agre to indemnifi and hold the foundation, the 
trademark owner, ani agent or employe of the foundation, anyon 
provid copi of project gutenberg-tm electron work in accord 
with thi agreement, and ani volunt associ with the production, 
promot and distribut of project gutenberg-tm electron works, 
harmless from all liability, cost and expenses, includ legal fees, 
that aris directli or indirectli from ani of the follow which you do 
or caus to occur: (a) distribut of thi or ani project gutenberg-tm 
work, (b) alteration, modification, or addit or delet to ani 
project gutenberg-tm work, and (c) ani defect you cause. 


section 2. inform about the mission of project gutenberg-tm 

project gutenberg-tm is synonym with the free distribut of 
electron work in format readabl by the widest varieti of comput 
includ obsolete, old, middle-ag and new computers. It exist 
becaus of the effort of hundr of volunt and donat from 
peopl in all walk of life. 

volunt and financi support to provid volunt with the 
assist they need, is critic to reach project gutenberg-tm' 
goal and ensur that the project gutenberg-tm collect will 
remain freeli avail for gener to come. In 2001, the project 
gutenberg literari archiv foundat wa creat to provid a secur 
and perman futur for project gutenberg-tm and futur generations. 
To learn more about the project gutenberg literari archiv foundat 
and how your effort and donat can help, see section 3 and 4 
and the foundat web page at http://www.pglaf.org. 


section 3. inform about the project gutenberg literari archiv 
foundat 

the project gutenberg literari archiv foundat is a non profit 
501(c)(3) educ corpor organ under the law of the 
state of mississippi and grant tax exempt statu by the intern 
revenu service. the foundation' ein or feder tax identif 
number is 64-6221541. it 501(c)(3) letter is post at 
http://pglaf.org/fundraising. contribut to the project gutenberg 
literari archiv foundat are tax deduct to the full extent 
permit by u.s. feder law and your state' laws. 

the foundation' princip offic is locat at 4557 melan dr. S. 
fairbanks, ak, 99712., but it volunt and employe are scatter 
throughout numer locations. it busi offic is locat at 
809 north 1500 west, salt lake city, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email 
business@pglaf.org. email contact link and up to date contact 
inform can be found at the foundation' web site and offici 
page at http://pglaf.org 

for addit contact information: 
dr. gregori B. newbi 
chief execut and director 
gbnewby@pglaf.org 


section 4. inform about donat to the project gutenberg 
literari archiv foundat 

project gutenberg-tm depend upon and cannot surviv without wide 
spread public support and donat to carri out it mission of 
increas the number of public domain and licens work that can be 
freeli distribut in machin readabl form access by the widest 
array of equip includ outdat equipment. mani small donat 
($1 to $5,000) are particularli import to maintain tax exempt 
statu with the irs. 

the foundat is commit to compli with the law regul 
chariti and charit donat in all 50 state of the unit 
states. complianc requir are not uniform and it take a 
consider effort, much paperwork and mani fee to meet and keep up 
with these requirements. We do not solicit donat in locat 
where we have not receiv written confirm of compliance. To 
send donat or determin the statu of complianc for ani 
particular state visit http://pglaf.org 

while we cannot and do not solicit contribut from state where we 
have not met the solicit requirements, we know of no prohibit 
against accept unsolicit donat from donor in such state who 
approach us with offer to donate. 

intern donat are grate accepted, but we cannot make 
ani statement concern tax treatment of donat receiv from 
outsid the unit states. u.s. law alon swamp our small staff. 

pleas check the project gutenberg web page for current donat 
method and addresses. donat are accept in a number of other 
way includ includ checks, onlin payment and credit card 
donations. To donate, pleas visit: http://pglaf.org/don 


section 5. gener inform about project gutenberg-tm electron 
works. 

professor michael S. hart is the origin of the project gutenberg-tm 
concept of a librari of electron work that could be freeli share 
with anyone. for thirti years, he produc and distribut project 
gutenberg-tm ebook with onli a loos network of volunt support. 


project gutenberg-tm ebook are often creat from sever print 
editions, all of which are confirm as public domain in the u.s. 
unless a copyright notic is included. thus, we do not necessarili 
keep ebook in complianc with ani particular paper edition. 


most peopl start at our web site which ha the main PG search facility: 

http://www.gutenberg.net 

thi web site includ inform about project gutenberg-tm, 
includ how to make donat to the project gutenberg literari 
archiv foundation, how to help produc our new ebooks, and how to 
subscrib to our email newslett to hear about new ebooks. 
