the project gutenberg ebook of each man kills, by victoria glad 

thi ebook is for the use of anyon anywher at no cost and with 
almost no restrict whatsoever. you may copi it, give it away or 
re-us it under the term of the project gutenberg licens includ 
with thi ebook or onlin at www.gutenberg.org 


title: each man kill 

author: victoria glad 

releas date: novemb 3, 2007 [ebook #23301] 

language: english 


*** start OF thi project gutenberg ebook each man kill *** 




produc by greg weeks, mari meehan and the onlin 
distribut proofread team at http://www.pgdp.net 









each man kill 

_bi victoria glad_ 

[transcrib note: thi etext wa produc from weird tale march 1951. 
extens research did not uncov ani evid that the u.s. copyright 
on thi public wa renewed.] 


"_... to live you must feed on the living_" 

head by vincent napoli 

[illustration] 




now that it' all over, it seem like a bad dream. but when I look at 
maria' pictur on my desk, I realiz it couldn't have been a dream. 
actually, it wa onli six month ago that I sat at thi same desk, 
look at her picture, wonder what could have happen to her. It 
had been six week sinc there had been ani word from her, and she had 
promis to write as soon as she arriv in europe. consid that my 
futur rest in her small hands, I had everi right to be apprehensive. 

We had grown up together, had lost our folk within a few year of each 
other and had been fond of each other the way kid are apt to be. then 
the chang came: It seem I love her, and she wa still just "fond" of 
me. dure our earli colleg day I sort of let thing ride, but onc we 
went on to graduat school, I began to crowd her. 

the next thing I knew, she had sign up with a student tour destin 
for central europe, and told me she would give me my answer when she 
returned. I had to be content with that, but couldn't help worrying. 
maria wa a strang girl--withdrawn, dreami and soft-hearted. know 
the section she wa go to, I wa inclin to be uneasy, sinc it is 
the realm of gypsies, fortun teller and the like. It is also the 
birthplac of mani strang legends, and maria claim to be strongli 
psychic. As a matter of fact, she had foretold one or two thing which 
were probabl coincidental, like the death of our parents, and which 
even made an impress on me--and you'd hardli call me a "believer." 

thi so-cal talent of her led her into troubl on more than one 
occasion. I rememb in her senior year at colleg she fell under the 
spell of a short, fat, greasi spook-read with a strictli phoni accent 
and all but gave her eye teeth away, until I realiz someth wa 
amiss, got to the bottom of it, and dispatch friend spook-read 
_pronto_. If she should meet some unscrupul person now, with no one 
around to get her out of the scrape--but I didn't want to think of that. 
I wa sure thi time everyth would be all right. 

when she didn't write at first, I let it go that she wa busy. finally, 
six weeks' silent treatment arous my curiosity. It also arous my 
nasti temper, and the next thing I knew I wa on a plane bound for the 
continent. within two hour after landing, I found her at a littl inn 
in transylvania, a quaint littl place that look as if it were made of 
gingerbread, and wa surround by the huge, craggi transylvania 
mountain range. I also found tod hunter. 

"what' wrong, maria? whi didn't you write?" I asked. 

her usual gay, shine brown eye flash angrily. "whi couldn't you 
leav me alone? I told you not to come after me. I came here so I could 
think thi out. for god' sake, bill, can't you see I want to think? 
To be by myself?" 

"but you promis to write," I persisted, wonder at thi chang in 
her, thi impatience. wondered, too, at her wraithlik slimness. she'd 
alway been curv in the right places. 

"maria ha been studi much too diligently," tod said slowly. "she' 
alway tire lately. she hasn't been too well, either. her throat 
bother her." 

* * * * * 

I want to punch hi head in. for some reason I didn't like him. not 
becaus I sens hi rivalry; I wa abov that. god know I want her 
to be happy, abov everything. It wa just someth about him that 
irrit me. An attitude. not supercilious; I could have cope with 
that. rather, it wa a calm imperturb that seem to speak hi 
faith in hi eventu success, regardless of ani effort on my part. 

I don't know how to fight that sort of strategy. I look like I am: blunt 
and obvious. suddenli I didn't care if he wa there. 

"maria. ria, darling. thi guy' no good for you, can't you see that? 
what do you know about him?" 

she look at me, her eye surpris and a littl hurt. then she look 
at him, seem to be look _through_ him and into herself, if you know 
what I mean. A slow flush spread from the base of her throat, that thin, 
almost transpar throat. 

"all I have to know," she said softly. "I love him." 

she look out the window. "i'm go up into _konigstein mountain_, to 
a small sanitarium for my health shortly; the doctor ha told me I must 
go away, and tod ha suggest thi place. there tod and I shall be 
married." 

I knew then how it felt to be on the receiv end of a monkey-punch. 
that she had come to thi decis becaus of my objections, I had not 
the slightest doubt. she wa go to marri someon about whom she knew 
absolut nothing. she wa much more ill than she knew. hunter wa 
undoubtedli after her money; she wa consider well-off. obvious 
she wa onc more be influenc in the wrong direction. 

"I won't let you!" I warned. "give it some more time, if for noth 
else, then for old times' sake." 

"how about me, morris?" tod interrupted. "you haven't ask me my 
feel on the subject. I happen to love maria dearly. have I no say 
just becaus you'r a childhood friend of hers?" 

"childhood friend! I wa her whole famili for year befor she ever 
heard of you! i'll see you in hell befor I let her marri you!" I 
shouted. look back, i'm sure that had he said anyth else, I would 
have kill him, if ria hadn't come between us. 

"that' enough, bill morris! i'v heard all I want to from you. i'm 
twenty-three, and if I choos to marri tod, i'll do so and there' 
noth you can do about it. now, pleas go." 

"okay, ria," I said, "if that' the way you want it. but i'm not 
through. If you won't protect yourself, i'll do it for you. i'd like to 
know more about the mysteri mr. tod hunter, american, and I do wish, 
for your own sake, you'd do the same. I wouldn't care if you marri 
king tut, so long as you knew all about him. peopl just don't marri 
strangers; not if they'r smart. for god' sake, ask him about himself!" 

"all right, bill," she replied, smile patiently. "i'll ask him. now, 
do stop be childish." 

"okay, darling," I said sheepishly. "but do me one more favor. don't 
marri him until I get back. onli a littl while; give me a week. just 
wait a littl longer." 

As I close the door, I could still feel hi smile, mocking--yet a 
littl sad. 

but maria didn't wait. I wa gone a week. I had walk my leg off 
tri to track down the elus mister hunter and discov 
exactly--nothing. all hi landladi could tell me wa that he wa an 
american who had come to thi climat for hi health, and that he slept 
late mornings. I wa lick and I knew it. If I had been a pup, I would 
have fit my tail neatli between my leg and made for home. but I 
wasn't a pup, so I head straight for ria' flat to face the music. 

* * * * * 

they were wait for me, she and tod. when I saw her, I wish I were 
dead. 

she lay in tod' arms, her bodi a mere whisper of a body. white and cold 
she was, like frozen milk on a cold winter' day. they were both dead. 

you know how it is when at a wake someon view the deceas and say 
kindly, "she' beautiful," and "she" isn't beauti at all; just a 
made-up, lifeless hand of clay. dead as dead, and frightening. well, 
it wasn't that way thi time. their fair skin were faintli pink-tint 
and their blond heads, her ashen and hi a reddish cast, gleam 
brightly. and they sat so close in the sofa befor the fire, hi head 
rest in the hollow of her throat. they looked--peaceful; no line 
mar their faces. I almost fanci I saw them breathe. and on her 
third finger, left hand, wa the ring--a thin, platinum band. He had 
won, and in win somehow he had lost. how they had die and whi they 
found each other and death at the same time, I would probabl never 
know. I onli knew one thing: I had to get away from there--quickly. I 
almost ran the distanc to my flat. stumbl into the place and pour a 
tripl scotch which I could scarc hold. the scotch sear my throat 
and tast bitter; someon must have pour salt in it. then I realiz 
that it wa tears--mi tears. I, bill morris, who hadn't cri sinc my 
fifth birthday--i wa sob like a baby. 

I didn't call the police. that would mean I would have to go back and 
watch them cover that love body, carri it away and submit it to untold 
indign in order to ascertain the caus of death. the clean girl 
would find them in the morn and would notifi the police. 

but it wasn't so simpl as that. In the morn I found I couldn't shake 
off the guilt which possess me. even two bottl of scotch hadn't 
help me to forget. I wa dead drunk and cold sober at the same time. 

I phone ria' landladi and told her I had fail to reach the hunter 
by phone, that I wa sure someth wa amiss. would she pleas go to 
their flat and see if anyth wa wrong. 

she wa amused. "really, mr. morris, you must be mistaken. miss maria 
went out just an hour ago with her new husband. sure you are jesting. 
whi she ha never look better. So happy. they have left for 
_konigstein_. they have also left you a note. 

I told her I would be right over, and hop a cab. I began to think I 
wa lose my mind. I had seen them both--dead. the landladi had seen 
them thi morning--_alive!_" 

when I arrived, the landladi look at me for a long moment, take in 
my rough, dark-blu complexion, unpress clothes, red-rim eyes, then 
wag a finger playfully. 

"you are play a joke, no? A wed joke, maybe. here, too, we haze 
newlyweds. but of cours I understood. who could help love miss maria? 
Be of good heart, young man. for you there will be another, some day. 
but I talk too much. here is your letter." 

I went where I would be undisturbed, to the read room of the librari 
on the same street as my flat. To the musty, oblong, dimli lit room 
whose threshold sunshin and fresh air dare not cross. without the 
save warmth of sunlight or the fresh, clean relief of sweet-smel 
air, I read. read, inhal the pungent, sour smell of the scotch I had 
consum dure the long, sleepless night. read, and then doubt that I 
had read at all--but the blue ink on the white paper forc me to 
acknowledg it actuality. It had been written by hunter, in a neat, 
scholar' script. 

_dear morris_: (it began) 

_whi should I not have want maria? you did; other doubtless did. whi 
then should she not be mine? there are mani thing wors than be 
marri to me; she might have marri a man who beat her!_ 

_with her I have known the two happiest day of my life. I want no more 
than that. I have no right to ask for more. have we, ani of us, a right 
to endless bliss on thi earth? hardly._ 

_you thought of her welfar abov all; for that I owe you some 
explanation. you must be patient, you must believe, and in the end, you 
must do as I ask._ you must. 

_you want to know about me--of my life befor maria. befor maria? It 
seem strang to think about it. there is no life without maria. still, 
there wa a time when for me she didn't exist. I have been constantli 
go forward to the day when I would meet her, yet there wa a time 
when I didn't know where I would find her, or even what her name would 
be!_ 

_it wa chanc that brought us together. for me, good chance; for you, 
possibl ill chance; for maria? onli she can say. some three year ago I 
wa studi in england under a rhode scholarship. the futur held 
great thing for me. I wa a yank like yourself, and damn proud of it. 
life in england seem strang and slow and sometim utterli dismal 
under austerity. then, littl by littl I slip into their slower 
ways, grow to love the peopl for their spunk, and final come to 
feel I wa one of them, so to speak._ 

_I have said everyth slow down: I wa wrong. studi intensifi 
for me. the folklor of the british isl intrigu me. I delv into 
the black welsh tales, the mischiev fanci of the irish, the english 
legend of the prowl werewolf. for me it wa a relief from polit 
science, which suddenli pall and which smack of treason in the light 
of current events. My extracurricular research consum the better part 
of my evenings. My book were and alway have been a part of me, and as 
wa to be expected, I overdid it. I studi too hard with too littl 
let-up. sometim it seem to me there wa more truth to what I read 
than myth. It becam somewhat of an obsession. suddenly, one night, 
everyth black out._ 

_I came to in a sanatorium. I didn't know how I got there, and when they 
explain it to me, I laughed. I thought they were joking. when I tri 
to get up, to walk, I collapsed. then I knew how bad it had been. I 
knew, too, I would have to go slowly._ 

_it wa there I met eve. she wa beautiful. not like maria, who is like 
a fragile, fair, spun-sugar angel. eve wa more earthy, with skin like 
ivory, creami and rich and pale. her blue-black hair she wore long and 
gather in the back. she look about twenty-five, but a streak of pure 
white ran back from each of her temples. she wa the most strike woman 
I have ever met. I had never known anyon like her, nor have I sinc I 
saw her last._ 

_you know how it is: the air of mysteri about a woman make a man like a 
kid again. she remind me of a sleek, black cat, with her large, hazel 
eyes. I bump into her one day on the verandah, and spent everi day 
with her after that._ 

_the doctor want me to take exercise--short walk and the like, and 
eve went with me, struggl to keep up with me. the slightest effort 
tire her. she suffer from a rather nasti case of anemia. she seldom 
smiled; the effort wa probabl too much for her. I saw her realli smile 
onli once._ 

_we had been on one of our short hike in the wood close by the 
grounds. she stumbl over a twig or a branch, i'm not sure which. 
suddenli she wa in my arms. have you ever held a cloud in your arms, 
morris? So light she was, although she wa almost as tall as I. warm and 
pulsating. her eye held mine; it wa almost uncanny. I have never been 
affect like that by a woman. then I wa kiss her; then a sharp 
sting, and I winced. there wa the warm, salt tast of blood on my lips. 
I never knew how it happened. but she wa smiling, her full mouth part 
in the strangest smile I have ever seen. and those small white teeth 
gleamed; and in her eyes, which were all black pupil now, with the iri 
quit hidden, wa desire--or someth beyond desire. I couldn't defin 
it then; now, I think I can. her small, pink tongu dart over her 
lips, tasting, seem to savor._ 

_I wa frightened, for some indefin reason. I want to get away 
from her, from the woods, from myself. I grasp her arm roughli and we 
start back for the grounds. We never mention the episod again, but 
we neither of us ever forgot. she intrigu me now, more than ever. the 
doctor were abl to satisfi my curios somewhat. they told me she had 
been a patient for some four years. some day she wa better, some day 
worse. she need rest--much rest. most day she slept past noon with 
their approval. some day there wa a faint flush beneath that ivori 
skin; other day it wa pale and cool._ 

_just when we becam lovers, I scarc remember. thing were happen 
so fast I could bare keep pace with them. there wa a magnet about 
eve which compelled. I couldn't have resist if i'd want to--and I 
didn't._ 

_I began to have long period of lassitude, time when I would black out 
and rememb noth afterwards. and the dream began. I would dream I 
wa stroke a large, velvety-black cat, a cat with shine yellow eye 
that look at me as if they knew my everi thought. I would stroke it 
continu and it would nip me playfully. then, one night the dream 
intensified: I wa play with the creature, caress it gently, when 
of a sudden it lip drew back in a snarl, and without warn it sprang 
at my throat and buri it fang deep! I thought I could feel life 
be drawn from me; I screamed._ 

_the doctor told me afterward that I wa semi-consci for days; that 
I had to be restrained._ 

_when I wa well again, eve came to see me. she wa gentle--soothing. 
she held me close to her and oh! it wa good to be aliv and to belong 
to someone._ 

_I rememb to thi day what she wore. black velvet loung slacks, a 
low-neck amber satin blouse, caught at the "v" by a curious wrought 
antiqu silver pin. It wa round, about four inch in diameter. In it 
center wa the carv figur of a serpent coil to strike. it eye 
were deep amber topaz and it dart tongu wa rais and set with a 
blood-r ruby._ 

_"what an unusu pin, eve," I said "i'v never seen it before, have 
i?"_ 

_"no," she replied. "it belong to the deep, dark, seldom discuss 
skeleton in the orcaczi closet, tod. you see, my great-great grandmoth 
wa quit a wick lady, to hear tell. went in for witches' mass and 
the like. they say she poison her husband, a rather elderli and veri 
childish man, for her lover, whom she subsequ married. togeth 
they did away with rel who stood in the way of their accumul 
more money. thi pin wa the instrument of death."_ 

_her slim finger press the rubi tongu and the pin opened, reveal 
a space larg enough to secret powder._ 

_"it' like those employ by the infam borgias, as you can see," she 
continued, shrugging. "perhap it wa fate then, that her devot new 
husband tire of her onc her fortun wa assur him, took a young 
mistress for himself, and dispos of the unfortun wife, use her 
own pin to perpetr her murder. she wa excommun by her church, 
too, which must have made it most unpleas for her, poor old dear." 
the slim shoulder straightened. "but let' not discuss such unpleas 
things, my dear. the import thing now is for you to get well quickly. 
i'v miss you terribly, you know."_ 

_it wa then I ask her to marri me. I knew I didn't realli love her, 
but there seem noth to prevent our marriage. and she had gotten 
under my skin. It wa as element as that. she said she thought we 
should wait until I fulli recovered._ 

_"don't say ani more, darling," she said. "rest your poor, sore 
throat."_ 

_she bent over me solicit and I reach up to stroke that smooth 
black hair. It had a familiar feel to it that I couldn't quit place. Of 
cours I had stroke it hundr of time before, but it wasn't that. 
then she look straight at me, those large, glow hazel eye bore 
into mine, and I knew. knew and disbeliev at the same time. I froze 
where I lay, paralyz by my fear; unabl to make a sound._ 

_"so you know," she whispered. "it is well. I have mark you for my own 
these mani months. now that you know, you will not fight. you know what 
I am, or at least you can guess. thi pin you admir so--it wa mine 
three hundr year ago and it will alway be mine!"_ 

_her lip were on mine. she had never kiss me like this. It wa like 
the touch of hot ice, freezing, then searing. unendurable. I lay inert; 
I couldn't have move if I want to. I could scarc breathe. then I 
felt the blood within me pounding, pulsing, begin to answer in spite 
of myself. I tast onc more the warm, salti fluid on my lips. eve' 
bodi wa liquid in my arms; warm, heady, narcotizing. onc again I felt 
the agonizing, dagger sharp pain in my throat and--darkness._ 

_have you ever waken to a bright, sunni afternoon and heard yourself 
pronounc dead? they spoke in low, hush tones. how unfortunate. young 
fellow onli thirty, die so far away from hi homeland. No family. good 
thing he wa well-set in life. thi sudden anemia wa most 
extraordinary; fellow show no sign of it previously. all he had 
realli need wa rest. If he had recovered, that love eve orcaczi 
might have made both their live happier, richer. sad end to what 
might have been an idyll. good of her to claim the body. she said she 
wa go to inter it in the famili vault in_ konigstein mountain _in 
transylvania._ 

_I heard them distinctly. I want to shout that I wasn't dead; I want 
to wake up from thi horribl nightmare. I wa as aliv as they. I knew 
I had to get out of there, some way; to get away from eve, whom I now 
feared. they left to make arrangements._ 

_the lassitud crept through me without warning; I doze in spite of 
myself. and I dream again. I wa a cat running, leap through 
windows, lope over the countryside, stop for no one. I pant with 
my exertions. town and citi flew by; I had to get someplac and 
quickly. then the dream ended._ 

_"tod," she said, "get up, my dear." I heard her and I hate her. hate 
her while I wa drawn to her. there wa a white mist befor my eyes. I 
reach up to brush it away. It wa not a mist; it wa a cloth. I 
shivered._ 

_"i must wake up," I whisper hoarsely, "I must! i'm go mad!"_ 

_there wa a creak sound and daylight descend upon me. when I saw 
where I was, I cover my face with my hand and sobbed. I tri to 
pray, but the word froze on my lips._ I wa sit in a coffin in a 
mausoleum! I had been buri alive! 

_"what am i?" I shrieked. "where am I and what have you done? i'm out of 
my mind; stark, stare mad!"_ 

_eve' lip parted, show the even white teeth--thos slightli point 
teeth._ 

_"you'r quit sane, my dear," she said calmly. "you are now one of us; 
a revenant, even as I, and to live you must feed on the living."_ 

_"it' not true!" I shouted. "thi is all a crazi nightmare, part of my 
illness! you'r not real! noth is real!"_ 

_"i'm quit real, tod. To be trite, I am what I am, and have accept it 
calmly, as you shall in time. I have told you of my life. you have been 
a student of legends. legend are often--mor often than you 
think--reality. when one ha been murdered, if one ha live a so-cal 
wick life, he is doom to walk the earth batten on the living. My 
fate wa seal as I lay in my coffin. but that wasn't enough. As I lay 
there, my pet cat, suma, slunk into the room and leapt over me. that wa 
a doubl insur of my life after death. those whom I mark for my own 
must, too, live on. accept it, my dear. you have no other choice."_ 

_"no!" I cried. "i'm an american! thing like thi don't happen to us! 
it' onli in stories, and then to foreigners!"_ 

_she chuckl drily. "i'm afraid these thing do happen, and in thi 
case, you'r it, my dear. make the best of it."_ 

_but I wouldn't; I refus to--for a while. I would not feast on the 
blood of the living. someth within me fought. for a time._ 

_then, the aw hunger began. the tear pang of hunger that ordinari 
food wouldn't arrest. I fought it as long as I could. I lost._ 

_first it wa small animals; anim that I loved. It wa my life or 
theirs. then there wa a littl girl; a dear littl creatur who might 
have been my child under differ circumstances._ 

_after the episod of the littl girl, eve left me. she had no further 
use for me; she had want the child, too, and I had got it. I wa now 
competit to be shunned. I wa alon onc again alon and thoroughli 
miserable. I couldn't understand myself, my motives, so how could I 
expect someon els to understand?_ 

_I onli knew what I was; nor could I ration on whi I had becom 
thi way. I could onli presum it had happen to other equal as 
innoc as myself of wrong-doing. In the daytime, when I wa like 
others, I reproach myself; good know I loath myself and what I 
had to do in order to "live." I wish I might realli die, for I wa 
tired--so fright tire and sick of it all. but I knew of no way to 
accomplish this, so I had to bear it all, fast until my voracious, 
disgust appetit got the better of me._ 

_I decid there must be some inform on my kind, particularli in 
thi area where vampir legend are rife, so I took to haunt read 
rooms. It wa there I met maria. she told me, after we knew each other 
better, that she wa do graduat work in region superstit and 
had decid that her thesi would treat of the histori of vampirism. she 
found it terribl amusing, but at the same time frightening: didn't I? I 
fear I saw noth laughabl about it, but I held my peace. why, I could 
have done a thesi for her that would have driven some mild-mann 
prof complet out of hi mind! I kept my knowledg to myself, though; 
I didn't want to scare maria._ 

_she wa like a flash of sunshin in a darken room. she made each day 
worth living. for the first time the hunger pang ceased. ceas for one 
week, then two. I wa certain I wa cured. perhaps, I thought, the whole 
thing wa just a dream and I am final awake._ 

_I felt then I had the right to tell her of my love. she look 
infinit sad. she wasn't certain, she said. she knew she wa aw 
fond of me, but she wa confused. she had just come away from the 
states, tri to make up her mind about someon dear, whom she didn't 
want to hurt, and she want a breather. I said I would wait up to and 
through eternity, if she wished._ 

_things, went along peac then. We would walk for hour together, 
walk in complet silenc and understanding. My strength seem to be 
return more day by day. We went far afield in search of materi for 
her thesis. she would track down the most minut speck of hearsay, to 
get authenticity._ 

_one day, in our wanderings, I thoughtlessli let myself be led too near 
my rest place. one of the local mention a "place of horror" nearbi 
and maria want to investigate. I had no choice. We poke amid the 
still fusti of the desert mausoleum I knew so well. she thought it 
odd that the door wa unlocked. I said, yes, wasn't it. then she saw the 
box, that gleam copper box which eve had so thought provided. 
she stroke it gently, comment on it beauty, and befor I could 
prevent it or divert her attention, she had lift the heavi lid 
expos the disarrang shroud, the remain of one or two hapless small 
creatures, the horribl blood-stain satin lining. she scream and 
drop the lid, somehow pinch her finger. she hop on one foot, as 
one usual doe to fight down sudden pain. then she wa cling to me, 
thoroughli frightened._ 

_"what doe it mean, tod?"_ 

_I quiet her with the usual platitudes. then I wa kiss that poor, 
red littl finger. without warn to myself or her, I nip it 
affectionately. A warm glow spread through me; there wa a tast more 
delight than fine old brandy, or vintag wine, and I knew irrevoc 
that I wa not cured; no, nor ever should be! and I knew, too, that I 
want maria--not just as a man long for the woman he loves--but to 
drink of the fountain of her life, that warm, intox fountain, 
greedily, joyously. she never knew what went through my mind at that 
moment. If I could have kill myself then, I would have, and with no 
compunction. but there is more to kill a reven than that. the 
church know the procedure. I hurri maria home as fast as I could and 
told her I had to go away for a week on business. she believ me and 
said she would miss me. but I didn't go away. that night I fought a 
lose battl with myself, and then and everi night thereafter, I 
return to her, partook of her and slunk away, loath myself. I knew 
that I must soon kill the one be I love abov all others, kill, too, 
her immort soul, and there wa noth I could do to prevent it._ 

_she began to fade visibly. when I "returned" in a week, she wa so ill 
that a few step tire her. her appetit all but vanished. she seem 
genuin glad to see me. she wa beset by nightmares, she said. could I 
help her get some rest? I took her to a physician who sage prescrib 
a chang in climate, rest and a diet rich in blood and iron, gave her a 
prescript for sedatives, and call it a day._ 

_you know how she look when you saw her. the day wa approach when 
she would have no more blood, when life as you know it would stop and 
she would becom like me. somehow I couldn't take her with me without 
some warning, but I didn't know how to do it. you see, sinc I wa an 
innoc victim myself. I could speak, could warn my intend victim, 
becaus although my soul had all but died, there wa still a spark that 
evil hadn't touched. I knew she would think it a joke if I told her 
about myself without warning._ 

_then, happili for me, you came along. I knew you would sens someth 
amiss and I didn't care. I wa almost certain of her love, and I decid 
to seiz the few minut left me and devil take the hindmost! when you 
told her to confront me, you gave me the happiest day of my life. for 
thi I thank you sincerely. for what I have done and will ask you to do, 
forgiv me!_ 

_maria ask me directly, as you had known she would. I repli frankly, 
spare her nothing. I told her that the fact that thi life had been 
wish on me, as it were, gave me some rights, and that I could tell her 
how to rid herself of me, if she wished. then she turn to me, her 
large, love eye thoughtful._ 

_"tod, dearest," she said softly, "I must die some day, realli die, so 
what differ doe it make when? I onli know that I love you. whi wait 
until i'm decrepit and alone, with onli a few memori to look back on? 
whi not now, with you, where life doesn't realli stop? with all i'v 
read about this, don't you think I could free myself if I wished?"_ 

_I still wonder if she realli believ me. We were marri three day 
later. I never told her what her life with me would be like--that one 
day I would desert her, fear and hate her rivalri for the veri 
sourc of my life, and the ghastli chain would continue. I couldn't. I 
love her so, morris, can you understand that? I couldn't betray her 
then and I can't now._ 

_on the second night of our marriage, she die as you know it, in my 
arms. I don't think she know it yet. but it won't be long until she 
doe discov it. We were quit aliv when you found us; she wa in an 
hypnot state induc by her condition. she heard and saw nothing. but 
I knew. and I must keep my faith. I must, and you are the onli one who 
can help me._ 

_if you will show thi to a priest, he will gladli accompani you to the 
place in_ konigstein, _where we rest dure the morn in a new "bed" I 
had special construct for us. I couldn't bring maria to that other 
bed of corruption. A map of how to get there is enclosed. there you will 
perform the ancient, effect rites, and you will lay us to rest 
together, as we wish. that is all I ask...._ 

* * * * * 

when I had finish read I stare at nothing, tri to forc myself 
to think. thi wa "all" he asked. In substance, he wish me to murder 
the girl I loved. I could refuse; I could ignor hi request. I could 
even doubt the veriti of hi statements. He might be a madman. but I 
didn't doubt. I believ everi word, and I knew I would do as he asked. 

that she had gone willingli I didn't doubt. I no longer hate him so 
much; rather I piti him, the hapless victim of a horribl chain of 
circumstance. 

* * * * * 

I found the priest, a venerable, gentl soul, after much searching. the 
younger men had look at me searchingly, laugh and told me to read 
the good book for consolation, and to lay off the bottle. father kalman 
wa understanding, with the wisdom of the veri old. 

"yes, my son," he said, "I will go. mani might doubt, but I believe. 
lucif roam the earth in mani guis and must be recogn and 
exorcised." 

It wa five o'clock in the morn when we approach the mausoleum. the 
good father explain that the "creatur of darkness" had to be back in 
their rest place befor the cock crew. At night they drew 
sustenance; dure the morn they slept. 

there wa a gleam copper casket. tod had not lied. We approach it 
warily. In it wa noth but grisli remains, bloodstain and dust. We 
drew back, fearful. then we saw the other, newer casket in richest 
mahogany, almost twice the width of the copper box: _their bridal bed!_ 

they lay together, hi arm about her. she wore a gown of palest blue, 
but oh, that mockeri of a gown! stain it wa with fresh blood which 
had seep onto it from him. obvious she had not taken to prowl 
yet. hi mouth wa dark, rich with blood, slightli open in a half-smile. 
hi hand press her fair head close to hi chest. she lay trustingli 
within the circl of hi arm, like a small child. the priest cross 
himself. the bodi twitch slightly. 

"you know what you must do," father kalman whispered. 

I nodded, the pit of my stomach churn madly. I couldn't do it! not 
maria, the lovely. but I knew I would; I had to. she must not wake again 
to see that blood-stain gown or to wonder at her husband' gori lips. 
she should know rest, etern rest. 

father kalman circl the box sever times, ring hi small bell, and 
at one point laid a crucifix upon each of their chests. their face 
writh and I felt my skin creep. 

then, chant in a low, firm voice, the priest gave me the signal. 
togeth we drove two long stakes, dip first in holi water, home, 
pierc their heart simultaneously. 

the bodi leapt forward in the box, strain against the stake, and a 
horrible, drawn-out wail shatter the still of the tomb. the priest 
drop to hi knee and I clap my hand over my ears, but the 
dread shriek penetrated. My stomach turn over and I retched. the 
good father follow suit. We were no supermen and our bodi and our 
veri soul revolt against thi monstrou thing. 

"let us finish, my son," the priest said slowly, after a time, hi face 
the color of ashes. "we must buri these dead, that they may sleep in 
consecr ground." 

I couldn't. I had to see her again befor it wa done. she lay, small 
and fragil as ever, her face calm, onli there wa no trace of life now. 
she wa still and white, as onli the dead--th truli dead--are. tod' 
arm wa flung across her chest, as if to protect her. I made myself move 
the arm, rest her head upon hi shoulder, where it belonged. then, as 
I looked, there wa just maria. tod wa gone and onli a hand of dust 
lay pile up around the stake. It wa enough. I slam the lid shut. 

* * * * * 

look back now, I can see it wa all for the best. ria wa 
different--apart from other women. A dreamer, a mystic, too easili 
influenc by the bizarr and un-normal. I, on the other hand, am 
practic almost to a fault. had she marri me I might have crush in 
her the veri thing that drew me to her. In time she might have grown to 
hate me. 

hunter, on the other hand, wa a student. introspective, given to 
romanticizing. suscept to suggestion. had I been confront with an 
eve, I should have run like hell. To him, though, she wa cloak in 
mystery; hence, more desirable. what better choic for him ultim 
than ria? that ria had to die to achiev her happi is of no real 
importance. life is a transitori thing anyway. 

sometimes, though, when I look at ria' picture, it' hard to be 
practical. she wa everyth I shall ever want. 

I had never been to europ befor the summer of 1947. I went to find 
maria, to marri her. instead, I found and murder her, and I will never 
go back again. 





end of the project gutenberg ebook of each man kills, by victoria glad 

*** end OF thi project gutenberg ebook each man kill *** 

***** thi file should be name 23301.txt or 23301.zip ***** 
thi and all associ file of variou format will be found in: 
http://www.gutenberg.org/2/3/3/0/23301/ 

produc by greg weeks, mari meehan and the onlin 
distribut proofread team at http://www.pgdp.net 


updat edit will replac the previou one--th old edit 
will be renamed. 

creat the work from public domain print edit mean that no 
one own a unit state copyright in these works, so the foundat 
(and you!) can copi and distribut it in the unit state without 
permiss and without pay copyright royalties. special rules, 
set forth in the gener term of use part of thi license, appli to 
copi and distribut project gutenberg-tm electron work to 
protect the project gutenberg-tm concept and trademark. project 
gutenberg is a regist trademark, and may not be use if you 
charg for the ebooks, unless you receiv specif permission. If you 
do not charg anyth for copi of thi ebook, compli with the 
rule is veri easy. you may use thi ebook for nearli ani purpos 
such as creation of deriv works, reports, perform and 
research. they may be modifi and print and given away--y may do 
practic anyth with public domain ebooks. redistribut is 
subject to the trademark license, especi commerci 
redistribution. 



*** start: full licens *** 

the full project gutenberg licens 
pleas read thi befor you distribut OR use thi work 

To protect the project gutenberg-tm mission of promot the free 
distribut of electron works, by use or distribut thi work 
(or ani other work associ in ani way with the phrase "project 
gutenberg"), you agre to compli with all the term of the full project 
gutenberg-tm licens (avail with thi file or onlin at 
http://gutenberg.org/license). 


section 1. gener term of use and redistribut project gutenberg-tm 
electron work 

1.a. By read or use ani part of thi project gutenberg-tm 
electron work, you indic that you have read, understand, agre to 
and accept all the term of thi licens and intellectu properti 
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agre to abid by all 
the term of thi agreement, you must ceas use and return or destroy 
all copi of project gutenberg-tm electron work in your possession. 
If you paid a fee for obtain a copi of or access to a project 
gutenberg-tm electron work and you do not agre to be bound by the 
term of thi agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or 
entiti to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.e.8. 

1.b. "project gutenberg" is a regist trademark. It may onli be 
use on or associ in ani way with an electron work by peopl who 
agre to be bound by the term of thi agreement. there are a few 
thing that you can do with most project gutenberg-tm electron work 
even without compli with the full term of thi agreement. see 
paragraph 1.c below. there are a lot of thing you can do with project 
gutenberg-tm electron work if you follow the term of thi agreement 
and help preserv free futur access to project gutenberg-tm electron 
works. see paragraph 1.e below. 

1.c. the project gutenberg literari archiv foundat ("the foundation" 
or pglaf), own a compil copyright in the collect of project 
gutenberg-tm electron works. nearli all the individu work in the 
collect are in the public domain in the unit states. If an 
individu work is in the public domain in the unit state and you are 
locat in the unit states, we do not claim a right to prevent you from 
copying, distributing, performing, display or creat deriv 
work base on the work as long as all refer to project gutenberg 
are removed. Of course, we hope that you will support the project 
gutenberg-tm mission of promot free access to electron work by 
freeli share project gutenberg-tm work in complianc with the term of 
thi agreement for keep the project gutenberg-tm name associ with 
the work. you can easili compli with the term of thi agreement by 
keep thi work in the same format with it attach full project 
gutenberg-tm licens when you share it without charg with others. 

1.d. the copyright law of the place where you are locat also govern 
what you can do with thi work. copyright law in most countri are in 
a constant state of change. If you are outsid the unit states, check 
the law of your countri in addit to the term of thi agreement 
befor downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distribut or 
creat deriv work base on thi work or ani other project 
gutenberg-tm work. the foundat make no represent concern 
the copyright statu of ani work in ani countri outsid the unit 
states. 

1.e. unless you have remov all refer to project gutenberg: 

1.e.1. the follow sentence, with activ link to, or other immedi 
access to, the full project gutenberg-tm licens must appear promin 
whenev ani copi of a project gutenberg-tm work (ani work on which the 
phrase "project gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "project 
gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed, 
copi or distributed: 

thi ebook is for the use of anyon anywher at no cost and with 
almost no restrict whatsoever. you may copi it, give it away or 
re-us it under the term of the project gutenberg licens includ 
with thi ebook or onlin at www.gutenberg.org 

1.e.2. If an individu project gutenberg-tm electron work is deriv 
from the public domain (doe not contain a notic indic that it is 
post with permiss of the copyright holder), the work can be copi 
and distribut to anyon in the unit state without pay ani fee 
or charges. If you are redistribut or provid access to a work 
with the phrase "project gutenberg" associ with or appear on the 
work, you must compli either with the requir of paragraph 1.e.1 
through 1.e.7 or obtain permiss for the use of the work and the 
project gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraph 1.e.8 or 
1.e.9. 

1.e.3. If an individu project gutenberg-tm electron work is post 
with the permiss of the copyright holder, your use and distribut 
must compli with both paragraph 1.e.1 through 1.e.7 and ani addit 
term impos by the copyright holder. addit term will be link 
to the project gutenberg-tm licens for all work post with the 
permiss of the copyright holder found at the begin of thi work. 

1.e.4. Do not unlink or detach or remov the full project gutenberg-tm 
licens term from thi work, or ani file contain a part of thi 
work or ani other work associ with project gutenberg-tm. 

1.e.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribut or redistribut thi 
electron work, or ani part of thi electron work, without 
promin display the sentenc set forth in paragraph 1.e.1 with 
activ link or immedi access to the full term of the project 
gutenberg-tm license. 

1.e.6. you may convert to and distribut thi work in ani binary, 
compressed, mark up, nonproprietari or proprietari form, includ ani 
word process or hypertext form. however, if you provid access to or 
distribut copi of a project gutenberg-tm work in a format other than 
"plain vanilla ascii" or other format use in the offici version 
post on the offici project gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org), 
you must, at no addit cost, fee or expens to the user, provid a 
copy, a mean of export a copy, or a mean of obtain a copi upon 
request, of the work in it origin "plain vanilla ascii" or other 
form. ani altern format must includ the full project gutenberg-tm 
licens as specifi in paragraph 1.e.1. 

1.e.7. Do not charg a fee for access to, viewing, displaying, 
performing, copi or distribut ani project gutenberg-tm work 
unless you compli with paragraph 1.e.8 or 1.e.9. 

1.e.8. you may charg a reason fee for copi of or provid 
access to or distribut project gutenberg-tm electron work provid 
that 

- you pay a royalti fee of 20% of the gross profit you deriv from 
the use of project gutenberg-tm work calcul use the method 
you alreadi use to calcul your applic taxes. the fee is 
owe to the owner of the project gutenberg-tm trademark, but he 
ha agre to donat royalti under thi paragraph to the 
project gutenberg literari archiv foundation. royalti payment 
must be paid within 60 day follow each date on which you 
prepar (or are legal requir to prepare) your period tax 
returns. royalti payment should be clearli mark as such and 
sent to the project gutenberg literari archiv foundat at the 
address specifi in section 4, "inform about donat to 
the project gutenberg literari archiv foundation." 

- you provid a full refund of ani money paid by a user who notifi 
you in write (or by e-mail) within 30 day of receipt that s/he 
doe not agre to the term of the full project gutenberg-tm 
license. you must requir such a user to return or 
destroy all copi of the work possess in a physic medium 
and discontinu all use of and all access to other copi of 
project gutenberg-tm works. 

- you provide, in accord with paragraph 1.f.3, a full refund of ani 
money paid for a work or a replac copy, if a defect in the 
electron work is discov and report to you within 90 day 
of receipt of the work. 

- you compli with all other term of thi agreement for free 
distribut of project gutenberg-tm works. 

1.e.9. If you wish to charg a fee or distribut a project gutenberg-tm 
electron work or group of work on differ term than are set 
forth in thi agreement, you must obtain permiss in write from 
both the project gutenberg literari archiv foundat and michael 
hart, the owner of the project gutenberg-tm trademark. contact the 
foundat as set forth in section 3 below. 

1.f. 

1.f.1. project gutenberg volunt and employe expend consider 
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcrib and proofread 
public domain work in creat the project gutenberg-tm 
collection. despit these efforts, project gutenberg-tm electron 
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain 
"defects," such as, but not limit to, incomplete, inaccur or 
corrupt data, transcript errors, a copyright or other intellectu 
properti infringement, a defect or damag disk or other medium, a 
comput virus, or comput code that damag or cannot be read by 
your equipment. 

1.f.2. limit warranty, disclaim OF damag - except for the "right 
of replac or refund" describ in paragraph 1.f.3, the project 
gutenberg literari archiv foundation, the owner of the project 
gutenberg-tm trademark, and ani other parti distribut a project 
gutenberg-tm electron work under thi agreement, disclaim all 
liabil to you for damages, cost and expenses, includ legal 
fees. you agre that you have NO remedi for negligence, strict 
liability, breach OF warranti OR breach OF contract except those 
provid IN paragraph f3. you agre that the foundation, the 
trademark owner, and ani distributor under thi agreement will not BE 
liabl TO you for actual, direct, indirect, consequential, punit OR 
incident damag even IF you give notic OF the possibl OF such 
damage. 

1.f.3. limit right OF replac OR refund - If you discov a 
defect in thi electron work within 90 day of receiv it, you can 
receiv a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by send a 
written explan to the person you receiv the work from. If you 
receiv the work on a physic medium, you must return the medium with 
your written explanation. the person or entiti that provid you with 
the defect work may elect to provid a replac copi in lieu of a 
refund. If you receiv the work electronically, the person or entiti 
provid it to you may choos to give you a second opportun to 
receiv the work electron in lieu of a refund. If the second copi 
is also defective, you may demand a refund in write without further 
opportun to fix the problem. 

1.f.4. except for the limit right of replac or refund set forth 
in paragraph 1.f.3, thi work is provid to you 'as-is' with NO other 
warranti OF ani kind, express OR implied, includ but not limit TO 
warranti OF merchant OR fit for ani purpose. 

1.f.5. some state do not allow disclaim of certain impli 
warranti or the exclus or limit of certain type of damages. 
If ani disclaim or limit set forth in thi agreement violat the 
law of the state applic to thi agreement, the agreement shall be 
interpret to make the maximum disclaim or limit permit by 
the applic state law. the invalid or unenforc of ani 
provis of thi agreement shall not void the remain provisions. 

1.f.6. indemn - you agre to indemnifi and hold the foundation, the 
trademark owner, ani agent or employe of the foundation, anyon 
provid copi of project gutenberg-tm electron work in accord 
with thi agreement, and ani volunt associ with the production, 
promot and distribut of project gutenberg-tm electron works, 
harmless from all liability, cost and expenses, includ legal fees, 
that aris directli or indirectli from ani of the follow which you do 
or caus to occur: (a) distribut of thi or ani project gutenberg-tm 
work, (b) alteration, modification, or addit or delet to ani 
project gutenberg-tm work, and (c) ani defect you cause. 


section 2. inform about the mission of project gutenberg-tm 

project gutenberg-tm is synonym with the free distribut of 
electron work in format readabl by the widest varieti of comput 
includ obsolete, old, middle-ag and new computers. It exist 
becaus of the effort of hundr of volunt and donat from 
peopl in all walk of life. 

volunt and financi support to provid volunt with the 
assist they need, is critic to reach project gutenberg-tm' 
goal and ensur that the project gutenberg-tm collect will 
remain freeli avail for gener to come. In 2001, the project 
gutenberg literari archiv foundat wa creat to provid a secur 
and perman futur for project gutenberg-tm and futur generations. 
To learn more about the project gutenberg literari archiv foundat 
and how your effort and donat can help, see section 3 and 4 
and the foundat web page at http://www.pglaf.org. 


section 3. inform about the project gutenberg literari archiv 
foundat 

the project gutenberg literari archiv foundat is a non profit 
501(c)(3) educ corpor organ under the law of the 
state of mississippi and grant tax exempt statu by the intern 
revenu service. the foundation' ein or feder tax identif 
number is 64-6221541. it 501(c)(3) letter is post at 
http://pglaf.org/fundraising. contribut to the project gutenberg 
literari archiv foundat are tax deduct to the full extent 
permit by u.s. feder law and your state' laws. 

the foundation' princip offic is locat at 4557 melan dr. S. 
fairbanks, ak, 99712., but it volunt and employe are scatter 
throughout numer locations. it busi offic is locat at 
809 north 1500 west, salt lake city, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email 
business@pglaf.org. email contact link and up to date contact 
inform can be found at the foundation' web site and offici 
page at http://pglaf.org 

for addit contact information: 
dr. gregori B. newbi 
chief execut and director 
gbnewby@pglaf.org 


section 4. inform about donat to the project gutenberg 
literari archiv foundat 

project gutenberg-tm depend upon and cannot surviv without wide 
spread public support and donat to carri out it mission of 
increas the number of public domain and licens work that can be 
freeli distribut in machin readabl form access by the widest 
array of equip includ outdat equipment. mani small donat 
($1 to $5,000) are particularli import to maintain tax exempt 
statu with the irs. 

the foundat is commit to compli with the law regul 
chariti and charit donat in all 50 state of the unit 
states. complianc requir are not uniform and it take a 
consider effort, much paperwork and mani fee to meet and keep up 
with these requirements. We do not solicit donat in locat 
where we have not receiv written confirm of compliance. To 
send donat or determin the statu of complianc for ani 
particular state visit http://pglaf.org 

while we cannot and do not solicit contribut from state where we 
have not met the solicit requirements, we know of no prohibit 
against accept unsolicit donat from donor in such state who 
approach us with offer to donate. 

intern donat are grate accepted, but we cannot make 
ani statement concern tax treatment of donat receiv from 
outsid the unit states. u.s. law alon swamp our small staff. 

pleas check the project gutenberg web page for current donat 
method and addresses. donat are accept in a number of other 
way includ checks, onlin payment and credit card donations. 
To donate, pleas visit: http://pglaf.org/don 


section 5. gener inform about project gutenberg-tm electron 
works. 

professor michael S. hart is the origin of the project gutenberg-tm 
concept of a librari of electron work that could be freeli share 
with anyone. for thirti years, he produc and distribut project 
gutenberg-tm ebook with onli a loos network of volunt support. 


project gutenberg-tm ebook are often creat from sever print 
editions, all of which are confirm as public domain in the u.s. 
unless a copyright notic is included. thus, we do not necessarili 
keep ebook in complianc with ani particular paper edition. 


most peopl start at our web site which ha the main PG search facility: 

http://www.gutenberg.org 

thi web site includ inform about project gutenberg-tm, 
includ how to make donat to the project gutenberg literari 
archiv foundation, how to help produc our new ebooks, and how to 
subscrib to our email newslett to hear about new ebooks. 
