the project gutenberg ebook of the ghost ship, by richard middleton 

thi ebook is for the use of anyon anywher at no cost and with 
almost no restrict whatsoever. you may copi it, give it away or 
re-us it under the term of the project gutenberg licens includ 
with thi ebook or onlin at www.gutenberg.net 


title: the ghost ship 

author: richard middleton 

releas date: februari 11, 2004 [ebook #11045] 

language: english 


*** start OF thi project gutenberg ebook the ghost ship *** 




produc by tom harri 




the ghost-ship 

by richard middleton 



thank are due to the editor of _the century_, 
_english review_, _vaniti fair_, and _the academy_, for 
permiss to reproduc most of the stori in thi volume. 




prefac 

the other day I said to a friend, "I have just been read in proof 
a volum of short stori by an author name richard middleton. He is 
dead. It is an extraordinari book, and all the work in it is full of 
a quit curiou and distinct quality. In my opinion it is veri 
fine work indeed." 

It would be so simpl if the busi of the introduc or 
preface-writ were limit to such a straightforward, honest, and 
direct express of opinion; unfortun that is not so. for most 
of us, the happier one of the world, it is enough to say "I like 
it," or "I don't like it," and there is an end: the critic ha to 
answer the everlast "why?" and so, I suppose, it is my office, 
in thi present instance, to say whi I like the collect of tale 
that follows. 

I think that I have found a hint as to the right answer in two of 
these stories. one is call "the stori of a book," the other "the 
biographi of a superman." each is rather an essay than a tale, though 
the form of each is narrative. the first relat the sad bewilder 
of a success novelist who feel that, after all, hi great work 
wa someth less than nothing. 

He could not help notic that london had discov the 
secret which made hi intellectu life a torment. the 
street were more than a mere assemblag of houses, 
london herself wa more than a tangl skein of streets, 
and overhead heaven wa more than a meeting-plac of 
individu stars. what wa thi secret that made word 
into a book, hous into cities, and restless and 
measur star into an unchang and immeasur 
universe? 

then from "the biographi of a superman" I select thi veri strike 
passage:-- 

possess of an intellect of great analyt and 
destruct force, he wa almost entir lack 
in imagination, and he wa therefor unabl 
to rais hi work to a plane in which the mutual 
comb element of hi natur might have been 
reconciled. hi light moment of envy, anger, and 
vaniti pass into the crucibl to come forth 
unchanged. He lack the magic wand, and hi work 
never took wing abov hi conception. 

now compar the two places; "the street were more than a mere 
assemblag of houses;" . . . "hi light moment . . . pass into the 
crucibl to come forth unchanged. He lack the magic wand." I think 
these two passag indic the answer to the "why" that I am forc 
to resolve; show someth of the secret of the strang charm which 
"the ghost-ship" possesses. 

It delight becaus it is significant, becaus it is no mere 
assemblag of word and fact and observ and incidents, it 
delight becaus it matter ha not pass through the crucibl 
unchanged. On the contrary, the jumbl of experi and impress 
which fell to the lot of the author as to us all had assuredli been 
place in the athanor of art, in that furnac of the sage which is 
said to be govern with wisdom. lead enter the burn of the 
fire, gold came forth from it. 

thi analog of the process of alchemi which richard middleton ha 
himself suggest is one of the finest and the fittest for our 
purpose; but there are mani others. the "magic wand" analog come to 
much the same thing; there is the like notion of someth ugli and 
insignific chang to someth beauti and significant. 
someth ugly; shall we not say rather someth formless transmut 
into form! after all, the latin dictionari declar solemnli that 
"beauty" is one of the mean of "forma" and here we are away from 
alchemi and the magic wand ideas, and pass to the thought of the 
first place that I have quoted: "the street were more than a mere 
assemblag of houses," the puzzl is solved; the jig-saw--i think 
they call it--ha been success fit together, there in a box 
lay all the jagged, irregular pieces, each in itself crazi and 
meaningless and irrit by it veri lack of meaning: now we see 
each part adapt to the other and the whole is one pictur and one 
purpose. 

but the first thing necessari to thi achiev is the recognit 
of the fact that there is a puzzle. there are mani peopl who go 
through life persuad that there isn't a puzzl at all; that it wa 
onli the infanc and rude childhood of the world which dream a vain 
dream of a pictur to be made out of the jag bit of wood, there 
never ha been a picture, these person say, and there never will be 
a picture, all we have to do is to take the bit out of the box, look 
at them, and put them back again. or, return to richard 
middleton' excel example: there is no such thing as london, 
there are onli houses. No man ha seen london at ani time; the veri 
word (mean "the fort on the lake") is nonsensical; no human eye 
ha ever beheld aught els but a number of houses; it is clear that 
thi "london" is as mythic and monstrou and irrat a concept 
as mani other of the same class. well, peopl who talk like that are 
doubtless sent into the world for some use but mysteri process; 
but they can't write real books. richard middleton knew that there 
wa a puzzle; in other words, that the univers is a great mystery; 
and thi conscious of hi is the sourc of the charm of "the 
ghost ship." 

I have compar thi orthodox view of life and the 
univers and the fine art that result from thi view to the solv 
of a puzzle; but the analog is not an absolut perfect one. for if 
you buy a jig-saw in a box in the haymarket, you take it home with 
you and begin to put the piec together, and sooner or later the 
toil is over and the difficulti are overcome: the pictur is clear 
befor you. yes, the toil is over, but so is the fun; it is but poor 
sport to do the trick all over again. and here is the vast 
inferior of the thing they sell in the shop to the universe: our 
great puzzl is never perfectli solved. We come across marvel 
hints, we join line to line and our heart beat with the raptur of a 
great surmise; we follow a certain track and know by sure sign and 
signal that we are not mistaken, that we are on the right road; we 
are furnish with certain chart which tell us "here there be 
water-pools," "here is a wast place," "here a high hill riseth," and 
we find as we journey that so it is. but, happily, by the veri natur 
of the case, we can never put the whole of the pictur together, we 
can never recov the perfect utter of the lost word, we can 
never say "here is the end of all the journey." man is so made that 
all hi true delight aris from the contempl of mystery, and 
save by hi own frantic and invinc folly, mysteri is never taken 
from him; it rise within hi soul, a well of joy unending. 

henc it is that the conscious of thi mystery, resolv into the 
form of art, express itself usual (or always) by symbols, by the 
part put for the whole. now and then, as in the case of dante, as it 
wa with the great romance-cycl of the holi graal, we have a sens 
of completeness. with the vision of the angel rose and the sentenc 
concern that love which move the sun and the other star there is 
the shadow of a cathol survey of all things; and so in a less 
degre it is as we read of the translat of galahad. still, the 
rose and the graal are but symbol of the etern verities, not those 
veriti themselv in their essences; and in these later day when 
we have becom clever--with the clever of the perform pig--it 
is a great thing to find the most obscur and broken indic of 
the thing which realli are. there is the true enchant of true 
romanc in the don quixote--for those who can understand--but it is 
deliv in the mode of parodi and burlesque; and so it is with the 
extraordinari fantasy, "the ghost-ship," which give it name to thi 
collect of tales. take thi stori to bits, as it were; analys it; 
you will be astonish at it frantic absurdity: the ghostli galleon 
blown in by a great tempest to a turnip-patch in fairfield, a littl 
villag lie near the portsmouth road about half-way between london 
and the sea; the farmer grumbl at the loss of so mani turnips; the 
captain of the weird vessel acknowledg the justic of the claim 
and toss a great gold brooch to the landlord by way of satisfi 
the debt; the deplor fact that all the decent villag ghost 
learn to riot with captain bartholomew roberts; the visit of the 
parson and hi godli admonit to the captain on the evil work he 
wa doing; mere craziness, you will say? 

yes; but the strang thing is that as, in spite of all jocos trick 
and low-comedi misadventures, don quixot depart from us with a 
great light shine upon him; so thi ghost-ship of richard 
middleton's, somehow or other, sail and anchor and re-sail in an 
unearthli glow; and captain bartholomew' rum that wa like hot oil 
and honey and fire in the vein of the mortal who drank of it, ha 
becom for me one of the _nobilium poculorum_ of story. and thu did 
the ship put forth from the villag and sail away in a great tempest 
of wind--to what unimagin sea of the spirit! 

the wind that had been howl outsid 
like an outrag dog had all of a sudden 
turn as melodi as the carol-boy of a 
christma eve. 

We went to the door, and the wind burst it 
open so that the handl wa driven clean into 
the plaster of the wall. but we didn't think 
much of that at the time; for over our heads, 
sail veri comfort through the windi 
stars, wa the ship that had pass the 
summer in landlord' field. her porthol 
and her bay-window were blaze with lights, 
and there wa a nois of sing and fiddl 
on her decks. "he' gone," shout landlord 
abov the storm, "and he' taken half the 
villag with him!" I could onli nod in 
answer, not have lung like bellow of 
leather. 

I declar I would not exchang thi short, crazy, enchant fantasi 
for a whole wilder of seemli novels, proclaim in decor 
accent the undoubt truth that there are mileston on the 
portsmouth road. 

arthur machen. 




the ghost-ship 

fairfield is a littl villag lie near the portsmouth road about 
half-way between london and the sea. stranger who find it by 
accid now and then, call it a pretty, old-fashion place; we who 
live in it and call it home don't find anyth veri pretti about it, 
but we should be sorri to live anywher else. our mind have taken 
the shape of the inn and the church and the green, I suppose. At all 
event we never feel comfort out of fairfield. 

Of cours the cockneys, with their vasti hous and noise-ridden 
streets, can call us rustic if they choose, but for all that 
fairfield is a better place to live in than london. doctor say that 
when he goe to london hi mind is bruis with the weight of the 
houses, and he wa a cockney born. He had to live there himself when 
he wa a littl chap, but he know better now. you gentlemen may 
laugh--perhap some of you come from london way--but it seem to me 
that a wit like that is worth a gallon of arguments. 

dull? well, you might find it dull, but I assur you that i'v 
listen to all the london yarn you have spun tonight, and they'r 
absolut noth to the thing that happen at fairfield. it' 
becaus of our way of think and mind our own business. If one 
of your london were set down on the green of a saturday night when 
the ghost of the lad who die in the war keep tryst with the lass 
who lie in the church-yard, he couldn't help be curiou and 
interfering, and then the ghost would go somewher where it wa 
quieter. but we just let them come and go and don't make ani fuss, 
and in consequ fairfield is the ghostiest place in all england. 
why, i'v seen a headless man sit on the edg of the well in 
broad daylight, and the children play about hi feet as if he were 
their father. take my word for it, spirit know when they are well 
off as much as human beings. 

still, I must admit that the thing i'm go to tell you about wa 
queer even for our part of the world, where three pack of 
ghost-hound hunt regularli dure the season, and blacksmith' 
great-grandfath is busi all night shoe the dead gentlemen' 
horses. now that' a thing that wouldn't happen in london, becaus of 
their interf ways, but blacksmith he lie up aloft and sleep as 
quiet as a lamb. onc when he had a bad head he shout down to them 
not to make so much noise, and in the morn he found an old guinea 
left on the anvil as an apology. He wear it on hi watch-chain now. 
but I must get on with my story; if I start tell you about the 
queer happen at fairfield i'll never stop. 

It all came of the great storm in the spring of '97, the year that we 
had two great storms. thi wa the first one, and I rememb it veri 
well, becaus I found in the morn that it had lift the thatch of 
my pigsti into the widow' garden as clean as a boy' kite. when I 
look over the hedge, widow--tom lamport' widow that was--wa 
prod for her nasturtium with a daisy-grubber. after I had 
watch her for a littl I went down to the "fox and grapes" to tell 
landlord what she had said to me. landlord he laughed, be a 
marri man and at eas with the sex. "come to that," he said, "the 
tempest ha blow someth into my field. A kind of a ship I 
think it would be." 

I wa surpris at that until he explain that it wa onli a 
ghost-ship and would do no hurt to the turnips. We argu that 
it had been blown up from the sea at portsmouth, and then we 
talk of someth else. there were two slate down at the 
parsonag and a big tree in lumley' meadow. It wa a rare 
storm. 

I reckon the wind had blown our ghost all over england. 
they were come back for day afterward with founder hors 
and as footsor as possible, and they were so glad to get back 
to fairfield that some of them walk up the street cri like 
littl children. squir said that hi great-grandfather' 
great-grandfath hadn't look so dead-beat sinc the battl 
of naseby, and he' an educ man. 

what with one thing and another, I should think it wa a week befor 
we got straight again, and then one afternoon I met the landlord on 
the green and he had a worri face. "I wish you'd come and have a 
look at that ship in my field," he said to me; "it seem to me it' 
lean real hard on the turnips. I can't bear think what the 
missu will say when she see it." 

I walk down the lane with him, and sure enough there wa a 
ship in the middl of hi field, but such a ship as no man had 
seen on the water for three hundr years, let alon in the 
middl of a turnip-field. It wa all paint black and cover 
with carvings, and there wa a great bay window in the stern 
for all the world like the squire' drawing-room. there wa a 
crowd of littl black cannon on deck and look out of her 
port-holes, and she wa anchor at each end to the hard 
ground. I have seen the wonder of the world on picture-postcards, 
but I have never seen anyth to equal that. 

"she seem veri solid for a ghost-ship," I said, see the landlord 
wa bothered. 

"I should say it' a betwixt and between," he answered, puzzl it 
over, "but it' go to spoil a matter of fifti turnips, and missu 
she'll want it moved." We went up to her and touch the side, and it 
wa as hard as a real ship. "now there' folk in england would call 
that veri curious," he said. 

now I don't know much about ships, but I should think that that 
ghost-ship weigh a solid two hundr tons, and it seem to me 
that she had come to stay, so that I felt sorri for landlord, who wa 
a marri man. "all the hors in fairfield won't move her out of my 
turnips," he said, frown at her. 

just then we heard a nois on her deck, and we look up and saw that 
a man had come out of her front cabin and wa look down at us veri 
peaceably. He wa dress in a black uniform set out with rusti gold 
lace, and he had a great cutlass by hi side in a brass sheath. "i'm 
captain bartholomew roberts," he said, in a gentleman' voice, "put 
in for recruits. I seem to have brought her rather far up the 
harbour." 

"harbour!" cri landlord; "why, you'r fifti mile from the sea." 

captain robert didn't turn a hair. "so much as that, is it?" he said 
coolly. "well, it' of no consequence." 

landlord wa a bit upset at this. "I don't want to be unneighbourly," 
he said, "but I wish you hadn't brought your ship into my field. you 
see, my wife set great store on these turnips." 

the captain took a pinch of snuff out of a fine gold box that he 
pull out of hi pocket, and dust hi finger with a silk 
handkerchief in a veri genteel fashion. "i'm onli here for a few 
months," he said; "but if a testimoni of my esteem would pacifi your 
good ladi I should be content," and with the word he loos a great 
gold brooch from the neck of hi coat and toss it down to landlord. 

landlord blush as red as a strawberry. "i'm not deni she' fond 
of jewellery," he said, "but it' too much for half a sack of 
turnips." and inde it wa a handsom brooch. 

the captain laughed. "tut, man," he said, "it' a forc sale, and 
you deserv a good price. say no more about it;" and nod good-day 
to us, he turn on hi heel and went into the cabin. landlord walk 
back up the lane like a man with a weight off hi mind. "that tempest 
ha blow me a bit of luck," he said; "the missu will be much 
pleas with that brooch. it' better than blacksmith' guinea, ani 
day." 

ninety-seven wa jubile year, the year of the second jubilee, you 
remember, and we had great do at fairfield, so that we hadn't 
much time to bother about the ghost-ship though anyhow it isn't our 
way to meddl in thing that don't concern us. landlord, he saw hi 
tenant onc or twice when he wa hoe hi turnip and pass the 
time of day, and landlord' wife wore her new brooch to church everi 
sunday. but we didn't mix much with the ghost at ani time, all 
except an idiot lad there wa in the village, and he didn't know the 
differ between a man and a ghost, poor innocent! On jubile day, 
however, somebodi told captain robert whi the church bell were 
ringing, and he hoist a flag and fire off hi gun like a loyal 
englishman. 'ti true the gun were shotted, and one of the round 
shot knock a hole in farmer johnstone' barn, but nobodi thought 
much of that in such a season of rejoicing. 

It wasn't till our celebr were over that we notic that 
anyth wa wrong in fairfield. 'twa shoemak who told me first 
about it one morn at the "fox and grapes." "you know my great 
great-uncle?" he said to me. 

"you mean joshua, the quiet lad," I answered, know him well. 

"quiet!" said shoemak indignantly. "quiet you call him, come home 
at three o'clock everi morn as drunk as a magistr and wake up 
the whole hous with hi noise." 

"why, it can't be joshua!" I said, for I knew him for one of the most 
respect young ghost in the village. 

"joshua it is," said shoemaker; "and one of these night he'll find 
himself out in the street if he isn't careful." 

thi kind of talk shock me, I can tell you, for I don't like to 
hear a man abus hi own family, and I could hardli believ that a 
steadi youngster like joshua had taken to drink. but just then in 
came butcher aylwin in such a temper that he could hardli drink hi 
beer. "the young puppy! the young puppy!" he kept on saying; and it 
wa some time befor shoemak and I found out that he wa talk 
about hi ancestor that fell at senlac. 

"drink?" said shoemak hopefully, for we all like compani in our 
misfortunes, and butcher nod grimly. 

"the young noodle," he said, empti hi tankard. 

well, after that I kept my ear open, and it wa the same stori all 
over the village. there wa hardli a young man among all the ghost 
of fairfield who didn't roll home in the small hour of the morn 
the wors for liquor. I use to wake up in the night and hear them 
stumbl past my house, sing outrag songs. the worst of it wa 
that we couldn't keep the scandal to ourselv and the folk at 
greenhil began to talk of "sodden fairfield" and taught their 
children to sing a song about us: 

"sodden fairfield, sodden fairfield, ha no use for bread-and-butter, 
rum for breakfast, rum for dinner, rum for tea, and rum for supper!" 

We are easy-go in our village, but we didn't like that. 

Of cours we soon found out where the young fellow went to get the 
drink, and landlord wa terribl cut up that hi tenant should have 
turn out so badly, but hi wife wouldn't hear of part with the 
brooch, so that he couldn't give the captain notic to quit. but as 
time went on, thing grew from bad to worse, and at all hour of the 
day you would see those young reprob sleep it off on the 
villag green. nearli everi afternoon a ghost-wagon use to jolt down 
to the ship with a lade of rum, and though the older ghost seem 
inclin to give the captain' hospit the go-by, the youngster 
were neither to hold nor to bind. 

So one afternoon when I wa take my nap I heard a knock at the 
door, and there wa parson look veri serious, like a man with a 
job befor him that he didn't altogeth relish. "i'm go down to 
talk to the captain about all thi drunken in the village, and I 
want you to come with me," he said straight out. 

I can't say that I fanci the visit much, myself, and I tri to 
hint to parson that as, after all, they were onli a lot of ghost it 
didn't veri much matter. 

"dead or alive, i'm respons for the good conduct," he said, "and 
i'm go to do my duti and put a stop to thi continu disorder. 
and you are come with me john simmons." So I went, parson be a 
persuas kind of man. 

We went down to the ship, and as we approach her I could see the 
captain tast the air on deck. when he saw parson he took off hi 
hat veri polit and I can tell you that I wa reliev to find that 
he had a proper respect for the cloth. parson acknowledg hi salut 
and spoke out stoutli enough. "sir, I should be glad to have a word 
with you." 

"come on board, sir; come on board," said the captain, and I could 
tell by hi voic that he knew whi we were there. parson and I 
climb up an uneasi kind of ladder, and the captain took us into the 
great cabin at the back of the ship, where the bay-window was. It wa 
the most wonder place you ever saw in your life, all full of gold 
and silver plate, sword with jewel scabbards, carv oak chairs, 
and great chest that look as though they were burst with guineas. 
even parson wa surprised, and he did not shake hi head veri hard 
when the captain took down some silver cup and pour us out a drink 
of rum. I tast mine, and I don't mind say that it chang my 
view of thing entirely. there wa noth betwixt and between about 
that rum, and I felt that it wa ridicul to blame the lad for 
drink too much of stuff like that. It seem to fill my vein with 
honey and fire. 

parson put the case squar to the captain, but I didn't listen much 
to what he said; I wa busi sip my drink and look through the 
window at the fish swim to and fro over landlord' turnips. 
just then it seem the most natur thing in the world that they 
should be there, though afterwards, of course, I could see that that 
prove it wa a ghost-ship. 

but even then I thought it wa queer when I saw a drown sailor 
float by in the thin air with hi hair and beard all full of bubbles. 
It wa the first time I had seen anyth quit like that at 
fairfield. 

all the time I wa regard the wonder of the deep parson wa 
tell captain robert how there wa no peac or rest in the villag 
owe to the curs of drunkenness, and what a bad exampl the 
youngster were set to the older ghosts. the captain listen 
veri attentively, and onli put in a word now and then about boy 
be boy and young men sow their wild oats. but when parson had 
finish hi speech he fill up our silver cup and said to parson, 
with a flourish, "I should be sorri to caus troubl anywher where I 
have been made welcome, and you will be glad to hear that I put to 
sea tomorrow night. and now you must drink me a prosper voyage." 
So we all stood up and drank the toast with honour, and that nobl 
rum wa like hot oil in my veins. 

after that captain show us some of the curios he had brought 
back from foreign parts, and we were greatli amazed, though 
afterward I couldn't clearli rememb what they were. and then I 
found myself walk across the turnip with parson, and I wa 
tell him of the glori of the deep that I had seen through the 
window of the ship. He turn on me severely. "if I were you, john 
simmons," he said, "I should go straight home to bed." He ha a way 
of put thing that wouldn't occur to an ordinari man, ha parson, 
and I did as he told me. 

well, next day it came on to blow, and it blew harder and harder, 
till about eight o'clock at night I heard a nois and look out into 
the garden. I dare say you won't believ me, it seem a bit tall even 
to me, but the wind had lift the thatch of my pigsti into the 
widow' garden a second time. I thought I wouldn't wait to hear what 
widow had to say about it, so I went across the green to the "fox and 
grapes", and the wind wa so strong that I danc along on tipto 
like a girl at the fair. when I got to the inn landlord had to help 
me shut the door; it seem as though a dozen goat were push 
against it to come in out of the storm. 

"it' a power tempest," he said, draw the beer. "I hear there' 
a chimney down at dickori end." 

"it' a funni thing how these sailor know about the weather," I 
answered. "when captain said he wa go tonight, I wa think it 
would take a cap of wind to carri the ship back to sea, but now 
here' more than a capful." 

"ah, yes," said landlord, "it' tonight he goe true enough, and, 
mind you, though he treat me handsom over the rent, i'm not sure 
it' a loss to the village. I don't hold with gentric who fetch 
their drink from london instead of help local trader to get their 
living." 

"but you haven't got ani rum like his," I said, to draw him out. 

hi neck grew red abov hi collar, and I wa afraid i'd gone too 
far; but after a while he got hi breath with a grunt. 

"john simmons," he said, "if you'v come down here thi windi night 
to talk a lot of fool' talk, you'v wast a journey." 

well, of course, then I had to smooth him down with prais hi rum, 
and heaven forgiv me for swear it wa better than captain's. for 
the like of that rum no live lip have tast save mine and 
parson's. but somehow or other I brought landlord round, and 
present we must have a glass of hi best to prove it quality. 

"beat that if you can!" he cried, and we both rais our glass to 
our mouths, onli to stop half-way and look at each other in amaze. 
for the wind that had been howl outsid like an outrag dog had 
all of a sudden turn as melodi as the carol-boy of a christma 
eve. 

"sure that' not my martha," whisper landlord; martha be hi 
great-aunt that live in the loft overhead. 

We went to the door, and the wind burst it open so that the handl 
wa driven clean into the plaster of the wall. but we didn't think 
about that at the time; for over our heads, sail veri comfort 
through the windi stars, wa the ship that had pass the summer in 
landlord' field. her porthol and her bay-window were blaze with 
lights, and there wa a nois of sing and fiddl on her decks. 
"he' gone," shout landlord abov the storm, "and he' taken half 
the villag with him!" I could onli nod in answer, not have lung 
like bellow of leather. 

In the morn we were abl to measur the strength of the storm, and 
over and abov my pigsti there wa damag enough wrought in the 
villag to keep us busy. true it is that the children had to break 
down no branch for the fire that autumn, sinc the wind had 
strewn the wood with more than they could carri away. mani of our 
ghost were scatter abroad, but thi time veri few came back, all 
the young men have sail with captain; and not onli ghosts, for a 
poor half-wit lad wa missing, and we reckon that he had stow 
himself away or perhap ship as cabin-boy, not know ani better. 

what with the lament of the ghost-girl and the grumbl of 
famili who had lost an ancestor, the villag wa upset for a while, 
and the funni thing wa that it wa the folk who had complain most 
of the carryings-on of the youngsters, who made most nois now that 
they were gone. I hadn't ani sympathi with shoemak or butcher, who 
ran about say how much they miss their lads, but it made me 
griev to hear the poor bereav girl call their lover by name 
on the villag green at nightfall. It didn't seem fair to me that 
they should have lost their men a second time, after give up life 
in order to join them, as like as not. still, not even a spirit can 
be sorri for ever, and after a few month we made up our mind that 
the folk who had sail in the ship were never come back, and we 
didn't talk about it ani more. 

and then one day, I dare say it would be a coupl of year after, 
when the whole busi wa quit forgotten, who should come 
trapes along the road from portsmouth but the daft lad who had 
gone away with the ship, without wait till he wa dead to becom a 
ghost. you never saw such a boy as that in all your life. He had a 
great rusti cutlass hang to a string at hi waist, and he wa 
tattoo all over in fine colours, so that even hi face look like 
a girl' sampler. He had a handkerchief in hi hand full of foreign 
shell and old-fashion piec of small money, veri curious, and he 
walk up to the well outsid hi mother' hous and drew himself a 
drink as if he had been nowher in particular. 

the worst of it wa that he had come back as soft-head as he went, 
and tri as we might we couldn't get anyth reason out of him. 
He talk a lot of gibberish about keel-haul and walk the 
plank and crimson murders--th which a decent sailor should know 
noth about, so that it seem to me that for all hi manner 
captain had been more of a pirat than a gentleman mariner. but to 
draw sens out of that boy wa as hard as pick cherri off a 
crab-tree. one silli tale he had that he kept on drift back to, 
and to hear him you would have thought that it wa the onli thing 
that happen to him in hi life. "we wa at anchor," he would say, 
"off an island call the basket of flowers, and the sailor had 
caught a lot of parrot and we were teach them to swear. Up and 
down the decks, up and down the decks, and the languag they use 
wa dreadful. then we look up and saw the mast of the spanish 
ship outsid the harbour. outsid the harbour they were, so we threw 
the parrot into the sea and sail out to fight. and all the 
parrot were drownd in the sea and the languag they use wa 
dreadful." that' the sort of boy he was, noth but silli talk of 
parrot when we ask him about the fighting. and we never had a 
chanc of teach him better, for two day after he ran away again, 
and hasn't been seen since. 

that' my story, and I assur you that thing like that are happen 
at fairfield all the time. the ship ha never come back, but somehow 
as peopl grow older they seem to think that one of these windi 
night she'll come sail in over the hedg with all the lost 
ghost on board. well, when she comes, she'll be welcome. there' one 
ghost-lass that ha never grown tire of wait for her lad to 
return. everi night you'll see her out on the green, strain her 
poor eye with look for the mast-light among the stars. A 
faith lass you'd call her, and i'm think you'd be right. 

landlord' field wasn't a penni the wors for the visit, but they do 
say that sinc then the turnip that have been grown in it have 
tast of rum. 




A drama Of youth 

I 

for some day school had seem to me even more tediou than usual. 
the long train journey in the morning, the walk through farringdon 
meat market, which æsthetic butcher made hideou with mosaic of the 
intestin of animals, as if the horror of sueti pavement and bloodi 
sawdust did not suffice, the weari of invent lie that no one 
believ to account for my late and neglect homework, and the 
monoton lesson that held me from my dream without ever for a 
singl instant captur my interest--al these thing made me ill 
with repulsion. worst of all wa the societi of my cheerful, 
content comrades, to avoid which I wa compel to mope in 
desert corridors, the prey of a sorrow that could not be enjoyed, a 
hatr that wa in no way stimulating. At the best of time the 
atmospher of the place disgust me. desks, windows, and floors, and 
even the grass in the quadrangle, were greasi with london soot, and 
there wa nowher ani clean air to breath or smell. I hate the 
gritti asphalt that gave no peac to my feet and cut my knee when my 
clumsi made me fall. I hate the long stone corridor whose 
echo seem to me to mock my hesit footstep when I pass 
from one dull class to another. I hate the stuffi malodor 
classrooms, with their whistl gas-jet and nois of inharmoni 
life. I would have hate the yellow fog had they not sometim 
shorten the hour of my bondage. that five hundr boy share thi 
horribl environ with me did not abat my suffer a jot; for 
it wa clear that they did not find it distasteful, and they 
therefor becam as unsympathet for me as the smell and nois and 
rot stone of the school itself. 

the master move as it were in anoth world, and, as the class 
were large, they understood me as littl as I understood them. they 
knew that I wa idl and untruthful, and they could not know that I 
wa as full of nerv as a girl, and that the mere task of get to 
school everi morn made me physic sick. they punish me 
repeatedli and in vain, for I found everi hour I pass within the 
wall of the school an overwhelm punish in itself, and noth 
I made ani differ to me. I lie to them becaus they expect it, 
and becaus I had no word in which to express the truth if I knew 
it, which is doubtful. for some reason I could not tell them at home 
whi I got on so badli at school, or no doubt they would have taken me 
away and sent me to a countri school, as they did afterwards. nearli 
all the real sorrow of childhood are due to thi dumb of the 
emotions; we teach children to convey fact by mean of words, but we 
do not teach them how to make their feel intelligible. 
unfortunately, perhaps, I wa veri happi at night with my story-book 
and my dreams, so that the real miseri of my day escap the 
attent of the grown-up people. Of cours I never even thought of 
do my homework, and the labour of invent new lie everi day to 
account for my neglig becam so wearisom that onc or twice I 
told the truth and simpli said I had not done it; but the master 
held that thi frank aggrav the offence, and I had to take up 
anew my tiresom tale of improb calamities. sometim my stori 
were so wild that the whole class would laugh, and I would have to 
laugh myself; yet on the strength of thi elabor polit to 
author I came to believ myself that I wa untruth by nature. 

the boy dislik me becaus I wa not sociable, but after a time 
they grew tire of bulli me and left me alone. I detest them 
becaus they were all so much alik that their number fill me with 
horror. I rememb that the first day I went to school I walk round 
and round the quadrangl in the luncheon-hour, and everi boy who 
pass stop me and ask me my name and what my father was. when I 
said he wa an engin everi one of the boy replied, "oh! the man 
who drive the engine." the reiter of thi childish joke made me 
hate them from the first, and afterward I discov that they were 
equal unimagin in everyth they did. sometim I would stand 
in the midst of them, and wonder what wa the matter with me that I 
should be so differ from all the rest. when they teas me, 
repeat the same question over and over again, I cri easily, 
like a girl, without quit know why, for their stupid could 
not hurt my reason; but when they bulli me I did not cry, becaus 
the pain made me forget the sad of my heart. perhap it wa 
becaus of thi that they thought I wa a littl mad. 

grey day follow grey day, and I might in time have abandon 
all effort to be faith to my dreams, and achiev a kind of 
beast-lik submiss that wa all the author expect of 
notori dunces. I might have taught my sens to accept the 
evil condit of life in that unclean place; I might even have 
succeed in make myself one with the armi of shadow that 
throng in the quadrangl and fill the air with meaningless 
noise. 

but one even when I reach home I saw by the face of the 
grown-up peopl that someth had upset their elabor 
precaut for an order life, and I discov that my brother, 
who had stay at home with a cold, wa ill in bed with the 
measles. for a while the signific of the news escap me; 
then, with a sudden movement of my heart, which made me feel ill, 
I realis that probabl I would have to stay away from school 
becaus of the infection. My feet tap on the floor with joy, 
though I tri to appear unconcerned. then, as I nurs my sudden 
hope of freedom, a littl fear lest it should prove an 
illusion, a new and enchant idea came to me. I slip from the 
room, ran upstair to my bedroom and, stand by the side of my 
bed, tore open my waistcoat and shirt with clumsy, trembl 
fingers. one, two, three, four, five! I count the spot in a 
triumphant voice, and then with a sudden revuls sat down on the 
bed to give the world an opportun to settl back in it place. 
I had the measles, and therefor I should not have to go back to 
school! I shut my eye for a minut and open them again, but 
still I had the measles. the cup of happi wa at my lips, but 
I sip delic becaus it wa full to the brim, and I would 
not spill a drop. 

thi mood did not last long. I had to run down the hous and tell 
the world the good news. the grown-up peopl rebuk my joyousness, 
while admit that it might be as well that I should have the 
measl then as later on. In spite of their air of resign I 
could hardli sit still for excitement. I want to go into the 
kitchen and show my measl to the servants, but I wa told to stay 
where I wa in front of the fire while my bed wa move into my 
brother' room. So I stare at the glow coal till my eye 
smarted, and dream long dreams. I would be in bed for days, all 
warm from head to foot, and no one would interrupt my pleasant 
excurs in the world I prefer to this. If I had heard of the 
benefic microb to which low my happiness, I would have 
mention it in my prayers. 

late that night, I call over to my brother to ask how long measl 
lasted. He told me to go to sleep, so that I knew he did not know the 
answer to my question. I lay at eas tranquilli turn the problem 
over in my mind. four weeks, six weeks, eight weeks; why, if I wa 
lucky, it would carri me through to the holidays! At all events, 
school wa alreadi veri far away, like a nightmar rememb at 
noon. I said good-night to my brother, and receiv an irrit 
grunt in reply. I did not mind hi surliness; tomorrow when I woke 
up, I would begin my dreams. 

II 

when I found myself in bed in the morning, alreadi sick at heart 
becaus even while I slept I could not forget the long torment of my 
life at school, I would lie still for a minut or two and tri to 
concentr my shudder mind on someth pleasant, some littl 
detail of the moment that seem to justifi hope. perhap I had some 
money to spend or a holiday to look forward to; though often enough I 
would find noth to save me from realis with childish intens 
the grey of the world in which it wa my fate to move. I did not 
want to go out into life; it wa dull and gruel and greasi with soot. 
I onli want to stop at home in ani littl quiet corner out of 
everybody' way and think my long, heroic thoughts. but even while I 
mumbl my hasti breakfast and ran to the station to catch my train 
the atmospher of the school wa all about me, and my dreamer' 
courag trembl and vanished. 

when I woke from sleep the morn after my good fortune, I did not 
at first realis the extent of my happiness; I onli knew that deep in 
my heart I wa consciou of some great caus for joy. then my eyes, 
still dim with sleep, discov that I wa in my brother' bedroom, 
and in a flash the joy truth wa reveal to me. I sat up and 
hastili examin my bodi to make sure that the rash had not 
disappeared, and then my spirit sang a song of thanksgiv of which 
the refrain was, "I have the measles!" I lay back in bed and enjoy 
the exquisit luxuri of think of the evil that I had escaped. for 
onc my morbid sens of atmospher wa a desir possess and 
help to my happiness. It wa delight to pull the bedcloth 
over my shoulder and conceiv the feel of a small boy who should 
ride to town in a jolt train, walk through a hundr kind of dirt 
and a hundr disgust smell to win to prison at last, where he 
should perform meaningless task in the distress societi of five 
hundr mock apes. It wa pleasant to see the morn sun and feel 
no sick in my stomach, no sens of depress in my tire brain. 
across the room my brother gurgl and choke in hi sleep, and in 
some subtl way contribut to my ecstasi of tranquillity. I wa no 
longer concern for the durat of my happiness. I felt that thi 
peac that I had desir so long must sure last for ever. 

To the grown-up folk who came to see us dure the day--th 
doctor, certain germ-proof unmarri aunts, trucul maternal, 
and the famili itself--mi brother' case wa far more interest 
than mine becaus he had caught the measl realli badly. I just 
had them comfortably; enough to be infectious, but not enough to 
feel ill, so I wa left in pleasant solitud while the women 
compet for the honour of smooth my brother' pillow and 
tipto in a fidget manner round hi bed. I lay on my back 
and look with placid interest at the crack in the ceiling. they 
were like the main road in a map, and I amus myself by build 
littl hous besid them--hous full of book and warm 
hearthrugs, and with a nice pond live with tadpol in the 
garden of each. from the window of the hous you could watch all 
the traffic that went along the road, men and women and horses, 
and best of all, the boy go to school in the morning--boy who 
had not done their homework and who would be late for prayers. 
when I talk about the crack to my brother he said that perhap 
the ceil would give way and fall on our heads. I thought about 
thi too, and found it quit easi to pictur myself lie in the 
bed with a smash head, and blood all over the pillow. then it 
occur to me that the plaster might smash me all over, and my 
impress of farringdon meat market ad a gruesom vivid 
to my concept of the consequences. I alway found it pleasant 
to imagin horribl things; it wa onli the realiti that made me 
sick. 

toward nightfal I becam a littl feverish, and I heard the 
grown-up say that they would give me some medicin later on. 
medicin for me signifi the nauseou powder of dr. gregory, 
so I pretend to be asleep everi time anyon came into the 
room, in order to escap my destiny, until at last some one 
stood by my bedsid so long that I becam cramp and had to 
pretend to wake up. then I wa given the medicine, and found to 
my surpris that it wa delici and tast of oranges. I felt 
that there had been a mistak somewhere, but my head sat a 
littl heavili on my shoulders, and I would not troubl to fix 
the responsibility. thi time I fell asleep in earnest, and woke 
in the middl of the night to find my brother stand by my 
bed, make nois with hi mouth. I thought that he had gone 
mad, and would kill me perhaps, but after a time he went back to 
bed say all the bad word he knew. the excit had made me 
wide awake, and I toss about think of the crack ceil 
abov my head. the room wa quit dark, and I could see nothing, 
so that it might be bulg over me without my know it. I 
stood up in bed and stretch up my arm, but I could not reach 
the ceiling; yet when I lay down again I felt as though it had 
sunk so far, that it wa touch my hair, and I found it 
difficult to breath in such a small space. I wa afraid to move 
for fear of bring it down upon me, and in a short while the 
pressur upon my bodi becam unbearable, and I shriek out for 
help. some one came in and lit the gas, and found me look 
veri foolish and my brother delirious. I fell asleep almost 
immediately, but wa consciou through my dream that the ga 
wa still alight and that they were watch by my brother' 
bedside. 

In the morn he wa veri ill and I wa no longer feverish, so it 
wa decid to move me back into my own bedroom. I wa wrap up in 
the bedcloth and told to sit still while the bed wa moved. I sat 
in an armchair, feel like a bundl of old clothes, and look at 
the crack in the ceil which seem to me like roads. I knew that 
I had alreadi lost all import as an invalid, but I wa veri 
happi nevertheless. for from the window of one of my littl hous I 
wa watch the boy go to school, and my heart wa warm with 
the knowledg of my own emancipation. As my leg hung down from the 
chair I found it hard to keep my slipper on my stockingless feet. 

iii 

there follow for me a period of deep and unbroken 
satisfaction. I wa soon consid well enough to get up, and I 
live pleasantli between the sofa and the firesid wait on my 
brother' convalescence, for it had been settl that I should 
go away with him to the countri for a chang of air. I read 
dicken and duma in english, and made up long stori in which 
I myself play import but not alway heroic parts. By mean 
of intellectu exercis of thi kind I achiev a tranquil 
like that of an old man, fear nothing, desir nothing, 
regret nothing. I no longer reckon the day or the hours, 
I content to enjoy a passionless condit of be that ask 
no question and sought none of me, nor did I troubl to number 
my journey in the world of infinit shadows. but in that long 
hour of peac I realis that in some inexplic way I wa 
interest in the bodi of a littl boy, whose hand obey my 
unspoken wishes, whose leg sprawl befor me on the sofa. I 
knew that befor I met him, thi boy, whose littl surpris 
me, had suffer ill dream in a nameless world, and now, worn 
out with tear and humili and dread of life, he slept, and 
while he slept I watch him dispassionately, as I would have 
look at a crippl daddy-long-legs. To have felt compass 
for him would have disturb the tranquil that wa a 
necessari condit of my existence, so I content myself with 
notic hi presenc and give him a small part in the pageant 
of my dreams. He wa not so beauti as I wish all my 
comrad to be, and he wa besid veri small; but shadow are 
amiabl play-friends, and they did not blame him becaus he 
cri when he wa teas and did not cri when he wa beaten, or 
becaus the wild unreason of hi sorrow made him find caus for 
tear in the veri full of hi rare enjoyment. for the first 
time in my life it seem to me I saw thi littl boy as he was, 
squat-bodied, big-headed, thick-lipped, and with a face swept 
clean of all emot save where hi two great eye glow with 
a sulki fire under exagger eyebrows. I notic hi grimi 
nails, hi soil collar, hi unbrush clothes, the patent 
sign of defeat chang to utter rout, and from the height of 
my great peac I wa not sorri for him. He wa like that, other 
boy were different, that wa all. 

and then on a day fear return to my heart, and my newli discov 
utopia wa no more. I do not know what chanc word of the grown-up 
peopl or what random thought of mine did the mischief; but of a 
sudden I realis that for all my dream I wa onli separ by a 
measur number of day from the horror of school. alreadi I wa 
sick with fear, and in place of my dream I distress myself by 
visualis the scene of the life I dreaded--th meat market, the 
dusti shadow of the gymnasium, the sombr retic of the great 
hall. all that my lost tranquil had given me wa a keener sens 
of my own being; my smallness, my ugliness, my helpless in the 
face of the great cruel world. befor I had sometim been abl to 
dull my emot in unpleas circumst and thu achiev a 
dog calm; now I wa horribl consciou of my physic sensations, 
and, abov all, of that deadli sink in my stomach call fear. I 
clench my hands, tell myself that I wa happy, and tri to 
forc my mind to pleasant thoughts; but though my head swam with the 
effort, I continu to be consciou that I wa afraid. In the midst 
of my mental struggl I discov that even if I succeed in 
think happi thing I should still have to go back to school after 
all, and the knowledg that thought could not avert calam wa 
like a bruis on my mind. I pinch my arm and legs, with the idea 
that immedi pain would make me forget my fear for the future; 
but I wa not brave enough to pinch them realli hard, and I could 
not forget the motiv for my action. I lay back on the sofa and 
kick the cushion with my feet in a kind of forlorn anger. thought 
wa no use, noth wa ani use, and my stomach wa sick, sick with 
fear. and suddenli I becam awar of an immens fatigu that 
overwhelm my mind and my body, and made me feel as helpless as a 
littl child. the tear that were alway near my eye stream down 
my face, make my cheek sore against the wet cushion, and my breath 
came in painful, ridicul gulps. for a moment I made an effort to 
control my grief; and then I gave way utterly, cri with my whole 
bodi like a littl child, until, like a littl child, I fell asleep. 

when I awok the room wa grey with dusk, and I sat up with a 
sway head, glad to hide the shame of my foolish swollen face 
amongst the shadows. My mouth wa still salt with tears, and I wa 
veri thirsty, but I wa alway anxiou to hide my weak from 
other people, and I wa afraid that if I ask for someth to 
drink they would see that I had been crying. the fire had gone out 
while I slept, and I felt cold and stiff, but my abandon of 
restraint had reliev me, and my fear wa now no more than a vagu 
unrest. My mind thought slowli but veri clearly. I saw that it wa a 
piti that I had not been more ill than I was, for then, like my 
brother, I should have gone away for a month instead of a fortnight. 
As it was, everybodi laugh at me becaus I look so well, and 
said they did not believ that I had been ill at all. If I had 
thought of it earlier I might have been abl to make myself wors 
somehow or other, but now it wa too late. when the maid came in and 
lit the ga for tea she blame me for let the fire out, and told 
me that I had a dirti face. I wa glad of the chanc to slip away 
and wash my burn cheek in cold water. when I had finish and 
dri my face on the rough towel I look at myself in the glass. I 
look as if I had been to the seasid for a holiday, my cheek were 
so red! 

that night as I lay sleepless in my bed, seek for a cool place 
between the sheet in which to rest my hot feet, the sick of fear 
return to me, and I knew that I wa lost. I shut my eye tightly, 
but I could not shut out the vivid pictur of school life that my 
memori had store up for my torment; I beat my head against the 
pillow, but I could not chang my thoughts. I recal all the 
possibl event that might interfer with my return to school, a new 
illness, a railway accident, even suicide, but my reason would not 
accept these romant issues. I wa helpless befor my destiny, and 
my destini made me I afraid. 

and then, perhap I wa half asleep or fond with fear, I leapt out of 
bed and stood in the middl of the room to meet life and fight it. 
the hem of my nightshirt tickl my shin and my feet grew cold on the 
carpet; but though I stood readi with my fist clench I could see 
no adversari among the friendli shadows, I could hear no sound but 
the I drum of the blood against the wall of my head. I got back 
into bed and pull the bedcloth about my chill body. It seem 
that life would not fight fair, and be onli a littl boy and not 
wise like the grown-up people, I could find no way in which to outwit 
it. 

IV 

My grow panic in the face of my immin return to school spoilt 
my holiday, and I watch my brother' careless delight in the surrey 
pine-wood with keen envy. It seem to me that it wa easi for him 
to enjoy himself with hi month to squander; and in ani case he wa a 
healthy, cheer boy who like school well enough when he wa there, 
though of cours he like holiday better. He had scant patienc with 
my moods, and secretli I too thought they were wicked. We had been 
taught to believ that we alon were respons for our sins, and it 
did not occur to me that the caus of my wicked might lie beyond 
my control. the beauti of the scent pine and the new green of the 
bracken took my breath and fill my heart with a joy that chang 
immedi to overwhelm grief; for I could not help contrast 
thi gloriou kind of life with the squalid exist to which I must 
return so soon. I realis so fierc the forc of the contrast that 
I wa afraid to make friend with the pine and admir the palm-lik 
beauti of the bracken lest I should increas my subsequ anguish; 
and I hid myself in dark corner of the wood to fight the grow 
sick of my bodi with the feebl weapon of my panic-stricken 
mind. there follow moment of bitter sorrow, when I blame myself 
for not take advantag of my hour of freedom, and I hurri along 
the sandi lane in a desol effort to enjoy myself befor it wa 
too late. 

In spite of the miser manner in which I spent my days, the 
fortnight seem to pass with extraordinari rapidity. As the end 
approached, the peopl around me made it difficult for me to conceal 
my emotions, the grown-up deduc from my melancholi that I wa 
tire of holiday and would be glad to get back to school, and my 
brother burden me with idl messag to the other boys-messag 
that shatter my hardli form hope that school did not realli 
exist. I stood ever on the verg of tears, and I dread meal-times, 
when I had to leav my solitude, lest some turn of the convers 
should set me weep befor them all, and I should hear onc more 
what I knew veri well myself, that it wa a shame thing for a boy 
of my age to cri like a littl girl. yet the tear were there and the 
hard lump in my throat, and I could not master them, though I stood 
in the wood while the sun set with a splendour that chill my 
heart, and tri to drain my eye dri of their rebellious, bitter 
waters. I would choke over my tea and be rebuk for bad manners. 

when the last day came that I had fear most of all, I succeed in 
say goodby to the peopl at the hous where I had stopped, and in 
make the mourn train journey home without disgrac myself. It 
seem as though a merci stupor had dull my sens to a mute 
accept of my purgatory. I slept in the train, and arriv home so 
sleepi that I wa allow to go straight to bed without comment. for 
onc my bodi domin my mind, and I slip between the sheet in 
an ecstasi of fatigu and fell asleep immediately. 

someth of thi rare mood linger with me in the morning, and it 
wa not until I reach the meat market that I realis the extent of 
my misfortune. I saw the greasy, red-fac men with their hand and 
apron stain with blood. I saw the hideou carcas of animals, the 
mass of entrails, the heap of repuls hides; but most clearli of 
all I saw an ugli sad littl boy with a satchel of book on hi back 
set down in the midst of an enorm and hostil world. the windows; 
and stone of the hous were black with soot, and befor me there 
lay school, the place that had never brought me anyth but sorrow 
and humiliation. I went on, but as I slid on the cobbles, my mind 
caught an echo of peace, the peac of pine-wood and heather, the 
peac of the librari at home, and, my bodi trembl with revulsion, 
I leant against a lamp-post, deadli sick. then I turn on my heel 
and walk away from the meat market and the school for ever. As I 
went I cried, sometim openli befor all men, sometim furtiv 
befor shop-windows, dab my eye with a wet pocket-handkerchief, 
and gasp for breath. I did not care where my feet led me, I would 
go back to school no more. 

I had play truant for three day befor the grown-up discov 
that I had not return to school. they treat me with that 
extraordinari consider that they alway extend to our great 
crime and never to our littl sin of thoughtless or high 
spirits. the doctor saw me. I wa told that I would be sent to a 
countri school after the next holidays, and meanwhil I wa allow 
to return to my sofa and my dreams. I lay there and read dicken and 
wa veri happy. As a rule the cat kept me company, and I wa pleas 
with hi placid society, though he made my leg cramped. I thought 
that I too would like to be a cat. 




the new boy 

I 

when I left home to go to boarding-school for the first time I did 
not cri like the littl boy in the story-books, though I had never 
been away from home befor except to spend holiday with relatives. 
thi wa not due to ani extraordinari self-control on my part, for I 
wa alway readi to shed tear on the most trivial occasion. but as a 
fact I had other thing to think about, and did not in the least 
realis the signific of my journey. I had lot of new cloth and 
more money in my pocket than I had ever had before, and in the 
guard' van at the back of the train there wa a larg box that I had 
pack myself with jam and pot meat and cake. In this, as in other 
matters, I had been aid by the expert advic of a brother who wa 
himself at a school in the north, and it wa perhap natur that in 
the comfort secur of the holiday he should have given me an 
almost lyric account of the joy of life at a boarding-school. 
moreover, my exist as a day-boy in london had been so unhappy; 
that I wa prepar to welcom ani change, so at most I felt onli a 
vagu uneas as to the future. 

after I had glanc at my papers, I sat back and stare at my eldest 
brother, who had been told off to see me safe to school. At that 
time I did not like him becaus he seem to me unduli insist on 
hi right and I could not help wonder at the tactless of the 
grown-up peopl in choos him as my travel companion. with ani 
one els thi journey might have been a joyou affair but there were 
incid between us that neither of us would forget, so that I 
could find noth better than an awkward polit with which to 
meet hi strain amiability. He feign an intens interest in hi 
magazin while I look out of window, with one finger in my 
waistcoat pocket, scratch the comfort mill edg of my 
money. when I saw littl farm-houses, forgotten in the green dimpl 
of the kentish hills, I thought that it would be nice to live there 
with a room full of story-books, away from the discomfort and 
difficulti of life. like a cat, I want to dream somewher where 
I would not be trodden on, somewher where I would be neglect by 
friend and foe alike. thi wa my normal desire, but side by side 
with my crave for peac I wa awar of a new and interest 
emot that suggest the possibl of a life even more 
agreeable. the excit of pack my box with provend like a 
sailor who wa go on a long voyage, the unwont thrill of have 
a larg sum of money conceal about my person, and abov all the 
imagin yarn of my elder brother, had fire me with the thought 
of adventure. hi stori had been fill with an utter contempt for 
lesson and a superb defianc of the authorities, and had rang 
from desper rabbit-shoot parti on the yorkshir wold to 
illicit feast of eccl cake and tin lobster in moonlit 
dormitories. I thought that it would be pleasant to experi thi 
romant kind of life befor settl down for good with my dreams. 

the train wander on and my eldest brother and I look at each 
other constrainedly. He had alreadi ask me twice whether I had my 
ticket, and I realis that he could not think of ani other neutral 
remark that fit the occasion. It occur to me to say that the 
train wa slow, but I rememb with a glow of anger how he had onc 
rub a strawberri in my face becaus I had taken the liberti of 
offer it to one of hi friends, and I held my peace. I had pray 
for hi death everi night for three week after that, and though he 
wa still aliv the knowledg of my unconfess and unrep 
wicked prevent me from be more than conveni polite, he 
thought I wa a cheeki littl toad and I thought he wa a bully, so 
we look at each other and did not speak. We were both glad, 
therefore, when the train pull up at the station that bore the name 
of my new school. 

My first emot wa a keen regret that my parent had not sent me 
to a place where the sun shone. As we sat in the littl omnibu 
that carri us from the station to the town, with my preciou 
box safe store on the roof, we pass between grey field 
whose featureless expans melt changelessli into the grey sky 
overhead. the prospect alarm me, for it seem to me that thi 
wa not a like world for adventures; nor wa I reassur by the 
sight of the town, whose one long street of low, old-fashion 
hous struck me as be mean and sordid. I wa consciou that 
the place had an unpleas smell, and I wa alreadi driven to 
think of my pocket-money and my play-box--agre thought 
which I had made up my mind in the train to reserv care for 
possibl hour of unhappiness. but the low roof of the omnibu wa 
like a limit to my imagination, and my bodi wa troubl by the 
displeas contact of the velvet cushions. I wa still wonder 
whi thi made my wrist ache, when the omnibu lurch from the 
cobbl on to a gravel drive, and I saw the school build 
tower all about me like the wall of a prison. I jump out and 
stretch my leg while the driver climb down to collect the 
fares. He look at me without a jot of interest, and I knew that 
he must have driven a great mani boy from the station to the 
school in the cours of hi life. 

A man appear in shirt-sleev of grey flannel and wheel my box 
away on a littl truck, and after a while a master came down and 
show us, in a perfunctori manner, over the more present 
quarter of the school. My brother wa anxiou to get away, becaus 
he had not been emancip long enough to find the atmospher of 
dormitori and class-room agreeable. I wa natur interested, 
in my new environment, but the presenc of the master constrain 
me, and I wa afraid to speak in front of thi unknown man whom it 
wa my lot to obey, so we were all reliev when our hurri 
inspect wa over. He told me that I wa at liberti to do what I 
pleas till seven o'clock, so I went for a walk through the town 
with my brother. 

the day wa draw to a chill grey close, and the town wa fill 
with a clammi mist taint with the odour of sewage, due, I 
afterward discovered, to the popular abus of the littl stream 
that gave the place it name. even my brother could not entir 
escap the melancholi influenc of the hour and the place, and he 
wa glad to take me into a baker' shop and have tea. By now the 
illus of adventur that had reconcil me to leav home wa in 
a desper state, and I drank my tea and consum my cake without 
enjoyment. If life wa alway go to be the same--if in flee 
one misfortun I had mere brought on myself the pain of becom 
accustom to another--i felt sure that my meagr stoicism would not 
suffic to carri me through with credit. I had fail once, I would 
fail again. I look forward with a sink heart to a tear and 
uncomfort future. 

there wa onli a veri poor train service, so my brother had plenti of 
time to walk back to the station, and it wa settl that I should go 
part of the way with him. As we walk along the white road, that 
stretch between uniform hedgerow of a shadowi greyness, I saw that 
he had someth on hi mind. In thi hour of my trial I wa will 
to forget the past for the sake of talk for a few minut with 
some human be whom I knew, but he return onli vagu answer to 
my eager questions. At last he stop in the middl of the road, and 
said I had better turn back. I would like to have walk farther 
with him, but I wa abov all thing anxiou to keep up appearances, 
so I said goodby in as compos a voic as I could find. My brother 
hesit for a minute; then with a timid glanc at heaven he put hi 
hand in hi pocket, pull out half a crown which he gave me, and 
walk rapidli away. I saw in a flash that for him, too, it had been 
an import moment; he had tip hi first schoolboy, and 
henceforth he wa beyond all question grown up. 

I did not like him, but I watch him disappear in the dusk with a 
desol heart. At that moment he stood for a great mani thing that 
seem valuabl to me, and I would have given much to have been 
walk by hi side with my face toward home and my back turn to 
the grey and unsavouri town to which I had to bear my despond 
loneliness. nevertheless I step out staunchli enough, in order 
that my mind should take courag from the exampl of my body. I 
thought strenuous of my brother' stories, of my play-box pack 
for a voyage, of the money in my pocket increas now by my eldest 
brother' unexpect generosity; and by dint of these violent mental 
exercis I had reduc my mind to a comfort stupor by the time I 
reach the school gates. there I wa overcom by shyness, and 
although I saw light in the form-room and heard the voic of boys, 
I stood awkwardli in the playground, not know where I ought to go. 
the mist in the air surround the light with a halo, and my 
nostril were fill with the acrid smell of burn leaves. 

I had stood there a quarter of an hour perhaps, when a boy came up 
and spoke to me, and the sound of hi voic gave me a shock. I think 
it wa the first time in my life a boy had spoken kindli to me. He 
ask me my name, and told me that it would be supper-tim in five 
minutes, so that I could go and sit in the dining-hal and wait. 
"you'll be all right, you know," he said, as he pass on; "they'r 
not a bad lot of chaps." the revuls nearli brought on a 
catastrophe, for the tear rose to my eye and I gaze after him with 
a swim head. I had prepar myself to receiv blow and insult 
with a calm brow, but I had no armour with which to oppos the nobl 
weapon of sympathi and good fellowship. they overcam the stubborn 
hatr with which I wa accustom to meet life, and left me 
defenceless. I felt as if I had been face to face with the hero of a 
dream. 

As I sat at supper befor a long tabl decor with plate of 
bread-and-butt and chees I saw my friend sit at the other end 
of the room, so I ask the boy next to me to tell me hi name. "oh," 
he said, look curious at my blushes, "you mean old mother f----. 
he' pious, you know; read the bibl and funk at game and all 
that." 

there are some thing which no self-respect schoolboy can afford 
to forgive. I had made up my mind that it wa not pleasant to be an 
ishmael, that as far as possibl I would tri to be an ordinari boy at 
my new school. My experi in london had taught me caution, and I 
wa anxiou not to compromis my posit at the outset by make an 
unpopular friend. So I nod my head sage in reply, and look at 
my new-discov hero with an air of profound contempt. 

II 

the day that follow were not so uncomfort as my first grey 
impress of the place had led me to expect. I prove to my own 
intens astonish to be rather good at lessons, so that I got on 
well with the masters, and the boy were kind enough in their 
careless way. I had plenti of pocket-money, and though I did not 
shine at associ football, for in london I had onli watch the 
big boy play rugby, I wa not afraid of be knock about, 
which wa all that wa expect of a new boy. most of my 
embarrass were due to the sensit that made me dislik 
ask questions--a weak that wa alway place me in fals 
positions. but my effort to make myself agreeabl to the boy were 
not unsuccessful, and while I look in vain for anyth like the 
romant adventur of which my brother had spoken, I sometim found 
myself almost enjoy my new life. 

and then, as the children say in the street of london, I woke 
up, and discov that I wa desper home-sick. partli no 
doubt thi wa due to a natur reaction, but there were other 
more obviou causes. for one thing my lavish hospit had 
exhaust my pocket-money in the first three weeks, and I wa 
asham to write home for more so soon. thi speedi end to my 
appar wealth certainli made it easier for the boy to find 
out that I wa not one of themselves, and they began to look at 
me askanc and leav me out of their conversations. I wa made 
to feel onc more that I had been born under a malign star 
that did not allow me to speak or act as they did. I had not 
their common sense, their blunt cheerfulness, their complet 
lack of sensibility, and while they resent my queer they 
could not know how anxiou I wa to be an ordinari boy. when I 
saw that they mistrust me I wa too proud to accept the crumb 
of their societi like poor mother f----, and I withdrew myself into 
a solitud that gave me far too much time in which to examin my 
emotions. I found out all the remot corner of the school in 
which it wa possibl to be alone, and when the other boy went 
for walk in the fields, I stay in the churchyard close to the 
school, disturb the sheep in their medit among the 
tomb-stones, and think what a long time it would be befor I 
wa old enough to die. 

now that the first fresh of my new environ had worn off, I 
wa abl to see my life as a seri of grey pictur that repeat 
themselv day by day. In my mind these pictur were mark off 
from each other by a sound of bells. I woke in the morn in a bed 
that wa like all the other beds, and lay on my back listen to 
the soft nois of sleep that fill the air with rumour of healthi 
boys. the bell would ring and the dormitori would break into an 
uproar, splash of water, drop of hair-brush and shout of 
laughter, for these super-boy could laugh befor breakfast. then we 
all troop downstair and I forc myself to drink bad coffe in a 
room that smelt of herrings. the next bell call us to chapel, and 
at interv dure the morn other bell call us from one class 
to another. dinner wa the one squar meal we had dure the day, 
and as it wa alway veri good, and there wa noth morbid about 
my appetite, I look forward to it with interest. after dinner we 
play football. I like the game well enough, but the atmospher of 
mud and forlorn grey field made me shudder, and as I kept goal I 
spent my leisur moment in harden my æesthet impressions. I 
never see the word footbal today without recal the curiou 
sensat caus by the mud dri on my bare knees. after footbal 
were other classes, class in which it wa sometim veri hard to 
keep awake, for the school wa old, and the badli ventil 
class-room were stuffi after the fresh air. then the bell summon 
us to even chapel and tea--a meal which we were allow to 
improv with sardin and egg and jam, if we had money to buy them 
or a hamper from home. after tea we had about two hour to ourselv 
and then came preparation, and supper and bed. everyth wa 
herald by a bell, and now and again even in the midst of lesson 
I would hear the church-bel toll for a funeral. 

I think my hatr of bell date back to my earli childhood, when the 
villag church, have onli three bells, play the first bar of 
"three blind mice" a million time everi sunday evening, till I could 
have cri for monotoni and the vexat of the thwart tune. but at 
school I had to pay the penalti for my prejudic everi hour of the 
day. especi I suffer at night dure preparation, when they 
rang the curfew on the church bell at intoler length, for these 
were tranquil hour to which I look forward eagerly. We prepar 
our lesson for the morrow in the great hall, and I would spread my 
book out on the desk and let my leg dangl from the form in a 
spirit of content for the troubl day happili past. over my head 
the ga star burn quietly, and all about me I heard the restrain 
breath of comrades, like a nois of flutter moths. and then, 
suddenly, the first stroke of the curfew would snarl through the air, 
fill the roof with nasal echoes, and troubl the quietud of my 
mind with insist vibrations. I deriv small satisfact from 
curs william the conqueror, who, the histori book told me, wa 
respons for thi ingeni tyranny. the long paus between the 
stroke held me in a state of strain expect until I want to 
howl. I would look about me for sympathi and see the boy at their 
lessons, and the master on duti read quietli at hi table. the 
curfew rang everi night, and they did not notic it at all. 

the onli bell I like to hear wa the last bell that call us to our 
brief supper and to bed, for onc the light wa out and my bodi wa 
between the sheet I wa free to do what I would, free to think or to 
dream or to cry. there wa no real differ between be in bed at 
school or anywher else; and sometim I would fill the shadow of 
the dormitori with the familiar furnitur of my littl bedroom at 
home, and pretend that I wa happy. but as a rule I came to bed 
brim over with the day' tears, and I would pull the bedcloth 
over my head so that the other boy should not know that I wa 
homesick, and cri until I wa sticki with tear and perspiration. 

the disciplin at school did not make us good boys, but it made us 
civilised; it taught us to conceal our crimes. and as home-sick 
wa justli regard as a crime of ingratitud to the author and 
to societi in general, I had to restrain my physic weak dure 
the day, and the reaction from thi restraint made my tear at night 
almost a luxury. My long for home wa found on trifles, but it 
wa not the less passionate. I hate thi life spent in walk on 
bare boards, and the blank wall and polish form of the school 
appear to me to be sordid. when now and again I went into one of 
the master' studi and felt a carpet under my feet, and saw a 
pleasant litter of pipe and novel lie on the table, it seem to 
me that I wa in a holi place, and I look at the hearthrug, the 
wallpaper, and the upholst chair with a kind of desol love 
for thing that were nice to see and touch. I suppos that if we had 
been in a workhouse, a prison, or a lunat asylum, our æesthet 
environ would have been veri much the same as it wa at school; 
and afterward when I went with the cricket and footbal team to 
other grammar school they all gave me the same impress of clean 
ugliness. It is not surpris that few boy emerg from their school 
life with that feel for colour and form which is common to nearli 
all children. 

there wa someth veri unpleas to me in the fact that we all 
wash with the same kind of soap, drank out of the same kind of cup, 
and in gener did the same thing at the same time. the school 
timet rob life of all those accident variat that make it 
interesting. our meals, our games, even our hour of freedom seem 
onli like subtl lessons. We had to eat at a certain hour whether we 
were hungri or not, we had to play at a certain hour when perhap we 
want to sit still and be quiet. the whole school disciplin tend 
to the format of habit at the expens of our reason faculties. 
yet the astonish thing to me wa that the boy themselv set up 
standard of conduct that still further narrow the possibl of 
our life. It wa bad form to read too much, to write home except on 
sundays, to work outsid the appoint hours, to talk to the day-boys, 
to cultiv social relationship with the masters, to be cambridg 
in the boat-race, and in fine to hold ani opinion or follow ani 
pursuit that wa not approv by the majority. It wa onli by hide 
myself away in corner that I could enjoy ani liberti of spirit, and 
though my thought were often cheerless when I rememb the 
rel freedom of home life, I prefer to linger with them rather 
than to weari myself in break the littl law of a societi for 
which I wa in no way fitted. 

these were black days, render blacker by my morbid fear of the 
physic weak that made me liabl to cri at ani moment, sometim 
even without in the least know why. I wa often on the brink of 
disaster, but my fear of the boys' ridicul prevent me from 
publicli disgrac myself. onc the headmast call a boy into 
hi study, and he came out afterward with red eyelid and a puf 
face. when they heard that hi mother had die suddenli in india, all 
the boy thought that these manifest of sorrow were veri 
creditable, and in the best of taste, especi as he did not let 
anybodi see him crying. for my part I look at him with a kind of 
envy, thi boy who could flaunt hi woe where he would. I, too, had 
my unassuag sorrow for the home that wa dead to me those 
forlorn days; but I could onli express it among the tomb in the 
churchyard, or at night, muffl between the blankets, when the 
silent dormitori seem to listen with suspici ears. 

iii 

A consol scrap of wisdom which unfortun children do not find 
written larg in their copybook is that sorrow is as transitori as 
happiness. although my childhood wa strewn with the memori wreath 
of dead miseries, I alway had a morbid sens that my present 
discomfort were immortal. So I had quit made up my mind that I 
would continu to be unhappi at school, when the intervent of two 
be whom I had thought utterli remot from me, gave me a new 
philosophi and reconcil me to life. the first wa a master, who 
found me griev in one of my oubliett and took me into hi studi 
and tri to draw me out. kind alway made me ineloquent, and 
as I sat in hi big basket chair and snif the delight odour of 
hi pipe, I express myself chiefli in woe-begon monosyl and 
hiccoughs. nevertheless he seem to understand me veri well, and 
though he did not say much, I felt by the way in which he puf out 
great, gener cloud of smoke, that he sympathis with me. He told 
me to come and see him twice a week, and that I wa at liberti to 
read ani of hi books, and in gener gave me a sens that I wa 
unfortun rather than criminal. thi did me good, becaus a larg 
part of my unhappi wa due to the fact that constant suppress 
by major had rob me of my self-respect. It is better for a 
boy to be conceit than to be asham of hi own nature, and to 
shudder when he see hi face reflect in a glass. 

My second benefactor wa nomin a boy, though in realiti he wa 
nearli as old as the master, and wa leav at the end of the term 
to go up to oxford. He took me by the shoulder one even in the 
dusk, and walk me round and round the big clump of rhododendron 
that stood in the drive in front of the school. I did not understand 
half he said, but to my great astonish I heard him confess 
that he had alway been unhappi at school, although at the end he 
wa captain in lessons, in games, in everything. I was, of course, 
highli flatter that thi giant should speak to me as an equal, and 
admit me to hi confidences. but I wa even more delight with the 
encourag light he threw on school life. "you'r onli here for a 
littl spell, you know; you'll be surpris how short it is. and 
don't be miser just becaus you'r different. i'm different; it' 
a jolli good thing to be different." I wa not used, to peopl who 
took thi wide view of circumstance, and hi voic in the shadow 
sound like some one speak in a story-book. yet although hi 
monologu gave me an entir new concept of life, no more of it 
linger in my mind, save hi last reflect criticism. "all the 
same, I don't see whi you should alway have dirti nails." He never 
confid in me again, and I would have die rather than have remind 
him of hi kindli indiscretion; but when he pass me in the 
playground he seem to look at me with a kind of retic interest, 
and it occur to me that after all my queer might not be such a 
bad thing, might even be someth to be proud of. 

the valu of thi discoveri to me can hardli be exaggerated. hitherto 
in my relationship with the boy I had fought noth but lose 
battles, for I had taken it for grant that they were right and I 
wa wrong. but now that I had hit on the astonish theori that the 
individu ha the right to think for himself, I saw quit clearli 
that most of their standard of conduct sprang from their sheep-lik 
stupidity. they move in flock becaus they had not the courag to 
choos a line for themselves. the materi result of thi new theori 
of life wa to make me enorm conceited, and I move among my 
comrad with a mysteri confidence, and gave myself the air of a 
byron in knickerbockers. My unpopular increas by leap and 
bounds, but so did my moral courage, and I accept the belat 
effort of my school-fellow to knock the intellig out of me as 
so mani tribut to the forc of my individuality. I no longer cri 
in my bed at night, but lay awak enraptur at the profund of my 
thoughts. after year of unquest humil I enjoy a prolong 
debauch of intellectu pride, and I marvel at the littl boy of 
yesterday who had wept becaus he could not be an imbecile. It wa 
the apotheosi of the ugli duckling, and I saw my swan' plumag 
reflect in the placid face of the boy around me, as in the vacant 
water of a pool. As yet I did not dream of a moult season, still 
less that a day would come when I should envi the duck their 
domest eas and the unthink tranquil of their lives. A 
littl boy may be excus for not realis that han andersen' 
stori is onli the prelud to a sadder stori that he had not the heart 
to write. 

My new freedom of spirit gave me courag to re-examin the emot 
and æesthet valu of my environment. I could not persuad myself 
that I like the sound of bells, and the grey of the countri in 
winter-tim still revolt me, as though I had not yet forgotten the 
cheer red and green and blue of the picture-book that fill 
my mind as a child with dream of a delight world. but now that I 
wa wise enough to make the best of my unboyish emotionalism, I began 
to take pleasur in certain phase of school-life. though I wa 
devoid of ani recognis religi sens I like the wide word in 
the psalm that we read at night in the school chapel. thi wa not 
due to ani precoci recognit of their poetry, but to the fact 
that their intens imageri conjur up all sort of preciou vision 
in my mind, I could see the hart pant after the water-brooks, in 
the valley of exmoor, where I had onc spent an enchant holiday. I 
could see the men go down to the sea in ships, and the stormi 
waves, and the staggering, fear mariners, for I had wit a 
great tempest off flamborough head. even such vagu phrase as "the 
hills" gave me an intens joy. I could see them so clearly, those 
hills, chalki hill cover with wild pansies, and with an all-blu 
sky overhead, like the lid of a chocolate-box. I liked, too, the 
servic in the old church on sunday nights, when the light were 
lower for the sermon, and I would put my hand over my ear and 
hear the voic of the preacher like the drone of a distant bee. after 
church the choral societi use to practis in the great hall, and as 
I walk round the school buildings, snatch of their sing would 
beat against my face like sudden gust of wind. when I listen at 
the door of my form-room I heard the boy talk about footbal 
matches, or indulg their tireless passion for unimagin 
personalities; I would stand on the mat outsid wonder whether I 
would be allow to read if I went in. 

I look forward to tuesday night, which wa my bath-night, 
almost as much as to sunday. the school sanitari arrang 
were primitive, and all the water had to be fetch in pails, 
and I use to like to see the man tip the hot water into the 
bath and fling hi great bodi back to avoid the steam that 
made hi grey flannel shirt-sleev cling to hi hairi arms. 
most of the boy ad a lot of cold water, but I like to boil 
myself becaus the subsequ languor wa so pleasant. the 
matron would bring our own bath towel warm from the fire, and I 
would press mine against my face becaus it smelt of childhood 
and of home. I alway thought my bodi look pretti after a 
realli hot bath; it rosi enabl me to forgiv myself for 
be fat. 

one veri strong impress wa connect with the onli master in the 
school whom I did not like. He wa a german, and as is the case with 
other of hi nationality, a spray of saliva flew from hi lip when 
he wa angry, and see this, I would edg away from him in alarm. 
perhap it wa on thi account that he treat me with systemat 
unfair and set himself the unnecessari task of make me 
ridicul in the eye of the other boys. one night I wa wander 
in the playground and heard him play the violin in hi study. My 
tast in music wa barbarian; I like comic songs, which I use to 
sing to myself in a lugubri voice, and in london the plaintiv 
clamour of the street-organ had help to make my sorrow 
rhythmical. but now, perhap for the first time, I becam awar of 
the illimit melancholi that lie at the heart of all great 
music. It seem to me that the german master, the man whom I hated, 
had shut himself up alon in hi study, and wa cri aloud. I knew 
that if he wa unhappy, it must be becaus he too wa an ishmael, a 
personality, one of the differ ones. A great sympathi woke within 
me, and I peep through the window and saw him play with hi 
face all shini with perspir and a silk handkerchief tuck 
under hi chin. I would have like to have knock at hi door and 
told him that I knew all about these things, but I wa afraid that 
he would think me cheeki and splutter in my face. 

the next day in hi class, I look at him hopefully, in the light 
of my new understanding, but it did not seem to make ani difference. 
He onli told me to get on with my work. 

the term drew to a close, and most of the boy in my form-room 
tick off the day on lists, in which the sunday were written in 
red ink to show that they did not realli count. As time went on they 
grew more and more boisterous, and wherev I went I heard them 
tell one anoth how they were go to spend their holidays. It 
wa surpris to me that these boy who were so ordinari dure 
term-tim should lead such adventur live in the holidays, and I 
felt a littl enviou of their good fortune. they talk of visit 
the theatr and foreign travel in a matter-of-fact way that made me 
think that perhap after all my home-lif wa incomplete. I had 
never been out of england, and my dramat knowledg wa limit to 
pantomimes, for which these enthusiast student of music comedi 
express a larg contempt. some of them were allow to shoot with 
real gun in the holidays, which remind me of the worst excess 
of my brother in yorkshire. examin my own life, I had often come 
to the conclus that adventur did not exist outsid books. but 
the boy shook thi comfort theori with their boast 
prophecies, and I thought onc more that perhap it wa my 
misfortun that they did not happen to me. I began to fear that I 
would find the holiday tame. 

there were other consider that made me look forward to the end 
of the term with misgiving. sinc it had been made plain to me that I 
wa a remark boy, I had rather enjoy my life at school. I had 
conceiv myself as strut with a measur digniti befor a 
background of the other boys--a background that move and did not 
change, like a wind-swept tapestry; but I wa quit sure that I would 
not be allow to give myself air at home. It seem to me that a 
youngest brother' portion of freedom would compar but poorli with 
the measur of intellectu liberti that I had secur for myself at 
school. My brother were all veri well in their way, but I would be 
expect to take my place in the background and do what I wa told. I 
should miss my sens of be superior to my environment, and my 
intens emot sunday would no longer divid time into weeks. 
the more I thought of it, the more I realis that I did not want to 
go home. 

On the last night of the term, when the dormitori had at length 
becom quiet, I consid the whole case dispassion in my bed. 
the labour of pack my play-box and write label for my luggag 
had given me a momentari thrill, but for the rest I had move among 
my insurg comrad with a chill heart. I knew now that I wa 
too greedi of life, that I alway thought of the pleasant side of 
thing when they were no longer within my grasp; but at the I same 
time my discont wa not wholli unreasonable. I had learnt more 
of myself in three month than I had in all my life before, and from 
be a nervous, hyster boy I had arriv at a complet 
understand of my emotions, which I studi with an almost adult 
calm of mind. I knew that in return to the societi of my 
healthy, boyish brothers, I wa go back to a kind of life for 
which I wa no longer fitted. I had changed, but I had the sens to 
see that it wa a chang that would not appeal to them, and that in 
consequ I would have anoth and harder battl to fight befor I 
wa allow to go my own way. 

I saw further still. I saw that after a month at home I would 
not want to come back to school, and that I should have to 
endur anoth period of despondency. I saw that my whole school 
life would be punctuat by these violent uprootings, that the 
altern of term-tim and holiday would make it imposs 
for me to chang life into a comfort habit, and that even to 
the end of my school-day it would be necessari for me to 
preserv my new-found courage. 

As I lay think in the dark I wa proud of the clariti of my 
mind, and glad that I had at last outwit the tear that had made 
my childhood so unhappy. I heard, the boy breath softli around 
me--thos wonder boy who could sleep even when they were 
excited--and I felt that I wa get the better of them in think 
while they slept. I rememb the prefect who had told me that we 
were there onli for a spell, but I did not specul as to what 
would follow afterwards. all that I had to do wa to watch myself 
ceaselessly, and be abl to explain to myself everyth that I felt 
I and did. In that way I should alway be strong I enough to guard 
my weak from the eye of the jealou world in which I moved. 

the church bell chime the hour, and I turn over and went to 
sleep. 




On the brighton road 

slowli the sun had climb up the hard white downs, till it broke 
with littl of the mysteri ritual of dawn upon a sparkl world 
of snow. there had been a hard frost dure the night, and the birds, 
who hop about here and there with scant toler of life, left no 
trace of their passag on the silver pavements. In place the 
shelter cavern of the hedg broke the monotoni of the white 
that had fallen upon the colour earth, and overhead the sky melt 
from orang to deep blue, from deep blue to a blue so pale that it 
suggest a thin paper screen rather than illimit space. across 
the level field there came a cold, silent wind which blew a fine 
dust of snow from the trees, but hardli stir the crest hedges. 
onc abov the skyline, the sun seem to climb more quickly, and as 
it rose higher it began to give out a heat that blend with the 
keen of the wind. 

It may have been thi strang altern of heat and cold that 
disturb the tramp in hi dreams, for he struggl tor a moment with 
the snow that cover him, like a man who find himself twist 
uncomfort in the bed-clothes, and then sat up with staring, 
question eyes. "lord! I thought I wa in bed," he said to himself 
as he took in the vacant landscape, "and all the while I wa out 
here." He stretch hi limbs, and, rise care to hi feet, 
shook the snow off hi body. As he did so the wind set him shivering, 
and he knew that hi bed had been warm. 

"come, I feel pretti fit," he thought. "I suppos I am lucki to wake 
at all in this. Or unlucky--it isn't much of a busi to come back 
to." He look up and saw the down shine against the blue, like 
the alp on a picture-postcard. "that mean anoth forti mile or 
so, I suppose," he continu grimly. "lord know what I did yesterday. 
walk till I wa done, and now i'm onli about twelv mile from 
brighton. damn the snow, damn brighton, damn everything!" the sun 
crept higher and higher, and he start walk patient along the 
road with hi back turn to the hills. 

"am I glad or sorri that it wa onli sleep that took me, glad or 
sorry, glad or sorry?" hi thought seem to arrang themselv in a 
metric accompani to the steadi thud of hi footsteps, and he 
hardli sought an answer to hi question. It wa good enough to walk 
to. 

presently, when three mileston had loiter past, he overtook a 
boy who wa stoop to light a cigarette. He wore no overcoat, and 
look unspeak fragil against the snow, "are you on the road, 
guv'nor?" ask the boy huskili as he passed. 

"I think I am," the tramp said. 

"oh! then i'll come a bit of the way with you if you don't walk too 
fast. it' bit lonesom walk thi time of day." 

the tramp nod hi head, and the boy start limp along by hi 
side. 

"i'm eighteen," he said casually. "I bet you thought I wa younger." 

"fifteen, i'd have said." 

"you'd have back a loser. eighteen last august, and i'v been on 
the road six years. I ran away from home five time when I wa a 
littl 'un, and the polic took me back each time. veri good to me, 
the polic was. now I haven't got a home to run away from." 

"nor have i," the tramp said calmly. 

"oh, I can see what you are," the boy panted; "you'r a gentleman 
come down. it' harder for you than for me." the tramp glanc at the 
limping, feebl figur and lessen hi pace. 

"I haven't been at it as long as you have," he admitted. 

"no, I could tell that by the way you walk. you haven't got tire 
yet. perhap you expect someth at the other end?" 

the tramp reflect for a moment. "I don't know," he said bitterly, 
"i'm alway expect things." 

"you'll grow out of that;" the boy commented. "it' warmer in london, 
but it' harder to come by grub. there isn't much in it really." 

"still, there' the chanc of meet somebodi there who will 
understand--" 

"countri peopl are better," the boy interrupted. "last night I took 
a leas of a barn for noth and slept with the cows, and thi 
morn the farmer rout me out and gave me tea and toke becaus I 
wa so little. Of course, I score there; but in london, soup on the 
embank at night, and all the rest of the time copper move you 
on." 

"I drop by the roadsid last night and slept where I fell. it' a 
wonder I didn't die," the tramp said. the boy look at him sharply. 

"how did you know you didn't?" he said. 

"I don't see it," the tramp said, after a pause. 

"I tell you," the boy said hoarsely, "peopl like us can't get away 
from thi sort of thing if we want to. alway hungri and thirsti and 
dog-tir and walk all the while. and yet if anyon offer me a 
nice home and work my stomach feel sick. Do I look strong? I know 
i'm littl for my age, but i'v been knock about like thi for six 
years, and do you think i'm not dead? I wa drown bath at 
margate, and I wa kill by a gypsi with a spike; he knock my head 
and yet i'm walk along here now, walk to london to walk away 
from it again, becaus I can't help it. dead! I tell you we can't get 
away if we want to." 

the boy broke off in a fit of coughing, and the tramp paus while he 
recovered. 

"you'd better borrow my coat for a bit, tommy," he said, "your 
cough' pretti bad." 

"you go to hell!" the boy said fiercely, puf at hi cigarette; 
"i'm all right. I wa tell you about the road. you haven't got 
down to it yet, but you'll find out presently. we'r all dead, all of 
us who'r on it, and we'r all tired, yet somehow we can't leav it. 
there' nice smell in the summer, dust and hay and the wind smack in 
your face on a hot day--and it' nice wake up in the wet grass on a 
fine morning. I don't know, I don't know--" he lurch forward 
suddenly, and the tramp caught him in hi arms. 

"i'm sick," the boy whispered--"sick." 

the tramp look up and down the road, but he could see no hous or 
ani sign of help. yet even as he support the boy doubt in the 
middl of the road a motor car suddenli flash in the middl 
distance, and came smoothli through the snow. 

"what' the trouble?" said the driver quietli as he pull up. "i'm a 
doctor." He look at the boy keenli and listen to hi strain 
breathing. 

"pneumonia," he commented. "i'll give him a lift to the infirmary, 
and you, too, if you like." 

the tramp thought of the workhous and shook hi head "i'd rather 
walk," he said. 

the boy wink faintli as they lift him into the car. 

"i'll meet you beyond reigate," he murmur to the tramp. "you'll 
see." and the car vanish along the white road. 

all the morn the tramp splash through the thaw snow, but at 
midday he beg some bread at a cottag door and crept into a lone 
barn to eat it. It wa warm in there, and after hi meal he fell 
asleep among the hay. It wa dark when he woke, and start trudg 
onc more through the slushi roads. 

two mile beyond reigat a figure, a fragil figure, slip out of 
the dark to meet him. 

"on the road, guv'nor?" said a huski voice. "then i'll come a bit of 
the way with you if you don't walk too fast. it' a bit lonesom 
walk thi time of day." 

"but the pneumonia!" cri the tramp, aghast. 

"I die at crawley thi morning," said the boy. 




A tragedi In littl 

I 

jack, the postmaster' littl son, stood in the bow-window of the 
parlour and watch hi mother water the nasturtium in the front 
garden. A certain intens of purpos wa express by the manner in 
which she handl the water-pot. for though it wa a fine afternoon 
the carrier' man had call over the hedg to say that there would 
be a thunderstorm dure the night, and everi one knew that he never 
made a mistak about the weather. nevertheless, jack' mother water 
the plant as if he had not spoken, for it seem to her that thi 
meteorolog gift smack a littl of sorceri and black magic; but 
in spite of herself she felt sure that there would be a thunderstorm 
and that her labour wa therefor vain, save perhap as a protest 
against idl superstition. It wa in the same spirit that she carri 
an umbrella on the brightest summer day. 

jack had been sent indoor becaus he would get hi leg in the way 
of the watering-pot in order to cool them, so now he had to be 
content to look on, with hi nose press so tightli against the 
pane that from outsid it look like the base of a sea-anemon 
grow in a glass tank. He could no longer hear the glad chuckl 
of the watering-pot when the water ran out, but, on the other hand, 
he could write hi name on the window with hi tongue, which he 
could not have done if he had been in the garden. also he had some 
sweet in hi pocket, bought with a halfpenni stolen from hi own 
money-box, and as the window did not tast veri nice he slip one 
into hi mouth and suck it with enjoyment. He did not like be 
in the parlour, becaus he had to sit there with hi best cloth on 
everi sunday afternoon and read the parish magazin to hi sleepi 
parents. but the front window wa lovely, like a picture, and, 
indeed, he thought that hi mother, with the flower all about her 
and the red sky overhead, wa like a ladi on one of the beauti 
calendar that the grocer gave away at christmas. He finish hi 
sweet and start another; he alway meant to suck them right 
through to make them last longer, but when the sweet wa half 
finish he invari crunch it up. hi father had done the same 
thing as a boy. 

the room behind him wa get dark, but outsid the sky seem to 
be grow lighter, and mother still stoop from bed to bed, move 
placidly, like a cow. sometim she put the watering-pot down on the 
gravel path, and bent to uproot a microscop weed or to pull the 
head off a dead flower. sometim she went to the well to get some 
more water, and then jack wa sorri that he had been shut indoors, 
for he like let the pail down with a run and hear it bump 
against the brick sides. onc he tap upon the window for 
permiss to come out, but mother shook her head vigor without 
turn round; and yet hi stock were hardli wet at all. 

suddenli mother straighten herself, and jack look up and saw hi 
father lean over the gate. He seem to be make grimaces, and 
jack made hast to laugh aloud in the empti room, becaus he knew 
that he wa good at see hi father' jokes. inde it wa a funni 
thing that father should come home earli from work and make face at 
mother from the road. mother, too, wa will to join in the fun, 
for she knelt down among the wet flowers, and as her head droop 
lower and lower it looked, for one ecstat moment, as though she 
were go to turn head over heels. but she lay quit still on the 
ground, and father came half-way through the gate, and then turn 
and ran off down the hill toward the station. jack stood in the 
window, clap hi hand and laughing; it wa a strang game, but 
not much harder to understand than most of the amus of the 
grown-up people. 

and then as noth happened, as mother did not move and father did 
not come back, jack grew frightened. the garden wa queer and the 
room wa full of darkness, so he beat on the window to chang the 
game. then, sinc mother did not shake her head, he ran out into the 
garden, smile care in case he wa be silly. first he went 
to the gate, but father wa quit small far down the road, so he 
turn back and pull the sleev of hi mother' dress, to wake her. 
after a dread while mother got up off the ground with her skirt 
all cover with wet earth. jack tri to brush it off with hi hand 
and made a mess of it, but she did not seem to notice, look across 
the garden with such a desol face, that when he saw it he burst 
into tears. for onc mother let him cri himself out without seek 
to comfort him; when he snif dolefully, hi nostril were full of 
the scent of crush marigolds. He could not help watch her hand 
through hi tears; it seem as though they were play togeth at 
cat's-cradle; they were not still for a moment. but it wa her face 
that at onc frighten and interest him. one minut it look 
smooth and white as if she wa veri cross, and the next minut it wa 
gather up in littl fold as if she wa go to sneeze. deep down 
in him someth chuckled, and he jump for fear that the cross part 
of her had heard it. At interv dure the evening, while mother 
wa get him hi supper, thi chuckl return to him, between 
unnot fit of crying. onc she stood hold a plate in the 
middl of the room for quit five minutes, and he found it hard to 
control hi mirth. If father had been there they would have had good 
fun together, teas mother, but by himself he wa not sure of hi 
ground. and father did not come back, and mother did not seem to hear 
hi questions. 

He had some tomato and rice-pud for hi supper, and as mother 
left him to help himself to brown sugar he enjoy it veri much, 
care leav the skin of the rice-pud to the last, becaus 
that wa the part he like best. after supper he sat nod at the 
open window, look out over the plum-tre to the sky beyond, where 
the black cloud were put out the star one by one. the garden 
smelt stuffy, but it wa nice to be allow to sit up when you felt 
realli sleepy. On the whole he felt that it had been a pleasant, 
excit sort of day, though onc or twice mother had frighten him 
by look so strange. there had been other mysteri day in hi 
life, however; perhap he wa go to have anoth littl dead 
sister. present he discov that it wa delight to shut your 
eye and nod your head and pretend that you were go to sleep; it 
wa like be in a swing that went up and up and never came down 
again. It wa like be in a rowing-boat on the river after a 
steamer had gone by. It wa like lie in a cradl under a lamplit 
ceiling, a cradl that rock gentli to and fro while mother sang 
far-away songs. 

He wa still a babi when he woke up, and he slip off hi chair 
and stagger blindli across the room to hi mother, with hi 
knuckl in hi eye like a little, littl boy. He climb into her 
lap and settl himself down with a grunt of contentment. there wa 
a mutter of thunder in hi ears, and he felt great warm drop of 
rain fall on hi face. and into hi dream he carri the dim 
conscious that the thunderstorm had begun. 

II 

the next morn at breakfast-tim father had not come back, and 
mother said a lot of thing that made jack feel veri uncomfortable. 
she herself had taught him that ani one who said bad thing about 
hi father wa wicked, but now it seem that she wa tri to tell 
him someth about father that wa not nice. she spoke so slowli 
that he hardli understood a word she said, though he gather that 
father had stolen something, and would be put in prison if he wa 
caught. with a guilti pang he rememb hi own deal with hi 
money-box, and he determin to throw away the rest of the sweet 
when, nobodi wa looking. then mother made the astound statement 
that he wa not to go to school that day, but hi sudden joy wa 
check a littl when she said he wa not to go out at all, except 
into the back garden. It seem to jack that he must be ill, but 
when he made thi suggest to mother, she gave up her explan 
with a sigh. afterward she kept on say aloud, "I must think, I 
must think!" she said it so often that jack start keep count on 
hi fingers. 

the day went slowli enough, for the garden wa wet after the 
thunderstorm, and mother would not play ani games. just befor 
tea-tim two gentlemen call and talk to mother in the 
parlour, and after a while they sent for jack to answer some 
question about father, though mother wa there all the time. 
they seem nice gentlemen, but mother did not ask them to stop 
to tea, as jack expected. He thought that perhap she wa sorri 
that she had not done so, for she wa veri sad all tea-time, and 
let him spread hi own bread and jam. when tea wa over thing 
were veri dull, and at last jack start cri becaus there 
wa noth els to do. present he heard a littl nois and 
found that mother wa cri as well. thi seem to him so 
extraordinari that he stop cri to watch her; the tear ran 
down her cheek veri quickly, and she kept on wipe them away 
with her handkerchief, but if she held her handkerchief to her 
eye perhap they would not be abl to come out at all. It 
occur to him that possibl she wa sorri she had said, wick 
thing about father, and to comfort her, for it made him feel 
fidgeti to see her cry, he whisper to her that he would not 
tell. but she stare at him hopelessli through her red eyelids, 
and he felt that he had not said the right thing. she call him 
her poor boy, and yet it appear that he wa not ill. It wa 
all veri mysteri and uncomfortable, and it would be a good 
thing when father came back and everyth went on as before, 
even though he had to go back to school. 

later on the woman from the mill came in to sit with mother. she 
brought jack some sweets, but instead of play with him she burst 
into tears. she made more nois when she cri than mother; in fact 
he wa afraid that in a minut he would have to laugh at her 
snortings, so he went into the parlour and sat there in the dark, 
eat hi sweets, and knit hi brow over the complex of 
life. He could see five stars, and there wa a light behind the red 
curtain of the front bedroom at arber' farm. It wa about twelv 
time as larg as a star, and a much prettier colour. By nearli 
close hi eye he could see everyth double, so that there were 
ten star and two red lights; he wa tri to make everyth come 
trebl when the gate click and he saw hi father' shadow. He wa 
delight with thi happi end to a tiresom day, and as he ran 
through the passag he call out to mother to say that father wa 
back. mother did not answer, but he heard a bit of nois in the 
kitchen as he open the front door. 

He said "good evening" in the grown-up voic that father encouraged, 
but father slip in and shut the door without say a word. everi 
night when he came back from the post-offic he brought jack the 
gum edg off the sheet of stamps, and jack held out hi hand 
for them as a matter of course. automat father felt in hi 
overcoat pocket and pull out a great handful. "take care of them, 
they'r the last you'll get," he said; but when jack ask why, hi 
father look at him with the same hopeless express that he had 
found in hi mother' eye a short while before. jack felt a littl 
cross that everi one should be so stupid. 

when they went into the kitchen everybodi look veri strange, and 
jack sat down in the corner and listen for an explanation. As a 
rule the convers of the grown-up peopl did not amus him, but 
tonight he felt that someth had happened, and that if he kept 
quiet he might find out what it was. He had notic befor that when 
the grown-up talk they alway said the same thing over and over 
again, and now they were wors than usual. father said, "it' no 
good, i'v got to go through it;" the mill-woman said, "whatev made 
you do it, george?" and mother said, "noth will ever happen to me 
again!" they all went on say these thing till jack grew tire of 
listening, and start plait hi stamp-pap into a mat. If you 
did it veri neatli it wa almost as good as an ordinari sheet of 
paper by the time you had finished. By and by, while he wa still at 
work, the mill-woman brought him hi supper on a plate, and rais 
hi head he saw that father and mother were sit close together, 
look at each other, and say noth at all. He wa veri 
disappoint that although father had come home they had not had ani 
joke all the evening, and as they were all so dull he did not veri 
much mind be sent to bed when he had finish hi supper. when he 
said good-night to father, he notic that hi boot were veri muddy, 
as if he had walk a long way like a common postman. He made a joke 
about this, but they all look at him as if he had said someth 
wrong, so he hurri out of the room, glad to get away from these 
peopl whose look had no reason significance, and whose word 
had no discover meaning. It had been a bad day, and he hope 
mother would let him go back to school the next morning. 

and yet though he took off hi cloth and got into bed, the day wa 
not quit over. He had onli doze for a few minut when he wa 
rous by a nois down below, and slip out on to the staircas he 
heard the mill-woman say good-night in the passage. when she had 
gone and the door had bang behind her, he listen still, and heard 
hi mother cri and hi father talk on and on in a strange, 
hoars voice. somehow these incomprehens sound made him feel 
lonely, and he would have like to have gone downstair and sat on 
hi mother' lap and blink drowsili in hi father' face, as he had 
done often enough before. but he wa alway shi in the presenc of 
strangers, and he felt that he did not know thi woman who wept and 
thi man who did not laugh. hi father wa hi play-friend, the 
sharer of all hi fun; hi mother wa a quiet woman who sat and 
sewed, and sometim told them not to be silly, which wa the best 
joke of all. It wa not right for peopl to alter. but the thought of 
hi bedroom made him desolate, and at last he pluck up hi courage, 
and crept downstair on bare feet. father and mother had gone back 
into the kitchen, and he peep through the crack of the door to see 
what they were doing. mother wa still crying, alway crying, but he 
had to chang hi posit befor he could see father. then he turn 
on hi heel and ran upstair trembl with fear and disgust. for 
father, the man of all the jokes, the man of whom burglar were 
afraid and compar with whom all other littl boys' father were as 
dirt, wa cri like a littl girl. 

He jump into bed and pull the bedcloth over hi face to shut 
out the ugli of the world. 

iii 

when jack woke up the next morn he found that the room wa full of 
sunshine, and that father wa stand at the end of the bed. the 
moment jack open hi eyes, he began tell him someth in a 
seriou voice, which wa alon suffici to prevent jack from 
understand what he said. besides, he use a lot of long words, and 
jack thought that it wa silli to use long word befor breakfast, 
when nobodi could be expect to rememb what they meant. father' 
bodi neatli fit the squar of the window, and the sunbeam shone 
in all round it and made it look splendid; and if jack had not 
alreadi forgotten the unfortun impress of the night before, 
thi would have enabl him to overcom it. everi now and then father 
stop to ask him if he understood, and he said he did, hope to 
find out what it wa all about later on. It seemed, however, that 
father wa not go to the post-offic ani more, and thi caus 
jack to pictur a seri of delight amus days. when father 
had finish talk he appear to expect jack to say something, but 
jack content himself with tri to look interested, for he knew 
that it wa alway veri stupid of littl boy not to understand 
thing they didn't understand. In realiti he felt as if he had been 
listen while hi father argu aloud with himself, talk up and 
down like an earthquak map. 

At breakfast they were still subdued, but afterwards, as the morn 
wore on, father becam liveli and help jack to build a hut in 
the back garden. they built it of bean-stick against the wall at the 
end, and father broke up a packing-cas to get plank for the roof. 
onli mother still had a sad face, and it made jack angri with her, 
that she should be such a spoil-fun. after dinner, while jack wa 
play in the hut, mr. simmons, of the police-station, and anoth 
gentleman call to take father for a walk, and jack went down to the 
front to see them off. jack knew mr. simmon veri well; he had been 
to tea with hi littl boy, but though he thought him a fine sort of 
man he could not help feel proud of hi father when he saw them 
side by side. mr. simmon look as if he were asham of himself, 
while father walk along with squar shoulder and a high head as if 
he had just done someth splendid. the other gentleman look like 
noth at all besid father. 

when they were out of sight jack went into the hous and found mother 
cri in the kitchen. As he felt more toler in hi after-dinn 
mood, he tri to cheer her up by tell her how fine father had 
look besid the other two men. mother rais her face, all swollen 
and spoilt with weeping, and gaze at her son in astonishment. "they 
are take him to prison," she wailed, "and god know what will 
becom of us." 

for a moment jack felt alarmed. then a thought came to him and he 
smiled, like a littl boy who ha just found a new and delight 
game. "never mind, mother," he said, "we'll help him to escape." 

but mother would not stop crying. 




shepherd' boy 

the path climb up and up and threaten to carri me over the 
highest point of the down till it falter befor a sudden 
outcrop of chalk and swerv round the hill on the level. I wa 
grate for the respite, for I had been walk all day and my 
knapsack wa grow heavy. abov me in the blue pastur of the 
sky the cloud-sheep were grazing, with the sun on their snowi 
backs, and all about me the grey sheep of earth were crop 
the wild pansi that grew wherev the chalk had won a cover 
of soil. 

present I came upon the shepherd stand erect by the path, a 
tall, spare man with a face that the sun and the wind had rob of 
all expression. the dog at hi feet look more intellig than he. 
"you'v come up from the valley," he said as I passed; "perhap 
you'll have seen my boy?" 

"i'm sorry, I haven't," I said, pausing. 

"sorrow break no bones," he muttered, and strode away with hi dog 
at hi heels. It seem to me that the dog wa apologet for hi 
master' rudeness. 

I walk on to the littl hill-girt village, where I had made up my 
mind to pass the night. the man at the villag shop said he would put 
me up, so I took off my knapsack and sat down on a sack of cattl 
cake while the bacon wa cooking. 

"if you came over the hill, you'll have met shepherd," said the man, 
"and he'll have ask you for hi boy." 

"yes, but I hadn't seen him." 

the shopman nodded. "there are clever folk who say you can see him, 
and clever folk who say you can't. the simpl one like you and me, 
we say nothing, but we don't see him. shepherd hasn't got no boy." 

"what! is it a joke?" 

"well, of cours it may be," said the shop-man guardedly, "though I 
can't say i'v heard mani peopl laugh at it yet. you see, 
shepherd' boy he broke hi neck. . . . 

"that wa in the day befor they built the fenc abov the big 
chalk-pit that you pass on your left come down. A danger 
place it use to be for the sheep, so shepherd' boy he use to lie 
along there to stop them drop into it, while shepherd' dog he 
stop them from go too far. and shepherd he use to come down 
here and have hi glass, for he took it then like you or me. he' 
blue ribbon now. 

"it wa one night when the mist were out on the hills, and mayb 
shepherd had had a glass too much, or mayb he got a bit lost in the 
smoke. but when he went up there to bring them home, he start 
drive them into the pit as straight as could be. shepherd' boy he 
holler out and ran to stop them, but four-and-twenti of them went 
over, and the lad he went with them. you mayn't believ me, but five 
of them weren't so much as scratched, though it' a sixti feet drop. 
like they fell soft on top of the others. but shepherd' boy he wa 
done. 

"shepherd he' a bit spotti now, and most time he think the boy' 
still with him. and there are clever folk who'll tell you that 
they'v seen the boy help shepherd' dog with the sheep. that 
would be a ghost now, I shouldn't wonder. i'v never seen it, but 
then i'm simple, as you might say. 

"but i'v had two boy myself, and it seem to me that a boy like 
that, who didn't eat and didn't get into mischief, and did hi work, 
would be the handiest kind of boy to have about the place." 




the pass of edward 

I found dorothi sit sedat on the beach, with a mass of black 
seawe twine in her hand and her bare feet sparkl white in the 
sun. even in the first glow of recognit I realis that she wa 
paler than she had been the summer before, and yet I cannot blame 
myself for the tactless of my question. 

"where' edward?" I said; and I look about the sand for a sailor 
suit and a littl pair of pranc legs. 

while I look dorothy' eye watch mine inquiringly, as if she 
wonder what I might see. 

"edward' dead," she said simply. "he die last year, after you 
left." 

for a moment I could onli gaze at the child in silence, and ask 
myself what reason there wa in the thing that had hurt her so. now 
that I knew that edward play with her no more, I could see that 
there wa a shadow upon her face too dark for her years, and that she 
had lost, to some extent, that exquisit careless of pois which 
make children so young. her voic wa so calm that I might have 
thought her forget had I not seen an instant of patent pain in her 
wide eyes. 

"i'm sorry," I said at length "very, very, sorri indeed. I had 
brought down my car to take you for a drive, as I promised." 

"oh! edward _would_ have like that," she answer thoughtfully; "he 
wa so fond of motors." she swung round suddenli and look at the 
sand behind her with stare eyes. 

"I thought I heard--" she broke off in confusion. 

I, too, had believ for an instant that I had heard someth 
that wa not the wind or the distant children or the smooth sea 
hiss along the beach. dure that golden summer which link 
me with the dead, edward had been wont, in moment of elation, 
to puff up and down the sands, in artist represent of a 
nobby, noisi motor-car. but the dead may play no more, and there 
wa noth there but the sand and the hot sky and dorothy. 

"you had better let me take you for a run, dorothy," I said. "the man 
will drive, and we can talk as we go along." 

she nod gravely, and began pull on her sandi stockings. 

"it did not hurt him," she said inconsequently. 

the restraint in her voic pain me like a blow. 

"oh, don't, dear, don't!" I cried, "there is noth to do but 
forget." 

"I have forgotten, quite," she answered, pull at her shoe-lac 
with calm fingers. "it wa ten month ago." 

We walk up to the front, where the car wa waiting, and dorothi 
settl herself among the cushion with a littl sigh of contentment, 
the human qualiti of which brought me a certain relief. If onli she 
would laugh or cry! I sat down by her side, but the man wait by the 
open door. 

"what is it?" I asked. 

"i'm sorry, sir," he answered, look about him in confusion, "I 
thought I saw a young gentleman with you." 

He shut the door with a bang, and in a minut we were run through 
the town. I knew that dorothi wa watch my face with her wound 
eyes; but I did not look at her until the green field leapt up on 
either side of the white road. 

"it is onli for a littl while that we may not see him," I said; "all 
thi is nothing." 

"I have forgotten," she repeated. "I think thi is a veri nice 
motor." 

I had not previous complain of the motor, but I wa wish then 
that it would ceas it poignant imit of a littl dead boy, a 
boy who would play no more. By the touch of dorothy' sleev against 
mine I knew that she could hear it too. and the mile flew by, green 
and brown and golden, while I wonder what use I might be in the 
world, who could not help a child to forget, possibl there wa 
anoth way, I thought. 

"tell me how it happened," I said. 

dorothi look at me with inscrut eyes, and spoke in a voic 
without emotion. 

"he caught a cold, and wa veri ill in bed. I went in to see him, 
and he wa all white and faded. I said to him, `how are you edward?' 
and he said, `I shall get up earli in the morn to catch beetles.' 
I didn't see him ani more." 

"poor littl chap!" I murmured. 

"I went to the funeral," she continu monotonously, "it wa veri 
rainy, and I threw a littl bunch of flower down into the hole. 
there wa a whole lot of flower there; but I think edward like 
appl better than flowers." 

"did you cry?" I said cruelly. 

she paused. "I don't know. I suppos so. It wa a long time ago; I 
think I have forgotten." 

even while she spoke I heard edward puf along the sands: edward 
who had been so fond of apples. 

"I cannot stand thi ani longer," I said aloud. "let' get out and 
walk in the wood for a change." 

she agreed, with a depth of comprehens that terrifi me; and the 
motor pull up with a jerk at a spot where hardli a post serv to 
mark where the wood commenc and the waysid grass stopped. We took 
one of the dim path which the rabbit had made and forc our way 
through the undergrowth into the peac twilight of the trees. 

"you haven't got veri sunburnt thi year," I said as we walked. 

"I don't know why. i'v been out on the beach all the days. 
sometim i'v played, too." 

I did not ask her what game she had played, or who had been her 
play-friend. yet even there in the quiet wood I knew that edward wa 
hold her back from me. It is true that, in hi boy' way, he had 
been fond of me; but I should not have dare to take her out without 
him in the day when hi live lip had fill the beach with song, 
and hi small brown bodi had danc among the surf. now it seem 
that I had been disloy to him. 

and present we came to a clear where the leav of forgotten 
year lay brown and rotten beneath our feet, and the air wa full of 
the dryness of death. 

"let' be go back. what do you think, dorothy?" I said. 

"I think," she said slowly,--"i think that thi would be a veri good 
place to catch beetles." 

A wood is full of secret noises, and that is why, I suppose, we 
heard a pair of small quick feet come with a danc of triumph 
through the rustl bracken. for a minut we listen deeply, and 
then dorothi broke from my side with a pierc call on her lips. 

"oh, edward, edward!" she cried; "edward!" 

but the dead may play no more, and present she came back to me with 
the tear that are the rich of childhood stream down her face. 

"I can hear him, I can hear him," she sobbed; "but I cannot see him. 
never, never again." 

and so I led her back to the motor. but in her tear I seem to 
find a promis of peac that she had not known before. 

now edward wa no veri wonder littl boy; it may be that he wa 
jealou and vain and greedy; yet now, it seem as he lay in hi 
small grave with the memori of dorothy' flower about him, he had 
wrought thi kind for hi sister. yes, even though we heard no 
more than the bird in the branch and the wind sway the scent 
bracken; even though he had pass with anoth summer, and the dead 
and the love of the dead may rise no more from the grave. 




the stori Of A book 

I. the writer 

the histori of a book must necessarili begin with the histori of it 
author, for sure in these enlighten day neither the youngest nor 
the oldest of critic can believ that work of art are found under 
gooseberry-bush or in the nest of storks. In truth, I am by no 
mean sure that everybodi knew thi befor the public of "the 
man shakespeare," and for the sake of a mystifi poster it may be 
well to explain that there wa onc a school of critic that 
thought it indec to pri into that treasure-hous of individu 
from which, if we reject the nurseri hypothes mention above, it 
is clearli obviou that author deriv their works. that the drama 
must need be close relat to the dramatist is just one of those 
simpl discoveri that invari elud the subtl profession 
mind; but in thi wiser hour I may be permit to assum that the 
author wa the consciou father of hi novel, and that he did not 
find it surprisingli in hi pocket one morning, like a bad shill 
taken in chang from the cabman overnight. 

befor he publish hi novel at the ripe age of thirty-seven the 
author had live an irreproach and gentlemanli life. born with at 
least a german-silv spoon in hi mouth, he passed, after a normal 
event childhood, through a respect public school, and spent 
sever agreeabl year at cambridg without take a degree. He then 
went into hi uncle' offic in the city, where he idl daili from 
ten to four, till in due cours he wa admit to a partnership, 
which enabl him to reduc hi hour of idl to eleven to three. 
these detail becom import when we reflect that from hi 
childhood on the author had a great deal of time at hi disposal. If 
he had been entir normal, he would have accept the convent 
of the societi to which he belonged, and devot himself to motoring, 
bridge, and the encourag of the lighter drama. but some 
deep-root habit of hi childhood, or even perhap some remot 
hereditari taint, led him to spend an appreci fraction of hi 
leisur time in the read of work of fiction. unlik most lover 
of light literature, he read with a certain mental concentration, and 
wa broad-mind enough to read good novel as well as bad ones. 

It is a pleasant fact that it is imposs to concentr one' mind 
on anyth without in time becom wiser, and in the cours of 
year the author becam quit a skil critic of novels. from the 
first he had allow hi read to colour hi impress of life, 
and had obedi live in a world of black and whites, of hero 
and heroines, of villain and adventuresses, until the grate 
discoveri of the realist school of fiction permit him to believ 
that men and women were for the most part neither good nor bad, but 
tabby. moreover, the leisur read of mani sentenc had given 
him some understand of the element of style. He perceiv that 
some combin of word were illogical, and that other were 
unlov to the ear; and at the same time he acquir a vocabulari 
and a knowledg of grammar and punctuat that hi earlier educ 
had fail to give him. He read new novel at hi writing-table, and 
took pleasur in correct the mistak of their author in ink. 
when he had done this, he would hand them to hi wife, who alway 
read the end first, and, indeed, rare pursu her investig of 
a book beyond the last chapter. 

We buy knowledg with illusions, and pay a high price for it, for the 
acquir of quit a small degre of wisdom will depriv us of a 
larg number of pleasant fancies. So it wa with the author, who 
found hi joy in novel-read diminish rapidli as hi critic 
knowledg increased. He wa no longer abl to lose himself between 
the cover of a romance, but slid hi paper-knif between the page 
of a book with an unwholesom readi to be irrit by the 
ignor and folli of the novelist. hi destruct critic of 
work of fiction becam so acut that it wa natur that hi 
unlett friend should suggest that he himself ought to write a 
novel. for a long while he wa content to receiv the flatter 
suggest with a retic smile that mask hi convict that 
there wa a differ between critic and creation. but as he grew 
older the imperfect in the book he read ceas to give him the 
thrill of the success explor in sight of the expected, and time 
began to trickl too slowli through hi idl fingers. one day he sat 
down and wrote "chapter i." at the head of a sheet of quarto paper. 

It seem to him that the difficulti wa onli one of selection, and 
he wrote two-third of a novel with a breathless eas of creation 
that made him marvel at himself and the piti struggl of less 
gift novelists. then in a moment of insight he pick up hi 
manuscript and realis that what he had written wa childishli 
crude. He had felt hi stori while he wrote it, but somehow or other 
he had fail to get hi emot on paper, and he saw quit clearli 
that it wa wors and not better than the major of the book which 
he had held up to ridicule. 

there wa a certain dogged in hi charact that might have made 
him a use citizen but for that unfortun hereditari spoon, and 
he wrote "chapter i." at the head of a new sheet of quarto paper long 
befor the librari fire had reach the heart of hi first luckless 
manuscript. thi time he wrote more slowly, and with a wane 
confid that fail him altogeth when he wa about half-way 
through. read the fragment dispassion he thought there were 
good page in it, but, taken as a whole, it wa unequal, and move 
forward onli by fit and starts. He began again with hi late 
manuscript spread about him on the tabl for reference. At the fifth 
attempt he succeed in write a whole novel. 

In the cours of hi struggl he had acquir a philosophi of 
composition. especi he had learn to shun those enchant hour 
when the labour of creation becam suspici easy, for he had 
found by experi that the work he did in these moment of 
inspir wa either bad in itself or out of key with the preced 
chapters. He thought that inspir might be use to poet or 
writer of short stories, but person as a novelist he found it a 
nuisance. By dint of hard work, however, he succeed in elimin 
it evil influenc from hi final draft. He told himself that he had 
no illus as to the merit of hi book. He knew he wa not a man 
of genius, but he knew also that the grammar and the punctuat of 
hi novel were far abov the averag of such works, and although he 
could not read sir thoma brown or walter pater with pleasure, he 
felt sure that hi book wa written in a straightforward and 
gentlemanli style. He wa prepar to be told that hi use of the 
colon wa audacious, and look forward with pleasur to an agreeabl 
controversi on the question. 

He read hi book to hi friends, who made suggest that would have 
involv it rewrit from one end to the other. He read it to hi 
enemies, who told him that it wa nearli good enough to publish; he 
read it to hi wife, who said that it wa veri nice, and that it wa 
time to dress for dinner. No one seem to realis that it wa the 
most import thing he had ever done in hi life. thi quicken hi 
eager to get it published--an eager onli temper by a veri 
real fear of those know dogs, the critics. He could not forget 
that he had criticis a good mani book himself in term that would 
have made the author abandon their profess if they had but heard 
hi strictures; and he had read notic in the paper that would have 
made him droop with shame if they had refer to ani work of his. 
when these sombr thought came to him he would pick up hi book and 
read it again, and in common fair he had to admit to himself that 
he found it uncommonli good. 

one day, after a whole batch of ungrammat novel had reach him 
from the library, he post hi manuscript to hi favourit 
publisher. He had heard stori of masterpiec mani time rejected, 
so he did not tell hi wife what he had done. 

ii. the sleepi publish 

the publish to whom our author had confid hi manuscript stood, 
like all publishers, at the veri head of hi profession. hi busi 
wa conduct on sound conserv lines, which mean that though he 
had regret abandon the three-volum novel for the novel 
publish at six shillings, he wa not among the intrepid 
revolutionari who were begin to produc new fiction at a still 
lower price. besid novel he publish solid work of biographi at 
thirty-on and six, art book at a guinea, travel book at fifteen 
shillings, flighti histor work at twelve-and-sixpence, and cheap 
edit of montaigne' essay and "robinson crusoe" at a shilling. 
some idea of hi busi method may be deriv from the fact that 
it pleas him to reflect that all the other publish were 
produc exactli the same book as he was. and though he would admit 
that the trade had been ruin by competit and the outrag 
royalti demand by success authors, and, further, that he made 
a loss on everi separ depart of hi business, in some 
mysteri fashion the busi as a whole continu to pay him veri 
well. He left the activ part of the manag to a confidenti 
clerk, and content himself with sign chequ and interview 
authors. 

with such a publish the fate of our author' book wa never in 
doubt. If it wa lack in those qualiti that might be expect to 
commend it to the read public, it wa conspicu rich in those 
merit that determin the favour judgment of publishers' readers. 
It wa abov all thing a gentlemanli book, without violenc and 
without eccentricities. It wa care and grammat written; 
but it had not that exot literari flavour which is so tiresom on a 
long railway journey. It could be put into the hand of ani 
schoolgirl, and at most would mere send her to sleep. the onli 
thing that could be said against it wa that the author' dread of 
inspir had made it grievous dull, but it wa the publisher' 
opinion that after a glut of sensat fiction the six-shil 
public had come to regard dull as the hall-mark of literari 
merit. He had no illus as to it possibl success, but, on the 
other hand, he knew that he could not lose ani money on it, so he 
wrote a letter to the author invit him to an interview. 

As soon as he had read the letter the author told himself that he 
had been certain all along that hi book would be accepted. 
nevertheless, he went to the interview move by certain emot 
flutter against which circumst had guard him ever sinc 
hi boyhood. He found thi mild excit of the nervou system by 
no mean unpleasant. It wa like digest a new and subtl liqueur 
that made him light-foot and tingl in the tip of hi fingers. 
He recal a phrase that had greatli pleas him in the earli day 
of hi novel. "a the sun colour flowers, so art colour life." It 
seem to him that thi wa begin to come true, and that life 
wa alreadi present itself to him in a gayer, brighter dress. He 
reach the publisher' office, therefore, in an unwontedli 
recept mood, and wa tremend impress by the rude of 
the clerks, who treat author as mendic and express their 
opinion of literatur by handl book as if they were bundl of 
firewood. 

the publish look at him under heavi eyelids, recognis hi 
posit in the social scale, and reflect with satisfact that 
hi acquaint could be reli on to purchas at least a hundr 
copies. the interview did not at all take the line that the author 
in hi innoc had expected, and in a surprisingli short space of 
time he found himself bow out, with the duplic of a contract in 
the pocket of hi overcoat. In the outer offic the confidenti 
clerk took him in hand and led him to the door of an enorm cellar, 
lit by electr and fill from one end to the other with bale 
and heap of books. "books!" said the confidenti clerk, with the 
smile of a gamekeep display hi hand-rear pheasants. "there 
are a great many," the author said timidly. 

"of course, we do not keep our stock here," the clerk explained. 
"these are just samples." It wa sometim necessari to remind 
inexperienc writer that the public of their first book wa 
onli a trivial incid in the histori of a great publish house. 
the author had a sad vision of hi novel as a littl brick in a 
monstrou pyramid built of books, and the clerk mental decid that 
he wa not the kind of man to turn up everi day at the offic to ask 
them how they were get on. 

the author wa a littl daze when he emerg into the street and the 
sunshine. hi book, which an hour befor had seem the most 
import thing in the world, had, becom almost insignific in the 
light of that vast collect of print matter, and in some subtl 
way he felt that he had dwindl with it. the publish had prais 
it without enthusiasm and had not specifi ani of it merits; he had 
not even comment on hi fantast use of the colon. the author had 
live with it now for mani months--it had becom a part of hi 
personality, and he felt that he had betray himself in deliv 
it into the hand of stranger who could not understand it. He had 
the retic of the well-br englishman, and though he told himself 
reassuringli that hi novel in no way reflect hi privat life, he 
could not quit overcom the sentiment that it wa a littl vulgar to 
allow alien eye to read the product of hi most intim thoughts. 
He had realli been shock at the matter-of-fact way in which everi 
one at the offic had spoken of hi book, and the sight of all the 
other book with which it would soon be inextric confus had 
emphasis the pain impression. thi all seem to rob the 
author' call of it presum distinction, and he look at the 
men and women who pass him on the pavement, and wonder whether 
they too had written books. 

thi mood last for some weeks, at the end of which time he receiv 
the proofs, which he read and re-read with real pleasur befor 
set himself to correct them with meticul care. He perform 
thi task with such conscientiousness, and made so mani minor 
alterations--h chang most of those flighti colon to more 
convent semicolons--that the confidenti clerk swore terribl 
when he glanc at the proof befor hand them to a boy, with 
instruct to remov three-quart of the offend emendations. 
A week or two later there happen one of those strang littl 
incid that make modern literari history. It wa a bright, sunni 
afternoon; the publish had been lunch with the star author of 
the firm, a novelist whose book were read wherev the british flag 
wave and there wa a circul librari to distribut them, and 
now, in the warm twilight of the lower blind he wa enjoy 
profound thoughts, delic tint by burgundi and old port. the 
shrewdest men make mistakes, and certainli it wa hardli wise of the 
confidenti clerk to choos thi peac moment to speak about our 
author' book. "I suppos we shall print a thousand?" he said. "five 
thousand!" ejacul the publisher. what wa he think about? wa 
he fill up an imaginari income-tax statement, or wa he tri to 
estim the number of butterfli that seem to float in the amber 
shadow of the room? the clerk did not know. "I suppos you mean one 
thousand, sir?" he said gently. the publish wa now wide awake. He 
had lost all hi butterflies, and he wa not the man to allow himself 
to be sleepi in the afternoon. "I said five thousand!" the clerk bit 
hi lip and left the room. 

the author never heard of thi brief dialogue; probabl if he had 
been present he would have miss it significance. He would never 
have connect it with the flood of paragraph that appear in the 
press announc that the acumen of the publish had discov a 
new author of genius--paragraph wherein he wa compar with 
dickens, thackeray, flaubert, richardson, sir walter besant, thoma 
browne, and the author of "an englishwoman' love-letters." As it 
was, it did not occur to him to wonder whi the publish should spend 
so much money on advertis a book of which he had seem to have 
but a half-heart appreciation. after all it wa hi book, and the 
author felt that it wa onli natur that as the hour of public 
drew near the world of letter should show sign of a dignifi 
excitement. 

iii. the critic errant 

there are some emot so intim that the most intrepid writer 
hesit to chronicl them lest it should be infer that he 
himself is in the confessional. We have endeavour to show our 
author as a level-head english-man with hi nerv well under 
control and an honest contempt for emotion in the stronger sex; 
but hi feel in the face of the first littl bundl of review 
sent him by the press-cut agenc would prove thi portrait 
incomplete. He notic with a vagu astonish that the flimsi 
scrap of paper were trembl in hi finger like banknot in the 
hand of a gambler, and he laid them down on the breakfast-t in 
disgust of the feminin weakness. thi unmistak proof that he had 
written a book, a real book, made him at onc happi and uneasy. these 
fragment of smudg print were hi passport into a new and 
delight world; they were, it might be said, the name of hi 
destin in the great republ of letters, and yet he hesit to 
look at them. He heard of the curiou blind of author that made 
it imposs for them to detect the most egregi fail in their 
own work, and it occur to him that thi might be hi malady. why: 
had he publish hi book? He felt at that moment that he had taken 
too great a risk. It would have been so easi to have had it privat 
print and content himself with distribut it among hi friends. 
but these peopl were paid for write about books, these critic who 
had sent keat to hi gallipot and swinburn to hi fig-tree, might 
well have fail to have recognis that hi book wa sacred, becaus 
it wa hi own. 

when he had at last achiev a fatalist tranquillity, he onc more 
pick up the notices, and thi time he read them through carefully. 
the _rutlandshir gazette_ quot shakespeare, the _thrum times_ 
compar him with christoph north, the _stamford-bridg herald_ 
thought that hi style resembl that of macaulay, but they were 
unanim in prais hi book without reservation. It seem to the 
author that he wa listen to the authent voic of fame. He 
rest hi chin on hi hand and dream long dreams. 

He could afford in thi hour of hi triumph to forget the annoy 
he had undergon sinc hi book wa first accepted. the publisher, 
with a larg first edit to dispos of, had been rather more than 
firm with the author. He had chang the titl of the book from 
"earth' returns"--a titl that had seem to the author dignifi 
and pleasantli literary--to "the improb marquis," which seem 
to him to mean noth at all. moreover, instead of give the book 
a quiet and scholarli exterior, he had bound it in board of an 
injudici heliotrope, inset with a nasti littl colour pictur 
of a young woman with a st. bernard dog. thi bind revolt the 
author, who objected, with some reason, that in all hi book there 
wa no mention of a dog of that description, or, indeed, of ani dog 
at all. the book wa wrap in an outer cover that bore a 
recommend of it contents, start with a hideou split 
infinit and describ it as an exquisit social comedi written 
from within. On the whole it seem to the author that hi book wa 
fli fals and undesir colours, and sinc art lie outsid the 
domesticities, he wa hardli reliev when hi wife told him that 
she thought the bind wa veri pretty. the author had shudder no 
less at the littl paragraph that the publish had insert in the 
newspap concern hi birth and education, wherein he wa 
bracket with other well-known writer whose career at the 
univers had been equal undistinguished. but now that, like 
byron, he found himself famou among the bacon and eggs, he wa in 
no mood to rememb these past vexations. As soon as he had finish 
breakfast he withdrew himself to hi studi and wrote half an essay 
on the republ of letters. 

In a countri wherein fifteen novels--or is it fifty?--ar 
publish everi day of the year, the publisher' account of the 
good he sell is bound to have a certain value. money talks, 
as mr. arnold bennett onc observed--inde today it is grown 
quit garrulous--and when a publish spend a lot of money on 
advertis a book, the infer is that some one believ the 
book to be good. thi will not secur a book good notices, but 
it will secur it notic of some kind or other, and that, as 
everi publish knows, is three-quart of the battle. the 
averag critic today is an old young man who ha not fail in 
literatur or art, possibl becaus he ha not tri to 
accomplish anyth in either. By the time he ha acquir some 
skill in critic he ha gener ceas to be a critic, 
through no fault of hi own, but through sheer weari of 
spirit. when a man is veri young he can danc upon everyon who 
ha not written a masterpiec with a light heart, but after 
thi period of joyou savageri there follow fatigu and a 
certain pity. the critic lose sight of hi first magnific 
standards, and becom grate for even the smallest merit in 
the book he is compel to read. like a mother give a 
powder to her child, he is at pain to disguis hi timid 
censur with a teaspoon of jam. As the year pass by he 
becom afraid of these book that continu to appear in 
unreason profusion, and that have long ago destroy hi 
faith in literature, hi love of reading, hi sens of humour, 
and the colour matter of hi hair. He realises, with a 
dread sens of the infinite, that when he is dead and buri 
thi torrent of book will overwhelm the individu of hi 
successors, bound like himself to a lifelong examin of the 
insignificant. 

timid is certainli the note of modern criticism, which is rare 
rous to indign save when confront by the infrequ outrag 
of some intellectu anarchist. If the critic of the more import 
journal were not so enthusiast as their provinci confreres, 
they were at least gentl with "the improb marquis." A critic of 
geniu would have said that such book were not worth writing, still 
less worth reading. An outspoken critic would have said that it wa 
too dull to be an accept present of a life that we all find 
interesting. As it was, most of the critic prais the style in 
which it wa written becaus it wa quit imposs to call it an 
enthral or even an entertain book. some of the younger 
critics, who still retain an interest in their own personalities, 
discov that it vacuiti made it a conveni mirror by mean of 
which they would display the progress of their own genius. In common 
gratitud they had to close these manifest of their merit with 
a word or two in prais of the book they were profess to review. 
"the improb marquis" wa veri favour receiv by the press 
in general. 

It was, as the publish made hast to point out in hi 
advertisements, a book of the year, and, reassur by it flippant 
exterior, the librari and the public bought it with avidity. the 
author past hi swollen collect of newspaper-cut into an 
album, and care revis hi novel in case a second edit 
should be call for. there wa one review which he had read more 
often than ani of the others, and nevertheless he hesit to 
includ it in hi collection. "thi book," wrote the anonym 
reviewer, "i as nearli faultless a book may be that possess no 
posit merit. It differ onli from seven-eighth of the novel 
that are produc today in be more care written. the author 
had noth to say, and he ha said it." that wa all, three 
malign line in a paper of no commerci importance, the sort of 
thing that wa pass round the publisher' offic with an 
appreci chuckle. In the face of the gener amiabl of the 
press, such a notic in an obscur journal could do the book no 
harm. 

onli the author sat hour after hour in hi studi with that diminut 
scrap of paper befor him on the table, and wonder if it wa 
true. 

iv. fame 

It wa some littl time befor the public, the mysteri section of 
the public that read work of fiction, discov that the 
publisher, aid by the normal good-humour of the critics, had 
persuad them to sacrific some of their scant hour of intellectu 
recreat on a work of portent dullness. therefor the literari 
audienc ha it sens of humour--they amus themselv for a while 
by recommend the book to their friends, and the sale crept 
steadili up to four thousand, and there stay with an unmistak 
air of finality. If the book had had ani real literari merit it life 
would have start at that point, for the weari comment of review 
and the strident outcri of publish tend to obscur rather than 
reveal the perman valu of a book. but six month after 
public "the improb marquis" wa complet forgotten, save 
by the second-hand booksellers, who found themselv embarrass with 
a number of book for which no one seem anxiou to pay six-pence, 
in spite of the strike heliotrop binding. the publisher, who wa 
awar of thi circumstance, offer the author five hundr copi at 
cost price, and the author bought them, and sent them to public 
libraries, without examin the motiv for hi action too closely. 
there were moment when he regard the success of hi book with 
suspicion. He would have prefer the prais that had greet it to 
have been less violent and more clearli defined. Of all the 
criticisms, the onli one that linger in hi mind wa the curt 
comment, "the author had noth to say, and he ha said it." He 
thought it wa unfair, but he had rememb it. At the same time, in 
examin hi own character, he could not find that master 
that seem to him necessari in a great man. but for the most part he 
wa content to accept hi new honour with a placid satisfaction, and 
to smile genial upon a world that wa eager to credit him with 
qualiti that possibl he did not possess. for if hi book wa no 
longer read hi fame as an author seem to be establish on a rock. 
society, with a larger S than that which he had hitherto adorned, wa 
delight to find after two notabl failur that geniu could still 
be presentable, and the author wa rather more than that. He wa 
rich, he had that air of the distinguish armi offic which fall 
so easili to those who occupi the pleasant posit of sleep 
partner in the city, and he had just the right shade of amus 
modesti with which to meet inquiri as to hi literari intentions. 
In a word, he wa an author of whom ani country--even france, that 
prolif parent of present authors--would have been proud. even 
hi wife, who had thought it an excel joke that her husband 
should have written a book, had to take him serious as an author 
when she found that their social posit wa steadili improving. 
with feminin tact she gave him a fountain-pen on hi birthday, from 
which he wa meant to conclud that she believ in hi mission as an 
artist. 

meanwhile, with the world at hi feet, the author spent an 
appreci part of hi time in visit the second-hand bookshop 
and buy copi of hi book absurdli cheap. He carri these waif 
home and store them in an attic secretly, for he would have found it 
hard to explain hi motiv to the intellectu childless. In the 
first flush of authorship he had sent a number of present copi 
of hi book to writer whom he admired, and he notic without 
bitter that some of these volum with their neatli turn 
inscript were come back to him through thi channel. At all the 
second-hand bookshop he saw long-hair young men look over the 
book without buy them, and he thought these must be authors, but 
he wa too shi to speak to them, though he had a great long to 
know other writers. He want to ask them question concern their 
method of work, for he wa have troubl with hi second book. He 
had read an articl in which the writer said that the great fault of 
modern fiction wa that author were more concern to produc good 
chapter than to produc good books. It seem to him that in hi 
first book he had onli aim at good sentences, but he knew no one 
with whom he could discuss such matters. 

one day he found a copi of "the improb marquis" in the chare 
cross road, and wa glanc through it with absent-mind interest, 
when a voic at hi elbow said, "I shouldn't buy that if I were you, 
sir. it' no good!" He look up and saw a wild young man, with 
bright eye and an untidi black beard. "but it' mine; I wrote it," 
cri the author. the young man stare at him in dismay. "i'm sorry; 
I didn't know," he blurt out, and fade away into the crowd. the 
author gaze after him wistfully, regret that he had not had 
presenc of mind enough to ask him to lunch. perhap the young man 
could have told him how he ought to write hi second book. 

for somehow or other, at the veri moment when hi literari posit 
seem most secur in the eye of hi wife and hi friends, the 
author had lost all confid in hi own powers. He shut himself up 
in hi studi everi night, and wa suppos by an admir and almost 
timor household to be produc masterpieces, when in realiti he 
wa conduct a seri of barren skirmish between the critic 
and the creativ element of hi nature. He would write a chapter or 
two in a fine furi of composition, and then would read what he had 
written with intens disgust. He felt that hi second book ought to 
be better than hi first, and he doubt whether he would even be 
abl to write anyth half so good. In hi hour of disillusion 
he recal the anonym critic who had treat "the improb 
marquis" with such scant respect, and he wrote to him ask him to 
expand hi judgment. He wa prepar to be wound by the answer, 
but the form it took surpris him. In repli to hi temper and 
courteou letter the critic sent a postcard bear onli five short 
words--"whi did you write it?" 

thi wa bad manners, but the author wa sensibl enough to see that 
it might be good criticism, especi as he found some difficulti in 
answer the question. whi had he written a book? not for money, or 
for fame, or to express a person of which he saw no reason to be 
proud. all hi friend had said that he ought to write a novel, and 
he had thought that he could write a better one than the average. but 
he had to admit that such motiv seem to him insufficient. there 
was, perhaps, some mysteri forc that drove men to creat work of 
art, and the critic had seen that hi book had lack thi necessari 
impulse. In the light of thi new theori the author wa rous by a 
sens of injustice. He felt that it should be possibl for anyon to 
write a good book if they took suffici pains, and he set himself 
to work again with a savag and unproduct energy. 

It seem to him that in spite of hi effort to bear in mind that the 
whole should be greater than ani part, hi chapter broke up into 
sentenc and hi sentenc into forlorn and ungregari words. when 
he look to hi first book for comfort he found the same horrid 
phenomenon take place in it familiar pages. sometim when he wa 
dishearten by hi fruitless effort he slip out into the 
streets, fix hi attent on concret object to rest hi tire 
mind. but he could not help notic that london had discov the 
secret which made hi intellectu life a torment. the street were 
more than a mere assemblag of houses, london herself wa more than a 
tangl skein of streets, and overhead heaven wa more than a 
meeting-plac of individu stars. what wa thi secret that made 
word into a book, hous into cities, and restless and measur 
star into an unchang and immeasur universe? 




the bird In the garden 

the room in which the burchel famili live in love street, s.e., wa 
underground and depend for light and air on a grate let into the 
pavement above. 

uncl john, who wa a queer one, had fill the area with green 
plant and creeper in box and tin hang from the grating, so 
that the room itself obtain veri littl light indeed, but there 
wa alway a nice bright green place for the peopl sit in it to 
look at. toby, who had peep into the area of other littl boys, 
knew that hi wa of quit except beauty, and it wa with a 
certain awe that he help uncl john to tend the plant in the 
morning, water them and take the piec of paper and straw 
that had fallen through the grate from their hair. "it is a great 
mistak to have straw in one hair," uncl john would say gravely; 
and tobi knew that it wa true. 

It wa in the morn after they had just been water that the 
plant look and smelt best, and when the sun shone through the 
grate and the diamond were shine and fall through the forest, 
tobi would tell the babi about the great bird who would one day come 
fli through the trees--a bird of all colours, ugli and beautiful, 
with a harsh sweet voice. "and that will be the end of everything," 
said toby, though of cours he wa onli repeat a stori hi uncl 
john had told him. 

there were other peopl in the big, dark room besid tobi and uncl 
john and the baby; dark peopl who flit to and fro about secret 
matters, peopl call father and mother and mr. hearn, who were apt 
to kick if they found you in their way, and who never laugh except 
at nights, and then they laugh too loudly. 

"they will frighten the bird," thought toby; but they were kind to 
uncl john becaus he had a pension. tobi slept in a corner on the 
ground besid the baby, and when father and mr. hearn fought at 
night he would wake up and watch and shiver; but when thi happen 
it seem to him that the babi wa laugh at him, and he would 
pinch her to make her stop. one night, when the men were fight 
veri fierc and mother had fallen asleep on the table, uncl john 
rose from hi bed and began sing in a great voice. It wa a song 
tobi knew veri well about trafalgar' bay, but it frighten the two 
men a great deal becaus they thought uncl john would be too mad to 
fetch the pension ani more. next day he wa quit well, however, and 
he and tobi found a larg green caterpillar in the garden among the 
plants. 

"thi is a fact of great importance," said uncl john, stroke it 
with a littl stick. "it is a sign!" 

tobi use to lie awak at night after that and listen for the bird, 
but he onli heard the clatter of feet on the pavement and the 
scream of engin far away. 

later there came a new young woman to live in the cellar--not a dark 
person, but a person you could see and speak to. she pat tobi on 
the head; but when she saw the babi she caught it to her breast and 
cri over it, call it pretti names. 

At first father and mr. hearn were both veri kind to her, and mother 
use to sit all day in the corner with burn eyes, but after a time 
the three use to laugh togeth at night as before, and the woman 
would sit with her wet face and wait for the come of the bird, with 
tobi and the babi and uncl john, who wa a queer one. 

"all we have to do," uncl john would say, "i to keep the garden 
clean and tidy, and to water the plant everi morn so that they 
may be veri green." and tobi would go and whisper thi to the baby, 
and she would stare at the ceil with large, stupid eyes. 

there came a time when tobi wa veri sick, and he lay all day in hi 
corner wonder about wonder. sometim the room in which he lay 
becam so small that he wa choke for lack of air, sometim it wa 
so larg that he scream out becaus he felt lonely. He could not 
see the dark peopl then at all, but onli uncl john and the woman, 
who told him in whisper that her name wa "mummie." she call him 
sonny, which is a veri pretti name, and when tobi heard it he felt a 
tickl in hi side which he knew to be gladness. mummie' face wa 
wet and warm and soft, and she wa veri fond of kissing. everi 
morn uncl john would lift tobi up and show him the garden, and 
tobi would slip out of hi arm and walk among the tree and plants. 
and the place would grow bigger and bigger until it wa all the 
world, and tobi would lose himself; amongst the tangl of tree and 
flower and creepers. He would see butterfli there and tame 
animals, and the sky wa full of bird of all colours, ugli and 
beautiful; but he knew that none of these wa the bird, becaus their 
voic were onli sweet. sometim he show these wonder to a littl 
boy call toby, who held hi hand and call him uncl john, 
sometim he show them to hi mummi and he himself wa toby; but 
alway when he came back he found himself lie in uncl john' arms, 
and, weari from hi walk, would fall into a pleasant dreamless sleep. 

It seem to tobi at thi time that a veil hung about him which, dim 
and unreal in itself, serv to make all thing dim and unreal. He 
did not know whether he wa asleep or awake, so strang wa life, so 
vivid were hi dreams. mummie, uncl john, the baby, tobi himself 
came with a flicker of the veil and disappear vagu without 
cause. It would happen that tobi would be speak to uncl john, and 
suddenli he would find himself look into the larg eye of the 
baby, turn stupidli toward the ceiling, and again the babi would 
be tobi himself, a hot, dri littl bodi without leg or arms, that 
sway suspend as if by magic a foot abov the bed. 

then there wa the vision of two small feet that move a long way 
off, and tobi would watch them curious as kitten do their tails, 
without know the caus of their motion. It wa all veri wonder 
and veri strange, and day by day the veil grew thicker; there wa no 
need to wake when the sleeptim wa so pleasant; there were no dark 
peopl to kick you in that dreami place. 

and yet tobi woke--wok to a life and in a place which he had never 
known before. 

He found himself on a heap of rag in a larg cellar which depend 
for it light on a grate let into the pavement of the street 
above. On the stone floor of the area and swing from the grate 
were a few sickly, grimi plant in pots. there must have been, a 
fine sunset up above, for a faint red glow came through the bar and 
touch the leav of the plants. 

there wa a light candl stand in a bottl on the table, and the 
cellar seem full of people. At the tabl itself two men and a woman 
were drinking, though they were alreadi drunk, and beyond in a corner 
tobi could see the head and shoulder of a tall old man. besid him 
there crouch a woman with a faded, pretti face, and between tobi 
and the rest of the room there stood a box in which lay a babi with 
large, wake eyes. 

toby' bodi tingl with excitement, for thi wa a new thing; he had 
never seen it before, he had never seen anyth before. 

the voic of the woman at the tabl rose and fell steadili without a 
pause; she wa abus the other woman, and the two drunken men were 
laugh at her and shout her on; tobi thought the other woman 
lack spirit becaus she stay crouch on the floor and said 
nothing. 

At last the woman stop her abuse, and one of the men turn and 
shout an order to the woman on the floor. she stood up and came 
toward him, hesitating; thi annoy the man and he swore at her 
brutally; when she came near enough he knock her down with hi 
fist, and all the three burst out laughing. 

tobi wa so excit that he knelt up in hi corner and clap hi 
hands, but the other did not notic becaus the old man wa up and 
sway wildli over the woman. He seem to be threaten the man 
who had struck her, and that one wa evid afraid of him, for he 
rose unsteadili and lift the chair on which he had been sit 
abov hi head to use as a weapon. 

the old man rais hi fist and the chair fell heavili on to hi 
wrinkl forehead and he drop to the ground. 

the woman at the tabl cri out, "the pension!" in her shrill voice, 
and then they were all quiet, looking. 

then it seem to tobi that through the forest there came flying, 
with a harsh sweet voic and a tumult of wings, a bird of all 
colours, ugli and beautiful, and he knew, though later there might be 
peopl to tell him otherwise, that that wa the end of everything. 




children Of the moon 

the boy stood at the place where the park tree stop and the 
smooth lawn slid away gentli to the great house. He wa dress onli 
in a pair of rag knickerbock and a gape buttonless shirt, so 
that hi leg and neck and chest shone silver bare in the moonlight. 
By day he had a mass of rough golden hair, but now it seem to brood 
abov hi head like a black cloud that made hi face deathli white by 
comparison. On hi arm there lay a great heap of gleam dew-wet 
rose and lilies, spoil of the park flower-beds. their cool petal 
touch hi cheek, and fill hi nostril with ach scent. He felt 
hi arm smart here and there, where the thorn of the rose had 
torn them in the dark, but these delic caress of pain onli 
serv to deepen to him the wonder of the night that wrap him 
about like a cloak. behind him there dream the black woods, and 
over hi head multitudin star quiver and balanc in space; but 
these thing were noth to him, for far across the lawn that wa 
spread knee-deep, with a web of mist there gleam for hi eager eye 
the splendour of a fairi palace. red and orang and gold, the light 
of the fairi revel shone from a hundr window and fill him with 
wonder that he should see with wake eye the jewel that he had 
desir so long in sleep. He could onli gaze and gaze until hi 
strain eye fill with tears, and set the enchant light 
danc in the dark. On hi ears, that heard no more the cri of 
the night-bird and the quick stir of the rabbit in the brake, there 
fell the strain of far music. the flower in hi arm seem to sway 
to it, and hi heart beat to the deep puls of the night. 

So enraptur were hi sens that he did not notic the come of 
the girl, and she wa abl to examin him close befor she call 
to him softli through the moonlight. 

"boy! boy!" 

At the sound of her voic he swung round and look at her with 
startl eyes. He saw her excit littl face and her white dress. 

"are you a fairy?" he ask hoarsely, for the night-mist wa in hi 
voice. 

"no," she said, "i'm a littl girl. you'r a wood-boy, I suppose?" 

He stay silent, regard her with a puzzl face. who wa thi 
littl white creatur with the tender voic that had slip so 
suddenli out of the night? 

"a a matter of fact," the girl continued, "i'v come out to have a 
look at the fairies. there' a ring down in the wood. you can come 
with me if you like, wood-boy." 

He nod hi head silently, for he wa afraid to speak to her, and 
set off through the wood by her side, still clasp the flower to 
hi breast. 

"what were you look at when I found you?" she asked. 

"the palace--th fairi palace," the boy muttered. 

"the palace?" the girl repeated. "why, that' not a palace; that' 
where I live." 

the boy look at her with new awe; if she were a fairy---- but the 
girl had notic that hi feet made no sound besid her shoes. 

"don't the thorn prick your feet, wood-boy?" she asked; but the boy 
said nothing, and they were both silent for a while, the girl look 
about her keenli as she walked, and the boy watch her face. 
present they came to a wide pool where a littl tinkl fountain 
threw bubbl to the hidden fish. 

"can you swim?" she said to the boy. 

He shook hi head. 

"it' a pity," said the girl; "we might have had a bathe. It would be 
rather fun in the dark, but it' pretti deep there. we'd better get 
on to the fairi ring." 

the moon had flung queer shadow across the glade in which the ring 
lay, and when they stood on the edg listen intent the wood 
seem to speak to them with a hundr voices. 

"you can take hold of my hand, if you like," said the girl, in a 
whisper. 

the boy drop hi flower about hi white feet and felt for the 
girl' hand in the dark. soon it lay in hi own, a warm live thing, 
that stir a littl with excitement. 

"i'm not afraid," the girl said; and so they waited. 

* * * * * 

the man came upon them suddenli from among the silver birches. He had 
a knapsack on hi back and hi hair wa as long as a tramp's. At 
sight of him the girl almost screamed, and her hand trembl in the 
boy's. some instinct made him hold it tighter. 

"what do you want?" he muttered, in hi hoars voice. 

the man wa no less astonish than the children. 

"what on earth are you do here?" he cried. hi voic wa mild and 
reassuring, and the girl answer him promptly. 

"I came out to look for fairies." 

"oh, that' right enough," comment the man; "and you," he said, 
turn to the boy, "are you after fairies, too? oh, I see; pick 
flowers. Do you mean to sell them?" 

the boy shook hi head. 

"for my sister," he said, and stop abruptly. 

"i your sister fond of flowers?" 

"yes; she' dead." 

the man look at him gravely. 

"that' a phrase," he said, "and phrase are the devil. who told you 
that dead peopl like flowers?" 

"they alway have them," said the boy, blush for shame of hi 
pretti thought. 

"and what are _you_ look for?" the girl interrupted. 

the man made a mock grimace, and glanc around the glade as if he 
were afraid of be overheard. 

"dreams," he said bluntly. 

the girl ponder thi for a moment. 

"and your knapsack?" she began. 

"yes," said the man, "it' full of them." 

the children look at the knapsack with interest, the girl' finger 
tingl to undo the strap of it. 

"what are they like?" she asked. 

the man gave a short laugh. 

"veri like your and his, I expect; when you grow older, young woman, 
you'll find there' realli onli one dream possibl for a sensibl 
person. but you don't want to hear about my troubles. thi is more in 
your line!" He put hi hand in hi pocket and pull out a flageolet, 
which he put to hi lips. 

"listen!" he said. 

To the girl it seem as though the littl tune had leapt from the 
pipe, and wa danc round the ring like a real fairy, while echo 
came trip through the tree to join it. the boy gape and said 
nothing. 

At last, when the fairi wa begin to falter and echo wa quit 
out of breath, the man took the flageolet from hi lips. 

"well," he said, with a smile. 

"thank you veri much," said the girl politely. "I think that wa veri 
nice indeed. oh, boy!" she broke off, "you'r hurt my hand!" 

the boy' eye were shine strangely, and he wa wave hi arm in 
dismay. 

"all the wast moonlight!" he cried; "the grass is quit wet with 
it." 

the girl turn to him in surprise. 

"why, boy, you'v found your voice." 

"after that," said the man gravely, as he put hi flageolet back in 
hi pocket, "I think I will show you the insid of my knapsack." 

the girl bent down eagerly, while he loosen the straps, but gave a 
cri of disappoint when she saw the contents. 

"pictures!" she said. 

"pictures," echo the man drily,--"pictur of dreams. I don't know 
how you'r go to see them. perhap the moon will do her best." 

the girl look at them nicely, and pass them on one by one to the 
boy. present she made a discovery. 

"oh, boy!" she cried, "your tear are spoil all the pictures." 

"i'm sorry," said the boy huskily; "I can't help it." 

"I know," the man said quickly; "it doesn't matter a bit. I expect 
you'v seen these pictur before." 

"I know them all," said the boy, "but I have never seen them." 

the man frowned. 

"it' the devil," he said to himself, "when boy speak english." He 
turn suddenli to the girl, who wa puzzl over the boy' tears. 
"it' time you went back to bed," he said; "there won't be ani 
fairi tonight. it' too cold for them." 

the girl yawned. 

"I shall get into a row when I get back if they'v found it out. I 
don't care." 

"the moon is fading," said the boy suddenly; "there are no more 
shadows." 

"we will see you through the wood," the man continued, "and say 
good-night." 

He put hi pictur back in hi knapsack and then walk silent 
through the murmur wood. At the edg of the wood the girl stopped. 

"you are a wood-boy," she said to the boy, "and you mustn't come ani 
farther. you can give me a kiss if you like." 

the boy did not move, but stay regard her awkwardly. 

"I think you are a veri silli boy," said the girl, with a toss of her 
head, and she stalk away proudli into the mist. 

"whi didn't you kiss her?" ask the man. 

"her lip would burn me," said the boy. 

the man and the boy walk slowli across the park. 

"now, boy," said the man, "sinc civilis ha gone to bed the 
time ha come for you to hear your destiny." 

"I am onli a poor boy," the boy repli simply. "I don't think I have 
ani destiny." 

"paradox," said the man, "i meant to conceal the insincer of the 
aged, not to express the simplic of youth. but I wander. you have 
made phrase tonight." 

"what are phrases?" 

"what are dreams? what are roses? what, in fine, is the moon? boy, I 
take you for a moon-child. you hold her pale flower in your arms, 
her white beam have caress your limbs, you prefer the kiss of 
her cool lip to those of that earth-child; all thi is veri well. 
but, abov all, you have the music of her great silence; abov all, 
you have her tears. when I play to you on my pipe you recognis 
the voic of your mother. when I show you my pictur you recal 
the tale with which she hush you to sleep. and so I knew that you 
were her son and my littl brother." 

"the moon ha alway been my friend," said the boy; "but I did not 
know that she wa my mother." 

"perhap your sister know it; the happi dead are glad to seek her 
for a mother; that is whi they are so fond of white flowers." 

"we have a mother at home. she work veri hard for us." 

"but it is your mother among the cloud who make your life 
beautiful, and the beauti of your life is the measur of your days." 

while the boy reflect on these thing they had reach the gate of 
the park, and they stole past the silent lodg on to the high road. A 
man wa wait there in the shadows, and when he saw the boy' 
companion he rush out and seiz him by the arm. 

"so i'v got you," he said; "I don't think i'll let you go again in a 
hurry." 

the son of the moon gave a queer littl laugh. 

"why, it' taylor!" he said pleasantly; "but, taylor, you know 
you'r make a great mistake." 

"veri possibly," said the keeper, with a laugh. 

"you see thi boy here, taylor; I assur you he is much madder than I 
am." 

taylor look at the boy kindly. 

"time you were in bed, tommy," he said. 

"taylor," said the man earnestly, "thi boy ha made three phrases. 
If you don't lock him up he will certainli becom a poet. He will 
set your preciou world of saniti ablaz with the fire of hi mother, 
the moon. your palac will totter, taylor, and your kingdom becom 
as dust. I have warn you." 

"that' right, sir; and now you must come with me." 

"boy," said the man generously, "keep your liberty. By grace of 
providence, all men in author are fools. We shall meet again under 
the light of the moon." 

with dreami eye the boy watch the departur of hi companion. He 
had becom almost invis along the road when, miracul as it 
seemed, the light of the moon broke through the tree by the waysid 
and lit up hi figure. for a moment it fell upon hi head like a 
halo, and touch the knapsack of dream with glory. then all wa 
lost in the black of night. 

As he turn homeward the boy felt a cold wind upon hi cheek. It wa 
the first breath of dawn. 




the coffin merchant 

I 

london on a novemb sunday inspir eustac reynold with a 
melancholi too insist to be ignor and too causeless to be 
enjoyed. the grey sky overhead between the house-tops, the cold wind 
round everi street-corner, the sad face of the men and women on the 
pavements, combin to creat an atmospher of ineloqu misery. 
eustac wa sensit to impressions, and in spite of a 
half-consci effort to remain a dispassion spectat of the 
world' melancholy, he felt the chill of the aimless day creep 
over hi spirit. whi wa there no sun, no warmth, no laughter on the 
earth? what had becom of all the children who keep laughter like a 
mask on the face of disillus men? the wind blew down 
southampton street, and chill eustac to a shiver that pass away 
in a shudder of disgust at the sombr colour of life. A windi sunday 
in london befor the lamp are lit, tempt a man to believ in the 
nobil of work. 

At the corner by chare cross telegraph offic a man thrust a 
handbil under hi eyes, but he shook hi head impatiently. the 
blueness of the finger that offer him the paper wa alon 
suffici to make him disinclin to remov hi hand from hi 
pocket even for an instant. but, the man would not be dismiss so 
lightly. 

"excus me, sir," he said, follow him, "you have not look to 
see what my bill are." 

"whatev they are I do not want them." 

"that' where you are wrong, sir," the man said earnestly. "you will 
never find life interest if you do not lie in wait for the 
unexpected. As a matter of fact, I believ that my bill contain 
exactli what you do want." 

eustac look at the man with quick curiosity. hi cloth were 
ragged, and the visibl part of hi flesh were blue with cold, but 
hi eye were bright with intellig and hi speech wa that of an 
educ man. It seem to eustac that he wa be regard with a 
keen expectancy, as though hi decis I on the trivial point wa of 
real importance. 

"I don't know what you are drive at," he said, "but if it will give 
you ani pleasur I will take one of your bills; though if you argu 
with all your client as you have with me, it must take you a long 
time to get rid of them." 

"I onli offer them to suitabl persons," the man said, fold up one 
of the handbil while he spoke, "and i'm sure you will not regret 
take it," and he slip the paper into eustace' hand and walk 
rapidli away. 

eustac look after him curious for a moment, and then open the 
paper in hi hand. when hi eye comprehend it significance, he 
gave a low whistl of astonishment. "you will soon be warn a 
coffin!" it read. "at 606, gray' inn road, your order will be 
attend to with civil and despatch. call and see us!!" 

eustac swung round quickli to look for the man, but he wa out of 
sight. the wind wa grow colder, and the lamp were begin to 
shine out in the grey streets. eustac crumpl the paper into 
hi overcoat pocket, and turn homewards. 

"how silly!" he said to himself, in consciou amusement. the sound of 
hi footstep on the pavement rang like an echo to hi laugh. 

II 

eustac wa impression but not temperament morbid, and he wa 
troubl a littl by the fact that the gruesom bizarr handbil 
continu to recur to hi mind. the thing wa so manifestli absurd, 
he told himself with conviction, that it wa not worth a second 
thought, but thi did not prevent him from think of it again and 
again. what manner of undertak could hope to obtain busi by 
give away foolish handbil in the street? really, the whole thing 
had the air of a brainless practic joke, yet hi intellectu 
fair forc him to admit that as far as the man who had given him 
the bill wa concerned, brainless wa out of the question, and 
joke improbable. there had been depth in those littl bright 
eye which hi glanc had not been abl to sound, and the man' 
manner in make him accept the handbil had given the whole 
transact a kind of ludicr significance. 

"you will soon be want a coffin----!" 

eustac found himself turn the word over and over in hi mind. 
If he had had ani near relat he might have constru the thing 
as an elabor threat, but he wa practic alon in the world, 
and it seem to him that he wa not like to want a coffin for 
anyon but himself. 

"oh damn the thing!" he said impatiently, as he open the door of 
hi flat, "it isn't worth worri about. I mustn't let the whim of 
some mad tradesman get on my nerves. i'v got no one to bury, 
anyhow." 

nevertheless the thing linger with him all the evening, and when 
hi neighbour the doctor came in for a chat at ten o'clock, eustac 
wa glad to show him the strang handbill. the doctor, who had 
experienc the queer magic that are practis to thi day on the 
west coast of africa, and who, therefore, had no nerves, wa 
delight with so strike an exampl of british commerci 
enterprise. 

"though, mind you," he ad gravely, smooth the crumpl paper on 
hi knee, "thi sort of thing might do a lot of harm if it fell into 
the hand of a nervou subject. I should be inclin to punch the 
head of the ass who perpetr it. have you turn that address up 
in the post offic directory?" 

eustac shook hi head, and rose and fetch the fat red book which 
make london an english city. togeth they found the gray' inn 
road, and ran their eye down to no. 606. 

"'harding, G. j., coffin merchant and undertaker.' not much 
inform there," mutter the doctor. 

"coffin merchant' a bit unusual, isn't it?" queri eustace. 

"I suppos he manufactur coffin wholesal for the trade. still, I 
didn't know they call themselv that. anyhow, it seems, as though 
that handbil is a genuin piec of downright foolishness. the idiot 
ought to be stop advertis in that way." 

"i'll go and see him myself tomorrow," said eustac bluntly. 

"well, he' given you an invitation," said the doctor, "so it' onli 
polit of you to go. i'll drop in here in the even to hear what 
he' like. I expect that you'll find him as mad as a hatter." 

"someth like that," said eustace, "or he wouldn't give handbil 
to peopl like me. I have no one to buri except myself." 

"no," said the doctor in the hall, "I suppos you haven't. don't let 
him measur you for a coffin, reynolds!" 

eustac laughed. 

"we never know," he said sententiously. 

iii 

next day wa one of those gorgeou blue day of which novemb give 
but few, and eustac wa glad to run out to wimbledon for a game of 
golf, or rather for two. It wa therefor dusk befor he made hi way 
to the gray' inn road in search of the unexpected. hi attitud 
toward hi errand despit the doctor' laughter and the prosaic 
entri in the directory, wa a littl confused. He could not help 
reflect that after all the doctor had not seen the man with the 
littl wise eyes, nor could he forget that mr. G. J. harding' 
descript of himself as a coffin merchant, to say the least of it, 
approach the unusual. yet he felt that it would be intoler to 
chop the whole busi without find out what it all meant. On the 
whole he would have prefer not to have discov the riddl at 
all; but have found it, he could not rest without an answer. 

no. 606, gray' inn road, wa not like an ordinari undertaker' shop. 
the window wa heavili drape with black cloth, but wa otherwis 
unadorned. there were no letter from grate mourners, no littl 
model coffins, no photograph of marbl memorials. even more 
surpris wa the absenc of ani name over the shop-door, so that 
the uninform stranger could not possibl tell what trade wa 
carri on within, or who wa respons for the manag of the 
business. thi uncommerci modesti did not tend to remov eustace' 
doubt as to the saniti of mr. G. J. harding; but he open the 
shop-door which start a larg bell swing noisily, and step 
over the threshold. the shop wa hardli more express insid than 
out. A broad counter ran across it, cut it in two, and in the 
partial gloom overhead a nake gas-burn whistl a noisi song. 
beyond thi the shop contain no furnitur whatever, and no 
stock-in-trad except a few plank lean against the wall in one 
corner. there wa a larg ink-stand on the counter. eustac wait 
patient for a minut or two, and then as no one came he began 
stamp on the floor with hi foot. thi prove efficacious, for 
soon he heard the sound of footstep ascend wooden stairs, the 
door behind the counter open and a man came into the shop. 

He wa dress quit neatli now, and hi hand were no longer blue 
with cold, but eustac knew at onc that it wa the man who had given 
him the handbill. nevertheless he look at eustac without a sign of 
recognition. 

"what can I do for you, sir?" he ask pleasantly. 

eustac laid the handbil down on the counter. 

"I want to know about this," he said. "it strike me as be in 
pretti bad taste, and if a nervou person got hold of it, it might be 
dangerous." 

"you think so, sir? yet our representative," he linger 
affection on the words, "our repres told you, I believe, 
that the handbil wa onli distribut to suitabl cases." 

"that' where you are wrong," said eustac sharply, "for I have no 
one to bury." 

"except yourself," said the coffin merchant suavely. 

eustac look at him keenly. "I don't see----" he began. but the 
coffin merchant interrupt him. 

"you must know, sir," he said, "that thi is no ordinari undertaker' 
business. We possess inform that enabl us to defi competit 
in our special class of trade." 

"information!" 

"well, if you prefer it, you may say intuitions. If our 
repres hand you that advertisement, it wa becaus he knew 
you would need it." 

"excus me," said eustace, "you appear to be sane, but your word do 
not convey to me ani reason significance. you gave me that 
foolish advertis yourself, and now you say that you did so 
becaus you knew I would need it. I ask you why?" 

the coffin merchant shrug hi shoulders. "our is a sentiment 
trade," he said, "I do not know whi dead men want coffins, but they 
do. for my part I would wish to be cremated." 

"dead men?" 

"ah, I wa come to that. you see mr.----?" 

"reynolds." 

"thank you, my name is harding--g. J. harding. you see, mr. reynolds, 
our intuit are of a veri special character, and if we say that 
you will need a coffin, it is probabl that you will need one." 

"you mean to say that i----" 

"precisely. In twenty-four hour or less, mr. reynolds, you will need 
our services." 

the revel of the coffin merchant' insan came to eustac 
with a certain relief. for the first time in the interview he had a 
sens of the dark empti shop and the whistl gas-jet over hi 
head. 

"why, it sound like a threat, mr. harding!" he said gaily. 

the coffin merchant look at him oddly, and produc a print form 
from hi pocket. "if you would fill thi up," he said. 

eustac pick it up off the counter and laugh aloud. It wa an 
order for a hundred-guinea funeral. 

"I don't know what your game is," he said, "but thi ha gone on long 
enough." 

"perhap it has, mr. reynolds," said the coffin merchant, and he 
leant across the counter and look eustac straight in the face. 

for a moment eustac wa amused; then he wa suddenli afraid. "I 
think it' time i----" he began slowly, and then he wa silent, hi 
whole will intent on fight the eye of the coffin merchant. the 
song of the gas-jet wane to a point in hi ears, and then rose 
steadili till it wa like the beat of the world' heart. the eye 
of the coffin merchant grew larger and larger, till they blend in 
one great circl of fire. then eustac pick a pen off the counter 
and fill in the form. 

"thank you veri much, mr. reynolds," said the coffin merchant, 
shake hand with him politely. "I can promis you everi civil 
and despatch. good-day, sir." 

outsid on the pavement eustac stood for a while tri to recal 
exactli what had happened. there wa a slight scratch on hi hand, 
and when he automat touch it with hi lips, it made them 
burn. the lit lamp in the gray' inn road seem to him a littl 
unsteady, and the passers-bi show a disposit to blunder into 
him. 

"queer business," he said to himself dimly; "i'd better have a cab." 

He reach home in a dream. 

It wa nearli ten o'clock befor the doctor rememb hi promise, 
and went upstair to eustace' flat. the outer door wa half-open so 
that he thought he wa expected, and he switch on the light in the 
littl hall, and shut the door behind him with the simplic of 
habit. but when he swung round from the door he gave a cri of 
astonishment. eustac wa lie asleep in a chair befor him with 
hi face flush and droop on hi shoulder, and hi breath 
hiss noisili through hi part lips. the doctor look at him 
quizzically, "if I did not know you, my young friend," he remarked, 
"I should say that you were as drunk as a lord." 

and he went up to eustac and shook him by the shoulder; but eustac 
did not wake. 

"queer!" the doctor muttered, snif at eustace' lips; "he hasn't 
been drinking." 




the soul Of A policeman 

I 

outside, abov the uneasi din of the traffic, the sky wa gloriou 
with the far peac of a fine summer evening. through the upper pane 
of the station window police-const bennett, who felt that hi 
sens at the moment were abnorm keen, recognis with a sink 
heart such red and yellow as bedeck the best patchwork quilt at 
home. By contrast the light of the superintendent' offic were 
subdued, so that within the wall of the police-st sound seem 
of greater importance. somewher a drunkard, depriv of hi boots, 
wa drum hi critic of author on the wall of hi cell. 
from the next room, where the men off duti were amus themselves, 
there came a steadi click of billiard-bal and dominoes, broken 
now and again by gruff burst of laughter. and at hi veri elbow the 
superintend wa speak in that suav voic that remind bennett 
of grey velvet. 

"you see, bennett, how matter stand. I have noth at all against 
your conduct. you are steadi and punctual, and I have no doubt that 
you are tri to do your duty. but it' veri unfortun that as far 
as result go you have noth to show for your efforts. dure the 
last three week you have not brought in a charg of ani description, 
and dure the same period I find that your colleagu on the beat 
have been except busy. I repeat that I do not accus you of 
neglect your duty, but these thing tell with the magistr and 
convey a gener suggest of slackness." 

bennett look down at hi brightli polish boots. hi finger were 
sandi and there wa soft felt beneath hi feet. 

"I have been afraid of thi for some time, sir," he said, "veri much 
afraid." 

the superintend look at him questioningly. 

"you have noth to say?" he said. 

"I have alway tri to do my duty, sir." 

"I know, I know. but you must see that a certain number of charges, 
if not of convictions, is the mark of a smart officer." 

"sure you would not have me arrest innoc persons?" 

"that is a most improp observation," said the superintend 
severely. "I will say no more to you now. but I hope you will take 
what I have said as a warning. you must bustl along, bennett, bustl 
along." 

outsid in the street, police-const bennett wa free to reflect 
on hi unpleas interview. the superintend wa ambiti and 
therefor pompous; he, himself, wa unambiti and therefor modest. 
left to himself he might have been content to triumph in the 
reflect that he had fail to say a number of foolish things, but 
the welfar of hi wife and children bound him, tiresom enough for 
a dreamer, tightli to the practical. It wa clear that if he did not 
forthwith produc sign of hi effici as a promot of the peac 
that welfar would be imperilled. yet he did not condemn the chanc 
that had made him a policeman or even the mischanc that brought no 
guilti person to hi hands. rather he look with a gentl curios 
into the face of the peopl who pass him, and wonder whi he 
could not detect trace of the gener assum wicked of the 
neighbourhood. these unkempt men and women were thiev and even 
murderers, it appeared; but to him they shone as happi youth and 
maidens, joyou victim of love' tyranny. 

As he drew near the street in which he live thi sens of univers 
love quicken in hi blood and stir him strangely. It did not 
escap hi eye that to the gener hi uniform wa an unfriendli 
thing. men and women paus in their anim chatter till he had 
passed, and even the children falter in their game to watch him 
with doubt eyes. and yet hi heart wa warm for them; he knew that 
he wish them well. 

nevertheless, when he saw hi hous shine in a row of similar 
houses, he realis that their attitud wa wiser than his. If he wa 
to be a success as a breadwinn he must wage a sterner war against 
these happy, lovabl people. It wa easy, he had been long enough in 
the forc to know how easy, to get cases. An intoler manner, a 
littl provoc harshness, and the thing wa done. yet with all 
hi heart he admir the poor for their resent independ of 
spirit. To him thi had alway been the suprem qualiti of the 
english character; how could he make use of it to fill english gaols? 

He open the door of hi house, with a sigh on hi lips. there came 
forth the merri shout of hi children. 

II 

abov the telephon wire the star dip at anchor in the cloudless 
sky. down below, in one of the dark, empti streets, police-const 
bennett turn the handl of door and test the fasten of 
windows, with a complet sceptic as to the valu of hi labours. 
gradually, he wa come to see that he wa not one of the few who 
are born to rule--to control--their simpl neighbours, ambiti onli 
for breath. where, if he had possess thi mission, he would have 
been eager to punish, he now felt no more than a sympathi that 
charg him with some respons for the sin of others. He 
share the uneasi convict of the multitud that human justice, as 
interpret by the inspir minority, is more than a littl unjust. 
the veri unpopular with which hi uniform endow him seem to 
him to express a sever critic of the system of which he wa an 
unwil supporter. He wish these peopl to regard him as a kind 
of offici friend, to advis and settl differences; yet, shrewder 
than he, they consid him as an enemy, who live on their mistak 
and the collaps of their social relationships. 

there remain hi duti to hi wife and children, and thi render 
the problem infinit perplexing. 

whi should he punish other becaus of hi love for hi children; or, 
again, whi should hi children suffer for hi scruples? yet it wa 
clear that, unless fortun permit him to accomplish some notabl 
yet honour arrest, he would either have to cheat and tyrannis 
with hi colleagu or leav the force. and what employ is 
avail for a discharg policeman? 

As he went systemat from hous to hous the consider of 
these thing mar the normal progress of hi dreams. consciou as 
he wa of the star and the great width of heaven that made the 
world so small, he nevertheless felt that hi love for hi famili and 
the wider love that determin hi honour were somehow intim 
connect with thi great of the univers rather than with the 
world of littl street and littl motives, and so were not lightli 
to be put aside. yet, how can one measur one love against anoth 
when all are true? 

when the door of gurneys', the moneylenders, open to hi touch, 
and drew him abruptli from hi speculations, hi first emot wa a 
quick irrit that chanc should interfer with hi thoughts. but 
when hi lantern show him that the lock had been tamper with, 
hi annoy chang to a thrill of hope excitement. what if 
thi were the way out? what if fate had grant him compromise, the 
opportun of pit hi offici virtu against offici crime, 
those shadowi forc in the exist of which he did not believe, 
but which lay on hi life like clouds? 

He wa not a physic coward, and it seem quit simpl to him to 
creep quietli through the open door into the silent offic without 
wait for possibl reinforcements. He knew that the safe, which 
would be the, natur goal of the presum burglars, wa in mr. 
gurney' privat offic beyond, and while he stood listen intent 
he seem to hear dim sound come from the direct of that room. 
for a moment he paused, frown slightli as a man doe when he is 
tri to catalogu an impression. when he achiev perception, it 
came oddli mingl with recollect of the littl tragedi of hi 
children at home. for some one wa cri like a child in the littl 
room where mr. gurney brow-beat recalcitr borrowers. danger 
burglar do not weep, and bennett hesit no longer, but step 
past the open flap of the counter, and threw open the door of the 
inner office. 

the electr light had been switch on, and at the tabl there sat a 
slight young man with hi face buri in hi hands, cri bitterly. 
behind him the safe stood open and empty, and the grate wa fill 
with smoulder ember of burnt paper. bennett went up to the 
young man and place hi hand on hi shoulder. but the young man wept 
on and did not move. 

tri as he might bennett could not help relax the grip of outrag 
law, and pat the young man' shoulder soothingli as it rose and 
fell. He had no fit weapon of rough and oppress with which to 
oppos thi child-lik grief; he could onli fight tear with tears. 

"come," he said gently, "you must pull yourself together." 

At the sound of hi voic the young man gave a great sob and then wa 
silent, shiver a little. 

"that' better," said bennett encouragingly, "much better." 

"I have burnt everything," the young man said suddenly, "and now the 
place is empty. I wa nearli sick just now." 

bennett look at him sympathetically, as one dreamer may look at 
another, who is sad with action dream too often for scatheless 
accomplishment. "i'm afraid you'll get into seriou trouble," he 
said. 

"I know," repli the young man, "but that blackguard gurney--" hi 
voic rose to a shrill scream and choke him for a moment. then 
he went on quietli "but it' all over now. finished! done with!" 

"I suppos you owe him money?" 

the young man nodded. "he live on fool like me. but he threaten 
to tell my father, and now i'v just about ruin him. pah! swine!" 

"thi won't be much better for your father," said bennett gravely. 

"no, it' worse; but perhap it will help some of the others. He kept 
on threaten and I couldn't wait ani longer. can't you see?" 

over the young man' shoulder the star beck and nod to bennett 
through the blindless window. 

"I see," he said; "I see." 

"so now you can take me." 

bennett look doubt at the outstretch wrists. "you are onli a 
fool," he said, "a dream fool like me, and they will give you 
year for this. I don't see whi they should give a man year for 
be a fool." 

the young man look up, taken with a sudden hope. "you will let me 
go?" he said, in astonishment. "I know I wa an ass just now. I 
suppos I wa a bit shaken. but you will let me go?" 

"I wish to god I had never seen you!" said bennett simply. "you have 
your father, and I have a wife and three littl children. who shall 
judg between us?" 

"mi father is an old man." 

"and my children are little. you had better go befor I make up my 
mind." 

without anoth word the young man crept out of the room, and bennett 
follow him slowli into the street. thi gallant crimin whose 
captur would have been honourable, had dwindl to a hyster 
foolish boy; and aid by hi own strang impuls thi boy had ruin 
him. the burglari had taken place on hi beat; there would be an 
inquiry; it did not need that to secur hi expuls from the force. 
onc in the street he look up hope to the heavens; but now the 
star seem unspeak remote, though as he pass along hi beat 
hi wife and hi three littl children were walk by hi side. 

iii 

bennett had develop mental without realis the logic result 
of hi develop until it smote him with calamity. Of hi betray 
of trust as a guardian of properti he thought nothing; of the 
possibl of poverti for hi famili he thought a great deal--al 
the more that hi dreamer' mind wa littl accustom to grip 
the practical. It wa strange, he thought, that hi final declar 
of war against hi posit should have been a littl lack in 
dignity. He had not taken the decis step through ani deep 
compass of utter poverti brave borne. hi had been no more than 
trivial piti of a young man' folly; and thi wa a frail thing on 
which to make so great a sacrifice. yet he regret nothing. hi 
task of moral guardian of men and women had becom imposs to him, 
and sooner or later he must have given it up. and there wa also hi 
family. "I must come to some decision," he said to himself firmly. 

and then the great scream fell upon hi ear and echo through hi 
brain for ever and ever. It came from the hous befor which he wa 
standing, and he expect the whole street to wake aghast with the 
horror of it. but there follow a silenc that seem to emphasis 
the ugli of the sound. far away an engin scream as if in 
mock imitation; and that wa all. bennett had count up to a 
hundr and seventi befor the door of the hous opened, and a man 
came out on to the steps. 

"oh, constable," he said coolly, "come inside, will you? I have 
someth to show you." 

bennett mount the step doubtfully. 

"there wa a scream," he said. 

the man look at him quickly. "so you heard it," he said. "it wa 
not pretty." 

"no, it wa not," repli bennett. 

the man led him down the dim passag into the back sitting-room. the 
bodi of a man lay on the sofa; it wa curl like a dri leaf. 

"that is my brother," said the man, with a littl emphat nod; "I 
have kill him. He wa my enemy." 

bennett stare dulli at the body, without believ it to be realli 
there. 

"dead!" he said mechanically. 

"and anyth I say will be use against me in evidence! As if you 
could compress my hatr into one littl lie notebook." 

"I don't care a damn about your hatred," said bennett, with heat. "an 
hour ago, perhaps, I might have arrest you; now I onli find you 
uninteresting." 

the man gave a long, low whistl of surprise. 

"A philosoph in uniform," he said, "god! sir, you have my 
sympathy." 

"and you have my pity. you have stolen your idea from cheap 
melodrama, and you make tragedi ridiculous. were I a policeman, I 
would lock you up with pleasure. were I a man, I should thrash you 
joyfully. As it is I can onli share your infamy. I too, I suppose, am 
a murderer." 

"you are in a low, nervou state," said the man; "and you are do 
me some injustice. It is true that I am a poor murderer; but it 
appear to me that you are a wors policeman." 

"I shall wear the uniform no more from tonight." 

"I think you are wise, and I shall mar my philosophi with no more 
murders. if, indeed, I have kill him; for I assur you that beyond 
administ the poison to hi wretch bodi I have done nothing. 
perhap he is not dead. can you hear hi heart beating?" 

"I can hear the spoon of my children beat on their empti 
platters!" 

"i it like that with you? poor devil! oh, poor, poor devil! 
philosoph should have no wives, no children, no homes, and no 
hearts." 

bennett turn from the man with unspeak loathing. 

"I hate you and such as you!" he cri weakly. "you justifi the 
exist of the police. you make me despis myself becaus I realis 
that your crime are no less mine than yours. I do not ask you to 
defend the dead of that thing lie there. I shall stir no finger 
to have you hanged, for the thought of suicid repel me, and I 
cannot separ your blood and mine. We are common children of a 
nobl mother, and for our mother' sake I say farewell." 

and without wait for the man' answer he pass from the hous to 
the street. 

IV 

haggard and with rebelli limbs, police-const bennett stagger 
into the superintendent' offic in the earli morning. 

"I have paid care attent to your advice," he said to the 
superintendent, "and I have pass across the citi in search of 
crime. In it place I have found but folly--such folli as you have, 
such folli as I have myself--th common heritag of our blood. It 
seem that in some way I have bound myself to bring crimin to 
justice. I have pass across the city, and I have found no man 
wors than myself. Do what you will with me." 

the superintend clear hi throat. 

"there have been too mani complaint concern the conduct of the 
police," he said; "it is time that an exampl wa made. you will be 
charg with be drunk and disorderli while on duty." 

"I have a wife and three littl children," said bennett softly--"and 
three pretti littl children." and he cover hi tire face with hi 
hands. 




the conjur 

certainli the audienc wa restive. In the first place it felt that 
it had been defrauded, see that cissi bradford, whose smile 
face adorn the bill outside, had, fail to appear, and secondly, 
it consid that the deputi for that famou ladi wa more than 
inadequate. To the littl man who sweat in the glare of the 
limelight and juggl desper with glass ball in a vain effort 
to steadi hi nerv it wa appar that hi turn wa a failure. and 
as he work he could have cri with disappointment, for hi wa a 
trial performance, and a year' engag in the hennings' group of 
music-hal would have reward success. yet hi tricks, thing that 
he had done with the utmost eas a thousand times, had been a 
success of blunders, rather mirth-provok than mystifi to 
the audience. present one of the glass ball fell crash on the 
stage, and amidst the jeer of the galleri he turn to hi wife, 
who serv as hi assistant. 

"i'v lost my chance," he said, with a sob; "I can't do it!" 

"never mind, dear," she whispered. "there' a nice steak and onion 
at home for supper." 

"it' no use," he said despairingly. "i'll tri the disappear trick 
and then get off. i'm done here." He turn back to the audience. 

"ladi and gentlemen," he said to the mocker in a waver voice, 
"I will now present to you the conclud item of my entertainment. I 
will caus thi ladi to disappear under your veri eyes, without the 
aid of ani mechan contriv or artifici device." thi wa the 
merest showman' patter, for, as a matter of fact, it wa not a veri 
wonder illusion. but as he led hi wife forward to present her to 
the audienc the conjur wa wonder whether the mishap that had 
ruin hi chanc would meet him even here. If someth should go 
wrong--h felt hi wife' hand trembl in his, and he press it 
tightli to reassur her. He must make an effort, an effort of will, 
and then no mistak would happen. for a second the light danc 
befor hi eyes, then he pull himself together. If an earthquak 
should disturb the curtain and show molli creep ignomini 
away behind he would still meet hi fate like a man. He turn round 
to conduct hi wife to the littl alcov from which she should 
vanish. she wa not on the stage! 

for a minut he did not guess the great of the disaster. then he 
realis that the theatr wa intens quiet, and that he would have 
to explain that the last item of hi programm wa even more of a 
fiasco than the rest. owe to a sudden indisposition--hi skin 
tingl at the thought of the hooting. hi tongu rasp upon 
crack lip as he brace himself and bow to the audience. 

then came the applause. again and again it broke out from all over 
the house, while the curtain rose and fell, and the conjur stood on 
the stage, mute, uncomprehending. what had happened? At first he had 
thought they were mock him, but it wa imposs to misjudg the 
natur of the applause. besides, the stage-manag wa allow him 
call after call, as if he were a star. when at length the curtain 
remain down, and the orchestra struck up the open bar of the 
next song, he stagger off into the wing as if he were drunk. there 
he met mr. jame hen himself. 

"you'll do," said the great man; "that last trick wa neat. you ought 
to polish up the other though. I suppos you don't want to tell me 
how you did it? well, well, come in the morn and we'll fix up a 
contract." 

and so, without have said a word, the conjur found himself 
hustl off by the vaudevil napoleon. mr. hen had someth 
more to say to hi manager. 

"bit rum," he said. "did you see it?" 

"queerest thing we'v struck." 

"how wa it done do you think?" 

"can't imagine. there one minut on hi arm, gone the next, no trap, 
or curtain, or anything." 

"money in it, eh?" 

"biggest hit of the century, I should think." 

"i'll go and fix up a contract and get him to sign it tonight. get 
on with it." and mr. jame hen fled to hi office. 

meanwhil the conjur wa wander in the wing with the droop 
heart of a lost child. what had happened? whi wa he a success, and 
whi did peopl stare so oddly, and what had becom of hi wife? when 
he ask them the stage hand laughed, and said they had not seen 
her. whi should they laugh? He want her to explain things, and hear 
their good luck. but she wa not in her dressing-room, she wa not 
anywhere. for a moment he felt like crying. 

then, for the second time that night, he pull himself together. 
after all, there wa no reason to be upset. He ought to feel veri 
pleas about the contract, howev it had happened. It seem that 
hi wife had left the stage in some queer way without be seen. 
probabl to increas the mysteri she had gone straight home in her 
stage dress, and had succeed in dodg the stage-door keeper. It 
wa all veri strange; but, of course, there must be some simpl 
explan like that. He would take a cab home and find her there 
already. there wa a steak and onion for supper. 

As he drove along in the cab he becam convinc that thi theori wa 
right. molli had alway been clever, and thi time she had certainli 
succeed in surpris everybody. At the door of hi hous he gave 
the cabman a shill for himself with a light heart. He could afford 
it now. He ran up the step cheer and open the door. the 
passag wa quit dark, and he wonder whi hi wife hadn't lit the 
gas. 

"molly!" he cried, "molly!" 

the small, weary-ey servant came out of the kitchen on a savouri 
wind of onions. 

"hasn't missu come home with you, sir?" she said. 

the conjur thrust hi hand against the wall to steadi himself, and 
the pattern of the wall-pap seem to burn hi finger-tips. 

"not here!" he gasp at the frighten girl. "then where is she? 
where is she?" 

"I don't know, sir," she began stuttering; but the conjur turn 
quickli and ran out of the house. Of course, hi wife must be at the 
theatre. It wa absurd ever to have suppos that she could leav the 
theatr in her stage dress unnoticed; and now she wa probabl 
worri becaus he had not wait for her. how foolish he had been. 

It wa a quarter of an hour befor he found a cab, and the theatr 
wa dark and empti when he got back to it. He knock at the stage 
door, and the night watchman open it. 

"mi wife?" he cried. "there' no one here now, sir," the man answer 
respectfully, for he knew that a new star had risen that night. 

the conjur leant against the doorpost faintly. 

"take me up to the dressing-rooms," he said. "I want to see whether 
she ha been, there while I wa away." 

the watchman led the way along the dark passages. "I shouldn't worri 
if I were you, sir," he said. "she can't have gone far." He did not 
know anyth about it, but he want to be sympathetic. 

"god knows," the conjur muttered, "I can't understand thi at all." 

In the dressing-room molly' cloth still lay neatli fold as she 
had left them when they went on the stage that night, and when he saw 
them hi last hope left the conjurer, and a strang thought came into 
hi mind. 

"I should like to go down on the stage," he said, "and see if there 
is anyth to tell me of her." 

the night watchman look at the conjur as if he thought he wa 
mad, but he follow him down to the stage in silence. when he wa 
there the conjur lean forward suddenly, and hi face wa fill 
with a wist eagerness. 

"molly!" he called, "molly!" 

but the empti theatr gave him noth but echo in reply. 




the poet' allegori 

I 

the boy came into the town at six o'clock in the morning, but the 
baker at the corner of the first street wa up, as is the way of 
bakers, and when he saw the boy passing, he hail him with a jolli 
shout. 

"hullo, boy! what are you after?" 

"i'm go about my business," the boy said pertly. 

"and what might that be, young fellow?" 

"I might be a good tinker, and worship god pan, or I might grind 
scissor as sharp as the nose of bakers. but, as a matter of fact, 
i'm a piper, not a rat-catcher, you understand, but just a simpl 
singer of sad songs, and a mad singer of merri ones." 

"oh," said the baker dully, for he had hope the boy wa in search of 
work. "then I suppos you have a message." 

"I sing songs," the boy said emphatically. "I don't run errand 
for anyon save it be for the fairies." 

"well, then, you have come to tell us that we are bad, that our live 
are corrupt and our home sordid. nowaday there' money in that if 
you can do it well." 

"your wit get up too earli in the morn for me, baker," said the 
boy. "I tell you I sing songs." 

"aye, I know, but there' someth in them, I hope. perhap you 
bring news. they'r not so popular as the other sort, but still, as 
long as it' bad news--" 

"i it the flour that ha chang hi brain to dough, or the heat of 
the oven that ha made them like dead grass?" 

"but you must have some news----?" 

"news! it' a fine morn of summer, and I saw a kingfish across 
the watermeadow come along. oh, and there' a cuckoo back in the 
fir plantation, sing with a may voice. It must have been asleep 
all these months." 

"but, my dear boy, these thing happen everi day. are there no 
battl or earthquak or famin in the world? ha no man 
murder hi wife or rob hi neighbour? Is no one oppress by 
tyrant or lie to by their officers." 

the boy shrug hi shoulders. 

"I hope not," he said. "but if it were so, and I knew, I should not 
tell you. I don't want to make you unhappy." 

"but of what use are you then, if it be not to rous in us the 
discont that is alon divine? would you have me go fat and happy, 
listen to your babbl of kingfish and cuckoos, while my 
brother and sister in the world are starving?" 

the boy wa silent for a moment. 

"I give my song to the poor for nothing," he said slowly. "certainli 
they are not much use to empti bellies, but they are all I have to 
give. and I take it, sinc you speak so feelingly, that you, too, do 
your best. and these others, these peopl who must be remind hourli 
to throw their crust out of window for the poor--would you have me 
sing to them? they must be told that life is evil, and I find it 
good; that men and women are wretched, and I find them happy; that 
food and cleanliness, order and knowledg are the essenc of 
content while I onli ask for love. would you have me lie to cheat 
mean folk out of their scraps?" 

the baker scratch hi head in astonishment. 

"certainli you are veri mad," he said. "but you won't get much money 
in thi town with that sort of talk. you had better come in and have 
breakfast with me." 

"but whi do you ask me?" said the boy, in surprise. 

"well, you have a decent, honest sort of face, although your tongu 
is disordered." 

"I had rather it had been becaus you like my songs," said the boy, 
and he went in to breakfast with the baker. 

II 

over hi breakfast the boy talk wise on art, as is the wont of 
young singers, and afterward he went on hi way down the street. 

"it' a great pity," said the baker; "he seem a decent young chap." 

"he ha nice eyes," said the baker' wife. 

As the boy pass down the street he frown a little. 

"what is the matter with them?" he wondered. "they'r pleasant peopl 
enough, and yet they did not want to hear my songs." 

present he came to the tailor' shop, and as the tailor had sharper 
eye than the baker, he saw the pipe in the boy' pocket. 

"hullo, piper!" he called. "mi leg are stiff. come and sing us a 
song!" 

the boy look up and saw the tailor sit cross-leg in the open 
window of hi shop. 

"what sort of song would you like?" he asked. 

"oh! the latest," repli the tailor. "we don't want ani old song 
here." So the boy sung hi new song of the kingfish in the 
water-meadow and the cuckoo who had overslept itself. 

"and what do you call that?" ask the tailor angrily, when the boy 
had finished. 

"it' my new song, but I don't think it' one of my best." but in hi 
heart the boy believ it was, becaus he had onli just made it. 

"I should hope it' your worst," the tailor said rudely. "what sort 
of stuff is that to make a man happy?" 

"to make a man happy!" echo the boy, hi heart sink within him. 

"if you have no news to give me, whi should I pay for your songs! I 
want to hear about my neighbours, about their lives, and their wive 
and their sins. there' the fat baker up the street--they say he 
cheat the poor with light bread. make me a song of that, and i'll 
give you some breakfast. Or there' the magistr at the top of the 
hill who made the girl drown herself last week. that' a poetic 
subject." 

"what' all this!" said the boy disdainfully. "can't you make dirt 
enough for yourself!" 

"you with your stuff about birds," shout the tailor; "you'r a rank 
impostor! that' what you are!" 

"they say that you are the ninth part of a man, but I find that they 
have grossli exaggerated," cri the boy, in retort; but he had 
a heavi heart as he made off along the street. 

By noon he had interview the butcher, the cobbler, the milkman, and 
the maker of candlesticks, but they treat him no better than the 
tailor had done, and as he wa feel tire he went and sat down 
under a tree. 

"I begin to think that the baker is the best of the lot of them," he 
said to himself ruefully, as he roll hi empti wallet between hi 
fingers. 

then, as the folli of singer provid them in some measur with a 
philosophy, he fell asleep. 

iii 

when he woke it wa late in the afternoon, and the children, fresh 
from school, had come out to play in the dusk. far and near, across 
the town-square, the boy could hear their merri voices, but he felt 
sad, for hi stomach had forgotten the baker' breakfast, and he did 
not see where he wa like to get ani supper. So he pull out hi 
pipe, and made a mourn song to himself of the danc gnat 
and the bitter odour of the bonfir in the townsfolk' gardens. and 
the children drew near to hear him sing, for they thought hi song 
wa pretty, until their father drove them home, saying, "that stuff 
ha no educ value." 

"whi haven't you a message?" they ask the boy. 

"I come to tell you that the grass is green beneath your feet and 
that the sky is blue over your heads." 

"oh I but we know all that," they answered. 

"do you! Do you!" scream the boy. "do you think you could stop 
over your absurd labour if you knew how blue the sky is? you would 
be out sing on the hill with me!" 

"then who would do our work?" they said, mock him. 

"then who would want it done?" he retorted; but it' ill argu on 
an empti stomach. 

but when they had tire of tell him what a fool he was, and gone 
away, the tailor' littl daughter crept out of the shadow and 
pat him on the shoulder. 

"I say, boy!" she whispered. "i'v brought you some supper. father 
doesn't know." the boy bless her and ate hi supper while she 
watch him like hi mother and when he had done she kiss him on 
the lips. 

"there, boy!" she said. 

"you have nice golden hair," the boy said. 

"see! it shine in the dusk. It strike me it' the onli gold I shall 
get in thi town." 

"still it' nice, don't you think?" the girl whisper in hi ear. 
she had her arm round hi neck. 

"I love it," the boy said joyfully; "and you like my songs, don't 
you?" 

"oh, yes, I like them veri much, but I like you better." 

the boy put her off roughly. 

"you'r as bad as the rest of them," he said indignantly. "I tell you 
my song are everything, I am nothing." 

"but it wa you who ate my supper, boy," said the girl. 

the boy kiss her remorsefully. "but I wish you had like me for my 
songs," he sighed. "you are better than ani silli old songs!" 

"a bad as the rest of them," the boy said lazily, "but somehow 
pleasant." 

the shadow flock to their even meet in the square, and 
overhead the star shone out in a sky that wa certainli exceedingli 
blue. 

IV 

next morn they arrest the boy as a rogu and a vagabond, and in 
the afternoon they brought him befor the magistrate. 

"and what have you to say for yourself!" said the magistr to the 
boy, after the second policeman, like a faith echo, had finish 
read hi notes. 

"well," said the boy, "I may be a rogu and a vagabond. indeed, I 
think that I probabl am; but I would claim the licens that ha 
alway been allow to singers." 

"oh!" said the magistrate. "so you are one of those, are you! and 
what is your message!" 

"I think if I could sing you a song or two I could explain myself 
better," said the boy. 

"well," repli the magistr doubtfully, "you can tri if you like, 
but I warn you that I wrote song myself when I wa a boy, so that I 
know someth about it." 

"oh, i'm glad of that," said the boy, and he sang hi famou song of 
the grass that is so green, and when he had finish the magistr 
frowned. 

"I knew that before," he said. 

So then the boy sang hi wonder song of the sky that is so blue. 
and when he had finish the magistr scowled. "and what are we to 
learn from that!" he said. 

So then the boy lost hi temper and sang some naughti doggerel he 
had made up in hi cell that morning. He abus the town and 
townsmen, but especi the townsmen. He damn their morals, their 
customs, and their institutions. He said that they had ugli faces, 
raucou voices, and that their bodi were unclean. He said they 
were thiev and liar and murderers, that they had no ear for music 
and no sens of humour. oh, he wa bitter! 

"good god!" said the magistrate, "that' what I call real improv 
poetry. whi didn't you sing that first? there might have been a 
miscarriag of justice." 

then the baker, the tailor, the butcher, the cobbler, the milkman, 
and the maker of candlestick rose in court and said-- 

"ah, but we all knew there wa someth in him." 

So the magistr gave the boy a certif that show that he wa 
a real singer, and the tradesmen gave him a purs of gold, but the 
tailor' littl daughter gave him one of her golden ringlets. "you 
won't forget, boy, will you?" she said. 

"oh, no," said the boy; "but I wish you had like my songs." 

presently, when he had come a littl way out of the town, he put hi 
hand in hi wallet and drew out the magistrate' certif and tore 
it in two; and then he took out the gold piec and threw them into 
the ditch, and they were not half as bright as the buttercups. but 
when he came to the ringlet he smile at it and put it back. 

"yet she wa as bad as the rest of them," he thought with a sigh. 

and he went across the world with hi songs. 




and who shall say----? 

It wa a dull novemb day, and the window were heavili 
curtained, so that the room wa veri dark. In front of the fire wa a 
larg arm-chair, which shut whatev light there might be from the 
two children, a boy of eleven and a girl about two year younger, who 
sat on the floor at the back of the room. the boy wa the better 
looking, but the girl had the better face. they were both gaze at 
the arm-chair with the utmost excitement. 

"it' all right. he' asleep," said the boy. 

"oh, do be careful! you'll wake him," whisper the girl. 

"are you afraid?" 

"no, whi should I be afraid of my father, stupid?" 

"I tell you he' not father ani more. he' a murderer," the boy said 
hotly. "he told me, I tell you. He said, `I have kill your 
mother, ray,' and I went and looked, and mother wa all red. I simpli 
shouted, and she wouldn't answer. that mean she' dead. hi hand wa 
all red, too." 

"wa it paint?" 

"no, of cours it wasn't paint. It wa blood. and then he came down 
here and went to sleep." 

"poor father, so tired." 

"he' not poor father, he' not father at all; he' a murderer, and 
it is veri wick of you to call him father," said the boy. 

"father," mutter the girl rebelliously. 

"you know the sixth command say `thou shalt do no murder,' and 
he ha done murder; so he'll go to hell. and you'll go to hell too if 
you call him father. it' all in the bible." 

the boy end vaguely, but the littl girl wa quit overcom by the 
thought of her badness. 

"oh, I am wicked!" she cried. "and I do so want to go to heaven." 

she had a stout and materialist belief in it as a place of sheet 
angel and harps, where it wa easi to be good. 

"you must do as I tell you, then," he said. "becaus I know. i'v 
learnt all about it at school." 

"and you never told me," said she reproachfully. 

"ah, there' lot of thing I know," he replied, nod hi head. 

"what must we do?" said the girl meekly. "shall I go and ask 
mother?" 

the boy wa sick at her obstinacy. 

"mother' dead, I tell you; that mean she can't hear anything. it' 
no use talk to her; but I know. you must stop here, and if father 
wake you run out of the hous and call `police!' and I will go now 
and tell a policeman now." 

"and what happen then?" she asked, with round eye at her brother' 
wisdom. 

"oh, they come and take him away to prison. and then they put a rope 
round hi neck and hang him like haman, and he goe to hell." 

"wha-at! Do they kill him?" 

"becaus he' a murderer. they alway do." 

"oh, don't let' tell them! don't let' tell them!" she 
screamed. 

"shut up!" said the boy, "or he'll wake up. We must tell them, or we 
go to hell--both of us." 

but hi sister did not collaps at thi aw threat, as he expected, 
though the tear were roll down her face. "don't let' tell them," 
she sobbed. 

"you'r a horrid girl, and you'll go to hell," said the boy, in 
disgust. but the silenc wa onli broken by her sobbing. "I tell you 
he kill mother dead. you didn't cri a bit for mother; I did." 

"oh, let' ask mother! let' ask mother! I know she won't want father 
to go to hell. let' ask mother!" 

"mother' dead, and can't hear, you stupid," said the boy. "I keep on 
tell you. come up and look." 

they were both a littl awe in mother' room. It wa so quiet, and 
mother look so funny. and first the girl shouted, and then the boy, 
and then they shout both together, but noth happened. the echo 
made them frightened. 

"perhap she' asleep," the girl said; so her brother pinch one of 
mother' hands--th white one, not the red one--but noth 
happened, so mother wa dead. 

"ha she gone to hell?" whisper the girl. 

"no! she' gone to heaven, becaus she' good. onli wick peopl go 
to hell. and now I must go and tell the policeman. don't you tell 
father where i'v gone if he wake up, or he'll run away befor the 
policeman comes." 

"why?" 

"so as not to go to hell," said the boy, with certainty; and they 
went downstair together, the littl mind of the girl be much 
perturb becaus she wa so wicked. what would mother say tomorrow 
if she had done wrong? 

the boy put on hi sailor hat in the hall. "you must go in there and 
watch," he said, nod in the direct of the sitting-room. "I 
shall run all the way." 

the door banged, and she heard hi step down the path, and then 
everyth wa quiet. 

she tipto into the room, and sat down on the floor, and look at 
the back of the chair in utter distress. she could see her father' 
elbow project on one side, but noth more. for an instant 
she hope that he wasn't there--hop that he had gone--but then, 
terrified, she knew that thi wa a piec of extrem wickedness. 

So she lay on the rough carpet, sob hopelessly, and see real 
and viciou devil of her brother' imagin in all the corner of 
the room. 

presently, in her misery, she rememb a packet of acid-drop that 
lay in her pocket, and drew them forth in a sticki mass, which part 
from it paper with regret. So she choke and suck her sweet at 
the same time, and found them salt and tasteless. 

ray wa gone a long time, and she wa a wick girl who would go to 
hell if she didn't do what he told her. those were her prevail 
ideas. 

and present there came a third. ray had said that if her father 
woke up he would run away, and not go to hell at all. now if she woke 
him up--. 

she knew thi wa dread naughty; but her mind clung to the idea 
obstinately. you see, father had alway been so fond of mother, and 
he would not like to be in a differ place. mother wouldn't 
like it either. she wa alway so sorri when father did not come home 
or anything. and hell is a dread place, full of things. she half 
convinc herself, and start up, but then there came an aw 
thought. 

If she did thi she would go to hell for ever and ever, and all the 
other would be in heaven. 

she hung there in suspense, suck her sweet and puzzl it over 
with knit brows. 

how can one be good? 

she swung round and look in the dark corner by the piano; but the 
devil wa not there. 

and then she ran across the room to her father, and shake hi arm, 
shouted, tremulously-- 

"wake up, father! wake up! the polic are coming!" 

and when the polic came ten minut later, accompani by a veri 
proud and virtuou littl boy, they heard a small shrill voic 
crying, despairingly-- 

"the police, father! the police!" 

but father would not wake. 




the biographi Of A superman 

"O limèd soul that struggl to be free 
art more engaged!" 

charl stephen dale, the subject of my study, wa a dramatist 
and, indeed, someth of a celebr in the earli year of the 
twentieth century. that he should be alreadi complet forgotten is 
by no mean astonish in an age that elect it great men with a 
charm indecis of touch. the gener prejudic against the 
grant of freehold ha spread to the desir land of fame; and 
where our proflig ancestor were will to call a man great in 
perpetuity, we, with more shrewdness, prefer to name him a geniu for 
seven years. We know that befor that period may have expir fate 
will have grant us a sea-serp with yet more coils, with a 
yet more bewild arrang of marin and sunset tints, and the 
conclus of previou leas will enabl us to grant him undisput 
possess of parnassus. If our ancestor were more gener they 
were certainli less discriminate; and it cannot be doubt that mani 
of them went to their grave under the impress that it is possibl 
for there to be more than one great man at a time! We have alter 
all that. 

for two year dale wa a great man, or rather the great man, and it 
is probabl that if he had not die he would have held hi posit 
for a longer period. when hi death wa announced, although the 
notic of hi life and work were of a flatter length, the 
leaderwrit were not unnatur aggriev that he should have 
resign hi post befor the popular interest in hi person wa 
exhausted. the censor might do hi best by prohibit the 
perform of all the play that the dead man had left behind him; 
but, as the author neglect to express hi view in their columns, 
and the common sens of their reader forbad the public of 
interview with him, the journal could draw but a poor 
satisfact from condemn or uphold the offici action. dale' 
regrett absenc reduc what might have been an agreeabl clash 
of person to an arid discuss on art. the consequ wa 
obvious. the end of the week saw the elev of jame macintosh, 
the great scotch comedian, to the vacant post, and dale wa 
complet forgotten. that thi oblivion is merit in term of hi 
work I am not prepar to admit; that it is merit in term of hi 
person I indignantli wish to deny. whatev dale may have been 
as an artist, he was, perhap in spite of himself, a man, and a man, 
moreover, possess of mani strike and unusu trait of character. 
It is to the man dale that I offer thi tribute. 

sprung from an old yorkshir family, charl stephen dale wa yet 
suffici of a cockney to justifi both hi friend and hi enemi 
in credit him with the celtic temperament. nevertheless, he wa 
essenti a modern, insomuch that hi contempt for the write of 
dead men surpass hi dislik of live authors. To these two 
central influenc we may trace most of the peculiar that 
render him notori and ultim great. thus, while hi celtic 
æsthetic permit him to eat noth but raw meat, becaus he 
mistrust alik "the reek product of the manure-heap and the 
barbar finger of cooks," it wa sure hi modern that made him 
an agnostic, becaus bishop sat in the hous of lords. smaller men 
might dislik veget and bishop without allow it to affect 
their conduct; but dale wa care to observ that everi slightest 
convict should have it place in the format of hi character. 
conversely, he wa noth without a reason. 

these may seem small thing to which to trace the motiv forc of a 
man' life; but if we add to them a third, found where the truth 
about a man not infrequ lies, in the rag-bag of hi enemies, our 
materi will be nearli complete. "dale hate hi 
fellow-human- beings," wrote some anonym scribbler, and, even 
express thu baldly, the statement is not wholli false. but he 
hate them becaus of their imperfections, and it would be truer to 
say that hi love of human amount to a posit hatr of 
individuals, and, _pace_ the critics, the love wa no less sincer 
than the hatred. He had drawn from the mental confus of the darker 
german philosoph an imag of the perfect man--an imag differ 
onli in inessenti from the idol worship by the imperialist as 
"efficiency." He did not find--it wa hardli like that he would 
find--that hi contemporari fulfil thi perfect conception, and 
he therefor felt it necessari to condemn them for the possess of 
those weaknesses, or as some would prefer to say, qualities, of which 
the sum is human nature. 

I now approach a quality, or rather the lack of a quality, that is in 
itself of so debat a character, that were it not of the utmost 
import in consid the life of charl stephen dale I should 
prefer not to mention it. I refer to hi complet lack of a sens of 
humour, the conscious of which defici went so far to detract 
from hi import as an artist and a man. the difficulti which I 
mention abov lie in the fact that, while everi one ha a clear 
concept of what they mean by the phrase, no one ha yet 
succeed in defin it satisfactorily. here I would ventur to 
suggest that it is a kind of magnific sens of proportion, a 
sens that relat the infinit great of the univers to the 
finit small of man, and draw the inevit conclus as to 
the import of our joy and sorrow and labours. I am awar that 
thi definit err on the side of vagueness; but possibl it may be 
found to includ the truth. obviously, the natur of those who 
possess thi sens will tend to be static rather than dynamic, and it 
is therefor against the limit impos by thi sens that 
intellectu anarchists, among whom I would number dale, and poets, 
primarili rebel. but--and it is thi rather than hi undoubt 
intellectu gift or hi dogmat definit of good and evil that 
definit separ dale from the normal men--ther can be no doubt 
that he felt hi lack of a sens of humour bitterly. In everi word he 
ever said, in everi line he ever wrote, I detect a pain strive 
after thi mysteri sense, that enabl hi neighbours, fool as he 
undoubtedli thought them, to laugh and weep and follow the faith of 
their heart without consciou realis of their own 
exist and the problem it induced. By dint of studi and strenuou 
observ he achieved, as ani man may achieve, a consider 
degre of wit, though to the last hi ignor of the audienc whom 
he serv and despised, prevent him from judg the effect of hi 
salli without experiment. but tri as he might the finer jewel lay 
far beyond hi reach. strong men fight themselv when they can find 
no fitter adversary; but in all the histori of literatur there is no 
stranger spectacl than thi lifelong contest between dale, the 
intellectu anarch and pioneer of supermen, and dale, the poor 
lone devil who wonder what made peopl happy. 

I have said that the struggl wa lifelong, but it must be ad that 
it wa alway unequal. the knowledg that in hi secret heart he 
desir thi quality, the imperfect of imperfections, onli serv 
to make dale' attack on the complac of hi contemporari more 
bitter. He ridicul their achievements, their ambitions, and their 
love with a furi that awaken in them a mild curiosity, but by no 
mean affect their comfort. moreover, the veri vehem with 
which he demand their contempt depriv him of much of hi forc as 
a critic, for they justli wonder whi a man should wast hi 
lifetim in attack them if they were inde so worthless. 
actually, they felt, dale wa a great deal more engag with hi 
audienc than mani of the imagin writer whom he affect to 
despis for their sycophancy. and, especi toward the end of hi 
life when hi power perhap were weakening, the devic which he 
use to arous the irrit of hi contemporari becam more and 
more childishli artificial, less and less effective. He wa like one 
of those actor who feel that they cannot hold the attent of their 
audienc unless they are alway do something, though noth is 
more monoton than manner vivacity. 

dale, then, wa a man who wa veri anxiou to be modern, but at the 
same time had not wholli succeed in conquer hi æesthet sense. 
He had constitut himself high priest of the most puritan and 
remot of all creeds, yet there wa that in hi blood that rebel 
ceaselessli against the intellectu limit he had voluntarili 
accepted. the result in term of art wa chaos. possess of an 
intellect of great analyt and destruct force, he wa almost 
entir lack in imagination, and he wa therefor unabl to rais 
hi work to a plane in which the mutual comb element of hi 
natur might have been reconciled. hi light moment of envy, anger, 
and vaniti pass into the crucibl to come forth unchanged. He 
lack the magic wand, and hi work never took wing abov hi 
conception. It is in vain to seek in ani of hi play or novels, 
tract or prefaces, for the product of inspiration, the divin gift 
that enabl one man to write with the common pen of humanity. He 
could onli employ hi curious perfect techniqu in reproduc the 
wayward flash of a mind incap of consecut thought. He never 
attempted--and thi is a hard saying--to produc ani work beauti 
in itself; while the confus of hi mind, and the vaniti that never 
allow him to ignor the effect hi work might produc on hi 
audience, prevent him from give clear express to hi creed. 
hi work will appeal rather to the student of men than to the 
student of art, and, wantonli incoher though it often is, must be 
held to constitut a remark human document. 

It is strang to reflect that among hi contemporari admir dale 
wa credit with an intellect of unusu clarity, for the 
examin of ani of hi play impress one with the number and 
mutual destruct of hi motiv for artist expression. A 
note debater, he made frequent use of the devic of attack the 
weak of the other man' speech, rather than the weak of 
the other man' argument. hi prose wa good, though at it best 
so imperson that it recal the manner of an except 
well-written lead article. At it worst it wa mar by 
numer vulgar and error of taste, not always, it is to be 
feared, intentional. hi attitud on thi point wa typic of hi 
strang blind to the necess of a pure artist ideal. He 
commit these extravagances, he would say, in order to irrit 
hi audienc into a condit of mental alertness. As a matter of 
fact, he gener made hi reader more sorri than angry, and he 
did not realis that even if he had been success it wa but a 
poor reward for the wanton spoil of much good work. He 
proclaim himself to be abov criticism, but he wa onli too 
often beneath it. revolt against the dignity, not infrequ 
pompous, of hi fellow-men of letters, he play the part of clown 
with more enthusiasm than skill. It is intellectu arrog in a 
clever man to believ that he can play the fool with success 
mere becaus he wish it. 

there is no need for me to enter into detail with regard to dale' 
person appearance; the caricaturist did him rather more than 
justice, the photograph rather less. In hi younger day he 
suggest a gingerbread man that had been left too long in the sun; 
toward the end he affect a cultur and elabor rugged that 
made him look like a duke or a market gardener. like most clever men, 
he had good eyes. 

nor is it my purpos to add more than a word to the publish 
account of hi death. there is someth strang piti in that 
last desper effort to achiev humour. We have all read the account 
of hi own death that he dictat from the sick-bed--cold, 
epigrammatic, and, alas! characterist lack in taste. and 
onc more it wa hi fate to make us rather sorri than angry. 

In the third scene of the second act of "henri v.," a play written 
by an author whom dale pretend to despise, dame quickli describ 
the death of falstaff in word that are too well known to need 
quotation. It wa thu and no otherwis that dale died. It is thu 
that everi man dies. 




blue blood 

He sat in the middl of the great café with hi head support 
on hi hands, miser even to bitterness. inwardli he curs the 
ancestor who had left him littl but a great name and a small and 
ridicul body. He thought of hi father, whose expens 
eccentr had amus hi fellow-countrymen at the cost of hi 
fortune; hi mother, for whom death had been a blessing; hi 
grandpar and hi uncles, in whom no man had found ani good. but 
most of all he curs himself, for whose folli even hered might 
not wholli account. He recal the school where he had made no 
friends, the univers where he had taken no degree. sinc he had 
left oxford, hi aimless, hopeless life, profligate, but 
dishonourable, perhaps, onli by accident, had depriv even hi titl 
of ani social value, and one by one hi veri acquaint had 
left him to the societi of broken men and the women who are anyth 
but light. and these, and here perhap the root of hi bitter 
lay, even these recognis him onli as a victim for their mockery, a 
thing more poor than themselves, whereon they could satisfi the anger 
of their tortur souls. and hi last miseri lay in this: that he 
himself could find no day in hi life to admire, no one past dream to 
cherish, no inmost corner of hi heart to love. the lowest tramp, the 
least-heed waif of the night, might have some ultim pride, but 
he himself had nothing, noth whatever. He wa a dream-pauper, an 
emot bankrupt. 

with a choke sob he drain hi brandi and told the waiter to bring 
him another. there had been a period in hi life when he had been 
abl to find some measur of sentiment satisfact in the stupor 
of drunkenness. In those days, through the veil of illus which 
alcohol had flung across hi brain, he had been abl to regard the 
contempt of the men as the intimaci of friendship, the scorn of the 
women as the laughter of light love. but now drink gave him 
noth but the mordant insight of morbidity, which cut through hi 
rotten soul like cheese. yet night after night he came to thi place, 
to be tortur afresh by the ridicul of the sordid frequenters, and 
by the careless music of the orchestra which told him of a flowerless 
spring and of a morn which held for him no hope. for hi last 
emot rest in thi self-inflict pain; he could onli breath 
freeli under the lash of hi own contempt. 

idli he let hi dull eye stray about the room, from tabl to table, 
from face to face. mani there he knew by sight, from none could he 
hope for sympathi or even companionship. In hi bitter he envi 
the courag of the coward who were brave enough to seek oblivion or 
punish in death. drop hi eye to hi soft, unlov hands, 
he marvel that anyth so useless should throb with life, and yet 
he realis that he wa afraid of physic pain, terrifi at the 
thought of death. there were dim ancestor of hi whose valour had 
thrill the song of minstrel and made hi name love in the 
glow folli of battles. but now he knew that he wa a coward, and 
even in the knowledg he could find no comfort. It is not given to 
everi man to hate himself gladly. 

the music and the laughter beat on hi sullen brain with a mock 
insistence, and he trembl with impot anger at the appar 
happi of humanity. whi should these peopl be merri when he wa 
miserable, what right had the orchestra to play a choru of triumph 
over the sting emblem of hi defeat? He drank brandi after 
brandy, vainli seek to dull the nausea of disgust which had 
stricken hi worn nerves; but the adulter spirit mere madden 
hi brain with the vision of new depth of horror, while hi bodi 
lay below, a mean, detest thing. had he known how to pray he 
would have beg that someth might snap. but no man may win to 
faith by mean of hatr alone, and hi heart wa cold as the marbl 
tabl against which he leant. there wa no more hope in the 
world. . . . 

when he came out of the café, the air of the night wa so pure 
and cool on hi face, and the light of the squar were so tender to 
hi eyes, that for a moment hi harsh mood wa softened. and in that 
moment he seem to see among the crowd that flock by a beauti 
face, a face touch with pearls, and the inner leav of pink 
rosebuds. He leant forward eagerly. "christine!" he cried, 
"christine!" 

then the illus passed, and, smitten by the anger of the pitiless 
stars, he saw that he wa look upon a mere woman, a woman of the 
earth. He fled from her smile with a shudder. 

As he went it seem to him that the sway hous buffet him 
about as a child might play with a ball. sometim they threw him 
against men, who curs him and bruis hi soft bodi with their 
fists. sometim they trip him up and hurl him upon the stone 
of the pavement. still he held on, till the embank broke befor 
him with the sudden peac of space, and he leant against the 
parapet, pant and sick with pain, but free from the tyranni of 
the houses. 

beneath him the river roll toward the sea, retic but 
more alive, it seemed, than the deepli pain thing which fate had 
attach to hi brain. He pictur himself tangl in the dark 
perplex of it waters, he fanci them fall upon hi face like 
a girl' hair, till they darken hi eye and choke the mouth 
which, even now, could not breath fast enough to satisfi him. the 
thought displeas him, and he turn away from the place that held 
peac for other men but not for him. from the shadow of one of the 
seat a woman' voic reach him, beg peevishli for money. 

"I have none," he said automatically. then he rememb and flung 
coins, all the money he had, into her lap. "I give it to you becaus 
I hate you!" he shrieked, and hurri on lest her thank should spoil 
hi spite. 

then the black hous and the warp street had him in their grip 
onc more, and sport with him till hi conscious wax to one 
white-hot point of pain. overhead the star were laugh quietli in 
the field of space, and sometim a policeman or a chanc passer-bi 
look curious at hi lurch figure, but he onli knew that 
life wa hurt him beyond endurance, and that he yet endured. Up 
and down the ice-cold corridor of hi brain, thought, formless and 
timeless, pass like a rodent flame. now he wa the universe, a vast 
thing loathsom with agony, now he wa a speck of dust, an atom whose 
infinit torment wa impercept even to god. alway there wa 
something--someth consciou of the intoler evil call life, 
someth that cri bitterli to be uncreated. always, while hi soul 
beat against the bars, hi bodi stagger along the streets, a thing 
helpless, unguided. 

there is an hour befor dawn when tire men and women die, and with 
the come of thi hour hi spirit found a strang releas from 
pain. onc more he realis that he wa a man, and, bruis and 
weari as he was, he tri to collect the lost thread of reason, 
which the night had torn from him. face him he saw a vast build 
dimli outlin against the darkness, and in some way it serv to 
touch a faint memori in hi die brain. for a while he wander 
amongst the shadows, and then he knew that it wa the keep of 
a castle, hi castle, and that high up where a window shone upon the 
night a girl wa wait for him, a girl with a face of pearl and 
roses. present she came to the window and look out, dress all 
in white for her love' sake. He stood up in hi armour and flash 
hi sword toward the envi stars. 

"it is I, my love!" he cried. "I am here." 

and there, befor the dawn had made the shadow of the law court 
grey, they found him; bruis and muddi and daub with blood, 
without the sword and spur of hi honour, lack the scent token 
of hi love. A thing in no way tragic, for here wa no misfortune, 
but mere the conclus of nature' remorseless logic. for centuri 
after centuri those of hi name had lived, shelter by the prowess 
of their ancestor from the trivial hardship and afflict that 
make us men. and now he lay on the pavement, stiff and cold, a babe 
that had cri itself to sleep becaus it could not understand, 
silent until the morning. 




fate and the artist 

the workmen' dwell stood in the northwest of london, in 
quaint rivalri with the comfort ugli of the maida vale block 
of flats. they were fairli new and veri well built, with wide stone 
staircas that echo all day to the impati footstep of children, 
and with a flat roof that serv at onc as a playground for them and 
a drying-ground for their mothers' washing. In hot weather it wa 
pleasant enough to play hide-and-seek or follow-my-lead up and down 
the long alley of cool white linen, and if a sudden gust of wind or 
some unexpect turn of the game set the wet sheet flap in the 
children' faces, their sens were rather tickl than annoyed. 

To george, moon in a corner of the rail that seem to keep all 
london in a cage, these game were hardli more import than the 
shout and whistl that rose from the street below. It seem to 
him that all hi life--h had live eleven years--h had been stand 
in a corner watch other peopl engag in meaningless ploy and 
antics. the sun wa hot, and yet the children ran about and made 
themselv hotter, and he wondered, as when he had been in bed with 
one of hi frequent ill he had wonder at the grown-up folk who 
came and went, move their arm and leg and speak with their 
mouths, when it wa possibl to lie still and quiet and feel the 
moment tick themselv off in one' forehead. As he rest in hi 
corner, he wa consciou of the sharp edg of the narrow stone ledg 
on which he wa sit and the thin iron rail that press into 
hi back; he smelt the evil smell of hot london, and the soapi odour 
of the washing; he saw the glitter of the dust, and the nois of the 
place beat harshli upon hi ears, but he could find no mean in it 
all. life spoke to him with a hundr tongues, and all the while he 
wa long for silence. To the older inhabit of the tenement he 
seem a morbid littl boy, unhappili too delic for sens to 
be safe knock into him; hi fellow-children would have ignor him 
complet if he had not had strang fanci that made interest 
stori and sometim inspir games. On the whole, georg wa lone 
without know what loneli meant. 

all day long the voic of london throb up beyond the bars, and 
georg would regard the chimney and the housetop and the section of 
live street that fell within hi rang with hi small, keen eyes, 
and wonder whi the world did not forthwith crumbl into silent, 
peac dust, instead of groan and quiver in continu unrest. 
but when twilight fell and the children were tire of playing, they 
would gather round him in hi corner by the tank and ask him to tell 
them stories. thi tank wa larg and open and held rain water for the 
use of the tenants, and origin it had been cut off from the rest 
of the roof by some special rail of it own; but two of the 
rail had been broken, and now the children could creep through and 
sit round the tank at dusk, like eastern villag round the villag 
well. 

and georg would tell them stories--qu stori with twist 
face and broken backs, that danc and caper merrili enough as a 
rule, but sometim stood quit still and made horribl grimaces. the 
children like the cheer moral stori better, such as arthur' 
boots. 

"onc upon a time," georg would begin, "there wa a boy call 
arthur, who live in a hous like this, and alway tie hi 
bootlac with knot instead of bows. one night he stood on the 
roof and wish he had wing like a sparrow, so that he could 
fli away over the houses. and a great wind began, so that everybodi 
said there wa a storm, and suddenli arthur found he had a littl 
pair of wings, and he flew away with the wind over the houses. and 
present he got beyond the storm to a quiet place in the sky, and 
arthur look up and saw all the star tie to heaven with littl 
bit of string, and all the string were tie in bows. and thi 
wa done so that god could pull the string quit easili when He 
want to, and let the star fall. On fine night you can see them 
dropping. arthur thought that the angel must have veri neat 
finger to tie so mani bows, but suddenly, while he wa looking, 
hi feet began to feel heavy, and he stoop down to take off hi 
boots; but he could not unti the knot quick enough, and soon he 
start fall veri fast. and while he wa falling, he heard the 
wind in the telegraph wires, and the shout of the boy who sell 
paper in the street, and then he fell on the top of a house. and 
they took him to the hospital, and cut off hi legs, and gave him 
wooden one instead. but he could not fli ani more becaus they 
were too heavy." 

for day afterward all the children would tie their bootlac in 
bows. 

sometim they would all look into the dark tank, and georg would 
tell them about the splendid fish that live in it depths. If the 
tank wa onli half full, he would whisper to the fish, and the 
children would hear it indistinct reply. but when the tank wa full 
to the brim, he said that the fish wa too happi to talk, and he would 
describ the beauti of it appear so vividli that all the children 
would lean over the tank and strain their eye in a desper effort 
to see the wonder fish. but no one ever saw it clearli except 
george, though most of the children thought they had seen it tail 
disappear in the shadow at one time or another. 

It wa doubt how far the children believ hi stories; probably, 
not have acquir the habit of examin evidence, they were 
content to accept idea that threw a pleasant glamour on life. but the 
come of jimmi simpson alter thi agreeabl condit of mind. 
jimmi wa one of those master stupid boy who excel at game and 
physic contests, and triumph over intellectu problem by sheer 
braggart ignorance. from the first he regard georg with contempt, 
and when he heard him tell hi stori he did not conceal hi 
disbelief. 

"it' a lie," he said; "there ain't no fish in the tank." 

"I have seen it, I tell you," said george. 

jimmi spat on the asphalt rudely. 

"I bet no one els has," he said. 

georg look round hi audience, but their eye did not meet his. 
they felt that they might have been mistaken in believ that 
they had seen the tail of the fish. and jimmi wa a veri good man with 
hi fists. "liar!" said jimmi at last triumphantly, and walk away. 
be masterful, he led the other with him, and georg brood by the 
tank for the rest of the even in solitude. 

next day georg went up to jimmi confidently. "I wa right about the 
fish," he said. "I dream about it last night." 

"rot!" said jimmy; "dream are onli made-up things; they don't mean 
anything." 

georg crept away sadly. how could he convinc such a man? all day 
long he worri over the problem, and he woke up in the middl of the 
night with it throb in hi brain. and suddenly, as he lay in hi 
bed, doubt came to him. suppos he had been wrong, suppos he had 
never seen the fish at all? thi wa not to be borne. He crept quietli 
out of the flat, and tipto upstair to the roof. the stone wa veri 
cold to hi feet. 

there were so mani thing in the tank that at first, georg could not 
see the fish, but at last he saw it gleam below the moon and the 
stars, larger and even more beauti than he had said. "I knew I 
wa right," he whispered, as he crept back to bed. In the morn he 
wa veri ill. 

meanwhil blue day succeed blue day, and while the water grew lower 
in the tank, the children, with jimmi for leader, had almost forgotten 
the boy who had told them stories. now and again one or other of them 
would say that georg wa very, veri ill, and then they would go on 
with their game. No one look in the tank now that they knew there 
wa noth in it, till it occur one day to jimmi that the dri 
weather should have brought final confirm of hi scepticism. 
leav hi comrad at the long jump, he went to george' neglect 
corner and peep into the tank. sure enough it wa almost dry, and, 
he nearli shout with surprise, in the shallow pool of sooti water 
there lay a larg fish, dead, but still gleam with rainbow colours. 

jimmi wa strong and stupid, but not ill-natured, and, recal 
george' illness, it occur to him that it would be a decent thing 
to go and tell him he wa right. He ran downstair and knock on the 
door of the flat where georg lived. george' big sister open 
it, but the boy wa too excit to see that her eye were wet. "oh, 
miss," he said breathlessly, "tell georg he wa right about the fish. 
i'v seen it myself!" 

"georgy' dead," said the girl. 




the great man 

To the peopl who do not write it must seem odd that men and women 
should be will to sacrific their live in the endeavour to 
find new arrang and combin of word with which to 
express old thought and older emotions, yet that is not an unfair 
statement of the task of the literari artist. words--symbol that 
repres the nois that human be make with their tongu and 
lip and teeth--li within our grasp like the fragment of a 
jig-saw puzzle, and we fit them into faulti pictur until our hand 
grow weari and our eye can no longer pretend to see the truth. In 
order to illustr an infinitesim fraction of our live by 
mean of thi preposter game we are will to sacrific all 
the rest. while ordinari effici men and women are enjoy the 
promis of the morning, the fulfil of the afternoon, the 
tranquil of evening, we are still tri to discov a fit 
epithet for the dew of dawn. for us spring pave the wood with 
beauti word rather than flowers, and when we look into the 
eye of our mistress we see noth but adjectives. love is an 
occas for songs; death but the overburden father of all our 
saddest phrases. We are of those who are born cri into the 
world becaus they cannot speak, and we end, like stevenson, by 
look forward to our death becaus we have written a good 
epitaph. sometim in the cours of our frequent descent from 
heaven to the waste-pap basket we feel that we lose too much to 
accomplish so little. doe a hand of love-song realli outweigh 
the smile of a pretti girl, or a hardly-written romanc compens 
the author for month of lost adventure? We have onli one life to 
live, and we spend the greater part of it write the histori of 
dead hours. our live lack balanc becaus we find it hard to 
discov a mean between the triolet we wrote last I night and the 
big book we are go to start tomorrow, and also becaus live 
onli with our head we tend to becom top-heavy. We justifi our 
present discomfort with the promis of a bright futur of flower 
and sunshin and gladdest life, though we know that in the garden 
of art there are mani chrysalid and few butterflies. few of us 
are fortun enough to accomplish anyth that wa in the least 
worth doing, so we fall back on the arid philosophi that it is 
effort alon that counts. 

luckily--or suicid would be the rule rather than the except 
for artists--th long process of disillusion is broken by 
hour when even the most self-crit feel nobli and indubit 
great; and thi is the onli reward that most artist ever have for 
their labours, if we set a higher price on art than money. On the 
whole, I am inclin to think that the artist is fulli rewarded, 
for the common man can have no concept of the joy that is to be 
found in belonging, though but momentarili and illusively, to the 
aristocraci of genius. To find the just word for all our emotions, 
to realis that our most trivial thought is illimit creative, 
to feel that it is our lot to keep life' gladdest promises, to 
see the great soul of men and women, steadfast in exist as 
star in a windless pool--these, indeed, are no ordinari 
pleasures. moreover, these hour of our illusori great endow 
us in their pass with a melancholi that is not taint with 
bitteress. We have noth to regret; we are in truth the richer 
for our rare adventure. We have been permit to explor the 
ultim possibl of our nature, and if we might not keep 
thi newly-discov territory, at least we did not return from 
our travel with empti hands. someth of the glamour lingers, 
someth perhap of the wisdom, and it is with a heighten 
passion, a fiercer enthusiasm, that we set ourselv onc more to 
our life-long task of chalk pink salmon and pinker sunset on 
the pavement of the world. 

I onc met an englishman in the forest that start outsid brussel 
and stretch for a long day' journey across the hills. We found a 
littl café under the trees, and sat in the sun talk about modern 
english literatur all the afternoon. In thi way we discov that 
we had a common standpoint from which we judg work of art, though 
our judgment differ pleasantli and provid us with materi 
for agreeabl discussion. By the time we had divid three bottl of 
guez lambic, the nobl beer of belgium, we had alreadi sketch out a 
scheme for the ideal literari newspaper. In other words, we had 
achiev friendship. 

when the afternoon grew suddenli cold, the englishman led me off to 
tea at hi house, which wa half-way up the hill out of woluwe. It 
wa one of those modern countri cottag that belgian architect 
steal openli and without shame from their english confreres. We were 
met at the garden gate by hi daughter, a dark-hair girl of 
fifteen or sixteen, so unreason beauti that she made a 
disillus scribbler feel like a sad line out of one of the 
saddest poem of franci thompson. In my mind I christen her 
monica, becaus I did not like her real name. the house, with it 
old furniture, it library, where the choic of book wa clearli 
dictat by individu prejudic and affections, and it 
unambiti parad of domest happiness, heighten my melancholy. 
while tea wa be prepar monica show me the garden. onli 
a few daffodil and crocus were in bloom, but she led me to the 
rose garden, and told me that in the summer she could pick a great 
basket of rose everi day. I pictur monica to myself, gather 
her rose on a breathless summer afternoon, and return to the 
hous feel like a batten version of the reverend laurenc 
sterne. I knew that I had gather all my roses, and I thought 
regret of the chill loneli of the world that lay beyond the 
limit of thi paradise. 

thi mood linger with me dure tea, and it wa not till that 
meal wa over that the miracl happened. I do not know whether it 
wa the englishman or hi wife that wrought the magic: or perhap 
it wa monica, nibbl "speculations" with her sharp white teeth; 
but at all event I wa led with delic diplomaci to talk about 
myself, and I present realis that I wa perform the 
grate labour realli well. My word were warm into life by an 
eloqu that is not ordinarili mine, my adject were neither 
commonplac nor far-fetched, my adverb fell into their socket 
with a sob of joy. I spoke of myself with a nobl sympathy, a 
compass so intens that it seem divin altruistic. and 
gradually, as the spirit of creation woke in my blood, I revealed, 
trembl between a natur sensit and a gener 
abandon of restraint, the inner life of a man of genius. 

I pass lightli by hi misunderstood childhood to concentr my 
sympathi on the literari struggl of hi youth. I spoke of the 
ignobl environment, the materi hardships, the masterpiec written 
at night to be condemn in the morning, the song of hi heart that 
were too great for hi immatur voic to sing; and all the while I 
bade them watch the fire of hi faith burn with a constant and 
quenchless flame. I trace the develop of hi powers, and 
instanc some of hi poems, my poems, which I recit so well that 
they sound to me, and I swear to them also, like stave from an 
angel hymn-book. I ask their compass for the man who, have 
such thing in hi heart, wa compel to wast hi hour in sordid 
journalist labours. 

So by degre I brought them to the present time, when, fatigu by 
a world that would not acknowledg the truth of hi message, 
the man of geniu wa prepar to retir from life, in order to 
devot himself to the composit of five or six masterpieces. I 
describ these masterpiec to them in outline, with a suggest 
detail dash in here and there to show how they would be finished. 
noth is easier than to describ unwritten literari masterpiec 
in outline; but by that time I had thoroughli convinc my audienc 
and myself, and we look upon these thing as complet books. the 
atmospher wa charg with the spirit of high endeavour, of 
wonder accomplishment. I heard the englishman breath deeply, 
and through the dusk I wa awar of the eye of monica, the wide, 
vagu eye of a young girl in which youth can find exactli what it 
pleases. 

It is a good thing to be great onc or twice in our lives, and that 
night I wa wise enough to depart befor the inevit anti-climax. 
At the gate the englishman press me warmli by the hand and beg 
me to honour hi hous with my presenc again. hi wife echo the 
wish, and monica look at me with those vacant eyes, that but a few 
year ago I would have charg with the wine of my song. As I stood 
in the tram on my way back to brussel I felt like a man recov 
from a terribl debauch, and I knew that the brief hour of my pride 
wa over, to return, perhaps, no more. work wa imposs to a man 
who had express consider more than he had to express, so I went 
into a café where there wa a string band to play sentiment music 
over the corps of my genius. chanc took me to a tabl presid over 
by a waiter I singularli detested, and the last ember of my 
great enabl me to order my drink in a voic so passion that 
he look at me aghast and fled. By the time he return with my hock 
the tale wa finished, and I tri to buy hi toler with an 
enorm _pourboire_. 

no; I will return to that hous on the hill abov woluw no more, not 
even to see monica stand on tipto to pick her roses. for I have 
left a giant' robe hang on a peg in the hall, and I would not 
have those amiabl peopl see how utterli incap I am of fill 
it under normal conditions. I feel, besides, a kind of sentiment 
tender for thi illus fate to have so short a life. I am no 
herod to slaughter babies, and it pleas me to think that it linger 
yet in that delight hous with the book and the old furnitur and 
monica, even though I myself shall probabl never see it again, even 
though the englishman watch the publishers' announc for the 
masterpiec that will never appear. 




A wet day 

As we grow older it becom more and more appar that our moment 
are the ghost of old moments, our day but pale repetit of day 
that we have known in the past. It might almost be said that after a 
certain age we never meet a stranger or win to a new place. the 
palac of our soul, grown larger let us hope with the years, is 
haunt by littl memori that creep out of corner to peep at us 
wist when we are most sure that we are alone. sometim we 
cannot hear the voic of the present for the whisper of the past; 
sometim the room is so full of ghost that we can hardli breathe. 
and yet it is often difficult to find the signific of these dead 
days, restor to us to disturb our sens of pass time. whi have 
our mind kept secret these trivial record so mani year to give 
them to us at last when they have no appar consequence? perhap it 
is onli that we are not clever enough to read the riddle; perhap 
these trifl that we have rememb unconsci year after year 
are in truth the tremend forc that have made our live what they 
are. 

stand at the window thi morn and watch the rain, I suddenli 
becam consciou of a wet morn long ago when I stood as I stood 
now and saw the drop slide one after anoth down the steami 
panes. I wa a boy of eight year old, dress in a sailor suit, and 
with my hair clip quit short like a french boy's, and my right 
knee wa stiff with a half-heal cut where I had fallen on the 
gravel path under the schoolroom window, it wa a realli wet, grey 
day. I could hear the rain drip from the fir-tre on to the 
sculleri roof, and everi now and then a gust of wind drove the rain 
down on the soak lawn with a nois like break surf. I could hear 
the water gurgl in the pipe that wa hidden by the ivy, and I saw 
with interest that one of the path wa flooded, so that a canal ran 
between the standard rose bush and recal pictur of venice. I 
thought it would be nice if it rain truli hard and flood the 
house, so that we should all have to starv for three weeks, and then 
be rescu excitingli in boats; but I had not realli ani hope. behind 
me in the schoolroom my two brother were play chess, but had not 
yet start quarrelling, and in a corner my littl sister wa 
patient beat a doll. there wa a fire in the grate, but it wa 
one of those sombre, smoki fire in which it is imposs to take 
ani interest. the clock on the mantelpiec tick veri slowly, and I 
realis that an etern of these long second separ me from 
dinner-time. I thought I would like to go out. 

the enterpris present certain difficulti and dangers, but none 
that could not be surpassed. I would have to steal down to the hall 
and get my boot and waterproof on unobserved. I would have to open 
the front door without make too much noise, for the other door 
were well guard by underlings, and I would have to run down the 
front drive under the eye of mani windows. onc beyond the gate I 
would be safe, for the wet of the day would secur me from 
danger encounters. walk in the rain would be pleasant than 
stay in the dull schoolroom, where life remain unchang for a 
quarter of an hour at a time; and I rememb that there wa a 
littl wood near our hous in which I had never been when it wa 
rain hard. perhap I would meet the magician for whom I had look 
so often in vain on sunni days, for it wa quit like that he 
prefer walk in bad weather when no one els wa about. It would 
be nice to hear the drop of rain fall on the roof of the trees, 
and to be quit warm and dri underneath. perhap the magician would 
give me a magic wand, and I would do thing like the conjur last 
christmas. 

certainli I would be punish when I got home, for even if I were not 
miss they would see that my boot were muddi and that my waterproof 
wa wet. I would have no pud for dinner and be sent to bed in the 
afternoon: but these thing had happen to me before, and though I 
had not like them at the time, they did not seem veri terribl in 
retrospect. and life wa so dull in the schoolroom that wet morn 
when I wa eight year old! 

and yet I did not go out, but stood hesit at the window, while 
with everi gust earth seem to fling back it curl of rain from it 
shine forehead. To stand on the brink of adventur is interest 
in itself, and now that I could think over the detail of my 
expedit wa no longer bored. So I stay dream till the golden 
moment for action wa passed, and a violent exclam from one of 
the chess-play call me back to a prosaic world. In a second the 
board wa overturn and the player were lock in battle. My littl 
sister, who had alreadi the feminin crave for tidiness, crept out 
of her corner and meekli gather the chessmen from under the feet of 
the combatants. I had seen it all before, and while I led my forc 
to the aid of the brother with whom at the moment I had some sort of 
alliance, I reflect that I would have done better to dare the 
adventur and set forth into the raini world. 

and thi morn when I stood at my window, and my memori a littl 
cruelli restor to thi vision of a day long dead, I wa still of 
the same opinion. oh! I should have put on my boot and my waterproof 
and gone down to the littl wood to meet the enchanter! He would have 
given me the cap of invisibility, the purs of fortunatus, and a pair 
of seven-leagu boots. He would have taught me to conquer worlds, and 
to leav the easi triumph of dreamer to madmen, philosophers, and 
poets, He would have made me a man of action, a statesman, a soldier, 
a founder of citi or a digger of graves. for there are two kind of 
men in the world when we have put asid the minor distinct of 
shape and colour. there are the men who do thing and the men who 
dream about them. No man can be both a dreamer and a man of action, 
and we are call upon to determin what rôle we shall play in life 
when we are too young to know what to do. 

I do not believ that it wa a mere wanton of memori that 
preserv the imag of that hour with such affection detail, where 
so mani brighter and more event hour have disappear for ever. 
It seem to me like enough that that moment of hesit befor 
the schoolroom window determin a habit of mind that ha kept me 
dream ever since. for all my life I have prefer thought to 
action; I have never run to the littl wood; I have never met the 
enchanter. and so thi morning, when fate play me thi trick and my 
dream wa chill for an instant by the ici breath of the past, I did 
not rush out into the street of life and lay about me with a flame 
sword. no; I pick up my pen and wrote some word on a piec of 
paper and lull my shock sens with the tranquil of the 
idlest dream of all. 





end of the project gutenberg ebook of the ghost ship, by richard middleton 

*** end OF thi project gutenberg ebook the ghost ship *** 

***** thi file should be name 11045-8.txt or 11045-8.zip ***** 
thi and all associ file of variou format will be found in: 
http://www.gutenberg.net/1/1/0/4/11045/ 

produc by tom harri 

updat edit will replac the previou one--th old edit 
will be renamed. 

creat the work from public domain print edit mean that no 
one own a unit state copyright in these works, so the foundat 
(and you!) can copi and distribut it in the unit state without 
permiss and without pay copyright royalties. special rules, 
set forth in the gener term of use part of thi license, appli to 
copi and distribut project gutenberg-tm electron work to 
protect the project gutenberg-tm concept and trademark. project 
gutenberg is a regist trademark, and may not be use if you 
charg for the ebooks, unless you receiv specif permission. If you 
do not charg anyth for copi of thi ebook, compli with the 
rule is veri easy. you may use thi ebook for nearli ani purpos 
such as creation of deriv works, reports, perform and 
research. they may be modifi and print and given away--y may do 
practic anyth with public domain ebooks. redistribut is 
subject to the trademark license, especi commerci 
redistribution. 



*** start: full licens *** 

the full project gutenberg licens 
pleas read thi befor you distribut OR use thi work 

To protect the project gutenberg-tm mission of promot the free 
distribut of electron works, by use or distribut thi work 
(or ani other work associ in ani way with the phrase "project 
gutenberg"), you agre to compli with all the term of the full project 
gutenberg-tm licens (avail with thi file or onlin at 
http://gutenberg.net/license). 


section 1. gener term of use and redistribut project gutenberg-tm 
electron work 

1.a. By read or use ani part of thi project gutenberg-tm 
electron work, you indic that you have read, understand, agre to 
and accept all the term of thi licens and intellectu properti 
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agre to abid by all 
the term of thi agreement, you must ceas use and return or destroy 
all copi of project gutenberg-tm electron work in your possession. 
If you paid a fee for obtain a copi of or access to a project 
gutenberg-tm electron work and you do not agre to be bound by the 
term of thi agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or 
entiti to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.e.8. 

1.b. "project gutenberg" is a regist trademark. It may onli be 
use on or associ in ani way with an electron work by peopl who 
agre to be bound by the term of thi agreement. there are a few 
thing that you can do with most project gutenberg-tm electron work 
even without compli with the full term of thi agreement. see 
paragraph 1.c below. there are a lot of thing you can do with project 
gutenberg-tm electron work if you follow the term of thi agreement 
and help preserv free futur access to project gutenberg-tm electron 
works. see paragraph 1.e below. 

1.c. the project gutenberg literari archiv foundat ("the foundation" 
or pglaf), own a compil copyright in the collect of project 
gutenberg-tm electron works. nearli all the individu work in the 
collect are in the public domain in the unit states. If an 
individu work is in the public domain in the unit state and you are 
locat in the unit states, we do not claim a right to prevent you from 
copying, distributing, performing, display or creat deriv 
work base on the work as long as all refer to project gutenberg 
are removed. Of course, we hope that you will support the project 
gutenberg-tm mission of promot free access to electron work by 
freeli share project gutenberg-tm work in complianc with the term of 
thi agreement for keep the project gutenberg-tm name associ with 
the work. you can easili compli with the term of thi agreement by 
keep thi work in the same format with it attach full project 
gutenberg-tm licens when you share it without charg with others. 

1.d. the copyright law of the place where you are locat also govern 
what you can do with thi work. copyright law in most countri are in 
a constant state of change. If you are outsid the unit states, check 
the law of your countri in addit to the term of thi agreement 
befor downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distribut or 
creat deriv work base on thi work or ani other project 
gutenberg-tm work. the foundat make no represent concern 
the copyright statu of ani work in ani countri outsid the unit 
states. 

1.e. unless you have remov all refer to project gutenberg: 

1.e.1. the follow sentence, with activ link to, or other immedi 
access to, the full project gutenberg-tm licens must appear promin 
whenev ani copi of a project gutenberg-tm work (ani work on which the 
phrase "project gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "project 
gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed, 
copi or distributed: 

thi ebook is for the use of anyon anywher at no cost and with 
almost no restrict whatsoever. you may copi it, give it away or 
re-us it under the term of the project gutenberg licens includ 
with thi ebook or onlin at www.gutenberg.net 

1.e.2. If an individu project gutenberg-tm electron work is deriv 
from the public domain (doe not contain a notic indic that it is 
post with permiss of the copyright holder), the work can be copi 
and distribut to anyon in the unit state without pay ani fee 
or charges. If you are redistribut or provid access to a work 
with the phrase "project gutenberg" associ with or appear on the 
work, you must compli either with the requir of paragraph 1.e.1 
through 1.e.7 or obtain permiss for the use of the work and the 
project gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraph 1.e.8 or 
1.e.9. 

1.e.3. If an individu project gutenberg-tm electron work is post 
with the permiss of the copyright holder, your use and distribut 
must compli with both paragraph 1.e.1 through 1.e.7 and ani addit 
term impos by the copyright holder. addit term will be link 
to the project gutenberg-tm licens for all work post with the 
permiss of the copyright holder found at the begin of thi work. 

1.e.4. Do not unlink or detach or remov the full project gutenberg-tm 
licens term from thi work, or ani file contain a part of thi 
work or ani other work associ with project gutenberg-tm. 

1.e.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribut or redistribut thi 
electron work, or ani part of thi electron work, without 
promin display the sentenc set forth in paragraph 1.e.1 with 
activ link or immedi access to the full term of the project 
gutenberg-tm license. 

1.e.6. you may convert to and distribut thi work in ani binary, 
compressed, mark up, nonproprietari or proprietari form, includ ani 
word process or hypertext form. however, if you provid access to or 
distribut copi of a project gutenberg-tm work in a format other than 
"plain vanilla ascii" or other format use in the offici version 
post on the offici project gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net), 
you must, at no addit cost, fee or expens to the user, provid a 
copy, a mean of export a copy, or a mean of obtain a copi upon 
request, of the work in it origin "plain vanilla ascii" or other 
form. ani altern format must includ the full project gutenberg-tm 
licens as specifi in paragraph 1.e.1. 

1.e.7. Do not charg a fee for access to, viewing, displaying, 
performing, copi or distribut ani project gutenberg-tm work 
unless you compli with paragraph 1.e.8 or 1.e.9. 

1.e.8. you may charg a reason fee for copi of or provid 
access to or distribut project gutenberg-tm electron work provid 
that 

- you pay a royalti fee of 20% of the gross profit you deriv from 
the use of project gutenberg-tm work calcul use the method 
you alreadi use to calcul your applic taxes. the fee is 
owe to the owner of the project gutenberg-tm trademark, but he 
ha agre to donat royalti under thi paragraph to the 
project gutenberg literari archiv foundation. royalti payment 
must be paid within 60 day follow each date on which you 
prepar (or are legal requir to prepare) your period tax 
returns. royalti payment should be clearli mark as such and 
sent to the project gutenberg literari archiv foundat at the 
address specifi in section 4, "inform about donat to 
the project gutenberg literari archiv foundation." 

- you provid a full refund of ani money paid by a user who notifi 
you in write (or by e-mail) within 30 day of receipt that s/he 
doe not agre to the term of the full project gutenberg-tm 
license. you must requir such a user to return or 
destroy all copi of the work possess in a physic medium 
and discontinu all use of and all access to other copi of 
project gutenberg-tm works. 

- you provide, in accord with paragraph 1.f.3, a full refund of ani 
money paid for a work or a replac copy, if a defect in the 
electron work is discov and report to you within 90 day 
of receipt of the work. 

- you compli with all other term of thi agreement for free 
distribut of project gutenberg-tm works. 

1.e.9. If you wish to charg a fee or distribut a project gutenberg-tm 
electron work or group of work on differ term than are set 
forth in thi agreement, you must obtain permiss in write from 
both the project gutenberg literari archiv foundat and michael 
hart, the owner of the project gutenberg-tm trademark. contact the 
foundat as set forth in section 3 below. 

1.f. 

1.f.1. project gutenberg volunt and employe expend consider 
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcrib and proofread 
public domain work in creat the project gutenberg-tm 
collection. despit these efforts, project gutenberg-tm electron 
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain 
"defects," such as, but not limit to, incomplete, inaccur or 
corrupt data, transcript errors, a copyright or other intellectu 
properti infringement, a defect or damag disk or other medium, a 
comput virus, or comput code that damag or cannot be read by 
your equipment. 

1.f.2. limit warranty, disclaim OF damag - except for the "right 
of replac or refund" describ in paragraph 1.f.3, the project 
gutenberg literari archiv foundation, the owner of the project 
gutenberg-tm trademark, and ani other parti distribut a project 
gutenberg-tm electron work under thi agreement, disclaim all 
liabil to you for damages, cost and expenses, includ legal 
fees. you agre that you have NO remedi for negligence, strict 
liability, breach OF warranti OR breach OF contract except those 
provid IN paragraph f3. you agre that the foundation, the 
trademark owner, and ani distributor under thi agreement will not BE 
liabl TO you for actual, direct, indirect, consequential, punit OR 
incident damag even IF you give notic OF the possibl OF such 
damage. 

1.f.3. limit right OF replac OR refund - If you discov a 
defect in thi electron work within 90 day of receiv it, you can 
receiv a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by send a 
written explan to the person you receiv the work from. If you 
receiv the work on a physic medium, you must return the medium with 
your written explanation. the person or entiti that provid you with 
the defect work may elect to provid a replac copi in lieu of a 
refund. If you receiv the work electronically, the person or entiti 
provid it to you may choos to give you a second opportun to 
receiv the work electron in lieu of a refund. If the second copi 
is also defective, you may demand a refund in write without further 
opportun to fix the problem. 

1.f.4. except for the limit right of replac or refund set forth 
in paragraph 1.f.3, thi work is provid to you 'as-is' with NO other 
warranti OF ani kind, express OR implied, includ but not limit TO 
warranti OF merchant OR fit for ani purpose. 

1.f.5. some state do not allow disclaim of certain impli 
warranti or the exclus or limit of certain type of damages. 
If ani disclaim or limit set forth in thi agreement violat the 
law of the state applic to thi agreement, the agreement shall be 
interpret to make the maximum disclaim or limit permit by 
the applic state law. the invalid or unenforc of ani 
provis of thi agreement shall not void the remain provisions. 

1.f.6. indemn - you agre to indemnifi and hold the foundation, the 
trademark owner, ani agent or employe of the foundation, anyon 
provid copi of project gutenberg-tm electron work in accord 
with thi agreement, and ani volunt associ with the production, 
promot and distribut of project gutenberg-tm electron works, 
harmless from all liability, cost and expenses, includ legal fees, 
that aris directli or indirectli from ani of the follow which you do 
or caus to occur: (a) distribut of thi or ani project gutenberg-tm 
work, (b) alteration, modification, or addit or delet to ani 
project gutenberg-tm work, and (c) ani defect you cause. 


section 2. inform about the mission of project gutenberg-tm 

project gutenberg-tm is synonym with the free distribut of 
electron work in format readabl by the widest varieti of comput 
includ obsolete, old, middle-ag and new computers. It exist 
becaus of the effort of hundr of volunt and donat from 
peopl in all walk of life. 

volunt and financi support to provid volunt with the 
assist they need, is critic to reach project gutenberg-tm' 
goal and ensur that the project gutenberg-tm collect will 
remain freeli avail for gener to come. In 2001, the project 
gutenberg literari archiv foundat wa creat to provid a secur 
and perman futur for project gutenberg-tm and futur generations. 
To learn more about the project gutenberg literari archiv foundat 
and how your effort and donat can help, see section 3 and 4 
and the foundat web page at http://www.pglaf.org. 


section 3. inform about the project gutenberg literari archiv 
foundat 

the project gutenberg literari archiv foundat is a non profit 
501(c)(3) educ corpor organ under the law of the 
state of mississippi and grant tax exempt statu by the intern 
revenu service. the foundation' ein or feder tax identif 
number is 64-6221541. it 501(c)(3) letter is post at 
http://pglaf.org/fundraising. contribut to the project gutenberg 
literari archiv foundat are tax deduct to the full extent 
permit by u.s. feder law and your state' laws. 

the foundation' princip offic is locat at 4557 melan dr. S. 
fairbanks, ak, 99712., but it volunt and employe are scatter 
throughout numer locations. it busi offic is locat at 
809 north 1500 west, salt lake city, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email 
business@pglaf.org. email contact link and up to date contact 
inform can be found at the foundation' web site and offici 
page at http://pglaf.org 

for addit contact information: 
dr. gregori B. newbi 
chief execut and director 
gbnewby@pglaf.org 

section 4. inform about donat to the project gutenberg 
literari archiv foundat 

project gutenberg-tm depend upon and cannot surviv without wide 
spread public support and donat to carri out it mission of 
increas the number of public domain and licens work that can be 
freeli distribut in machin readabl form access by the widest 
array of equip includ outdat equipment. mani small donat 
($1 to $5,000) are particularli import to maintain tax exempt 
statu with the irs. 

the foundat is commit to compli with the law regul 
chariti and charit donat in all 50 state of the unit 
states. complianc requir are not uniform and it take a 
consider effort, much paperwork and mani fee to meet and keep up 
with these requirements. We do not solicit donat in locat 
where we have not receiv written confirm of compliance. To 
send donat or determin the statu of complianc for ani 
particular state visit http://pglaf.org 

while we cannot and do not solicit contribut from state where we 
have not met the solicit requirements, we know of no prohibit 
against accept unsolicit donat from donor in such state who 
approach us with offer to donate. 

intern donat are grate accepted, but we cannot make 
ani statement concern tax treatment of donat receiv from 
outsid the unit states. u.s. law alon swamp our small staff. 

pleas check the project gutenberg web page for current donat 
method and addresses. donat are accept in a number of other 
way includ includ checks, onlin payment and credit card 
donations. To donate, pleas visit: http://pglaf.org/don 


section 5. gener inform about project gutenberg-tm electron 
works. 

professor michael S. hart is the origin of the project gutenberg-tm 
concept of a librari of electron work that could be freeli share 
with anyone. for thirti years, he produc and distribut project 
gutenberg-tm ebook with onli a loos network of volunt support. 

project gutenberg-tm ebook are often creat from sever print 
editions, all of which are confirm as public domain in the u.s. 
unless a copyright notic is included. thus, we do not necessarili 
keep ebook in complianc with ani particular paper edition. 

each ebook is in a subdirectori of the same number as the ebook' 
ebook number, often in sever format includ plain vanilla ascii, 
compress (zipped), html and others. 

correct edit of our ebook replac the old file and take over 
the old filenam and etext number. the replac older file is renamed. 
version base on separ sourc are treat as new ebook receiv 
new filenam and etext numbers. 

most peopl start at our web site which ha the main PG search facility: 

http://www.gutenberg.net 

thi web site includ inform about project gutenberg-tm, 
includ how to make donat to the project gutenberg literari 
archiv foundation, how to help produc our new ebooks, and how to 
subscrib to our email newslett to hear about new ebooks. 

ebook post prior to novemb 2003, with ebook number below #10000, 
are file in directori base on their releas date. If you want to 
download ani of these ebook directly, rather than use the regular 
search system you may util the follow address and just 
download by the etext year. 

http://www.gutenberg.net/etext06 

(or /etext 05, 04, 03, 02, 01, 00, 99, 
98, 97, 96, 95, 94, 93, 92, 92, 91 or 90) 

ebook post sinc novemb 2003, with etext number over #10000, are 
file in a differ way. the year of a releas date is no longer part 
of the directori path. the path is base on the etext number (which is 
ident to the filename). the path to the file is made up of singl 
digit correspond to all but the last digit in the filename. for 
exampl an ebook of filenam 10234 would be found at: 

http://www.gutenberg.net/1/0/2/3/10234 

or filenam 24689 would be found at: 
http://www.gutenberg.net/2/4/6/8/24689 

An altern method of locat ebooks: 
http://www.gutenberg.net/gutindex.al 

