the project gutenberg ebook of the return, by walter de la mare 

thi ebook is for the use of anyon anywher at no cost and with 
almost no restrict whatsoever. you may copi it, give it away or 
re-us it under the term of the project gutenberg licens includ 
with thi ebook or onlin at www.gutenberg.org 


title: the return 

author: walter de la mare 

post date: februari 22, 2009 [ebook #3075] 
releas date: february, 2002 
last updated: novemb 11, 2016 

language: english 

charact set encoding: utf-8 

*** start OF thi project gutenberg ebook the return *** 




produc by eve sobol 





the return 

walter de la mare 



transcriber’ note: 

thi edit ha singl quotat mark for direct quotes, 
and doubl for indirect quotes. 

there are no period in the origin text after 
Mr 
mr 
Dr 


“look not for rose in attalu hi garden, or wholesom 
flower in a venom plantation. and sinc there is scarc 
ani one bad, but some other are the wors for him; tempt 
not contagion by proxim and hazard not thyself in the 
shadow of corruption.” 

sir thoma browne. 





chapter one 
prefac 
the churchyard in which arthur lawford found himself wander that mild 
and golden septemb afternoon wa old, green, and refreshingli still. 
the silenc in which it lay seem as keen and mellow as the light--th 
pale, almost heatless, sunlight that fill the air. here and there 
robin sang across the stones, elvishli shrill in the quiet of harvest. 
the onli other live creatur there seem to lawford to be hi own 
rather fair, not insubstantial, rather languid self, who at the nois 
of the bird had rais hi head and glanc as if between content and 
incredul across hi still and solitari surroundings. An increas 
inclin for such lone ramblings, togeth with the feel that 
hi continu ill-health had grown a littl irksom to hi wife, and 
that now that he wa realli better she would be reliev at hi absence, 
had induc him to wander on from home without much consid where 
the quiet lane were lead him. and in spite of a peculiar melancholi 
that had well up into hi mind dure these last few days, he had 
certainli smile with a faint sens of the ironi of thing on lift 
hi eye in an unusu depress moodi to find himself look 
down on the shadow and peac of widderstone. 

with that anxiou irresolut which ill so often bring in it 
train he had hesit for a few minut befor actual enter the 
graveyard. but onc safe within he had begun to feel extrem loth to 
think of turn back again, and thi not the less at rememb with 
a real forebod that it wa now draw toward evening, that anoth 
day wa nearli done. He trail hi umbrella behind him over the 
grass-grown paths; stay here and there to read some time-worn 
inscription; stoop a littl broodingli over the dark green graves. 
not for the first time dure the long labori convalesc that had 
follow appar so slight an indisposition, a fleet sens almost 
as if of an unintellig remors had overtaken him, a vagu thought 
that behind all these past years, hidden as it were from hi daili life, 
lay someth not yet quit reckon with. how often as a boy had he 
been rap into a galvan activ out of the deep reveri he use 
to fall into--thos fit of a kind of fishlik day-dream. how often, 
and even far beyond boyhood, had he found himself bent on some distant 
thought or fleet vision that the sudden clash of self-possess had 
made to seem quit illusory, and yet had left so strang haunting. and 
now the old habit had stir out of it long sleep, and, through the 
gate that influenza in depart had left ajar, had return upon him. 

‘but I suppos we are all pretti much the same, if we onli knew it,’ he 
had consol himself. ‘we keep our crazi side to ourselves; that’ all. 
We just go on for year and year do and say whatev happen to 
come up--and realli keen about it too’--h had glanc up with a kind of 
challeng in hi face at the squat littl belfry--‘and then, without 
the slightest reason or warning, down you go, and it all begin to wear 
thin, and you get wonder what on earth it all means.’ memori slip 
back for an instant to the life that in so unusu a fashion seem 
to have float a littl aloof. fortun he had not discuss these 
inward symptom with hi wife. how surpris sheila would be to see him 
loaf in thi old, crook churchyard. how she would lift her dark 
eyebrows, with that handsome, indiffer tolerance. He smiled, but a 
littl confusedly; yet the thought gave even a spice of adventur to the 
evening’ ramble. 

He loiter on, scarc think at all now, stoop here and there. 
these faint listless idea made no more stir than the sunlight gild 
the fade leaves, the crisp turf underfoot. with a slight effort he 
stoop even onc again;-- 

‘stranger, a moment pause, and stay; 
In thi dim chamber hidden away 
lie one who onc found life as dear 
As now he find hi slumber here: 
pray, then, the judgement but increas 
hi deep, everlast peace!’ 

‘but then, do you know you lie at peace?’ lawford audibl questioned, 
gaze at the doggerel. and yet, as hi eye wander over the blunt 
green stone and the rambl crimson-berri brier that had almost 
encircl it with it thorns, the echo of that whisper rather jarred. 
He was, he supposed, rather a dull creature--at least peopl seem 
to think so--and he seldom felt at eas even with hi own small 
facetiousness. besides, just that kind of question wa get 
veri common. now that clever wa the fashion most peopl were 
clever--even perfect fools; and clever after all wa often onli 
a bore: all head and no body. He turn languidli to the small 
cross-shap stone on the other side: 

‘here lie the bodi of ann hard, who die in child-bed. 
also of james, her infant son.’ 

He mutter the word over with a kind of mourn bitterness. ‘that’ 
just it--just it; that’ just how it goes!’... He yawn softly; the 
pathway had come to an end. beyond him lay ranker grass, one and 
anoth obscur mounds, an old scar oak seat, shadow by a few 
everlastingli green cypress and coral-fruit yew-trees. and abov and 
beyond all hung a pale blue arch of sky with a few voyag cloud like 
silver wool, and the calm wide curv of stubbl field and pastur 
land. He stood with vacant eyes, not in the least awar how queer a 
figur he made with hi glove and hi umbrella and hi hat among the 
stain and totter gravestones. then, just to linger out hi hour, 
and half sunken in reverie, he walk slowli over to the few solitari 
grave beneath the cypresses. 

one onli wa commemor with a tombstone, a rather unusu oval-head 
stone, carv at each corner into what might be the head of angels, 
or of pagan dryads, blindli face each other with worn-out, sightless 
faces. A low curv granit canopi arch over the grave, with a crevic 
so wide between it stone that lawford actual bent down and slid in 
hi glove finger between them. He straighten himself with a 
sigh, and follow with extrem difficulti the well-nigh, illeg 
inscription: 

‘here lie ye bone of one, 
nichola sabathier, a stranger to thi parish, 
who fell by hi own hand on ye 
eve of ste. michael and all angels. 
mdccxxxix 

Of the date he wa a littl uncertain. the ‘hand’ had lost it ‘n’ and 
‘d’; and all the ‘angels’ rain had erased. He wa not quit sure even 
of the ‘stranger.’ there wa a great rich ‘s,’ and the twist tail of 
a ‘g’; and, whether or not, lawford smilingli thought, he is no stranger 
now. but how rare and how memor a name! french evidently; probabl 
huguenot. and the huguenots, he rememb vaguely, were a rather 
remark ‘crowd.’ He had, he thought, even play at ‘huguenots’ 
once. what wa the man’ name? coligny; yes, of course, coligny. ‘and I 
suppose,’ lawford continued, mutter to himself, ‘I suppos thi poor 
beggar wa put here out of the way. they might, you know,’ he ad 
confidentially, rais the ferrul of hi umbrella, ‘they might have 
stuck a stake through you, and buri you at the crossroads.’ and 
again, a feel of ennui, a faint disgust at hi poor littl witticism, 
cloud over hi mind. It wa a piti thought alway ran the easiest 
way, like water in old ditches. 

‘“here lie ye bone of one, nichola sabathier,”’ he began murmur 
again--‘mer bones, mind you; brain and heart are quit anoth 
story. and it’ pretti certain the fellow had some kind of brains. 
besides, poor devil! he kill himself. that seem to hint at brains... 
oh, for goodness’ sake!’ he cri out; so loud that the sound of hi 
voic alarm even a robin that had perch on a twig almost within 
touch, with glitter eye intent abov it dim red breast on thi other 
and even rarer stranger. 

‘I wonder if it is xxxix.; it might be lxxix.’ lawford cast a cautiou 
glanc over hi round grey shoulder, then labori knelt down besid 
the stone, and peep into the gape cranny. there he encount 
mere the tiny, pale-green, faintli conspicu eye of a larg spider, 
confront hi own. It wa for the moment an alarming, and yet a 
faintli fascin experience. the littl almost colourless fire 
remain so changeless. but still, even when at last they had actual 
vanish into the recess of that quiet habitation, lawford did not 
rise from hi knees. An utterli unreason feel of dismay, a sudden 
weak and weari had come over him. 

‘what is the good of it all?’ he ask himself inconsequently--thi 
monotonous, restless, stupid life to which he wa soon to be returning, 
and for good. He began to realiz how ludicr a spectacl he must be, 
kneel here amid the weed and grass beneath the solemn cypresses. 
‘well, you can’t have everything,’ seem loos to express hi 
disquiet. 

He stare vacantli at the green and fret gravestone, dimli awar that 
hi heart wa beat with an unusu effort. He felt ill and weak. He 
leant hi hand on the stone and lift himself on to the low wooden 
seat nearby. He drew off hi glove and thrust hi bare hand under hi 
waistcoat, with hi mouth a littl ajar, and hi eye fix on the dark 
squar turret, it bell sharpli defin against the even sky. 

‘dead!’ a bitter inward voic seem to break into speech; ‘dead!’ 
the viewless air seem to be flock with hidden listeners. the veri 
clear and the crystal silenc were their ambush. He alon seem to 
be the target of cold and hostil scrutiny. there wa not a breath to 
breath in thi crisp, pale sunshine. It wa all too rare, too thin. the 
shadow lay like wing everlastingli folded. the robin that had been 
hi onli live wit lift it throat, and broke, as if from the 
uttermost outskirt of reality, into it shrill, passionless song. 
lawford move heavi eye from one object to another--bird--sun-gild 
stone--thos two small earth-worn faces--hi hands--a stir in the 
grass as of some creatur labour to climb up. It wa useless to sit 
here ani longer. He must go back now. fanci were all veri well for 
a change, but must be onli occasion guest in a world devot to 
reality. He lean hi hand on the dark grey wood, and close hi eyes. 
the lid present unseal a little, momentarili reveal astonished, 
aggriev pupils, and softly, slowli they again descended.... 

the flame rose that had swiftli surg from the west into the zenith, 
dye all the churchyard grass a wild and vivid green, and the stoop 
stone abov it a pure faint purple, wane softli back like a fall 
fountain into it basin. In a few minutes, onli a faint orang burn in 
the west, dimli illumin with it band of light the huddl figur 
on hi low wood seat, hi right hand still press against a faintli 
beat heart. dusk gathered; the first white star appeared; out of the 
shadowi field a nightjar purred. but there wa onli the silenc of the 
fall dew among the graves. down here, under the ink-black cypresses, 
the blade of the grass were stoop with cold drops; and dark lay 
like the hem of an enorm cloak, whose jewel abov the breast of 
it wearer might be in the unfathom clear the glitter 
constellations.... 

In hi small cage of dark lawford shudder and rais a furtiv 
head. He stood up and peer eagerli and strang from side to side. He 
stay quit still, listen as raptli as some wander night-beast to 
the indiscrimin stir and echo of the darkness. He cock hi head 
abov hi shoulder and listen again, then turn upon the soundless 
grass toward the hill. He felt not the faintest astonish or 
strang in hi solitud here; onli a littl chilled, and physic 
uneasy; and yet in thi vast dark a faint spiritu exalt 
seem to hover. 

He hasten up the narrow path, walk with knee a littl bent, like 
an old labour who ha live a life of stooping, and came out into the 
dri and dusti lane. one moment hi instinct hesit as to which turn 
to take--onli a moment; he wa soon walk swiftly, almost trotting, 
downhil with thi vivid exalt in the huge dark night in hi 
heart, and sheila mere a littl angri titianesqu cloud on a scarc 
percept horizon. He had no notion of the time; the golden hand of 
hi watch were indiscern in the gloom. but presently, as he pass 
by, he press hi face close to the cold glass of a littl shop-window, 
and pierc that out by an old swiss cuckoo-clock. He would if he 
hurri just be home befor dinner. 

He broke into a slow, steadi trot, gain speed as he ran on, vagu 
elat to find how well hi breath wa serv him. An odd smile 
darken hi face at remembr of the thought he had been thinking. 
there could be littl amiss with the heart of a man who could shambl 
along like this, take even pleasure, an increas pleasur in thi 
long, wolf-lik stride. He turn round occasion to look into the 
face of some fellow-wayfar whom he had overtaken, for he felt not onli 
thi unusu animation, thi peculiar zest, but that, like a boy on some 
secret errand, he had slightli disguis hi veri presence, wa go 
masked, as it were. even hi cloth seem to have conniv at thi 
queer illusion. No tailor had for these ten year allow him so 
much latitude. He cautious at last open hi garden gate and with 
soundless agil mount the six stone steps, hi latch-key readi in 
hi gloveless hand, and softli let himself into the house. 

sheila wa out, it seemed, for the maid had forgotten to light the 
lamp. without paus to take off hi greatcoat, he hung up hi hat, ran 
nimbl upstairs, and knock with a light knuckl on hi bedroom door. 
It wa closed, but no answer came. He open it, shut it, lock it, and 
sat down on the bedsid for a moment, in the darkness, so that he could 
scarc hear ani other sound, as he sat erect and still, like some 
night animal, wari of danger, attent alert. then he rose from the 
bed, threw off hi coat, which wa clammi with dew, and lit a candl on 
the dressing-table. 

it narrow flame lengthened, drooped, brightened, gleam clearly. He 
glanc around him, unusu contented--at the ruddi of the low 
fire, the brass bedstead, the warm red curtains, the soft silveri 
here and there. It seem as if a heavi and dull dream had withdrawn out 
of hi mind. He would go again some day, and sit on the littl hard seat 
besid the crook tombston of the friendless old huguenot. He open 
a drawer, took out hi razors, and, faintli whistling, return to the 
tabl and lit a second candle. and still with thi strang heighten 
sens of life stir in hi mind, he drew hi hand gentli over hi 
chin and look unto the glass. 

for an instant he stood head to foot icili still, without the least 
feeling, or thought, or stir--star into the looking-glass. then an 
inconceiv drum beat on hi ear. A warm surge, like the onset of 
a wave, broke in him, flood neck, face, forehead, even hi hand with 
colour. He caught himself up and wheel deliber and complet 
round, hi eye dart to and fro, suddenli to fix themselv in 
a prolong stare, while he took a deep breath, caught back hi 
self-possess and paused. then he turn and onc more confront the 
chang strang face in the glass. 

without a sound he drew up a chair and sat down, just as he was, frigid 
and appalled, at the foot of the bed. To sit like this, with a kind of 
incred swift torrent of consciousness, bear echo and imag 
like straw and bubbl on it surface, could not be call thinking. 
some stealthi hand had thrust open the sluic of memory. and words, 
voices, face of mockeri stream through without connection, tendency, 
or sense. hi hand hung between hi knees, a deep and settl frown 
darken the featur stoop out of the direct ray of the light, and 
hi eye wander like busi and inquisitive, but stupid, anim over 
the floor. 

if, in that flood of unintellig thoughts, anyth clearli recur 
at all, it wa the memori of sheila. He saw her face, lit, transfigured, 
distorted, stricken, appealing, horrified. hi lid narrowed; a vagu 
terror and horror master him. He hid hi eye in hi hand and cri 
without sound, without tears, without hope, like a desol child. He 
ceas crying; and sat without stirring. and it seem after an age of 
vacanc and meaningless he heard a door shut downstairs, a distant 
voice, and then the rustl of some one slowli ascend the stairs. some 
one turn the handle; in vain; tapped. ‘i that you, arthur?’ 

for an instant lawford paused, then like a child listen for an echo, 
answered, ‘yes, sheila.’ and a sigh broke from him; hi voice, except 
for a littl huskiness, wa singularli unchanged. 

‘may I come in?’ lawford stood softli up and glanc onc more into the 
glass. hi lip set tight, and a slight frown settl between the long, 
narrow, intens dark eyes. 

‘just one moment, sheila,’ he answer slowly, ‘just one moment.’ 

‘how long will you be?’ 

He stood erect and rais hi voice, gaze the while impass into 
the glass. 

‘it’ no use,’ he began, as if repeat a lesson, ‘it’ no use your 
ask me, sheila. pleas give me a moment, a...i am not quit myself, 
dear,’ he ad quit gravely. 

the faintest hint of vexat wa in the answer. 

‘what is the matter? can’t I help? it’ so veri absurd--’ 

‘what is absurd?’ he ask dully. 

‘why, stand like thi outsid my own bedroom door. are you ill? I 
will send for dr. simon.’ 

‘please, sheila, do noth of the kind. I am not ill. I mere want 
a littl time to think in.’ there wa again a brief pause, and then a 
slight rattl at the handle. 

‘arthur, I insist on know at onc what’ wrong; thi doe not sound a 
bit like yourself. It is not even quit like your own voice.’ 

‘it is myself,’ he repli stubbornly, stare fixedli into the glass. 
you must give me a few moments, sheila. someth ha happened. My face. 
come back in an hour.’ 

‘don’t be absurd; it’ simpli wick to talk like that. how do I know 
what you are doing? As if I can leav you for an hour in uncertainty! 
your face! If you don’t open at onc I shall believ there’ someth 
serious wrong: I shall send ada for assistance.’ 

‘if you do that, sheila, it will be disastrous. I cannot answer for the 
con--. Go quietli downstairs. say I am unwell; don’t wait dinner for me; 
come back in an hour; oh, half an hour!’ 

the answer broke out angrily. ‘you must be mad, besid yourself, to ask 
such a thing. I shall wait in the next room until you call.’ 

‘wait where you please,’ lawford replied, ‘but tell them downstairs.’ 

‘then if I tell them to wait until half-past eight, you will come down? 
you say you are not ill: the dinner will be ruined. it’ absurd.’ 

lawford made no answer. He listen a while, then he deliber sat 
down onc more to tri to think. like a squirrel in a cage hi mind 
seem to be aimlessly, unceasingli astir. ‘what is it really? what 
is it really?--really?’ He sat there and it seem to him hi bodi wa 
transpar as glass. It seem he had no bodi at all--onli the memori 
of an hallucinatori reflect in the glass, and thi inward voic 
crying, arguing, questioning, threaten out of the silence--‘what is 
it really--really--really?’ and at last, cold, weari out, he rose 
onc more and lean between the two long candle-flames, and stare 
on--on--on, into the glass. 

He gave that long, dark face that had been foist on him trick to 
do--lift an eyebrow, frown. there wa scarc ani percept paus 
between the wish and it performance. He found to hi discomfitur that 
the face answer instantan to the slightest emotion, even to hi 
fainter secondari thoughts; as if these unfamiliar featur were not 
entir within control. He could not, in fact, without the glass befor 
him, tell precis what that face wa expressing. He wa still, it 
seemed, keenli sane. that he would discov for certain when sheila 
returned. terror, rage, horror had fallen back. If onli he felt ill, or 
wa in pain: he would have rejoic at it. He wa simpli caught in some 
unheard-of snare--caught, how? when? where? by whom? 



chapter two 

but the cool and deliber of hi scrutiny, had to a certain 
extent calm lawford’ mind and given him confidence. hitherto he had 
met the littl difficulti of life onli to vanquish them with eas and 
applause. now he wa stand face to face with the unknown. He burst 
out laughing, into a long, low, helpless laughter. then he aros and 
began to walk softly, swiftly, to and fro across the room--from wall to 
wall seven paces, and at the fourth, that awful, unseen, brightly-lit 
profil pass as swiftli over the tranquil surfac of the 
looking-glass. the power of concentr wa gone again. He simpli 
pace on mechanically, listen to a babel of questions, a conflict 
medley of answers. but abov all the confus and turmoil of hi brain, 
as a boatswain’ whistl rise abov a storm, so sound that same 
infinitesim voice, incessantli repeat anoth question now, ‘what 
are you go to do? what are you go to do?’ 

and in the midst of thi confusion, out of the infinite, as it were, 
came anoth sharp tap at the door, and all within sank to utter 
still again. 

‘it’ nearli half-past eight, arthur; I can’t wait ani longer.’ 

lawford cast a last fleet look into the glass, turned, and confront 
the close door. ‘veri well, sheila, you shall not wait ani longer.’ He 
cross over to the door, and suddenli a swift crafti idea flash into 
hi mind. 

He tap on the panel. ‘sheila,’ he said softly, ‘I want you first, 
befor you come in, to get me someth out of my old writing-desk in 
the smoking-room. here is the key.’ He push a tini key--from off the 
ring he carried--beneath the door. ‘in the third littl drawer from the 
top, on the left side, is a letter; pleas don’t say anyth now. It 
is the letter you wrote me, you will remember, after I had ask you to 
marri me. you scribbl in the corner under your signatur the initi 
“y.s.o.a.”--do you remember? they meant, you silli old arthur!--do you 
remember? will you pleas get that letter at once?’ 

‘arthur,’ answer the voic from without, empti of all expression, 
‘what doe all thi mean, thi mystery, thi hopeless nonsens about 
a silli letter? what ha happened? Is thi a miser form of 
persecution? are you mad?--i refus to get the letter.’ 

lawford stooped, black and angular, against the door. ‘I am not mad. oh, 
I am in the deadliest earnest, sheila. you must get the letter, if onli 
for your own peac of mind.’ He heard hi wife hesit as she turned. 
He heard a sob. and onc more he waited. 

‘I have brought the letter,’ came the low toneless voic again. 

‘have you open it?’ 

there wa a rustl of paper. ‘are the letter there underlin three 
times--“y.s.o.a.”?’ 

‘the letter are there.’ 

‘and the date of the month is underneath, “april 3rd.” No one els 
in the whole world, live or dead, could know of thi but ourselves, 
sheila?’ 

‘will you pleas open the door?’ 

‘no one?’ 

‘I suppos not--no one.’ 

‘then come in.’ He unlock the door and open it. A dark, rather 
handsom woman, with sleek hair, in a silk dress of a dark rich colour 
entered. lawford close the door. but hi face wa in shadow. He had 
still a moment’ respite. 

‘I need not ask you to be patient,’ he began quickly; ‘if I could 
possibl have spare you--if there had been anybodi in the world to go 
to... I am in horrible, horribl trouble, sheila. It is inconceivable. I 
said I wa sane: so I am, but the fact is--i went out for a walk; it 
wa rather stupid, perhaps, so soon: and I think I wa taken ill, or 
something--mi heart. A kind of fit, a nervou fit. possibl I am a 
littl unstrung, and it’ all, it’ mainli fancy: but I think, I can’t 
help think it ha a littl distorted--chang my face; everything, 
sheila; except, of course, myself. would you mind looking?’ He walk 
slowli and with face avert toward the dressing-table. 

‘simpli a nervous--to make such a fuss, to scare!...’ began hi wife, 
follow him. 

without a word he took up the two old china candlesticks, and held them, 
one in each lank-fing hand, befor hi face, and turned. 

lawford could see hi wife--everi tint and curv and line as distinctli 
as she could see him. her cheek never had much colour; now her whole 
face visibl darkened, from pallor to a duski leaden grey, as she 
gazed. It wa not an illus then; not a miser hallucination. the 
unbelievable, the inconceivable, had happened. He replac the candl 
with trembl finger and sat down. 

‘well,’ he said, ‘what is it really; what is it really, sheila? what on 
earth are we to do?’ 

‘i the door locked?’ she whispered. He nodded. with eye fix 
stirlessli on hi face, sheila unsteadili seat herself, a littl out 
of the candlelight, in the shadow. lawford rose and put the key of 
the door on hi wife’ littl rose-wood prayer-desk at her elbow, and 
deliber sat down again. 

‘you said “a fit”--where?’ 

‘I suppose--is--i it veri different--hopeless? you will understand 
my being... O sheila, what am I to do?’ hi wife sat perfectli still, 
watch him with unflinch attention. 

‘you gave me to understand--“a nervou fit”; where?’ 

lawford took a deep breath, and quietli face her again. ‘in the old 
churchyard, widderstone; I wa look at--at the gravestones.’ 

‘A fit; in the old churchyard, widderstone--y were “look at the 
gravestones”?’ 

lawford shut hi mouth. ‘I suppos so--a fit,’ he said presently. 
‘mi heart went a littl queer, and I sat down and fell into a kind of 
doze--a stupor, I suppose. I don’t rememb anyth more. and then I 
woke; like this.’ 

‘how do you know?’ 

‘how do I know what?’ 

‘“like that”?’ 

He turn slowli toward the looking-glass. ‘why, here I am!’ 

she gaze at him steadily; and a hard, incredulous, almost cun glint 
came into her wide blue eyes. she took up the key carelessly, glanc 
at it; glanc at him. ‘it ha made me--i mean the first shock, you 
know--it ha made me a littl faint.’ she walk slowly, deliber to 
the door, and unlock it. ‘i’ll get a littl sal volatile.’ she softli 
drew out the key, and without onc remov her eye from hi face, 
open the door and push the key noiselessli in on the other side. 
‘pleas stay there; I won’t be a minute.’ 

lawford’ face smiled--a rather desperate, yet for all that a patient, 
resolut smile. ‘oh yes, of course,’ he said, almost to himself, ‘I had 
not foreseen--at least--you must do precis what you please, sheila. 
you were go to lock me in. you will, however, befor take ani final 
step, pleas think over what it will entail. I did not think you would, 
after such proof, in thi aw trouble--i did not think you would 
simpli disbeliev me, sheila. who els is there to help me? you have the 
letter in your hand. isn’t that suffici proof? It wa overwhelm 
proof to me. and even I doubt too; doubt myself. but never mind; whi 
I should have dream you would believ me; or taken thi aw thing 
differently, I don’t know. it’ rather aw to have to go on alone. 
but there, think it over. I shall not stir until I hear the voices. and 
then: honestly, sheila, I couldn’t face quit that. i’d sooner give up 
altogether. ani proof you can think of--i will... O god, I cannot bear 
it!’ He cover hi face with hi hands; but in a moment look up, 
unmov onc more. ‘why, for that matter,’ he ad slowly, and, as it 
were, with infinit pains, a faint thin smile again steal into hi 
face, ‘I think,’ he turn wearili to the glass, ‘I think, it’ almost 
an improvement!’ 

someth deep in those dark clear pupils, out of that lean adventur 
face, gleam back at him, the distant flash of a heliograph, as it 
were, height to height, flash ‘courage!’ He shuddered, and shut hi 
eyes. ‘but I would realli rather,’ he aid in a quiet childlik way, ‘I 
would realli rather, sheila, you left me alon now.’ 

hi wife stood irresolute. ‘I understand you to explain,’ she said, 
‘that you went out of thi house, just your usual self, thi afternoon, 
for a walk; that for some reason you went to widderstone--“to read the 
tombstones,” that you had a heart attack, or, as you said at first, a 
fit, that you fell into a stupor, and came home like--lik this. Am I 
like to believ all that? Am I like to believ such a stori as that? 
whoever you are, whoever you may be, is it likely? I am not in the least 
afraid. I thought at first it wa some silli practic joke. I thought 
that at first.’ she paused, but no answer came. ‘well, I suppos in a 
civilis countri there is a remedi even for a joke as wick as that.’ 

lawford listen patiently. ‘she is pretending; she is tri me; she is 
feel her way,’ he kept repeat to himself. ‘she know I AM I, but 
hasn’t the courage... let her talk!’ 

‘I shall leav the door open,’ sheila continued. ‘I am not, as you 
no doubt veri natur assumed--i am not go to do anyth either 
senseless or heedless. I am mere go to ask your brother cecil 
to come in, if he is at home, and if not, no doubt our old friend 
mr. montgomeri would--would help us.’ her scrutini wa still and 
concentrated, like that of a cat abov a mouse’ hole. 

lawford sat crouch togeth in the candle-light. ‘bi all means, 
sheila,’ he said slowli choos hi words, ‘if you think poor old 
cecil, who next januari will have been three year in hi grave, will 
be of ani use in our difficulty. who mr. montgomeri is...’ hi voic 
drop in utter weariness. ‘you did it veri well, my dear,’ he ad 
softly. 

sheila gentli close the door and sat down on the bed. He heard her 
softli crying, he heard the bed shaken with her sobs. but a slow glanc 
toward the steadi candle-flam restrain him. He let her cri on 
alone. when she had becom a littl more compos he stood up. ‘you have 
had no dinner,’ he manag to blurt out at last, ‘you will be faint. 
it’ useless to talk, even to think, ani more to-night. leav me to 
myself for a while. don’t look at me ani more. perhap I can sleep: 
perhap if I sleep it will come right again. when the servant are 
gone up, I will come down. just let me have some--som medic book, or 
other; and some more candles. don’t think, sheila; don’t even think!’ 

sheila paid him no attent for a while. ‘you tell me not to think,’ 
she began, in a low, almost listless voice; ‘why--i wonder I am in my 
right mind. and “eat”! how can you have the heartless to suggest it? 
you don’t seem in the least to realiz what you say. you seem to have 
lost all--al consciousness. I quit agree, it is useless for me to 
burden you with my compani while you are in your present condit of 
mind. but you will at least promis me that you won’t take ani further 
step in thi aw business.’ she could not, tri as she would, bring 
herself again to look at him. she rose softly, paus a moment with 
sidelong eyes, then turn deliber toward the door, ‘what, what 
have I done to deserv all this?’ 

from behind her that voice, so extraordinarili like--and yet in some 
vagu fashion more arresting, more reson than her husband’s, broke 
incred out onc more. ‘you will pleas leav the key, sheila. I am 
ill, but I am not yet in the pad room. and pleas understand, I take 
no further step in “thi aw business” until I hear a strang voic 
in the house.’ sheila paused, but the quiet voic rang in her ear, 
desper yet convincingly. she took the key out of the lock, place 
it on the bed, and with a sigh, that wa not quit without a hint of 
relief in it misery, she furtiv extinguish the gas-light on the 
land and rustl downstairs. 

she speedili returned. ‘I have brought the book.’ she said hastily. 
‘I could onli find the one volume. I have said you have taken a fresh 
chill. No one will disturb you.’ 

lawford took the book without a word. and onc more, with eye stonili 
averted, hi wife left him to hi own compani and that of the face in 
the glass. 

when complet deserted, lawford with fumbl finger open quain’ 
‘dictionari of medicine.’ He had never had much curiosity, and had 
alway hate what he disbelieved, but none the less he had heard 
occasion of absurd and question experiments. He rememb 
even to have glanc over report of case in the newspap concern 
disappearances, loss of memory, dual personality. cranks... Oh yes, he 
thought now, with a sens of cold humili relief, there had been 
such case as hi before. they were no doubt curable. they must be 
compar common in america--that land of jangl nerves. possibl 
bromide, rest, a battery. but quain, it seemed, share hi prejudices, 
at least in thi edition, or had hidden away all such apocryph matter 
beneath technic terms, where no sensibl man could find it, ‘besides,’ 
he mutter angrily, ‘what’ the good of your one volume?’ He flung 
it down and strode to the bed, and rang the bell. then suddenli 
recollect himself, he paus and listened. there came a tap on the 
door. ‘i that you, sheila?’ he called, doubtfully. 

‘no, sir, it’ me,’ came the answer. 

‘oh, don’t trouble; I onli want to speak to your mistress. it’ all 
right.’ 

‘mrs. lawford ha gone out, sir,’ repli the voice. 

‘gone out?’ 

‘yes, sir; she told me not to mention it; but I suppos as you asked--’ 

‘oh, that’ all right; never mind; I didn’t ring.’ He stood with face 
uplifted, thinking. 

‘can I do anything, sir?’ came the faint, nervou question after a long 
pause. 

‘one moment, ada,’ he call in a loud voice. He took out hi 
pocket-book, sat down, and scribbl a littl note. He hardli notic 
how chang hi handwrit was--th clear round letter crab and 
irregular. 

‘are you there, ada?’ he called. ‘I am slip a note beneath the 
door; just draw back the mat; that’ it. take it at once, please, to mr. 
critchett’s, and be sure to wait for an answer. then come back direct 
to me, up here. I don’t think, ada, your mistress believ much in 
critchett; but I have fulli explain what I want. He ha made me up 
mani prescriptions. explain that to hi assist if he is not there. 
Go at once, and you will be back befor she is. I should be so veri much 
obliged, tell him. “mr arthur lawford.”’ 

the minut slowli drift by. He sat quit still in the clear 
untroubl light, wait in the silenc of the empti house. and for 
the first time he wa confront with the cold incred horror of hi 
ordeal. who would believe, who could believe, that behind thi strang 
and awful, yet how simpl mask, lay himself? what test; what heaped-up 
evid of ident would break it down? It wa all a loathsom 
ignominy. It wa utterli absurd. It was-- 

suddenly, with a kind of ape-lik cunning, he deliber rais a 
long lean forefing and point it at the shadowi crystal of the 
looking-glass. perhap he wa dead, wa realli and inde chang in 
body, wa fate realli and inde to chang in soul, into that. ‘it’ 
that beastli voic again,’ lawford cri out loud, look vacantli at 
hi upstretch finger. and then, hand and arm, not too willingly, as it 
were, obeyed; relax and fell to hi side. ‘you must keep a tight hold, 
old man,’ he mutter to himself. ‘once, onc you lose yourself--th 
least symptom of that--th least symptom, and it’ all up!’ and the 
fools, the heartless, preposter fool had brought him one volume! 

when on earth wa ada come back? she wa lag on purpose. she wa 
in the conspiraci too. oh, it should be a lesson to sheila! oh, if onli 
daylight would come! ‘what are you go to do--to do--to do?’ He rose 
onc more and pace hi silent cage. To and fro, think no more; 
just use hi eyes, compel them to wander from pictur to picture, 
bedpost to bedpost; now count aloud hi footsteps; now humming; only, 
onli to keep himself from thinking. At last he took out a drawer and 
actual began arrang it medley of contents; ties, letters, studs, 
concert and theatr programmes--al higgledy-piggledy. and in the midst 
of thi childish strategem he heard a faint sound, as of heavi water 
trickl from a height. He turned. A thief wa in one of the candles. 
It wa gutter out. He would be left in darkness. He turn hastili 
without a moment’ heed, to call for light, flung the door open and full 
in the flare of a lamp, illumin her pale forehead and astonish 
face beneath her black straw hat, stood face to face with ada. 

with one swift dexter movement he drew the door to after him, 
look straight into her almost colourless steadi eyes. ‘ah,’ he 
said instantly, in a high faint voice, ‘the powder, thank you; yes, 
Mr lawford’ powder; thank you, thank you. He must be kept absolut 
quiet--absolutely. mr lawford is following. pleas tell her that I am 
here, when she returns. Mr critchett wa in, then? thank you. extreme, 
extrem silence, please.’ again that knotted, melodramat finger rais 
itself on high; and within that lean, cadaver bodi the soul of it 
lodger quail at thi spectral boldness. but it wa triumphant. the 
maid at onc left him and went downstairs. He heard faint voic in 
muffl consultation. and in a moment sheila’ silk rustl onc 
more on the staircase. lawford put down the lamp, and watch her 
deliber close the door. 

‘what doe thi mean?’ she began swiftly, ‘I understand that--ada tell 
me a stranger is here; give orders, directions. who is he? where 
is he? you bound yourself on your solemn promis not to stir till 
I returned. you... how can I, how can we get decent through thi 
horribl busi if you are so wretchedli indiscreet? you sent ada to 
the chemist’s. what for? what for? I say.’ 

lawford watch hi wife with an almost extran interest. she wa 
certainli extrem interest from that point of view, that veri 
novel point of view. ‘it’ quit useless,’ he said, ‘to get in the least 
nervou or hysterical. I don’t care for the dark just now. that wa 
all. tell the girl I am a strang doctor--dr simon’ new partner. you 
are clever at conventionalities, sheila. invent! I said our patient must 
be kept quiet--i realli think he must. that is all, so far as ada is 
concerned.... what on earth els are we to say?’ he broke out. ‘that, 
for the present to everybody, is our onli possibl story. It will give 
us what we must have--time. and next--wher is the second volum of 
quain? I want that. and next--whi have you broken faith with me?’ mr 
lawford sat down. thi sudden and baffl outburst had stupefi her. 

‘I can’t, I can’t make head or tail of what you say. and as for have 
broken faith, as you call it, would ani wife, would ani sane woman face 
what you have brought on us, a situat like this, without seek 
advic and help? Mr bethani will be perfectli discreet--if he think 
discret desirable. He is the onli avail friend we have close 
enough to ask at once. and thing of thi kind are, I suppose, if 
anybody’ concern, his. it’ certain to leak out. everybodi will hear 
of it. don’t flatter yourself you are go to hush up a thing like thi 
for long. you can’t keep live skeleton in a cupboard. you think onli 
of yourself, onli of your own misfortune. but who’ to know, pray, that 
you realli are my husband--if you are? the sooner I get the vicar on 
my side the better for us both. who in the whole of the parish--i ask 
you--and you must have the sens left to see that--who will believ that 
a respect man, a gentleman, a churchman, would deliber go out 
to seek an afternoon’ amus in a poki littl countri churchyard? 
why, apart from everyth else, that wa absolut mad to start with. 
can you realli wonder at the result?’ 

probabl becaus she still steadfastli refus to look at him, her 
memori kept lose it hold on the appal fact face them. she 
realis fulli onli that she wa in a great, unwarrantable, and 
insurmount difficulty, but until she actual lift her eye for a 
moment she had not fulli realis what that difficulti was. she got up 
with a sudden and horribl nausea. ‘one moment,’ she said, ‘I will see 
if the servant have gone to bed.’ 

that long saturnin face, behind which lawford lay in a dull and 
desper ambush, smiled. someth partak of it clay, some reflex 
ghost of it rather remark features, wa even a littl amus at 
sheila. 

she return in a moment, and stood in profil in the doorway. ‘will you 
come down?’ she remark distantly. 

‘one moment, sheila,’ lawford began miserably. ‘befor we take thi 
irrevoc step, a step I implor you to postpon awhile--for what 
comes, I suppose, may go--what precis have you told the vicar? I must 
in fair know that.’ 

‘in fairness,’ she began ironically, and suddenli broke off. her husband 
had turn the flame of the lamp low down in the vacant room behind 
them; the corridor wa lit obscur by the chandeli far down in the 
hall below. A faint, inexplic dread fell softli and coldli on her 
heart. ‘have you no trust in me?’ she murmur a littl bitterly. ‘I 
have simpli told him the truth.’ 

they softli descend the stairs; she first, the dark figur follow 
close behind her. 



chapter three 

Mr bethani sat await them in the dining-room, a large, 
heavily-furnish room with a great benign looking-glass on the 
mantelpiece, a marbl clock, and with rich old damask curtains. fleeci 
silver hair wa all that wa visibl of their visitor when they entered. 
but Mr bethani rose out of hi chair when he heard them, and with a 
littl jerk, turn sharpli round. thu it wa that the gold-spectacl 
vicar and lawford first confront each other, the one brightli 
illuminated, the other frame in the gloom of the doorway. Mr bethany’ 
first scrutini wa timid and courteous, but beneath it he tri to be 
keen, and himself hasten round the tabl almost at a trot, to obtain, 
as delic as possible, a closer view. but lawford, have shut 
the door behind him, had gone straight to the fire and seat himself, 
lean hi face in hi hands. Mr bethani smile faintly, wave hi hand 
almost as if in blessing, but certainli in peace, and tap mr lawford 
into the chair upon the other side. but he himself remain standing. 

‘mr lawford has, I declare, been tell famili secrets,’ he began, 
and paused, peering. but there, you will forgiv an old friend’ 
intrusion--thi littl confid about a change, my dear fellow--about 
a rambl and a change?’ He sat down, put up hi kind littl pucker 
face and peer again at lawford, and then veri hastili at hi wife. 
but all her attent wa centr on the bow figur opposit to her. 
lawford respond to thi cautiou advanc without rais hi head. 

‘you do not wish me to repeat all that my wife tell me she ha told 
you?’ 

‘dear me, no,’ said Mr bethani cheerfully, ‘I wish nothing, nothing, old 
friend. you must not burden yourself with me. If I may be of ani help, 
here I am.... oh, no, no....’ he paused, with blink eyes, but wit 
still shrewd and alert. whi doesn’t the man rais hi head? he thought. 
A mere domest dispute! 

‘I thought,’ he went on ruminatingly, ‘I thought on tuesday, yes, on 
tuesday, that you weren’t look quit the thing. indeed, I remark on 
it. but now, I understand from mr lawford that the maladi ha taken 
a graver turn--eh, lawford, an heret turn? I hear you have been 
wander from the true fold.’ Mr bethani lean forward with what might 
be describ as a veri larg smile in a veri small compass. ‘and that, 
of course, entail instant retribution.’ He broke off solemnly. ‘I know 
widderston churchyard well; a most verdant and beauti spot. the late 
rector, a Mr strickland, wa a veri old friend of mine. and hi wife, 
dear good alicia, use to set out her babies, in the morning, to sleep 
and to play there, twenty, dear me, perhap twenty-f year ago. but 
I did not know, my dear lawford, that you--’ and suddenly, without an 
instant’ warning, someth seem to shout at him, ‘look, look! He is 
look at you!’ He stopped, faltered, and a slight warmth came into hi 
face. ‘and and you were taken ill there?’ hi voic had fallen flat and 
faint. 

‘I fell asleep--or someth of that sort,’ came the stubborn reply. 

‘yes,’ said Mr bethany, brightly, ‘so your wife wa saying. “fell 
asleep,” so have I too--scor of times’; he beamed, with bead of sweat 
glisten on hi forehead. ‘and then? i’m not, i’m not persisting?’ 

‘then I woke; refreshed, I think, as it seemed--i felt much better and 
came home.’ 

‘ah, yes,’ said hi visitor. and after that there wa a long, brightli 
lit, intens pause; at the end of which lawford rais hi face and 
again look firmli at hi friend. 

Mr bethani wa now a shrunken old man; he sat perfectli still, hi head 
crane a littl forward, and hi vein hand clutch hi bent, spare 
knees. 

there wasn’t the least sign of devilry, or out-facingness, or insol 
in that lean shadowi steadi head; and yet he himself wa compel to 
sidl hi glanc away, so much the face shook him. He close hi eyes, 
too, as a cat doe after exchang too direct a scrutini with human 
eyes. He put out towards, and withdrew, a grope hand from mr lawford. 

‘i it,’ came a voic from somewhere, ‘i it a great change, sir? I 
thought perhap I may have exaggerated--candle-light, you know.’ 

Mr bethani remain still and silent, strive to entertain one thought 
at a time. hi lip move as if he were talk to himself. and again 
it wa lawford’ falter voic that broke the silence. ‘you see,’ 
he said, ‘I have never... no fit, or anyth of that kind before. I 
rememb on tuesday... oh yes, quit well. I did feel seedy, very. and 
we talked, didn’t we?--harvest festival, mr wine’ flowers, the new 
offertory-bags, and all that. for god’ sake, vicar, it is not as bad 
as--a they make out?’ 

Mr bethani woke with a start. He lean forward, and stretch out a 
long black wrinkl sleeve, just manag to reach far enough to tap 
lawford’ knee. ‘don’t worry, don’t worry,’ he said soothingly. ‘we 
believe, we believe.’ 

It was, none the less, a sheer act of faith. He took off hi spectacl 
and took out hi handkerchief. ‘what we must do, eh, my dear,’ he half 
turn to mr lawford, ‘what we must do is to consult, yes, consult 
together. and later--w must have advice--med advice; unless, as 
I veri much suspect, it is mere a littl quit temporari physic 
aberration. science, I am told, is make great strides, experimenting, 
grope after thing which no sane man ha ever dream of 
before--without be burn aliv for it. what’ in a name? nerves, 
especially, lawford.’ 

mr lawford sat perfectli still, absorbedli listening, turn her face 
first thi way, then that, to each speaker in turn. ‘that is what 
I thought,’ she said, and cast one fleet glanc across at the 
fireplace, ‘but--’ 

the littl old gentleman turn sharpli with half-blind eyes, and lip 
tight shut. ‘I think,’ he said, with a hind of auster humour, ‘I think, 
do you know, I see no “but.”’ He paus as if to catch the echo and 
added, ‘it’ our onli course.’ He continu to polish round and round 
hi glasses. mr lawford rather magnific rose. 

‘perhap if I were to leav you togeth awhile? I shall not be far 
off. It is,’ she explained, as if into a huge vacuum, ‘it is a terribl 
visitation.’ she move grave round the tabl and veri softli and 
firmli close the door after her. 

lawford took a deep breath. ‘of course.’ he said, ‘you realis my 
wife doe not believ me. she thinks,’ he explain naively, as if to 
himself, ‘she think I am an imposter. good know what she doe 
think. I can’t think much myself--for long!’ 

the vicar rub busili on. ‘I have found, lawford,’ he said smoothly, 
‘that in all real difficulti the onli feasibl plan is--i to face the 
main issue. the other right themselves. now, to take a plung into your 
generosity. you have let me in far enough to make it imposs for me 
to get out--may I hear then exactli the whole story? all that I know 
now, so far as I could gather from your wife, poor soul, is of cours 
inconceivable: that you went out one man and came home another. you will 
understand, my dear man, I am speaking, as it were, by rote. god ha 
merci order that the human brain work slowly; first the 
blow, hour afterward the bruise. oh, dear me, that man hume--“on 
miracles”--posit amazing! So that too, please, you will be quit 
clear about. credo--not quia imposs est, but becaus you, lawford, 
have told me. now then, if it won’t be too wearisom to you, the whole 
story.’ He sat, lean and erect in hi big chair, a hand rest 
loos on each knee, in one spectacles, in the other a dangl pocket 
handkerchief. and the dark, sallow, aquiline, formid figure, with 
it oddli chang voice, re-told the whole stori from the beginning. 

‘you were awar then of noth different, I understand, until you 
actual look into the glass?’ 

‘onli vaguely. I mean that after wake I felt much better, more alert. 
and my thoughts--’ 

‘ah, yes, your thoughts?’ 

‘I hardli know--oh, clear as if I had had a real long rest. It wa just 
like be a boy again. influenza dispirit one so.’ 

Mr bethani gaze without stirring. ‘and yet, you know,’ he said, ‘I can 
hardli believe, I mean conceive, how--you have been take no drugs, no 
quackery, lawford?’ 

‘I never dose myself,’ said lawford, with sombr pride. 

‘god bless me, that’ lawford to the echo,’ thought hi visitor. ‘and 
before--?’ he went on gently; ‘I realli cannot conceive, you see, how 
a mere fit could... befor you sat down you were quit alone?’ He stuck 
out hi head. ‘there wa nobodi with you?’ 

‘with me? Oh no,’ came the soft answer. 

‘what had you been think of? In these day of faith-cures, and 
hypnotism, and telepathy, and subliminalities--why, the simpl old world 
grow veri confusing. but rarely, veri rare novel. you were thinking, 
you say; do you remember, perhaps, just the drift?’ 

‘well,’ began lawford ruminatingly, ‘there wa someth curiou even 
then, perhaps. I remember, for instance, I knelt down to read an old 
tombstone. there wa a littl seat--no back. and an epitaph. the sun wa 
just setting; some french name. and there wa a long jag crack in 
the stone, like the black line you know one see after lightning, I mean 
it’ as clear as that even now, in memory. Oh yes, I remember. and then, 
I suppose, came the sleep--stupid, sluggish: and then; well, here I am.’ 

‘you are absolut certain, then,’ persist Mr bethani almost 
querulously, ‘there wa no live creatur near you? bless me, lawford, 
I see no unkind in believ what the bibl itself relates. there 
are power supernatural. saul, and so on. We are all convinc of that. 
No one?’ 

‘I rememb distinctly,’ repli lawford, in a calm, stubborn voice, ‘I 
look up all around me, while I wa kneel there, and there wasn’t a 
soul to be seen. because, you see, it even then occur to me that it 
would have look rather queer--mi wander about like that, I mean. 
face me there were some cypress-trees, and beyond, a low sunken 
fence, and then, just open country. Up abov there were the graveston 
toppl down the hill, where I had just stroll down, and sunshine!’ 
He suddenli threw up hi hand. ‘oh, marvellous! stream in 
gold--flaming, like god’ own ante-chamber.’ 

there wa a veri pregnant pause. Mr bethani shrunk back a littl into 
hi chair. hi lip moved; he fold hi spectacles. 

‘yes, yes,’ he said. and then veri quietli he stole one mole-lik look 
into hi sidesman’ face. 

‘what is Dr simon’ number?’ he said. lawford wa gaze gloomili 
into the fire. ‘oh, annandale,’ he repli absently. ‘I don’t know the 
number.’ 

‘do you believ in him? your wife mention him. Is he clever?’ 

‘oh, he’ new,’ said lawford; ‘old jame wa our doctor. he--h kill 
my father.’ He laugh out shamefacedly. 

‘A sound, lovabl man,’ said Mr bethany, ‘one of the kindest men I ever 
knew; and a veri old friend of mine.’ 

and suddenli the dark face turn with a shudder from the fire, and 
spoke in a low trembl voice. ‘onli one thing--onli one thing--mi 
sanity, my sanity. If onc I forget, who will believ me?’ He thrust hi 
long lean finger beneath hi coat. ‘and mad,’ he added; ‘I would sooner 
die.’ 

Mr bethani deliber adjust hi spectacles. ‘may I, may I 
experiment?’ he said boldly. there came a tap on the door. 

‘bless me,’ said the vicar, take out hi watch, ‘it is a quarter to 
twelve. ‘yes, yes, mr lawford,’ he trot round to the door. ‘we are 
begin to see light--a ray!’ 

‘but i--i can see in the dark,’ whisper lawford, as if at a cue, 
turn with an inscrut smile to the fire. 

the vicar came again, wrap up in a littl tight grey great-coat, and 
a white silk muffler. He look up unflinch into lawford’ face, 
and tear stood in hi eyes. ‘patience, patience, my dear fellow,’ 
he repeat gravely, squeez hi hand. ‘and rest, complet rest, is 
imperative. just till the first thing to-morrow. and till then,’ he 
turn to mr lawford, where she stood look in at the doorway, ‘oh 
yes, complet quiet; and caution!’ 

mr lawford let him out. He shook hi head onc or twice, hold her 
fingers. ‘oh yes,’ he whispered, ‘it is your husband, not the smallest 
doubt. I tried: for myself. but something--someth ha happened. don’t 
fret him now. have patience. Oh yes, it is incredible... the change! but 
there, the veri first thing to-morrow.’ she close the door gentli 
after him, and step softli back to the dining-room, peer in. her 
husband’ back wa turned, but he could see her in the looking-glass, 
stoop a little, with set face watch him, in the silveri stillness. 

‘well,’ he said, ‘i the old--’ he doggedli met the fix eye face 
him there, ‘i our old friend gone?’ 

‘yes,’ said sheila, ‘he’ gone.’ lawford sigh and turn round. ‘it’ 
useless talk now, sheila. No more questions. I cannot tell you how 
tire I am. and my head--’ 

‘what is wrong with your head?’ inquir hi wife discreetly. 

the haggard face turn grave and patiently. ‘onli one of my old 
headaches.’ he smiled, ‘mi old biliou headaches--th hereditari lawford 
variety.’ but hi voic fell low again. ‘we must get to bed.’ 

with a rather pretti and childish movement, sheila gentli drew her hand 
across her silk skirts. ‘yes, dear,’ she said, ‘I have made up a bed for 
you in the larg spare room. It is thoroughli aired.’ she came softli 
in, hasten over to a close work-tabl that stood under the curtains, 
and open it. 

lawford watch her, utterli expressionless, utterli motionless. He 
open hi mouth and shut it again, still watch hi wife as she 
stoop with ridicul too busi fingers, search through her 
colour silks. 

again he open hi mouth. ‘yes,’ he said, and stalk slowli toward 
the door. but there he paused. ‘god knows,’ he said, strang and 
meekly, ‘I am sorry, sorri for all this. you will forgiv me, sheila?’ 

she look up swiftly. ‘it’ veri tiresome, I can’t find anywhere,’ she 
murmured, ‘I can’t find anywher the--th littl red box key.’ 

lawford’ cheek turn more sallow than ever. ‘you are onli pretend 
to look for it,’ he said, ‘to tri me. We both know perfectli well the 
lock is broken. ada broke it.’ 

sheila let fall the lid; and yet for a while her eye rove over it as 
if in violent search for something. then she turned: ‘I am so veri glad 
the vicar wa at home,’ she said brightly. ‘and mind, mind you rest, 
arthur. there’ noth so bad but it might be worse.... oh, I can’t, I 
can’t bear it!’ she sat down in the chair and huddl her face between 
her hands, sob on and on, without a tear. 

lawford listen and stare solemnly. ‘whatev it may be, sheila, I 
will be loyal,’ he said. 

her sob hushed, and again cold horror crept over her. nobodi in 
the whole world could have said that ‘I will be loyal’ quit like 
that--nobodi but arthur. she stood up, pat her hair. ‘I don’t think 
my brain would bear much more. it’ useless to talk. If you will go up; 
I will put out the lamp.’ 



chapter four 

one solitari and tall candl burn on the great dressing-table. faint, 
solitari pictur broke the blank of each wall. the carpet wa rich, 
the bed impressive, and the basin on the washstand as uninvit as the 
bed. lawford sat down on the edg of it in complet isolation. He sat 
without stirring, listen to hi watch tick in hi pocket. the 
china clock on the chimney piec point cheer to the hour of dawn. 
It wa exactly, he comput carefully, five hour and seven minut 
fast. not the slightest sound broke the stillness, until he heard, very, 
veri softli and gradually, the key of hi door turn in the oil wards, 
and realiz that he wa a prisoner. 

women were strang creatures. how often he had heard that said, he 
thought lamely. He felt no anger, no surpris or resentment, at the 
trick. It wa onli to be expected. He could sit on till morning; easili 
till morning. He had never notic befor how empti a well-furnish 
room could seem. It wa hi own room too; hi best visitors’ room. hi 
father-in-law had slept here, with hi whisker on that pillow. hi 
wife’ most formid aunt had been all night here, alon with these 
pictures. she certainli was... ‘but what are you do here?’ cri a 
voic suddenli out of hi reverie. 

He start up and stretch himself, and take out the neat littl 
packet that the maid had brought from the chemist’s, he drew up a chair, 
and sat down onc more in front of the glass. He sigh vacantly, rose 
and lift down from the wall abov the fireplac a tint photograph 
of himself that sheila had had enlarg about twelv year ago. It wa 
a brighter, younger, hairier, but unmistak the same dull indol 
lawford who had ventur into widderston churchyard that afternoon. the 
cheek wa a littl plumper, the eye not quit so full-lidded, the hair 
a littl more precis parted, the upper lip grace with a small blond 
moustache. He tilt the portrait into the candlelight, and compar it 
with thi reflect in the glass of what had come out of widderstone, 
featur with feature, with perfect composur and extrem care, then he 
laid down the massiv frame on the table, and gaze quietli at the tini 
packet. 

It wa to be a day of queer experiences. He had never befor realiz 
with how mani miracl mere everyday life is besieged. here in thi 
small punctili packet lay a sesame--a power of transform besid 
which the transform of that rather flaccid face of the noonday into 
thi tense, sinist face of midnight wa but as a move from hous 
to house--a chang just as irrevoc and complete, and yet so veri 
normal. which should it be, that, or--hi face lift itself onc more 
to the ice-lik gloom of the looking-glass-that, or this? 

It simpli gaze back with a kind of quizzic piti on it lean featur 
under the scrutini of eye so deep, so meaningful, so desolate, and yet 
so indomit courageous. In the brain behind them a slow and stolid 
argument wa in progress; the one baffl repli on the one side to 
everi appeal on the other be still simply. ‘what dream may come?’ 

those eye sure knew someth of dreams, else, whi thi violent and 
stubborn endeavour to keep awake. 

lawford did inde onc actual frame the question, ‘but who the 
devil are you?’ and it realli seem the eye percept widen or 
brightened. the mere vexat of hi unparallel position. sheila’ 
pathet incredulity, hi old vicar’ labori kindness, the tiresom 
network of experi into which he would be drag struggl on the 
morrow, and on the morrow after that, and after that--th thought of 
all these thing fade for the moment from hi mind, lost if not their 
significance, at least their instancy. 

He simpli sat face to face with the sheer difficulti of live on 
at all. He even conclud in a kind of lethargi that if noth had 
occurred, no ‘change,’ he might still be sit here, arthur rennet 
lawford, in hi best visitor’ room, decid between inscrut life 
and just--death. He suppos he wa tire out. hi thought hadn’t even 
the energi to complet themselves. none care but himself and this--thi 
silence. 

‘but what doe it all mean?’ the insist voic he wa get to know 
so well began tedious inquir again. and everi time he rais 
hi eyes, or, rather, as in mani case it seemed, hi eye rais 
themselves, they saw thi haunt face there--a face he no longer 
bitterli rebel at, nor dim with scrutiny, but a face that wa 
becom a kind of hold on life, even a kind of refuge, an ally. It wa 
a face that might have come out of a rather flashi book; or such as is 
rever on the stage. ‘A rotten bad face,’ he whisper at it in hi own 
familiar slang, after some such abrupt encounter; a fearless, packed, 
daring, fascin face, with even--what?--a spice of geniu in it. 
whose the devil’ face wa it? what on earth wa the matter?... ‘brazen 
it out,’ a jubil thought cri suddenly; ‘follow it up; play the 
game! give me just one opening. think--think what i’v risked!’ 

and all these voic thought lawford, in deadli lassitude, meant onli 
one thing--insanity. A blazing, impot indign seiz him. He 
lean near, peer as it were out of a red duski mist. He snatch up 
the china candlestick, and pois it abov the sardon reflection, as 
if to throw. then slowly, with infinit pains, he drew back from the 
glass and replac the candlestick on the table; stuf hi paper 
packet into hi pocket, took off hi boot and threw himself on to the 
bed. In a littl while, in the faint, still light, he open drowsili 
wonder eyes. `poor old thing!’ hi voic murmured, ‘poor old sheila!’ 



chapter five 

It wa but littl after daybreak when mr lawford, after listen at 
hi door a while, turn the key and look in on her husband. blue-grey 
light from between the venetian blind just dusk the room. she stood 
in a bluish dressing-gown, her hand on her bosom, look down on the 
lean impass face. for the briefest instant her heart had leapt with 
an indescrib surmise; to fall dull as lead onc more. breath 
equabl and quietly, the strang figur lay stretch upon the bed. ‘how 
can he sleep? how can he sleep?’ she whisper with a black and hopeless 
indignation. what a night she had had! and he! 

she turn noiselessli away. the candl had gutter to extinction. the 
big glass reflect her, volumin and wan, her dark-ring eyes, full 
lips, rich, glossi hair, and round chin. ‘yes, yes,’ it seem to 
murmur mournfully. she turn away, and draw stealthili near stoop 
onc more quit low, and examin the face on the pillow with lynx-lik 
concentration. and though everi nerv revolt at the thought, she wa 
final convinced, unwillingly, but assuredly, that her husband wa 
here. indeed, if it were not so, how could she for a singl moment have 
accept the possibl that he wa a stranger? He seem to haunt, 
like a ghostli emanation, thi strange, detest face--a memori 
suppli the featur conceal beneath a mask. the face wa still 
and stony, like one dead or imag in wax, yet beneath it dream were 
passing--silly, ordinari lawford dreams. she wa almost alarm at the 
terribl rancor hatr she felt for the face... ‘it wa just like 
arthur to be so taken in!’ 

then she too rememb quain, and rememb also in the slowli pale 
dusk that the hous would soon be stirring. she went out and noiselessli 
lock the door again. but it wa useless to begin look for 
quain now--her husband had a good mani dull books, most of them hi 
‘eccentric’ father’s. what must the servant be thinking? and what wa 
all that talk about a mysteri visitor? she would have to question 
ada--diplomatically. she return to her room and sat down in an 
arm-chair, and waited. In sheer weari she fell into a doze, and woke 
at the sound of dustpan and broom. she rang the bell, and ask for hot 
water, tea, and a basin of cornflour. 

‘and please, ada, be as quiet as possibl over your work; your master is 
in a nice sleep, and must not be disturb on ani account. In the front 
bedroom.’ she look up suddenly. ‘bi the way, who let Dr ferguson in 
last night?’ It wa dangerous, but successful. 

‘dr ferguson, ma’am? oh, you mean... He wa in.’ 

sheila smile resignedly. ‘wa in? what do you mean, “wa in”? and where 
were you, then?’ 

‘I had been sent out to critchett’s, the chemist’s.’ 

‘of course, of course. So cook let Dr ferguson in, then? whi didn’t you 
say so before, ada? and did you bring the medicin with you?’ 

‘it wa a packet in an envelope, ma’am. but cook is sure she heard 
no knock--not while I wa out. So Dr ferguson must have come in quit 
unbeknown.’ 

‘well, really,’ said sheila, ‘it seem veri difficult to get at the 
truth sometimes. and when ill is in the hous I cannot understand 
whi there should be no one avail to answer the door. you must 
have left it ajar, unsecured, when you went out. and pray, what if Dr 
ferguson had been some common tramp? that would have been a nice thing.’ 

‘I am quit certain,’ said ada a littl flatly, ‘that I did shut the 
door. and cook say she never so much as stir from the kitchen till 
I came down the area step with the packet. and that’ all I know about 
it, ma’am; except that he wa here when I came back. I did not know even 
there wa a Dr ferguson; and my mother ha live here nineteen years.’ 

‘we must be thank your mother enjoy such good health,’ repli 
mr lawford suavely. ‘pleas tell cook to be veri care with the 
cornflour--to be sure it’ well mix and thoroughli done.’ 

mr lawford’ eye follow with a certain discomfort those narrow print 
shoulder descend the stairs. and thi abomin ruse was--arthur’s! 
she ran up lightli and listen with her ear to the panel of hi door. 
and just as she wa about to turn away again, there came a littl light 
knock at the front door. 

mr lawford paus at the loop of the staircase; and not altogeth 
with gratitud or relief she heard the voic of Mr bethany, inquir in 
cautiou but quit audibl tone after her husband. 

she dress quickli and went down. the littl white old man look veri 
solitari in the long, fireless, drawing-room. 

‘I could not sleep,’ he said; ‘I don’t think I grasp in the least, I 
don’t indeed, until I wa nearli home, the complex of our problem. 
I came, in fact, to a lamppost. It wa cast a peculiar shadow. 
and then--you know how such thought seiz us, my dear--lik a sudden 
inspiration, I realis how tenuous, how appallingli tenuou a hold we 
everi one of us have on our mere personality. but that,’ he continu 
rapidly, ‘that’ onli for ourselves--and after the event. ours, just 
now, is to act. and first--?’ 

‘you realli do, then--you realli are convinced--’ began mr lawford. 

but Mr bethani wa too quick. ‘we must be most circumspect. My dear 
friend, we must be most circumspect, for all our sakes. and this, you’ll 
say,’ he added, smiling, stretch out hi arms, hi soft hat in one 
hand, hi umbrella in the other--‘thi is be circumspect--a seven 
o’clock in the morn call! but you see, my dear, I have come, as I 
took the precaut of explain to the maid, becaus it’ now or 
never to-day. It doe so happen that I have to take a wed for an old 
friend’ niec at witchett; so when in need, you see, provid enabl 
us to tell even the convent truth. now really, how is he? ha he 
slept? ha he recal himself at all? is there ani change?--and, dear 
me, how are you?’ 

mr lawford sighed. ‘A broken night is realli veri littl to a mother,’ 
she said. ‘he is still asleep. He hasn’t, I think, stir all night.’ 

‘not stirred!’ Mr bethani repeated. ‘you baffl me. and you have 
watched?’ 

‘oh no,’ wa the cheer answer; ‘I felt that quiet, solitude; space, 
wa everything; he prefer it so. he--h chang alone, I suppose. 
don’t you think it almost stand to reason that he will be alone...when 
he come back? wa I right? but there, it’ useless, it’ wors than 
useless, to talk like this. My husband is gone. some terribl thing ha 
happened. whatev the mysteri may be, he will never come back alive. My 
onli fear is that I am drag you into a matter that should from the 
begin have been entrust to--oh, it’ monstrous!’ It appear for a 
moment as if she were blink to keep back her tears, yet her scrutini 
seem mere to harden. 

onli the merest flicker of the fold eyelid over the greenish eye of 
her visitor answer the challenge. He stood small and black, peep 
fixedli out of the window at the sunfleck laurels. 

‘last night,’ he said slowly, ‘when I said good-by to your husband, on 
the tip of my tongu were the word I have used, in season and out of 
season, for nearli forty-f years--“god know best.” well, my dear 
lady, a sens of humour, a sens of reverence, or perhap even a taint 
of scepticism--cal it what you will--just intercept them. Oh no, 
not ani of these, my child; just pity, overwhelm pity. god doe know 
best; but in a matter like thi it is not even my place to say so. It 
would be good for none of us to endang our soul even with verbal 
cant. now, if, do you think, I had just five minutes’ talk--fiv 
minutes; would it disquiet him?’ 

onli by an almost undignifi haste, for the vicar wa remark 
agile, sheila manag to unlock the bedroom door without appar hi 
perceiv it, and with a warn finger she preced him into the great 
bedroom. ‘oh, yes, yes,’ he wa whisper to himself; ‘alone--well, 
well!’ He hung hi hat on hi umbrella and lean it in a corner, and 
then he turned. 

‘I don’t think, you know, an old friend doe him ani wrong; but last 
night I had no real oppor--’ He firmli adjust hi spectacles, and 
look long into the dark, dispass face. 

‘h’m!’ he said, and fidgeted, and peer again. mr lawford watch him 
keenly. 

‘do you still--’ she began. 

but at the same moment he too broke silence, suddenli step back with 
the innoc remark, ‘ha he--ha he ask for anything?’ 

‘onli for quain.’ 

‘“quain”?’ 

‘the medic dictionary.’ 

‘oh, yes; bless me; of course.... A calm, complet sleep of utter 
prostration--utt nervou prostration. and can one wonder? poor fellow, 
poor fellow!’ He walk to the window and peer between the blinds. 
‘sparrows, sunshine--yes, and here’ the postman,’ he said, as if to 
himself. then he turn sharpli round, with mind made up. 

‘now, do you leav me here,’ he said. ‘take half an hour’ quiet rest. 
He will be glad of a dull old fellow like me when he wakes. and as for 
my pretti bride, if I miss the train, she must wait till the next. 
good discipline, my dear. oh, dear me! I don’t change. what a preciou 
experi now thi would have been for a tottery, talkative, owlish 
old parochi creatur like me. but there, there. light word make heavi 
hearts, I see. I shall be quit comfortable. no, no, I breakfast at 
home. there’ hat and umbrella; at 9.3 I can fly.’ 

mr lawford thank him mutely. He smilingli but firmli bow her out 
and close the door. 

but eye and brain had been veri busy. He had look at the gut 
candle; at the tint bland portrait on the dressing-table; at the chair 
drawn-up; at the boots; and now again he turn almost with a groan 
toward the sleeper. then he took out an envelope, on which he had 
jot variou memoranda, and wait awhile. minut pass and at last 
the sleeper faintli stirred, muttering. 

Mr bethani stoop quickly. ‘what is it, what is it?’ he whispered. 

lawford sighed. ‘I wa onli dreaming, sheila,’ he said, and softly, 
peac open hi eyes. ‘I dream I wa in the--, hi lid 
narrowed, hi dark eye fix themselv on the anxiou spectacl face 
bend over him. ‘mr bethany! where? what’ wrong?’ 

hi friend put out hi hand. ‘there, there,’ he said soothingly, ‘do not 
be disturbed; do not disquiet yourself.’ 

lawford struggl up. slowly, pain conscious return to him. 
He glanc furtiv round the room, at hi clothes, slinkingli at 
the vicar; lick hi lips; flush with extraordinari rapidity; and 
suddenli burst into tears. 

Mr bethani sat without movement, wait till he should have spent 
himself. ‘now, lawford,’ he said gently, compos yourself, old friend. 
We must face the music--lik men.’ He went to the window, drew up the 
blind, peep out, and took off hi spectacles. 

‘the first thing to be done,’ he said, return briskli to hi chair, 
‘i to send for simon. now, doe simon know you well?’ lawford shook hi 
head. ‘would he recognis you?... I mean...’ 

‘I have onli met him once--in the evening.’ 

‘good; let him come immediately, then. tell him just the facts. If I am 
not mistaken, he will pooh-pooh the whole thing; tell you to keep quiet, 
not to worry, and so on. My dear fellow, if we realised, say, typhoid, 
who’d dare to face it? that will give us time; to wait a while, to 
recov our breath, to see what happen next. and if--a I don’t 
believ for a moment--why, in that case I heard the other day of a most 
excel man--grosser, of wimpol street; nerves. He would be absorbed. 
he’ll bottl you in spirit, lawford. we’ll have him down quietly. you 
see? but there won’t be ani necessity. Oh no. By then light will have 
come. We shall remember. what I mean is this.’ He cross hi leg 
and push out hi lips. ‘we are on quaki ground; and it’ absolut 
essenti that you keep cool, and trust. I am yours, heart and soul--you 
know that. I own frankly, at first I wa shaken. and I have, I confess, 
been veri cunning. but first, faith, then evid to bolster it up. the 
faith wa absolute’--h place one firm hand on lawford’ knee--‘why, 
I cannot explain; but it was. the evid is convincing. but there are 
other to think of. the shock, the incredibleness, the consequences; we 
must not scan too closely. think with; never against: and bang go all 
the arguments. your wife, poor dear, believes; but of course, of course, 
she is horribly--’ he broke off; ‘of cours she is shaken, you old 
simpleton! time will heal all that. time will wear out the mask. time 
will tire out thi detest physic witchcraft. the mind, the self’ 
the thing. old fogey though I may seem for say it--that must be kept 
unsmirched. We won’t go wearili over the pain subject again. you 
told me last night, dear old friend, that you were absolut alon at 
widderstone. that is enough. but here we have visibl facts, tangibl 
effects, and there must have been a definit reason and a caus for 
them. I believ in the devil, in the power of darkness, lawford, 
as firmli as I believ he and they are powerless--in the long run. 
they--what shall we say?--hav surrend their intrinsicality. you can 
just go through evil, as you can go through a sewer, and come out on the 
other side too. A loathsom process too. but there--w are not speak 
of ani such monstrosities, and even if we were, you and I with god’ 
help would just tire them out. and that alli gone, our poor dear old mr 
grundi will at onc capitulate. eh? eh?’ 

through all thi long and arduou harangue, consciousness, like the 
gradual light of dawn, had been flood that other brain. and the face 
that now confront Mr bethany, though with hi feebl unaid sight he 
could onli veri obscur discern it, wa vigil and keen, in everi 
sharp-cut hungri feature. 

A rather prolong silenc followed, the visitor peer mutely. the 
black eye nearli closed, the face turn slowli toward the window, saw 
burnt-out candle, comprehens glass. 

‘yes, yes.’ he said; ‘i’ll send for simon at once.’ 

‘good,’ said Mr bethany, and more doubt repeat ‘good.’ ‘now 
there’ onli one thing left,’ he went on cheerfully. ‘I have jot down 
a few test question here; they are question no one on thi earth could 
answer but you, lawford. they are mere for extern proofs. you won’t, 
you can’t, mistak my motive. We cannot foretel or forese what need 
may aris for just such jog-trot primit evidence. I propos that you 
now answer them here, in writing.’ 

lawford stood up and walk to the looking-glass, and paused. He put hi 
hand to hi head, ‘es,’ he said, ‘of course; it’ a rattl good move. 
i’m not quit awake; myself, I mean. i’ll do it now.’ He took out a 
pencil case and tore anoth leaf from hi pocket-book. ‘what are they?’ 

Mr bethani rang the bell. sheila herself answer it. she stood on the 
threshold and look across through a shaft of autumn sunshin at 
her husband, and her husband with a quiet strang smile look across 
through the sunshin at hi wife. Mr bethani wait in vain. 

‘I am just go to put the arch-impostor through hi credentials,’ he 
said tartly. ‘now then, lawford!’ He read out the questions, one by one, 
from hi crafti littl list, purs hi lip between each; and one 
by one, lawford, seat at the dressing-table, fluentli scribbl 
hi answers. then question and answer were rigor compar by Mr 
bethany, with small white head bent close and spectacl pois upon the 
power nose, and sign and dated, and pass to mr lawford without a 
word. 

mr lawford read question and answer where she stood, in complet 
silence. she look up. ‘mani of these question I don’t know the 
answer to myself,’ she said. 

‘it is immaterial,’ said Mr bethany. 

‘one answer is--i inaccurate. ‘yes, yes, quit so: due to a mistak in 
a letter from myself.’ 

mr lawford read quietli on, fold the papers, and held them out 
between finger and thumb. ‘the--handwriting...’ she remark veri 
softly. 

‘wonderful, isn’t it?’ said Mr bethani warmly; ‘all the gener look and 
run of the thing different, but everi real essenti featur unchanged. 
now into the envelope. and now a littl wax?’ 

mr lawford stood waiting. ‘there’ a green piec of sealing-wax,’ 
almost drawl the quiet voice, ‘in the top right drawer of the nest 
in the study, which old jame gave me the christma befor last.’ He 
glanc with lower eyelid at hi wife’ flush cheek. their eye 
met. 

‘thank you,’ she said. 

when she return the vicar wa sit in a chair, lean hi chin on 
the knob handl of hi umbrella. He rose and lit a taper for her 
with a match from a littl green pot on the table. and mr lawford, with 
trembl fingers, seal the letter, as he directed, with hi own seal. 

‘there!’ he said triumphantly, ‘how mani more such brilliant lawyers, I 
wonder, lie dormant in the church? and who shall keep this?... why, all 
three, of course.’ He went on without pausing. ‘some littl drawer now, 
secret and undetectable, with a lock.’ just such a littl drawer that 
lock itself with a spring lay by chanc in the looking-glass. there 
the letter wa hidden. and Mr bethani look at hi watch. ‘nineteen 
minutes,’ he said. ‘the next thing, my dear child--we’r get on 
swimmingly--and it’ astonish how thing are simplifi by mere 
use--th next thing is to send for simon.’ 

sheila took a deep breath, but did not look up. ‘I am entir in your 
hands,’ she replied. 

‘so be it,’ said he crisply. ‘get to bed, lawford; it’ better so. and 
i’ll look in on my way back from witchett. I came, my dear fellow, in 
gloomi disturb of mind. It wa get up too early; it fog old 
brains. good-bye, good-bye.’ 

He squeez lawford’ hand. then, with umbrella under hi arm, hi hat 
on hi head, hi spectacl readjusted, he hurri out of the room. mr 
lawford follow him. for a few minut lawford sat motionless, with 
head bent a little, and eye restlessli scan the door. then he rose 
abruptly, and in a quarter of an hour wa in bed, alon with hi slow 
thoughts: while a basin of cornflour stood untast on a littl tabl 
at hi bedside, and a cheer fire burn in the best visitors’ room’ 
tini grate. 

At half-past eleven Dr simon enter thi soundless seclusion. He sat 
down besid lawford, and took temperatur and pulse. then he half close 
hi lids, and scan hi patient out of an unusu dark, un-english 
face, with straight black hair, and listen attent to hi rather 
incoher story. It wa a stori veri much modifi and round off. 
nor did lawford draw Dr simon’ attent to the portrait now smile 
convent abov their head from the wall over the fireplace. 

‘it wa rather bleak--th wind; and, I think, perhaps, I had had a 
touch of influenza. It wa a silli thing to do. but still, Dr simon, one 
doesn’t expect--well, there, I don’t feel the same man--physically. I 
realli cannot explain how great a chang ha taken place. and yet I feel 
perfectli fit in myself. and if it were not for--for be laugh at, 
go back to town, to-day. whi my wife scarc recognis me.’ 

Dr simon continu hi scrutiny. tri as he would, lawford could not 
rais hi downcast eye to meet direct the doctor’ polit attention. 

‘and what,’ said Dr simon, ‘what precis is the natur of the change? 
have you ani pain?’ 

‘no, not the least pain,’ said lawford; ‘I think, perhaps, or rather my 
face is a littl shrunken--and yet lengthened; at least it feel so; 
and a faint twing of rheumatism. but my hair--well, I don’t know; it’ 
difficult to say one’ self.’ He could get on so veri much better, 
he thought, if onli hi mind would be at peac and these preposter 
prompt and voic were still. 

Dr simon face the window, and drew hi hand softli over hi head. 
‘we never can be too cautiou at a certain age, and especi after 
influenza,’ he said. ‘it undermin the whole system, and in particular 
the nervou system; leav the mind the prey of the most melancholi 
fancies. I should astound you, Mr lawford, with the devil influenza 
plays.... A slight nervou shock and a chill; quit slight, I hope. A 
few days’ rest and plenti of nourishment. there’ nothing; temperatur 
inconsiderable. all perfectli intelligible. most certainli reassur 
yourself! and as for the chang you speak of’--h look steadili at the 
dark face on the pillow and smile amiably--‘i don’t think we need 
worri much about that. It certainli wa a bleak wind yesterday--and a 
cemetery, my dear sir! It wa indiscreet--yes, very.’ He held out hi 
hand. ‘you must not be alarmed,’ he said, veri distinctli with 
the merest trace of an accent; ‘air, sunshine, quiet, nourishment; 
sleep--that is all. the littl window might be a few inch open, 
and--and ani light reading.’ 

He open the door and join mr lawford on the staircase. He talk 
to her quietli over hi shoulder all the way downstairs. ‘it was, it wa 
sport with providence--a wind, believ me, nearli due east, in spite 
of the warm sunshine.’ 

‘but the change--th change!’ mr lawford manag to murmur tragically, 
as he strode to the door. Dr simon smiled, and grace tap hi 
forehead with a red-glov forefinger. 

‘humour him, humour him,’ he repeat indulgently. ‘rest and quiet 
will soon put that littl troubl out of hi head. Oh yes, I did notic 
it--th set drawn look, and the droop: quit so. good morning.’ 

mr lawford gentli close the door after him. A glimps of ada, cross 
from room to room, suggest a precaution. she call out in her 
clearest notes. ‘if Dr ferguson should call while I am out, ada, will 
you pleas tell him that Dr simon regret that he wa unabl to wait? 
thank you.’ she paus with hand on the balusters, then slowli ascend 
the stairs. her husband’ face wa turn to the ceiling, hi hand 
clasp abov hi head. she took up her stand by the fireplace, rest 
one silk-slipp foot on the fender. ‘dr simon is reassuring,’ she 
said, ‘but I do hope, arthur, you will follow hi advice. He look a 
fairli clever man.... but with a big practice.... Do you think, dear, he 
quit realis the extent of the--th change?’ 

‘I told him what happened,’ said her husband’ voic out of the 
bed-clothes. 

‘yes, yes, I know,’ said sheila soothingly; ‘but we must rememb he is 
compar a stranger. He would not detect--’ 

‘what did he tell you?’ ask the voice. 

mr lawford deliber considered. If onli he would alway thu keep 
hi face concealed, how much easier it would be to discuss matter 
rationally. ‘you see, dear,’ she said softly, ‘I know, of course, 
noth about the nerves; but personally, I think hi suggest absurd. 
No mere fancy, surely, can make a last alter in one’ face. and 
your hair--i don’t want to say anyth that may seem unkind--but isn’t 
it realli quit a distinct shade darker, arthur?’ 

‘ani great strain will chang the colour of a man’ hair,’ said lawford 
stolidly; ‘at ani rate, to white. why, I read onc of a fellow in india, 
a hindoo, or something, who--’ 

‘but have you had ani intens strain, or anxiety?’ broke in sheila. ‘you 
might, at least, have confid in me; that is, unless--but there, don’t 
you think really, arthur, it would be much more satisfactori in everi 
way if we had further advic at once? alic will be home next week. 
to-morrow is the harvest festival, and next week, of course, the 
dedication; and, in ani case, the bazaar is out of the question. they 
will have to find anoth stall-holder. We must do our utmost to avoid 
comment or scandal. everi minut must help to--to fix a thing like that. 
I own even now I cannot realis what thi aw calam means. it’ 
useless to brood on it. We must, as the poor dear old vicar said onli 
last night, keep our head clear. but I am sure Dr simon wa under a 
misapprehension. if, now, it wa explain to him, a littl more fully, 
arthur--a photograph. oh, anyth on earth but thi dread wear 
uncertainti and suspense! besid ...i simon quit an english name?’ 

lawford drew further into hi pillow. ‘do as you think best, sheila,’ 
he said. ‘for my own part, I believ it may be as he suggests--partli an 
illusion, a touch of nervou breakdown. It simpli can’t be as bad as I 
think it is. If it were, you would not be here talk like this; and 
bethani wouldn’t have believ a word I said. whatev it is, it’ no 
good cri it on the housetops. give me time, just time. besides, how 
do we know what he realli thought? doctor don’t tell their patient 
everything. give the poor chap a chance, and more so if he is a 
foreigner. he’s’--hi voic sank almost to a whisper--‘he’ no darker 
than this. and do, please, sheila, take thi infern stuff away, and 
let me have someth solid. i’m not ill--in that way. all I want is 
peac and quiet, time to think. let me fight it out alone. it’ been 
sprung on me. the worst’ not over. but i’ll win through; wait! and 
if not--well, you shall not suffer, sheila. don’t be afraid. there are 
other way out.’ 

sheila broke down. ‘ani one would think to hear you talk, that I wa 
perfectli heartless. I told ada to be most care about the cornflour. 
and as for other way out, it’ a posit wick thing to say to me 
when i’m nearli distract with troubl and anxiety. what motiv could 
you have had for loiter in an old cemetery? and in an east wind! it’ 
useless for me to remain here, arthur, to be accus of everi horribl 
thing that come into a morbid imagination. I will leav you, as you 
suggest, in peace.’ 

‘one moment, sheila,’ answer the muffl voice. ‘I have accus you 
of nothing. If you knew all; if you could read my thoughts, you would 
be surprised, perhaps, at my--but never mind that. On the other hand, I 
realli do think it would be better for the present to discuss the thing 
no more. to-day is friday. give thi miser face a week. talk it over 
with bethani if you like. but I forbid’--h struggl up in bed, 
sallow and sinister--‘i flatli forbid, pleas understand, ani other 
interfer till then. afterward you must do exactli as you please. 
send round the town crier! but till then, silence!’ 

sheila with rais head confront him. ‘this, then, is your gratitude. 
So be it. silence, no doubt! until it’ too late to take action. until 
you have worm your way in, and think you are safe. To have believed! 
where is my husband? that is what I am ask you now. when and how you 
have learn hi secret god onli knows, and your conscience! but he 
alway wa a simpleton at heart. I warn you, then. until next thursday 
I consent to say noth provid you remain quiet; make no disturbance, 
no scandal here. the servant and all who inquir shall simpli be told 
that my husband is confin to hi room with--with a nervou breakdown, 
as you have yourself so glibli suggested. I am at your mercy, I own it. 
the vicar believ your preposter story--with hi spectacl off. 
you would convinc anybodi with the wick cun with which you have 
cajol and wheedl him, with which you have deceiv and fool a 
foreign doctor. but you will not convinc me. you will not convinc 
alice. I have friend in the world, though you may not be awar of it, 
who will not be quit so apt to believ ani cock-and-bul stori you may 
see fit to invent. that is all I have to say. to-night I tell the vicar 
all that I have just told you. and from thi moment, please, we are 
strangers. I shall come into the room no more than necess dictates. 
On friday we resum our real parts. My husband--arthur--to--to conniv 
at... phh!’ 

rage had transfigur her. she scarc heard her own words. they pour 
out senselessly, monotonously, one call up another, as if from the 
lip of a cassandra. lawford sank back into bed, clutch the sheet 
with both lean hands. He took a deep breath and shut hi mouth. 

‘it remind me, sheila,’ he began arduously, ‘of our first quarrel 
befor we were married, the even after your aunt rose die at 
llandudno--do you remember? you threw open the window, and I think--i 
save your life.’ A paus followed. then a queer, almost inarticul 
voic added, ‘at least, I am afraid so.’ 

A cold and aw quiet fell on sheila’ heart. she stare fixedli 
at the tuft of dark hair, the onli visibl sign of her husband, on the 
pillow. then, take up the basin of cold cornflour, she left the room. 
In a quarter of an hour she reappear carri a tray, with ham and 
egg and coffe and honey invitingli displayed. she laid it down. 

‘there is onli one other question,’ she said, with perfect 
composure--‘that of money. your signatur as it appear on the--th 
document drawn up thi morning, would, of course, be quit useless on 
a cheque. I have taken all the money I could find; it is in safety. 
you may, however, conceiv be in need of some yourself; here is five 
pounds. I have my own cheque-book, and shall therefor have no need 
to consid the question again for--for the present. So far as you are 
concerned, I shall be guid sole by Mr bethany. He will, I do not 
doubt, take full responsibility.’ 

‘and may the lord have merci on my soul!’ utter a stifled, unfamiliar 
voic from the bed. mr lawford stooped. ‘arthur!’ she cri faintly, 
‘arthur!’ 

lawford rais himself on hi elbow with a sigh that wa veri near to 
be a sob. ‘oh, sheila, if you’d onli be your real self! what is the 
use of all thi pretence? just consid MY posit a little. the fear 
and horror are not all on your side. you call me arthur even then. i’d 
willingli do anyth you wish to save you pain; you know that. can’t we 
be friend even in this--thi ghastly--won’t you, sheila?’ 

mr lawford drew back, struggl with a doubt heart. 

‘I think,’ she said, `it would be better not to discuss that now.’ 

the rest of the morn lawford remain in solitude. 



chapter six 

there were three book in the room--jeremi taylor’ ‘holi live and 
dying,’ a volum of the quiver, and a littl gild book on wildflowers. 
He read in vain. He lay and listen to the uproar of hi thought on 
which an occasion sound--th drone of a fly, the cri of a milkman, 
the nois of a pass van--obtrud from the workaday world. the pale 
gold sunlight edg softli over the bed. He ate up everyth on hi 
tray. He even, on the shoal of nightmare, dream awhile. but by and 
by as the hour wheel slowli on he grew less calm, less strenuous 
resolv on lie there inactive. everi sparrow that twitter cri 
reveil through hi brain. He long with an ardour strang to hi 
tempera to be up and doing. 

what if hi misfortun was, as he had in the excit of the moment 
suggest to sheila, onli a morbid delus of mind; share too in part 
by sheer forc of hi absurd confession? even if he wa go mad, who 
know how peac a releas that might not be? could hi shrewd old 
vicar have implicitli believ in him if the chang were as complet 
as he suppos it? He flung off the bedcloth and lock the door. 
He dress himself, noticing, he fancied, with a deadli revuls 
of feeling, that hi coat wa a littl too short in the sleeves, hi 
waistcoat too loose. In the midst of hi dress came sheila bring 
hi luncheon. ‘i’m sorry,’ he call out, stoop quickli besid the 
bed, ‘I can’t talk now. pleas put the tray down.’ 

about half an hour afterward he heard the outer door close, and peep 
from behind the curtain saw hi wife go out. all wa drowsili quiet in 
the house. He devour hi lunch like a schoolboy. that finish to the 
last crumb, without a moment’ delay he cover hi face with a towel, 
lock the door behind him, put the key in hi pocket, and ran lightli 
downstairs. He stuf the towel into an ulster pocket, put on a soft, 
wide-brim hat, and noiselessli let himself out. then he turn 
with an almost hyster delight and ran--ran like the wind, without 
pausing, without thinking, straight on, up one turning, down another, 
until he reach a broad open common, thickli wooded, sprinkl with 
gors and hazel and may, and faintli purpl with fade heather. there 
he flung himself down in the beauti sunlight, among the yellow 
bracken, to recov hi breath. 

He lay there for mani minutes, think almost with composure. flight, 
it seemed, had for the moment quieten the demand of that other feebli 
struggl person which wa begin to insinu itself into hi 
consciousness, which had so miracul broken in and taken possess 
of hi body. He would not think now. all he need wa a littl quiet 
and patienc befor he threw off for good and all hi right to be free, 
to be hi own master, to call himself sane. 

He scrambl up and turn hi face toward the wester sun. what wa 
there in the still of it beauti splendour that seem to sharpen 
hi horror and difficulty, and yet to stir him to such a dare and 
devilri as he had never known sinc he wa a boy? there wa littl sound 
of life; somewher an unknown bird wa singing, and a few late bee were 
drone in the bracken. all these year he had, like an old blind horse, 
stolidli plod round and round in a dull self-set routine. and now, 
just when the spirit had come for rebellion, the mood for a harmless 
truancy, there had fallen with them too thi hideou enigma. He sat 
there with the duski silhouett of the face that wa now drench with 
sunlight in hi mind’ eye. He set off again up the stoni incline. 

whi not walk on and on? In time real wholesom weari would come; he 
could sleep at eas in some pleasant waysid inn, without onc meet 
the eye that stood as it were like a window between himself and a 
shrewd incredul scof world that would turn him into a monstros 
and hi stori into a fable. and in a littl while, perhap in three 
days, he would awaken out of thi engross nightmare, and know he 
wa free, thi black dog gone from hi back, and (a the old say 
express it without ani one dream what it realli meant) hi own 
man again. how astonish sheila would be; how warmli she would welcom 
him!... Oh yes, of cours she would. 

He came again to a standstill. No voic answer him out of that 
illimit gold and blue. noth seem awar of him. but as he stood 
there, doubt as cain on the outskirt of the unknown, he caught the 
sound of a footfal on the lone and stone-strewn path. 

the ground slope steepli away to the left, and slowli mount the 
hillsid came mildli on an old ladi he knew, a miss sinnet, an old 
friend of hi mother’s. there wa just such a littl seat as that 
other he knew so well, on the brow of the hill. He made hi way to it, 
intend to sit quietli there until the littl old ladi had pass by. 
Up and up she came. her larg bonnet appeared, and then her mild white 
face, inclin a littl toward him as she ascended. evid thi veri 
seat wa her goal; and evas wa impossible. evasion!... memori rush 
back and set hi puls beating. He turn boldli to the sun, and the 
old lady, with a brief glanc into hi face, compos herself at the 
other end of the littl seat. she gaze out of a gentl reveri into the 
golden valley. and so they sat a while. and almost as if she had 
felt the bond of acquaint between them, she present sighed, and 
address him: ‘A very, very, beauti view, sir.’ 

lawford paused, then turn a gloomy, earnest face, gild with 
sunshine. ‘beautiful, indeed,’ he said, ‘but not for me. no, miss 
sinnet, not for me.’ 

the old ladi grave turn and examin the aquilin profile. ‘well, I 
confess,’ she remark urbanely, ‘you have the advantag of me.’ 

lawford smile uneasily. ‘believ me, it is littl advantage.’ 

‘mi sight,’ said miss sinnet precisely, ‘i not so good as I might wish; 
though better perhap than I might have hoped; I fear I am not much 
wiser; your face is still unfamiliar to me.’ 

‘it is not unfamiliar to me,’ said lawford. whose trickeri wa this? he 
thought, put such affect stuff into hi mouth. 

A faint lighten of piti came into the silveri and scrupul 
countenance. ‘ah, dear me, yes,’ she said courteously. 

lawford rest a lean hand on the seat. ‘and have you,’ he asked, ‘not 
the least recollect in the world of my face?’ 

‘now really,’ she said, smile blandly, ‘i that quit fair? think of 
all the score and score of face in seventi long years; and how veri 
treacher memori is. you shall do me the servic of remind me of 
one whose name ha for the moment escap me.’ 

‘I am the son of a veri old friend of yours, miss sinnet,’ said lawford 
quietli ‘a friend that wa onc your schoolfellow at brighton.’ 

‘well, now,’ said the old lady, grasp her umbrella, ‘that is 
undoubtedli a clue; but then, you see, all but one of the friend of my 
girlhood are dead; and if I have never had the pleasur of meet her 
son, unless there is a decid resemblance, how am I to recollect her by 
look at him?’ 

‘there is, I believe, a likeness,’ said lawford. 

she nod her great bonnet at him with gentl amusement. ‘you are 
insist in your fancy. well, let me think again. the last to leav 
me wa fanni urquhart, that was--let me see--last october. now you are 
certainli not fanni urquhart’ son,’ she stoop austerely, ‘for she 
never had one. last year, too, I heard that my dear, dear mr jameson 
wa dead. her I hadn’t met for many, mani years. but, if I may ventur 
to say so, your is not a scottish face; and she not onli marri a 
scottish husband, but wa herself a dunbar. no, I am still at a loss.’ 

A miser strife wa in her chanc companion’ mind, a strife of anger 
and recrimination. He turn hi eye wearili to the fast declin sun. 
‘you will forgiv my persistency, but I assur you it is a matter of 
life or death to me. Is there no one my face recalls? My voice?’ 

miss sinnet drew her long lip together, her eyebrow lift with the 
faintest perturbation. ‘but he certainli know my name,’ she said to 
herself. she turn onc more, and in the still autumn beauty, beneath 
that pale blue arch of evening, these two human be confront 
one anoth again. she eye him blandly, yet with a certain grave 
directness. 

‘I don’t realli think,’ she said, ‘you can be mari lawford’ son. I 
could scarc have mistaken him.’ 

lawford gulp and turn away. He hardli knew what thi surg of 
feel meant. wa it hope, despair, resentment; had he caught even the 
echo of an unholi joy? hi mind for a moment becam confus as if 
in the tumult of a struggle. He heard himself expostulate, ‘ah, miss 
bennett, I fear I set you too difficult a task.’ 

the old ladi drew abruptli in, like a trust and gentl snail into it 
shock house. ‘bennett, sir; but my name is not bennett.’ 

and again lawford accept the miser prompting. ‘not bennett!... how 
can I ever then apologis for so frantic a mistake?’ 

the littl old ladi took firm hold of her umbrella. she did not answer 
him. ‘the likeness, the likeness!’ he began unctuously, and stopped, 
for the glanc that dwelt fleetingli on him wa cold with the formid 
digniti and displeasur of age. He rais hi hat and turn miser 
home. He strode on out of the last gold into the blue twilight. what 
fantast fooleri of mind wa master him? He cast a hurri look 
over hi shoulder at the kindli and offend old figur sit there, 
solitary, on the littl seat, in her great bonnet, with back turn 
resolut upon him--th friend of hi dead mother who might have prove 
in hi need a friend inde to him. and he had by thi insan capric 
hopelessli estrang her. 

she would rememb thi face well enough now, he thought bitterly, 
and would take her place among hi quiet enemies, if ever the day of 
reckon should come. It wa scandalous, it wa banal to have abus 
her trust and courtesy. oh, it wa hopeless to struggl ani more! the 
fate were against him. they had play him a trick. He wa to be their 
transitori sport, as mani a better man he could himself recollect had 
been befor him. He would go home and give in; let sheila do with him 
what she pleased. No one but a lunat could have act as he had, with 
just that frantic hint of method so remark in the insane. 

He left the common. A lamplight wa light the lamps. A thin 
even haze wa on the air. If onli he had stay at home that fate 
afternoon! who, what had induc him, entic him to ventur out? and 
even with the thought well up into hi mind an intens desir to go 
to the old green time-worn churchyard again; to sit there contentedli 
alone, where none heed the completest metamorphosis, down besid the 
yew-trees. what a fool he had been. there alone, of course, lay hi onli 
possibl chanc of recovery. He would go to-morrow. perhap sheila had 
not yet discov hi absence; and there would be no difficulti in 
repeat so success a stratagem. 

remembr of hi miser mistake, of miss sinnet, faintli return 
to him as he swiftli mount the step to hi porch. poor old lady. He 
would make amend for hi discourtesi when he wa quit himself again. 
she should some day hear, perhaps, hi infinit tragic, infinit 
comic experi from hi own lips. He would take her some flowers, some 
old keepsak of hi mother’s. what would he not do when the old mood 
and brain of the stupid arthur lawford, whom he had appreci so 
littl and so superficially, came back to him. 

He ran up the step and stop dead, hi hand in hi pocket, chill 
and aghast. sheila had taken hi keys. He stood there, daze and still, 
beneath the dim yellow of hi own fanlight; and onc again that inward 
spring flew back. ‘brazen it out; brazen it out! knock and ring!’ 

He knock flamboyantly, and rang. 

there came a quiet step and the door opened. ‘dr simon, of course, ha 
called?’ he inquir suavely. 

‘yes, sir.’ 

‘ah, and gone’--a I feared. and mr lawford?’ 

‘I think mr lawford is in, sir.’ 

lawford put out a detain hand. ‘we will not disturb her; we will not 
disturb her. I can find my way up; oh yes, thank you!’ 

but ada still pale bar the way. ‘I think, sir,’ she said, ‘mr 
lawford would prefer to see you herself; she told me most particularli 
“all callers.” and Mr lawford wa not to be disturb on ani account.’ 

‘disturbed? god forbid!’ said lawford, but hi dark eye fail to 
move these lightest hazel. ‘well,’ he continu nonchalantly, 
‘perhaps--perhap it--would be as well if mr lawford should know that 
I am here. no, thank you, I won’t come in. pleas go and tell--’ 
but even as the maid turn to obey, sheila herself appear at the 
dining-room door in hat and veil. 

lawford hesit an immeasur moment. In one swift glanc 
he perceiv the lamplit mysteri of evening, beckoning, calling, 
pleading--fly, fly! home’ here for you. begin again, begin again. and 
there befor him in quiet and hostil decorum stood maid and mistress. 
He took off hi hat and step quickli in. 

‘so late, so veri late, I fear,’ he began glibly. ‘A sudden call, a 
perfectli imposs distance. shall we disturb him, do you think?’ 

‘wouldn’t it,’ began sheila softly, ‘be rather a piti perhaps? Dr simon 
seem to think.... but, of course, you must decid that.’ 

ada turn quiet small eyes. 

‘no, no, by no means,’ he almost mumbled. 

and a hard, slow smile pass over sheila’ face. ‘excus me one 
moment,’ she said; ‘I will see if he is awake.’ she swept swiftli 
forward, superb and triumphant, beneath the gaze of those dark, restless 
eyes. but so still wa home and street that quit distinctli a clear 
and youth laughter wa heard, and light footstep approaching. sheila 
paused. ada, in the act of close the door, peer out. ‘miss alice, 
ma’am,’ she said. 

and in thi infinitesim advantag of time Dr ferguson had seiz hi 
vanish opportunity, and wa alreadi swiftli mount the stairs. mr 
lawford stood with veil half rais and coldli smile lip and, as if 
it were by pre-arrangement, her daughter’ laugh greet from the 
garden, and from the land abov her, a faint ‘ah, and how are we 
now?’ broke out simultaneously. and ada, silent and discreet, had thrown 
open the door again to the twilight and to the young peopl ascend 
the steps. 

lawford wa still sit on hi bed befor a cold and ashi hearth when 
sheila knock at the door. 

‘yes?’ he said; ‘who’ there?’ No answer followed. He rose with a 
shudder sigh and turn the key. hi wife entered. 

‘that littl exhibit of finess wa part of our agreement, I 
suppose?’ 

‘I say--’ began lawford. 

‘to creep out in my absenc like a thief, and to return like a 
mountebank; that wa part of our compact?’ 

‘I say,’ he stubbornli began again, ‘did you wire for alice?’ 

‘will you pleas answer my question? Am I to be a mere catspaw in your 
intrigues, in thi miser masquerad befor the servants? To set the 
whole place ring with the name of a doctor that doesn’t exist, and 
a bedridden patient that slip out of the hous with hi bedroom key in 
hi pocket! are you awar that ada ha been hammer at your door 
everi half-hour of your absence? are you awar of that? how much,’ 
she continu in a low, bitter voice, ‘how much should I offer for her 
discretion?’ 

‘who wa that with alice?’ inquir the same toneless voice. 

‘I refus to be ignored. I refus to be made a child of. will you pleas 
answer me?’ 

lawford turned. ‘look here, sheila,’ he began heavily, ‘what about 
alice? If you wired: well, it’ useless to say anyth more. but if you 
didn’t, I ask you just thi one thing. don’t tell her!’ 

‘oh, I perfectli appreci a father’ natur anxiety.’ 

her husband drew up hi shoulder as if to receiv a blow. ‘yes, yes,’ 
he said, ‘but you won’t?’ 

the sound of a young laugh voic came faintli up from below. ‘how did 
jimmi fortescu know she wa come home to-day?’ 

‘will you not inquir of jimmi fortescu for yourself?’ 

‘oh, what is the use of sneering?’ began the dull voic again. ‘I am 
horribl tired, sheila. and tri how you will, you can’t convinc me that 
you believ for a moment that I am not myself, that you are as hard 
as you pretend. An acquaintance, even a friend might be deceived; but 
husband and wife--oh no! It isn’t onli a man’ face that’ himself--or 
even hi hands.’ He look at them, straighten them slowli out, and 
buri them in hi pockets. ‘all I care about now is alice. Is she, or 
is she not go to be told? I am simpli ask you to give her just a 
chance.’ 

‘“simpli ask me to give alic a chance”; now isn’t that realli just a 
little...?’ 

lawford slowli shook hi head. ‘you know in your heart it isn’t, sheila; 
you understand me quit well, although you persist pretend not to. 
I can’t argu now. I can’t speak up for myself. I am just about as far 
down as I can go. it’ onli alice.’ 

‘I see; a lucid interval?’ suggest hi wife in a low, trembl voice. 

‘yes, yes, if you like,’ said her husband patiently, ‘“a lucid 
interval.” don’t pleas look at my face like that, sheila. think--think 
that it’ just lupus, just some horribl disfigurement.’ 

not much light wa in the larg room, and there wa someth so 
extraordinarili characterist of her husband in those stoop 
shoulders, in the head hung a littl forward, and in the preternatur 
solemn voice, that sheila had to bend a littl over the bed to catch a 
glimps of the sallow and keener face again. she sighed; and even on her 
own strain ear her sigh sound almost like one of relief. 

‘it’ useless, I know, to ask you anyth while you are in thi mood,’ 
continu lawford dully; ‘I know that of old.’ 

the white, ring hand clenched, ‘“of old!”’ 

‘I didn’t mean anything. don’t listen to what I say. it’ only--it’ 
just alic knowing, that wa all; I mean at once.’ 

‘don’t for a moment suppos I am not perfectli awar that it is onli 
alic you think of. you were particularli anxiou about my feelings, 
weren’t you? you broke the news to me with the tenderest solicitude. I 
am glad our--our daughter share my husband’ love.’ 

‘look here,’ said lawford densely, ‘you know that I love you as much as 
ever; but with this--a I am; what would be the good of my say so?’ 
mr lawford took a deep breath. 

and a voic call softli at the door, ‘mother, are you there? Is father 
awake? may I come in?’ 

In a flash the memori return to her; twenty-four hour ago she wa 
ask that veri question of thi unspeak figur that sat hunched-up 
befor her. 

‘one moment, dear,’ she called. and ad in a veri low voice, ‘come 
here!’ 

lawford look up. ‘what?’ he said. 

‘perhaps, perhaps,’ she whispered, ‘it isn’t quit so bad.’ 

‘for mercy’ sake, sheila,’ he said, ‘don’t tortur me; tell the poor 
child to go away.’ 

she paused. ‘are you there, alice? would you mind, father says, wait 
a little? He is so veri tired.’ 

‘too tire to.... oh, veri well, mother.’ 

mr lawford open the door, and call after her, ‘i jimmi gone?’ 

‘oh, yes, hours.’ 

‘where did you meet?’ 

‘I couldn’t get a carriag at the station. He carri my dressing-bag; 
I beg him not to. the other’ come on. you know what jimmi is. 
how very, veri lucki I did come home. I don’t know what made me; just an 
impulse; they did laugh at me so. father dear--do speak to me; how are 
you now?’ 

lawford open hi mouth, gulped, and shook hi head. 

‘ssh, dear!’ whisper sheila, ‘I think he ha fallen asleep. I will 
be down in a minute.’ mr lawford wa about to close the door when ada 
appeared. 

‘if you please, ma’am,’ she said, ‘I have been waiting, as you told me, 
to let Dr ferguson out, but it’ nearli seven now; and the table’ not 
laid yet.’ 

‘I realli should have thought, ada,’ sheila began, then caught back the 
angri words, and turn and look over her shoulder into the room. 
‘do you think you will need anyth more, Dr ferguson?’ she ask in a 
sepulchr voice. 

again lawford’ lip moved; again he shook hi head. 

‘one moment, ada,’ she said close the door. ‘some more medicine--what 
medicine? quick! she mustn’t suspect.’ 

‘“what medicine?”’ repeat lawford stolidly. 

‘oh, vexing, vexing; don’t you see we must send her out? don’t you see? 
what wa it you sent to critchett’ for last night? tell him that’ 
gone: we want more of that.’ 

lawford stare heavily. oh, yes, yes,’ he said thickly, ‘more of 
that....’ 

sheila, with a shrug of extrem distast and vexation, hastili open 
the door. ‘dr ferguson want a further suppli of the drug which Mr 
critchett made up for Mr lawford yesterday evening. you had better go at 
once, ada, and pleas make as much hast as you possibl can.’ 

‘I say, I say,’ began lawford; but it wa too late, the door wa shut. 

‘how I detest thi wretch falsehood and subterfuge. what could have 
induc you....?’ 

‘yes,’ said her husband, ‘what! I think i’ll be get to bed again, 
sheila; I forgot I had been ill. and now I do realli feel veri tired. 
but I should like to feel--in spite of thi hideous--i should like to 
feel we are friends, sheila.’ 

sheila almost impercept shuddered, cross the room, and face 
the still, almost lifeless mask. ‘I spoke,’ she said, in a low, cold, 
difficult voice--‘i spoke in a temper thi morning. you must tri to 
understand what a shock it ha been to me. now, I own it frankly, I 
know you are--arthur. but god onli know how it frighten me, 
and--and--horrifi me.’ she shut her eye beneath her veil. they wait 
on in silenc a while. 

‘poor boy!’ she said at last, lightli touch the loos sleeve; ‘be 
brave; it will all come right, soon. meanwhile, for alice’ sake, if 
not for mine, don’t give way to--to caprices, and all that. keep quietli 
here, arthur. and--and forgiv my impatience.’ 

He put out hi hand as if to touch her. ‘forgiv you!’ he said humbly, 
push it stubbornli back into hi pocket again. ‘oh, sheila, the 
forgiv is all on your side. you know I have noth to forgive.’ A 
long silenc fell between them. 

‘then, to-night,’ at last began sheila wearily, draw back, ‘we 
say noth to alice, except that you are too tired--just nervou 
prostration--to see her. what we should do without thi influenza, I 
cannot conceive. Mr bethani will probabl look in on hi way home; and 
then we can talk it over--w can talk it over again. So long as you 
are like this, yourself, in mind, whi i--what is it now?’ she broke off 
querulously. 

‘if you please, ma’am, Mr critchett say he doesn’t know Dr ferguson, 
hi name’ not in the directory, and there must be someth wrong with 
the message, and he’ sorry, but he must have it in write becaus 
there wa more even in the first packet than he ought by right to send. 
what shall I do, if you please?’ 

still look at her husband. sheila listen quietli to the end, and 
then, as if in inarticul disdain, she deliber shrug her 
shoulders, and went out to play her part unaided. 



chapter seven 

her husband turn wearili onc more, and draw up a chair sat down in 
front of the cold grate. He realis that sheila thought him as much 
of a fool now as she had for the moment thought him an impostor, or 
someth worse, the night before. that wa at least someth gained. 
He realised, too, in a vagu way that the exuber of mind that had 
practic invent Dr ferguson, and outrag miss sinnet, had quit 
suddenli flicker out. It wa astonishing, he thought, with gaze 
fix innoc on the black coals, that he should ever have done such 
things. He detest that kind of ‘rot’; that jaunti theatric pose so 
mani men pride their jackdaw brain on. 

and he sat quit still, like a cat at a cranny, listening, as it 
were, for the faintest remotest stir that might hint at ani return of 
this--activity. It wa the first realli sane moment he had had sinc 
the ‘change.’ whatev it wa that had happen at widderston wa now 
distinctli weaken in effect. why, now, perhaps? He stole a thievish 
look over hi shoulder at the glass, and cautious drew finger and 
thumb down that beak nose. then he realli quietli smiled, a smile he 
felt thi abomin facial caricatur wa quit unus to, the superior 
lawford smile of guileless contempt for the fanatical, the fantastic, 
and the bizarre: He wouldn’t have sat with hi feet on the fender befor 
a burnt-out fire. 

and the animos of that ‘he,’ utter onli just under hi breath, 
surpris even himself. It actual did seem as if there were a chance; 
if onli he kept cool and collected. If the whole mind of a man wa bent 
on be one thing, sure no power on earth, certainli not on earth, 
could for long compel him to look another, ani more (follow the 
resplend thought) than vice versa. 

that, in fact, wa the trick that had been in fit fashion play him 
sinc yesterday. obviously, and apart altogeth from hi promis to 
sheila, the best possibl thing he could do would be to walk quietli 
over to widderston to-morrow and like a child that ha lost a penny, 
just make the attempt to revers the process: look at the graves, read 
the inscript on the weather-beaten stones, compos himself onc more 
to sleep on the littl seat. 

magic, witchcraft, possession, and all that--well, Mr bethani might 
prefer to take it on the author of the bibl if it wa hi duty. but 
it wa at least mainli old testament stuff, like polygamy, joshua, and 
the ‘unclean beasts.’ the ‘unclean beasts.’ It wa simply, as simon had 
said, mainli an affair of the nerves, like indian jugglery. He had heard 
of dozen of such cases, or similar cases. and it wa hardli like 
that case even remot like hi own would be much brag about, or 
advertised. all those mysteri ‘disappearances,’ too, which one 
read about so repeatedly? what of them? even now, he felt (and glanc 
swiftli behind him at the fancy), it would be better to think as softli 
as possible, not to hope too openly, certainli not to triumph in the 
least degree, just in case of--well--listeners. 

He would wrap up too. and he wouldn’t tell sheila of the project till 
he had come safe back. what an excel joke it would be to confess 
meekli to hi escapade, and to be scolded, and then suddenli to reveal 
himself. He sat back and gaze with an almost malign animos at the 
face in the portrait, come and plump. 

An inarticulate, unfathom depress roll back on him, like a 
mist out of the sea. He hastili undressed, put watch and door-key and 
critchett’ powder under hi pillow, paused, vacantli ruminated, and 
then replac the powder in hi waistcoat pocket, said hi prayers, and 
got shiver to bed. He did not feel hurt at sheila’ leav him like 
this. So long as she realli believ in him. and now--alic wa home. He 
listened, tri not to shiver, for her voice; and sometim heard, he 
fancied, the clear note. It wa thi beastli influenza that made him 
feel so cold and lifeless. but all would soon come right--that is, if 
onli that face, lumin against the float dark within, would not 
appear the instant he close hi eyes. 

but legion of dream are influenza’ allies. He fell into a chill doze, 
heard voic innumerable, and one abov the rest, shout them down, 
until there fell a lull. and another, as it were, from afar said quit 
clearli and distinctly, ‘but surely, my dear, you have heard the stori 
of the poor old charwoman who talk greek in her delirium? A littl 
school french need not alarm us.’ and lawford open hi eye again on 
Mr bethani stand at hi bed. 

‘tt, tt! there, i’v been and wake him. and yet they say men make such 
excel nurs in time of war. but you see, lawford, what did I tell 
you? wasn’t I now an infal prophet? your wife ha been give me a 
most glow account. quit your old self, she tell me, except for just 
this--thi touch of facial paralysis. and I think, do you know’ (the 
kind old creatur stoop over the bed, but still, lawford notic 
bitterly, still without hi spectacles)--‘yes, I realli think there is 
a decid improvement. not quit so--drawn. We must make hast slowly. 
wedderburn, you know, believ profoundli in simon; he pull hi 
wife through a danger confinement. and here’ pill and tonic and 
liniments--a whole chemist’ shop. oh, we are get on swimmingly.’ 

flamelight wa flicker in the candl dusk. lawford turn hi head 
and saw sheila’ coiled, beauti hair in the firelight. 

‘you haven’t told alice?’ he asked. 

‘mi dear good man,’ said Mr bethany, ‘of cours we haven’t. you shall 
tell her yourself on monday. what an incred tradit it will be! 
but you mustn’t worry; you mustn’t even think. and no more of these 
jaunts, eh? that ferguson business--that wa too bad. what are we go 
to do with the fellow now we have creat him? He will come home to 
roost--mark my words. and as like as not down the vicarag chimney. 
I wouldn’t have believ it of you, my dear fellow.’ He beamed, but 
looked, none the less, veri lean and fag and depressed. 

‘how did the wed go off?’ lawford manag to think of inquiring. 

‘oh, a1,’ said Mr bethany. ‘i’v just been describ it to alice--th 
bride, her bridegroom, mother, aunts, cake, presents, finery, blushes, 
tears, and everyth that wa hers. we’v been in fits, haven’t we, mr 
lawford? and alic say i’m a worth in a cleric collar--didn’t she? 
and that it’ onli art that ha kept me out of an apron. now look here; 
quiet, quiet, quiet; no excitement, no pranks. what is there to worri 
about, pray? and now littl dorrit’ down with influenza too. and craik 
and I will have doubl work to do. well, well; good-bye, my dear. god 
bless you, lawford. I can’t tell you how relieved, how unspeak 
reliev I am to find you so much--so much better. feed him up, my other 
dear; bodi and mind and soul and spirit. and there goe the bell. I must 
have a biscuit. i’v swallow noth but a cupid in plaster of pari 
sinc breakfast. goodnight; we shall miss you both--both.’ 

but when sheila returned, her husband wa sunk again into a quiet sleep, 
from which not even the mani question she fret to put to him seem 
weighti enough to warrant hi disturbance. 

So when lawford again open hi eye he found himself lie wide awake, 
clear and refreshed, and eager to get up. but upon the air lay the still 
hush of earli morning. He tri in vain to catch back sleep again. 
A distant shred of dream still float in hi mind, like a cloud 
at evening. He rare dreamed, but certainli someth immens 
interest had but a moment ago elud him. He sat up and look at 
the clear red cinder and their maze of grottoes. He got out of bed and 
peep through the blinds. To the east and opposit to him garden and 
an apple-orchard lay, and there in strang liquid tranquil hung the 
morn star, and rose, rifl into the dusk of night, the first grey 
of dawn. the street beneath it autumn leav wa vacant, charmed, 
deserted. 

hardli sinc childhood had lawford seen the dawn unless over hi winter 
breakfast-table. veri much like a child now he stood gaze out of hi 
bow-window--th child whom time’ busi robin had long ago cover over 
with the leav of numberless hours. A vagu exult fume up into 
hi brain. still on the border of sleep, he unlock the great wardrob 
and took out an old fade purpl and crimson dressing-gown that had 
belong to hi grandfather, the chief glori of everi christma charade. 
He pull the cowl-lik hood over hi head and strode majest over 
to the looking-glass. 

He look in there a moment on the strang face, like a child dismay 
at it own excitement, and a fit of sob that wa half uncontrol 
laughter swept over him. He threw off the hood and turn onc more to 
the window. conscious had flood back indeed. what would sheila 
have said to see him there? the unearthli beauti and stillness, and 
man’ small labours, garden and wall and roof-tre idl and smokeless in 
the light of daybreak--ther seem to be some half-told secret between 
them. what had life done with him to leav a realiti so clouded? He 
put on hi slippers, and, gentli open the door, crept with extrem 
caution up the stairs. At a long, narrow land window he confront 
a panorama of starri night-gardens, slope orchards; and beyond them 
fields, hills, orion, the dogs, in the clear and cloudless darkness. 

‘mi god, how beautiful!’ a voic whispered. and a cock crow mistili 
afar. He stood stare like a child into the wintri bright of a 
pastry-cook’s. then onc more he crept stealthili on. He stoop and 
listen at a close door, until he fanci that abov the beat of 
hi own heart he could hear the breath of the sleeper within. then, 
take firm hold of the handl with both hands, he slowli noiselessli 
turn it, and peep in on alice. 

the moon wa long past her faint shine here. the blind wa down. and 
yet it wa not pitch dark. He stood with eye fixed, waiting. then he 
edg softli forward and knelt down besid the bed. He could hear her 
breath now: long, low, quiet, unhastening--th miracl of life. He 
could just dimli discern the dark of her hair against the pillow. 
some long-seal spring of tender seem to rise in hi heart with a 
grief and an ach he had never known before. here at least he could find 
a littl peace, a brief pause, howev futil and stupid all hi hope 
of the night had been. He leant hi head on hi hand on the counterpan 
and refus to think. He felt a quick tremor, a startl movement, and 
knew that eye wide open with fear were strive to pierc the gloom 
between them. 

‘there, there, dearest,’ he said in a low whisper, ‘it’ onli me, onli 
me.’ He stroke the narrow hand and gaze into the shadowiness. her 
finger lay quiet and passiv in his, with that strang sens of 
immateri that sleep bring to the body. 

‘you, you!’ she answer with a deep sigh. ‘oh, dearest, how you 
frighten me. what is wrong? whi have you come? are you worse, dearest, 
dearest?’ 

He kiss her hand. ‘no, alice, not worse. I couldn’t sleep, that wa 
all.’ 

‘oh, and I came so utterli miser to bed becaus you would not see 
me. and mother would tell me onli so veri little. I didn’t even know 
you had been ill.’ she press hi hand between her own. ‘but this, you 
know, is very, veri naughty--y will catch cold, you bad thing. what 
would mother say?’ 

‘I think we mustn’t tell her, dear. I couldn’t help it; I felt much I 
want to see you. I have been rather miserable.’ 

‘why?’ she said, stroke hi hand from wrist to fingertip with one 
soft finger. ‘you mustn’t be miserable. you and me have never done such 
a thing before; have we? wa it that wretch old flu?’ 

It wa too dark in the littl fragrant room even to see her face so 
close to hi own. and yet he feared. ‘dr simon,’ she went on softly, 
‘said it was. but isn’t your voic a littl hoarse, and it sound so 
melancholi in the dark. and oh’--sh squeez hi wrist--‘you have grown 
so thin! you do frighten me. whatev should I do if you were realli 
ill? and it wa so odd, dear. when first I woke I seem to be still 
strain my eye in a dream, at such a curious, haunt face--not veri 
nice. I am glad, I am glad you were here.’ 

‘what wa the dream-fac like?’ came the mutter question. 

‘dark and sharp, and rather dwell eyes; you know those long face one 
see in dreams: like a hawk, like a conjuror’s.’ 

like a conjuror’s!--it wa the first unguard and ungarbl criticism. 
‘perhaps, dear, if you find my voic different, and my hand shrunk up, 
you will find my face changed, too--lik a conjuror’s.... what then?’ 

she laugh gaili and tenderly. ‘you silli silly; I should love you more 
than ever. your hand are ici cold. I can’t warm them nohow.’ 

lawford held tight hi daughter’ hand. ‘you do love me, alice? you 
would not turn against me, whatev happened? ah, you shall see, you 
shall see.’ A sudden burn hope sprang up in him. sure when all wa 
well again, these last few hour would not have been spent in vain. 
like the shadow of death they had been, against whose dark the green 
familiar earth seem beauti as the plain of paradise. had he but 
realiz befor how much he love her--what year of life had been 
wast in leav it all unsaid! He came back from hi reveri to find 
hi hand wet with her tears. He stroke her hair, and touch gentli her 
eyelid without speaking. 

‘you will let me come in to-morrow?’ she pleaded; ‘you won’t keep me 
out?’ 

‘ah, but, dear, you must rememb your mother. she get so anxious, and 
everi word the doctor say is law. how would you like me to come again 
like this, perhaps?--lik santa claus?’ 

‘you know how I love have you,’ she said, and stopped. ‘but--but...’ 
He lean closer. ‘yes, yes, come,’ she said, clutch hi hand and 
hide her eyes; ‘it is onli my dream--that horrible, dwell face in 
the dream; it frighten me so.’ 

lawford rose veri slowli from hi knees. He could feel in the dark hi 
brow drawn down; there came a low, sullen beat on hi ear; he saw 
hi face as it were in dim outlin against the dark. rage and rebellion 
surg up in him; even hi love could be turn to bitterness. well, two 
could play at ani game! alic sprang up in bed and caught hi sleeve. 
‘dearest, dearest, you must not be angri with me now!’ 

He flung himself down besid the bed. anger, resent die away. ‘you 
are all I have left,’ he said. 

He stole back, as he had come, in the clear dawn to hi bedroom. 

It wa not five yet. He put a few more coal on hi fire and blew out 
the night-light, and lay down. but it wa imposs to rest, to remain 
inactive. He would go down and search for that first volum of quain. 
hallucination, influenza, insanity--why, sheila must have purpos 
mislaid it. A rather formid figur he looked, descend the stair 
in the grey dusk of daybreak. the breakfast-room wa at the back of 
the house. He tilt the blind, and a faint light flow in from the 
chang colour of the sky. He open the glass door of the littl 
bookcas to the right of the window, and ran eye and finger over the few 
row of books. but as he stood there with hi back to the room, just as 
the shadow of a bird’ wing float across the moonlight of a pool, he 
becam suddenli consciou that something, somebodi had pass across the 
doorway, and in pass had look in on him. 

He stood motionless, listening; but no sound broke the morn 
slumbrousness, except the faraway warbl of a thrush in the first 
light. So sudden and transitori had been the experi that it seem 
now to be illusory; yet it had so caught him up, it had with so furtiv 
and sinist a quiet broken in on hi solitude, that for a moment he 
dare not move. A cold, indefinit sensat stole over him that he wa 
be watched; that some dim, evil presenc wa behind him bide it 
time, patient and stealthy, with eye fix unmovingli on him where 
he stood. but, watch and wait as silent as he might, onli the day 
broaden at the window, and at last a narrow ray of sunlight stole 
trembl up into the duski bowl of the sky. 

At ani rate quain wa found, with all the ill of life, from A to I; and 
lawford turn back to hi bondag with the book under hi arm. 



chapter eight 

the sabbath, pale with septemb sunshine, and monoton with chime 
bells, had pass languidli away. Dr simon had come and gone, optimist 
and urbane, yet with a faint inward dissatisfact over a patient 
behind whose taciturn a hint of mockeri and subterfug seem to 
lurk. even mr lawford had appear to share her husband’ reticence. 
but Dr simon had happen on other case in hi experi where tact 
wa requir rather than skill, and time than medicine. 

the voic and footsteps, even the frou-frou of worshipp go to 
church, the voic and footstep of worshipp return from church, 
had float up to the patient’ open window. sunlight had drawn across 
hi room in one pale beam, and vanished. A few caller had called. 
hothous flowers, waxen and pale, had been left with messag of 
sympathy. even Dr critchett had respect and discreetli made 
inquiri on hi way home from chapel. 

lawford had spent most of hi time in pace to and fro in hi soft 
slippers. the veri monotoni had eas hi mind. now and again he had 
lain motionless, with hi face to the ceiling. He had doze and had 
awakened, cold and torpid with dream. He had hardli been awar of 
the process, but everi hour had done something, it seemed, toward 
clarifi hi point of view. A conscious had begun to stir in him 
that wa neither that of the old, easi lawford, whom he had never been 
fulli awar of before, nor of thi strang ghostli intellig that 
haunt the hawklike, restless face, and pluck so insist at hi 
distract nerves. He had begun in a vagu fashion to be awar of them 
both, could in a fashion discrimin between them, almost as if there 
realli were two spirit in stubborn conflict within him. It would, of 
course, wear him down in time. there could be onli one end to such a 
struggle--th end. 

all day he had long for freedom, on and on, with crave for the open 
sky, for solitude, for green silence, beyond these madden walls. thi 
heed silken come and going, these sunday voices, thi reiter 
yelp of a singl peevish bell--would they never cease? and abov all, 
betwixt dread and an almost physic greed, he hunger for night. He 
sat down with elbow on knee and head on hi hands, think of night, 
it secrecy, it immeasur solitude. 

hi eyelid twitched; the fire befor him had for an instant gone black 
out. He seem to see slow-gestur branches, grass stoop beneath 
a grey and wind-swept sky. He start up; and the remembr of the 
morn return to him--th glassi light, the chang rays, the 
beam gilt upon the useless books. now, at last, at the windows; 
afternoon had begun to wane. and when sheila brought up hi tea, as if 
chanc had heard hi cry, she enter in hat and stole. she put down the 
tray, and paus at the glass, look across it out of the window. 

‘alic say you are to eat everi one of those delici sandwiches, and 
especi the tini omelette. you have scarc touch anyth to-day, 
arthur. I am a poor one to preach, I am afraid; but you know what that 
will mean--a wors breakdown still. you realli must tri to think of--of 
us all.’ 

‘are you go to church?’ he ask in a low voice. 

‘not, of course, if you would prefer not. but Dr simon advis me most 
particularli to go out at least onc a day. We must remember, thi is 
not the begin of your illness. long-continu anxiety, I suppose, 
doe tell on one in time. anyhow, he said that I look worri and 
run-down. I AM worried. let us both tri for each other’ sakes, or even 
if onli for alice’s, to--to do all we can. I must not harass you; but is 
there any--do you see the slightest chang of ani kind?’ 

‘you alway look pretty, sheila; to-night you look prettier: that is the 
onli change, I think.’ 

mr lawford’ attitud intensifi in it stillness. ‘now, speak 
quit frankly, what is it in you suggest these remark at such a time? 
that’ what baffl me. It seem so childish, so needlessli blind.’ 

‘I am veri sorry, sheila, to be so childish. but i’m not, say what 
you like, blind. you are pretty: i’d repeat it if I wa burn at the 
stake.’ 

sheila lower her eye softli on to the rich-ton pictur in the 
glass. ‘supposing,’ she said, watch her lip move, ‘supposing--of 
course, I know you are get better and all that--but suppos you 
don’t chang back as Mr bethani thinks, what will you do? honestly, 
arthur, when I think over it calmly, the whole tragedi come back on me 
with such a forc it sweep me off my feet; I am for the moment scarc 
my own mistress. what would you do?’ 

‘I think, sheila,’ repli a low, infinit weari voice, ‘I think I 
should marri again.’ It wa the same wavering, faintli iron voic 
that had slightli discompos Dr simon that same morning. 

‘“marri again”!’ exclaim incredul the full lip in the 
looking-glass. ‘who?’ 

‘you, dear!’ 

sheila turn softli round, consciou in a most humili manner that 
she had ever so littl flushed. 

her husband wa pour out hi tea, unaware, apparently, of her chang 
of position. she watch him curiously. In spite of all her reason, of 
her absolut certainty, she wonder even again for a moment if thi 
realli could be arthur. and for the first time she realis the power 
and masteri of that eager and far too hungri face. her mind seem to 
pause, flutter in air, like a bird in the wind. she hasten rather 
unsteadili to the door. 

‘will you want anyth more, do you think, for an hour?’ she asked. 

her husband look up over hi littl table. ‘i alic go with you?’ 

‘oh yes; poor child, she look so pale and miserable. We are go to 
mr sherwin’s, and then on to church. you will lock your door?’ 

‘yes, I will lock my door.’ 

‘and I do hope arthur--noth rash!’ 

A change, that seem almost the effect of actual shadow, came over hi 
face. ‘I wish you could stay with me,’ he said slowly. ‘I don’t think 
you have ani idea what--what I go through.’ 

It wa as if a child had ask on the verg of terror for a candl in 
the dark. but an hour’ terror is better than a lifetim of timidity. 
sheila sighed. 

‘I think,’ she said, ‘I too might say that. but there; give way will 
do noth for either of us. I shall be gone onli for an hour, or two 
at the most. and I told Mr bethani I should have to come out befor the 
sermon: it’ onli Mr craik.’ 

‘but whi mr sherwin? she’d worm a secret out of one’ grave.’ 

‘it’ useless to discuss that, arthur; you have alway consist 
dislik my friends. it’ scarc like that you would find ani 
improv in them now.’ 

‘oh, well--’ he began. but the door wa alreadi closed. 

‘sheila!’ he call in a burst of anger. 

‘well, arthur?’ 

‘you have taken my latchkey.’ 

sheila came hastili in again. ‘your latchkey?’ 

‘I am go out.’ 

‘“go out!”--you will not be so mad, so criminal; and after your 
promise!’ 

He stood up. ‘it is useless to argue. If I do not go out, I shall 
certainli go mad. As for criminal--why, that’ a woman’ word. who on 
earth is to know me?’ 

‘it is of no consequence, then, that the servant are alreadi gossip 
about thi imposs Dr ferguson; that you are certain to be seen 
either go or returning; that alic is bound to discov that you are 
well enough to go out, and yet not even enough to say good-night to your 
own daughter--oh, it’ monstrous, it’ a frantic, a heartless thing to 
do!’ her voic vagu suggest tears. 

lawford eye her coldli and stubbornly--think of the empti room 
he would leav await hi return, it lamp burning, it fire-flam 
shining. It wa almost a physic discomfort, thi long unspeak 
for the twilight, the green secreci and the silenc of the graves. ‘keep 
them out of the way,’ he said in a low voice; ‘it will be dark when I 
come in.’ hi harden face lit up. ‘it’ useless to attempt to dissuad 
me.’ 

‘whi must you alway be hurt me? whi do you seem to delight in tri 
to estrang me?’ husband and wife face each other across the clear-lit 
room. He did not answer. 

‘for the last time,’ she said in a quiet, hard voice, ‘I ask you not to 
go.’ 

He shrug hi shoulders. ‘ask me not to come back,’ he said; ‘that’ 
nearer your hope.’ He turn hi face to the fire. without move 
he heard her go out, return, pause, and go out again. and when he 
deliber wheel round in hi chair the littl key lay conspicu 
there on the counterpane. 



chapter nine 

the last light of sunset lay in the west; and a sullen wrack of cloud 
wa mount into the windless sky when lawford enter the countri 
graveyard again by it dark weather-worn lych-gate. the old stone church 
with it squar tower stood amid trees, it eastern window faintli aglow 
with crimson and purple. He could hear a steady, rather nasal voic 
through it open lattices. but the stoop stone and the cypress 
were out of sight of it porch. He would not be seen down there. He 
paus a moment, however; hi hat wa drawn down over hi eyes; he wa 
shivering. far over the harvest field show a grow pallor in 
the solitari seat beneath the cypresses. He stood hesitating, gaze 
steadili and yet half vacantli at the motionless figure, and in a while 
a face wa lift in hi direction, and undisconcert eye calmli 
survey him. 

‘I am afraid,’ call lawford rather nervously--‘i hope I am not 
intruding?’ 

‘not at all, not at all,’ said the stranger. ‘I have no privileg here; 
at least as yet.’ 

lawford again hesitated, then slowli advanced. ‘it’ astonishingli quiet 
and beautiful,’ he said. 

the stranger turn hi head to glanc over the fields. ‘yes, it is, 
very,’ he replied. there wa the faintest accent, a littl drawl of 
unfriendli in the remark. 

‘you often sit here?’ lawford persisted. 

the stranger rais hi eyebrows. ‘oh yes, often.’ He smiled. ‘it is 
my own modest fashion of attend divin service. the congreg is 
rapt.’ 

‘mi visits,’ said lawford, ‘have been veri few--in fact, so far as I 
know, I have onli onc been here before.’ 

‘I envi you the novelty.’ there wa again the same faint unmistak 
antagon in voic and attitude; and yet so deep wa the relief in 
talk to a fellow creatur who hadn’t the least suspicion of anyth 
unusu in hi appear that lawford wa extrem disinclin to turn 
back. He made anoth effort--for convers with stranger had alway 
been a difficulti to him--and advanc toward the seat. ‘you mustn’t 
pleas let me intrud upon you,’ he said, ‘but realli I am veri 
interest in thi queer old place. perhap you would tell me someth 
of it history?’ He sat down. hi companion move slowli to the other 
side of the broken gravestone. 

‘to tell you the truth,’ he replied, pick hi way as it were from 
word to word, ‘it’ “history,” as peopl call it, doe not interest me 
in the least. after all, it’ not when a thing is, but what it is, that 
much matters. what thi is’--h glanced, with head bent, across the 
shadowi stones, ‘i pretti evident. Of course, age ha it charms.’ 

‘and is thi veri old?’ 

‘oh yes, it’ old right enough, as thing go; but even age, perhaps, 
is mainli an affair of the imagination. there’ a tombston near that 
littl old hawthorn, and there are two other side by side under the 
wall, still even legibl late seventeenth century. that’ pretti 
good weathering.’ He smile faintly. ‘of course, the church itself is 
centuri older, drench with age. but she’ still sleep-walk while 
these old tombston dream. glow-worm and cricket are not such bad 
bedfellows.’ 

‘what interest me most, I think,’ said lawford haltingly, ‘wa this.’ 
He point with hi stick to the grave at hi feet. 

‘ah, yes, sabathier’s,’ said the stranger; ‘I know hi peculiar histori 
almost by heart.’ 

lawford found himself stare with unusu concentr into the 
rather long and pale face. ‘not, I suppose,’ he resum faintly--‘not, I 
suppose, beyond what’ there.’ 

hi companion leant hi hand on the old stoop tombstone. ‘well, you 
know, there’ a good deal there’--h stoop over--‘if you read between 
the lines. even if you don’t.’ 

‘A suicide,’ said lawford, under hi breath. 

‘yes, a suicide; that’ whi our christian countrymen have buri him 
outsid of the fold. dead or alive, they tri to keep the wolf out.’ 

‘i this, then, unconsecr ground?’ said lawford. 

‘haven’t you noticed,’ drawl the other, ‘how green the grass grow 
down here, and how veri sharp are poor old sabathier’ thorns? besides, 
he wa a stranger, and they--kept him out.’ 

‘but, surely,’ said lawford, ‘wa it so entir a matter of choice--th 
law of the church? If he did kill himself, he did.’ 

the stranger turn with a littl shrug. ‘I don’t suppos it’ a matter 
of much consequ to him. I fanci I wa hi onli friend. may I 
ventur to ask whi you are interest in the poor old thing?’ 

lawford’ mind wa as calm and shallow as a millpond. ‘oh, a rather 
unusu thing happen to me here,’ he said. ‘you say you often come?’ 

‘often,’ said the stranger rather curtly. 

‘ha anything--ever--occurred?’ 

‘“occurred?”’ He rais hi eyebrows. ‘I wish it had. I come here 
simply, as I have said, becaus it’ quiet; becaus I prefer the compani 
of those who never answer me back, and who do not so much as condescend 
to pay me the least attention.’ He smile and turn hi face toward 
the quiet fields. 

lawford, after a long pause, lift hi eyes. ‘do you think,’ he said 
softly, ‘it is possibl one ever could?’ 

‘“one ever could?”’ 

‘answer back?’ 

there wa a low rot wall of stone encompass sabathier’ grave; 
on thi the stranger sat down. He glanc up rather curious at hi 
companion. ‘seldom the time and the place and the reven altogether. 
the thought ha occur to others,’ he ventur to add. 

‘of course, of course,’ said lawford eagerly. ‘but it is an absolut 
new one to me. I don’t mean that I have never had such an idea, just in 
one’ own superfici way; but’--h paus and glanc swiftli into the 
fast-thicken twilight--‘i wonder: are they, do you think, really, all 
quit dead?’ 

‘call and see!’ taunt the stranger softly. 

‘ah, yes, I know,’ said lawford. ‘but I believ in the resurrect of 
the body; that is what we say; and supposing, when a man dies--suppos 
it wa most fright against one’ will; that one hate the aw 
inact that death brings, shut a poor devil up like a child 
kick against the door in a dark cupboard; one might sure one 
might--just quietly, you know, tri to get out? wouldn’t you?’ he added. 

‘and, surely,’ he found himself begin gentli to argu again, 
‘surely, what about, say, him?’ He nod toward the old and broken 
grave that lay between them. 

‘what, sabathier?’ the other echoed, lay hi hand upon the stone. 

and a sheer enorm abyss of silenc seem to follow the unanswer 
question. 

‘he wa a stranger; it say so. good god!’ said lawford, ‘how he must 
have want to get home! He kill himself, poor wretch, think of the 
fret and fever he must have been in--just before. imagin it.’ 

‘but it might, you know,’ suggest the other with a smile--‘might have 
been sheer indifference.’ 

‘“nichola sabathier, stranger to thi parish”--no, no,’ said lawford, 
hi heart beat as if it would choke him, ‘I don’t fanci it wa 
indifference.’ 

It wa almost too dark now to distinguish the stranger’ featur but 
there seem a faint suggest of ironi in hi voice. ‘and how do 
you suppos your angri naughti child would set about it? it’ narrow 
quarters; how would he begin?’ 

lawford sat quit still. ‘you say--i hope I am not detain you--you 
say you have come here, sat here often, on thi veri seat; have you ever 
had--hav you ever fallen asleep here?’ 

‘whi do you ask?’ inquir the other curiously. 

‘I wa onli wondering,’ said lawford. He wa cold and shivering. He felt 
instinct it wa mad to sit on here in the thin glide mist 
that had gather in swath abov the grass, milk-pal in the rise 
moon. the stranger turn away from him. 

‘“for in that sleep of death what dream may come must give us pause,”’ 
he said slowly, with a littl satir catch on the last word. ‘what 
did you dream?’ 

lawford glanc helplessli about him. the moon cast lean grey beam 
of light between the cypresses. but to hi wide and wander eye it 
seem that a radianc other than her haunt these mound and lean 
stones. ‘have you ever notic it?’ he said, put out hi hand 
toward hi unknown companion; ‘thi stone is crack from head to 
foot?... but there’--h rose stiff and chilled--‘i am afraid I have 
bore you with my company. you came here for solitude, and I have been 
tri to convinc you that we are surround with witnesses. you will 
forgiv my intrusion?’ there wa a kind of old-fashion courtesi in hi 
manner that he himself wa dimli awar of. He held out hi hand. 

‘I hope you will think noth of the kind,’ said the other earnestly; 
‘how could it be in ani sens an intrusion? it’ the old stori of 
bluebeard. and I confess I too should veri much like a peep into hi 
cupboard. who wouldn’t? but there, it’ mere a matter of time, I 
suppose.’ He paused, and togeth they slowli ascend the path alreadi 
glimmer with a heavi dew. At the porch they paus onc more. and now 
it wa the stranger that held out hi hand. 

‘perhaps,’ he said, ‘you will give me the pleasur of some day 
continu our talk. As for our friend below, it so happen that I have 
manag to pick up a littl more of hi histori than the sexton seem to 
have heard of--if you would care some time or other to share it. I live 
onli at the foot of the hill, not half a mile distant. perhap you could 
spare the time now?’ 

lawford took out hi watch, ‘you are realli veri kind,’ he said. ‘but, 
perhaps--well, whatev that histori may be, I think you would agre 
that mine is even--but, there, i’v talk too much about myself 
already. perhap to-morrow?’ 

‘why, to-morrow, then,’ said hi companion. ‘it’ a flat wooden house, 
on the left-hand side. come at ani time of the evening’; he paus again 
and smiled--‘th third hous after the rectory, which is mark up on 
the gate. My name is herbert--herbert herbert to be precise.’ 

lawford took out hi pocket-book and a card. ‘mine,’ he said, hand 
it grave to hi companion. ‘i lawford--at least...’ It wa realli the 
first time that either had seen the other’ face at close quarter and 
clear-lit; and on lawford’ a moon almost at the full shone 
dazzlingly. He saw an expression--dismay, incredulity, overwhelm 
astonishment--start suddenli into the dark, rather indiffer eyes. 

‘what is it?’ he cried, hastili stoop close. 

‘why,’ said the other, laugh and turn away, ‘I think the moon must 
have bewitch me too.’ 



chapter ten 

lawford listen awhil befor open hi door. He heard voic in the 
dining-room. A light shone faintli between the blind of hi bedroom. He 
veri gentli let himself in, and unheard, unseen, mount the stairs. He 
sat down in front of the fire, tire out and bitterli cold in spite 
of hi long walk home. but hi mind wa wearier even than hi body. He 
tri in vain to catch up the thread of hi thoughts. He onli knew for 
certain that so far as hi first hope and motiv had gone hi errand 
had prove entir futile. ‘how could I possibl fall asleep with that 
fellow talk there?’ he had said to himself angrily; yet knew in hi 
heart that their talk had driven everi other idea out of hi mind. He 
had not yet even glanc into the glass. hi everi thought wa vainli 
wander round and round the one curiou hint that had drift in, but 
which he had not yet been abl to put into words. 

supposing, though, that he had realli fallen into a deep sleep, with 
none to watch or spy--what then? howev ridicul that idea, it wa 
not more ridiculous, more incred than the actual fact. If he had 
remain there, he might, it wa just possibl that he would by now, 
have actual awaken just hi own familiar every-day self again. and 
the thought of that--though he hardli realis it full import--actu 
did send him on tip-to for a glanc that more or less effectu set 
the question at rest. and there look out at him, it seemed, the 
same dark sallow face that had so much appal him onli two night 
ago--expressionless, cadaverous, with shadowi hollow beneath the 
glitter eyes. and even as he watch it, it lips, of their own 
volition, drew togeth and question him--‘whose?’ 

He wa not to be given much leisure, however, for fantast reveri 
like this. As he lean hi head on hi hands, gladli consciou that he 
could not possibl bear thi incess strain for long, sheila open 
the door. He start up. 

‘I wish you would knock,’ he said angrily; ‘you talk of quiet; you tell 
me to rest, and think; and here you come creep and spi on me as 
if I wa a child in a nursery. I refus to be watch and guard and 
peep on like this.’ He knew that hi hand were trembling, that he 
could not keep hi eye fixed, that hi voic wa nearli inarticulate. 

sheila drew in her lips. ‘I have mere come to tell you, arthur, that 
Mr bethani ha brought Mr danton in to supper. He agre with me it 
realli would be advis to take such a veri old and prudent and 
practic friend into our confidence. you do noth I ask of you. I 
simpli cannot bear the burden of thi incess anxiety. look, now, what 
your night walk ha done for you! you look posit at death’ door.’ 

‘what--what an instinct you have for the right word,’ said lawford 
softly. ‘and danton, of all peopl in the world! It wa sure rather a 
curious, a thoughtless choice. ha he had supper?’ 

‘whi do you ask?’ 

‘he won’t believe: too--bloated.’ 

‘I think,’ said sheila indignantly, ‘it is hardli fair to speak of a 
veri old and a veri true friend of mine in such--well, vulgar term as 
that. besides, arthur, as for believing--without in the least desir 
to hurt your feelings--i must candidli warn you, some peopl won’t.’ 

‘come along,’ said lawford, with a faint gust of laughter; ‘let’ see.’ 

they went quickli downstairs, sheila with less dignity, perhaps, than 
she had been surpris into sinc she had left a slimmer girlhood 
behind. she swept into the gaze of the two gentlemen stand togeth 
on the hearthrug; and so wa caught, as it were, between a rain of 
conflict glances, for her husband had follow instantly, and stood 
now behind her, stoop a little, and with someth between contempt 
and defianc confront an old fat friend, whom that one brief 
challeng instant had congeal into a condit of passiv and 
immov hostility. 

Mr danton compos hi chin in hi collar, and deliber 
turn himself toward hi companion. hi small eye wandered, and 
instantan met and rest on those of mr lawford. 

‘arthur thought he would prefer to come down and see you himself.’ 

‘you take such formid risks, lawford,’ said Mr bethani in a dry, 
difficult voice. 

‘am I realli to believe,’ danton began huskily. ‘I am sure, bethany, 
you will--mi dear mr lawford!’ said he, stir vaguely, glanc 
restlessly. 

‘it wa not my wish, vicar, to come at all,’ said a voic from the 
doorway. ‘to tell you the truth, I am too tire to care a jot either 
way. and’--h lift a long arm--‘i must posit refus to produc 
the least, the remotest proof that I am not, so far as I am person 
aware, even the man in the moon. danton at heart wa alway an 
incorrig sceptic. aren’t you, T. d.? you pride your dear old brawn 
on it in secret?’ 

‘I really--’ began danton in a rich still voice. 

‘oh, but you know you are,’ drawl on the slightli hesit 
long-drawn syllables; ‘it’ your parochi metier. firm, unctuous, 
subtle, scepticism; and to that end your bodi flourishes. you were born 
fat; you becam fat; and fat, my dear danton, ha been deliber 
thrust on you--in layers! lampreys! you’ll perish of surfeit some day, 
of sheer dantonism. and fat, postmortem, danton. oh, what a basting’ 
there!’ 

Mr bethany, with a convuls effort, woke. He turn swiftli on mr 
lawford. ‘why, why, could you not have seen?’ he cried. 

‘it’ no good, vicar. she’ all sheer laodicean. blow hot, blow cold. 
north, south, east, west--to have a weathercock for a wife is to marri 
the wind. there’ noth to be got from poor sheila but.... 

‘lawford!’ the littl man’ voic wa as sharp as the crack of a whip; 
‘I forbid it. Do you hear me? I forbid it. some self-command; my dear 
good fellow, remember, rememb it’ onli the will, the will that keep 
us breathing.’ 

lawford peer as if out of a gather dusk, that thicken and 
flicker with shadow befor hi eyes. ‘what’ he mean, then,’ he 
mutter huskily, ‘come here with hi black, still carcase--peeping, 
peeping--what’ he mean, I say?’ there wa a moment’ silence. then with 
lift brow and wide eye that to everi one of hi three wit 
left an indel memori of clear and wolfish light within their glassi 
pupils, he turn heavily, and climb back to hi solitude. 

‘I suppose,’ began danton, with an obviou effort to disentangl himself 
from the humili of the moment, ‘I suppos he was--wandering?’ 

‘bless me, yes,’ said Mr bethani cordially--‘fever. We all know what 
that means.’ 

‘yes,’ said danton, take refug in mr lawford’ white and intent 
gaze. 

‘just think, think, danton--th awful, incess strain of such an 
ordeal. think for an instant what such a thing means!’ 

danton insert a plump, white finger between collar and chin. ‘oh yes. 
but--eh?--needlessli abusive? I never said I disbeliev him.’ 

‘do you?’ said mr lawford’ voice. 

He pois himself, as if it were, on the monolith stabil of hi 
legs. ‘eh?’ he said. 

Mr bethani sat down at the table. ‘I rather fear some such temporari 
breakdown as this, danton. I think I foresaw it. and now, just while we 
are all three alon here togeth in friendli conclave, wouldn’t it be 
as well, don’t you think, to confront ourselv with the difficulties? 
I know--w all know, that that poor half-dement creatur IS arthur 
lawford. thi morn he wa as sane, as lucid as I hope I am now. An 
aw calam ha suddenli fallen upon him--thi change. I own frankli 
at the first sheer shock it stagger me as I think for the moment it 
ha stagger you. but when I had seen the poor fellow face to face, 
heard him talk, and watch him there upstair in the silenc stir and 
awak and come up again to hi troubl out of hi sleep. I had no more 
doubt in my own mind and heart that he wa he than I have in my mind 
that i--am I. We do in some mysteri way, you’ll own at once, grow so 
accustomed, so inured, if you like, to each other’ face (mask 
though they be) that we hardli realis we see them when we are speak 
together. and yet the slightest, the most infinitesim chang is 
instantli apparent.’ 

‘oh yes, vicar; but you see--’ 

Mr bethani rais a small lean hand: ‘one moment, please. I have heard 
lawford’ own account. consciou or unconscious, he ha been through 
some terrif strain, some such aw conflict with the unseen power 
that we--thank god!--hav onli read about, and never perhaps, until 
death is upon us, shall wit for ourselves. what more likely, more 
inevit than that such a thing should leav it scar, it cloud, it 
mask shadow?--cal it what you will. A smile can turn a face we dread 
into a face we’d die for. some experience, which would be noth but 
a hideou cruelti and outrag to ask too close about--one, perhaps, 
which he could, even if he would, poor fellow, give no account of--ha 
put him temporarili at the world’ mercy. they made him a nine days’ 
wonder, a byword. and that, my dear danton, is just where we come in. 
We know the man himself; and it is to be our privileg to act as a 
buffer-state, to be intermediari between him and the rest of thi 
deadly, craving, sheepish world--for the time being; oh yes, just for 
the time being. other and keener and more knowledg mind than mine 
or your will some day bring him back to us again. We don’t attempt to 
explain; we can’t. We simpli believe.’ 

but danton mere continu to stare, as if into the quiet of an 
aquarium. 

‘mi dear good danton,’ persist Mr bethani with cherub patience, ‘how 
old are you?’ 

‘I don’t see quite...’ smile danton with recov ease, and 
rapidli mobilis forces. ‘excus the confidence, mr lawford, i’m 
forty-three.’ 

‘good,’ said Mr bethany; ‘and i’m seventy-one, and thi child here’--h 
point an accus finger at sheila--i youth perpetual. so,’ he 
briskli brightened, ‘say, between us we’r six score all told. are 
we--can we, deliberately, with thi mere pinch of year at our command 
out of the wheel million that have gone--can we say, “thi is 
impossible,” to ani singl phenomenon? can we?’ 

‘no, we can’t, of course,’ said danton formidably. ‘not finally. that’ 
all veri well, but’--h paused, and nodded, nod hi round head 
upward as if toward the inaud overhead, ‘I suppos he can’t hear?’ 

Mr bethani rose cheerfully. ‘all right, danton; I am afraid you are 
exactli what the poor fellow in hi delirium solemnli asseverated. 
and, jest apart, it is in delirium that we tell our sheer, plain, 
unadulter truth: you’r a nice cover sceptic. personally, I 
refus to discuss the matter. mere dull, stubborn prejudice; bigotry, if 
you like. I will onli remark just this--that mr lawford and I, in our 
inmost hearts, know. you, my dear danton, forgiv the freedom, mere 
incredul grope. faith versu reason--that prehistor armageddon. 
some day, and a day not far distant either, lawford will come back 
to us. this--thi shutter will be taken down as abruptli as by some 
inconceiv drowsi heedless of common natur it ha been put 
up. he’ll win through; and of hi own sheer will and courage. but now, 
becaus I ask it, and thi poor child here entreat it, you will say 
noth to a live soul about the matter, say, till friday? what 
step-by-step creatur we are, to be sure! I say friday becaus it 
will be exactli a week then. and what’ a week?--to natur scarc 
the unfold of a rose. but still, friday be it. then, if noth ha 
occurred, we will, we shall have to call a friendli gathering, we shall 
be compel to have a friendli consultation.’ 

‘i’m not, I hope, a brute, bethany,’ said danton apologetically; ‘but, 
honestly, speak for myself, simpli as a man of the world, it’ a 
big risk to be take on--what shall we call it?--on mere intuition. 
personally, and even in a court of law--though heaven forbid it ever 
reach that stage--personally, I could swear that the fellow that stood 
abus me there, in that revolt fashion, wa not lawford. It would 
be easier even to believ in him, if there were not that--that glaze, 
that shock simul of the man himself, the veri man. but then, I 
am a sceptic; I own it. and ‘pon my word, mr lawford, there’ plenti of 
room for sceptic in a world like this.’ 

‘veri well,’ said Mr bethani crisply, ‘that’ settled, then. with your 
permission, my dear,’ he added, turn untarnish clear childlik 
eye on sheila, ‘I will take all risks--even to the foot of the gibbet: 
accessory, danton, after the fact.’ and so direct and cloudless wa hi 
gaze that sheila tri in vain to evad it and to catch a glimps 
of danton’ small agate-lik eyes, now complet under mastery, and 
await confid the meet with her own. 

‘of course,’ she said, ‘I am entir in your hands, dear Mr bethany.’ 



chapter eleven 

lawford slept far into the cloudi monday morning, to wake steep in 
sleep, lethargic, and fret haunt by inconclus remembr 
of the night before. when sheila, with obviou and capaci composure, 
brought him hi breakfast tray, he watch her face for some time 
without speaking. 

‘sheila,’ he began, as she wa about to leav the room again. 

she paused, smiling. 

‘did anyth happen last night? would you mind tell me, sheila? who 
wa it wa here?’ 

her lid the least bit narrowed. ‘certainly, arthur; Mr danton wa 
here.’ 

‘then it wa not a dream?’ 

‘oh no,’ said sheila. 

‘what did I say? what did HE say? It wa hopeless, anyhow.’ 

‘I don’t quit understand what you mean by “hopeless,” arthur. and must 
I answer the other questions?’ 

lawford drew hi hand over hi face, like a tire child. ‘he 
didn’t--believe?’ 

‘no, dear,’ said sheila softly. 

‘and you, sheila?’ came the subdu voice. 

sheila cross slowli to the window. ‘well, quit honestly, arthur, I 
wa not veri much surprised. whatev we are agre about on the whole, 
you were scarc yourself last night.’ 

lawford shut hi eyes, and re-open them full on hi wife’ calm 
scrutiny, who had in that moment turn in the light of the one drawn 
blind to face him again. 

‘who is? always?’ 

‘no,’ said sheila; ‘but--it wa at least unfortunate. We can’t, I 
suppose, reli on Dr bethani alone.’ 

lawford crouch over hi food. ‘will he blab?’ 

‘blab! Mr danton is a gentleman, arthur.’ 

lawford roll hi eye as if in temporari vertigo. ‘yes,’ he said. and 
sheila onc more prepar to make a repos exit. 

‘I don’t think I can see simon thi morning.’ 

‘oh. who, then?’ 

‘I mean I would prefer to be left alone.’ 

‘believ me, I had no intent to intrude.’ and thi time the door 
realli closed. 

‘he is in a quiet, sooth sleep,’ said sheila a few minut later. 

‘noth could be better,’ said Dr simon; and lawford, to hi 
inexpress relief, heard the fever throb of the doctor’ car 
reverse, and turn over and shut hi eyes, dull and exhaust in 
the still unfriendli of the vacant room. hi spirit had sunk, 
he thought, to their lowest ebb. He scarc heed the fragment of 
dreams--clear, green landscapes, amaz gleam of peace, the 
sudden broken voices, the rustl and call shadowi of 
subconsciousness--in thi quiet sunlight of reality. the cloud had 
broken, or had been withdrawn like a veil from the octob skies. one 
thought alon wa hi refuge; one face alon haunt him with it 
peace; one remembr sooth him--alice. through all hi scatter 
and purposeless argument he strove to rememb her voice, the 
loving-kind of her eyes, her untroubl confidence. 

In the afternoon he got up and dress himself. He could not bring 
himself to stand befor the glass and deliber shave. He even smile 
at the thought of play the barber to that lean chin. He dress by 
the fireplace. 

‘I couldn’t rest,’ he told sheila, when she present came in on one 
of her quiet, cautious, heed visits; ‘and one tire of read even 
quain in bed.’ 

‘have you found anything?’ she inquir politely. 

‘oh yes,’ said lawford wearily; ‘I have discov that infinit 
wors thing are infinit commoner. but that there’ noth quit so 
picturesque.’ 

‘tell me,’ said sheila, with refresh naivete. ‘how doe it feel? doe 
it even in the slightest degre affect your mind?’ 

He turn hi back and look up at hi broad gilt portrait for 
inspiration. ‘practically, not at all,’ he said hollowly. ‘of course, 
one’ nerves--that fellow danton--when one’ overtired. you have’--hi 
voice, in spite of everi effort, faintli quavered--‘y haven’t notic 
anything? My mind?’ 

‘me? Oh dear, no! I never wa the least bit observant; you know 
that, arthur. but apart from that, and I hope you will not think me 
unsympathetic--but don’t you think we must sooner or later be think 
of what’ to be done? At present, though I fulli agre with Mr bethani 
as to the wisdom of hush thi unhappi busi up as long as 
possible, at least from the gossip outsid world, still we are onli 
stand still. and your malady, dear, I suppose, isn’t. you will help 
me, arthur? you will tri and think? poor alice!’ 

‘what about alice?’ 

‘she mopes, dear, rather. she cannot, of course, quit understand whi 
she must not see her father, and yet hi not being, or, for the matter 
of that, even if he was, at death’ door.’ 

‘at death’ door,’ murmur lawford under hi breath; ‘who wa it 
wa say that? have you ever, sheila, in a dream, or just as one’ 
thought go sometimes, seen that door?...it ruinou stone lintel carv 
into lichen stone heads...stonili silent in the last thin sunlight, 
hang in peac unlatched. heated, hunted, in agony--in that cold, 
green-clad shadow porch is haven and sanctuary....but beyond--o god, 
beyond!’ 

sheila stood listen with startl eyes. ‘and wa all that in quain?’ 
she inquir rather flutteringly. 

lawford turn a sidelong head, and look steadili at hi wife. 

she shook herself, with a slight shiver. ‘veri well, then,’ she said and 
paus in the silence. 

her husband yawned, and smiled, and almost as if lit with that thin last 
sunshin seem the smile that pass for an instant across the reveri 
of hi shadowi face. He drew a hand wearili over hi eyes. ‘what ha he 
been say now?’ he inquir like a fret child. 

sheila stood veri quiet and still, as if in fear of scare some rare, 
wild, timid creatur by the least stir. ‘who?’ she mere breathed. 

lawford paus on the hearth-rug with hi comb in hi hand. ‘it’ just 
the last rag of that beastli influenza,’ he said, and began vigor 
comb hi hair. and yet, simpl and frank though the action was, it 
move sheila, perhaps, more than ani other of the congest occurr 
of the last few days. her forehead grew suddenli cold, the palm of 
her hand began to ache, she had to hasten out of the room to avoid 
reveal the sheer physic repuls she had experienced. 

but lawford, quit unmind of the shock, continu in a kind of 
heedless reveri to watch, as he combed, the still visionari thought 
that pass in tranc still befor hi eyes. He long beyond 
measur for freedom that until yesterday he had not even dream exist 
outsid the cover of some old imposs romance--th magic of the 
darken sky, the invis flock presenc of the dead, the shock 
of imagin that had no words, of quixot emot which the 
stranger had stir in that low, mocking, furtiv talk besid the 
broken stone of the huguenot. wa the ‘change’ quit so monstrous, so 
meaningless? how often, indeed, he rememb curious had he seem to 
be stand outsid these fast-shut gate of thought, that now had been 
freeli open to him. 

He drew ajar the door, and leant hi ear to listen. from far away came 
a rich, long-continu chuckl of laughter, follow by the clatter of a 
fall plate, and then, still more uncontrol laughter. there wa a 
faint smell of toast on the air. lawford ventur out on to the land 
and into a littl room that had once, in year gone by, been alice’ 
nursery. He stood far back from the strip of open window that show 
beneath the green blind, crane forward to see into the garden--th 
trees, their knot trunks, and then, as he stole nearer, a flower-bed, 
late roses, geraniums, calceolarias, the lawn and--yes, three wicker 
chairs, a footstool, a work-basket, a littl tabl on the smooth grass 
in the honey-colour sunshine; and sheila sit there in the autumn 
sunlight, her hand rest on the arm of her chair, her head bent, 
evid deepli engross in her thoughts. He crept an inch or two 
forward, and stooped. there wa a hat on the grass--alice’ big garden 
hat--and besid it lay flitters, nose on paws, long ear sagging. He 
had forgotten flitters. had flitter forgotten him? would he bark at the 
strange, distast scent of a--dr ferguson? the coast wa clear, then. 
He turn even softlier yet, to confront, rapt, still, and hover 
betwixt astonish and dread, the blue calm eye of hi daughter, 
look in at the door. It seem to lawford as if they had both been 
suddenli swept by some unseen power into a still, unearthli silence. 

‘we thought,’ he began at last, ‘we thought just to beckon mr lawford 
from the window. he--h is asleep.’ 

alic nodded. her whole face wa in a moment flood with red. It eb 
and left her pale. ‘I will go down and tell mother you want to see her. 
It wa veri silli of me. I did not quit recognis at first...i suppose, 
think of my father--’ the word faltered, and the eye were lift to 
hi face again with a desolate, incredul appeal. lawford turn away 
heartsick and trembling. 

‘certainly, certainly, by no means,’ he began, listen vagu to the 
glib patter that seem to come from anoth mouth. ‘your father, 
my dear young lady, I ventur to think is now realli on the road to 
recovery. Dr simon make excel progress. but, of course--two heads, 
we know, are so much better than one when there’ the least--th least 
difficulty. the great thing is quiet, rest, isolation, no possibl of 
a shock, else--’ hi voic fell away, hi eloqu failed. 

for alic stood gaze stirlessli on and on into thi infinit 
strange, infinit familiar shadowy, phantasm face. ‘oh yes,’ she 
replied, ‘I quit understand, of course; but if I might just peep even, 
it would--i should be so much, much happier. Do let me just see him, 
Dr ferguson, if onli hi head on the pillow! I wouldn’t even breathe. 
couldn’t it possibl help--even a faith-cure?’ she leant forward 
impulsively, her voic trembling, anal her eye still shine beneath 
their faint, melancholi smile. 

‘I fear, my dear...it cannot be. He long to see you. but with hi mind, 
you know, in thi state, it might--?’ 

‘but mother never told me,’ broke in the girl desperately, ‘there wa 
anyth wrong with hi mind. oh, but that wa quit unfair. you don’t 
mean, you don’t mean--that--?’ 

lawford scan swiftli the littl squar belov and memori room that 
fate had suddenli convert for him into a cage of unspeak pain 
and longing. ‘oh no; believ me, no! not hi brain, not that, not even 
wandering; really: but alway thinking, alway long on and on for 
you, dear, only. quite, quit master of himself, but--’ 

‘you talk,’ she broke in again angrily, ‘onli in pretence! you are 
treat me like a child; and so doe mother, and so it ha been ever 
sinc I came home. why, if mother can, and you can, whi may not I? why, 
if he can walk and talk in the night....’ 

‘but who--who “can walk and talk in the night?”’ inquir a low stealthi 
voic out of the quiet behind her. 

alic turn swiftly. her mother wa stand at a littl distance, with 
all the calm and moveless concentr of a waxwork figure, look up 
at her from the staircase. 

‘I was--i wa talk to Dr ferguson, mother.’ 

‘but as I came up the stair I understood you to be inquir someth 
of Dr ferguson, “if,” you were saying, “he can walk and talk in the 
night”: you sure were not refer to your father, child? that could 
not possibl be, in hi state. Dr ferguson, I know, will bear me out 
in that at least. and besides, I realli must insist on follow out 
medic direct to the letter. Dr ferguson I know, will fulli concur. 
do, pray, Dr ferguson,’ continu sheila, rais her voic even now 
scarc abov a rapid murmur--‘do pray assur my daughter that she must 
have patience; that howev much even he himself may desir it, it is 
imposs that she should see her father yet. and now, my dear child, 
come down, I want to have a moment’ talk with Dr ferguson. I fear 
from hi beckon at the window that someth wa amiss.’ 

alic turned, dismayed, and look steadily, almost with hostility, 
at the stranger, so curious transfix and isol in her small old 
play-room. and in thi scorn yet plead confront her eye fell 
suddenli on the pin in hi scarf--th claw and the pearl she had known 
all her life. from that her gaze flitted, like some wild dement 
thing’s, over face, hair, hands, clothes, attitude, expression, and her 
heart stood still in an awful, inarticul dread of the unknown. she 
turn slowli toward her mother, grope forward a few steps, turn 
onc more, stretch out her hand toward the vagu still figur 
whose eye had call so piteous to her out of their depths, and fell 
faint in the doorway. lawford stood motionless, vacantli watch 
sheila, who knelt, chafe the cold hands. ‘she ha fainted?’ he said; 
‘oh, sheila, tell me--onli fainted?’ 

sheila made no answer; did not even rais her eyes. 

‘some day, sheila’ he began in a dull voice, and broke off, and without 
anoth word, without even anoth glanc at the still face and blue, 
twitch lids, he pass her rapidli by, and in anoth instant sheila 
heard the house-door shut. she got up quickly, and after a glanc into 
the vacant bedroom turn the key; then she hasten upstair for sal 
volatil and eau de cologne.... 

It wa yet clear daylight when lawford appear beneath the portico of 
hi house. with a glanc of circumspect that almost seem to suggest 
a fear of pursuit, he descend the steps, onli to be made awar in so 
do that ada wa with a kind of furtiv eager point out the 
mysteri Dr ferguson to a steadili gaze cook. one or two well-known 
and mani a well-rememb face he encount in the thin stream of 
citi men tread blackli along the pavement. It wa a still, high 
evening, and someth veri like a forlorn compass rose in hi mind 
at sight of their grave, rather pretentious, rather dull, respect 
faces. 

He found himself walk with an affect of effrontery, and smile 
with a faint contempt on all alike, as if to keep himself from slinking, 
and the wolf out of hi eyes. He felt restless, and watchful, and 
suspicious, as if he had suddenli come down in the world. his, then, wa 
a disguis as effectu as a shabbi coat and a glaze eye. hi 
heart sickened. wa it even worth while live on a crust of social 
respect so thin and so exquisit treacherous? He challeng 
no one. one or two actual acquaint rais and lower a faintli 
inquir eyebrow in hi direction. one even recal in hi confus 
a smile of recognit just a moment too late. there was, it seemed, 
a peculiar aura in lawford’ presence, a shadow of a someth in hi 
demeanour that prove him alien. 

none the less green widderston kept call him, much as a bell in the 
imagin toll on and on, the echo of reality. If the worst should 
come to the worst, why--ther is pastur in the solitari by-way for 
the beast that strays. He quicken hi pace along loneli streets, 
and soon strode freeli through the littl flag and cobbl villag of 
shops, past the same small jut window whose clock had told him the 
hour on that first dark hurri night. all wa pale and faint with die 
colour now; and decay wa in the leaf, and the last swallow fill 
the gold air with their clash stillness. No one heed him here. He 
look from side to side, exult in the strangeness. shop were 
left behind, the last mileston passed, and in a littl while he wa 
descend the hill beneath the elm boughs, which he rememb had 
stood like a turret wall against the sunset when first he had wander 
down into the churchyard. 

At the foot of the hill he pass by the green and white rectory, and 
there wa the parson, a short fat, pursi man with wrist protrud from 
hi jacket sleev as he stood on tip-to tie up a rambl rose-shoot 
on hi trim cedar lawn. the next hous bare show it old red 
chimney-tops, abov it bowers; the next wa empty, with window 
vacantli gazing, it path peopl with great beard weed that stood 
mute watch and guard the seldom-open gate. then came more 
lofti grandmotherli elms, a dens hedg of everi leaf that pricks, and 
then lawford found himself stand at the small canopi gate of 
the queer old wooden hous that the stranger of hi talk had in part 
described. 

It stood squar and high and dark in a small amphitheatr of verdure. 
rose here and there sprang from the grass, and a narrow box-edg path 
led to a small door in a low green-mantl wing, with it one squar 
window abov the porch. and while, with vacant mind, lawford stood 
waiting, as one stand forebodingli upon the eve of a new experi he 
heard as if at a distanc the sound of fall water. He still paus on 
the countri roadside, scrutinis thi strange, still, wooden presence; 
but at last with an effort he push open the gate, follow the wind 
path, and pull the old iron hang bell. there came present a 
quiet tread, and herbert himself open the door which led into a 
littl squar wood-panel hall, hung with queer old print and obscur 
portrait in dark frames. 

‘ah, yes, come in, Mr lawford,’ he drawled; ‘I wa begin to be 
afraid you were not coming.’ 

lawford laid hat and walking-stick on an oak bench, and follow hi 
churchyard companion up a slightli inclin corridor and a staircas 
into a high room, cover far up the yellowish wall with old book on 
shelv and in cases, between which hung in littl black frames, mezzo 
tints, etchings, and antiqu maps. A larg tabl stood a few pace 
from the deep alcov of the window, which wa surround by a low, 
faded, green seat, and wa screen from the sunshin by wooden 
shutters. and here the tranquil surg of fall water shook incessantli 
on the air, for the three lower casement stood open to the fade 
sunset. On a smaller tabl were spread cups, old earthenwar dish of 
fruit, and a big bowl of damask roses. 

‘pleas sit down; I shan’t be a moment; I am not sure that my sister is 
in; but if so, I will tell her we are readi for tea.’ left to himself 
in thi quiet, strang old room, lawford forgot for a while everyth 
else, he wa for the moment so taken up with hi surroundings. 

what seiz on hi fanci and strang affect hi mind wa thi 
incess chang roar of fall water. It must be the widder, he said 
to himself, flow close to the walls. but not until he had had the 
bold to lean head and shoulder out of the nearest window did he 
fulli realiz how close inde the widder was. It came sweep dark 
and deep and begreen and full with the earli autumn rains, actual 
against the lower wall of the hous itself, and in the middl suddenli 
swerv in a black, smooth arch, and tumbl headlong into a great 
pool, nod with tall slender water-weeds, and charg in it bubbl 
black here and there with the last crimson of the set sun. To 
the left of the house, where the water float free again, stood vast, 
still tree abov the cluster rushes; and in glimps between their 
spread bough lay the far-stretch countryside, now dim with the 
first mist of approach evening. So absorb he becam as he stood 
lean over the wooden sill abov the fall water, that eye and ear 
becam enslav by the roar and stillness. and in the faint atmospher 
of age that seem like a veil to hang about the odd old hous and these 
prodigi branches, he fell into a kind of wake dream. 

when at last he did draw back into the room it wa percept darker, 
and a thin keen shaft of recollect struck across hi mind--th 
recollect of what he was, and of how he came to be there, hi reason 
for come and of that dark indefin presenc which like a raven had 
begun to build it dwell in hi mind. He sat on, hi eye restlessli 
wandering, hi face lean on hi hands; and in a while the door open 
and herbert returned, carri an old crimson and green teapot and a 
dish of hot cakes. 

‘they’r all out,’ he said; ‘sister, sallie, and boy; but these were in 
the oven, so we won’t wait. I hope you haven’t been veri much bored.’ 

lawford drop hi hand from hi face and smiled. ‘I have been look 
at the water,’ he said. 

‘mi sister’ favorit occupation; she sit for hour and hours, with not 
even a book for an apology, stare down into the black old roar pot. 
It ha a sort of hypnot effect after a time. and you’d be surpris 
how quickli one get use to the noise. To me it’ even less distract 
than sheer silence. you don’t know, after all, what on earth sheer 
silenc means--even at widderstone. but one can just realiz a 
water-nymph. they chatter; but, thank heaven, it’ not articulate.’ He 
hand lawford a cup with a certain nice and self-consciousness, 
lift hi eyebrow slightli as he turned. 

lawford found himself listen out of a peculiar still of mind 
to the voic of thi suav and rather inscrut acquaintance. ‘the 
curiou thing is, do you know,’ he began rather nervously, ‘that though 
I must have pass your gate at least twice in the last few months, I 
have never notic it before, never even caught the sound of the water.’ 

‘no, that’ the best of it; nobodi ever does. We are just buri alive. 
We have live here for years, and scarc know a soul--not even our 
own, perhaps. whi on earth should one? acquaintances, after all, are 
littl els than a bad habit.’ 

‘but then, what about me?’ said lawford. 

‘but that’ just it,’ said herbert. ‘I said acquaintances; that’ just 
exactli what i’m go to prove--what veri old friend we are. you’v no 
idea! It realli is rather queer.’ He took up hi cup and saunter over 
to the window. 

lawford eye him vacantli for a moment, and, follow rather hi 
own curiou thought than seek ani light on thi somewhat vagu 
explanation, again broke the silence. ‘it’ odd, I suppose, but thi 
hous affect me much in the same way as widderston does. i’m not 
particularli fanciful--at least, I use not to be. but sit here I 
seem, I hope it isn’t a veri frantic remark, it seem as though, if onli 
my ear would let me, I should hear--well, voices. it’ just what you 
said about the silence. I suppos it’ the age of the place; it IS veri 
old?’ 

‘pretti old, I suppose; it’ worm-eaten and rat-eaten and tinderi enough 
in all conscience; and the damp doesn’t exactli foster it. it’ a queer 
old shanty. there are two or three account of it in some old local 
stuff I have. and of cours there’ a ghost.’ 

‘A ghost?’ echo lawford, look up. 



chapter twelv 

what’ in a name?’ laugh herbert. ‘but it realli is a queer show-up of 
human oddity. A fellow come in here, searching; that’ all.’ hi back 
wa turned, as he stood stare absent out, sip hi tea between 
hi sentences. ‘he come in--oh, it’ a posit fact, for i’v seen him 
myself, just sit back in my chair here, you know, watch him as 
one would a tramp in one’ orchard.’ He cast a candid glanc over hi 
shoulder. ‘first he look round, like a pri servant. then he come 
cautious on--a kind of grizzled, fawn-colour face, middle-size, with 
big hands; and then just like some quiet, groping, nocturn creature, 
he begin hi preciou search--shelves, drawer that are not here, 
cupboard gone year ago, quest and nose no end, and quit 
method too, until he reach the window. then he stops, look 
back, narrow hi foxi lids, listens--quit perceptibly, you know, a 
kind of gingerish blur; then he seem to open thi corner bookcas here, 
as if it were a door and goe out along what I suppos might at some 
time have been an outsid galleri or balcony, unless, as I rather fancy, 
the hous extend onc beyond these windows. anyhow, out he goe quit 
deliberately, tread the air as lightli as botticelli’ angels, 
until, howev far you lean out of the window, you can’t follow him ani 
further. and then--and thi is the bit that take one’ fancy--when you 
have contentedli noddl down again to whatev you may have been do 
when the wretch appeared, or are sit in a cold sweat, with bolt 
eye await developments, just accord to your school of thought, 
or of nerves, the creatur come back--com back; and with what look 
uncommonli like a light candl in hi hand. that realli is a thrill, I 
assur you.’ 

‘but you’v seen this--you’v realli seen thi yourself?’ 

‘oh yes, twice,’ repli herbert cheerfully. ‘and my sister, quit 
by haphazard, onc saw him from the garden. she wa shell pea one 
even for sallie, and she distinctli saw him shambl out of the window 
here, and go shuffl along, mid-air, across the roar washpot down 
below, turn sharp round the high corner of the house, sheer against 
the stars, in a kind of frighten hurry. and then, after five minutes’ 
concentr watch over the shucks, she saw him come shuffl back 
again--th same distraction, the same nebul snuff colour, and a 
candl trail it smoke behind him as he whisk in home.’ 

‘and then?’ 

‘ah, then,’ said herbert, lag along the bookshelves, and scan 
the book-back with eye partial closed: he turn with lift teapot, 
and refil hi visitor’ cup; ‘then, wherev you are--i mean,’ he 
added, cut up a littl cake into six neat slices, ‘wherev the 
chanc inmat of the room happen to be, he come straight for you, at 
a quit alarm velocity, and fades, vanishes, melts, or, as it were, 
silt inside.’ 

lawford listen in a curiou hush that had suddenli fallen over hi 
mind. ‘“fade inside? silts?”--i’m aw stupid, but what on earth 
do you mean?’ the room had slowli empti itself of daylight; it own 
darkness, it seemed, had met that of the narrow night, and herbert 
deliber lit a cigarett befor replying. hi clear pale face, with 
it smooth outlin and thin mouth and rather long dark eyes, turn with 
a kind of seren good-humour toward hi questioner. 

‘why,’ he said, ‘I mean frankli just that. besides, it’ grisel’ own 
phrase; and an old nurs we use to have said much the same. He comes, 
or IT come toward you, first just walking, then with a kind of 
gradual acceler slide or glide, and sweep straight into you,’ he 
tap hi chest, ‘me, whoever it may be is here. In a kind of panic, I 
suppose, to hide, or perhap simpli to get back again.’ 

‘get back where?’ 

‘be resumed, as it were, via you. you see, I suppos he is compel to 
regain hi circle, or purgatory, or styx, whatev you like to call it, 
via consciousness. No one present, then no reven or spook, or 
astral body, or hallucination: what’ in a name? and of cours even an 
hallucin is mind-stuff, and on it own, as it were. what I mean is 
that the poor devil must have some kind of human person to get back 
through in order to make hi exit from our sphere of conscious 
into his. and naturally, of cours to make hi entranc too. If like 
a tenuou smoke he can get in, the probabl is that he get out 
in precis the same fashion. for really, if you weren’t conscious 
expect the customari impact (you actual jerk forward in the act of 
resist unresisted), you would not notic hi going. I am afraid I 
must be horribl bore you with all these tangl theories. all I mean 
is, that if you were realli absorb in what you happen to be do at 
the time, the thing might come and go, with your mind for entranc and 
exit, as it were, without your be consciou of it at all.’ there wa 
a longish pause, in which herbert slowli inhal and softli breath out 
hi smoke. 

‘and what--what is the poor wretch search for? and what--why, what 
becom of him when he doe go?’ 

‘ah, there you have me! one mere surmis just as one’ tempera or 
convict lean. grisel say it’ some poor derelict soul in search of 
peace--that the poor beggar want final to die, in fact, and can’t. 
salli smell crime. after all, what is everi man?’ he talk on; ‘a 
hord of ghosts--lik a chines nest of boxes--oak that were acorn 
that were oaks. death lie behind us, not in front--in our ancestors, 
back and back, until--’ 

‘“until?”’ lawford manag to remark. 

‘ah, that settl me again. don’t they call it an amoeba? but realli I 
am abjectli ignor of all that kind of stuff. We are all we are, and 
all in a sens we care to dream we are. and for that matter, anyth 
outlandish, bizarre, is a godsend in thi rather stodgi life. It is 
after all just what the old boy said--it’ onli the imposs that’ 
credible; whatev credibl may mean....’ 

It seem to lawford as if the last remark had waft him bodili into 
the presenc of hi kind, blinking, intens anxiou old friend, Mr 
bethany. and what leagu asund the two men were who had happen on 
much the same word to express their convictions. 

He drew hi hand gropingli over hi face, half rose, and again seat 
himself. ‘whatev it may be,’ he said, ‘the whole thing remind me, you 
know--it is in a way so curious like my own--mi own case.’ 

herbert sat on, a littl drawn up in hi chair, quietli smoking. the 
crash of the fall water, after seem to increas in volum with 
the fade of evening, had again die down in the dark to a low 
multitudin tumult as of countless inarticulate, echo voices. 

‘“bizarre,” you said; god know I am.’ but herbert still remain 
obdur silent. ‘you remember, perhaps,’ lawford faintli began again, 
‘our talk the other night?’ 

‘oh, rather,’ repli the cordial voic out of the dusk. 

‘I suppos you thought I wa insane?’ 

‘insane!’ there wa a genuin amus astonish in the echo. ‘you 
were lucid itself. besides--well, honestly, if I may venture, I don’t 
put veri much truck in what one call one’ sanity: except, of course, 
as a bond of respect and a mean of livelihood.’ 

‘but did you realis in the least from what I said how I realli 
stand? that I went down into that old shadowi hollow one man, and came 
back--well--this?’ 

‘I gather vagu someth like that. I thought at first it wa 
mere an affectation--that what you said wa an affectation, I 
mean--until--well, to be frank, it wa the “this” that so immens 
interest me. especially,’ he ad almost with a touch of gaiety, 
‘especi the last glimpse. but if it’ realli not a forbidden 
question, what precis wa the other? what precis manner of man, I 
mean, came down into widderstone?’ 

‘it is my face that is changed, Mr herbert. If you’ll tri to understand 
me--mi face. what you see now is not what I realli am, not what I was. 
oh, it is all quit different. I know perfectli well how absurd it must 
sound. and you won’t press me further. but that’ the truth: that’ what 
they have done for me.’ 

It seem to lawford as if a remot tini shout of laughter had been 
suddenli caught back in the silenc that had follow thi confession. 
He peer in vain in the direct of hi companion. even hi cigarett 
reveal no sign of him. ‘I know, I know,’ he went gropingli on; ‘I felt 
it would sound to you like noth but frantic incred nonsense. you 
can’t see it. you can’t feel it. you can’t hear these hoot voices. 
it’ no use at all blink the fact; I am simpli on the verge, if not 
over it, of insanity.’ 

‘a to that, Mr lawford,’ came the still voic out of the darkness; 
‘the veri fact of your be abl to say so seem to me all but proof 
posit that you’r not. insan is on anoth plane, isn’t it? 
in which one can’t compar one’ states. As for what you say be 
credible, take our preciou noodl of a spook here! ninety-nin 
hundredth of thi amiabl world of our would have guffaw the 
poor creatur into impercept age ago. To such poor credul 
creatur as my sister and I he is no more and no less a fact, a 
personality, an amus realiti than--well, thi teacup. here we are, 
amaz mysteri both of us in ani case; and all round us are score 
of books, deal just with life, pure, candid, and unexpurgated; and 
there’ not a singl one among them but read like a taradiddle. yet 
grope between the line of ani autobiography, it’ pretti clear what 
one ha got--a feeble, timid, creep attempt to describ the 
indescribable. As for what you say your case is, the bizarre--that kind 
veri seldom get into print at all. In all our make-believe, all our 
pretence, how, honestly, could it? but there, thi is immaterial. the 
real question is, may I, can I help? what I gather is this: you just 
trundl down into widderston all among the dead men, and--but one 
moment, i’ll light up.’ 

A light flicker up in the dark. shade it in hi hand from the night 
air stray through the open window, herbert lit the two candl 
that stood upon the littl chimneypiec behind lawford’ head. then 
saunter over to the window again, almost as if with an affect 
of nonchalance, he drew one of the shutters, and sat down. ‘noth much 
struck me,’ he went on, lean back on hi hands, ‘I mean on sunday 
evening, until you said good-bye. It wa then that I caught in the moon 
a distinct glimps of your face.’ 

‘this,’ said lawford, with a sudden horribl sink of the heart. 

herbert nodded. ‘the fact is, I have a print of it,’ he said. 

‘A print of it?’ 

‘A miser littl dingi engraving.’ 

‘of this?’ herbert nodded, with eye fixed. ‘where?’ 

‘that’ the nuisance. I search high and low for it the instant I got 
home. for the moment it ha been mislaid; but it must be somewher in 
the hous and it will turn up all in good time. it’ the frontispiec 
of one of a queer old hotchpotch of pamphlets, sewn up togeth by 
some amateur enthusiast in a marbl paper cover--confessions, travels, 
trial and so on. all eighteenth century, and all in french.’ 

‘and mine?’ said lawford, gaze stonili across the candlelight. 

herbert, from a head slightli stooping, gaze back in an almost birdlik 
fashion across the room at hi visitor. 

‘sabathier’s,’ he said. 

‘sabathier’s!’ 

‘A realli curiou resemblance. Of course, I am speak onli from 
memory; and perhap it’ not quit so vivid in thi light; but still 
astonishingli clear.’ 

lawford sat drawn up, stare at hi companion’ face in an intens and 
helpless silence. hi mouth open but no word came. 

‘of course,’ began herbert again, ‘I don’t say there’ anyth in 
it--except the--th mere coincidence,’ he paus and glanc out of the 
open casement besid him. ‘but there’ just one obviou question. Do you 
happen to know of ani strain of french blood in your family?’ 

lawford shut hi eyes, even memori seem to be forsak him at last. 
‘no,’ he said, after a long pause, ‘there’ a littl dutch, I think, on 
my mother’ side, but no french.’ 

‘no sabathier, then?’ said herbert, smiling. ‘and then there’ anoth 
question--thi change; is it realli as complet as you suppose? ha 
it--pleas just warn me off if I am in the least intruding--ha it been 
noticed?’ 

lawford hesitated. ‘oh, yes,’ he said slowly, ‘it ha been noticed--mi 
wife, a few friends.’ 

‘do you mind thi infern clatter?’ said herbert, lay hi finger on 
the open casement. 

‘no, no. and you think?’ 

‘mi dear fellow, I don’t think anything. it’ all the craziest 
conjecture. stranger thing even than thi have happened. there are 
dozen here--in print. what are we human be after all? clay in the 
hand of the potter. our bodi are mere an inheritance, pack tight 
and cord up. We have practic no control over their main functions. 
We can’t even replac a littl finger-nail. and look at the face of 
us--what atroci mockeri most of them are of ani kind of image! but 
we know our bodi change--age, sickness, thought, passion, fatality. It 
prove they are amazingli plastic. and mere even as a theori it is not 
in the least unten that by forc of some violent convuls effort 
from outsid one’ bodi might change. It answer with odd voluntari 
to friend or foe, smile or snarl. As for what we call the law of 
nature, they are pure assumpt to-day, and may be noth better 
than scrap-iron tomorrow. good heavens, lawford, consid man’ abysm 
impudence.’ He smoke on in silenc for a moment. ‘you say you fell 
asleep down there?’ 

lawford nodded. herbert tap hi cigarett on the sill. ‘just 
follow up our ludicr conjecture, you know,’ he remark musingly, 
‘it wasn’t such a bad opportun for the poor chap.’ 

‘but surely,’ said lawford, speak as it were out of a dream of 
candle-light and reverber sound and clearest darkness, toward 
thi strang deliber phantom with the unruffl clear-cut 
features--‘sur then, in that case, he is here now? and yet, on my 
word of honour, though everi friend I ever had in the world should 
deni it, I am the same. memori stretch back clear and sound to my 
childhood. I can see myself with extraordinari lucidity, how I think, my 
motiv and all that; and in spite of these voic that I seem to hear, 
and thi peculiar kind of long to break away, as it were, just 
to press on--it is i,--i myself, that am speak to you now out of 
this--thi mask.’ 

herbert glanc reflect at hi companion. ‘you mustn’t let me tire 
you,’ he said; ‘but even on our theori it would not necessarili 
follow that you yourself would be much affected. it’ true thi fellow 
sabathi realli wa someth of a personality. He had a rather 
unusu itch for life, for tri on and on to squeez someth out 
of experi that isn’t there; and he seem never to weari of a 
magnific attempt to find in hi fellow-creatures, especi in the 
women he met, what even--if they have it--they cannot give. the littl 
book I want to show you is partli autobiograph and realli doe 
manag to set the fellow on hi feet. even there he doe absolut take 
one’ imagination. I shall never forget the thrill of pick him up in 
the chare cross road. you see, I had known the queer old tombston for 
years. he’ enorm vivid--quit beyond my feebl to describe, 
with a kind of french verv and rapture. unluckili we can’t get nearer 
than two year to hi death. I shouldn’t mind guess some last 
devast dream swept over him, held him the breath of an instant too 
long beneath the wave, and he cave in. We know he kill himself; and 
perhap live to regret it ever after. 

‘after all, what is thi preciou die we talk so much about?’ herbert 
continu after a while, hi eye restlessli wander from shelf to 
shelf. ‘you rememb our talk in the churchyard? We all know that the 
bodi fade quick enough when it occup is gone. suppos even in the 
sleep of the live it lie veri feebli guarded. and suppos in that 
state some infern potent thing outsid it, wander disembodied, 
just happen on it--lik some hungri sexton beetl on the carcas of 
a mouse. supposing--i know it’ the most outrag theorising--but 
suppos all these year of sun and dark, sabathier’ emanation, 
or whatev you like to call it, horribl restless, by some fatal 
long on and on just for life, or even for the face, the voice, of 
some “imposs she” whom he couldn’t get in thi muddl world, simpli 
loath all else; suppos he ha been linger in ambush down besid 
those poor old dusti bone that had pour out for him such marrowi 
hospitality--oh, I know it; the dead do. and then, by a chance, one 
quiet autumn evening, a verit godsend of a littl miss muffet come 
wander down under the shade of hi immort cypresses, half asleep, 
fag out, depress in mind and body, perhaps: imagin yourself in hi 
place, and he in yours!’ herbert stood up in hi eagerness, hi sleek 
hair shining. ‘the one clinch chanc of a century! wouldn’t you 
have made a fight for it? wouldn’t you have risk the raid? I can just 
conceiv it--th amaz struggl in that dark within a darkness; 
like some daze alien bee burst through the sentinel of a hive; 
one mad impetu clutch at victory; then the appal stir on the 
other side; the grope back to a hous dismantled, rearranged, not, 
mind you, disorganis or disintegrated....’ He broke off with a smile, 
as if of apolog for hi long, fantast harangue. 

lawford sat listening, hi eye fix on herbert’ colourless face. 
there wa not a sound else, it seemed, than that slightli drawl 
scrupul voic poke it way amid a maze of enticing, baffl 
thoughts. herbert turn away with a shrug. ‘it’ tempt stuff,’ he 
said, choos anoth cigarette. ‘but anyhow, the poor beggar failed.’ 

‘failed?’ 

‘why, surely; if he had succeed I should not now be talk to a mere 
imperfect simulacrum, to the outward illus of a pass like 
to the man, but to sabathi himself!’ hi eye move slowli round and 
dwelt for a moment with a dark, quiet scrutini on hi visitor. 

‘you say a pass likeness; do you mean that?’ 

herbert smile indulgently. ‘if one can mean what is pure a 
speculation. I am onli tri to look at the thing dispassionately, you 
see. We are so much the slave of mere repetition. here is life--your 
and mine--a kind of plenum in vacuo. It is onli when we begin to play 
the eavesdropper; when someth goe askew; when one of the sentri on 
the frontier of the unexpect shout a hoars “qui vive?”--it is onli 
then we begin to question; to prick our aldermen and pinch the calv 
of our kings. why, who is there can answer to anybody’ but hi own 
satisfact just that one fundament question--ar we the prisoners, 
the slaves, the inheritors, the creatures, or the creator of our 
bodies? fallen angel or horrif dust? As for ident or like 
or personality, we have onli our neighbours’ nod for them, and just a 
fade memory. no, the old fairi tale knew better; and witchcraft’ 
witchcraft to the end of the chapter. honestly, and just of cours on 
that one theory, lawford, I can’t help think that sabathier’ raid 
onli just so far succeed as to leav hi impress in the wax. 
It doesn’t, of course, follow that it will necessarili end there. It 
might--it may be even now just gradual fade away. It may, you know, 
need drive out--with whip and scorpions. It might, perhaps, work in.’ 

lawford sat cold and still. ‘it’ no good, no good,’ he said, ‘I don’t 
understand; I can’t follow you. I wa alway stupid, alway bigot and 
cocksure. these thing have never seem anyth but old women’ tale 
to me. and now I must pay for it. and thi nichola sabathier; you say 
he wa a blackguard?’ 

‘well,’ said herbert with a faint smile, ‘that depend on your 
definit of the word. He wasn’t a flunkey, a fool, or a prig, if 
that’ what you mean. He wasn’t perhap on mr grundy’ visit 
list. He wasn’t exactli gregarious. and yet in a sens that kind of 
tempera is so rare that sappho, nelson, and shelley share it. To 
the stodgy, sueti world of cours it’ littl els than sheer moonshine, 
midsumm madness. naturally, in it own charm and stodgi way 
the world kept flicker cold water in hi direction. natur it 
hissed.... I shall find the book. you shall have the book; oh yes.’ 

‘there’ onli one more question,’ said lawford in a dull, slow voice, 
stoop and cover hi face with hi hands. ‘I know it’ imposs 
for you to realise--but to me time seem like that water there, to be 
heap up about me. I wait, just as one wait when the conductor of an 
orchestra lift hi hand and in a moment the whole surg of brass and 
wood, cymbal and drum will crash out--and sweep me under. I can’t tell 
you herbert, how it all is, with just these grope stir of that 
mole in my mind’ dark. you say it may be thi face, work in! god 
knows. I find it easi to speak to you--thi cold, clear sense, you know. 
the other feel too much, or are afraid, or--let me think--yes, I 
wa go to ask you a question. but no one can answer it.’ He peer 
darkly, with white face suddenli reveal between hi hands. ‘what 
remain now? where do I come in? what is there left for ME to do?’ 

and at that moment there sounded, even abov the monoton roar of 
the water beyond the window--ther fell the sound of a light footfal 
approach along the corridor. 

‘listen,’ said herbert; ‘here’ my sister coming; we’ll ask her.’ 




chapter thirteen 

the door opened. lawford rose, and into the further ray of the 
candlelight enter a rather slim figur in a light summer gown. 

‘just home?’ said herbert. 

‘we’v been for a walk--’ 

‘mi sister alway forget everything,’ said herbert, turn to lawford; 
‘even tea-time. thi is Mr lawford, grisel. we’v been argu no end. 
and we want you to give a decision. it’ just this: suppos if by some 
imposs trick you had come in now, not the charm familiar sister 
you are, but shorter, fatter, fair and round-faced, quit different, 
physically, you know--what would you do?’ 

‘what nonsens you talk, herbert!’ 

‘yes, but supposing: a complet transmogrification--bi some unimagin 
ingress or enchantment, by nibbl a bunch of roses, or whatev you 
like to call it?’ 

‘onli physically?’ 

‘well, yes, actually; but potentially, why--that’ anoth matter.’ 

the dark eye pass slowli from her brother’ face and rest grave 
on their visitor’s. 

‘i he make fun of me?’ 

lawford almost impercept shook hi head. 

‘but what a question! and i’v had no tea.’ she drew her glove slowli 
through her hand. ‘the thing, of course, isn’t possible, I know. but 
shouldn’t I go mad, don’t you think?’ 

lawford gaze quietli back into the clear, grave, deliber eyes. 
‘suppose, suppose, just for the sake of argument--not,’ he suggested. 

she turn her head and reflected, glanc from one to the other of the 
pure, steadi candle-flames. 

‘and what wa your answer?’ she said, look over her shoulder at her 
brother. 

‘mi dear child, you know what my answer are like!’ 

‘and yours?’ 

lawford took a deep breath, gaze mutely, forlornly, into the love 
untroubl peac of her eyes, and without the least warn tear swept 
up into hi own. with an immens effort he turned, and choke back 
everi sound, beat hack everi thought, grope hi way toward the 
squar black dark of the open door. 

‘I must think, I must think,’ he manag to whisper, lift hi hand 
and steadi himself. He caught over hi shoulder the glimps of a 
curious distort vision, a lift candle, and a still face gaze 
after him with infinit griev eyes, then found himself grope and 
stumbl down the steep, uneven staircas into the dark of the 
queer old wooden and hush and lone house. the night air cold on hi 
face calm hi mind. He turn and held out hi hand. 

‘you’ll come again?’ herbert wa saying, with a hint of anxiety, even of 
apolog in hi voice. 

lawford nodded, with eye fix blankli on the candle, and turn onc 
more, made hi way slowli down the narrow green-bord path upon which 
the star rain a scatter light so feebl it seem but as a haze 
that blur the darkness. He push open the littl white wicket 
and turn hi face toward the soundless, leaf-crown hill. He had 
advanc hardli a score of step in the thick dust when almost as if 
it veri silenc had struck upon hi ear he rememb the black broken 
grave with it sightless head that lay beyond the leaves. and fear, 
vast and menacing, fear such as onli children know, broke like a sea of 
dark on hi heart. He stop dead--cold, helpless, trembling. 
and, in the silenc he heard a faint cri behind him and light footstep 
pursu him. He turn again. In the thick close gloom beneath the 
enorm elm-bough the grey eye shone clearli visibl in the face 
upturn to him. ‘mi brother,’ she began breathlessly--‘th littl 
french book. It wa I who--who mislaid it.’ 

the set, stricken face listen unmoved. 

‘you are ill. come back! I am afraid you are veri ill.’ 

‘it’ not that, not that,’ lawford muttered; ‘don’t leav me; I am 
alone. don’t question me,’ he said strangely, look down into her 
face, clutch her hand; ‘onli understand that I can’t, I can’t go on.’ 
He swept a lean arm toward the unseen churchyard. ‘I am afraid.’ 

the cold hand clasp hi closer. ‘hush, don’t speak! come back; come 
back. I am with you, a friend, you see; come back.’ 

lawford clutch her hand as a blind man in sudden peril might clutch 
the hand of a child. He saw noth clearly; spoke almost without 
understand hi words. 

‘oh, but it’ must,’ he said; ‘I must go on. you see--why, everyth 
depend on struggl through: the future! but if you onli knew--there!’ 
again hi arm swept out, and the lean terrifi face turn shudder 
from the dark. 

‘I do know; believ me, believ me! I can guess. see, I am come with 
you; we will go together. As if, as if I did not know what it is to be 
afraid. oh, believ me; no one is near; we go on; and see! it gradually, 
gradual lightens. how thank I am I came.’ 

she had turn and they were steadili ascend as if push their way, 
battl on through some obstacl of the mind rather than of the sens 
beneath the star-powd callou vault of night. and it seem to 
lawford as if, as they press on together, some obscur detest 
presenc as slowly, as doggedli had drawn worst aside. He could 
see again the peac outspread branch of the trees, the lych-gat 
stand in clear-cut silhouett against the liquid dusk of the sky. 
A strang calm stole over hi mind. the veri mean and memori of hi 
fear fade out and vanished, as the passed-away cloud of a storm that 
leav a purer, seren sky. 

they stop and stood togeth on the brow of the littl hill, and 
lawford, still trembl from head to foot, look back across the 
hush and lightless countryside. ‘it’ all gone now,’ he said 
wearily, ‘and now there’ noth left. you see, I cannot even ask your 
forgiveness--and a stranger!’ 

‘pleas don’t say that--unless--unless--a “pilgrim” too. I think, 
surely, you must own we did have the best of it that time. yes--and I 
don’t care who may be listening--but we did win through.’ 

‘what can I say? how shall I explain? how shall I make you understand?’ 

the clear grey eye show not the faintest perturbation. ‘but I do; I 
do indeed, in part; I do understand, ever so faintly.’ 

‘and now I will come back with you.’ 

they paus in the dark face to face, the silenc of the sky, 
arch in it vast abov the littl hill, the onli wit of their 
triumph. 

she turn unquestioningly. and laugh softli almost as children 
do, the stalk shadow of a twilight wood behind them--they trod in 
silenc back to the house. they said good-by at the gate, and lawford 
start onc more for home. He walk slowly, consciou of an almost 
intoler weariness, as if hi strength had suddenli been wrest away 
from him. and at some distanc beyond the top of the hill he sat down on 
the bank besid a nettl ditch, and with hi book press down upon 
the waysid grass struck a match, and hold it low in the scented, 
windless air turn slowli the cockl leaf. 

few of them were alik except for the dingi of the print and the 
sinist smudg of the portraits. all were sewn roughli togeth into 
a mould-stained, marbl cover. He lit a second match, and as he did so 
glanc as if inquiringli over hi shoulder. and a score or so of page 
befor the end he came at last upon the name he wa seeking, and turn 
the page. 

It wa a like even more strike in it crude of ink and line 
and paper than the most finish of portrait could have been. It 
repelled, and yet it fascin him. He had not for a moment doubt 
herbert’ calm conviction. and yet as he stoop in the grass, close 
scrutinis the blur obscur features, he felt the faintest surpris 
not so much at the signific resembl but at hi own composure, hi 
own steady, unflinch confront with thi sinist and intang 
adversary. the match burn down to hi fingers. It hiss faintli in 
the grass. 

He stuf the book into hi pocket, and stare into the pale dial of 
hi watch. It wa a few minut after eleven. midnight, then, would 
just see him in. He rose stiffli and yawn in sheer exhaustion. then, 
hesitating, he turn hi head and look back toward the hollow. but 
a vagu forebod held him back. A sour and vacuou incredul swept 
over him. what wa the use of all thi struggl and vexation. what 
gain in live on? onc dead hi sluggish spirit at least would find 
it rest. dust to dust it would inde be for him. what else, in sober 
earnest, had he been all hi daili stolid life but half dead, scarc 
conscious, without a live thought, or desire, in head or heart? 

and while he wa still gloomili debat within himself he had turn 
toward home, and soon wa walk in a kind of reverie, even hi 
extrem tired in part forgotten, and onli a far-away dog 
recollect in hi mind that in spite of shame, in spite of all hi 
miser weakness, the word had been utter onc for all, and in all 
sincerity, ‘we did win through.’ 

yet a desol and odd air of strang seem to drape hi unlight 
hous as he stood look up in a kind of furtiv communion with it 
windows. It affect him with that discomfort air of extrem and 
meaningless novelti that thing veri familiar sometim take upon 
themselves. In thi leaden tired no impress could be trustworthy. 
hi lid shut of themselv as he softli mount the steps. It seem a 
needlessli wide door that soundlessli admit him. but howev hard he 
press the key hi bedroom door remain stubbornli shut until he 
found that it wa alreadi unlock and he had onli to turn the handle. 
A night-light burn in a littl basin on the washstand. the room wa 
hung, as it were, with the still of night. and half lie on the 
bed in her dressing-gown, her head lean on the rail at the foot, wa 
alice, just as sleep had overtaken her. 

lawford return to the door and listened. It seem he heard a voic 
talk downstairs, and yet not talking, for it ran on and on in an 
incess slightli argument monotoni that had neither break nor 
interruption. He close the door, and stoop laid hi hand softli on 
alice’ narrow, still childish hand that lay half-fold on her knee. 
her eye open instantli and gaze wide into hi face. A slow vacant 
smile of sleep came and went and her finger tighten gentli over hi 
as again her lid droop down over the drowsi blue eyes. 

‘at last, at last, dear,’ she said; ‘I have been wait such a time. 
but we mustn’t talk much. mother is wait up, reading.’ 

faintli through the close-shut door came the sound of that distant 
expressionless voic monoton rise and falling. 

‘whi didn’t you tell me, dear?’ alic still sleepili whispered. ‘would 
I have ask a singl question? how could I? oh, if you had onli trust 
me!’ 

‘but the change--th change, alice! you must have seen that. you spoke 
to me, you did think I wa onli a stranger; and even when you knew, it 
wa onli fear on your face, dearest, and aversion; and you turn to 
your mother first. don’t think, alice, that I am...god onli knows--i’m 
not complaining. but truth is best whatev it is. I do feel that. you 
mustn’t be afraid of hurt me, my dear.’ 

her veri hand seem to quicken in hi as now, with sleep quit gone, 
the fret of memori returned, and she must reassur both herself and him. 
‘but you see, dear, mother had told me that you--besides, I did know 
you at once, really; quit inside, you know, deep down. I know I wa 
perplexed; I didn’t understand; but that wa all. why, even when you 
came up in the dark, and we talked--if you onli knew how miser I had 
been--though I knew even then there wa someth different, still I 
wa not a bit afraid. wa I? and shouldn’t I have been afraid, horribl 
afraid, if you had not been you?’ she repress a littl shudder, and 
clasp hi hand more closely. ‘don’t let us say anyth more about it, 
she implor him; ‘we are just togeth again, you and I; that is all 
that matters.’ but her word were like brave soldier who have fought 
their way through an ambuscad but have left all confid behind them. 

lawford listened; and that wa enough just now--that she still, in spite 
of doubt, believ in him, and thought and care for him. He wa too 
tire to have refus the least kindness. He made no answer, but leant 
hi head on the cool, slender finger in gratitud and peace. and, just 
as he was, he almost instantli fell asleep. He woke in the dark to 
find himself alone. He grope hi way heavili to the door and turn 
the handle. but now it wa realli locked. energi fail him. ‘I 
suppose--sheila...’ he muttered. 



chapter fourteen 

sheila, calm, alert, reserved, wa sit at the open window when he 
awok again. hi breakfast tray stood on a littl tabl besid the bed. 
He rais himself on hi elbow and look at hi wife. the morn 
light shone full on her featur as she turn quickli at sound of hi 
stirring. 

‘you have slept late,’ she said, in a low, mellow voice. 

‘have I, sheila? I suppos I wa tire out. It is veri kind of you to 
have got everyth readi like this.’ 

‘I am afraid, arthur, I wa think rather of the maids. I like to 
inconveni them as littl as possible; in their usual routine, I 
mean. how are you feeling, do you think, thi morning?’ 

‘i--i haven’t seen the glass, sheila.’ 

she paus to place a littl pencil tick at the foot of the page of her 
butcher’ book. ‘and did you--did you try?’ 

‘did I try? tri what?’ 

‘I understood,’ she said, turn slowli in her chair, ‘you gave me to 
understand that you went out with the specif intent of tri to 
regain.... but there, forgiv me, arthur; I think I must be get a 
littl bit harden to the position, so far at least as ani hope is in 
my mind of rather amateurish experi be of much help. I may seem 
unsympathet in say frankli what I feel. but amateurish or no, you 
are curious erratic. why, if you realli were the Dr ferguson whose 
part you play so admir you could scarc spend a more activ life.’ 

‘all you mean, sheila, I suppose, is that I have failed.’ 

‘“failed” did not enter my mind. I thought, look at you just now 
in your cloth on the bed, one might for the moment be deceiv into 
think there wa a slight--quit the slightest improvement. there 
wa not quit that’--sh hover for the right word--‘that tenseness. 
whether or not, whether you desir ani such chang or didn’t, I should 
have suppos in ani case it would have been better to act as far 
as possibl like ani ordinari person. you were certainli in an 
extraordinarili sound sleep. I wa almost alarmed; until I rememb 
that it wa a littl after two when I look up from read aloud to 
keep myself awak and discov that you had onli just come home. I had 
no fire. you know how easili late hour bring on my headaches; a littl 
thought might possibl have suggest that I should be anxiou to hear. 
but no; it seem I cannot profit by experience, arthur. and even now you 
have not answer sure a veri natur question. you do not recollect, 
perhaps, exactli what did happen last night? did you go in the direct 
even of widderstone?’ 

‘yes, sheila, I went to widderstone.’ 

‘it wa of cours absurd to suppos that sit on a seat besid 
the broken-down grave of a suicid would have the slightest effect on 
one’s--one’ physic condition; though possibl it might affect one’ 
brain. It would mine; I am at least certain of that. It wa your own 
prescription, however; and it mere occur to me to inquir whether 
the actual experi ha not brought you round to my own opinion.’ 

‘yes, I think it has,’ lawford answer calmly. ‘but I don’t quit see 
what suicid ha got to do with it; unless--y know widderstone, then, 
sheila?’ 

‘I drove there last saturday afternoon.’ 

‘for prayer or praise?’ although lawford had not actual rais hi 
head, he becam consciou rather of the wonder adjust mass 
of hair than of the pain digniti in the face that wa now close 
regard him. 

‘I went,’ came the rigidli control retort, ‘simpli to test an 
inconceiv story.’ 

‘and returned?’ 

‘convinced, arthur, of it inconceivability. but if you would kindli 
inform me what precis formula you follow at widderston last night, I 
would tell you whi I think the explanation, or rather your first account 
of the matter, is not an explan of the facts.’ 

lawford shot a rather doglik glanc over hi toast. ‘danton?’ he said. 

‘candidly, arthur, Mr danton doubt the whole story. your veri 
conduct--well, it would serv no use purpos to go into that. 
candidly, on the other hand, mr. danton did make some extrem help 
suggestions--bas them, of course, on the truth of your account. He 
ha seen a good deal of life; and certainli veri mysteri thing do 
occur to quit innoc and well-mean peopl without the faintest 
shadow of warning, and as mr. bethani himself said, evil bird do come 
home to roost, and often out of a clear sky, as it were. but there, 
everi fresh solut that occur to me onli make the thing more 
preposterous, more, I wa go to say, disreputable--i mean, of course, 
to the outsid world. and we have our duti to perform to them too, I 
suppose. why, what can we say? what plausibl account of ourselv have 
we? We shall never be abl to look anybodi in the face again. I can 
only--i am compel to believ that god ha been pleas to make thi 
precis visit upon us--an eye for an eye, I suppose, somewhere. and 
to that convict I shall hold until actual circumst convinc me 
that it’ false. what, however, and thi is all that I have to say now, 
what I cannot understand are your amaz indiscretions.’ 

‘do you understand your own, sheila?’ 

‘mi indiscretions, arthur?’ 

‘well,’ said lawford, ‘wasn’t it indiscreet, don’t you think, to risk 
divin retribut by marri me? shouldn’t you have inquired? wasn’t 
it indiscreet to allow me to remain here in--in my “visitation?” wasn’t 
it indiscreet to risk the moral stigma thi unhappi face of mine must 
cast on it surroundings? I am not sure whether such a chang as thi 
constitut cruelty.... oh, what is the use of fret and babbl on 
like this?’ 

‘am I to understand, then, that you refus posit to discuss thi 
horribl busi ani more? you are do your best to drive me away, 
arthur; you must see that. will you be veri disappoint if I refus to 
go?’ 

lawford rose from the bed. ‘listen just thi once,’ he said, seat 
himself on the corner of the dressing-table. ‘imagin all this--whatev 
you like to call it--obliterated. take this,’ he nod toward the 
glass, ‘entir for itself, on it own merits, as it were. let the dead 
past buri it dead. which, now, precisely, realli do you prefer--him,’ 
he jerk hi head in the direct of the dispassion youth 
pictur on the wall, ‘him or me?’ 

He wa so close to her now that he could see the faintest tremor on the 
face that had suddenli becom grey and still in the thin clear sunshine. 

‘I own it, I own it,’ he went on, slowly; ‘the chang is more than 
skin-deep now. one can’t go through what I have gone through these last 
few terrifi days, sheila, unchanged. they have play the devil with 
my body; now begin the tamper with my mind. not even danton know 
how it will end. but shall I tell you whi you won’t, whi you can’t 
answer me that one question--him or me? shall I tell you?’ 

sheila slowli rais her eyes. 

‘it is because, my dear, you don’t care the ghost of a straw for either. 
that one--h wa worn out long ago, and we never knew it. I know it now. 
time and the sheer going-on of day by day, without either of us guess 
at it, wore that down till it had no more mean for you or me than ani 
other fade remembr in thi intermin footl with truth that we 
call life. and thi one--th whole abject mean of it lie simpli in 
the fact that it ha pierc down and shown us up. I had no courage. 
I couldn’t see how feebl a hold I had on life--just one’ friends’ 
opinions. It wa all at second hand. what I want to know now is--leav 
me out; don’t think, or care, or regard my living-on one shadow of an 
iota--al I ask is, what am I to do for you?’ He turn away and stood 
stare down at the cinder in the fireless grate. 

‘I answer that mad wick outburst with one plain question,’ said a low, 
trembl voice; ‘did you or did you not go to widderston yesterday?’ 

‘I did go.’ 

‘you sat there, just as you said you sat before; and with all your heart 
and soul strove to regain--yourself?’ 

lawford lift a still, colourless face into the sunlight. ‘no,’ he 
said; ‘I spent the even at the hous of a friend.’ 

‘then I say it is infamous. you cast all thi on me. you have brought 
me into contempt and poison alice’ whole life. you dream and idl 
on just as you use to do, without the least care or thought or 
consider for others; and go out in thi condition--go out 
absolut unashamed--to spend the even at a friend’s. peculiar 
friend they must be. why, really, arthur, you must be mad!’ 

lawford paused. like a flock of sheep stream helter-skelt befor 
the onset of a wolf were the thought that a moment befor had seem so 
orderli and sober. 

‘not mad--possessed,’ he said softly. 

‘and I add this,’ cri sheila, as it were out of a tragic mask, 
‘somewher in the past, whether of your own life, or of the live of 
those who brought you into the world--th world which you pretend so 
conveni to despise--somewher is hidden some miser secret. god 
visit all sins. On you ha fallen at last the payment. that I believe. 
you can’t run away, ani more than a child can run away from the cupboard 
it ha been lock into for a punishment. who’ go to hear you now? 
you have deliber refus to make a friend of me. fight it out 
alone, then!’ 

lawford heard the door close, and the die away of the sound that had 
been the unceas accompani of all these later years--th rustl 
of hi wife’ skirts, her crisp, authorit footstep. and he turn 
toward the flood sunlight that stream in on the upturn surfac 
of the looking-glass. No clear decis thought came into hi mind, onli 
a vagu recognit that so far as sheila wa concern thi wa the 
end. No regret, no remors visit him. He wa just alon again, that 
wa all--alone, as in realiti he had alway been alone, without have 
the sens or power to see or to acknowledg it. all he had said had been 
the mere flotsam of the moment, and now it stood stark and irrevoc 
between himself and the past. 

He sat down daze and stupid. again and again a struggl recollect 
tri to obtrud itself; again and again he beat it back. and rather 
for someth to distract hi attent than for ani real interest 
or enlighten he might find in it pages, he took out the grimi 
dog’s-ear book that herbert had given him, and turn slowli over the 
leav till he came to sabathi onc more. snatch of remembr of 
their long talk return to him, but just as that dark, water-haunt 
hous had seem to banish remembr and the realiti of the room in 
which he now sat, and of the old familiar life; so now the house, the 
face of yesterday seem in their turn unreal, almost spectral, and 
the thick print on the smudgi page no more signific than a stori one 
read and throw away. 

but a moment’ comparison in the glass of the two face side by 
side suddenli sharpen hi attention--th resembl wa so oddli 
arresting, and yet, and yet, so curious inconclusive. there wa then 
someth of the stolid old saxon left, he thought. Or had it been 
regained? which wa it? not mere the complex of the question, but 
a half-consci distast of attempt to face it, set him read veri 
slowli and laboriously, for hi french wa littl more than fragmentari 
recollection, the first few page of the life of thi buri sabathier. 
but with a disinclin almost amount to avers he made veri slow 
progress. mani of the word were meaningless to him, and everi other 
moment he found himself listen with intens concentr for the 
least hint of what sheila wa doing, of what wa go on in the hous 
beneath him. He had not veri long to wait. He wa sit with hi head 
lean on hi hand, the book unheed beneath the other on the table, 
when the door open again behind him, and sheila entered. she stood for 
a moment, calm and dignified, look down on him through her veil. 

‘pleas understand, arthur, that I am not take thi step in pique, 
or even in anger. It would serv no purpos to go on like this--thi 
incess heedless and recrimination. there have been mistakes, 
misconceptions, perhaps, on both sides. To me natur your are most 
conspicuous. that need not, however, blind me to my own.’ 

she paus in vain for an answer. 

‘think the whole thing over candidli and quietly,’ she began again in a 
quiet rapid voice. ‘have you realli shown the slightest regard, I won’t 
say for me, or even for alice, but for just the obviou difficulti 
and--and proprieti of our position? I have given up as far as I 
can brood on and on over the same horribl imposs thoughts. I 
withdraw unreservedli what I said just now about punishment. whatev 
the evidence, it is not even a wife’ place to judg like that. you will 
forgiv me that?’ 

lawford did not turn hi head. ‘of course,’ he said, look rather 
vacantli out of the window, ‘it wa onli in the heat of the moment, 
sheila; though, who knows? it may be true.’ 

‘well,’ she took hold of the great brass knob at the foot of the bed 
with one glove hand--‘well, I feel it is my duti to withdraw it. apart 
from it, I see onli too clearli that even though all that ha happen 
in these last few day wa in realiti noth but a horribl nightmare, 
I see that even then what you have said about our marri life togeth 
can never be recalled. you have told me quit deliber that for 
year past your life ha been noth but a pretence--a sham. you 
impli that mine had been too. honestly, I wa not awar of it, arthur. 
but suppos all that ha happen to you had been mere what might 
happen at ani moment to anybody, some actual defac (you will 
forgiv me suggest such a horribl thing)--why, if what you say is 
true, even in that case my sympathi would have been onli a continu 
fret and annoy to you. and this--thi change, I own, is infinit 
harder to bear. It would be an outrag on common sens and on all that 
we hold seemli and--and sacr in life, even in some trumperi story. you 
do, you must see all that, arthur?’ 

‘oh yes,’ said lawford, narrow hi eye to pierc through the 
sunlight, ‘I see all that.’ 

‘then we need not go over it all again. whatev other may say, 
or think, I shall still, at least so long as noth occur to the 
contrary, keep firmli to my present convictions. Mr bethani ha assur 
me repeatedli that he ha no--no misgivings; that he understands. and 
even if I still doubted, which I don’t, arthur, though it would be 
rather tri to have to accept one’ husband at second-hand, as it 
were, I should have to be satisfied. I dare say even such an unheard-of 
thing as what we are discuss now, or someth equal ghastly, doe 
occur occasionally. In foreign countries, perhaps. I have not studi 
such thing enough to say. We were all veri much restrict in our 
read as children, and I honestli think, not unwisely. It is enough 
for the present to repeat that I do believe, and that whatev may 
happen--and I know absolut noth about the procedur in such 
cases--but whatev may happen, I shall still be loyal; I shall alway 
have your interest at heart.’ her word falter and she turn her 
head away. ‘you did love me once, arthur, I can’t forget that.’ the 
contralto voic trembl ever so little, and the glove hand smooth 
gentli the brass knob beneath. 

‘if,’ said lawford, rest hi face on hi hands, and curious 
watch the while hi move reflect in the looking-glass befor 
him--‘if I said I still love you, what then? 

‘but you have alreadi deni it, arthur.’ 

‘yes; but if I said that that too wa said onli in haste, that brood 
over the troubl this--thi metamorphosi wa bring on us all had 
driven me almost beyond endurance: suppos that I withdrew all that, 
and instead said now that I do still love you, just as i--’ he turn a 
little, and turn back again, ‘like this?’ 

sheila paused. ‘could ani woman answer such a question?’ she almost 
sigh at last. 

‘yes, but,’ lawford press on, in a voic almost naiv and stubborn as 
a child’s, ‘if I tri to--to make you? I did once, sheila.’ 

‘I can’t, I can’t conceiv such a position. sure that alon is almost 
as frantic as it is heartless! Is it, is it even right?’ 

‘well, I have not actual ask it. I own,’ he ad moodily, almost 
under hi breath, ‘it would be--dangerous.... but there, sheila, thi 
poor old mask of mine is wear out. I am somehow convinc of that. 
what will be left, god onli knows. you were saying--’ He rose abruptly. 
‘please, pleas sit down,’ he said; ‘I did not notic you were 
standing.’ 

‘I shall not keep you a moment,’ she answer hurriedly; ‘I will sit 
here. the truth is, arthur,’ she began again almost solemnly, ‘apart 
from all sentiment and--and good intentions, my presenc here onli 
harass you and keep you back. I am not so bound up in myself that I 
cannot realis that. the consequ is that after calmly--and I 
hope considerately--think the whole thing over, I have come to the 
conclus that it would arous veri littl comment, the least possibl 
perhap in the circumstances, if I just went away for a few days. you 
are not in ani sens ill. In fact, I have never known you so--so robust, 
so energetic. you will be alone: Mr bethany, perhaps.... you could go 
out and come in just as you pleased. possibly,’ sheila smile frankli 
beneath her veil, ‘even thi Dr ferguson you have invent will be a 
help. it’ onli the servant that remain to be considered.’ 

‘I should prefer to be quit alone.’ 

‘then do not worri about them. I can easili explain. and if you would 
not mind let her in, mr gull can come in everi other day or so just 
to keep thing in order. she’ entir trustworthi and discreet. Or 
perhaps, if you would prefer--’ 

‘mr gull will do nicely, sheila. it’ veri good of you to have given me 
so much thought.’ A long and rather arduou paus followed. 

‘oh, one other thing, arthur. you sent out to Mr critchett--do you 
remember?--th night you first came home. I think, too, after the first 
aw shock, when we were sit in our bedroom, you actual refer 
to--to violent measures. you will promis me, I may perhap at least ask 
that, you will promis me on your word of honour, for alice’ sake, if 
not for mine, to do noth rash.’ 

‘yes, yes,’ said lawford, sink lower even than he had suppos 
possibl into the thin and lightless chill of ennui--‘noth rash.’ 

sheila rose with a sigh onli in part suppressed. ‘I have not seen Mr 
bethani again. I think, however, it would be better to let harri know; I 
mean, dear, of your derangement. after all, he is one of the family--at 
least, of mine. He will not interfere. He would, perhap quit 
naturally, be hurt if we did not take him into our confidence. otherwis 
there is no press caus for haste, at least for anoth week or so. 
after that, I suppose, someth will have to be done. then there’ Mr 
wedderburn; wouldn’t it be as well to let him know that at least for the 
present you are quit unabl to think of return to town? that, 
too, in time will have to be arranged, I suppose, if noth happen 
meanwhile; I mean if thing don’t come right. and I do hope, arthur, you 
will not set your mind too close on what may onli prove fals hopes. 
thi is all intens pain to me; of course, to us both.’ 

again lawford, even though he did not turn to confront it, becam 
consciou of the black veil turn toward him tentatively, 
speculatively, impenetrably. 

‘yes,’ he said, ‘i’ll write to wedderburn; he’ had hi up and down 
too.’ 

‘I alway rather fanci so,’ said sheila reflectively, ‘he look rather 
a--a restless man. oh, and then again,’ she broke off quickly, ‘there’ 
the question of money. I suppose--it is onli a conjecture--i suppos it 
would be better to do noth in that direct just for the present. 
ada ha now gone to the bank. fifti pounds, arthur; it is out of my own 
privat account--do you think that will be enough, just, of course, for 
your present needs?’ 

‘a a bribe, hush-money, or a thank-offering, sheila?’ murmur her 
husband wearily. 

‘I don’t follow you,’ repli the discreet voic from beneath the veil. 

He did actual turn thi time and glanc steadili over hi shoulder. 
‘how long are you go for? and where?’ 

‘I propos to go to my cousin’s, betti lovat’s; that is, of course, if 
you have no objection. it’ near; it will be a long-def visit; and 
she need know veri little. and, of course, if for the least thing in the 
world you should want me, there I am within call, as it were. and you 
will write? We are act for the best, arthur?’ 

‘so long as it is your best, sheila.’ 

sheila pondered. ‘you think, you mean, they’ll all say I ought to have 
stayed. candidly, I can’t see it in that light. sure everi experi 
of life prove that in intim domest matters, and especi in 
those between husband and wife, onli the parti concern have ani 
mean of judg what is best for them? It ha been our experi at 
ani rate: though I must in fair confess that, outwardli at least, 
I haven’t had much of that kind of thing to complain of.’ sheila paus 
again for a reply. 

‘what kind of thing?’ 

‘domest experience, dear.’ 

the hous wa quiet. there wa not a sound stir in the still 
sunni road of orchard and discreet and drowsi villas. A long silenc 
followed, immens activ and alert on the one side, almost morbidli 
letharg so far as the stoop figur in front of the looking-glass 
wa concerned. At last the last haunt question came in a kind of 
croak, as if onli by a suprem effort could it be compel to produc 
itself for consideration. 

‘and alice, sheila?’ 

‘alice, dear, of cours goe with me.’ 

‘you realise,’ he stir uneasily, `you realis it may be final.’ 

‘mi dear arthur,’ cri sheila, ‘it is surely, apart from mere delicacy, 
a parent oblig to screen the poor child from the shock. could she 
be at such a time in ani better keep than her mother’s? At present 
she onli vagu guesses. To know definit that her father, infinit 
wors than death, had--had--oh, is it possibl to realis anyth in 
thi aw cloud? It would kill her outright.’ 

lawford made no stir. the quietest of rap came at the door. ‘the money 
from the bank, ma’am,’ said a faint voice. 

sheila care open the door a few inches. she laid the blue 
envelop on the dressing-t at her husband’ elbow. ‘you had better 
perhap count it,’ she said in a low voice--‘forti in notes, the rest 
in gold,’ and narrow her eye beneath her veil upon her husband’ veri 
peculiar method of forget hi responsibilities. 

‘french?’ she said with a nod. ‘how veri quaint.’ 

lawford’ eye fell and rest grave on the dingi page of herbert’ 
mean-look bundl of print. A queer feel of cold crept over him. 
‘yes,’ he said vaguely, ‘french,’ and hopelessli fail to fill in the 
silenc that seem like some rather sleek nocturn creatur quietli 
wait to be fed. 

sheila swept softli toward the door. ‘well, arthur, I think that is 
all. the servant will have gone by thi evening. I have order a 
carriag for half-past twelve. perhap you would first write down 
anyth that occur to you to be necessary? perhaps, too, it would be 
better if Dr simon were told that we shall not need him ani more, 
that you are think of a complet chang of scene, a voyage. He is 
obvious useless. besides, Mr bethany, I think, is go to discuss 
a specialist with you. I have written him a littl note, just briefli 
explaining. shall I write to Dr simon too?’ 

‘you rememb everything,’ said lawford, and it seem to him it wa a 
remark he had heard age and age ago. ‘it’ onli thi money, sheila; 
will you pleas take that away?’ 

‘take it away?’ 

‘I think, sheila, if I do take a voyag I should almost prefer to work 
my passage. As for a mere “chang of scene,” that’ quit uncostly.’ 

‘it is onli your face, arthur,’ said sheila solemnly, ‘that suggest 
these wick stabs. some day you will perhap repent of everi one.’ 

‘it is possible, sheila; we none of us stand still, you know. one rip 
open a lid sometim and the wax face rot befor one’ eyes. take back 
your blue envelope; and thank you for think of me. it’ alway the 
woman of the hous that ha the head.’ 

‘I wish,’ said sheila almost pathetically, and yet with a faint quaver 
of resignation, ‘I wish it could be said that the man of the hous 
sometim ha the heart. think it over, arthur!’ 

sheila, with her husband’ luncheon tray, brought also her farewells. 
lawford surveyed, not without a faint, shi stir of incredulity, 
the superbl restrain presence. He stood befor her dry-lipped, 
inarticulate, a schoolboy caught redhand in the shabbiest of offences. 

‘it is your wish then that I go, arthur?’ she said pleadingly. 

He hand her her money without a word. 

‘veri well, arthur; if you won’t take it,’ she said. ‘I should scarc 
have thought thi the occas for mere pride.’ 

‘the tenth,’ she continued, as she squeez the envelop into her purse, 
with onli the least harden of voice, ‘although I daresay you have not 
troubl to rememb it--th tenth will be the eighteenth anniversari 
of our wedding-day. It make parting, howev advisable, and though onli 
for the few day we should think noth of in happier circumstances, 
a littl harder to bear. but there, all will come right. you will see 
thing in a differ light, perhaps. word may wound, but time will 
heal.’ but even as she now look close into hi colourless sunken 
face some distant memori seem to well up irresistibly--th memori of 
eye just as ingenuous, and as unassum that even in claim her love 
had express onli their stolid unworthiness. 

‘did you know it? have you seen it?’ she said, stoop forward a 
little. ‘I believ in spite of all....’ He gaze on solemnly, almost 
owlishly, out of hi fade mask. 

‘wait till Mr bethani tell you; you will believ it perhap from him.’ 
He saw the grey-glov hand a littl reluctantli lift toward him. 

‘good-bye, sheila,’ he said, and turn mechan back to the window. 

she hesitated, listen to a small far-away voic that kept urg her 
with an almost frog-lik pertinac to do, to say something, and yet as 
stubbornli would not say what; and she wa gone. 



chapter fifteen 

ray and gleam in the sunlight the hire landau drove up to the 
gate. lawford, peep between the blinds, look down on the coachman, 
with rein hang loos from hi red squat-thumb hand, seat in 
hi tight liveri and indescrib hat on the fade cushions. one thing 
onli wa in hi mind; and it wa almost with an audibl cri that he 
turn toward the figur that edged, white and trembling, into the 
chill room, to fling herself into hi arms. ‘don’t look at me,’ he 
beg her, ‘onli remember, dearest, I would rather have die down 
there and been never seen again than have given you pain. run--run, your 
mother’ calling. write to me, think of me; good-bye!’ 

He threw himself on the bed and lay there till evening--til the door 
had shut gentli behind the last rat to leav the sink ship. all 
the clearness, the calm were gone again. round and round in dizzi 
sicken flare and clatter hi thought whirled. contempt, fear, 
loathing, blasphemy, laughter, longing: there wa no end. death wa no 
end. there wa no meaning, no refuge, no hope, no possibl peace. To 
give up wa to go to perdition: to go forward wa to go mad. and even 
madness--h sat up with trembl lip in the twilight--mad itself 
wa onli a state, onli a state. you might be bereaved, and the pain 
and hopeless of that would pass. you might be cast out, betrayed, 
deserted, and still be you, still find solitud love and in a brave 
face a friend. but madness!--it surg in on him with all the clear 
and empti of a dream. and he sat quit still, hi hand clutch the 
bedclothes, hi head askew, wait for the sound of footsteps, for the 
presenc and the voic that have their thin-wal dwell beneath 
the shallow crust of consciousness. 

inki black drift up in wisps, in smoke befor hi eyes; he wa 
powerless to move, to cri out. there wa no room to turn; no air to 
breathe. and yet there wa a low, continuous, never-vari stir as of 
an enorm wheel whirl in the gloom. countless infinitesim face 
arch like glimmer pebbl the huge dim-colour vault abov hi 
head. He heard a voic abov the monstrou rustl of the wheel, 
clamouring, call him back. He wa hasten headlong, mutter to 
himself hi own flat meaningless name, like a child repeat as he run 
hi errand. and then as if in a charm cold pool he awok and open 
hi eye again on the gather dark of the great bedroom, and heard 
a quick, importunate, long-continu knock on the door below, as of 
some one who had alreadi knock in vain. 

cramp and heavy-limbed, he felt hi way across the room and lit a 
candle. He stood listen awhile: hi eye fix on the door that hung 
a littl open. all in the room seem acut fantast still. the 
flame burn dim, misl in the sluggish air. He stole slowli to the 
door, look out, and again listened. again the knock broke out, more 
impetu and yet with a certain restraint and caution. shield the 
flame of hi candl in the shell of hi left hand, lawford move slowly, 
with chin uplifted, to the stairs. He bent forward a little, and stood 
motionless and drawn up, the pupil of hi eye slowli contract and 
expand as he gaze down into the carpet vacant gloom; past the dim 
lour presenc that had fallen back befor him. 

hi mouth opened. ‘who’ there?’ at last he called. 

‘thank god, thank god!’ he heard Mr bethani mutter. ‘I mustn’t call, 
lawford,’ came a hurri whisper as if the old gentleman were press 
hi lip to speak through the letter-box. ‘come down and open the door; 
there’ a good fellow! i’v been knock no end of a time.’ 

‘yes, I am coming,’ said lawford. He shut hi mouth and held hi 
breath, and stair by stair he descended, drive steadili befor him the 
crouching, gloat menac shape, darkli lift up befor him against 
the darkness, contend the way with him. 

‘are you ill? are you hurt? ha anyth happened, lawford?’ came the 
anxiou old voic again, strive in vain to be restrained. 

‘no, no,’ mutter lawford. ‘I am coming; come slowly.’ He paus to 
breathe, hi hand trembling, hi hair lank with sweat, and still 
with eye wide open he descend against the phantom lurk in the 
darkness--an adversari that, if he should but for one moment close hi 
lids, he felt would master saniti and imagin with it evil. ‘so 
long as you don’t get in,’ he heard himself muttering, ‘so long as you 
don’t get in, my friend!’ 

‘what’ that you’r saying?’ came up the muffled, querul voice; ‘I 
can’t for the life of me hear, my boy.’ 

‘nothing, nothing,’ came softli the answer from the foot of the stairs. 
‘I wa onli speak to myself.’ 

deliberately, with candl held rigidli on a level with hi eyes, lawford 
push forward a pace or two into the airless, empti drawing-room, and 
grasp the handl of the door. He gaze in awhile, a black obliqu 
shadow flung across hi face, hi eye fix like an animal’s, then drew 
the door steadili toward him. and suddenli some power that had held him 
tens seem to fail. He thrust out hi head, and, hi face quiver 
with fear and loathing, spat defianc as if in a passion of triumph into 
the gloom. 

still muttering, he shut the door and turn the key. In anoth moment 
hi light wa gleam out on the grey perturb face and black narrow 
shoulder of hi visitor. 

‘you gave me quit a fright,’ said the old man almost angrily; ‘have you 
hurt your foot, or something?’ 

‘it wa veri dark,’ said lawford, ‘down the stairs.’ 

‘what!’ said Mr bethani still more angrily, blink out of hi 
unspectacl eyes; ‘ha she cut off the gas, then?’ 

‘you got the note?’ said lawford, unmoved. 

‘yes, yes; I got the note.... gone?’ 

‘oh, yes; all gone. It wa my choice. I prefer it so.’ 

Mr bethani sat down on one of the hard old wooden chair that stood on 
either side of the lofti hall, and breath rather thickly, rest hi 
hand on hi knees. ‘what’ happened?’ he inquired, look up into the 
candle. ‘I forgot my glasses, old fool that I am, and can’t, my dear 
fellow, see you veri plainly. but your voice--’ 

‘I think,’ said lawford, ‘I think it’ begin to come back.’ 

‘what, the whole thing! Oh no, my dear, dear man; be frank with me; not 
the whole thing?’ 

‘yes,’ said lawford, ‘the whole thing--very, veri gradually, 
imperceptibly. I think even sheila noticed. but I rather feel it than 
see it; that is all.... i’m corner him.’ 

‘him?’ 

lawford jerk hi candl as if toward some definit goal. ‘in time,’ 
he said. 

the two face with the candl between them seem as it were to gain 
light each from the other. 

‘well, well,’ said Mr bethany, ‘everi man for himself, lawford; it’ the 
onli way. but what’ go to be done? We must be cautious; must think 
of--of the others?’ 

‘oh, that,’ said lawford; ‘she’ go to squeez me out.’ 

‘you’ve--squabbled? oh, but my dear, honest old, honest old idiot, there 
are score of famili here in thi parish, within a stone’ throw, that 
squabble, wrangle, all but polit tear each other’ eye out, everi 
day of their earthli lives. it’ perfectli natural. where should we poor 
old busybodi be else. peac on earth we bring, and it’ mainli between 
husband and wife.’ 

‘yes,’ said lawford, ‘but you see, thi wa not our earthli life. It wa 
between us.’ 

‘listen, listen to the dear mystic!’ exclaim the old creatur 
scoffingly. ‘what depth we’r touching. here’ the first seriou break 
of hi lifetime, and he’ gone stark stare transcendental. Ah well.’ 
He paus and glanc quickli about him, with hi curiou bird-lik 
pois of head. ‘but you’r not alon here?’ he inquir suddenly; ‘not 
absolut alone?’ 

‘yes,’ said lawford. ‘but there’ plenti to think about--and read. I 
haven’t thought or read for years.’ 

‘no, nor I; after thirty, my dear boy, one mere annotates, and the 
book’ call life. bless me, hi solemn old voic is grind epigram 
out of even thi poor old parochi barrel-organ. you don’t suppose, you 
cannot be suppos you are the onli seriou person in the world? what’ 
more, it’ onli skin deep.’ 

lawford smiled. ‘skin deep. but think quietli over it; you’ll see i’m 
done.’ 

‘come here,’ said Mr bethany. ‘where’ the whiskey, where’ the cigars? 
you shall smoke and drink, and i’ll watch. If it weren’t for a 
piti old stomach, i’d join you. come on!’ He led the way into the 
dining-room. 

He look sparer, more wizen and sinewi than ever as he stoop to 
open the sideboard. ‘where on earth do they keep everything?’ he wa 
mutter to himself. 

lawford put the candlestick down on the table. ‘there’ onli one thing,’ 
he said, watch hi visitor’ rummaging; ‘what precis do you think 
they will do with me?’ 

‘look here, lawford,’ snap Mr bethany; ‘i’v come round here, hoot 
through your letter-box, to talli sense, not sentiment. whi ha your 
wife desert you? without a servant, without a single--it’ perfectli 
monstrous.’ 

‘on my word of honour, I prefer it so. I couldn’t have gone on. alon 
I all but forget this--thi lupus. everi turn of her littl finger 
remind me of it. We are all of us alone, whether we know it or 
not; you said so yourself. and it’ better to realiz it stark and 
unconfused. besides, you have no idea what--what odd things.... there 
may be; there IS someth on the other side. i’ll win through to that.’ 

Mr bethani had been listen attentively. He scrambl up from hi 
knee with a half-empti syphon of sodawater. ‘see here, lawford,’ he 
said; ‘if you realli want to know what’ your most insidi and most 
danger symptom just now, it is spiritu pride. you’v won what you 
think a domest victory; and you can scarc bear the splendour. 
oh, you may shrug! pray, what IS thi “other side” which the superior 
double-fac creature’ go to win through to now?’ He rap it out 
almost bitterly, almost contemptuously. 

lawford hardli heard the question. befor hi eye had suddenli arisen 
the peace, the friendli unquest stillness, the thunder lullabi 
old as the grave. ‘it’ onli a fancy. It seem I could begin again.’ 

‘well, look here,’ said Mr bethany, hi whole face suddenli line and 
grey with age. ‘you can’t. it’ the one solitari thing i’v got to say, 
as i’v said it to myself morn, noon, and night these score of years. 
you can’t begin again; it’ all a delus and a snare. you say we’r 
alone. So we are. the world’ a dream, a stage, a mirage, a rack, call 
it what you will--but you don’t change, you’r no illusion. there’ 
no cri off for you no ravel out, no clean leaves. you’v got 
this--thi trouble, thi affliction--mi dear, dear fellow what shall 
I say to tell you how I griev and groan for you oh yes, and actual 
laughed, I confess it, a vile hyster laughter, to think of it. 
you’v got thi almost intoler burden to bear; it’ come like a 
thief in the night; but bear it you must, and alone! they say death’ a 
go to bed; I doubt it; but anyhow life’ a long undressing. We came 
in pule and naked, and everi stitch must come off befor we get out 
again. We must stand on our feet in all our rabelaisian nakedness, and 
watch the world fade. well then, and not anoth word of sens shall you 
worm out of my worn-out old brain after today--al I say is, don’t give 
in! why, if you stood here now, freed from thi devilish disguise, the 
old, fat, sluggish fellow that sat and yawn hi head off under my eye 
in hi pew the sunday befor last, if I know anyth about human natur 
i’d say it to your face, and a fig for your vaniti and resignation--your 
last state would be wors than the first. there!’ 

He bunch up a big white handkerchief and mop it over hi head. 
‘that’ done,’ he said, ‘and we won’t go back. what I want to know now 
is what are you go to do? where are you sleeping? what are you go 
to think about? i’ll stay--yes, yes, that’ what it must be: I must 
stay. and I detest strang beds. i’ll stay, you shan’t be alone. Do you 
hear me, lawford?--y shan’t be alone!’ 

lawford gaze gravely. ‘there is just one littl thing I want to ask 
you befor you go. i’v worm out an extraordinari old french book; 
and--just as you say--to pass the time, i’v been have a shot at 
translat it. but i’m fright rusty; it’ old french; would you 
mind have a look?’ 

Mr bethani blink and listened. He tri for the twentieth time to 
judg hi friend’ eyes, to gain as best he could some sustain and 
unobserv glanc at thi baffl face. ‘where is your preciou french 
book?’ he said irritably. 

‘it’ upstairs.’ 

‘fire away, then!’ lawford rose and glanc about the room. ‘what, no 
light there either?’ snap Mr bethany. ‘take this; I don’t mind the 
dark. there’l be plenti of that for me soon.’ 

lawford hesit at the door, look rather strang back. ‘no,’ 
he said, ‘there are match upstairs.’ He shut the door after him. the 
dark seem cold and still as water. He went slowli up, with eye 
fix wide on the float lumin gloom, and out of memori seem to 
gather, as faintli as in the dark which they had exorcis for him, 
the strang piti eye of the night before. and as he mount a chill, 
terrible, physic peac seem to steal over him. 

Mr bethani wa sit as he had left him, look steadili on the 
floor, when lawford returned. He flatten out the book on the tabl 
with a sniff of impatience. and drag the candl nearer, and stoop 
hi nose close to the fusti print, he began to read. 

‘wa thi in the house?’ he inquir presently. 

‘no,’ said lawford; ‘it wa lent to me by a friend--herbert.’ 

‘h’m! don’t know him. anyhow, preciou poor stuff thi is. 
thi sabathier, whoever he is, seem to be a kind of clap-trap 
eighteenth-centuri adventur who thought the world would be better off, 
apparently, for a long account of all hi sentiment amours. rousseau, 
with a touch of don quixot in hi composition, and an echo of that 
princ of bogies, poe! what, in the name of wonder, induc you to fix 
on thi for your holiday reading?’ 

‘sabathier’ alive, isn’t he?’ 

‘I never said he wasn’t. he’ a good deal too much aliv for my old 
wits, with hi mam’sel thi and madam the other; interest enough, 
perhaps, for the profession literari nose with a tast for patchouli.’ 

‘yet I suppos even that is not a veri rare character?’ Mr bethani 
peer up from the dingi book at hi ingenu questioner. ‘I should say 
decidedli that the fellow wa a veri rare character, so long as by rare 
you don’t mean good. it’ one of the dullest stupid of the present 
day, my dear fellow, to dote on a man simpli becaus he’ differ 
from the rest of us. onc a man stray out of the common herd, he’ 
more like to meet wolv in the thicket than angels. from what I can 
gather in just these few page thi sabathi appear to have been 
an amorous, adventurous, emot frenchman, who went to the dog as 
easili and as rapidli as hi own natur and hi period allowed. and I 
should say, lawford, that he made preciou bad read for a poor old 
troubl hermit like yourself at the present moment.’ 

‘there’ a portrait of him a few page back.’ 

Mr bethany, with some littl impatience, turn back to the engraving. 
‘“nichola de sabathier,”’ he muttered. ‘“de,” indeed!’ He poke in at 
the foxi print with narrow eyes. ‘I don’t deni it’ a striking, even 
perhaps, a rather take face. I don’t deni it.’ He gaze on with 
an even more acut concentration, and look up sharply. ‘look here, 
lawford, what in the name of wonder--what trick are you play on me 
now?’ 

‘trick?’ said lawford; and the world fell with the tiniest plash in the 
silence, like a vivid littl float upon the surfac of a shadowi pool. 

the old face flushed. ‘what conceiv bearing, I say, ha thi dead 
and gone old roue on us now?’ 

‘you don’t think, then, you see ani resemblance--ani resembl at 
all?’ 

‘resemblance?’ repeat Mr bethani in a flat voice, and without rais 
hi face again to meet lawford’ direct scrutiny. ‘resembl to whom?’ 

‘to me? To me, as I am?’ 

‘but even, my dear fellow (forgiv my dull old brains!), even if there 
wa just the faintest superfici suggest of--of that; what then?’ 

‘why,’ said lawford, ‘he’ buri in widderstone.’ 

‘buri in widderstone?’ the keen childlik blue eye look almost 
stealthili up across the book; the old man sat without speaking, so 
still that it might even be suppos he himself wa listen for a 
quiet distant footfall. 

‘he is buri in the grave besid which I fell asleep,’ said lawford; 
‘all green and still and broken,’ he ad faintly. ‘you remember,’ he 
went on in a repress voice--‘y rememb you ask me if there wa 
anybodi els in sight, ani eavesdropper? you don’t think--him?’ 

mr. bethani push the book a few inch away from him. ‘who, did you 
say--who wa it you said put the thing into your head? A queer friend 
surely?’ he paus helplessly. ‘and how, pray, do you know,’ he began 
again more firmly, ‘even if there is a sabathi buri at widderstone, 
how do you know it is thi sabathier? it’ not, I think,’ he ad 
boldly, ‘a veri uncommon name; with two b’ at ani rate. whereabout is 
the grave?’ 

‘quit down at the bottom, under the trees. and the littl seat I told 
you of is there, too, where I fell asleep. you see,’ he explained, ‘the 
grave’ almost isolated; I suppos becaus he kill himself.’ 

Mr bethani clasp hi knuckl finger on the tablecloth. ‘it’ no 
good,’ he conclud after a long pause; ‘the fellow’ got up into 
my head. I can’t think him out. We must thrash it out quietli in the 
morn with the bless sun at the window; not thi farth dip. To 
me the whole idea is as revolt as it is incredible. why, abov a 
century--no, no! and on the other hand, how easili one’ fanci builds! A 
few straw and there’ a nest and squawk fledglings, all complete. 
Is that why--i that whi that good, practic wife of your and all your 
faith household have absconded? doe it’--h threw up hi head as if 
toward the hous abov them--‘do it reek with him?’ 

lawford shook hi head. ‘she hasn’t seen him: not--not apart. I haven’t 
told her.’ 

Mr bethani toss the hugger-mugg of pamphlet across the table. 
‘then, for simpl sanity’ sake, don’t. hide it; burn it; put the thing 
complet out of your mind. A friend! who, where is thi wonder 
friend?’ 

‘not veri far from widderstone. He lives--pract alone.’ 

‘and all that stumbl and mutter on the stairs?’ he leant forward 
almost threateningly. ‘there isn’t anybodi here, lawford?’ 

‘oh, no,’ said lawford. ‘we are practic alon with this, you know,’ 
he point to the book, and smile frankly, howev faintly. 

again Mr bethani sank into a fix yet uneasi reverie, and again shook 
himself and rais hi eyes. 

‘well then,’ he said, in a voic all but moros in it fretfullness, 
‘what I suggest is that first you keep quiet here; and next, that you 
write and get your wife back. you say you are better. I think you said 
she herself notic a slight improvement. isn’t it just exactli as I 
foresaw? and yet she’ gone! but that’ not our business. get her back. 
and don’t for a singl instant wast a thought on the other; not for a 
singl instant, I implor you, lawford. and in a week the whole thing 
will be no more than a dreary, preposter dream.... you don’t answer 
me!’ he cri impulsively. 

‘but can one so easili forget a dream like this?’ 

‘you don’t speak out, lawford; you mean she won’t.’ 

‘it must at least seem to have been in part of my own seeking, or 
contriving; or at ani rate--sh said it--of my own hereditari or 
unconsci deserving.’ 

‘she said that!’ Mr bethani sat back. ‘I see, I see,’ he said. ‘i’m 
noth but a fumbl old meddler. and there wa I, not ten minut 
ago, preach for all I wa worth on a text I knew noth about. god 
bless me, lawford, how long we take a-learning. i’ll say no more. but 
what an illusion. To think this--this--h laid a long lean hand at arm’ 
length flat upon the tabl toward hi friend--‘to think thi is our old 
jog-trot arthur lawford! from henceforth I throw you over, you old wolf 
in sheep’ wool. I wash my hand of you. and now where am I go to 
sleep?’ 

He cover up hi age and weari for an instant with a small crook 
hand. 

lawford took a deep breath. ‘you’r going, old friend, to sleep at home. 
and i--i’m go to give you my arm to the vicarag gate. here I am, 
immeasur relieved, fitter than i’v been sinc I wa a dolt of a 
schoolboy. On my word of honour: I can’t say why, but I am. I don’t care 
that, vicar, honestly--puf up with spiritu pride. If a man can’t 
sleep with pride for a bed-fellow, well, he’d better tri elsewhere. it’ 
no good; i’m as stubborn as a mule; that’ at least a relic of the old 
adam. I care no more,’ he rais hi voic firmli and gravely--‘i 
don’t care a jot for solitude, not a jot for all the ghost of all the 
catacombs!’ 

mr. bethani listened, grimli purs up hi lips. ‘not a jot for all the 
ghost of all the catechisms!’ he muttered. `nor the devil himself, I 
suppose?’ He turn onc more to glanc sharpli in the direct of the 
face he could so dimly--and of set purpose--discern; and without a word 
trot off into the hall. lawford follow with the candle. 

‘’pon my word, you haven’t had a mouth of supper. let me forage; just 
a quarter of an hour, eh?’ 

‘not me,’ said Mr bethany; ‘if you won’t have me, home I go. I refus 
to encourag thi miser grass-widowering. what would they say? 
what would the busybodi say? ghoul and grave and shock 
mysteries--selina! sister anne! come on.’ 

He shuffl on hi hat and caught firm hold of hi knob umbrella. 
‘better not leav a candle,’ he said. 

lawford blew out the candle. 

‘what? what?’ call the old man suddenly. but no voic had spoken. 

A thin trickl of light from the lamp in the street stuck up through 
the fanlight as, with a smile that could be describ neither as 
mischievous, saturnine, nor vindictive, and wa yet faintli suggest 
of all three, lawford quietli open the drawing-room door and put down 
the candlestick on the floor within. 

‘what on earth, my good man, are you fumbl after now?’ came the 
almost fret question from under the echo porch. 

‘coming, coming,’ said lawford, and slam the door behind them. 




chapter sixteen 

the first faint streak of dawn were silver across the star when 
lawford again let himself into hi desert house. He stumbl down 
to the pantri and cut himself a crust of bread and cheese, and ate it, 
sit on the table, watch the leafi eastern sky through the paint 
bar of the area window. He munch on, hungri and tired. hi night 
walk had cool head and heart. have obstin refus Mr bethany’ 
invit to sleep at the vicarage, he had sat down on an old low wall, 
and watch until hi light had shone out at hi bedroom window. then 
he had simpli wander on, past rustl glimmer gardens, under 
the great timber of yellow elms, hardli thinking, hardli awar 
of himself except as in a far-away vision of a sluggish insignific 
creatur struggl across the tossed-up crust of an old, 
incomprehens world. 

the secret of hi content in that long leisur rambl had been 
that repeatedli by a scarc realis effort it had not lain in the 
direct of widderstone. and now, as he sat hungrili devour hi 
breakfast on the tabl in the kitchen, with the daybreak comfort hi 
eyes, he thought with a posit mockeri of that poor old night-th 
he had given inch by inch into the safe keep of hi pink and white 
drawing-room. don quixote, poe, rousseau--they were familiar but not 
veri signific label to a mind that had found veri poor entertain 
in reading. but they were at least repres enough to set him 
wonder which of their influenc it wa that had inflat with such 
a gaseou heroism the lawford of the night before. He thought of sheila 
with a not unkindli smile, and of the rest. ‘I wonder what they’ll do?’ 
had been a question almost as much in hi mind dure these last few 
hour as had ‘what am I to do?’ in the first bout of hi ‘visitation.’ 

but the ‘they’ wa not veri precis visualised. He saw sheila, and 
harry, and dainti pale-blu betti lovat, and cautiou old wedderburn, 
and danton, and craik, and cheery, gossipi Dr sutherland, and the 
verger, Mr dutton, and critchett, and the gardener, and ada, and the 
whole vagu popul host that keep one as definit in one’ place in 
the world’ economi as a firm-set pin the camphor moth. what hi place 
wa to be onli time could show. meanwhil there wa in thi loneli 
at least a respite. 

solitude!--h bath hi weari bone in it. He lave hi eyelid in 
it, as in a woodland brook after the heat of noon. He sat on in calmest 
reveri till hi hunger wa satisfied. then, scatter out hi last 
crumb to the bird from the bar window, he climb upstair again, 
past hi usual bedroom, past hi detest guest room, up into the narrow 
sweet of alice’s, and fling himself on her bed fell into a long 
and dreamless sleep. 

By ten next morn lawford had bath and dressed. and at half-past ten 
he got up from sheila’ fat littl french dictionari and hi memoir to 
answer mr gull’ summon on the area bell. the littl woman stood with 
arm fold over an empti and capaci bag, with an air of sustain 
melancholi on her friendli face. she wish him a veri nervou ‘good 
morning,’ and dive down into the kitchen. the hour drag slowli by 
in a silenc broken onli by an occasion ring at the bell. about three 
she emerg from the hous and climb the area step with her bag 
hook over her arm. He watch the littl black figur out of 
sight, watch a man in a white canva hat ascend the step to push a 
blue-print circular through the letter-box. It had begun to rain a 
little. He return to the breakfast-room and with the window wide open 
to the rustl cool of the leaves, edg hi way veri slowli across 
from line to line of the obscur french print. 

sabathi none the less, and in spite of hi unintellig 
literariness, did begin to take shape and consistency. the man himself, 
breathing, and thinking, began to live for lawford even in those few 
half-articul pages, though not in quit so formid a fashion as 
Mr bethani had sum him up. but as the west began to lighten with the 
declin sun, the same old disquietude, the same old friendless and 
forebod ennui stole over lawford’ solitud onc more. He shut hi 
books, place a candlestick and two box of match on the hall table, 
lit a bead of gas, and went out into the rainy-sweet street again. 

At a mean littl barber’ with a pole abov hi letter door he went 
in to be shaved. and a few step further on he sat down at the 
crumb-litt counter of a littl baker’ shop to have some tea. It 
pleas him almost to childish to find how easili he could listen 
and even talk to the oil and crimpi littl barber, and to the pretty, 
consumptive-looking, print-dress baker’ wife. whatev hi face might 
now be conniv at, the arthur lawford of last week could never have 
hob-nob so affabl with hi social ‘inferiors.’ 

for no reason in the world, unless to spend a moment or two longer 
in the friendli baker’ shop, he bought six-penny-worth of cakes. He 
watch them as they were deposit one by one in the bag, and even 
ask for one sort to be exchang for another, flush a littl at the 
pretti compliment he had ventur on. 

He climb out of the shop, and paus on the wooden doorstep. ‘do you 
happen to know Mr herbert herbert’s?’ he said. 

the baker’ wife glanc up at him with clear, reflect eyes. ‘mr 
herbert’s?--that must be some littl way off, sir. I don’t know ani such 
name, and I know most, just round about like.’ 

‘well, yes, it is,’ said lawford, rather foolishly; ‘I hardli know whi I 
asked. it’ past the churchyard at widderstone.’ 

‘oh yes, sir,’ she encourag him. 

‘A big, wooden-look house.’ 

‘really, sir. wooden?’ 

lawford look into her face, but could find noth more to say, so he 
smile again rather absently, and ascend into the street. 

He sat down outsid the churchyard gate on the veri bank where he had in 
the sour of the nettl first open sabathier’ memoirs. the world 
lay still beneath the pale sky. present the littl fat rector walk 
up the hill, hi wrist still show beneath hi sleeves. lawford 
medit watch him pass by. A small boy with a switch, a tini 
nose, and a swing gallipot, hi cheek lit with the sunset, follow 
soon after. lawford beckon him with hi finger and held out the bag 
of tarts. He watch him, half incredul of hi prize, and with mani a 
cautiou look over hi shoulder, pass out of sight. for a long while 
he sat alone, onli the even bird sing out of the green and 
silenc of the churchyard. what a haunt inescap riddl life was. 

colour suddenli fade out of the light stream between the branches. 
and depression, alway lie in ambush of the novelti of hi freedom, 
began like mist to rise abov hi restless thoughts. It wa all so 
devilish empty--thi raft of the world float under evening’ shadow. 
how mani sermon had he listen to, enrich with the simil of the 
ocean of life. here they were, come home to roost. He had fallen asleep, 
ineffectu sailor that he was, and a thief out of the cloudi deep had 
stolen oar and sail and compass, leav him adrift amid the ride of 
the waves. 

‘are they worth, do you think, quit a penny?’ suddenli inquir a quiet 
voic in the silence. He look up into the almost colourless face, into 
the grey eye beneath their clear narrow brows. 

‘I wa thinking,’ he said, ‘what a curiou thing life is, and 
wondering--’ 

‘the first half is well worth the penny--it originality! I can’t afford 
twopence. So you must give me what you were wondering.’ 

lawford gaze rather blankli across the twilight fields. ‘I wa 
wondering,’ he said with an oddli naiv candour, ‘how long it took one 
to sink.’ 

‘they say, you know,’ grisel repli solemnly, ‘drown sailor float 
midway, suffer their sea change; purgatory. but what a splendid 
pennyworth. all pure philosophy!’ 

‘“philosophy!”’ said lawford; ‘I am a perfect fool. ha your brother 
told you about me?’ 

she glanc at him quickly. ‘we had a talk.’ 

‘then you do know--?’ He stop dead, and turn to her. ‘you realli 
realis it, look at me now?’ 

‘I realise,’ she said gravely, ‘that you look even a littl more pale 
and haggard than when I saw you first the other night. We both, my 
brother and I, you know, thought for certain you’d come yesterday. 
In fact, I went into the widderston in the even to look for you, 
know your nocturn habits....’ she glanc again at him with a kind 
of shi anxiety. 

‘why--whi is your brother so--whi doe he let me bore him so horribly?’ 

‘doe he? he’ tremend interested; but then, he’ pretti easili 
interest when he’ interest at all. If he can possibl twist 
anyth into the slightest show of a mystery, he will. but, of course, 
you won’t, you can’t, take all he say seriously. the tiniest pinch of 
salt, you know. he’ an absolut fanat at talk in the air. besides, 
it doesn’t realli matter much.’ 

‘in the air?’ 

‘I mean if onc a theori get into hi head--th more far-fetched, 
so long as it’ original, the better--it flower out into a posit 
miracl of incredibilities. and of cours you can rout out evid for 
anyth under the sun from hi dingi old folios. whi did he lend you 
that particular book?’ 

‘didn’t he tell you that, then?’ 

‘he said it wa sabathier.’ she seem to think intens for the 
merest fraction of a moment, and turned. ‘honestly, though, I think he 
immens exagger the likeness. As for...’ 

He touch her arm, and they stop again, face to face. ‘tell me what 
differ exactli you see,’ he said. ‘I am quit myself again now, 
honestly; pleas tell me just the veri worst you think.’ 

‘I think, to begin with,’ she began, with exagger candour, ‘hi is 
rather a detest face.’ 

‘and mine?’ he said gravely. 

‘why--veri troubled; oh yes--but hi wa like some bird of prey. 
yours--what mad stuff to talk like this!--not the least symptom, that I 
can see, of--why, the “prey,” you know.’ 

they had come to the wicket in the dark thorni hedge. ‘would it be veri 
dread to walk on a little--just to finish?’ 

‘very,’ she said, turn as grave at hi side. 

‘what I want to say was--’ began lawford, and forget altogeth 
the thread by which he hope to lead up to what he realli want to 
say, broke off lamely; ‘I should have thought you would have absolut 
despis a coward.’ 

‘it would be rather absurd to despis what one so horribl well 
understands. besides, we weren’t cowards--w weren’t coward a bit. My 
childhood wa one long, reiter terror--night and night of it. but 
I never had the pluck to tell ani one. No one so much as dreamt of 
the compani I had. ah, and you didn’t see either that my heart wa 
absolut in my mouth, that I wa shrivel up with fear, even at 
sight of the fear on your face in the dark. there’ absolut noth 
so catching. so, you see, I do know a littl what nerv are; and 
dream too sometimes, though I don’t choos charnelhous if I can get a 
comfort bed. A coward! may I realli say that to ask my help wa one 
of the bravest thing in a man I ever heard of. bullets--that kind of 
courage--no real woman care twopenc for bullets. An old aunt of mine 
stare a man right out of the hous with the thing in her face. anyhow, 
whether I may or not, I do say it. So now we are quits.’ 

‘will you--’ began lawford, and stopped. ‘what I want to say was,’ 
he jerk on, ‘it is sheer horribl hypocrisi to be talk to you like 
this--though you will never have the faintest idea of what it ha meant 
and done for me. I mean... and yet, and yet, I do feel when just for 
the least moment I forget what I am, and that isn’t veri often, when 
I forget what I have becom and what I must go back to--i feel that I 
haven’t ani busi to be talk with you at all. “quits!” and here I 
am, an outcast from decent society. ah, you don’t know--’ 

she bent her head and laugh under her breath. ‘you do realli stumbl 
on such delici compliments. and yet, do you know, I think my brother 
would be immens pleas to think you were an outcast from decent 
societi if onli he could be thought one too. He ha been tri half hi 
life to wither decent societi with neglect and disdain--but it doesn’t 
take the least notice. the deaf adder, you know. besides, besides; what 
is all thi meek talk? I detest meek talk--god or men. sure in the 
first and last resort all we are is ourselves. someth ha happened; 
you are jangled, shaken. but to us, believ me, you are simpli one of 
fewer friends-and I think, after struggl up widderston lane hand in 
hand with you in the dark, I have a right to say “friends” than I could 
count on one hand. what are we all if we onli realiz it? We talk of 
digniti and propriety, and we are like so mani children play 
with knucklebon in a giant’ scullery. come along, he will, some 
suppertime, for us, each in turn--and how mani even will so much as look 
up from their play to wave us good-bye? that’ what I mean--th plot 
of silenc we are all in. If onli I had my brother’ lucidity, how much 
better I would have said all this. It is only, believ me, that I want 
ever so much to help you, if I may--even at risk, too,’ she added, 
rather shakily, ‘of have that help--well--i know it’ littl good.’ 

the lane had narrowed. they had climb the arch of a narrow stone 
bridg that span the smooth dark widder. A few late starl were 
wing far abov them. dark wa come on apace. they stood for 
awhil look down into the black flow water, with here and there 
the mild silver of a star dim leagu below. ‘I am afraid,’ said 
grisel, look quietli up, ‘you have led me into talk most pitiless 
nonsense. how mani hours, I wonder, did I lie awak in the dark last 
night, think of you? honestly, I shall never, never forget that walk. 
It haunt me, on and on.’ 

‘think of me? Do you realli mean that? then it wa not all 
imagination; it wasn’t just the drown man clutch at a straw?’ 

the grey eye question him. ‘you see,’ he explain in a whisper, as 
if afraid of be overheard, ‘it--it came back again, and--i don’t mind 
a bit how much you laugh at me! I had been asleep, and had had a most 
aw dream, one of those dream that seem to hint that some day that 
will be our real world, that some day we may awak where dream then 
will be of this; and I woke--cam back--and there wa a tremend 
knock go on downstairs. I knew there wa no one els in the 
house--’ 

‘no one els in the house? and you like this?’ 

‘yes,’ said lawford, stolidly, ‘they were all out as it happened. and, 
of course,’ he went on quickly, ‘there wa noth for me to do but 
simpli to go down and open the door. and yet, do you know, at first I 
simpli couldn’t move. I lit a candle, and then--then somehow I got 
to know that wait for me wa just--but there,’ he broke off 
half-ashamed, ‘I mustn’t bother you with all thi morbid stuff. will 
your brother be in now, do you think?’ 

‘mi brother will be in, and, of course, expect you. but as for 
“bother,” believ me--well, did I quit deserv it?’ she stoop toward 
him. ‘you lit a candle--and then?’ 

they turn and retrac their way slowli up the hill. 

‘it came again.’ 

‘it?’ 

‘that--that presence, that shadow. I don’t mean, of course, it’ a real 
shadow. It comes, doesn’t it, from--from within? As if from out of some 
unheard-of hide place, where it ha been lurk for age and age 
befor one’ childhood; at least, so it seem to me now. and yet 
although it doe come from within, there it is, too, in front of you, 
befor your eyes, feed even on your fear, just watching, wait 
for--what nonsens all thi must seem to you!’ 

‘yes, yes; and then?’ 

‘then, and you must rememb the poor old boy had been knock all thi 
time--mi old friend--mr bethany, I mean--knock and call through 
the letter-box, think I wa in extremis, or something; then--how 
shall I describ it?--wel you came, your eyes, your face, as clear as 
when, you know, the night befor last, we went up the hill together. and 
then...’ 

‘and then?’ 

‘and then, we--you and I, you know--simpli drove him downstairs, and 
I could hear myself grunt as if it wa realli a physic effort; we 
drove him, step by step, downstairs. and--’ He laugh outright, and 
boyishli continu hi adventure. ‘what do you think I did then, without 
the ghost of a smile, too, at the idioci of the thing? I lock the poor 
beggar in the drawing-room. I saw him there, as plainli as I ever saw 
anyth in my life, and the furnitur glimmering, though it wa pitch 
dark: I can’t describ it. It all seem so desper real, absolut 
vital then. It all seem so meaningless and imposs now. and yet, 
although I am utterli play out and done for, and howev absurd it may 
sound, I wouldn’t have lost it; I wouldn’t go back for ani bribe there 
is. I feel just as if a great bundl had been roll off my back. Of 
course, the queerest, the most detest part of the whole busi 
is that it--th thing on the stairs--wa this’--h lift a grave and 
haggard face toward her again--‘or rather that,’ he point with hi 
stick toward the starri churchyard. ‘sabathier,’ he said. 

again they had paus togeth befor the white gate, and thi time 
lawford push it open, and follow hi companion up the narrow path. 

she stay a moment, her hand on the bell. ‘wa it my brother who 
actual put that horribl idea into your mind?--about sabathier?’ 

‘oh no, not realli put it into my head,’ said lawford hollowly. ‘he onli 
found it there; lit it up.’ 

she laid her hand lightli on hi arm. ‘whether he did or not,’ she said 
with an earnest that wa almost an entreaty, ‘of course, you must 
agre that we everi one of us have some such experience--that kind 
of visitor, onc at least, in a lifetime.’ ‘ah, but,’ began lawford, 
turn forlornli away, ‘you didn’t see, you can’t have realized--th 
change.’ 

she pull the bell almost as if in some inward triumph. ‘but don’t you 
think,’ she suggested, ‘that that, like the other, might be, as it were, 
partli imagin too? If now you thought back.’ 

but a littl old woman had open the door, and the sentence, for the 
moment, wa left unfinished. 



chapter seventeen 

there wa no one in the room, and no light, when they entered. for a 
moment grisel stood by the open window, look out. then she turn 
impulsively. ‘mi brother, of course, will ask you too,’ she said; ‘we 
had made up our mind to do so if you came again; but I want you to 
promis me now that you won’t dream of go back to-night. that sure 
would be tempting--well, not providence. I couldn’t rest if I thought 
you might be alone; like that again.’ her voic die away into the 
call of the waters. A light move across the dingi old row of book 
and as hi sister turn to go out herbert appear in the doorway, 
carri a green-shad lamp, with an old leather quarto under hi arm. 

‘ah, here you are,’ he said. ‘I guess you had probabl met.’ He drew 
up, burdened, befor hi visitor. but hi clear black glance, instead of 
wander off at hi first greeting, had intensified. and it wa almost 
with an air of absorpt that he turn away. He dump hi book on to 
a chair and it turn over with scatter leav on to the floor. He 
put the lamp down and stoop after it, so that hi next word came up 
muffled, and as if the remark had been forc out of him. ‘you don’t 
feel worse, I hope?’ He got up and face hi visitor for the answer. and 
for the moment lawford stood consid hi symptoms. 

‘no,’ he said almost gaily; ‘I feel enorm better.’ but herbert’ 
long, oval, question eye beneath the sleek black hair were still 
fix on hi face. ‘I am afraid, my dear fellow,’ he said, with 
someth more than hi usual curious indiffer courtesy, ‘the 
struggl ha fright pull you to pieces.’ 

‘the question is,’ answer lawford, with a kind of tire yet whimsic 
melancholi in hi voice, ‘though I am not sure that the answer veri much 
matters--what’ go to put me togeth again? it’ the old stori of 
humpti dumpty, herbert. besides, one thing you said ha stuck out in a 
quit curiou way in my memory. I wonder if you will remember?’ 

‘what wa that?’ said herbert with unfeign curiosity. 

‘why, you said even though sabathi had failed, though I wa still 
my own old stodgi self, that you thought the face--th face, you know, 
might work in. somehow, sometim I think it has. It doe realli rather 
haunt me. In that case--well, what then?’ lawford had himself listen 
to thi involv explan much as one watch the accomplish of 
a difficult trick, marvel more at it complet at all than at the 
difficulti involv in the do of it. 

‘“work in,”’ repeat herbert, like a rather blase child confront with 
a new mechan toy; ‘did I realli say that? well, honestly, it wasn’t 
bad; it’ what one would expect on that hypothesis. you see, we are 
onli different, as it were, in our differences. onc the foot’ over the 
threshold, it’ nine point of the law! but I don’t rememb say it.’ 
He shamefacedli and naiv confess it: ‘I say such an aw lot of 
things. and i’m alway chang my mind. it’ a stand joke against me 
with my sister. she say the record angel will have two side to my 
account: mondays, wednesdays, and fridays; and tuesdays, thursdays, and 
saturdays--diametr opposit convictions, and both kind wrong. On 
sunday I am all thing to all men. As for sabathier, by the way, I 
do want particularli to have anoth go at him. i’v been think him 
over, and i’m afraid in some way he won’t quit wash. and that remind 
me, did you read the poor chap?’ 

‘I just grub through a page or two; but most of my french wa left at 
school. what I did do, though, wa to show the book to an old friend 
of ours--mi wife’ and mine--just to skim--a Mr bethany. he’ an old 
clergyman--our vicar, in fact.’ 

herbert had sat down, and with eye slightli narrow wa listen with 
peculiar attention. He smile a littl magnanimously. ‘hi verdict, I 
should think, must have been a perfect joy.’ 

‘he said,’ said lawford, in hi rather low, monoton voice, ‘he said 
it wa preciou poor stuff, that it remind him of patchouli; and that 
sabathier--th print I mean--look like a foxi old roue. they were, I 
think, hi exact words. We were alon together, last night.’ 

‘you don’t mean that he simpli didn’t see the faintest resemblance?’ 

lawford nodded. ‘but then,’ he ad simply, ‘whenev he come to see 
me now he leav hi spectacl at home.’ 

and at that, as if at some preconcert signal, they both went off into 
a simpl shout of laughter, unanim and sustained. 

but thi first wild bout of laughter over, the first real burst of 
the dam, perhaps, for years, lawford found himself at a lower ebb than 
ever. 

‘you see,’ he said presently, and while still hi companion’ face wa 
smile around the remembr of hi laughter like rippl after the 
splash of a stone, ‘bethani ha been absolut my sheet-anchor right 
through. and I was--it was--you can’t possibl realis what a ghastli 
chang it realli was. I don’t think ani one ever will.’ 

herbert open hi hand and look reflect into it palm befor 
allow himself to reply. ‘I wonder, you know; I have been wonder a 
good deal; simpli take the other point of view for a moment; wa it? 
I don’t mean “ghastly” exactli (like, say, smallpox, g.p.i, 
elephantiasis), but wa it quit so complete, so radical, as in the 
first sheer gust of astonish you fancied?’ 

lawford thought on a littl further. ‘you know how one see oneself in 
a passion--why, how a child looks--th whole face darken and drawn and 
possessed? that wa the change. that’ how it seem to come back to me. 
and something, somebody, dodg behind the eyes. yes; more that than 
even ani excess chang of feature, except, of course, that I also 
seemed--shal I ever forget that first cold, stifl stare into the 
looking-glass! I certainli wa much darker, even my hair. but i’v told 
you all thi before,’ he ad wearily, ‘and the score and score of 
time i’v thought it. I use to sit up there in the big spare bedroom 
my wife put me up in, simpli gloating. My flesh seem noth more 
than an hallucination: there I was, haunt my body, an old grin 
tenement, and all that I thought I wanted, and couldn’t do without, all 
I valu and pride myself on--stack up in the drizzl street below. 
why, herbert, our bodi are onli glass or cloud. they melt, don’t they, 
like wax in the sun onc we’r out. but those first few day don’t make 
veri pleasant thinking. friday night wa the first, when I sat there 
like a twitch waxwork, soberli debat between bedlam here and 
bedlam hereafter. I even sometim wonder whether it veri repetit 
ha not dull the memori or distort it. My wife,’ he ad 
ingenuously, ‘seem to think there are sign of a slight improvement--a 
go back, I mean. but i’m not sure whether she meant it.’ 

herbert survey hi visitor critically. ‘you say “dark,” he said; ‘but 
surely, lawford, your hair now is nearli grey; well-fleck at least.’ 

although the remark carri noth compar of a shock with it, 
yet it seem to lawford as if an electr current had pass over hi 
scalp, coldli stir everi hair upon hi head. but somehow or other it 
wa easier to sit quietli on, to express no surprise, to let them do or 
say what they liked. ‘well’ he retort with an odd, crook smile, ‘you 
must rememb I am a good deal older than I wa last saturday. I grew 
grey in the grave, herbert.’ 

‘but it’ like this, you know,’ said herbert, rise excitedly, and at 
the next moment, on reflection, composedli reseat himself. ‘how mani 
of your peopl actual saw it? how mani own to it be as bad, as 
complete, as you made out? I don’t want for a moment to cut right across 
what you said last night--our talk--but there are two million side 
to everi question, and as often as not the less conspicu have 
sounder--well--roots. that’ all.’ 

‘I think really, do you know, I would rather not go over the detest 
thing again. not many; my wife, though, and a man I know call danton, 
who--who’ prejudiced. after all, I have myself to think about too. and 
right through, right through--ther wasn’t the least doubt of that--they 
all in their heart knew it wa me. they knew I wa behind. I could feel 
that absolut always; it’ not just eye and ear we use, there’ us 
ourselv to consider, though god alon know what that means. but 
the password wa there, as you might say; and they all knew I knew it, 
all--except’--h look up as if in bewilderment--‘except just one, a 
poor old lady, a veri old friend of my mother’s, whom i--i sabathiered!’ 

‘whom--you--sabathiered!’ repeat herbert carefully, with infinit 
relish, look sidelong at hi visitor. ‘and it is just precis 
that....’ 

but at that moment hi sister appear in the doorway to say that supper 
wa ready. and it wa not until herbert wa actual engag in carv 
a cold chicken that he follow up hi advantage. ‘mr. lawford, grisel,’ 
he said, ‘ha just enrich our jade languag with a new verb--to 
sabathier. and if I may ventur to defin it in the presenc of 
the distinguish neologist himself, it means, “to deal with 
histrionically”; or, rather, that’ what it will mean a coupl of 
hundr year hence. for the moment it means, “to act under the 
influenc of subliminalization; To perplex, or bemuse, or estrang 
with otherness.” Do tell us, lawford, more about the littl old lady.’ 
He pass with her plate a littl meaning glanc at hi sister, and 
repeated, ‘do!’ 

‘but i’v been plagu your sister enough already. you’ll wish...’ 
lawford began, and turn hi tired-out eye toward those other 
await them so frankli they seem in their perfect friendli 
a rest from all hi troubles. ‘you see,’ he went on, ‘what I kept on 
think and think of wa to get a quit unbias and unprejud 
view. she had known me for years, though we had not actual met more 
than onc or twice sinc my mother’ death. and there she wa sit 
with me at the other end of just such anoth littl seat as’--h 
turned--to herbert ‘a ours, at widderstone. It wa on bewley common: I 
can see it all now; it wa sunset. and I simpli turn and ask her in 
a kind of a whine affect manner if she rememb me; and when after 
a long time she came round to own that to all intent and purpos 
she did not--i profess to have made a mistak in recognis her. I 
think,’ he added, glanc up from one to the other of hi two strang 
friends, ‘I think it wa the meanest trick I can remember.’ 

‘h’m,’ said herbert solemnly: ‘I wish I had as sensit a conscience. 
but as your old friend didn’t recognis you, who’ the worse? As for her 
not do so, just think of the differ a few year make to a man, 
and ani sever shock. life wear so infern badly. who, for that 
matter, doe not change, even in charact and yet who profess to see 
it? mind, I don’t say in essence! but then how mani of the human ghost 
one meet doe one know in essence? one doesn’t want to. It would 
be posit cataclysmic. and that’ what bring me around to feel, 
lawford, if I may ventur to say so, that you may have brood a littl 
too keenli on--on your own case. tell ani one you feel ill; he will 
commiser with you to posit nausea. tell ani priest your soul is 
in danger; will he wait for proof? it’ miserer and penanc world 
without end. tell ani woman you love her; will she, can she, should she, 
gainsay you? there you are. the cat’ out of the bag, you see. My sister 
and I sat up half the night talk the thing over. I said i’d take the 
plunge. I said i’d risk appear the crassest, contradictoriest wretch 
that ever drew breath. I don’t deni that what I hint at the other 
night must seem in part directli contrari to what i’m go to say now.’ 

He wheel hi black eye as if for inspiration, and help himself to 
salad. ‘it’ this,’ he said. ‘isn’t it possible, isn’t it even probabl 
that be ill, and overstrung, mope a littl over thing more or less 
out of the common ruck, and sit there in a kind of trance--isn’t it 
possibl that you may have veri larg imagin the change? hypnotis 
yourself into believ it much worse--mor profound, radical, 
acute--and simpli absolut hypnot other into think so, too. 
christendom is just begin to rediscov that there is such a thing 
as faith, that it is just possibl that, say, megrim or melancholia may 
be remov at least as easili as mountains. the converse, of course, 
is obviou on the face of it. A man fail becaus he think himself a 
failure. it’ the men that run away that lose the battle. suppos then, 
lawford’--h lean forward, keen and suave--‘suppos you have been and 
“sabathiered” yourself!’ 

lawford had grown accustom dure the last few day to find himself 
gaze out like a child into reality, as if from the window of a dream. 
He had in a sens follow thi long, loos stitched, preliminari 
argument; he had at least in part realis that he sat there between 
two clear friendli mind act in the friendliest and most obviou 
collusion. but he wa incap of fix hi attent veri close 
on ani singl fragment of herbert’ apology, or of rous himself into 
be much more than a dispassion and not veri interest spectat 
of the littl melodrama that fate, it appeared, had at the last moment 
decid rather caprici to twist into a farce. He turn with a 
smile to the face so keenli fix and enthusiast with the question it 
had so labori led up to: ‘but surely, I don’t quit see...’ 

herbert lift hi glass as if to hi visitor’ acumen and set it down 
again without tast it. ‘why, my dear fellow,’ he said triumphantly, 
‘even a dream must have a peg. your wa thi unforgett old suicide. 
candidli now, how much of sabathi wa actual yours? In spite of all 
that that fantast fellow, herbert, said last night, dead men don’t 
tell tales. the last place in the world to look for a ghost is where 
hi traitor bone lie crumbling. good heavens, think what irrefut 
mass of evid there would be at our finger-tip if everi tombston 
hid it ghost! no; the fellow just arrest you with hi creepi 
epitaph: an epitaph, mind you, that is in a literari sens distinctli 
fertilizing. It catch one’ fanci in it own crude way, as page 
and page of infinit more complic stuff take possess of, 
germinate, and sprout in one’ imagin in anoth way. We are all 
psychic parasites. why, given hi epitaph, given the surroundings, I 
wager ani sensit conscious could have guess at hi face; and 
guessing, as it were, would have feign it. what do you think, grisel?’ 

‘I think, dear, you are talk absolut nonsense; what do they call 
it--“darken counsel”? it’ “the hair of the dog,” Mr lawford.’ 

‘well, then, you see,’ said herbert over a hasti mouthful, and turn 
again to hi victim--‘then you see, when you were just in the pink of 
condit to credit ani idl tale you heard, then I came in. what, with 
the least impetus, can one not see by moonlight? the howl of a dog turn 
the midnight into a brocken; the branch of a tree stoop out at you like 
a beelzebub crust with gadflies. i’d, mind you, sip of the deadli 
old huguenot too. i’d listen to your innoc prattl about the child 
kick hi toe out on death’ cupboard door; what more like thing in 
the world, then, than that with that moon, in that pack air, I should 
have swallow the bait whole, and seen sabathi in everi crevic of 
your skin? I don’t say there wasn’t ani resemblance; it wa for the 
moment extraordinary; it wa even when you were here the other night 
distinctli arresting. but now (poor old grisel, i’m nearli done) all I 
want to say is this: that if we had the “foxi old roue” here now, and 
grisel play pari between the three of us, she’d hand over the appl 
not to you but to me.’ 

‘I don’t quit see where poor pari come in,’ suggest grisel meekly. 

‘no, nor do i,’ said herbert. ‘all that I mean, sagaci child, is, 
that Mr lawford no more resembl the poor wretch now than I resembl 
the apollo belvedere. If you had onli heard my sister scold me, 
rail at me for put such idea into your jangl head! they 
don’t affect ME one iota. I have, I suppose, what is usual call 
imagination; which mere mean that I can sup with the devil, spoon 
for spoon, and could sleep in bluebeard’ linen-closet without turn 
a hair. you, if I am not veri much mistaken, are not much troubl with 
that veri unprofit quality, and so, I suppose, when a crook and 
bizarr fanci doe edg into your mind it root there.’ 

and that said, not without some littl confusion, and covert glanc of 
inquiri at hi sister, herbert made all the hast he could to catch up 
the cours that hi companion had alreadi finished. 

If only, lawford thought, thi insuffer weari would lift awhil 
he could enjoy the quiet, absurd, heedless talk, and thi veri friendli 
topsy-turvi effort to eas hi mind and sooth hi nerves. He might even 
take an interest again in hi ‘case.’ 

‘you see,’ he said, turn to grisel, ‘I don’t think it realli veri 
much matter how it all came about. I never could believ it would last. 
It may perhaps--som of it at least may be fancy. but then, what isn’t? 
what is trustworthy? and now your brother tell me my hair’ turn 
grey. I suppos I have been live too slowly, too sluggishly, and they 
thought it wa high time to stir me up.’ 

He saw with extraordinari vivid the low panel room; the still 
listen face; the white muslin shoulder and dark hair; and the 
eye that seem to recal some far-off desol long for home and 
childhood. It wa all a dream. that wa the end of the matter. even now, 
perhaps, hi tire old stupid bodi wa lie hunch up, drench with 
dew upon the littl old seat under the mist-wreath branches. soon it 
would bestir itself and wake up and go off home--hom to sheila, to the 
old deadli round that onc had seem so natur and inevitable, to the 
old dull lawford--ey and brain and heart. 

they return up the dark shallow staircas to herbert’ book-room, and 
he talk on to veri quiet and passiv listen in hi own fantast 
endless fashion. and ever and again lawford would find himself 
intercept fleet and anxiou glanc at hi face, glanc almost 
of remors and pity; and thought he detect beneath thi irrespons 
contradictori babbl an unceas effort to clear the sky, to lure away 
too press memories, to put hi doubt and fear complet to rest. 

herbert even went so far as to plead guilty, when grisel gave him the 
cue, of have a littl heighten and overcolour hi stori of 
the restless phantasm old creatur that haunt their queer wooden 
hauntabl old house. and when they rose, laugh and yawn to take 
up their candles, it was, after all, after a rather anim discussion, 
with mani a hair-rais ghost stori brought in for proof between 
brother and sister, as to exactli how mani time that snuff-colour 
spectr had made hi appearance; and, with less unanim still, as 
to the precis manner in which he wa in the habit of make hi 
precipit exit. 

‘you do at ani rate acknowledge, grisel, that the old creatur doe 
appear, and that you saw him yourself step out into space when you were 
sit down there under the willow shell peas. i’v seen him twice 
for certain, onc rather hazily; salli saw him so plainli she ask hi 
business: that’ five. I resign.’ 

‘acknowledge!’ said grisel; ‘of cours I do. i’d acknowledg anyth in 
the world to save argument. why, I don’t know what I should do without 
him. If only, now Mr lawford would give him a fair chanc to show 
himself read quietli here about ten minut to one, or shell pea 
even, if he prefer it. If onli he’d stay long enough for that. wouldn’t 
it be the veri thing for them both!’ 

‘of course,’ said herbert cordially, ‘the veri thing.’ 

lawford look up at neither of them. He shook hi head. 

but he need littl persuas to stay at least one night. the prospect 
of that long solitari walk, of that tire stupid stoop figur 
drag itself along the intermin countri road seem a sheer 
impossibility. ‘it is not--it isn’t, I swear it--th other that beep me 
back,’ he had solemnli assur the friend that half smile her relief at 
hi acceptance, ‘but--if you onli knew how empti it’ all got now; all 
reason gone even to go on at all.’ 

‘but doesn’t it follow? Of cours it’ empty. and now life is go 
to begin again. I assur you it is, I do indeed. only, onli have 
courage--just the will to win on.’ 

He said good-night; shut-to the latch door of hi long low room, 
ceiling with rafter close under the steep roof, it brown wall hung 
with quiet, dark, ponder and beauti face look grave across 
at him. and with hi candl in hi hand he sat down on the bedside. all 
specul wa gone. the noisi clock of hi brain had run down again. 
He turn toward the old oval looking-glass on the dressing-t 
without the faintest stir of interest, suspense, or anxiety. what 
did it matter what a man look like--a now familiar but enfeebl and 
deprec voic seem to say. He knew that a chang had come. even 
sheila had notic it. and sinc then what had he not gone through? what 
now wa here seem of littl moment, so far at least as thi world wa 
concerned. 

At last with an effort he rose, cross the uneven floor, and look in 
unmovedli on what wa hi own poor face come back to him: chang inde 
almost beyond belief from the sleek self-satisfi genial yet languid 
arthur lawford of the past years, and still haunt with some faint 
trace of the set and ici sharpness, and challenge, and affront of the 
dark adventurer, but that--how immeasur dim and blunt and 
faded. He had expect to find it so. would it (the thought vanish 
across hi mind) would it have been as unmistak there had he 
come hot-foot, fearing, expect to find the other? but--wa he 
disappointed! 

He hardli knew how long he stood there, lean on hi hands, survey 
almost listlessli in the candle-light that lined, bedraggled, grey, 
hopeless countenance, those dark-socketed, smoulder eyes, whose 
pupil even now were so dilat that a casual glanc would have fail 
to detect the least hint of ani iris. ‘it must have been someth 
pretti bad you were, you know, or someth pretti bad you did,’ they 
seem to be tri to say to him, ‘to drag us down to this.’ 

He knelt down by forc of habit to say hi prayers; but no word came. 
well, between earthli friend a betray such as thi would have caus 
a livelong estrang and hostility. the god the old lawford use to 
pray to would forgiv him, he thought wearily, if just for the present 
he wa a littl too sore at heart to play the hypocrite. but if, 
while kneeling, he said nothing, he saw a good mani thing in such 
tranquil and clear as the mere eye of the bodi can share but 
rare with their sister of the imagination. and now it wa alic 
who look mourn out of the dark at him; and now the littl old 
charwoman, mr gull, with her bag hook over her arm, climb pain 
up the area steps; and now it wa the lean vex face of a friend, 
nurs some restless and anxiou grievanc against him--mr bethany; 
and then and ever again it wa the face of one who seem pure dream and 
fantasi and yet... He listen intent and fanci even now he could 
hear the voic of brother and sister talk quietli and circumspectli 
togeth in the room beneath. 



chapter eighteen 

A quiet knock arous him in the long, tranquil bedroom; and 
herbert’ head wa poke into the room. ‘there’ a bath behind that door 
over there,’ he whispered, `or if you like i’m off for a bath in the 
widder. it’ a lusciou day. shall I wait? all right,’ and the head wa 
withdrawn. ‘don’t put much on,’ came the voic at the panel; ‘we’ll be 
home again in twenti minutes.’ 

the green and bright of the morn must have been prepar for 
overnight by spider and the dew. everywher the gleam net were 
hung, and everywher there rose a tini splendour from the waterdrops, so 
clear and pure and changeabl it seem with their fire and colour 
they shook a tini crystal music in the air. herbert led the way along a 
clayey downward path beneath hazel toss softli togeth their twig 
of nuts, until they came out into a round hollow that, mound with 
thyme, slope gentli down to the green bank of the widder. the water 
pour like clearest glass beneath a rain of misti sunbeams. 

‘mi sister alway say that thi is the veri dell boccaccio had in hi 
mind’ eye when he wrote the “decameron.” there realli is someth 
almost classic in those pines. and i’d sometim swear with my eye just 
out of the water i’v seen dryad half in hide peep between those 
beeches. good lord, lawford, what a world we wretch modern have made, 
and missed!’ 

the water wa violent cold. It seem to lawford, as it swept up over 
hi body, and as he plung hi night-distort eye beneath it blaze 
surface, that it wa charg with some strange, power enchant to 
wash away in it ici clear even the memori of the dull and tarnish 
day behind him. If one could but tie up anyhow that stain bundl of 
inconsequ memori call life, and fling it into a cupboard remot 
even than bluebeard’s, and lock the door, and drop the quickly-rust 
key into these live waters! 

He dress himself with window thrown open to the blackbird and 
thrushes, and the occasion shrill solitari whistl of a robin. but, 
like the sour-sweet fragranc of the brier, it wander desol burst 
of music had power to wake memory, and carri him instantli back to 
that first aimless descent into the even gloom of widderston from 
which it wa in vain to hope ever to climb again. sure never a more 
ghoulish face look out on it man befor than that which confront 
him as with borrow razor he stood shave those sunken chaps, that 
angular chin. 

and even now, beneath the lantern of broad daylight, just as within that 
other face had lurk the undeni ghost and presenc of himself, so 
beneath the sunken featur seem to float, tenuou as smoke, scarc 
less elus than a dream, between eye and object, the sinist dark 
of the face that in those two bout with fear he had by some strang 
miracl manag to repel. 

‘work in,’ the chanc phrase came back. It had work in in sober 
earnest; and so far as the live of the next few week went, sure it 
might prove an alli without which he simpli could not conceiv himself 
as struggl on at all. 

but as dexter mind as even restless sabathier’ had him just now in 
safe and kindli keeping. all the quiet octob morn herbert kept him 
talk and stoop over hi extraordinari collect of books. 

‘the point is,’ he explain to lawford, stand amid a posit 
archipelago of preciou ‘finds,’ with hi foot hoist onto a chair and 
a patched-up, sea-stain folio on hi knee, ‘I honestli detest the mere 
give and take of what we are fool enough to call life. I don’t deni 
life’ there,’ he swept hi hand toward the open window--‘in that 
frantic tophet we call london; but there’ no focus, no point of 
vantage. even a scribbler onli get it piecem and through a dull 
medium. We learn to read befor we know how to see; we swallow our 
tastes, convictions, and emot whole; so that nine-tenth of the 
world’ nectar is mere honeydew.’ He smile pleasantli into the 
fix vacanc of hi visitor’ face. ‘that’ whi i’v just gone on,’ he 
continu amiably, ‘collect thi particular kind of stuff--what you 
might call riff-raff. there’ not a book here, lawford, that hasn’t 
at least a glimmer of the real thing in it--just life, seen through 
a live eye, and felt. As for literature, and style, and all that 
gallimaufry, don’t fear for them if your author ha the ghost of a hint 
of geniu in hi making.’ 

‘but surely,’ said lawford, tri for the twentieth time to pretend 
to himself that these endless book carri the faintest savour of the 
delight to him which they must, he rather forlornli supposed, shower 
upon herbert, ‘sure geniu is a veri rare thing!’ 

‘rare! the world simpli swarm with it. but befor you can bottl it up 
in a book it’ got to be articulate. just for a singl instant imagin 
yourself falstaff, and if there weren’t hundr of falstaff in everi 
generation, to be exampl of hi ungodli life, he’d be as dead as a 
doornail to-morrow--imagin yourself falstaff, and be so, 
sit down to write “henri iv,” or “the merri wives.” it’ simpli 
preposterous. you wouldn’t be such a fool as to wast the time. A mere 
elizabethan scribbler come along with a gift of express and an 
observ eye, lift the bloat old tippler clean out of life, and 
swim down the age as the greatest geniu the world ha ever seen. 
whereas, surely, though you mustn’t let me bore you with all thi 
piffle, it’ falstaff is the genius, and W. S. mere a talent 
reporter. 

‘lear, macbeth, mercutio--they live on their own, as it were. the 
newspap are full of them, if we were onli the shakespear to see it. 
have you ever been in a polic court? have you ever watch tradesmen 
behind their counters? My soul, the secret walk in the streets! you 
jostl them at everi corner. there’ a poloniu in everi first-class 
railway carriage, and as mani juliet as there are boarding-schools. 
what the devil are you, my dear chap, but geniu itself, with all the 
world brand new upon your shoulders? and who’d have thought it of you 
ten day ago? 

‘it’ simpli and sole becaus we’r all, poor wretches, dumb--dumb as 
butt of malmsez; dumb as drummerless drums. here am I, ass that I am, 
trickl out this--thi whey that no more express me than tupper 
doe sappho. but that’ what I want to mean. how inexhaust rich 
everyth is, if you onli stick to life. here it is pack away behind 
these rot covers, just the real thing, no respect stodge; no 
mere parasit stuff; not more than a dozen poets; score of outcast 
and vagabonds--and the real thing in vagabond is pretti rare in print, 
I can tell you. we’r all, everi one of us, sodden with facts, drug 
with the second-hand, and barnacl with respect until--until the 
touch comes. good know where from; but there’ no mistak it; oh 
no!’ 

‘but what,’ said lawford uneasily, ‘what on earth do you mean by the 
touch?’ 

‘I mean when you ceas to be a puppet onli and sit up in the galleri 
too. when you squeez through to the other side. when you suffer a kind 
of convers of the mind; becom awar of your senses. when you get a 
live inkling. when you becom articul to yourself. when you see.’ 

‘I am aw stupid,’ lawford murmured, ‘but even now I don’t realli 
follow you a bit. but when, as you say, you do becom articul to 
yourself, what happen then?’ 

‘why, then,’ said herbert with a shrug almost of despair, ‘then 
begin the weari tramp back. one by one drop off the truisms, and the 
grundyisms, and the pedantries, and all the stillborn claptrap of the 
marketplac slough off. then one can serious begin to think about 
save one’ soul.’ 

‘save one’ soul,’ groan lawford; ‘why, I am not even sure of my own 
bodi yet.’ He walk slowli over to the window and with everi thought in 
hi head as quiet as dove on a sunni wall, stare out into the garden 
of green thing growing, leav fade and fall water. ‘I tell you 
what,’ he said, turn irresolutely, ‘I wonder if you could possibl 
find time to write me out a translat of sabathier. My french is much 
too hazi to let me realli get at the chap. he’ gone now; but I realli 
should like to know what kind of stuff exactli he ha left behind.’ 

‘oh, sabathier!’ said herbert, laughing. ‘what do you think of that, 
grisel?’ he asked, turn to hi sister, who at that moment had look 
in at the door. ‘here’ Mr lawford ask me to make a translat of 
sabathier. lunch, lawford.’ 

lawford sighed. and not until he had slowli descend half the narrow 
uneven stair that led down to the dining-room did he fulli realis the 
guil of a sister that could induc a hopeless bookworm to wast a whole 
morn over the stupidest of companions, simpli to keep hi tired-out 
mind from rankling, and give hi sabathi a chanc to go to roost. 

‘I think, do you know,’ he manag to blurt out at last ‘I think I ought 
to be get home again. the hous is empty--and--’ 

‘you shall go thi evening,’ said herbert, ‘if you realli must insist 
on it. but honestly, lawford, we both think that after what the last few 
day must have been, it is mere common sens to take a rest. how can 
you possibl rest with a dozen empti room echo everi thought you 
think? there’ noth more to worri about; you agre to that. send 
your peopl a note say that you are here, safe and sound. give them a 
chanc of light a fire, and drive in the fat calf. stay on with 
us just the week out.’ 

lawford turn from one to the other of the two friendli faces. but what 
wa dimli in hi mind refus to express itself. ‘I think, you know, 
i--’ he began falteringly. 

‘but it’ just thi think that’ the deuce--thi preposter habit 
of have continu to make up one’ mind. off with hi head, grisel! 
My sister’ go to take you for a picnic; we go everi other fine 
afternoon; and you can argu it out with her.’ 

onc alon again with grisel, however, lawford found talk 
unnecessary. silenc seem to fall between them as quietli and 
rest as even flow into night. they walk on slowli through the 
fade woods, and when they had reach the top of the hill that slope 
down to the dark and foamless widder they sat down in the honey-sc 
sunshin on a knoll of heather and bracken, and grisel light the 
littl spirit-kettl she had brought with her, and busi herself veri 
method over make tea. 

that done, she clasp her hand round her knees, and sat now gossiping, 
now silent, in the pale autumn beauty. there wa a bird wist 
twitter in the branch overhead, and ever and again a wither leaf 
would slip circl down from the motionless beech bough arch in 
their still abov their head beneath the thin blue sky. 

‘men, you know,’ she began again suddenly, start out of reverie, 
‘realli are absurdli blind; and just a littl bit absurdli kindli 
stupid. how mani time have I been at the point of laugh out at my 
brother’ delici naiv subtleties. but you do, you will, understand, 
Mr lawford, that he was, that we are both “do our best”--to make 
amends?’ 


‘I understand--i do indeed--a tenth part of all your kindness.’ 

‘yes, but that’ just it--that horribl word “kindness”! If ever there 
were two utterli self-absorb people, without a trace, with an absolut 
horror of kindness, it is just my brother and I. it’ most of it fals 
and most of it useless. We all sure must take what come in thi 
topsy-turvi world. I believ in say out:--that the more one think 
about life the wors it becomes. there are onli two kind of happi 
in thi world--a wooden post’ and prometheus’s. and who ever heard 
of ani one have the impud to be kind to prometheus? As for a 
miser “medium” like me, not quit a post and leagu and leagu 
from even envi a prometheus, she’ better for the powder without the 
jam. but that’ all nothing. what I can’t help thinking--and it’ not a 
bit give my brother away, becaus we both think it--that it wa partli 
our thoughtless that ad at least someth to--to the rest. It 
wa perfectli absurd. He saw you were ill; he saw--h must have seen 
even in that first sunday talk--that your nerv were all askew. and 
who doesn’t know what “nerves” mean nowadays? and yet he deliber 
chattered. He love it--just at large, you know, like me. I told him 
befor I came out that I intended, if I could, to say all this. and now 
it’ said you’ll pleas forgiv me for go back to it.’ 

‘pleas don’t talk about forgiveness. but when you say he chattered, you 
mean about sabathier, of course. and that, you know, I don’t care a fig 
for now. We can settl all that between ourselves--him and me, I mean. 
and now tell me candidli again--i there ani “prey” in my face now?’ 

she look up fleetingli into hi eyes, leant back her head and laughed. 
‘“prey,” there never wa a glimpse.’ 

‘and “change”?’ their eye met again in an infinit brief, infinit 
bewild argument. 

‘really, really, scarc perceptible,’ she assur him, ‘except, of 
course, how horribly, horribl ill you look. and that onli seem to 
prove to me you must be hide someth else. No illus on earth 
could--could have done that to your face.’ 

‘you think, I know,’ he persisted, ‘that I must be persuad and 
cosset and humoured. yes, you do; it’ my poor old saniti that’ 
realli in both your minds. perhap I am--not absolut sound. anyhow. 
i’v been watch it in your look at each other all the time. and I 
can never, never say, never tell you what you have done for me. but you 
see, after all, we did win through; I keep on tell myself that. So 
that now it’ pure from the most selfish and practic motiv that I 
want you to be perfectli frank with me. I have to go back, you know; and 
some of them, one or two of my friend I mean, are not all on my side. 
think of me as I wa when you came into the room, three centuri ago, 
and you turn and looked, frown at me in the candle-light; rememb 
that and look at me now. what is the difference? doe it shock you? doe 
it make the whole world seem a trick, a sham? doe it simpli sour your 
life to think such a thing possible? oh, the hour i’v spent gloat 
on widderstone’ miser mask of skin and bone, as I wa say to 
your brother onli last night, and never knew until they shuffl me that 
the old self too wa noth better than a stifl suffoc mask.’ 

‘but don’t you see,’ she argu softly, turn her face away a little, 
‘you were a stranger then (though I certainli didn’t mean to frown). and 
then a littl while after we were, well, just human beings, shoulder 
to shoulder, and if friendship doe not mean that, I don’t know what it 
doe mean. and now, you are--well, just you: the you, you know, of three 
centuri ago! and if you mean to ask me whether at ani precis moment 
I have been consciou that thi you I am now speak to wa not the 
you of last night, or of that dark climb up the hill, why, it is simpli 
frantic to think it could ever be necessari to say over and over again, 
no. but if you mean, have you chang else? all I could answer is, don’t 
we all chang as we grow to know one another? what were just features, 
what just dingili repres one, as it were, is forgotten, or rather 
get remembered. Of course, the first glimps is the landscap under 
lightn as it were. but afterward isn’t it sure like the alphabet 
to a child; what wa first a queer angular scrawl becom A, and is 
alway ever after A, undistinguished, half-forgotten, yet stand at 
last for good know what real wonder things--or for just the dri 
bone of soulless words? Is that it?’ she stole a sidelong glanc into 
hi brood face, lean her head on her hand. 

‘yes, yes,’ came the rather dissatisfi reply. ‘I do agree; perfectly. 
but then, you see--i told you I wa go to talk of noth but 
myself--what did at first happen to me wa someth much worse, and, I 
suppose, someth quit differ from that.’ 

‘and yet, didn’t you tell us, that of all your friend not one realli 
deni in their heart your--what they would call, I suppose--your 
identity; except that poor littl offend old lady. and even she, if my 
intuit is worth a penni piece, even she when you go soon and talk to 
her will own that she did know you, and that it wa not becaus you 
were a stranger that she wa offended, but becaus you so ungener 
pretend to be one. that wa a littl mad, now, if you like!’ 

‘oh yes,’ said lawford, ‘I am go to ask her forgiveness. I don’t know 
what I didn’t vow to take her for a peace-off if the chanc should 
ever come--and the courage--to make my peac with her. but now that the 
chanc ha come, and I think the courage, it is the desir that’ gone. 
I don’t seem to care either way. I feel as if I had got past make my 
peac with ani one.’ 

but thi time no answer help him out. 

‘after all,’ he went plod on, ‘there is more than just the mere day 
to day to consider. and one doesn’t realis that one’ face actual 
IS one’ fortun without a shock. and that that gone, one is, as 
your brother said, just like a bee come back to the wrong hive. It 
undermines,’ he smile rather bitterly, ‘one’ view rather. and it 
certainli shift one’ friends. If it hadn’t been just for my old’--h 
stop dead, and again push slowli on--‘if it hadn’t been for our 
old friend, Mr bethany, I doubt if we should now have had a soul on our 
side. I onc read somewher that wolv alway chase the old and weak 
and maim out of the pack. and after all, what do we do? where do 
we keep the homeless and the insane? and yet, you know,’ he ad 
ruminatingly, ‘it is not as if mine wa ever a particularli love or 
lovabl face! while as for the poor wretch behind it, well, I realli 
cannot see what meaning, or life even, he had before--’ 

‘before?’ 

lawford met brave the clear whimsic eyes. ‘before, I wa 
sabathiered.’ 

grisel laugh outright. 

‘you think,’ he retort almost bitterly, ‘you think I am talk like a 
child.’ 

‘yes,’ she sigh cheerfully, ‘I wa quit envi you.’ 

‘well, there I am,’ said lawford inconsequently. ‘and now; well, now, 
I suppose, the whole thing’ to begin again. I can’t help begin to 
wonder what the mean of it all is; whi one’ duti should alway seem 
so veri stupid a thing. and then, too, what can there be on earth 
that even a buri sabathi could desire?’ He glanc up in a realli 
anim perplex at the still, dark face turn in the even light 
toward the darken valley. and perplex deepen into a disquiet 
frown--lik that of a child who is rous suddenli from a daydream by 
the half-forgotten question of a stranger. He turn hi eye almost 
furtiv away as if afraid of disturb her; and for awhil they sat 
in silence... At last he turn again almost shyly. ‘I hope some day you 
will let me bring my daughter to see you.’ 

‘yes, yes,’ said grisel eagerly; ‘we should both love it, of course. 
isn’t it curious?--i simpli knew you had a daughter. sheer intuition!’ 

‘I say “some day,”’ said lawford; ‘I know, though, that that some day 
will never come.’ 

‘wait; just wait,’ repli the quiet confid voice, ‘that will come 
too. one thing at a time, Mr lawford. you’v won your old self back 
again; you’ll win your old love of life back again in a littl while; 
never fear. oh, don’t I know that aw land’ end after illness; and 
that longing, too, that gnaw longing, too, for ultima thule. so, 
it’ a bargain between us that you bring your daughter soon.’ she busi 
herself over the tea things. ‘and, of course,’ she added, as if it were 
an afterthought, look across at him in the pale green sunlight as she 
knelt, ‘you simpli won’t think of go back to-night.... solitude, I 
realli do think, solitud just now would be absolut madness. you’ll 
write to-day and go, perhaps, to-morrow!’ 

lawford look across in hi mind at hi squar ungainli house, 
full-front the afternoon sun. He tri to repress a shudder. ‘I 
think, do you know, I ought to go to-day.’ 

‘well, whi not? whi not? just to reassur yourself that all’ well. and 
come back here to sleep. If you’d realli promis that i’d drive you in. 
i’d love it. there’ the jolliest littl governess-cart we sometim 
hire for our picnics. way I? you’v no idea how much easier in our mind 
my brother and I would be if you would. and then to-morrow, or at ani 
rate the next day, you shall be surrendered, whole and in your right 
mind. there, that’ a bargain too. now we must hurry.’ 



chapter nineteen 

herbert himself went down to order the gover cart, and pack them 
in with a rug. and in the dusk grisel set lawford down at the corner of 
hi road and drove on to an old bookseller’ with a commiss from her 
brother, promis to return for him in an hour. dust and a few straw 
lay at rest as if in some abstrus arrang on the stone of the 
porch just as the last faint whirl gust of sunset had left them. shut 
lid of sightless indiffer seem to greet the wander from the 
curtain windows. 

He open the door and went in. for a moment he stood in the vacant 
hall; then he peep first into the blind-drawn dining-room, faintly, 
dingili sweet, like an empti wine-bottle. He went softli on a few pace 
and just open the door look in on the faintli glitter twilight 
of the drawing-room. but the congeal stump of candl that he had set 
in the corner as a final rancor challeng to the beaten shade wa 
gone. He slowli and deliber ascend the stairs, consciou of a 
peculiar sens of ownership of what in even so brief an absenc had 
taken on so queer a look of strangeness. It wa almost as if he might be 
some lone heir come in the rather mourn dusk to view what melancholi 
fate had unexpectedli bestow on him. 

‘work in’--what on earth els could thi chill sens of strang 
mean? would he ever free hi memori from that one haphazard, haunt 
hint? and as he stood in the doorway of the big, calm room, which seem 
even now to be stir with the restless shadow of these last few 
far-away days; now pace sullenli to and fro; now sit hunched-up to 
think; and now lie impot in a vain, hopeless endeavour onli for the 
breath of a moment to forget--h awok out of reveri to find himself 
smile at the thought that a chang face wa practic at the merci 
of an incredul world, wherea a chang heart wa no one’ deadli 
dull affair but it owner’s. the merest breath of piti even stole over 
him for the sabathi who after all had dare and had needed, perhaps, 
noth like so arrog and merciless a coup de grace to realis that 
he had so ignomini failed. 

‘but there, that’ done!’ he exclaim out loud, not without a ting of 
regret that theories, howev brilliant and bizarre, could never now be 
anyth else--that now inde that the symptom had gone, the ‘malady,’ 
for all who had not been actual admit into the shock circle, 
wa becom noth more than an inan ‘tall’ story; stuf not 
even savouri enough for a goose. how wide exactly, he wondered, would 
sheila’ discreet, shock circl prove? He stood onc more befor the 
looking-glass, hear again grisel’ word in the still green shadow 
of the beech-tree, ‘except of course, horribly, horribl ill.’ ‘what a 
fool, what a coward she think I am!’ 

there wa still nearli an hour to be spent in thi great barn of fade 
interests. He lit a candl and descend into the kitchen. A mous went 
scamper to it hole as he push open the door. the memori of that 
raven morn meal nauseat him. It wa sour and veri still here; 
he stood erect; the air smelt faint of earth. In the breakfast-room the 
bookcas still swung open. late even mantl the garden; and in 
sheer ennui again he sat down to the table, and turn for a last not 
unfriendli hob-a-nob with hi poor old friend sabathier. He would take 
the thing back. herbert, of course, wa go to translat it for him. 
now if the patient old frenchman had storm herbert instead--that 
sure would have been someth like a coup! those frenzi books. 
the absurd talk of the man. herbert wa perfectli right--h could have 
entertain fifti old huguenot without turn a hair. ‘i’m such an 
aw stodge.’ 

He turn the woolli leav over veri slowly. He frown impatiently, 
and from the end backward turn them over again. then he laid the book 
softli down on the tabl and sat back. He stare with narrow lid 
into the flame of hi quiet friendli candle. everi trace, everi shred of 
portrait and memoir were gone. onc more, deliberately, punctiliously, 
he examin page by page the blur and unfamiliar french--th sooti 
heads, the long, lean noses, the baggi eye pass like figur in 
a peepshow one by one under hi hand--to the last fragmentari and 
dexter mend leaf. yes, sabathi wa gone. quit the old slow 
lawford smile crept over hi face at the discovery. It wa a smile a 
littl sheepish too, as he thought of sheila’ quiet vigilance. 

and the next instant he had look up sharply, with a sudden peculiar 
shrug, and a kind of cry, like the first thin cri of an awaken child, 
in hi mind. without a moment’ hesit he climb swiftli upstair 
again to the big sepulchr bedroom. He press with hi fingernail the 
tini spring in the looking-glass. the empti drawer flew open. there were 
finger-mark still in the dust. 

yet, strang enough, beneath all the clash thought that came 
flock into hi mind as he stood with the empti drawer in hi hand, 
wa a wound yet still a littl amus piti for hi old friend Mr 
bethany. So far as he himself wa concern the discovery--well, he 
would have plenti of time to consid everyth that could possibl now 
concern himself. anyhow, it could onli simplifi matters. 

He rememb wake to that old wave of sicken horror on the first 
unhappi morning; he rememb the keen yet owlish old face blink 
it deathless friendli at him, and the steadi pressur of the cold, 
skinni hand. As for sheila, she had never done anyth by halves; 
certainli not when it came to throw over a friend no longer 
necessari to one’ social satisfaction. but she would edg out cleverly, 
magnanimously, triumphantli enough, no doubt, when the day of reckon 
should come, the day when, her net wide spread, her bait prepared, he 
must stand up befor her outrag circl and posit prove himself 
her law husband, perhap even to the veri imprint of hi thumb. 

‘poor old thing!’ he said again; and thi time hi piti wa share 
almost equal between both wit to Mr bethany’ ingenu littl 
document, the loss of which had fallen so softli and pathet that 
he felt onli asham of have discov it so soon. 

He shut back the tell-tal drawer, and after tri to collect hi 
thought in case anyth should have been forgotten, he turn with a 
deep trembl sigh to descend the stairs. but on the land he drew 
back at the sound of voices, and then a footstep. soon came the sound of 
a key in the lock. He blew out hi candl and leant listen over the 
balusters. 

‘who’ there?’ he call quietly. 

‘me, sir,’ came the feebl repli out of the darkness. 

‘what is it, ada? what have you come for?’ 

‘only, sir, to see that all wa safe, and you were in, sir.’ 

‘yes,’ he said. ‘all’ safe; and I am in. what if I had been out?’ It 
wa like drop tini pebbl into a deep well--so long after came the 
answer feebl splash. 

‘then I wa to go back, sir.’ and a moment after the discreet voic 
float up with the faintest ting of effronteri out of the hush. ‘i 
that Dr ferguson, too sir?’ 

‘no, ada; and pleas tell your mistress from me that Dr ferguson is 
unlik to call again.’ A keen but rather forlorn smile pass over hi 
face. ‘he’ dine with friend no doubt at holloway. but of cours if 
she should want to see him he will see her to-morrow at ani hour at mr 
lovat’s. and--ada!’ 

‘yes, sir?’ 

‘say that i’m a littl better; your mistress will be reliev to hear 
that i’m a littl better; still not quit myself say, but, I think, a 
littl better.’ 

‘yes, sir; and i’m sure i’m veri glad to hear it,’ came fainter still. 

‘what voic wa that I heard just now?’ 

‘miss alice’s, sir; but she came quit against my wishes, and I hope you 
won’t repeat it, sir. she promis if she came that mistress shouldn’t 
know. I wa onli afraid she might disturb you, or--or Dr ferguson. and 
did you say, sir, that I wa to tell mistress that he might be come 
back?’ 

‘ah, that I don’t know; so perhap it would be as well not to mention 
him at all. Is miss alic there?’ 

‘I said I would tell her if you were alone. but I hope you’ll understand 
that it wa onli becaus she beg so. mistress ha gone to St peter’ 
bazaar; and that’ how it was.’ 

‘I quit understand. beckon to her.’ 

there came a hasti step in the hall and a hurri murmur of explanation. 
lawford heard her call as she ran up the stairs; and the next moment 
he had alice’ hand in hi and they were grope togeth through the 
gloam back into the solitud of the empti room again. 

‘don’t be alarmed, dear,’ he heard himself imploring. just hold tight 
to that clear common sense, and abov all you won’t tell? It must be our 
secret; a dead, dead secret from everi one, even your mother, for just 
a littl while; just a mere two day or so--in case. i’m--i’m better, 
dear.’ 

He fumbl with the littl box of matches, drop one, broke another; 
but at last the candle-flam dipped, brightened, and with the door shut 
and the last pale blueness of dusk at the window lawford turn and 
look at hi daughter. she stood with eye wide open, like the eye 
of a child walk in it sleep; then twist her finger more tightli 
within his. ‘oh, dearest, how ill, how ill you look,’ she whispered. 
‘but there, never mind--nev mind. It wa all a miser dream, then; 
it won’t, it can’t come back? I don’t think I could bear it come 
back. and mother told me such curiou things; as if I were a child and 
understood nothing. and even after I knew that you were you--i mean 
befor I sat up here in the dark to see you--sh said that you were 
gone and would never come back; that a terribl thing had happened--a 
disgrac which we must never speak of; and that all the other wa onli 
a pretenc to keep peopl from talking. but I did not believ then, and 
how could I believ afterwards?’ 

‘there, never mind now, dear, what she said. It wa all meant for the 
best, perhaps. but here I am; and not nearli so ill as I look, alice; 
and there’ noth more to troubl ourselv about; not even if it 
should be necessari for me to go away for a time. and thi is our 
secret, mind; our only; just a dead secret between you and me.’ 

they sat for awhil without speak or stirring. and faintli along the 
hush road lawford heard in the silenc a leisur indol beat of 
littl hoof approaching, and the sound of wheels. A sudden wave of 
feel swept over him. He took alice’ quiet love face in hi hand 
and kiss her passionately. ‘do not so much as think of me yet, or 
doubt, or question: onli love me, dearest. and soon--and soon--’ 

‘we’ll just begin again, just begin again, won’t we? all three of us 
together, just as we use to be. I didn’t mean to have said all those 
horrid thing about mother. she wa onli dread anxiou and meant 
everyth for the best. you’ll let me tell her soon?’ 

the haggard face turn slowly, listening. ‘I hear, I understand, but 
I can’t think veri clearli now, alice; I can’t, dear; my miser old 
tangl nerves. I just stumbl along as best I can. you’ll understand 
better when you get to be a poor old thing like me. We must do the best 
we can. and of cours you’ll see, dillie, how aw import it is 
not to rais fals hopes. you understand? I mustn’t risk the least thing 
in the world, must I? and now goodbye; onli for a few hour now. and not 
a word, not a word to a singl live soul.’ 

He extinguish the candl again, and led the way to the top of the 
stairs. ‘are you there, ada?’ 

‘yes, sir,’ answer the quiet imperturb voic from under the black 
straw brim. alic went slowli down, but at the foot of the stairs, 
look out into the cold, blue, lamplit street she paus as if at a 
sudden recollection, and ran hastili up again. 

‘there wa noth more, dear?’ she said, lean back to peer up. 

‘“noth more?” what?’ 

she stood pant a littl in the darkness, listen to some cautiou 
yet uneasi thought that seem to haunt her mind. ‘I thought--it seem 
there wa someth we had not said, someth I could not understand. 
but there, it is nothing! you know what a fanci old silli I am. you 
do love me? quit as much as ever?’ 

‘more, sweetheart, more!’ 

‘good-night again, then; and god bless you, dear.’ 

the outer door close softly, the footstep die away. lawford still 
hesitated. He took hold of the stair abov hi head as he stood on 
the land and lean hi head upon hi hands, strive calmli to 
disentangl the perplex of hi thoughts. hi puls were beat in 
hi ear with a low muffl roar. He look down between the blind to 
where against the blue of the road beneath the straggl yellow beam 
of the lamp stood the littl cart and drooping, shaggi pony, and grisel 
sit quietli there await him. He shut hi eye as if in hope by 
some convuls effort of mind to break through thi subtl glasslik 
atmospher of dream that had stolen over consciousness, and blot out 
the significance, almost the mean of the past. He turn abruptly. 
empti as the empti room around him, unansw were mind and heart. 
life wa a tale told by an idiot--signifi nothing. 

He paus at the head of the staircase. and even then the doubt 
confront him: would he ever come back? who knows? he thought; and 
again stood pondering, arguing, denying. At last he seem to have come 
to a decision. He made hi way downstairs, open and left ajar a long 
narrow window in a passag to the garden beyond the kitchen. He turn 
on hi heel as he reach the gate and wave hi hand as if in a kind of 
forlorn mockeri toward the darkli glitter windows. the drowsi poni 
awok at touch of the whip. 

grisel lift the rug and squeez a littl closer into the corner. she 
had drawn a veil over her face, so that to lawford her eye seem to 
be dream in a littl dark of their own as he laid hi hand on 
the side of the cart. ‘it’ a most curiou thing,’ he said, ‘but peep 
down at you just now when the sound of the wheel came, a memori came 
clearli back to me of year and year ago--of my mother. she use to 
come to fetch me at school in a littl cart like this, and a littl 
poni just like this, with a thick dusti coat. and onc I rememb I wa 
simpli sick of everything, a failure, and fag out, and all that, and 
wa look out in the twilight; I fanci even it wa autumn too. It wa 
a littl side staircas window; I wa horribl homesick. and she came 
quit unexpectedly. I shall never forget it--th misery, and then, her 
coming.’ He lift hi eyes, cow with the incess struggle, and 
watch her face for some time in silence. ‘ought I to stay?’ 

‘I see no “ought,”’ she said. ‘no one is there?’ 

‘onli a miser broken voic out of a broken cage--cal conscience.’ 

‘don’t you think, perhaps, that even that ha a good mani 
disguises--convention, cowardice, weakness, ennui; they all take their 
turn at hoot in it feathers? you must, you realli must have rest. 
you don’t know; you don’t see; I do. just a littl snap, some one last 
exquisit thread give way, and then it is all over. you see I have even 
to tri to frighten you, for I can’t tell you how you distress me.’ 

‘whi do I distress you?--mi face, my stori you mean?’ 

‘no; I mean you: your trouble, that horribl empti house, and--oh, dear 
me, yes, your courag too.’ 

‘listen,’ said lawford, stoop forward. He could scarc see the 
pale, veil face through thi mist that had risen up over hi eyes. 
‘I have no courag apart from you; no courag and no hope. ask me to 
come!--a stranger with no history, no mockery, no miser rant of a 
grave and dark and fear behind me. are we not all haunted--everi 
one? that forgotten, and the fool I was, and the vacillating, and the 
pretence--oh, how it all sweep clear befor me; without a will, without 
a hope or glimps or whisper of courage. Be just the memori of my 
mother, the face, the friend i’v never seen; the voic that everi dream 
leav echoing. ask me to come.’ 

she sat unstirring; and then as if by some uncontrol impuls 
stoop a littl closer to him and laid her glove hand on his. 

‘I hear, you know; I hear too,’ she whispered. ‘but we mustn’t listen. 
come now. it’ grow late.’ 

the littl villag echo back from it stone wall the clatter of the 
pony’ hoofs. night had darken to it deepest when their lamp shone 
white on the wicket in the hedge. they had scarc spoken. lawford had 
simpli watch pass by, almost without a thought, the arch trees, the 
darken fields; had watch rise up in a mist of primros light the 
harvest moon to shine in saffron on the face and shoulder of the few 
wayfar they met, or who pass them by. the still grave face beneath 
the shadow of it veil had never turned, though the moon pour all her 
flood of brillianc upon the dark profile. and onc when as if in sudden 
alarm he had lift hi head and look at her, a sudden doubt had 
assail him so instantli that he had half put out hi hand to touch 
her, and had as quickli withdrawn it, lest her beauti and still 
should be, even as the moment’ fanci had suggested, onli a far-gon 
memori return in dream. 

herbert hail them from the dark of an open window. He came 
down, and they talk a littl in the cold air of the garden. He lit 
a cigarette, and climb languidli into the cart, and drove the drowsi 
littl poni off into the moonlight. 



chapter twenti 

It wa a quiet supper the three friend sat down to. herbert sat 
narrow hi eye over hi thoughts, which, when the fanci took him, he 
scatter out upon the others’ silence. lawford appar had not yet 
shaken himself free from the sorceri of the moonlight. hi eye shone 
dark and full like those of a child who ha trespass beyond it hour 
for bed, and sit marvel at realiti in a wake dream. 

long after they had bidden each other good-night, long after herbert 
had trodden on tipto with hi candl past hi close door, lawford 
sat lean on hi arm at the open window, stare out across the 
motionless moonlit tree that seem to stand like drape and dream 
pilgrims, come to the peac of their nirvana at last besid the crash 
music of the waters. and he himself, the self that never sleep beneath 
the tide and wave of consciousness, wa listening, too, almost as 
unmovedli and unheedingli to the thought that clash in conflict 
through hi brain. 

why, in a strang transitori life wa one the slave of these small 
cares? what if even in that dark pit beneath, which seem to whisper 
leth to the tumultuous, swirl waters--what if there, too, were 
mere a begin again, and to seek a slumber refug there mere a 
blind and reiter plung into the heat and tumult of anoth day? who 
wa that poor, dark, homeless ghoul, sabathier? who wa thi helen of an 
imposs dream? her face with it strang smile, her eye with their 
still piti and rapt courag had taken hope away. ‘here’ not your rest,’ 
cri one insist voice; ‘she is the mysteri that haunt day and 
night, past all the chang of the restless hours. chanc ha given you 
back eye to see, a heart that can be broken. chanc and the stir 
of a long-gon life have torn down the veil age spin so thick and fast. 
pride and ambition; what dull fool men are! effort and duty, what dull 
fool men are!’ He listen on and on to these phantom plead and to 
the rather coars old lawford conscienc grunt them mercilessli down, 
too weari even to tri to rest. 

rook at dawn came sweep beneath the turquois of the sky. He saw 
their sharp-beak head turn thi way, that way, as they float on 
outspread wing across the misti world. except for the hoars roar of 
the water under the huge thin-leaf trees, not a sound wa stirring. 
‘one thing,’ he seem to hear himself mutter as he turn with a shiver 
from the morn air, ‘it won’t be for long. you can, at least, poor 
devil, wait the last act out.’ If in thi foolish hustl mob of the 
world, hire anywher and anywhen for the one poor dubiou wage of a 
penny--if it wa onli hi own small dull part to carri a mock spear, 
and shout huzza with the rest--ther wa noth for it, he grunt 
obstin to himself, shout he would with the loudest. 

He threw himself on to the bed with eye so weari with want of sleep 
it seem they had lost their livelong skill in find it. not the echo 
of triumph nor even a sigh of relief stir the torpor of hi mind. He 
knew vagu that what had been the miseri and mad of the last few 
day wa gone. but the thought had no power to move him now. sheila’ 
good sense, and Mr bethany’ stubborn loyalti were alik old stori 
that had lost their savour and meaning. gone, too, wa the need for that 
portent famili gather that had sat so often in hi fanci dure 
these last few day around hi dining-room table, discuss with futil 
decorum the problem of how to hush him up, to muffl him down. half 
dreaming, half awake, he saw the familiar door slowli open and, like the 
time hero in a melodrama, hi own figur appear befor the stricken 
and astonish company. hi eye open half-fearfully, and glanc up 
in the morn twilight. their perplex gave place to a quiet, almost 
vacant smile; the lid slowli close again, and at last the lean hand 
twitch awhil in sleep. 

next morn he spent rummag among the old books, dip listlessli 
here and there as the tasteless fanci took him, while herbert sat 
write with seren face and lift eyebrow at hi open window. but the 
unfamiliar long s’s, the close type, and the spell of the musti old 
book weari eye and mind. what he read, too, howev far-fetched, 
or lively, or sententious, or gross, seem either to be of the same 
textur as what had becom hi everyday experience, and so baffl him 
with it nearness, or els wa onli the meaningless rambl of an idl 
pen. and this, he thought to himself, look covertli up at the spruce 
clear-cut profil at the window, thi is what herbert had call life. 

‘am I interrupt you, herbert; are you veri busy?’ he ask at last, 
take refug on a chair in a far corner of the room. 

‘bless me, no; not a bit--not a bit,’ said herbert amiably, lay down 
hi pen. ‘i’m afraid the old leatherjacket have been bore you. it’ 
a habit thi beastli reading; thi gorg and glint and fever all at 
second-hand--pur a bad habit, like morphia, like laudanum. but onc 
in, you know there’ no recoveri anyhow, i’m neck-deep, and to struggl 
would be simpli to drown.’ 

‘I wa onli go to say how sorri I am for have left sabathi at 
home.’ 

‘mi dear fellow--’ began herbert reassuringly. 

‘it wa onli becaus I want so veri much to have your translation. I 
get muddl up with other thing grope through the dictionary.’ 

herbert survey him critically. ‘what exactli is your interest now, 
lawford? you don’t mean that my old “theory” ha left ani sting now?’ 

‘no sting; oh no. I wa onli curious. but you yourself still think it 
really, don’t you?’ 

herbert turn for a moment to the open window. 

‘I wa simpli tri then to find someth to fit the fact as you 
experienc them. but now that the fact have gone--and they have, 
haven’t they?--exit, of course, my theory!’ 

‘I see,’ wa the cryptic answer. ‘and yet, herbert,’ lawford solemnli 
began again, ‘it ha chang me; even in my way of thinking. when I shut 
my eye now--i onli discov it by chance--i see immedi face 
quit strang to me; or places, sometim throng with people; and onc 
an old well with some one sit in the shadow. I can’t tell you how 
clearly, and yet it is all altogeth differ from a dream. even when 
I sit with my eye open, I am conscious, as it were, of a kind of faint, 
colourless mirage. In the old days--i mean befor widderstone, what 
I saw wa onli what i’d seen already. noth came uncal for, 
unexplained. thi make the old life seem so blank; I did not know what 
extraordinarili real thing I wa do without. and whether for that 
reason or another, I can’t quit make out what in fact I did want then, 
and wa alway fret and strive for. I can see no wisdom or purpos 
in anyth now but to get to one’ journey’ end as quickli and brave 
as one can. and even then, even if we do call life a journey, and death 
the inn we shall reach at last in the even when it’ over; that, too, 
I feel will be onli as brief a stopping-plac as ani other inn would 
be. our experi here is so scanti and shallow--noth more than the 
moment of the continu present. sure that must go on, even if one 
doe call it eternity. and so we shall all have to begin again. probabl 
sabathi himself.... but there, what on earth are we, herbert, when all 
is said? who is it has--ha done all thi for us--what kind of self? 
and to what possibl end? Is it that the clockwork ha been wound up and 
must still jolt on a while with jar wheels? will it never run down, 
do you think?’ 

herbert smile faintly, but made no answer. 

‘you see,’ continu lawford, in the same quiet, dispassion 
undertone, ‘I wouldn’t mind if it wa onli myself. but there are so mani 
of us, so mani selves, I mean; and they all seem to have a voic in the 
matter. what is the realiti to thi infern dream?’ 

‘the realiti is, lawford, that you are fret your life out over thi 
rotten illusion. Be guid by me just thi once. we’ll go, all three 
of us, a good ten-mil walk to-day, and thoroughli tire you out. and 
to-night you shall sleep here--a realli sound, refresh sleep. then 
to-morrow, whole and hale, back you shall go; honestly. it’ onli 
profession strong men should ask questions. babe like you and me must 
keep to slops.’ 

so, though lawford made no answer, it wa agreed. befor noon the three 
of them had set out on their walk across the fields. and after rambl 
on just as capric took them, past redden blackberri bush and 
cops of hazel, and flame beech, they sat down to spread out their 
meal on the slope of a hill, overlook quiet plough field and 
graze cattle. herbert stretch himself with hi back to the earth, 
and hi placid face to the pale vacant sky, while lawford, even more 
dispirit after hi walk, wander up to the crest of the hill. 

At the foot of the hill, upon the other side, lay a farm and it 
out-buildings, and a pool of water beneath a group of elms. It wa 
vacant in the sunlight, and the water vividli green with a scum of weed. 
and about half a mile beyond stood a cluster of cottag and an old 
tower church. He gaze idli down, listen vagu to the wail of 
a curlew flit anxious to and fro abov the broken solitud of 
it green hill. and it seem as if a thin and dark cloud began to be 
quietli withdrawn from over hi eyes. hill and wail cri and barn and 
water fade out. and he wa stare as if in an endless still at an 
open window against which the sun wa beat in a bristl torrent of 
gold, while out of the garden beyond came the voic of some even bird 
sing with such an unspeak ecstasi of grief it seem it must 
be perch upon the confin of anoth world. the light gather to a 
radianc almost intolerable, drive back with it rain beam some 
memory, forlorn, remorseless, remote. hi bodi stood dark and senseless, 
rock in the air on the hillsid as if bereft of it spirit. then hi 
hand were drawn over hi eyes. He turn unsteadili and made hi way, 
as if through a thick, drizzl haze, slowli back. 

‘what is that--there?’ he said almost menacingly, stand with 
bloodshot eye look down upon herbert. 

‘“that!”--what?’ said herbert, glanc up startl from hi book. ‘why, 
what’ wrong, lawford?’ 

‘that,’ said lawford sullenly, yet with a faintli mourn cadenc in 
hi voice; ‘those field and that old empti farm--that villag over 
there? whi did you bring me here?’ 

grisel had not stirred. ‘the village...’ 

‘ssh!’ she said, catch her brother’ sleeve; ‘that’ detcham, yes, 
detcham.’ 

lawford turn wide vacant eye on her. He shook hi head and shuddered. 
‘no, no; not detcham. I know it; I know it; but it ha gone out of my 
mind. not detcham; i’v been there before; don’t look at me. horrible, 
horrible. It take me back--i can’t think. I stood there, trying, 
trying; it’ all in a blur. don’t ask me--a dream.’ 

grisel lean forward and touch hi hand. ‘don’t think; don’t even 
try. whi should you? We can’t; we mustn’t go back.’ 

lawford, still gaze fixedly, turn again a darken face toward 
the steep of the hill. ‘I think, you know,’ he said, stoop and 
whispering, ‘he would know--th window and the sun and the singing. and 
oh, of cours it wa too late. you understand--too late. and once... you 
can’t go back; oh no. you won’t leav me? you see, if you go, it would 
onli be all. I could not be quit so alone. but detcham--detcham? 
perhap you will not trust me--tel me? that wa not the name.’ 
He shudder violent and turn dog-lik beseech eyes. 
‘to-morrow--yes, to-morrow,’ he said, ‘I will promis anyth if you 
will not leav me now. once--’ but again the thread run so faintli 
through that inextric maze of memori elud him. ‘so long as you 
won’t leav me now!’ he implor her. 

she wa vainli tri to win back her composure, and could not answer 
him at once.... 

In the even after supper grisel sat her guest down in front of a big 
wood fire in the old book-room, where, stare into the play flames, 
he could fall at peac into the almost motionless reveri which he 
seem mere to harass and weari himself by tri to disperse. she 
open the littl piano at the far end of the room and play on and 
on as fanci led--chopin and beethoven, a fugu from bach, and love 
forlorn old english airs, till the music seem not onli a voic 
persuading, pondering, and lamenting, but gather about itself the 
hollow surg of the water and the darkness; wist and clear, as the 
thought of a solitari child. ever and again a log burnt through it 
strength, and fall amid sparks, stirred, like a restless animal, the 
stillness; or herbert in hi corner lift hi head to glanc toward 
hi visitor, and to turn anoth page. At last the music, too, fell 
silent, and lawford stood up with hi candl in hi hand and eye with a 
strang fixiti brother and sister. hi glanc wander slowli round the 
quiet flame-lit room. 

‘you won’t,’ he said, stoop toward them as if in extrem confidence, 
‘you won’t much notice? they come and go. I tri not to--to speak. it’ 
the onli way through. It is not that I don’t know they’r onli dreams. 
but if onc the--th other thought there had been ani tampering’--h 
tap hi forehead meaningly--‘here: if onc they thought that, it 
would, you know, be quit over then. how could I prove...?’ He turn 
cautious toward the door, and with labori signific nod hi 
head at them. 

herbert bent down and held out hi long hand to the fire. ‘tampering, 
my dear chap: that’ what the lump said to the leaven.’ 

‘yes, yes,’ said lawford, put out hi hand, ‘but you know what 
I mean, herbert. anyth I tri to do then would be quite, quit 
hopeless. that would be poison the wells.’ 

they watch him out of the room, and listen till quit distinctli in 
the still night-shad hous they heard hi door gentli close. then, as 
if by consent, they turn and look long and questioningli into each 
other’ faces. 

‘then you are not afraid?’ herbert said quietly. 

grisel gaze steadili on, and almost impercept shook her head. 

‘you mean?’ he question her; but still he had again to read her answer 
in her eyes. 

‘oh, veri well, grisel,’ he said quietly, ‘you know best,’ and return 
onc more to hi writing. 

for an hour or two lawford slept heavily, so heavili that when a littl 
after midnight he awoke, with hi face toward the uncurtain window, 
though for mani minut he lay brightli confront all orion, that from 
blaze helm to flame dog at heel fill high the glimmer square, 
he could not lift or stir hi cold and leaden limbs. He rose at last and 
threw off the burden of hi bedclothes, and rest awhile, as if freed 
from the heavi of an unremember nightmare. but so clear wa hi 
mind and so extraordinarili refresh he seem in bodi that sleep for 
mani hour would not return again. and he spent almost all the remaind 
of the lag dark pace softli to and fro; one face onli befor 
hi eyes, the one sure thing, the one thing unattain in a world of 
phantoms. 

herbert wait on in vain for hi guest next morning, and after 
wander up and down the mossi lawn at the back of the house, went off 
cheer at last alon for hi dip. when he return lawford wa in 
hi place at the breakfast-table. He sat on, moodi and constrained, 
until even herbert’ haphazard talk trickl low. 

‘I fanci my sister is nurs a headache,’ he said at last, ‘but she’ll 
be down soon. and i’m afraid from the look of you, lawford, your night 
wa not particularli restful.’ He felt hi way veri heedfully. ‘perhap 
we walk you a littl too far yesterday. We are so use to tramp 
that--’ lawford kept thought eye fix on the deprec face. 

‘I see what it is, herbert--y are humour me again. I have 
been wrack my brain in vain to rememb what exactli did happen 
yesterday. I feel as if it wa all sunk ocean deep in sleep. I get so 
far--and then i’m done. It won’t give up a hint. but you realli mustn’t 
think i’m an invalid, or--or in my second childhood. the truth is,’ he 
added, ‘it’ onli my first, come back again. but now that i’v got so 
far, now that i’m realli better, i--’ He broke off rather vacantly, as 
if afraid of hi own confidence. ‘I must be get on,’ he sum 
up with an effort, ‘and that’ the solemn fact. I keep on forget 
i’m--i’m a ratepayer!’ 

herbert sat round in hi chair. ‘you see, lawford, the veri term is 
littl els than double-dutch to me. As a matter of fact grisel send 
all my hush-money to the horribl peopl that do the clean up, as 
it were. I can’t catch their drift. govern to me is mere the 
spectacl of the clever, or the specious, manag the dull. It deal 
mere with the physical, and just the fring of consciousness. I am not 
joking. I think I follow you. all I mean is that the obligations--mainli 
tepid, I take it--that are lure you back to the fold would be the 
veri one that would scare me quickest off. the imagination, the appeal 
faded: we’r dead.’ 

lawford open hi mouth; ‘temporarili tepid,’ he at last all but 
cough out. 

‘oh yes, of course,’ said herbert intelligently. ‘onli temporarily. it’ 
thi beastli gregari that’ the devil. the veri thought of it 
undo me--with an absolut shock of sheepishness. I suddenli realis 
my human nakedness: that here we are, littl better than nake animals, 
bleat behind our illusori wattl on the slope of--of infinity. 
and nakedness, after all, is a wholesom thing to realiz onli when one 
think too much of one’ clothes. I peer sometimes, feebli enough, out 
of my wool, and it seem to me that all these busybodies, all these 
fact-devourers, all thi news-read rabble, are noth brighter than 
veri dull-wit children tri to play an imagin game, much too 
deep for their poor reasons. I don’t mean that your want to go home 
is anyth gregarious, but I do think their insist on your come 
back at onc might be. and I know you won’t visit thi stuff on me as 
anyth more than just my “scum,” as grisel call the fine flower of my 
maiden meditations. all that I realli want to say is that we should both 
be more than delight if you’d stay just as long as it will not be a 
bore for you to stay. stay till you’r heartili tire of us. Go back 
now, if you must; tell them how much better you are. bolt off to a nerv 
specialist. he’ll say complet rest--chang of scene, and all that. they 
all do. instinct via intellect. and whi not take your rest here? We 
are such miser dull compani to one anoth it would be a greater 
pleasur to have you with us than I can say. I mean it from the veri 
bottom of my heart. do!’ 

lawford listened. ‘I wish--,’ he began, and stop dead again. ‘anyhow, 
i’ll go back. I am afraid, herbert, i’v been play truant. It wa all 
veri well while--to tell you the truth I can’t think quit straight yet. 
but it won’t last for ever. besides--well, anyhow, i’ll go back.’ 

‘right you are,’ said herbert, pretend to be cheerful. ‘you can’t 
expect, you realli can’t, everyth to come right straight away. just 
have patience. and now, let’ go out and sit in the sun. they’v mix 
septemb up with may.’ 

and about half an hour afterward he glanc up from hi book to find 
hi visitor fast asleep in hi garden chair. 

grisel had taken her brother’ place, with a littl pile of needlework 
besid her on the grass, when lawford again open hi eye under the 
rosi shade of a parasol. He watch her for a while, without speaking. 

‘how long have I been asleep?’ he said at last. 

she start and look up from her needle. 

‘that depend on how long you have been awake,’ she said, smiling. ‘mi 
brother tell me,’ she went on, begin to stitch, ‘that you have 
made up your mind to leav us to-day. perhap we are onli flatter 
ourselv it ha been a rest. but if it has--i that, do you think, 
quit wise?’ 

He leant forward and hid hi face in hi hands. ‘it’ because--it’ 
becaus it’ the onli “must” I can see.’ 

‘but even “musts”--well, we have to be sure even of “musts,” haven’t 
we? are you?’ she glanc up and for an instant their eye met, and the 
fall water seem to be sound out of a distanc so remot it might 
be but the echo of a dream. she stoop onc more over her work. 

‘supposing,’ he said veri slowly, and almost as if speak to himself, 
‘suppos sabathier--and you know he’ mere like a friend now one 
mustn’t be seen talk to--suppos he came back; what then?’ 

‘oh, but sabathier’ gone: he never realli came. It wa onli a fancy--a 
mood. It wa onli you--anoth you.’ 

‘who wa that yesterday, then?’ 

she glanc at him swiftli and knew the question wa but a venture. 

‘yesterday?’ 

‘oh, veri well,’ he said fretfully, ‘you too! but if he did, if he did, 
come realli back: “prey” and all?’ 

‘what is the riddle?’ she said, take a deep breath and face him 
brightly. 

‘would MY “must” still be his?’ the face he rais to her, as he lean 
forward under the direct light of the sun, wa so colourless, cadaver 
and haggard, the thought cross her mind that it did inde seem littl 
more than a shadowi mask that but one hour of dark might dispel. 

‘you said, you know, we did win through. whi then should we be even 
think of defeat now?’ 

‘“we”!’ 

‘oh no, you!’ she cri triumphantly. 

‘you do not answer my question.’ 

‘nor you mine! It wa a gloriou victory. Is there the ghost of a reason 
whi you should cast your mind back? Is there, now?’ 

‘only,’ said lawford, look patient up into her face, ‘onli becaus 
I love you’: and listen in the silenc to the word as one may watch a 
bird that ha escap for ever and irrevoc out of it cage, steadili 
fli on and on till lost to sight. 

for an instant the grey eye faltered. ‘but that, surely,’ she began 
in a low voice, still steadili sewing, ‘that wa our compact last 
night--that you should let me help, that you should trust me just as you 
trust the mother year ago who came in the littl cart with the shaggi 
dusti poni to the homesick boy watch at the window. perhaps,’ she 
added, her finger trembling, ‘in thi odd shuffl of soul and faces, 
I AM that mother, and most fright anxiou you should not give in. 
why, even becaus of the tiredness, even becaus the caus seem vain, 
you must still fight on--wouldn’t she have said it? sure there are 
prizes, a daughter, a career, no end! and even they gone--stil the self 
undimmed, undaunted, that took it drub like a man.’ 

‘I know you know i’m all but crazed; you see thi wretch mind all 
litter and broken down; look at me like that, then. forget even you 
have befriend me and pretended--whi must I blunder on and on like 
this? oh, grisel, my friend, my friend, if onli you love me!’ 

tear cloud her eyes. she turn vagu as if for a hiding-place. 
‘we can’t talk here. how mad the day is. listen, listen! I do--i do love 
you--moth and woman and friend--from the veri moment you came. it’ 
all so clear, so clear: that, and your miser “must,” my friend. 
come, we will go away by ourselv a little, and talk. that way. i’ll 
meet you by the gate.’ 



chapter twenty-on 

she came out into the sunlight, and they went through the littl gate 
together. she walk quickly, without speaking, over the bridge, past a 
littl cottag whose hollyhock lean fade abov it low flint wall. 
skirt a field of stubble, she struck into a wood by a path that ran 
steepli up the hillside. and by and by they came to a glen where the 
woodmen of a score of year ago had fell the trees, leav a green 
hollow of sapl in the midst of their tower neighbours. 

‘there,’ she said, hold out her hand to him, ‘now we are alone. just 
six hour or so--and then the sun will be there,’ she point to the 
tree-top to the west, ‘and then you will have to go; for good, for 
good--you your way, and I mine. what a tangle--a tangl is thi life of 
ours. could I have dreamt we should ever be talk like this, you and 
I? friend of an hour. what will you think of me? doe it matter? don’t 
speak. say nothing--poor face, poor hands. If onli there were someth 
to look to--to pray to!’ she bent over hi hand and press it to her 
breast. ‘what world we’v seen together, you and I. and then--anoth 
parting.’ 

they wander on a littl way, and came back and listen to the first 
few bird that flew up into the higher branches, noonday be past, to 
sing. 

they talked, and were silent, and talk again with out question, or 
sadness, or regret, or reproach; she mock even at themselves, mock 
at thi ‘change’--‘why, and yet without it, would you ever even have 
dream onc a poor fool of a frenchman went to hi restless grave for 
me--for me? need we understand? were we told to pry? who made us 
human must be human too. whi must we take such care, and make such a 
fret--thi soul? I know it, I know it; it is all we have--“to save,” 
they say, poor creatures. no, never to spend, and so they daren’t for a 
solitari instant lift it on the finger from it cage. well, we have; and 
now, soon, back it must go, back it must go, and tri it best to whistl 
the day out. and yet, do you know, perhap the veri freedom doe a 
littl shake its--it monotony. it’ true, you see, they have live 
a long time; these worldli wisefolk they were wise befor they were 
swaddled.... 

‘there, and you are hungry?’ she ask him, laugh in hi eyes. `of 
course, of cours you are--scarc a mouth sinc that first still 
wonder supper. and you haven’t slept a wink, except like a tired-out 
child after it first party, on that old garden chair. I sat and 
watched, and yes, almost hope you’d never wake in case--in case. come 
along, see, down there. I can’t go home just yet. there’ a littl old 
inn--we’l go and sit down there--a if we were realli tri to be 
romantic! I know the woman quit well; we can talk there--just the day 
out.’ 

they sat at a littl tabl in the garden of ‘the cherri trees,’ it 
thick green appl branch burden with ripen fruit. and grisel tri 
to persuad him to eat and drink, ‘for to-morrow we die,’ she said, 
her hand trembling, her face as it were veil with a faint mysteri 
light. 

‘there are dozen and dozen of old stories, you know,’ she said, 
lean on her elbows, ‘dozen and dozens, mean onli us. you must, 
you must eat; look, just an apple. we’v got to say good-bye. and 
faint will doubl the difficulty.’ she lightli touch hi hand as 
if to compel him to smile with her. ‘there, i’ll peel it; and thi is 
eden; and soon it will be the cool of the evening. and then, oh yes, the 
voic will come. what nonsens I am talking. never mind.’ 

they sat on in the quiet sunshine, and a spider slid softli through 
the air and with busi claw set to it nets; and those small ghost the 
robin went whistl restlessli among the heavi boughs. 

A child present came out of the porch of the inn into the garden, and 
stood with it batter doll in it arms, softli watch them awhile. 
but when grisel smile and tri to coax her over, she burst out 
laugh and ran in again. 

lawford stoop forward on hi chair with a groan. ‘you see,’ he said, 
‘the whole world mock me. you say “thi evening”; need it be, must it 
be thi evening? If you onli knew how far they have driven me. If you 
onli knew what we should onli detest each other for say and 
for listen to. the whole thing’ dull and staled. who want 
a changeling? who want a paint bird? who doe not loath the 
converted?--and i’m convert to sabathier’ god. should we be sit 
here talk like thi if it were not so? I can’t, I can’t go back.’ 

she rose and stood with her hand press over her mouth, watch him. 

‘won’t you understand?’ he continued. ‘I am an outcast--a felon caught 
red-handed, come in the flesh to a hideou and righteou judgment. I 
hear myself say all these things; and yet, grisel, I do, I do love 
you with all the dull best I ever had. not now, then; I don’t ask new 
even. I can, I would begin again. god know my face ha chang enough 
even as it is. think of me as that poor wander ghost of yours; how 
easili I could hide away--in your memory; and just wait, wait for you. 
In time even thi wild futil mad too would fade away. then I could 
come back. may I try?’ 

‘I can’t answer you. I can’t reason. only, still, I do know, talk, put 
off, forget as I may, must is must. right and wrong, who know what 
they mean, except that one’ to be done and one’ to be forsworn; 
or--forgive, my friend, the truest thing I ever said--or els we lose 
the savour of both. oh, then, and I know, too, you’d weari of me. I know 
you, monsieur nicholas, better than you can ever know yourself, though 
you have risen from your grave. you follow a dream, no voic or face or 
flesh and blood; and not to do what the one old raven within you cri 
you must, would be in time to hate the veri sound of my footsteps. you 
shall go back, poor turncoat, and face the clearness, the utterli more 
difficult, bald, and heartless clearness, as togeth we face the dark. 
life is a littl while. and though I have no word to tell what alway 
are and must be foolish reason becaus they are not reason at all but 
ghost of memory, I know in my heart that to face the worst is your onli 
hope of peace. should I have stake so much on your find that, and 
now throw up the game? don’t let us talk ani more. i’ll walk half 
the way, perhaps. perhap I will walk all the way. I think my brother 
guesses--at least MY madness. i’v talk and talk him nearli past hi 
patience. and then, when you are quit safely, oh yes, quit safe and 
soundli gone, then I shall go away for a little, so that we can’t even 
hear each other speak, except in dreams. life!--well, I alway thought 
it wa much too plain a tale to have as dull an ending. and with us the 
power beyond have play a newer trick, that’ all. anoth hour, and 
we will go. till then there’ just the solitari walk home and onli the 
dull old haunt hous that hoard as mani ghost as we ourselv to 
watch our coming.’ 

even began to shine between the trees; they seem to stand aflame, 
with a melancholi raptur in their uplift bough abov their fade 
coats. the field of the garner harvest shone with a golden stillness, 
awhir with shimmer flock of starlings. and the old bird that had 
sung in the spring sang now amid the same leaves, grown older too to 
give them harbourage. 

herbert wa sit in hi room when they returned, nurs hi teacup 
on hi knee while he pretend to be reading, with elbow prop on the 
table. 

‘here’ nichola sabathier, my dear, come to say goodby awhile,’ 
said grisel. she stood for a moment in her white gown, her face turn 
toward the clear green twilight of the open window. ‘I have promis to 
walk part of the way with him. but I think first we must have some tea. 
no; he flatli refus to be driven. We are go to walk.’ 

the two friend were left alone, face to face with a rather difficult 
silence, onli the least degre of nervous apparent, so far as 
herbert wa concerned, in that odd aloof sustain air of imperson 
that had so baffl hi companion in their first queer talk together. 

‘your sister said just now, herbert,’ blurt lawford at last. ‘“here’ 
nichola sabathi come to say good-bye” well, i--what I want you to 
understand is that it is sabathier, the worst he ever was; but also that 
it is “good-bye.”’ 

herbert slowli turned. ‘I don’t quit see whi “goodbye,” lawford. 
and--frankly, there is noth to explain. We have chosen to live such 
a veri out-of-the-way life,’ he went on, as if follow up a train of 
thought.... ‘the truth is if one want to live at all--one’ own life, 
I mean--there’ no time for mani friends. and just steadfastli regard 
your neighbour’ tail as you follow it down into the nowhere--it’ that 
that seem to me the deadliest form of hypnotism. one must simpli go 
one’ own way, do one’ best to free one’ mind of cant--and I dare 
say clear some excel stuff out with the rubbish. one consequ 
is that I don’t think, howev foolhardi it may be to say so, I don’t 
think I care a groat for ani opinion as human as my own, good or bad. My 
sister’ a million time a better woman than I am a man. what possibl 
could there be, then, for me to say?’ He turn with a nervou smile. 
‘whi should it be good-bye?’ 

lawford glanc involuntarili toward the door that stood in shadow 
duskili ajar. ‘well,’ he said, ‘we have talked, and we think it must 
be that, until, at least,’ he smile faintly, ‘I can come as quietli as 
your old ghost you told me of; and in that case it may not be so veri 
long to wait.’ 

their eye met fleetingli across the still, listen room. ‘the more 
I think of it,’ lawford push slowli on, ‘the less I understand the 
frantic purposeless of all that ha happen to me. until I 
went down, as you said, “a godsend of a littl miss muffet,” and the 
inconceiv farc came off, I wa fairli happy, fairli content to 
danc my littl wooden danc and wait till the showman should put me 
down into hi box again. and now--well, here I am. the whole thing ha 
gone by and scarc left a trace of it visit. here I am for all my 
friend to swear to; and yet, herbert, if you’ll forgiv me troubl 
you with thi stuff about myself, not a singl belief, or thought, or 
desir remain unchanged. you will rememb all that, I hope. it’ not, 
of course, the ghost of an apology, onli the mere facts.’ 

herbert rose and pace slowli across to the window. ‘the longer I live, 
lawford, the more I curs thi futil gift of speech. here am I, want 
to tell you, to say out frankli what, if mind could appeal direct to 
mind, would be mere as the wind pass through the leav of a tree 
with just one--on multitudin rustle, but which, if I tri to 
put into words--well, daybreak would find us still grope on....’ He 
turned; a peculiar wri smile on hi face. ‘it’ a dumb world: but there 
we are. and some day you’ll come again.’ 

‘well,’ said lawford, as if with an almost hopeless effort to turn 
thought into such primit speech, ‘that’ where we stand, then.’ He 
got up suddenli like a man awaken in the midst of unforeseen danger, 
‘where is your sister?’ he cried, look into the shadow. and as if in 
actual answer to hi entreaty, they heard the clink of the cup on 
the little, old, green lacquer tray she wa at that moment carri into 
the room. she sat down on the window seat and put the tray down besid 
her. ‘it will be befor dark even now,’ she said, glanc out at the 
faintli burn skies. 

they had trudg on togeth with almost as deep a sens of physic 
exhaust as peasant have who have been labour in the field sinc 
daybreak. and a littl beyond the village, befor the last, long road 
began that led in present to the hous and scrupul suburb, she 
stop with a sob besid an old scar mileston by the wayside. 
‘this--i as far as I can go,’ she said. she stooped, and laid her hand 
on the cold moss-grown surfac of the stone. ‘even now it’ wet with 
dew.’ she rose again and look strang into hi face. ‘yes, yes, here 
it is,’ she said, ‘oh, and worse, wors than ani fear. but noth now 
can troubl you again of that. we’r both at least past that.’ 

‘grisel,’ he said, ‘forgiv me, but I can’t--i can’t go on.’ 

‘don’t think, don’t think,’ she said, take hi hands, and lift them 
to her bosom. ‘it’ onli how the day goes; and it ha all, my one 
dear, happen score and score of time before--moth and child and 
friend--and lover that are all these too, like us. We mustn’t cri out. 
perhap it wa all befor even we could speak--thi sorrow came. take 
all the hope and all the future: and then may come our chance.’ 

‘what’ life to me now. you said the desir would come back; that I 
should shake myself free. I could if you would help me. I don’t know 
what you are or what your mean is, onli that I love you; care for 
nothing, wish for noth but to see you and think of you. A flat, dull 
voic keep say that I have no right to be tell you all this. 
you will know best. I know I am nothing. I ask nothing. If we love one 
another, what is there els to say?’ 

‘nothing, noth to say, except onli good-bye. what could you tell 
me that I have not told myself over and over again? reason’ gone. 
thinking’ gone. now I am onli sure.’ she smile shadowily. ‘what peac 
did HE find who couldn’t, perhaps, like you, face the last good-bye?’ 

they stood in utter solitud awhil in the even gloom. the air wa 
as still and cold as some grey unfathom untravers sea. abov them 
uncount cloud drift slowli across space. 

‘whi do they all keep whisper together?’ he said in a low voice, with 
cower face. ‘oh if you knew, grisel, how they have hem me in; how 
they have come press in through the narrow gate I left ajar. onli to 
mock and mislead. it’ all dark and unintelligible.’ 

He touch her hand, peer out of the shadow that seem to him to be 
gather between their faces. He drew her closer and touch her lip 
with hi fingers. her beauti seem to hi distort sens to fill 
earth and sky. this, then, wa the presence, the grave and love 
overshadow dream whose surrend made life a torment, and death the 
near fold of an immortal, starri veil. she broke from him with a faint 
cry. and he found himself run and running, just as he had run that 
other night, with death instead of life for inspiration, toward hi 
earthli home. 



chapter twenty-two 

He wa utterli wearied, but he walk on for a long while with a dog 
unglanc pertinac and without look behind him. then he rest 
under the dew-sodden hedgesid and buri hi face in hi hands. once, 
indeed, he did turn and grind hi way back with hard uplift face for 
mani minutes, but at the meet with an old woman who in the late dusk 
pass him unheed on the road, he stop again, and after stand 
awhil look down upon the dust, tri to gather up the tangl 
thread of hi thoughts, he onc more set off homewards. 

It wa clear, starry, and quit dark when he reach the house. the lamp 
at the roadsid obscur lit it breadth and height. lamp-light within, 
too, wa show yellow between the venetian blinds; a cold gas-jet 
gleam out of the basement window. He seem bereft now of all desir 
or emotion, simpli the passiv wit of thing extern in a calm 
which, though he scarc realis it cause, wa an exquisit solac 
and relief. hi sens were intens sharpen with sleeplessness. the 
faintest sound bell clear and keen on hi ear. the thinnest beam of 
light besprinkl hi eye with curiou brilliance. 

As quietli as some nocturn creatur he ascend the step to the 
porch, and lean between stone pilast and wall, listen intent 
for ani rumour of those within. 

He heard a clear, rather languid and delic voic quietli speak on 
until it broke into a littl peal of laughter, followed, when it fell 
silent by sheila’s--rapid, rich, and low. the first speaker seem to be 
standing. probably, then, hi even visitor had onli just come in, or 
were prepar to depart. He insert hi latchkey and gentli push at 
the cumbersom door. It wa lock against him. with not the faintest 
thought of resent or surprise, he turn back, stoop over the 
balustrad and look down into the kitchen. noth there wa visibl 
but a narrow strip of the white table, on which lay a black cotton 
glove, and beyond, the glint of a copper pan. what made all these mute 
and inanim thing so coldli hostile? 

An extreme, almost nauseou distast fill him at the thought of 
knock for admission, of confront ada, possibl even sheila, in the 
cold echo gloom of the detest porch; of meet the first wild, 
almost metallic, flash of recognition. He swept softli down again, and 
paus at the open gate. onc befor the voic of the night had call 
him: they would not summon him forev in vain. He rais hi eye again 
toward the window. who were these visitor met togeth to drum the 
alien out? He narrow hi lid and smile up at the vacuou unfriendli 
house. then wheeling, on a sudden impuls he grope hi way down the 
gravel path that led into the garden. As he had left it, the long white 
window wa ajar. 

with extrem caution he push it noiselessli up, and climb in, and 
stood listen again in the black passag on the other side. when 
he had fulli recov hi breath, and the knock of hi heart wa 
stilled, he trod on softly, till turn the corner he came in sight 
of the kitchen door. It wa now narrowli open, just enough, perhaps, to 
admit a cat; and as he softli approached, look steadili in, he 
could see ada sit at the empti table, beneath the singl whistl 
chandelier, in her black dress and black straw hat. she wa read 
apparently; but her back wa turn to him and he could not distinguish 
her arm beyond the elbow. then almost in an instant he discovered, as, 
drawn up and unstir he gaze on, that she wa not reading, but had 
covertli and instantan rais her eye from the print on the tabl 
beneath, and wa transfixedli listen too. He turn hi eye away and 
waited. when again he peer in she had appar bent onc more over 
her magazine, and he stole on. 

one by one, with a thin remot exult in hi progress, he mount 
the kitchen stairs, and with each deliber and grope step the voic 
abov him becam more clearli audible. At last, in the dark of the 
hall, but faintli stir by the gleam of lamplight from the chink of 
the dining-room door, he stood on the threshold of the drawing-room door 
and could hear with vari distinct what those friendli voic 
were so absorbedli discussing. hi ear seem as exquisit as some 
contriv of science, regist passiv the least sound, the 
faintest syllable, and like it, in no sens meddl with the thought 
that speech conveyed. He simpli stood listening, fix and motionless, 
like some uncouth statu in the leafi hollow of a garden, stony, 
unspeculating. 

‘oh, but you either refus to believe, bettie, or you won’t understand 
that it’ far wors than that.’ sheila seem to be upbraiding, or at 
least reason with, the last speaker. ‘ask Mr danton--h actual saw 
him.’ 

‘“saw him,”’ repeat a thick, still voice. ‘he stood there, in that 
veri doorway, mr lovat, and posit rail at me. He stood there 
and stream out all the name he could lay hi tongu to. I 
wasn’t--unfriendli to the poor beggar. when bethani let me into it 
I thought it wa simply--i did indeed, mr lawford--a monstrou 
exaggeration. flatly, I didn’t believ it; shall I say that? but when I 
stood face to face with him, I could have taken my oath that that wa no 
more poor old arthur lawford than--well, I won’t repeat what particular 
word occur to me. but there,’ the corpul shrug wa almost audible, 
‘we all know what old bethani is. A sterl old chap, mind you, so far 
as mere charact is concerned; the right man in the right place; but as 
gullibl and as soft-heart as a tom-tit. i’v said all thi before, I 
know, mr lawford, and been properli snub for my pains. but if I 
had been bethani i’d have sift the whole stori at the beginning, 
the moment he put hi foot into the house. look at that tichborn 
fellow--w for month and months, just pick up one day what he 
floor old hawkins--wasn’t it?--with the next. but of course,’ he ad 
gloomily, ‘now that’ all too late. he’ moan himself into a toler 
tight corner. i’d just like to see, though, a british juri compar 
thi claimant with hi photograph, ‘pon my word I would. where would he 
be then, do you think?’ 

‘but my dear Mr danton,’ went on the clear, languid voic lawford had 
heard break so light-heartedli into laughter, ‘you don’t mean to tell me 
that a woman doesn’t know her own husband when she see him--or, for the 
matter of that, when she doesn’t see him? If tom came home from a rambl 
as handsom as apollo to-morrow, i’d recognis him at the veri first 
blush--literally! he’d go nuzzl off to get hi slippers, or complain 
that the lamp had been smoking, or hunt the hous down for last week’ 
paper. oh, besides, tom’ tom--and there’ an end of it.’ 

‘that’ precis what I think, mr lovat; one is satur with one’ 
personality, as it were.’ 

‘you see, that’ just it! that’ just exactli everi woman’ husband all 
over; he is satur with hi personality. bravo, Mr craik!’ 

‘good lord,’ said danton softly. ‘I don’t deni it!’ 

‘but that,’ broke in sheila crisply--‘that’ just precis what I ask 
you all to come in for. it’ becaus I know now, apart altogeth from 
the mere evidence, that--that he is arthur. mind, I don’t say I ever 
realli doubted. I wa onli so utterli shocked, I suppose. I posit 
put poser to him; but hi memori wa perfect in spite of the shock 
which would have kill a--a more sensit nature.’ she had risen, it 
seemed, and wa move with all her splendid impress of silk and 
presenc across the gener line of vision. but the hall wa dark and 
still; her eye were dim with light. lawford could survey her there 
unmoved. 

‘are you there, ada?’ she call discreetly. 

‘yes, ma’am,’ answer the faint voic from below. 

‘you have not heard anything--no knock?’ 

‘no, ma’am, no knock.’ 

‘the door is open if you should call.’ 

‘yes, ma’am.’ 

‘the girl’ scare out of her wits,’ said sheila return to her 
audience. ‘i’v told you all that miser ferguson story--a piec of 
calm, callou presenc of mind I should never have dream my husband 
capabl of. and the curiou thing is--at least, it is no longer curiou 
in the light of the ghastli fact I am onli wait for Mr bethani 
to tell you--from the veri first she instinct detest the veri 
mention of hi name.’ 

‘I believe, you know,’ said Mr craik with some decision, ‘that servant 
must have the same wonder instinct as dog and children; they are 
natural, intuit judg of character.’ 

‘yes,’ said sheila gravely, ‘and it’ onli through that that I got to 
hear of the--th mysteri friend in the littl pony-carriage. ada’ 
magnific loyal--i will say that.’ 

‘I don’t want to suggest anything, mr lawford,’ began Mr craik rather 
hurriedly, ‘but wouldn’t it perhap be wiser not to wait for Mr bethany? 
It is not at all unusu for him to be kept a consider time in the 
vestri after service, and to-day is the feast of St michael’ and all 
angels, you know. mightn’t your husband be--er--com back, don’t you 
think?’ 

‘craik’ right, mr lawford; it’ not a bit of good waiting. bethani 
would stick there till midnight if ani old woman’ spiritu state could 
keep her go so long. here we all are, and at ani moment we may be 
interrupted. mind you, I promis nothing--onli that there shall be 
no scene. but here I am, and if he doe come knock and ring and 
lung out in the disgust manner he--well, all I ask is permiss 
to speak for you. ‘pon my soul, to think what you must have gone 
through! It isn’t the place for ladi just now--honestli it ain’t.’ 

‘besides, suppos the romant ladi of the pony-carriag ha friends? 
are you a pugilist, Mr craik?’ 

‘I hope I could give some littl account of myself, mr lovat; but you 
need have no anxieti about that.’ 

‘there, Mr danton. So as there is not the least caus for anxieti even 
if poor arthur should return to hi earthli home, may we share your 
dread stori at once, sheila; and then, perhaps, hear Mr bethany’ 
exposit of it when he doe arrive? We are ampli guarded.’ 

‘honestly, you know, you are a bit of a sceptic, mr lovat,’ plead 
danton playfully. ‘i’v seen him.’ 

‘and see is disbelieving, I suppose. now then, sheila.’ 

‘I don’t think there’ the least chanc of arthur return to-night,’ 
said sheila solemnly. ‘I am perfectli well awar it’ best to be as 
cheer as one can--and as resolved; but I think, bettie, when even 
you know the whole horribl secret, you won’t think Mr danton was--wa 
horrifi for nothing. the ghastly, the aw truth is that my 
husband--ther is no other word for it--is--possessed!’ 

‘“possessed,” sheila! what in the name of all the creep is that?’ 

‘well, I dare say Mr craik will explain it much better than I can. By 
a devil, dear.’ the voic wa perfectli pois and restrained, and Mr 
craik did not see fit for the moment to embellish the definition. 

lawford, with an almost wooden immobility, listen on. 

‘but the devil, or A devil? isn’t there a distinction?’ inquir mr 
lovat. 

‘it’ in the bible, bettie, over and over again. It wa quit a common 
thing in the middl ages; I think i’m right in say that, am I not, 
Mr craik?’ Mr craik must have solemnli nod or abundantli look 
hi unwil affirmation. ‘and what ha been,’ continu sheila 
temperately, ‘I suppos may be again.’ 

‘when the fellow began rave at me the other night,’ began danton 
huskily, as if out of an unfathom pit of reflection, ‘among other 
thing he said that I haven’t ani wish to rememb wa that I wa a 
sceptic. and bethani said ditto to it. I don’t mind be call a 
sceptic: why, I said myself mr lovat wa a sceptic just now! but when 
it come to “devils,” mr lawford--i may be convinc about the other, 
but “devils”! well, i’v been in the citi nearli twenty-f years, and 
it’ my impress human natur can rais all the devil WE shall 
ever need. and anoth thing,’ he added, as if inspired, and with an 
immens intellig blink, ‘i it just precis that word in the 
revis version--eh, craik?’ 

‘i’ll certainli look it up, danton. but I take it that mr lawford is 
not so much insist on the word, as on the--th manifestation. and 
i’m bound to confess that the societi for psychic research, which 
ha among it member quit emin and entir trustworthi men of 
science--i am bound to admit they have some veri curiou stori to 
tell. the old idea was, you know, that there are seventy-two princ 
devils, and as mani as seven million--er--commoners. It may veri well 
sound quaint to our ears, mr lovat; but there it is. but whether 
that ha ani bear on--on what you were saying, danton, I can’t say. 
perhap mr lawford will throw a littl more light on the subject 
when she tell us on what precis fact her--her distress theori is 
based.’ 

lawford had soundlessli stolen a pace or two nearer, and by stoop 
forward a littl he could, each in turn, scrutinis the littl intent 
compani sit over hi stori around the lamp at the further end of the 
table; squat like littl children with their twig and pins, fish 
for wonder on the brink of the unknown. 

‘yes,’ mr lovat wa saying, ‘I quit agree, Mr craik. seventy-two 
princes, and no princesses. oh, these masculin prejudices! but do throw 
a littl more modern light on the subject, sheila.’ 

‘I mean this,’ said sheila firmly. ‘when I went in for the last time to 
say good-bye--and of cours it wa at hi own wish that I did leav him; 
and precis whi he wish it is now unhappili onli too apparent--i had 
brought him some money from the bank--fifti pounds, I think; yes, fifti 
pounds. and quit by the merest chanc I glanc down, in passing, at a 
book he had appar been reading, a book which he seem veri anxiou 
to conceal with hi hand. arthur is not a great reader, though I believ 
he studi a littl befor we were married, and--well, I detest anyth 
like subterfuge, and I said it out without thinking, “why, you’r 
read french, arthur!” He turn deathli white but made no answer.’ 

‘and can’t you even confid to us the title, sheila?’ sigh mr lovat 
reproachfully. 

‘wait a minute,’ said sheila; ‘you shall make as much fun of the thing 
as you like, bettie, when i’v finished. I don’t know why, but that 
peculiar, stealthi look haunt me. “whi french?” I kept ask myself. 
“whi french?” arthur hasn’t open a french book for years. He doesn’t 
even approv of the entente. hi argument wa that we ought to be 
friend with the german becaus they are more hostile. never mind. when 
ada came back the next even and said he wa out, I came the follow 
morning--bi myself--and knocked. No one answered, and I let myself in. 
hi bed had not been slept in. there were candl and match all over 
the house--on even burnt nearli to the stick on the floor in the corner 
of the drawing-room. I suppos it wa foolish, but I wa alone, and just 
that, somehow, horrifi me. It seem to point to such a peculiar state 
of mind. I hesitated; what wa the use of look further? yet someth 
seem to say to me--and it wa sure providential--“go downstairs!” 
and there in the breakfast-room the first thing I saw on the tabl 
wa thi book--a dingy, ragged, bleared, patched-up, oh, a horrible, 
a loathsom littl book (and I have read bit too here and there); 
and besid it wa my own littl school dictionary, my own child’ ‘she 
look up sharply. ‘what wa that? did anybodi call?’ 

‘nobodi I heard,’ said danton, stare stonili round. 

‘it may have been the pass of the wind,’ suggest Mr craik, after a 
pause. 

‘peep between the blinds, Mr craik; it may be poor Mr bethani 
confront pneumonia in the porch.’ 

‘there’ no one there, mr lovat,’ said the curate, return softli 
from hi errand. ‘pleas continu your--your narrative, mr lawford.’ 

‘we are pant for the “devil,” my dear.’ 

‘well, I sat down and, veri much against my inclination, turn over the 
pages. It wa full of the most revolt confess and trials, so 
far as I could see. In fact, I think the book wa mere an amateur 
collect of--of horrors. and the faces, the portraits! well, then, can 
you imagin my feel when toward the end of the book about thirti 
page from the end, I came upon this--gloat up at me from the tabl 
in my hous befor my veri eyes?’ 

she cast a rapid glanc over her shoulder, and gather up her silk 
skirt, drew out, from the pocket beneath, the few crumpl pages, and 
pass them without a word to danton. lawford kept him plainli in view, 
as, lower hi great face, he slowli stooped, and hold the loos 
leav with both fat hand between hi knees, stare into the portrait. 
then he trucul lift hi crop head. 

‘what did I say?’ he said. ‘what did I say? what did I tell old bethani 
in thi veri room? what d’ye think of that, mr lovat, for a portrait of 
arthur lawford? what d’ye make of that, craik--eh? devil--eh?’ 

mr lovat glanc with arch eyebrows, and with her finger-tip hand 
the sheet on to her neighbour, who gaze with a settl and mourn 
frown and return them to sheila. 

she took the pages, fold them and replac them care in her 
pocket. she swept her hand over her skirts, and turn to danton. 

‘you agree,’ she inquir softly, ‘it’ like?’ 

‘like! it’ the livin’ livid image. the livin’ image,’ he repeated, 
stretch out hi arm, ‘a he stood there that veri night.’ 

‘what will you say, then,’ said sheila, quietly, ‘what will you say if I 
tell you that that man, nichola de sabathier, ha been in hi grave for 
over a hundr years?’ 

danton’ littl eye seemed, if anything, to draw back even further 
into hi head. ‘i’d say, mr lawford, if you’ll excus the word, that 
it might be a damn horribl coincidence--i’d go farther, an almost 
incred coincidence. but if you want the sober truth, i’d say it wa 
noth more than a crafty, clever, abomin piec of trickery. that’ 
what i’d say. oh, you don’t know, mr lovat. when a scamp’ a scamp, 
he’ll stop at nothing. I could tell you some tales.’ 

‘ah, but that’ not all,’ said sheila, eye them steadfastli one by 
one. ‘we all of us know that my husband’ stori wa that he had gone 
down to widderstone--into the churchyard, for hi convalesc ramble; 
that story’ true. We all know that he said he had had a fit, a heart 
attack, and that a kind of--of stupor had come over him. I believ on my 
honour that’ true too. but no one know but he himself and Mr bethani 
and I, that it wa a wretch broken grave, quit at the bottom of the 
hill, that he chose for hi rest place, nor--and I can’t get the 
scene out of my head--nor that the name on that one solitari tombston 
down there was--was...this!’ 

danton roll hi eyes. ‘I don’t begin to follow,’ he said stubbornly. 

‘you don’t mean,’ said Mr craik, who had not remov hi gaze from 
sheila’ face, ‘I am not to take it that you mean, mr lawford, the--th 
other?’ 

‘yes,’ said sheila, ‘his’--sh pat her skirts--‘sabathier’s.’ 

‘you mean,’ said mr lovat crisply, ‘that the man in the grave is the 
man in the book, and that the man in the book is--i poor arthur’ 
chang face?’ 

sheila nodded. 

danton rose cumbrous from hi chair, look beadili down on hi three 
friends. 

‘oh, but you know, it isn’t--it isn’t right,’ he began. ‘lord! I can see 
him now. glassy--yes, that’ the veri word I said--glassy. It won’t do, 
mr lawford; on my solemn honour, it won’t do. I don’t deni it, call it 
what you like; yes, devils, if you like. but what I say as a practic 
man is that it’ just rank--that’ what it is! bethany’ had too much 
rope. the time’ gone by for sentiment and all that foolery. mercy’ all 
veri well, but after all it’ justic that clinch the bargain. there’ 
onli one way: we must catch him; we must lay the poor wretch by the 
heel befor it’ too late. No publicity, god bless me, no. we’d have 
all the rag in london on us. they’d pillori us nine day on end. we’d 
never live it down. no, we must just hush it up--a home or something; 
an asylum. for my part,’ he turn like a huge toad, hi chin low in hi 
collar--‘and i’d say the same if it wa my own brother, and, after all, 
he is your husband, mr lawford--i’d sooner he wa in hi grave. It 
take two to play at that game, that’ what I say. To lay himself open! 
I can’t stand it--honestly, I can’t stand it. and yet,’ he jerk hi 
chin over the peak of hi collar toward the ladies, ‘and yet you say 
he’ be fetched; come creep home, and is fetch at dark by a--a 
ladi in a pony-carriage. god bless me! it’ rank. what,’ he broke out 
violent again, ‘what wa he do there in a cemeteri after dark? Do 
you think that beastli frenchman would have play such a trick on craik 
here? would he have tri hi littl game on me? deviltri be it, if 
you prefer the word, and all defer to you, mr lawford. but I know 
this--a coupl of hundr year ago they would have burnt a man at the 
stake for less than a tenth of this. ask craik here. I don’t know how, 
and I don’t know when: hi mother, i’v alway heard say, wa a littl 
eccentric; but the truth is he’ manag by some unholi legerdemain to 
get the thing at hi finger’ ends; that’ what it is. think of that 
unspeak book. left open on the table! look at hi ferguson game. 
it’ our solemn duti to keep him for good and all out of mischief. It 
reflect all round. there’ no get out of it; we’r all in it. and 
tar sticks. and then there’ poor littl alic to consider, and--and 
you yourself, mrs. lawford: I wouldn’t give the fellow--friend though 
he was, in a way--it isn’t safe to give him five minutes’ freedom. 
we’v simpli got to save you from yourself, mr lawford; that’ what it 
is--and from old-fashion sentiment. and I onli wish bethani wa here 
now to disput it!’ 

He stir himself down, as it were, into hi clothes, and stood in the 
middl of the hearthrug, gentli oscillating, with hi hand behind 
hi back. but at some faint rumour out of the silent hous hi postur 
suddenli stiffened, and he lift a little, with heavy, steadi lids, hi 
head. 

‘what is the matter, danton?’ said Mr craik in a small voice; ‘whi are 
you listening?’ 

‘I wasn’t listening,’ said danton stoutly, ‘I wa thinking.’ 

At the same moment, at the creak of a footstep on the kitchen stairs, 
lawford also had drawn soundlessli back into the dark of the empti 
drawing-room. 

‘while Mr danton is “thinking,” sheila,’ mr lovat wa softli 
interposing, ‘do pleas listen a moment to me. Do you mean realli that 
that frenchman--th one you’v pocketed--i the poor creatur in the 
grave?’ 

‘yes, mr lawford,’ said Mr craik, put out hi face a little, ‘are 
we to take it that you mean that?’ 

‘it’ the same date, dear, the same name even to the spelling; what 
possibl els can I think?’ 

‘and that the poor creatur in the grave actual climb up out of the 
dark and--well, what?’ 

‘I know no more than you do now, bettie. but the two faces--y must 
rememb you haven’t seen my husband since.’ you must rememb you 
haven’t heard the peculiar--th most peculiar thing he--arthur 
himself--ha said to me. thing such as a wife... and not in jest, 
bettie; I assur you....’ 

‘and Mr bethany?’ interpol Mr craik modestly, feel hi way. 

‘pah, bethany, craik! he’d back old nick himself if he came with a good 
tale. we’v got to act; we’v got to settl hi hash befor he doe ani 
mischief.’ 

‘well,’ began mr lovat, smile a littl remors beneath the arch 
of her rais eyebrows, ‘I sincer hope you’ll all forgiv me; but I 
realli am, heart and soul, with old nick, as Mr danton seem on intim 
term enough to call him. dead, he is realli immens alluring; and 
alive, I think, awfully--just aw piti and--and pathetic. but if 
I know anyth of arthur he won’t be beaten by a frenchman. As for 
just the portrait, I think, do you know, I almost prefer dark men’--sh 
glanc up at the face immedi in front of the clock--‘at least,’ 
she ad softly, ‘when they are not look veri vindictive. I suppos 
peopl are fairli often possessed, Mr craik? how mani “deadli sins” are 
there?’ 

‘a a matter of fact, mr lovat, there are seven. but I think in thi 
case mr lawford intend to suggest not so much that--that her husband 
is in that condition; habitu sin, you know--grav enough, of course, 
I own--but that he is actual be compelled, even to the extent of a 
more or less complet chang of physiognomy, to follow the bid of 
some atroci spiritu influence. It is no breach of confid to 
say that I have myself been present at a death-b where the struggl 
against what I may call the end wa perfectli aw to witness. I 
don’t profess to follow all the ramif of the affair, but though 
possibl Mr danton may seem a littl harsh, such harshness, if I may 
ventur to intercede, is not necessarili “vindictive.” and--and person 
secur is a consideration.’ 

‘if you onli knew the aw fear, the aw uncertainti I have been 
in, bettie! oh, it is worse, infinit worse, than you can possibl 
imagine. I have myself heard the voic speak out of him--a high, hard, 
nasal voice. i’v seen what Mr danton call the “glassiness” come into 
hi face, and an express so wild and so appallingli depraved, as 
it were, that I have had to hurri downstair to hide myself from the 
thought. i’m will to sacrific everyth for my own husband and for 
alice; but can it be expect of me to go on harbouring....’ lawford 
listen on in vain for a moment; poor sheila, it seemed, had all but 
broken down. 

‘look here, mr lawford,’ began danton huskily, ‘you realli mustn’t give 
way; you realli mustn’t. it’ awful, unspeak awful, I admit. but 
here we are; friends, in the midst of friends. and there’ absolut 
nothing--what’ that? eh? who is it?... oh, the maid!’ 

ada stood in the doorway look in. ‘all i’v come to ask, ma’am,’ she 
said in a low voice, ‘is, am I to stay downstair ani longer? and are 
you awar there’ somebodi in the house?’ 

‘what’ that? what’ that you’r saying?’ broke out the huski voic 
again. ‘control yourself! speak gently! what’ that?’ 

‘beg your pardon, sir, i’m perfectli under control. and all I say is 
that I can’t stay ani longer alon downstair there. there’ somebodi in 
the house.’ 

A concentr hush seem to have fallen on the littl assembly. 

‘“somebody”--but who?’ said sheila out of the silence. ‘you come up 
here, ada, with these idl fancies. who’ in the house? there ha been 
no knock--no footstep.’ 

‘no knock, no footstep, ma’am, that i’v heard. it’ Dr ferguson, ma’am. 
He wa here that first night; and he’ been here ever since. He wa here 
when I came on tuesday; and he wa here last night. and he’ here now. 
I can’t be deceiv by my own feelings. it’ not right, it’ not 
out-spoken to keep me in the dark like this. and if you have no 
objection, I would like to go home.’ 

lawford in hi utter weari had nearli close the door and now sat 
bent up on a chair, wonder vagu when thi poor play wa come to 
an end, long with an intens almost beyond endur for the keen 
night air, the open sky. but still hi ear drank in everi tiniest sound 
or stir. He heard danton’ lower voic mutter hi arguments. He 
heard ada quietli snif in the dark of the hall. and thi wa hi 
world! thi wa hi life’ panorama, creak on at everi jolt. thi wa 
the ‘must’ grisel had sent him back to--thes poor fool pack 
togeth in a panic at an old stale tale! well, they would all come out 
presently, and cluster; and the crested, cackl fellow would lead them 
safe away out of the haunt farmyard. 

He start out of hi reveri at danton’ voic close at hand. 

‘look here, my good girl, we haven’t the least intent of keep you 
in the dark. If you want to leav your mistress like thi in the midst 
of her anxieti she say you can go and welcome. but it’ not a bit of 
good in the world come up with these cock-and-bul stories. the truth 
is your master’ mad, that’ the sober truth of it--hopelessli insane, 
you understand; and we’v got to find him. but nothing’ to be said, 
d’ye see? it’ got to be done without fuss or scandal. but if there’ 
ani wit wanted, or anyth of that kind, why, here you are; and,’ 
he drop hi voic to an almost inaud hoot, ‘and well worth your 
while! you did see him, eh? step into the trap, and all that?’ 

ada stood silent a moment. ‘I don’t know, sir,’ she began quietly, ‘bi 
what right you speak to me about what you call my cock-and-bul stories. 
If the master is mad, all I can say to anybodi is i’m veri sorri to hear 
it. I came to my mistress, sir, if you please; and I prefer to take my 
order from one who ha a right to give them. did I understand you to 
say, ma’am, that you wouldn’t want me ani more thi evening?’ 

sheila had swept solemnli to the door. ‘mr danton meant all that he said 
quit kindly, ada. I can perfectli understand your feelings--perfectly. 
and i’m veri much oblig to you for all your kind to me in veri 
tri circumstances. We are all agreed--w are forc to the terribl 
conclus which--which Mr danton ha just--expressed. and I know I 
can reli on your discretion. don’t stay on a moment if you realli are 
afraid. but when you say “some one” ada, do you mean--som one like you 
or me; or do you mean--th other?’ 

‘i’v been sit in the kitchen, ma’am, unabl to move. i’m watch 
everywhere. the other even I went into the drawing-room--i wa alon 
in the house--and... I can’t describ it. It wasn’t dark; and yet it wa 
all still and black, like the ruin after a fire. I don’t mean I saw it, 
onli that it wa like a scene. and then the watching--i am quit awar 
to some it may sound all fancy. but i’m not superstitious, never was. 
I onli mean--that I can’t sit alon here. I daren’t. else, i’m quit 
myself. So if so be you don’t want me ani more; if I can’t be of ani 
further use to you or to--to mr. lawford, i’d prefer to go home.’ 

‘veri well, ada; thank you. you can go out thi way.’ 

the door wa unchain and unbolted, and ‘good-night’ said. and sheila 
swept back in sombr pomp to her absorb friends. 

‘she’ quit a good creatur at heart,’ she explain frankly, as if to 
disclaim ani finesse, ‘and almost quixot loyal. but what realli 
did she mean, do you think? she is so obstinate. that madden “some 
one”! how they do repeat themselves. It can’t be my husband; not Dr 
ferguson, I mean. you don’t suppose--oh surely, not “some one” else!’ 
again the dark silenc of the hous seem to drift in on the littl 
company. 

Mr craik clear hi throat. ‘I fail to catch quit all that the maid 
said,’ he murmur apologetically; ‘but I certainli did gather it wa to 
some kind of--of eman she wa referring. and the “ruin,” you know. 
i’m not a mystic; and yet do you know, that somehow seem to me almost 
offens suggest of--of demon influence. you don’t suppose, 
mr lawford--and of cours I wouldn’t for a moment ventur on such a 
conjectur unsupported-but even if thi restless spirit (let us call 
it) did succeed in make a footing, it might possibl be rather in 
the natur of a lodg than a perman residence. moreov we are, I 
think, bound to rememb that probabl in all sphere of exist like 
attract like; even the gadaren episod seem to suggest a possibl 
multiplication!’ he peer largely. ‘you don’t suppose, mr lawford...?’ 

‘I think Mr craik doesn’t quit relish have to break the news, sheila 
dear,’ explain mr lovat soothingly, ‘that perhap sabathier’ out. 
which realli is quit a heavenli suggestion, for in that case your 
husband would be in, wouldn’t he? just our old stolid arthur again, you 
know. and next Mr craik is suggesting, and it certainli doe seem rather 
fascinating, that poor ada’ got mix up with the frenchman’ friends, 
or perhaps, even, with one of the seventy-two princ royal. I know 
women can’t, or mustn’t reason, Mr danton, but you do, I hope, just 
catch the drift?’ 

danton started. ‘I wasn’t realli listen to the girl,’ he explain 
nonchalantly, shrug hi black shoulder and purs up hi eyes. 
‘personally, mr lovat, i’d pack the baggag off to-night, box and all. 
but it’ not my business.’ 

‘you mustn’t be depressed--must he, Mr craik? after all, my dear man, 
the business, as you call it, is not exactli entailed. but really, 
sheila, I think it must be get veri late. Mr bethani won’t come now. 
and the dear old thing ought certainli to have hi say befor we go ani 
further; oughtn’t he, Mr danton? So what’ the use of worrit poor 
ada’ ghost ani longer. and as for poor arthur--i haven’t the faintest 
desir in the world to hear the littl cart drive up, simpli in case it 
should be to leav your unfortun husband behind it, sheila. what 
it must be to be alon all night in thi hous with a dead and buri 
frenchman’ face--well, I shudder, dear!’ 

‘and yet, mr lovat,’ said Mr craik, with some littl show of return 
bravado, ‘a we make our bed, you know.’ 

‘but in thi case, you see,’ she repli reflectively, ‘if all account 
are true, Mr craik, it’ manifestli the wick frenchman who ha made 
the bed, and sheila who refu---- but look; Mr danton is fret to get 
home.’ 

‘if you’ll all go to the door,’ said danton, seiz a fleet 
opportun to rais hi eyebrow more express even than if he had 
again shrug hi shoulder at sheila, ‘i’ll put out the light.’ 

the night air flow into the dark hous as danton hastili grope hi 
way out of the dining-room. 

‘there’ onli one thing,’ said sheila slowly. ‘when I last saw my 
husband, you know, he was, I think, the least bit better. He wa alway 
stubbornli convinc it would all come right in time. that’ why, 
I think, he’ been spend his--hi even away from home. but 
suppos it did?’ 

‘for my part,’ said mr lovat, breath the faint wind that wa rise 
out of the west, ‘i’d sigh; i’d rub my eyes; i’d thank god for such an 
excit dream; and i’d turn comfort over and go to sleep again. i’m 
all for arthur--absolutely--back against the wall.’ 

‘for my part,’ said danton, loom in the dusk, ‘friend or no friend, 
i’d cut the--i’d cut him dead. but don’t fret, mr lawford, devil or no 
devil, he’ gone for good.’ 

‘and for my part--’ began Mr craik; but the door at that moment slammed. 

voices, however, broke out almost immedi in the porch. and after 
a hurri consultation, lawford in hi stagnant retreat heard the door 
softli reopen, and the strike of a match. and Mr craik, follow 
close by danton’ great body, stole circumspectli across hi dim 
chink, and the first adventur went stumbl down the kitchen 
staircase. 

‘I suppose,’ mutter lawford, turn hi head in the darkness, ‘they 
have come back to put out the kitchen gas.’ 

danton began a busi tuneless whistl between hi teeth. 

‘coming, craik?’ he call thickly, after a long pause. 

appar no answer had been return to hi inquiry: he wait a 
littl longer, with leg apart, and eyebal envelop in brood 
darkness. ‘i’ll just go and tell the ladi you’r coming,’ he suddenli 
bawl down the hollow. ‘do you hear, craik? they’r alone, you know.’ 
and with that he resolut wheel and rapidli made hi way down 
the step into the garden. some few moment afterward Mr craik shook 
himself free of the basement, hasten at a spirit trot to rejoin hi 
companions, and in hi absenc of mind omit to shut the front door. 



chapter twenty-thre 

lawford sat on in the darkness, and now one sentenc and now anoth of 
their talk would repeat itself in hi memory, in much the same way as 
one listlessli turn over an antiqu diary, to read here and there a 
flatten and almost meaningless sentiment. sometim a footstep pass 
echo along the path under the trees, then hi thought would leav 
him, and he would listen and listen till it had die quit out. It wa 
all so veri far away. and they too--thes talkers--so veri far away; as 
remot and yet as clear as the charact in a play when they have made 
their final bow, and have left the curtain stage, and one is stand 
uncompanion and nearli the last of the spectators, and the light that 
have summon back realiti again are be extinguished. It wa onli by 
pain effort of mind that he kept recal himself to himself--whi he 
wa here; what it all meant; that thi wa inde actuality. 

yet, after all, thi by now wa hi customari loneliness: there wa 
littl els he desir for the present than the hospit of the dark. 
He glanc around him in the clear, black, stirless air. here and there, 
it seemed, a hump or spindl form held against all comer it passiv 
place. here and there a tini faint of light played. night after 
night these chair and tabl kept their blank vigil. why, he thought, 
pleas as an overtir child with the fancy, in a sens they were 
alway alone, shut up in a kind of senselessness--just like us all. but 
what--what, he had suddenli risen from hi chair to ask himself--what 
on earth are they alon with? No precis answer had been forthcom to 
that question. but as in turn in the doorway, he look out into 
the night, flash here and there in dark space of the sky abov 
the wither appl leaves--th long dark wall and quiet untrodden 
road--with the tumultu beat of the stars--on thing at least he 
wa consciou of have learn in these last few days: he knew what 
kind of a place he wa alon in. 

It seem to weav a spell over him, to call up a nostalgia he had lost 
all remembr of sinc childhood. and that queer homesickness, at 
ani rate, wa all sabathier’ doing, he thought, smile in hi rather 
careworn fashion. sabathier! It wa thi mystery, bereft now of all 
fear, and thi beauti together, that made life the endless, chang and 
yet changeless, thing it was. and yet mysteri and loveli alik were 
onli realli appreci with one’ legs, as it were, dangl down over 
into the grave. 

just with one’ lantern lit, on the edg of the whisper unknown, and 
a reiter go back out of the solitud into the light and warmth, 
to the voic and glanc of eyes, to say good-bye:--that after all wa 
thi life on earth for those who watch as well as acted. what if one’ 
earthli home were empty?--stil the restless fret travel must 
tarry; ‘for the horribl worst of it is, my friend,’ he said, as if to 
some silent companion listen behind him, ‘the worst of it is, your 
way wa just simply, sole suicide.’ what wa it herbert had call 
it? yes, a cul-de-sac--black, lofty, immens still and old and 
picturesque, but none the less mere a contempt cul-de-sac; no 
abid place, scarc even suffic with it flagston for a groan 
from the fugit and delud refugee. there wa no peac for the 
wicked. the question of cours then came in--wa there ani peac 
anywhere, for anybody? 

He smile at a sudden odd remembr of a quiet, sardon old aunt 
whom he use to stay with as a child. ‘children should be seen and not 
heard,’ she would say, peer at him over hi favourit pudding. 

hi eye rest vacantli on the darkl street. He fell again into 
reverie, gigant brood over by shape onli imagin dimli 
conceiv of: the remot alley of hi mind astir with a shadowi and 
ceaseless traffic which it wasn’t at least thi life’ busi to 
hearken after, or regard. and as he stood there in a mysteri 
throng peac solitud such as he had never known before, faintli 
out of the silenc broke the sound of approach hoofs. hi heart 
seem to gather itself close; a momentari blind veil hi eyes, so 
wildli had hi blood surg up into cheek and brain. He remained, caught 
up, with head slightli inclined, listening, as, with an intermin 
tardiness, measureless anguish hope die down into noth in hi 
mind. 

cold and heavy, hi heart began to beat again, as if to catch up those 
laggard moments. He turn with an infinit revuls of feel to look 
out on the lamp of the old fli that had drawn up at hi gate. 

He watch incuri a littl old ladi rather arduous alight, pause, 
and look up at hi darken windows, and after a momentari hesitation, 
and a word over her shoulder to the cabman, stoop and fumbl at the iron 
latch. He watch her with a kind of wonder aversion, still scarc 
ting with curiosity. she had succeed in lift the latch and in 
push her way through, and wa even now steadili advanc toward 
him along the tile path. and a minut after he recognis with the 
strangest reaction the quiet old figur that had share a sunset with 
him age and age ago--hi mother’ old schoolfellow, miss sinnet. 

He wa alreadi ransack the still faintly-perfum dining-room for 
matches, and had just succeed in relight the still-warm lamp, when 
he heard her quiet step in the porch, even felt her peer in, in the 
gloom, with all her years’ trickl customari behind her, a littl 
dubiou of knock on a wide-open door. 

but the lamp lit lawford went out again and welcom hi visitor. ‘I am 
alone,’ he wa explain gravely, ‘mi wife’ away and the whole hous 
topsy-turvy. how very, veri kind of you!’ 

the old ladi wa breath a littl heavili after her ascent of the 
steep steps, and seem not to have notic hi outstretch hand. none 
the less she follow him in, and when she wa well advanc into the 
light room, she sigh deeply, rais her veil over the front of her 
bonnet, and leisur took out her spectacles. 

‘I suppose,’ she wa explain in a littl quiet voice, ‘you are Mr 
arthur lawford, but as I did not catch sight of a light in ani of the 
window I began to fear that the cabman might have set me down at the 
wrong house.’ 

she rais her head, and first through, and then over her spectacl she 
deliber and steadfastli regard him. 

‘yes,’ she said to herself, and turned, not as it seem entir with 
satisfaction, to look for a chair. He wheel the most comfort up to 
the table. 

‘I have been visit my old friend miss tucker--rev W. tucker’ 
daughter--she, I knew, could give me your address; and sure enough she 
did. your road, d’ye see, wa on my way home. and I determined, in spite 
of the hour, just to inquire. you must understand, Mr lawford, there 
wa someth that I rather particularli want to say to you. but 
there!--you’r look sadly, sadli ill; and,’ she glanc round a 
littl inquisitively, ‘I think my stori had better wait for a more 
conveni occasion.’ 

‘not at all, miss sinnet; pleas not,’ lawford assur her, ‘really. I 
have been ill, but i’m now practic quit myself again. My wife and 
daughter have gone away for a few days; and I follow to-morrow, so if 
you’ll forgiv such a veri poor welcome, it may be my--mi onli chance. 
Do pleas let me hear.’ 

the old ladi leant back in her chair, place her hand on it arm and 
softli panted, while out of the rather broad seren of her face she 
sat blink up at her companion as if after a long talk, instead of 
at the begin of one. ‘no,’ she repeat reflectively, ‘I don’t like 
your look at all; yet here we are, enjoy beauti autumn weather, 
Mr lawford, whi not make use of it?’ 

‘oh yes,’ said lawford, ‘I do. I have been make tremend use of it.’ 

her eyelid flicker at hi candid glance. ‘and doe your busi 
permit of much walking?’ 

‘well, i’v been maling these last few day idl at home; but I 
am usual more or less my own man, miss sinnet. I walk a little.’ 

‘h’m, but not much in my direction, Mr lawford?’ she quizz him. 

‘all horribl indolence, miss sinnet. but I often--often think of you; 
and especi just lately.’ 

‘well, now,’ she wriggl round her head to get a better view of him 
rather stiffli seat on hi chair, ‘that’ veri peculiar; becaus I too 
have been think late a great deal of you. and yet--i fanci I 
shall succeed in mystifi you presently--not precis of you, but of 
somebodi else!’ 

‘you do mystifi me--“somebodi else”!’ he repli gallantly. ‘and that is 
the story, I suppose?’ 

‘that’ the story,’ repeat miss sinnet with some littl triumph. ‘now, 
let me see; it wa on saturday last--yes, saturday evening; a wonder 
sunset; bewley heath.’ 

‘oh yes; my daughter’ favourit walk.’ 

‘and your daughter’ age now?’ 

‘she’ nearli sixteen; alice, you know.’ 

‘ah, yes, alice; to be sure. It is a beauti walk, and if fine, I 
gener take mine there too. it’ near; there’ shade; it’ veri 
littl frequented; and I can wander and muse undisturbed. and that 
I think is pretti well all that an old woman like me is fit for, Mr 
lawford. “nearli sixteen!” Is it possible? dear, dear me? but let me get 
on. On my way home from the heath, you may be aware, befor one reach 
the road again, there’ a somewhat steep ascent. I haven’t the strength 
I had, and whether i’m fatigu or not, I have alway made it a rule to 
rest awhil on a most conveni littl seat at the summit, admir the 
view--what I can see of it--and then make my way quietly, quietli home. 
On saturday, however, and it most rare occurs--once, I remember, when 
a veri civil nursemaid wa sit with two charmingli behav littl 
children in the sunshine, and I heard they were my old friend major 
loder’ son’ children--on saturday, as I wa saying, my own particular 
littl haunt wa alreadi occupied.’ she glanc back at him from out of 
her thoughts, as it were. ‘bi a gentleman. I say, gentleman; though I 
must confess that hi conduct--perhaps, too, a littl someth even in 
hi appearance, somewhat beli the term. anyhow, gentleman let us call 
him.’ 

lawford, all attention, nodded, and encouragingli smiled. 

‘i’m not one of those tiresome, suspici people, Mr lawford, who 
distrust strangers. I have never been molested, and I have enjoy mani 
and mani a most interesting, and sometim instructive, talk with an 
individu whom i’v never seen in my life before, and thi side of the 
grave perhaps, am never like to see again.’ she lift her head with 
purs lips, and grave yet still flickeringli regard him onc more. 
‘well, I made some trifl remark--th weather, the view, what-not,’ 
she explain with a littl jerk of her shoulder--‘and to my extrem 
astonish he turn and address me by name--miss sinnet. 
unmistakably--sinnet. now, perhaps, and veri rightly, you won’t 
consid that a veri peculiar thing to do? but you will recollect, Mr 
lawford, that I had been sit there a consider time. surely, now, 
if you had recognis my face you would have address me at once?’ 

‘wa he, do you think, miss sinnet, a littl uncertain, perhaps?’ 

‘never mind, never mind; let me get on with my stori first. the next 
thing my gentleman doe is more mysteri still. hi whole manner wa 
a littl peculiar, perhaps--a certain restlessness, what, in fact, one 
might be almost tempt to call a certain furtiv of behaviour. 
never mind. what he doe next is to ask me a riddle! perhap you won’t 
think that wa peculiar either?’ 

‘what wa the riddle?’ smile lawford. 

‘why, to be sure, to guess hi name! simpli guided, so I surmised, 
by some veri faint resembl in hi face to hi mother, who was, 
he assur me, an old schoolfellow of mine at brighton. I thought 
and thought. I confess the adventur wa begin to be a littl 
perplexing. but of course, very, veri few of my old schoolfellow remain 
distinctli in my memori now; and I fear that grow more treacher the 
longer I live. their face as girl are clear enough. but later in life 
most of them drift out of sight--many, alas, are dead; and, well, at 
last I narrow my man down to one. and who now, do you suppos that 
was?’ 

lawford sustain an express of abysm mystification. ‘do tell 
me--who?’ 

‘your own poor dear mother, Mr lawford.’ 

‘he said so?’ 

‘no, no,’ said the old lady, with some vexation, close her eyes. ‘I 
said so. He ask me to guess. and I guess mari lawford; now do you 
see?’ 

`yes, yes. but wa he like her, miss sinnet? that wa realli very, veri 
extraordinary. did you see ani like in hi face?’ 

miss sinnet veri deliber took her spectacl out of their case 
again. ‘now, see here, sir; thi is be practical, isn’t it? i’m just 
go to take a leisur glanc at yours. but you mustn’t let me forget 
the time. you must look after the time for me.’ 

‘it’ about a quarter to ten,’ said lawford, have glanc first at the 
stop clock on the chimney-piec and then at hi watch. He then sat 
quit still and endeavour to sit at ease, while the old ladi lift 
her bonnet head and ever so grave and benignli survey him. 

‘h’m,’ she said at last. ‘there’ no mistak you. it’ mary’ chin, 
and mary’ brow--with just a littl something, perhaps, of her dreami 
eye. but you haven’t all her looks, Mr lawford, by ani manner of means. 
she wa a veri beauti girl, and so vivacious, so fanciful--it was, I 
suppos the foreign strain show itself. even marriag did not quit 
succeed in spoil her.’ 

‘the foreign strain?’ lawford glanc with a kind of fleet fixiti at 
the quiet old figure. ‘the foreign strain?’ 

your mother’ maiden name, my dear Mr lawford, sure memori doe not 
deceiv me in that, wa van der gucht. that, I believe, is a foreign 
name.’ 

‘ah, yes,’ said lawford, hi rise thought sink quietli to rest 
again. ‘van der gucht, of course. i--how stupid of me!’ 

‘a a matter of fact, your mother wa veri proud of her dutch blood. but 
there,’ she flung out littl fin-lik sleeves, ‘if you don’t let me keep 
to my stori I shall go back as uneasi as I came. and you didn’t,’ she 
ad even more fretfully, ‘you didn’t tell me the time.’ 

lawford stare at hi watch again for some few moment without replying. 
‘it’ a few minut to ten,’ he said at last. 

‘dear me! and i’m keep the cabman! I mast hurri on. well, now, I put 
it to you; you shall be my father confessor--though I detest the idea in 
real life--wa I wrong? wa I justifi in profess to the poor fellow 
that I detect a like when there wa extrem littl like 
there?’ 

‘what! none at all!’ cri lawford; ‘not the faintest trace?’ 

‘mi dear good Mr lawford,’ she expostulated, pat her lap, ‘there’ 
veri littl more than a trace of my dear beauti mari in you, her 
own son. how could there be--how could you expect it in him, a complet 
stranger? no, it wa noth but my own foolish kindliness. It might 
have been mary’ son for all that I could recollect. I haven’t for 
years, pleas remember, had the pleasur of receiv a visit from 
you. I am firmli of opinionthat I wa justified. My motiv wa entir 
benevolent. and then--to my posit amazement--well, I won’t say hard 
thing of the absent; but he suddenli turn round on me with a “thank 
you, miss bennett.” bennett, hark ye! perhap you won’t agre that I had 
ani justif in be vex and--and affront at that.’ 

‘I think, miss sinnet,’ said lawford solemnly, ‘that you were perfectli 
justified. oh, perfectly. I wonder even you had the patienc to give 
the real arthur lawford a chanc to ask your forgiv for--or the 
stranger.’ 

‘well, candidly,’ said miss sinnett severely. ‘I wa veri much 
scandalised; and I shouldn’t be here now tell you my stori if it 
hadn’t been for your mother.’ 

‘mi mother!’ 

the old ladi rather grimli enjoy hi confusion. ‘yes, Mr lawford, 
your mother. I don’t know why--someth in hi manner, someth in 
hi face--so dejected, so unhappy, so--if it is not uncharitablness to 
say it--so wild: it ha haunt me: I haven’t been abl to put the 
matter out of my mind. I have lain awak in my bed think of him. whi 
did he speak to me, I keep ask myself. whi did he play me so veri 
aimless a trick? how had he learn my name? whi wa he sit there so 
solitari and so dejected? and wors even than that, what ha becom of 
him? A littl more patience, a littl more charity, perhaps--what might 
I not have done for him? the whole thing ha harass and distress me 
more than I can say. would you believ it, I have actual twice, and on 
one occasion, three time in a day made my way to the seat--hop to 
see him there. and I am not so young as I was. and then, as I say, to 
crown all, I had a most remark dream about your mother. but that’ 
my own affair. elderli peopl like me are used--well, perhap I won’t 
say used--we’r not surpris or disturb by visit from those who have 
gone before. We live, in a sense, among the tombs; though I would not 
have you fanci it’ in ani way a morbid or unhappi life to lead. We 
don’t talk about it--certainli not to young people. let them enjoy their 
eden while they can; though there’ plenti of apples, I fear, on the 
tree yet, Mr lawford.’ 

she leant forward and whisper it with a big, simpl smile:--‘w don’t 
even discuss it much among ourselves. but as one get nearer and nearer 
to the wicket-g there’ other compani around one than you’ll find 
in--in the directory. and that is whi I have just come on here tonight. 
veri probabl my errand may seem to have no mean for you. you look 
ill, but you don’t appear to be in ani great troubl or adversity, as I 
fear in my--well, there--a I fear you might be. I must say, though, 
it seem a terribl empti house. and no lights, too!’ 

she slowly, with a littl trembl nod of her bonnet, turn 
her head and glanc quietly, fixedly, and unflinchingly, out of the 
half-open door. ‘but that’ not my affair.’ and again she look at him 
for a littl while. 

then she stoop forward and touch him kindli and trustingli on the 
knee. ‘troubl or no trouble,’ she said, ‘it’ never too late to remind 
a man of hi mother. and i’m sure, Mr lawford, i’m veri glad to hear you 
are struggl up out of your ill again. We must keep a brave heart, 
forti or seventy, whichev we may be: “while the evil day come not nor 
the year draw nigh when thou shalt say, I have no pleasur in them,” 
though they have not come to me even yet; and I trust from the bottom of 
my heart, not to you.’ 

she look at him without a trace of emot or constraint in her 
large, quiet face, and their eye met for a moment in that brief, fixed, 
baffl fashion that seem to prove that mankind is after all but a 
dumb mask creatur saddl with the vain illus of speech. 

‘and now that i’v eas my conscience,’ said the old lady, pull 
down her veil, ‘I must beg pardon for intrud at such an hour of the 
evening. and may I have your arm down those dread steps? really, Mr 
lawford, judg from the hous they erect for us, the builder must 
have a veri peculiar notion of mankind. Is the fli still there? I 
expressli told the man to wait, and what I am go to do if--!’ 

‘he’ there,’ lawford reassur her, crane hi neck in their slow 
progress to catch a peep into the quiet road. and like a flock of bird 
scare by a chanc comer at their feed in some desert field, a 
whir cloud of memori swept softli up in hi mind--memori whose 
import he made no effort to discover. none the less, the leisur 
descent becam in their compani someth of a real experi even in 
such a brim week. 

‘I hope, some day, you will realli tell me your dream?’ he said, push 
the old lady’ silk skirt in after her as she slowli climb into the 
carriage. 

‘ah, my dear lawford, when you are my age,’ she call back to him, 
grope her way into the rather musti gloom, ‘you’ll dream such dream 
for yourself. life’ not what’ just the fashion. and there are queerer 
thing to be seen and heard just quietli in one’ solitud than thi 
busi life give us time to discover. but as for my mystifi bewley 
acquaintance--i confess I cannot make head or tail of him.’ 

‘wa he,’ said lawford rather vaguely, look up into the dim white 
face that with it plume fill nearli the whole carriag window, ‘wa 
hi face veri unpleasing?’ 

she rais a glove hand. ‘it ha haunt me, haunt me, Mr lawford; 
its--it conflict! poor fellow; I hope, I do hope, he face hi troubl 
out. but I shall never see him again.’ 

He squeez the trembling, kindli old hand. ‘I bet, miss sinnet,’ he 
said earnestly, ‘even your have thought kindli of the poor beggar 
eas hi mind--whoev he may have been. I assur you, assur you of 
that.’ 

‘ay, but I did more than think,’ repli the old ladi with a chuckl 
that might have seem even a littl deris if it had not been so 
profoundli magnanimous. 

He watch the old black fli roll slowli off, and still smile at miss 
sinnet’ inscrut finess went back into the house. ‘and now, my 
friend,’ he said, address peac the throng darkness, ‘the 
time’ nearli up for me to go too.’ 

He had made up hi mind. or, rather, it seem as if in the unregard 
silenc of thi last long talk hi mind had made up itself. onli among 
imposs had he the shadow of a choice. In thi old haunt 
house, amid thi shallow turmoil no practic clue could show itself 
of a way out. He would go away for a while. 

He left the door ajar behind him for the moment still left, and 
stood for a while thinking. then, lamp in hand, he descend into the 
breakfast-room for pen, ink, and paper. He sat for some time in that 
underground calm, nibbl hi pen like a harass and self-consci 
schoolboy. At last he began: 

‘mi dear sheila,--i must tell you, to begin with, that the chang ha 
now all pass away. I am--a near as man can be--complet myself 
again. and next: that I overheard all that wa said to-night in the 
dining-room. 

‘i’m sorri for listening; but it’ no good go over all that now. here 
I am, and, as you said, for alice’ sake we must make the best of it. I 
am go away for a while, to get, if I can, a chanc to quiet down. I 
suppos everi one come sooner or later to a time in life when there 
is noth els to be done but just shut one’ eye and blunder on. and 
that’ all I can do now--blund on....’ 

He paused, and suddenly, at the echo of the word in hi mind, a 
revuls of feeling--sham and hatr of himself surg up, and he 
tore hi letter into tini pieces. onc more he began, ‘mi dear sheila,’ 
drop hi pen, sat on for a long time, cold and inert, harbour 
almost unendur a pitiful, hopeless longing.... He would write to 
grisel anoth day. 

He leant back in hi chair, hi finger press against hi eyelids. and 
clearer than those which myriad-hu realiti can ever present, pictur 
of the imagin swam up befor hi eyes. It seemed, indeed, that even 
now some ghost, some reven of himself wa sit there, in the old 
green churchyard, roof onli with a thousand thousand stars. the breath 
of dark stir softli on hi cheek. some littl scamper shape 
slip by. A bird on high cri weirdly, solemnly, over the globe. He 
shudder faintly, and look out again into the small lamplit room. 

here, too, wa quit as inexplic a come and going. A fli wa 
walk on the tabl beneath hi eyes, with the uneasi gait of one that 
ha outliv hi hour and most of hi companions. mice were scamper 
and shriek in the empti kitchen. and all about him, in the viewless 
air, the phantom of anoth life pass by, unmind of hi motionless 
body. He fell into a lethargi of the senses, and onli gradual becam 
awar after a while of the strang long-drawn sigh of rain at the 
window. He rose and open it. the night air flow in, chill with it 
water and faintli fragrant of the dust. It sooth away all thought for 
a while. He turn back to hi chair. He would wait until the rain had 
lull befor starting.... 

A littl befor midnight the door wa softly, and with extrem care, 
push open, and Mr bethany’ old face, with an intens and sharpen 
scrutiny, look in on the lamplit room. and as if still intent on 
the least sound within the empti wall around him, he came near, and 
stoop across the table, stare through hi spectacl at the sidelong 
face of hi friend, so still, with hand so lightli laid on the arm of 
hi chair that the old man had need to watch close to detect in hi 
heavi slumber the slow measur rise and fall of hi breast. 

He turn wearili away mutter a little, between an immeasur 
relief and a now almost intoler medley of vexations. what wa 
thi monstrou web of craik’s? what had the creatur been nod and 
ducket about?--thos whisperings, that tattling? and what in the end, 
when you were old and sour and out-strategied, what wa the end to be 
of thi urgent dream call life? He sat quietli down and drew hi hand 
over hi face, push hi lean knot finger up under hi spectacles, 
then sat blinking--and softli slowli deciph the solitari ‘mi dear 
sheila’ on lawford’ note-paper. ‘h’m,’ he muttered, and look up again 
at the dark still eyelid that in the strang torpor of sleep might yet 
be dimli convey to the dream brain behind them some hint of hi 
presence. ‘I wish to goodness, you wonder old creature,’ he muttered, 
wag hi head, ‘I wish to good you’d wake up.’ 

for some time he sat on, listen to the still soft downpour on the 
fade leaves. ‘they don’t come to me,’ he said softli again; with a 
tini smile on hi old face. ‘it’ that old mediev craik: with a 
face like a last year’ rookery!’ and again he sat, with head a littl 
sidelong, listen now to the infinitesim sound of life without, 
now to the thought within, and ever and again he gaze steadfastli on 
lawford. 

At last it seem in the haunt quiet other thought came to him. 
A cloud, as it were of youth, drew over the wrinkl skin, compos the 
birdlik keenness; hi head nodded. once, like lawford in the dark 
at widderstone, he glanc up sharpli across the lamplight at 
hi phantasmagor shadowi companion, heard the steadi surg of 
multitudin rain-drops, like the roar of time’ wing chariot 
hurri near; then he too, with spectacl awry, bob on in hi 
chair, a weari old sentinel on the outskirt of hi friend’ denud 
battlefield. 





end of the project gutenberg ebook of the return, by walter de la mare 

*** end OF thi project gutenberg ebook the return *** 

***** thi file should be name 3075-0.txt or 3075-0.zip ***** 
thi and all associ file of variou format will be found in: 
http://www.gutenberg.org/3/0/7/3075/ 

produc by eve sobol 

updat edit will replac the previou one--th old edit 
will be renamed. 

creat the work from public domain print edit mean that no 
one own a unit state copyright in these works, so the foundat 
(and you!) can copi and distribut it in the unit state without 
permiss and without pay copyright royalties. special rules, 
set forth in the gener term of use part of thi license, appli to 
copi and distribut project gutenberg-tm electron work to 
protect the project gutenberg-tm concept and trademark. project 
gutenberg is a regist trademark, and may not be use if you 
charg for the ebooks, unless you receiv specif permission. If you 
do not charg anyth for copi of thi ebook, compli with the 
rule is veri easy. you may use thi ebook for nearli ani purpos 
such as creation of deriv works, reports, perform and 
research. they may be modifi and print and given away--y may do 
practic anyth with public domain ebooks. redistribut is 
subject to the trademark license, especi commerci 
redistribution. 



*** start: full licens *** 

the full project gutenberg licens 
pleas read thi befor you distribut OR use thi work 

To protect the project gutenberg-tm mission of promot the free 
distribut of electron works, by use or distribut thi work 
(or ani other work associ in ani way with the phrase “project 
gutenberg”), you agre to compli with all the term of the full project 
gutenberg-tm licens (avail with thi file or onlin at 
http://gutenberg.org/license). 


section 1. gener term of use and redistribut project gutenberg-tm 
electron work 

1.a. By read or use ani part of thi project gutenberg-tm 
electron work, you indic that you have read, understand, agre to 
and accept all the term of thi licens and intellectu properti 
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agre to abid by all 
the term of thi agreement, you must ceas use and return or destroy 
all copi of project gutenberg-tm electron work in your possession. 
If you paid a fee for obtain a copi of or access to a project 
gutenberg-tm electron work and you do not agre to be bound by the 
term of thi agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or 
entiti to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.e.8. 

1.b. “project gutenberg” is a regist trademark. It may onli be 
use on or associ in ani way with an electron work by peopl who 
agre to be bound by the term of thi agreement. there are a few 
thing that you can do with most project gutenberg-tm electron work 
even without compli with the full term of thi agreement. see 
paragraph 1.c below. there are a lot of thing you can do with project 
gutenberg-tm electron work if you follow the term of thi agreement 
and help preserv free futur access to project gutenberg-tm electron 
works. see paragraph 1.e below. 

1.c. the project gutenberg literari archiv foundat (“the foundation” 
or pglaf), own a compil copyright in the collect of project 
gutenberg-tm electron works. nearli all the individu work in the 
collect are in the public domain in the unit states. If an 
individu work is in the public domain in the unit state and you are 
locat in the unit states, we do not claim a right to prevent you from 
copying, distributing, performing, display or creat deriv 
work base on the work as long as all refer to project gutenberg 
are removed. Of course, we hope that you will support the project 
gutenberg-tm mission of promot free access to electron work by 
freeli share project gutenberg-tm work in complianc with the term of 
thi agreement for keep the project gutenberg-tm name associ with 
the work. you can easili compli with the term of thi agreement by 
keep thi work in the same format with it attach full project 
gutenberg-tm licens when you share it without charg with others. 

1.d. the copyright law of the place where you are locat also govern 
what you can do with thi work. copyright law in most countri are in 
a constant state of change. If you are outsid the unit states, check 
the law of your countri in addit to the term of thi agreement 
befor downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distribut or 
creat deriv work base on thi work or ani other project 
gutenberg-tm work. the foundat make no represent concern 
the copyright statu of ani work in ani countri outsid the unit 
states. 

1.e. unless you have remov all refer to project gutenberg: 

1.e.1. the follow sentence, with activ link to, or other immedi 
access to, the full project gutenberg-tm licens must appear promin 
whenev ani copi of a project gutenberg-tm work (ani work on which the 
phrase “project gutenberg” appears, or with which the phrase “project 
gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed, 
copi or distributed: 

thi ebook is for the use of anyon anywher at no cost and with 
almost no restrict whatsoever. you may copi it, give it away or 
re-us it under the term of the project gutenberg licens includ 
with thi ebook or onlin at www.gutenberg.org 

1.e.2. If an individu project gutenberg-tm electron work is deriv 
from the public domain (doe not contain a notic indic that it is 
post with permiss of the copyright holder), the work can be copi 
and distribut to anyon in the unit state without pay ani fee 
or charges. If you are redistribut or provid access to a work 
with the phrase “project gutenberg” associ with or appear on the 
work, you must compli either with the requir of paragraph 1.e.1 
through 1.e.7 or obtain permiss for the use of the work and the 
project gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraph 1.e.8 or 
1.e.9. 

1.e.3. If an individu project gutenberg-tm electron work is post 
with the permiss of the copyright holder, your use and distribut 
must compli with both paragraph 1.e.1 through 1.e.7 and ani addit 
term impos by the copyright holder. addit term will be link 
to the project gutenberg-tm licens for all work post with the 
permiss of the copyright holder found at the begin of thi work. 

1.e.4. Do not unlink or detach or remov the full project gutenberg-tm 
licens term from thi work, or ani file contain a part of thi 
work or ani other work associ with project gutenberg-tm. 

1.e.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribut or redistribut thi 
electron work, or ani part of thi electron work, without 
promin display the sentenc set forth in paragraph 1.e.1 with 
activ link or immedi access to the full term of the project 
gutenberg-tm license. 

1.e.6. you may convert to and distribut thi work in ani binary, 
compressed, mark up, nonproprietari or proprietari form, includ ani 
word process or hypertext form. however, if you provid access to or 
distribut copi of a project gutenberg-tm work in a format other than 
“plain vanilla ascii” or other format use in the offici version 
post on the offici project gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org), 
you must, at no addit cost, fee or expens to the user, provid a 
copy, a mean of export a copy, or a mean of obtain a copi upon 
request, of the work in it origin “plain vanilla ascii” or other 
form. ani altern format must includ the full project gutenberg-tm 
licens as specifi in paragraph 1.e.1. 

1.e.7. Do not charg a fee for access to, viewing, displaying, 
performing, copi or distribut ani project gutenberg-tm work 
unless you compli with paragraph 1.e.8 or 1.e.9. 

1.e.8. you may charg a reason fee for copi of or provid 
access to or distribut project gutenberg-tm electron work provid 
that 

- you pay a royalti fee of 20% of the gross profit you deriv from 
the use of project gutenberg-tm work calcul use the method 
you alreadi use to calcul your applic taxes. the fee is 
owe to the owner of the project gutenberg-tm trademark, but he 
ha agre to donat royalti under thi paragraph to the 
project gutenberg literari archiv foundation. royalti payment 
must be paid within 60 day follow each date on which you 
prepar (or are legal requir to prepare) your period tax 
returns. royalti payment should be clearli mark as such and 
sent to the project gutenberg literari archiv foundat at the 
address specifi in section 4, “inform about donat to 
the project gutenberg literari archiv foundation.” 

- you provid a full refund of ani money paid by a user who notifi 
you in write (or by e-mail) within 30 day of receipt that s/he 
doe not agre to the term of the full project gutenberg-tm 
license. you must requir such a user to return or 
destroy all copi of the work possess in a physic medium 
and discontinu all use of and all access to other copi of 
project gutenberg-tm works. 

- you provide, in accord with paragraph 1.f.3, a full refund of ani 
money paid for a work or a replac copy, if a defect in the 
electron work is discov and report to you within 90 day 
of receipt of the work. 

- you compli with all other term of thi agreement for free 
distribut of project gutenberg-tm works. 

1.e.9. If you wish to charg a fee or distribut a project gutenberg-tm 
electron work or group of work on differ term than are set 
forth in thi agreement, you must obtain permiss in write from 
both the project gutenberg literari archiv foundat and michael 
hart, the owner of the project gutenberg-tm trademark. contact the 
foundat as set forth in section 3 below. 

1.f. 

1.f.1. project gutenberg volunt and employe expend consider 
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcrib and proofread 
public domain work in creat the project gutenberg-tm 
collection. despit these efforts, project gutenberg-tm electron 
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain 
“defects,” such as, but not limit to, incomplete, inaccur or 
corrupt data, transcript errors, a copyright or other intellectu 
properti infringement, a defect or damag disk or other medium, a 
comput virus, or comput code that damag or cannot be read by 
your equipment. 

1.f.2. limit warranty, disclaim OF damag - except for the “right 
of replac or refund” describ in paragraph 1.f.3, the project 
gutenberg literari archiv foundation, the owner of the project 
gutenberg-tm trademark, and ani other parti distribut a project 
gutenberg-tm electron work under thi agreement, disclaim all 
liabil to you for damages, cost and expenses, includ legal 
fees. you agre that you have NO remedi for negligence, strict 
liability, breach OF warranti OR breach OF contract except those 
provid IN paragraph f3. you agre that the foundation, the 
trademark owner, and ani distributor under thi agreement will not BE 
liabl TO you for actual, direct, indirect, consequential, punit OR 
incident damag even IF you give notic OF the possibl OF such 
damage. 

1.f.3. limit right OF replac OR refund - If you discov a 
defect in thi electron work within 90 day of receiv it, you can 
receiv a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by send a 
written explan to the person you receiv the work from. If you 
receiv the work on a physic medium, you must return the medium with 
your written explanation. the person or entiti that provid you with 
the defect work may elect to provid a replac copi in lieu of a 
refund. If you receiv the work electronically, the person or entiti 
provid it to you may choos to give you a second opportun to 
receiv the work electron in lieu of a refund. If the second copi 
is also defective, you may demand a refund in write without further 
opportun to fix the problem. 

1.f.4. except for the limit right of replac or refund set forth 
in paragraph 1.f.3, thi work is provid to you ‘as-is’ with NO other 
warranti OF ani kind, express OR implied, includ but not limit TO 
warranti OF merchant OR fit for ani purpose. 

1.f.5. some state do not allow disclaim of certain impli 
warranti or the exclus or limit of certain type of damages. 
If ani disclaim or limit set forth in thi agreement violat the 
law of the state applic to thi agreement, the agreement shall be 
interpret to make the maximum disclaim or limit permit by 
the applic state law. the invalid or unenforc of ani 
provis of thi agreement shall not void the remain provisions. 

1.f.6. indemn - you agre to indemnifi and hold the foundation, the 
trademark owner, ani agent or employe of the foundation, anyon 
provid copi of project gutenberg-tm electron work in accord 
with thi agreement, and ani volunt associ with the production, 
promot and distribut of project gutenberg-tm electron works, 
harmless from all liability, cost and expenses, includ legal fees, 
that aris directli or indirectli from ani of the follow which you do 
or caus to occur: (a) distribut of thi or ani project gutenberg-tm 
work, (b) alteration, modification, or addit or delet to ani 
project gutenberg-tm work, and (c) ani defect you cause. 


section 2. inform about the mission of project gutenberg-tm 

project gutenberg-tm is synonym with the free distribut of 
electron work in format readabl by the widest varieti of comput 
includ obsolete, old, middle-ag and new computers. It exist 
becaus of the effort of hundr of volunt and donat from 
peopl in all walk of life. 

volunt and financi support to provid volunt with the 
assist they need, are critic to reach project gutenberg-tm’ 
goal and ensur that the project gutenberg-tm collect will 
remain freeli avail for gener to come. In 2001, the project 
gutenberg literari archiv foundat wa creat to provid a secur 
and perman futur for project gutenberg-tm and futur generations. 
To learn more about the project gutenberg literari archiv foundat 
and how your effort and donat can help, see section 3 and 4 
and the foundat web page at http://www.pglaf.org. 


section 3. inform about the project gutenberg literari archiv 
foundat 

the project gutenberg literari archiv foundat is a non profit 
501(c)(3) educ corpor organ under the law of the 
state of mississippi and grant tax exempt statu by the intern 
revenu service. the foundation’ ein or feder tax identif 
number is 64-6221541. it 501(c)(3) letter is post at 
http://pglaf.org/fundraising. contribut to the project gutenberg 
literari archiv foundat are tax deduct to the full extent 
permit by u.s. feder law and your state’ laws. 

the foundation’ princip offic is locat at 4557 melan dr. S. 
fairbanks, ak, 99712., but it volunt and employe are scatter 
throughout numer locations. it busi offic is locat at 
809 north 1500 west, salt lake city, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email 
business@pglaf.org. email contact link and up to date contact 
inform can be found at the foundation’ web site and offici 
page at http://pglaf.org 

for addit contact information: 
dr. gregori B. newbi 
chief execut and director 
gbnewby@pglaf.org 


section 4. inform about donat to the project gutenberg 
literari archiv foundat 

project gutenberg-tm depend upon and cannot surviv without wide 
spread public support and donat to carri out it mission of 
increas the number of public domain and licens work that can be 
freeli distribut in machin readabl form access by the widest 
array of equip includ outdat equipment. mani small donat 
($1 to $5,000) are particularli import to maintain tax exempt 
statu with the irs. 

the foundat is commit to compli with the law regul 
chariti and charit donat in all 50 state of the unit 
states. complianc requir are not uniform and it take a 
consider effort, much paperwork and mani fee to meet and keep up 
with these requirements. We do not solicit donat in locat 
where we have not receiv written confirm of compliance. To 
send donat or determin the statu of complianc for ani 
particular state visit http://pglaf.org 

while we cannot and do not solicit contribut from state where we 
have not met the solicit requirements, we know of no prohibit 
against accept unsolicit donat from donor in such state who 
approach us with offer to donate. 

intern donat are grate accepted, but we cannot make 
ani statement concern tax treatment of donat receiv from 
outsid the unit states. u.s. law alon swamp our small staff. 

pleas check the project gutenberg web page for current donat 
method and addresses. donat are accept in a number of other 
way includ checks, onlin payment and credit card donations. 
To donate, pleas visit: http://pglaf.org/don 


section 5. gener inform about project gutenberg-tm electron 
works. 

professor michael S. hart is the origin of the project gutenberg-tm 
concept of a librari of electron work that could be freeli share 
with anyone. for thirti years, he produc and distribut project 
gutenberg-tm ebook with onli a loos network of volunt support. 


project gutenberg-tm ebook are often creat from sever print 
editions, all of which are confirm as public domain in the u.s. 
unless a copyright notic is included. thus, we do not necessarili 
keep ebook in complianc with ani particular paper edition. 


most peopl start at our web site which ha the main PG search facility: 

http://www.gutenberg.org 

thi web site includ inform about project gutenberg-tm, 
includ how to make donat to the project gutenberg literari 
archiv foundation, how to help produc our new ebooks, and how to 
subscrib to our email newslett to hear about new ebooks. 
