the project gutenberg ebook, the doom of the griffiths, by elizabeth 
gaskel 


thi ebook is for the use of anyon anywher in the unit state and most 
other part of the world at no cost and with almost no restrict 
whatsoever. you may copi it, give it away or re-us it under the term of 
the project gutenberg licens includ with thi ebook or onlin at 
www.gutenberg.org. If you are not locat in the unit states, you'll have 
to check the law of the countri where you are locat befor use thi ebook. 




title: the doom of the griffith 


author: elizabeth gaskel 



releas date: januari 11, 2015 [ebook #2549] 
[thi file wa first post on april 21, 2000] 

language: english 

charact set encoding: utf-8 


***start OF the project gutenberg ebook the doom OF the griffiths*** 


transcrib from the 1896 “lizzi leigh and other tales” macmillan and 
co. edition. scan and proof by david price, email ccx074@pglaf.org 





the doom OF the griffiths. 


chapter I. 

prefac 
I have alway been much interest by the tradit which are scatter 
up and down north wale relat to owen glendow (owain glendwr is the 
nation spell of the name), and I fulli enter into the feel which 
make the welsh peasant still look upon him as the hero of hi country. 
there wa great joy among mani of the inhabit of the principality, 
when the subject of the welsh prize poem at oxford, some fifteen or 
sixteen year ago, wa announc to be “owain glendwr.” It wa the most 
proudli nation subject that had been given for years. 

perhaps, some may not be awar that thi redoubt chieftain is, even in 
the present day of enlightenment, as famou among hi illiter 
countrymen for hi magic power as for hi patriotism. He say 
himself—or shakespear say it for him, which is much the same thing— 

‘at my nativ 
the front of heaven wa full of fieri shape 
Of burn cresset . . . 
. . . I can call spirit from the vasti deep.’ 

and few among the lower order in the princip would think of ask 
hotspur’ irrever question in reply. 

among other tradit preserv rel to thi part of the welsh 
hero’ character, is the old famili propheci which give titl to thi 
tale. when sir david gam, “a black a traitor as if he had been born in 
builth,” sought to murder owen at machynlleth, there wa one with him 
whose name glendwr littl dream of have associ with hi enemies. 
rhi ap gryfydd, hi “old familiar friend,” hi relation, hi more than 
brother, had consent unto hi blood. sir david gam might be forgiven, 
but one whom he had loved, and who had betray him, could never be 
forgiven. glendwr wa too deepli read in the human heart to kill him. 
no, he let him live on, the loath and scorn of hi compatriots, and 
the victim of bitter remorse. the mark of cain wa upon him. 

but befor he went forth—whil he yet stood a prisoner, cower beneath 
hi conscienc befor owain glendwr—that chieftain pass a doom upon him 
and hi race: 

“I doom thee to live, becaus I know thou wilt pray for death. thou 
shalt live on beyond the natur term of the life of man, the scorn of 
all good men. the veri children shall point to thee with hiss tongue, 
and say, ‘there goe one who would have shed a brother’ blood!’ for I 
love thee more than a brother, oh rhi ap gryfydd! thou shalt live on 
to see all of thi house, except the weakl in arms, perish by the 
sword. thi race shall be accursed. each gener shall see their 
land melt away like snow; yea their wealth shall vanish, though they may 
labour night and day to heap up gold. and when nine gener have 
pass from the face of the earth, thi blood shall no longer flow in the 
vein of ani human being. In those day the last male of thi race shall 
aveng me. the son shall slay the father.” 

such wa the traditionari account of owain glendwr’ speech to hi 
once-trust friend. and it wa declar that the doom had been 
fulfil in all things; that live in as miserli a manner as they would, 
the griffith never were wealthi and prosperous—inde that their worldli 
stock diminish without ani visibl cause. 

but the laps of mani year had almost deaden the wonder-inspir 
power of the whole curse. It wa onli brought forth from the hoard of 
memori when some untoward event happen to the griffith family; and in 
the eighth gener the faith in the propheci wa nearli destroyed, by 
the marriag of the griffith of that day, to a miss owen, who, 
unexpectedly, by the death of a brother, becam an heiress—to no 
consider amount, to be sure, but enough to make the propheci appear 
reversed. the heiress and her husband remov from hi small patrimoni 
estat in merionethshire, to her heritag in caernarvonshire, and for a 
time the propheci lay dormant. 

If you go from tremadoc to criccaeth, you pass by the parochi church of 
ynysynhanarn, situat in a boggi valley run from the mountains, 
which shoulder up to the rivals, down to cardigan bay. thi tract of 
land ha everi appear of have been redeem at no distant period of 
time from the sea, and ha all the desol rank often attend upon 
such marshes. but the valley beyond, similar in character, had yet more 
of gloom at the time of which I write. In the higher part there were 
larg plantat of firs, set too close to attain ani size, and 
remain stunt in height and scrubbi in appearance. indeed, mani of 
the smaller and more weakli had died, and the bark had fallen down on the 
brown soil neglect and unnoticed. these tree had a ghastli 
appearance, with their white trunks, seen by the dim light which 
struggl through the thick bough above. nearer to the sea, the valley 
assum a more open, though hardli a more cheer character; it look 
dark and overhung by sea-fog through the greater part of the year, and 
even a farm-house, which usual impart someth of cheer to a 
landscape, fail to do so here. thi valley form the greater part of 
the estat to which owen griffith becam entitl by right of hi wife. 
In the higher part of the valley wa situat the famili mansion, or 
rather dwelling-house, for “mansion” is too grand a word to appli to the 
clumsy, but substantially-built bodowen. It wa squar and 
heavy-looking, with just that much pretens to ornament necessari to 
distinguish it from the mere farm-house. 

In thi dwell mrs. owen griffith bore her husband two sons—llewellyn, 
the futur squire, and robert, who wa earli destin for the church. 
the onli differ in their situation, up to the time when robert wa 
enter at jesu college, was, that the elder wa invari indulg by 
all around him, while robert wa thwart and indulg by turns; that 
llewellyn never learn anyth from the poor welsh parson, who wa 
nomin hi privat tutor; while occasion squir griffith made a 
great point of enforc robert’ diligence, tell him that, as he had 
hi bread to earn, he must pay attent to hi learning. there is no 
know how far the veri irregular educ he had receiv would have 
carri robert through hi colleg examinations; but, luckili for him in 
thi respect, befor such a trial of hi learn came round, he heard of 
the death of hi elder brother, after a short illness, brought on by a 
hard drinking-bout. Of course, robert wa summon home, and it seem 
quit as much of course, now that there wa no necess for him to “earn 
hi bread by hi learning,” that he should not return to oxford. So the 
half-educated, but not unintelligent, young man continu at home, dure 
the short remaind of hi parent’ lifetime. 

hi wa not an uncommon character. In gener he wa mild, indolent, and 
easili managed; but onc thoroughli roused, hi passion were vehement 
and fearful. He seemed, indeed, almost afraid of himself, and in common 
hardli dare to give way to justifi anger—so much did he dread lose 
hi self-control. had he been judici educated, he would, probably, 
have distinguish himself in those branch of literatur which call for 
tast and imagination, rather than ani exert of reflect or 
judgment. As it was, hi literari tast show itself in make 
collect of cambrian antiqu of everi description, till hi stock 
of welsh mss. would have excit the envi of dr. pugh himself, had he 
been aliv at the time of which I write. 

there is one characterist of robert griffith which I have omit to 
note, and which wa peculiar among hi class. He wa no hard drinker; 
whether it wa that hi head wa easili affected, or that hi 
partially-refin tast led him to dislik intox and it attend 
circumstances, I cannot say; but at five-and-twenti robert griffith wa 
habitu sober—a thing so rare in llyn, that he wa almost shun as a 
churlish, unsoci being, and paus much of hi time in solitude. 

about thi time, he had to appear in some case that wa tri at the 
caernarvon assizes; and while there, wa a guest at the hous of hi 
agent, a shrewd, sensibl welsh attorney, with one daughter, who had 
charm enough to captiv robert griffiths. though he remain onli a 
few day at her father’ house, they were suffici to decid hi 
affections, and short wa the period allow to elaps befor he brought 
home a mistress to bodowen. the new mrs. griffith wa a gentle, 
yield person, full of love toward her husband, of whom, nevertheless, 
she stood someth in awe, partli aris from the differ in their 
ages, partli from hi devot much time to studi of which she could 
understand nothing. 

she soon made him the father of a bloom littl daughter, call 
augharad after her mother. then there came sever unev year in 
the household of bodowen; and when the old women had one and all declar 
that the cradl would not rock again, mrs. griffith bore the son and 
heir. hi birth wa soon follow by hi mother’ death: she had been 
ail and low-spirit dure her pregnancy, and she seem to lack the 
buoyanc of bodi and mind requisit to bring her round after her time of 
trial. her husband, who love her all the more from have few other 
claim on hi affections, wa deepli griev by her earli death, and hi 
onli comfort wa the sweet littl boy whom she had left behind. that 
part of the squire’ character, which wa so tender, and almost feminine, 
seem call forth by the helpless situat of the littl infant, who 
stretch out hi arm to hi father with the same earnest coo that 
happier children make use of to their mother alone. augharad wa almost 
neglected, while the littl owen wa king of the house; still next to hi 
father, none tend him so lovingli as hi sister. she wa so accustom 
to give way to him that it wa no longer a hardship. By night and by day 
owen wa the constant companion of hi father, and increas year 
seem onli to confirm the custom. It wa an unnatur life for the 
child, see no bright littl face peer into hi own (for augharad 
was, as I said before, five or six year older, and her face, poor 
motherless girl! wa often anyth but bright), hear no din of clear 
ring voices, but day after day share the otherwis solitari hour of 
hi father, whether in the dim room, surround by wizard-lik 
antiquities, or patter hi littl feet to keep up with hi “tada” in 
hi mountain rambl or shoot excursions. when the pair came to some 
littl foam brook, where the stepping-ston were far and wide, the 
father carri hi littl boy across with the tenderest care; when the 
lad wa weary, they rested, he cradl in hi father’ arms, or the 
squir would lift him up and carri him to hi home again. the boy wa 
indulg (for hi father felt flatter by the desire) in hi wish of 
share hi meal and keep the same hours. all thi indulg did 
not render owen unamiable, but it made him wilful, and not a happi child. 
He had a thought look, not common to the face of a young boy. He knew 
no games, no merri sports; hi inform wa of an imagin and 
specul character. hi father delight to interest him in hi own 
studies, without consid how far they were healthi for so young a 
mind. 

Of cours squir griffith wa not unawar of the propheci which wa to 
be fulfil in hi generation. He would occasion refer to it when 
among hi friends, with sceptic levity; but in truth it lay nearer to 
hi heart than he chose to acknowledge. hi strong imagin render 
him peculiarli impress on such subjects; while hi judgment, seldom 
exercis or fortifi by sever thought, could not prevent hi 
continu recur to it. He use to gaze on the half-sad counten 
of the child, who sat look up into hi face with hi larg dark eyes, 
so fondli yet so inquiringly, till the old legend swell around hi 
heart, and becam too pain for him not to requir sympathy. besides, 
the overpow love he bore to the child seem to demand fuller vent 
than tender words; it made him like, yet dread, to upbraid it object for 
the fear contrast foretold. still squir griffith told the legend, 
in a half-jest manner, to hi littl son, when they were roam over 
the wild heath in the autumn days, “the saddest of the year,” or while 
they sat in the oak-wainscot room, surround by mysteri relic that 
gleam strang forth by the flicker fire-light. the legend wa 
wrought into the boy’ mind, and he would crave, yet tremble, to hear it 
told over and over again, while the word were intermingl with caress 
and question as to hi love. occasion hi love word and action 
were cut short by hi father’ light yet bitter speech—“get thee away, my 
lad; thou knowest not what is to come of all thi love.” 

when augharad wa seventeen, and owen eleven or twelve, the rector of the 
parish in which bodowen wa situated, endeavour to prevail on squir 
griffith to send the boy to school. now, thi rector had mani congeni 
tast with hi parishioner, and wa hi onli intimate; and, by repeat 
arguments, he succeed in convinc the squir that the unnatur life 
owen wa lead wa in everi way injurious. unwillingli wa the father 
wrought to part from hi son; but he did at length send him to the 
grammar school at bangor, then under the manag of an excel 
classic. here owen show that he had more talent than the rector had 
given him credit for, when he affirm that the lad had been complet 
stupefi by the life he led at bodowen. He bade fair to do credit to 
the school in the peculiar branch of learn for which it wa famous. 
but he wa not popular among hi schoolfellows. He wa wayward, though, 
to a certain degree, gener and unselfish; he wa reserv but gentle, 
except when the tremend burst of passion (similar in charact to 
those of hi father) forc their way. 

On hi return from school one christmas-time, when he had been a year or 
so at bangor, he wa stun by hear that the undervalu augharad wa 
about to be marri to a gentleman of south wales, resid near 
aberystwith. boy seldom appreci their sisters; but owen thought of 
the mani slight with which he had requit the patient augharad, and he 
gave way to bitter regrets, which, with a selfish want of control over 
hi words, he kept express to hi father, until the squir wa 
thoroughli hurt and chagrin at the repeat exclam of “what shall 
we do when augharad is gone?” “how dull we shall be when augharad is 
married!” owen’ holiday were prolong a few weeks, in order that he 
might be present at the wedding; and when all the festiv were over, 
and the bride and bridegroom had left bodowen, the boy and hi father 
realli felt how much they miss the quiet, love augharad. she had 
perform so mani thoughtful, noiseless littl offices, on which their 
daili comfort depended; and now she wa gone, the household seem to 
miss the spirit that peac kept it in order; the servant roam 
about in search of command and directions, the room had no longer the 
unobtrus order of tast to make them cheerful, the veri fire 
burn dim, and were alway sink down into dull heap of gray ashes. 
altogeth owen did not regret hi return to bangor, and thi also the 
mortifi parent perceived. squir griffith wa a selfish parent. 

letter in those day were a rare occurrence. owen usual receiv one 
dure hi half-yearli absenc from home, and occasion hi father 
paid him a visit. thi half-year the boy had no visit, nor even a 
letter, till veri near the time of hi leav school, and then he wa 
astound by the intellig that hi father wa marri again. 

then came one of hi paroxysm of rage; the more disastr in it 
effect upon hi charact becaus it could find no vent in action. 
independ of slight to the memori of the first wife which children 
are so apt to fanci such an action implies, owen had hitherto consid 
himself (and with justice) the first object of hi father’ life. they 
had been so much to each other; and now a shapeless, but too real 
someth had come between him and hi father there for ever. He felt as 
if hi permiss should have been asked, as if he should have been 
consulted. certainli he ought to have been told of the intend event. 
So the squir felt, and henc hi constrain letter which had so much 
increas the bitter of owen’ feelings. 

with all thi anger, when owen saw hi stepmother, he thought he had 
never seen so beauti a woman for her age; for she wa no longer in the 
bloom of youth, be a widow when hi father marri her. her manners, 
to the welsh lad, who had seen littl of femal grace among the famili 
of the few antiquarian with whom hi father visited, were so fascin 
that he watch her with a sort of breathless admiration. her measur 
grace, her faultless movements, her tone of voice, sweet, till the ear 
wa sate with their sweetness, made owen less angri at hi father’ 
marriage. yet he felt, more than ever, that the cloud wa between him 
and hi father; that the hasti letter he had sent in answer to the 
announc of hi wed wa not forgotten, although no allus wa 
ever made to it. He wa no longer hi father’ confidant—hardli ever hi 
father’ companion, for the newly-marri wife wa all in all to the 
squire, and hi son felt himself almost a cipher, where he had so long 
been everything. the ladi herself had ever the softest consider for 
her stepson; almost too obtrus wa the attent paid to hi wishes, 
but still he fanci that the heart had no part in the win advances. 
there wa a watch glanc of the eye that owen onc or twice caught 
when she had imagin herself unobserved, and mani other nameless littl 
circumstances, that gave him a strong feel of want of sincer in hi 
stepmother. mrs. owen brought with her into the famili her littl child 
by her first husband, a boy nearli three year old. He wa one of those 
elfish, observant, mock children, over whose feel you seem to have 
no control: agil and mischievous, hi littl practic jokes, at first 
perform in ignor of the pain he gave, but afterward proceed to a 
malici pleasur in suffering, realli seem to afford some ground to 
the superstiti notion of some of the common peopl that he wa a fairi 
changeling. 

year pass on; and as owen grew older he becam more observant. He 
saw, even in hi occasion visit at home (for from school he had pass 
on to college), that a great chang had taken place in the outward 
manifest of hi father’ character; and, by degrees, owen trace 
thi chang to the influenc of hi stepmother; so slight, so 
impercept to the common observer, yet so resistless in it effects. 
squir griffith caught up hi wife’ humbl advanc opinions, and, 
unawar to himself, adopt them as hi own, defi all argument and 
opposition. It wa the same with her wishes; they met their fulfilment, 
from the extrem and delic art with which she insinu them into her 
husband’ mind, as hi own. she sacrif the show of author for the 
power. At last, when owen perceiv some oppress act in hi father’ 
conduct toward hi dependants, or some unaccount thwart of hi own 
wishes, he fanci he saw hi stepmother’ secret influenc thu 
displayed, howev much she might regret the injustic of hi father’ 
action in her convers with him when they were alone. hi father 
wa fast lose hi temper habits, and frequent intox soon took 
it usual effect upon the temper. yet even here wa the spell of hi 
wife upon him. befor her he place a restraint upon hi passion, yet 
she wa perfectli awar of hi irrit disposition, and direct it 
hither and thither with the same appar ignor of the tendenc of 
her words. 

meanwhil owen’ situat becam peculiarli mortifi to a youth whose 
earli remembr afford such a contrast to hi present state. As a 
child, he had been elev to the consequ of a man befor hi year 
gave ani mental check to the selfish which such conduct wa like to 
engender; he could rememb when hi will wa law to the servant and 
dependants, and hi sympathi necessari to hi father: now he wa as a 
cipher in hi father’ house; and the squire, estrang in the first 
instanc by a feel of the injuri he had done hi son in not sooner 
acquaint him with hi purpos marriage, seem rather to avoid than 
to seek him as a companion, and too frequent show the most utter 
indiffer to the feel and wish which a young man of a high and 
independ spirit might be suppos to indulge. 

perhap owen wa not fulli awar of the forc of all these circumstances; 
for an actor in a famili drama is seldom unimpass enough to be 
perfectli observant. but he becam moodi and soured; brood over hi 
unlov existence, and crave with a human heart after sympathy. 

thi feel took more full possess of hi mind when he had left 
college, and return home to lead an idl and purposeless life. As the 
heir, there wa no worldli necess for exertion: hi father wa too 
much of a welsh squir to dream of the moral necessity, and he himself 
had not suffici strength of mind to decid at onc upon abandon a 
place and mode of life which abound in daili mortifications; yet to 
thi cours hi judgment wa slowli tending, when some circumst 
occur to detain him at bodowen. 

It wa not to be expect that harmoni would long be preserved, even in 
appearance, between an unguard and sour young man, such as owen, and 
hi wari stepmother, when he had onc left college, and come, not as a 
visitor, but as the heir to hi father’ house. some caus of differ 
occurred, where the woman subdu her hidden anger suffici to becom 
convinc that owen wa not entir the dupe she had believ him to be. 
henceforward there wa no peac between them. not in vulgar alterc 
did thi show itself; but in moodi reserv on owen’ part, and in 
undisguis and contemptu pursuanc of her own plan by hi 
stepmother. bodowen wa no longer a place where, if owen wa not love 
or attend to, he could at least find peace, and care for himself: he 
wa thwart at everi step, and in everi wish, by hi father’ desire, 
apparently, while the wife sat by with a smile of triumph on her 
beauti lips. 

So owen went forth at the earli day dawn, sometim roam about on the 
shore or the upland, shoot or fishing, as the season might be, but 
often “stretch in indol repose” on the short, sweet grass, 
indulg in gloomi and morbid reveries. He would fanci that thi 
mortifi state of exist wa a dream, a horribl dream, from which he 
should awak and find himself again the sole object and darl of hi 
father. and then he would start up and strive to shake off the incubus. 
there wa the molten sunset of hi childish memory; the gorgeou crimson 
pile of glori in the west, fade away into the cold calm light of the 
rise moon, while here and there a cloud float across the western 
heaven, like a seraph’ wing, in it flame beauty; the earth wa the 
same as in hi childhood’ days, full of gentl even sounds, and the 
harmoni of twilight—th breez came sweep low over the heather and 
blue-bel by hi side, and the turf wa send up it even incens 
of perfume. but life, and heart, and hope were chang for ever sinc 
those bygon days! 

Or he would seat himself in a favourit nich of the rock on moel gêst, 
hidden by a stunt growth of the whitty, or mountain-ash, from gener 
observation, with a rich-tint cushion of stone-crop for hi feet, and a 
straight precipic of rock rise just above. here would he sit for 
hours, gaze idli at the bay below with it back-ground of purpl hills, 
and the littl fishing-sail on it bosom, show white in the sunbeam, 
and glide on in such harmoni with the quiet beauti of the glassi sea; 
or he would pull out an old school-volume, hi companion for years, and 
in morbid accord with the dark legend that still lurk in the 
recess of hi mind—a shape of gloom in those innermost haunt await 
it time to come forth in distinct outline—would he turn to the old greek 
drama which treat of a famili foredoom by an aveng fate. the worn 
page open of itself at the play of the œdipu tyrannus, and owen dwelt 
with the crave diseas upon the propheci so nearli resembl that 
which concern himself. with hi conscious of neglect, there wa a 
sort of self-flatteri in the consequ which the legend gave him. He 
almost wonder how they durst, with slight and insults, thu provok 
the avenger. 

the day drift onward. often he would vehement pursu some sylvan 
sport, till thought and feel were lost in the violenc of bodili 
exertion. occasion hi even were spent at a small public-house, 
such as stood by the unfrequ wayside, where the welcome, hearty, 
though bought, seem so strongli to contrast with the gloomi neglig 
of home—unsympathis home. 

one even (owen might be four or five-and-twenty), weari with a day’ 
shoot on the clenneni moors, he pass by the open door of “the goat” 
at penmorfa. the light and the cheeri within tempt him, poor 
self-exhaust man! as it ha done mani a one more wretch in worldli 
circumstances, to step in, and take hi even meal where at least hi 
presenc wa of some consequence. It wa a busi day in that littl 
hostel. A flock of sheep, amount to some hundreds, had arriv at 
penmorfa, on their road to england, and throng the space befor the 
house. insid wa the shrewd, kind-heart hostess, bustl to and fro, 
with merri greet for everi tire drover who wa to pass the night in 
her house, while the sheep were pen in a field close by. ever and 
anon, she kept attend to the second crowd of guests, who were 
celebr a rural wed in her house. It wa busi work to martha 
thomas, yet her smile never flagged; and when owen griffith had finish 
hi even meal she wa there, readi with a hope that it had done him 
good, and wa to hi mind, and a word of intellig that the 
wedding-folk were about to danc in the kitchen, and the harper wa the 
famou edward of corwen. 

owen, partli from good-natur complianc with hi hostess’ impli 
wish, and partli from curiosity, loung to the passag which led to the 
kitchen—not the every-day, working, cook kitchen, which wa behind, 
but a good-siz room, where the mistress sat, when her work wa done, 
and where the countri peopl were commonli entertain at such 
merry-mak as the present. the lintel of the door form a frame for 
the anim pictur which owen saw within, as he lean against the wall 
in the dark passage. the red light of the fire, with everi now and then 
a fall piec of turf send forth a fresh blaze, shone full upon four 
young men who were danc a measur someth like a scotch reel, 
keep admir time in their rapid movement to the capit tune the 
harper wa playing. they had their hat on when owen first took hi 
stand, but as they grew more and more anim they flung them away, and 
present their shoe were kick off with like disregard to the spot 
where they might happen to alight. shout of applaus follow ani 
remark exert of agility, in which each seem to tri to excel hi 
companions. At length, weari and exhausted, they sat down, and the 
harper gradual chang to one of those wild, inspir nation air 
for which he wa so famous. the throng audienc sat earnest and 
breathless, and you might have heard a pin drop, except when some maiden 
pass hurriedly, with flare candl and busi look, through to the real 
kitchen beyond. when he had finish hi beauti theme on “the march 
of the men of harlech,” he chang the measur again to “tri chant o’ 
bunnan” (three hundr pounds), and immedi a most unmusical-look 
man began chant “pennillion,” or a sort of recit stanzas, which 
were soon taken up by another, and thi amus last so long that 
owen grew weary, and wa think of retreat from hi post by the 
door, when some littl bustl wa occasioned, on the opposit side of the 
room, by the entranc of a middle-ag man, and a young girl, appar 
hi daughter. the man advanc to the bench occupi by the senior of 
the party, who welcom him with the usual pretti welsh greeting, “pa sut 
mae dy galon?” (“how is thi heart?”) and drink hi health pass on to 
him the cup of excel _cwrw_. the girl, evid a villag belle, 
wa as warmli greet by the young men, while the girl eye her rather 
askanc with a half-jeal look, which owen set down to the score of her 
extrem prettiness. like most welsh women, she wa of middl size as to 
height, but beauti made, with the most perfect yet delic 
round in everi limb. her littl mob-cap wa care adjust to a 
face which wa excess pretty, though it never could be call 
handsome. It also wa round, with the slightest tendenc to the oval 
shape, richli coloured, though somewhat oliv in complexion, with dimpl 
in cheek and chin, and the most scarlet lip owen had ever seen, that 
were too short to meet over the small pearli teeth. the nose wa the 
most defect feature; but the eye were splendid. they were so long, 
so lustrous, yet at time so veri soft under their thick fring of 
eyelash! the nut-brown hair wa care braid beneath the border of 
delic lace: it wa evid the littl villag beauti knew how to make 
the most of all her attractions, for the gay colour which were display 
in her neckerchief were in complet harmoni with the complexion. 

owen wa much attracted, while yet he wa amused, by the evid coquetri 
the girl displayed, collect around her a whole bevi of young fellows, 
for each of whom she seem to have some gay speech, some attract look 
or action. In a few minut young griffith of bodowen wa at her side, 
brought thither by a varieti of idl motives, and as her undivid 
attent wa given to the welsh heir, her admirers, one by one, drop 
off, to seat themselv by some less fascin but more attent fair 
one. the more owen convers with the girl, the more he wa taken; she 
had more wit and talent than he had fanci possible; a self-abandon and 
thoughtfulness, to boot, that seem full of charms; and then her voic 
wa so clear and sweet, and her action so full of grace, that owen wa 
fascin befor he wa well aware, and kept look into her bright, 
blush face, till her uplift flash eye fell beneath hi earnest 
gaze. 

while it thu happen that they were silent—sh from confus at the 
unexpect warmth of hi admiration, he from an unconsci of 
anyth but the beauti chang in her flexil countenance—th man 
whom owen took for her father came up and address some observ to 
hi daughter, from whenc he glide into some commonplac though 
respect remark to owen, and at length engag him in some slight, 
local conversation, he led the way to the account of a spot on the 
peninsula of penthryn, where teal abounded, and conclud with beg 
owen to allow him to show him the exact place, say that whenev the 
young squir felt so inclined, if he would honour him by a call at hi 
house, he would take him across in hi boat. while owen listened, hi 
attent wa not so much absorb as to be unawar that the littl 
beauti at hi side wa refus one or two who endeavour to draw her 
from her place by invit to dance. flatter by hi own 
construct of her refusals, he again direct all hi attent to her, 
till she wa call away by her father, who wa leav the scene of 
festivity. befor he left he remind owen of hi promise, and added— 

“perhaps, sir, you do not know me. My name is elli pritchard, and I 
live at Ty glas, on thi side of moel gêst; anyon can point it out to 
you.” 

when the father and daughter had left, owen slowli prepar for hi ride 
home; but encount the hostess, he could not resist ask a few 
question rel to elli pritchard and hi pretti daughter. she 
answer shortli but respectfully, and then said, rather hesitatingly— 

“master griffiths, you know the triad, ‘tri pheth tebyg y naill i’r 
llall, ysgnbwr heb yd, mail deg heb ddiawd, a merch deg heb ei geirda’ 
(three thing are alike: a fine barn without corn, a fine cup without 
drink, a fine woman without her reputation).” she hastili quit him, 
and owen rode slowli to hi unhappi home. 

elli pritchard, half farmer and half fisherman, wa shrewd, and keen, 
and worldly; yet he wa good-natured, and suffici gener to have 
becom rather a popular man among hi equals. He had been struck with 
the young squire’ attent to hi pretti daughter, and wa not 
insens to the advantag to be deriv from it. nest would not be 
the first peasant girl, by ani means, who had been transplant to a 
welsh manor-hous as it mistress; and, accordingly, her father had 
shrewdli given the admir young man some pretext for further 
opportun of see her. 

As for nest herself, she had somewhat of her father’ worldliness, and 
wa fulli aliv to the superior station of her new admirer, and quit 
prepar to slight all her old sweetheart on hi account. but then she 
had someth more of feel in her reckoning; she had not been 
insens to the earnest yet compar refin homag which owen 
paid her; she had notic hi express and occasion handsom 
counten with admiration, and wa flatter by hi so immedi 
singl her out from her companions. As to the hint which martha thoma 
had thrown out, it is enough to say that nest wa veri giddy, and that 
she wa motherless. she had high spirit and a great love of admiration, 
or, to use a softer term, she love to please; men, women, and children, 
all, she delight to gladden with her smile and voice. she coquetted, 
and flirted, and went to the extrem length of welsh courtship, till the 
senior of the villag shook their heads, and caution their daughter 
against her acquaintance. If not absolut guilty, she had too 
frequent been on the verg of guilt. 

even at the time, martha thomas’ hint made but littl impress on 
owen, for hi sens were otherwis occupied; but in a few day the 
recollect thereof had wholli die away, and one warm gloriou summer’ 
day, he bent hi step toward elli pritchard’ with a beat heart; 
for, except some veri slight flirtat at oxford, owen had never been 
touched; hi thoughts, hi fancy, had been otherwis engaged. 

Ty gla wa built against one of the lower rock of moel gêst, which, 
indeed, form a side to the low, lengthi house. the materi of the 
cottag were the shingli stone which had fallen from above, plaster 
rude together, with deep recess for the small oblong windows. 
altogether, the exterior wa much ruder than owen had expected; but 
insid there seem no lack of comforts. the hous wa divid into two 
apartments, one large, roomy, and dark, into which owen enter 
immediately; and befor the blush nest came from the inner chamber 
(for she had seen the young squir coming, and hastili gone to make some 
alter in her dress), he had had time to look around him, and note 
the variou littl particular of the room. beneath the window (which 
command a magnific view) wa an oaken dresser, replet with drawer 
and cupboards, and brightli polish to a rich dark colour. In the 
farther part of the room owen could at first distinguish little, enter 
as he did from the glare sunlight, but he soon saw that there were two 
oaken beds, close up after the manner of the welsh: in fact, the 
domitori of elli pritchard and the man who serv under him, both on 
sea and on land. there wa the larg wheel use for spin wool, left 
stand on the middl of the floor, as if in use onli a few minut 
before; and around the ampl chimney hung flitch of bacon, dri 
kids’-flesh, and fish, that wa in process of smoke for winter’ store. 

befor nest had shyli dare to enter, her father, who had been mend 
hi net down below, and seen owen wind up to the house, came in and 
gave him a hearti yet respect welcome; and then nest, downcast and 
blushing, full of the conscious which her father’ advic and 
convers had not fail to inspire, ventur to join them. To owen’ 
mind thi reserv and shyness gave her new charms. 

It wa too bright, too hot, too anyth to think of go to shoot teal 
till later in the day, and owen wa delight to accept a hesit 
invit to share the noonday meal. some ewe-milk cheese, veri hard 
and dry, oat-cake, slip of the dri kids’-flesh broiled, after have 
been previous soak in water for a few minutes, delici butter and 
fresh butter-milk, with a liquor call “diod griafol” (made from the 
berri of the _sorbu aucuparia_, infus in water and then fermented), 
compos the frugal repast; but there wa someth so clean and neat, 
and withal such a true welcome, that owen had seldom enjoy a meal so 
much. indeed, at that time of day the welsh squir differ from the 
farmer more in the plenti and rough abund of their manner of live 
than in the refin of style of their table. 

At the present day, down in llyn, the welsh gentri are not a wit behind 
their saxon equal in the expens eleg of life; but then (when 
there wa but one pewter-servic in all northumberland) there wa noth 
in elli pritchard’ mode of live that grate on the young squire’ 
sens of refinement. 

littl wa said by that young pair of wooer dure the meal; the father 
had all the convers to himself, appar heedless of the ardent 
look and inattent mien of hi guest. As owen becam more seriou in 
hi feelings, he grew more timid in their expression, and at night, when 
they return from their shooting-excursion, the caress he gave nest wa 
almost as bash offer as received. 

thi wa but the first of a seri of day devot to nest in reality, 
though at first he thought some littl disguis of hi object wa 
necessary. the past, the future, wa all forgotten in those happi day 
of love. 

and everi worldli plan, everi womanli wile wa put in practic by elli 
pritchard and hi daughter, to render hi visit agreeabl and alluring. 
indeed, the veri circumst of hi be welcom wa enough to attract 
the poor young man, to whom the feel so produc wa new and full of 
charms. He left a home where the certainti of be thwart made him 
chari in express hi wishes; where no tone of love ever fell on hi 
ear, save those address to others; where hi presenc or absenc wa a 
matter of utter indifference; and when he enter Ty glas, all, down to 
the littl cur which, with clamor barkings, claim a part of hi 
attention, seem to rejoice. hi account of hi day’ employ found 
a will listen in ellis; and when he pass on to nest, busi at her 
wheel or at her churn, the deepen colour, the consciou eye, and the 
gradual yield of herself up to hi lover-lik caress, had world of 
charms. elli pritchard wa a tenant on the bodowen estate, and 
therefor had reason in plenti for wish to keep the young squire’ 
visit secret; and owen, unwil to disturb the sunni calm of these 
halcyon day by ani storm at home, wa readi to use all the artific 
which elli suggest as to the mode of hi call at Ty glas. nor wa he 
unawar of the probable, nay, the hoped-for termin of these repeat 
day of happiness. He wa quit consciou that the father wish for 
noth better than the marriag of hi daughter to the heir of bodowen; 
and when nest had hidden her face in hi neck, which wa encircl by her 
clasp arms, and murmur into hi ear her acknowledg of love, he 
felt onli too desir of find some one to love him for ever. though 
not highli principled, he would not have tri to obtain nest on other 
term save those of marriage: he did so pine after endur love, and 
fanci he should have bound her heart for evermor to his, when they had 
taken the solemn oath of matrimony. 

there wa no great difficulti attend a secret marriag at such a place 
and at such a time. one gusti autumn day, elli ferri them round 
penthryn to llandutrwyn, and there saw hi littl nest becom futur ladi 
of bodowen. 

how often do we see giddy, coquetting, restless girl becom sober by 
marriage? A great object in life is decided; one on which their thought 
have been run in all their vagaries, and they seem to verifi the 
beauti fabl of undine. A new soul beam out in the gentl and 
repos of their futur lives. An indescrib soft and tender 
take place of the weari vaniti of their former endeavour to attract 
admiration. someth of thi sort took place in nest pritchard. If at 
first she had been anxiou to attract the young squir of bodowen, long 
befor her marriag thi feel had merg into a truer love than she 
had ever felt before; and now that he wa her own, her husband, her whole 
soul wa bent toward make him amends, as far as in her lay, for the 
miseri which, with a woman’ tact, she saw that he had to endur at hi 
home. her greet were abound in delicately-express love; her 
studi of hi tast unwearying, in the arrang of her dress, her 
time, her veri thoughts. 

No wonder that he look back on hi wedding-day with a thank 
which is seldom the result of unequ marriages. No wonder that hi 
heart beat aloud as formerli when he wound up the littl path to Ty glas, 
and saw—keen though the winter’ wind might be—that nest wa stand out 
at the door to watch for hi dimly-seen approach, while the candl flare 
in the littl window as a beacon to guid him aright. 

the angri word and unkind action of home fell deaden on hi heart; he 
thought of the love that wa sure his, and of the new promis of love 
that a short time would bring forth, and he could almost have smile at 
the impot effort to disturb hi peace. 

A few more months, and the young father wa greet by a feebl littl 
cry, when he hastili enter Ty glas, one morn early, in consequ 
of a summon convey mysteri to bodowen; and the pale mother, 
smiling, and feebli hold up her babe to it father’ kiss, seem to 
him even more love than the bright gay nest who had won hi heart at 
the littl inn of penmorfa. 

but the curs wa at work! the fulfil of the propheci wa nigh at 
hand! 




chapter ii. 


IT wa the autumn after the birth of their boy; it had been a gloriou 
summer, with bright, hot, sunni weather; and now the year wa fade away 
as season into mellow days, with morn of silver mist and clear 
frosti nights. the bloom look of the time of flowers, wa past and 
gone; but instead there were even richer tint abroad in the sun-colour 
leaves, the lichens, the golden blossom furze; if it wa the time of 
fading, there wa a glori in the decay. 

nest, in her love anxieti to surround her dwell with everi charm for 
her husband’ sake, had turn gardener, and the littl corner of the 
rude court befor the hous were fill with mani a delic 
mountain-flower, transplant more for it beauti than it rarity. the 
sweetbrier bush may even yet be seen, old and gray, which she and owen 
plant a green slipl beneath the window of her littl chamber. In 
those moment owen forgot all besid the present; all the care and 
grief he had known in the past, and all that might await him of woe and 
death in the future. the boy, too, wa as love a child as the fondest 
parent wa ever bless with; and crow with delight, and clap hi 
littl hands, as hi mother held him in her arm at the cottage-door to 
watch hi father’ ascent up the rough path that led to Ty glas, one 
bright autumn morning; and when the three enter the hous together, 
it wa difficult to say which wa the happiest. owen carri hi boy, 
and toss and play with him, while nest sought out some littl articl 
of work, and seat herself on the dresser beneath the window, where now 
busili pli the needle, and then again look at her husband, she 
eagerli told him the littl piec of domest intelligence, the win 
way of the child, the result of yesterday’ fishing, and such of the 
gossip of penmorfa as came to the ear of the now retir nest. she 
notic that, when she mention ani littl circumst which bore the 
slightest refer to bodowen, her husband appear chafe and uneasy, 
and at last avoid anyth that might in the least remind him of home. 
In truth, he had been suffer much of late from the irrit of hi 
father, shown in trifl to be sure, but not the less gall on that 
account. 

while they were thu talking, and caress each other and the child, a 
shadow darken the room, and befor they could catch a glimps of the 
object that had occas it, it vanished, and squir griffith lift 
the door-latch and stood befor them. He stood and looked—first on hi 
son, so different, in hi buoyant express of content and enjoyment, 
with hi nobl child in hi arms, like a proud and happi father, as he 
was, from the depressed, moodi young man he too often appear at 
bodowen; then on nest—poor, trembling, sicken nest!—who drop her 
work, but yet durst not stir from her seat, on the dresser, while she 
look to her husband as if for protect from hi father. 

the squir wa silent, as he glare from one to the other, hi featur 
white with restrain passion. when he spoke, hi word came most 
distinct in their forc composure. It wa to hi son he address 
himself: 

“that woman! who is she?” 

owen hesit one moment, and then replied, in a steady, yet quiet 
voice: 

“father, that woman is my wife.” 

He would have ad some apolog for the long conceal of hi 
marriage; have appeal to hi father’ forgiveness; but the foam flew 
from squir owen’ lip as he burst forth with invect against nest:— 

“you have marri her! It is as they told me! marri nest pritchard yr 
buten! and you stand there as if you had not disgrac yourself for ever 
and ever with your accurs wiving! and the fair harlot sit there, in 
her mock modesty, practis the mim air that will becom her 
state as futur ladi of bodowen. but I will move heaven and earth befor 
that fals woman darken the door of my father’ hous as mistress!” 

all thi wa said with such rapid that owen had no time for the word 
that throng to hi lips. “father!” (he burst forth at length) “father, 
whosoev told you that nest pritchard wa a harlot told you a lie as 
fals as hell! ay! a lie as fals as hell!” he added, in a voic of 
thunder, while he advanc a step or two nearer to the squire. and then, 
in a lower tone, he said— 

“she is as pure as your own wife; nay, god help me! as the dear, preciou 
mother who brought me forth, and then left me—with no refug in a 
mother’ heart—to struggl on through life alone. I tell you nest is as 
pure as that dear, dead mother!” 

“fool—poor fool!” 

At thi moment the child—th littl owen—who had kept gaze from one 
angri counten to the other, and with earnest look, tri to 
understand what had brought the fierc glare into the face where till now 
he had read noth but love, in some way attract the squire’ 
attention, and increas hi wrath. 

“yes,” he continued, “poor, weak fool that you are, hug the child of 
anoth as if it were your own offspring!” owen involuntarili caress 
the affright child, and half smile at the implic of hi father’ 
words. thi the squir perceived, and rais hi voic to a scream of 
rage, he went on: 

“I bid you, if you call yourself my son, to cast away that miserable, 
shameless woman’ offspring; cast it away thi instant—thi instant!” 

In thi ungovern rage, see that owen wa far from compli with 
hi command, he snatch the poor infant from the love arm that held 
it, and throw it to hi mother, left the hous inarticul with fury. 

nest—who had been pale and still as marbl dure thi terribl dialogue, 
look on and listen as if fascin by the word that smote her 
heart—open her arm to receiv and cherish her preciou babe; but the 
boy wa not destin to reach the white refug of her breast. the 
furiou action of the squir had been almost without aim, and the infant 
fell against the sharp edg of the dresser down on to the stone floor. 

owen sprang up to take the child, but he lay so still, so motionless, 
that the awe of death came over the father, and he stoop down to gaze 
more closely. At that moment, the upturned, filmi eye roll 
convulsively—a spasm pass along the body—and the lips, yet warm with 
kissing, quiver into everlast rest. 

A word from her husband told nest all. she slid down from her seat, and 
lay by her littl son as corpse-lik as he, unheed all the agon 
endear and passion adjur of her husband. and that poor, 
desol husband and father! scarc one littl quarter of an hour, and 
he had been so bless in hi conscious of love! the bright promis 
of mani year on hi infant’ face, and the new, fresh soul beam forth 
in it awaken intelligence. and there it was; the littl clay image, 
that would never more gladden up at the sight of him, nor stretch forth 
to meet hi embrace; whose inarticulate, yet most eloqu coo might 
haunt him in hi dreams, but would never more be heard in wake life 
again! and by the dead babe, almost as utterli insensate, the poor 
mother had fallen in a merci faint—th slandered, heart-pierc nest! 
owen struggl against the sick that came over him, and busi 
himself in vain attempt at her restoration. 

It wa now near noon-day, and elli pritchard came home, littl dream 
of the sight that await him; but though stunned, he wa abl to take 
more effectu measur for hi poor daughter’ recoveri than owen had 
done. 

by-and-bi she show symptom of return sense, and wa place in her 
own littl bed in a darken room, where, without ever wake to complet 
consciousness, she fell asleep. then it wa that her husband, suffoc 
by pressur of miser thought, gentli drew hi hand from her tighten 
clasp, and print one long soft kiss on her white waxen forehead, 
hastili stole out of the room, and out of the house. 

near the base of moel gêst—it might be a quarter of a mile from Ty 
glas—wa a littl neglect solitari copse, wild and tangl with the 
trail branch of the dog-ros and the tendril of the white bryony. 
toward the middl of thi thicket a deep crystal pool—a clear mirror for 
the blue heaven above—and round the margin float the broad green 
leav of the water-lily, and when the regal sun shone down in hi 
noonday glori the flower aros from their cool depth to welcom and 
greet him. the cops wa music with mani sounds; the warbl of bird 
rejoic in it shades, the ceaseless hum of the insect that hover 
over the pool, the chime of the distant waterfall, the occasion 
bleat of the sheep from the mountaintop, were all blend into the 
delici harmoni of nature. 

It had been one of owen’ favourit resort when he had been a lone 
wanderer—a pilgrim in search of love in the year gone by. and thither 
he went, as if by instinct, when he left Ty glas; quell the upris 
agoni till he should reach that littl solitari spot. 

It wa the time of day when a chang in the aspect of the weather so 
frequent take place; and the littl pool wa no longer the reflect 
of a blue and sunni sky: it sent back the dark and slati cloud above, 
and, everi now and then, a rough gust shook the paint autumn leav 
from their branches, and all other music wa lost in the sound of the 
wild wind pipe down from the moorlands, which lay up and beyond the 
cleft in the mountain-side. present the rain came on and beat down in 
torrents. 

but owen heed it not. He sat on the dank ground, hi face buri in 
hi hands, and hi whole strength, physic and mental, employ in 
quell the rush of blood, which rose and boil and gurgl in hi 
brain as if it would madden him. 

the phantom of hi dead child rose ever befor him, and seem to cri 
aloud for vengeance. and when the poor young man thought upon the victim 
whom he requir in hi wild long for revenge, he shuddered, for it 
wa hi father! 

again and again he tri not to think; but still the circl of thought 
came round, eddi through hi brain. At length he master hi 
passions, and they were calm; then he forc himself to arrang some plan 
for the future. 

He had not, in the passion hurri of the moment, seen that hi father 
had left the cottag befor he wa awar of the fatal accid that 
befel the child. owen thought he had seen all; and onc he plan to 
go to the squir and tell him of the anguish of heart he had wrought, and 
awe him, as it were, by the digniti of grief. but then again he durst 
not—h distrust hi self-control—th old propheci rose up in it 
horror—h dread hi doom. 

At last he determin to leav hi father for ever; to take nest to some 
distant countri where she might forget her firstborn, and where he 
himself might gain a livelihood by hi own exertions. 

but when he tri to descend to the variou littl arrang which 
were involv in the execut of thi plan, he rememb that all hi 
money (and in thi respect squir griffith wa no niggard) wa lock up 
in hi escritoir at bodowen. In vain he tri to do away with thi 
matter-of-fact difficulty; go to bodowen he must: and hi onli hope—nay 
hi determination—wa to avoid hi father. 

He rose and took a by-path to bodowen. the hous look even more gloomi 
and desol than usual in the heavi down-pour rain, yet owen gaze on 
it with someth of regret—for sorrow as hi day in it had been, he 
wa about to leav it for mani mani years, if not for ever. He enter 
by a side door open into a passag that led to hi own room, where he 
kept hi books, hi guns, hi fishing-tackle, hi write materials, et 
cetera. 

here he hurriedli began to select the few articl he intend to take; 
for, besid the dread of interruption, he wa feverishli anxiou to 
travel far that veri night, if onli nest wa capabl of perform the 
journey. As he wa thu employed, he tri to conjectur what hi 
father’ feel would be on find that hi once-lov son wa gone 
away for ever. would he then awaken to regret for the conduct which had 
driven him from home, and bitterli think on the love and caress boy 
who haunt hi footstep in former days? or, alas! would he onli feel 
that an obstacl to hi daili happiness—to hi content with hi wife, 
and hi strange, dote affect for the child—wa taken away? would 
they make merri over the heir’ departure? then he thought of nest—th 
young childless mother, whose heart had not yet realiz her ful of 
desolation. poor nest! so love as she was, so devot to her child—how 
should he consol her? He pictur her away in a strang land, pine 
for her nativ mountains, and refus to be comfort becaus her child 
wa not. 

even thi thought of the home-sick that might possibl beset nest 
hardli made him hesit in hi determination; so strongli had the idea 
taken possess of him that onli by put mile and leagu between 
him and hi father could he avert the doom which seem blend itself 
with the veri purpos of hi life as long as he stay in proxim with 
the slayer of hi child. 

He had now nearli complet hi hasti work of preparation, and wa full 
of tender thought of hi wife, when the door opened, and the elfish 
robert peer in, in search of some of hi brother’ possessions. On 
see owen he hesitated, but then came boldli forward, and laid hi hand 
on owen’ arm, saying, 

“nesta yr buten! how is nest yr buten?” 

He look malici into owen’ face to mark the effect of hi words, 
but wa terrifi at the express he read there. He start off and 
ran to the door, while owen tri to check himself, say continually, 
“he is but a child. He doe not understand the mean of what he says. 
He is but a child!” still robert, now in fanci security, kept call 
out hi insult words, and owen’ hand wa on hi gun, grasp it as 
if to restrain hi rise fury. 

but when robert pass on daringli to mock word relat to the poor 
dead child, owen could bear it no longer; and befor the boy wa well 
aware, owen wa fierc hold him in an iron clasp with one hand, 
while he struck him hard with the other. 

In a minut he check himself. He paused, relax hi grasp, and, to 
hi horror, he saw robert sink to the ground; in fact, the lad wa 
half-stunned, half-frightened, and thought it best to assum 
insensibility. 

owen—miser owen—se him lie there prostrate, wa bitterli 
repentant, and would have drag him to the carv settle, and done all 
he could to restor him to hi senses, but at thi instant the squir 
came in. 

probably, when the household at bodowen rose that morning, there wa but 
one among them ignor of the heir’ relat to nest pritchard and her 
child; for secret as he tri to make hi visit to Ty glas, they had 
been too frequent not to be noticed, and nest’ alter conduct—no longer 
frequent danc and merry-makings—wa a strongli corrobor 
circumstance. but mrs. griffiths’ influenc reign paramount, if 
unacknowledged, at bodowen, and till she sanction the disclosure, none 
would dare to tell the squire. 

now, however, the time drew near when it suit her to make her husband 
awar of the connect hi son had formed; so, with mani tears, and much 
seem reluctance, she broke the intellig to him—tak good care, 
at the same time, to inform him of the light charact nest had borne. 
nor did she confin thi evil reput to her conduct befor her 
marriage, but insinu that even to thi day she wa a “woman of the 
grove and brake”—for centuri the welsh term of opprobrium for the 
loosest femal characters. 

squir griffith easili track owen to Ty glas; and without ani aim but 
the gratif of hi furiou anger, follow him to upbraid as we 
have seen. but he left the cottag even more enrag against hi son 
than he had enter it, and return home to hear the evil suggest of 
the stepmother. He had heard a slight scuffl in which he caught the 
tone of robert’ voice, as he pass along the hall, and an instant 
afterward he saw the appar lifeless bodi of hi littl favourit 
drag along by the culprit owen—th mark of strong passion yet visibl 
on hi face. not loud, but bitter and deep were the evil word which the 
father bestow on the son; and as owen stood proudli and sullenli 
silent, disdain all exculp of himself in the presenc of one who 
had wrought him so much graver—so fatal an injury—robert’ mother enter 
the room. At sight of her natur emot the wrath of the squir wa 
redoubled, and hi wild suspicion that thi violenc of owen’ to robert 
wa a premedit act appear like the proven truth through the mist 
of rage. He summon domest as if to guard hi own and hi wife’ 
life from the attempt of hi son; and the servant stood wonder 
around—now gaze at mrs. griffiths, altern scold and sobbing, 
while she tri to restor the lad from hi realli bruis and 
half-unconsci state; now at the fierc and angri squire; and now at 
the sad and silent owen. and he—h wa hardli awar of their look of 
wonder and terror; hi father’ word fell on a deaden ear; for befor 
hi eye there rose a pale dead babe, and in that lady’ violent sound 
of grief he heard the wail of a more sad, more hopeless mother. for 
by thi time the lad robert had open hi eyes, and though evid 
suffer a good deal from the effect of owen’ blows, wa fulli 
consciou of all that wa pass around him. 

had owen been left to hi own nature, hi heart would have work itself 
to doubli love the boy whom he had injured; but he wa stubborn from 
injustice, and harden by suffering. He refus to vindic himself; 
he made no effort to resist the imprison the squir had decreed, 
until a surgeon’ opinion of the real extent of robert’ injuri wa 
made known. It wa not until the door wa lock and barred, as if upon 
some wild and furiou beast, that the recollect of poor nest, without 
hi comfort presence, came into hi mind. oh! thought he, how she 
would be wearying, pine for hi tender sympathy; if, indeed, she had 
recov the shock of mind suffici to be sensibl of consolation! 
what would she think of hi absence? could she imagin he believ hi 
father’ words, and had left her, in thi her sore troubl and 
bereavement? the thought maden him, and he look around for some mode 
of escape. 

He had been confin in a small unfurnish room on the first floor, 
wainscoted, and carv all round, with a massi door, calcul to resist 
the attempt of a dozen strong men, even had he afterward been abl to 
escap from the hous unseen, unheard. the window wa place (a is 
common in old welsh houses) over the fire-place; with branch chimney 
on either hand, form a sort of project on the outside. By thi 
outlet hi escap wa easy, even had he been less determin and 
desper than he was. and when he had descended, with a littl care, a 
littl winding, he might elud all observ and pursu hi origin 
intent of go to Ty glas. 

the storm had abated, and wateri sunbeam were gild the bay, as owen 
descend from the window, and, steal along in the broad afternoon 
shadows, made hi way to the littl plateau of green turf in the garden 
at the top of a steep precipit rock, down the abrupt face of which he 
had often dropped, by mean of a well-secur rope, into the small 
sailing-boat (hi father’ present, alas! in day gone by) which lay 
moor in the deep sea-wat below. He had alway kept hi boat there, 
becaus it wa the nearest avail spot to the house; but befor he 
could reach the place—unless, indeed, he cross a broad sun-light 
piec of ground in full view of the window on that side of the house, 
and without the shadow of a singl shelter tree or shrub—h had to 
skirt round a rude semicircl of underwood, which would have been 
consid as a shrubberi had ani one taken pain with it. step by step 
he stealthili move along—hear voic now, again see hi father and 
stepmoth in no distant walk, the squir evid caress and 
consol hi wife, who seem to be urg some point with great 
vehemence, again forc to crouch down to avoid be seen by the cook, 
return from the rude kitchen-garden with a hand of herbs. thi wa 
the way the doom heir of bodowen left hi ancestr hous for ever, and 
hope to leav behind him hi doom. At length he reach the plateau—h 
breath more freely. He stoop to discov the hidden coil of rope, 
kept safe and dri in a hole under a great round flat piec of rock: hi 
head wa bent down; he did not see hi father approach, nor did he hear 
hi footstep for the rush of blood to hi head in the stoop effort of 
lift the stone; the squir had grappl with him befor he rose up 
again, befor he fulli knew whose hand detain him, now, when hi 
liberti of person and action seem secure. He made a vigor struggl 
to free himself; he wrestl with hi father for a moment—h push him 
hard, and drove him on to the great displac stone, all unsteadi in it 
balance. 

down went the squire, down into the deep water below—down after him went 
owen, half consciously, half unconsciously, partli compel by the 
sudden cessat of ani oppos body, partli from a vehement 
irrepress impuls to rescu hi father. but he had instinct 
chosen a safer place in the deep seawat pool than that into which hi 
push had sent hi father. the squir had hit hi head with much violenc 
against the side of the boat, in hi fall; it is, indeed, doubt 
whether he wa not kill befor ever he sank into the sea. but owen 
knew noth save that the aw doom seem even now present. He 
plung down, he dive below the water in search of the bodi which had 
none of the elast of life to buoy it up; he saw hi father in those 
depths, he clutch at him, he brought him up and cast him, a dead 
weight, into the boat, and exhaust by the effort, he had begun himself 
to sink again befor he instinct strove to rise and climb into the 
rock boat. there lay hi father, with a deep dent in the side of hi 
head where the skull had been fractur by hi fall; hi face blacken 
by the arrest cours of the blood. owen felt hi pulse, hi heart—al 
wa still. He call him by hi name. 

“father, father!” he cried, “come back! come back! you never knew how I 
love you! how I could love you still—if—oh god!” 

and the thought of hi littl child rose befor him. “yes, father,” he 
cri afresh, “you never knew how he fell—how he died! oh, if I had but 
had patienc to tell you! If you would but have born with me and 
listened! and now it is over! Oh father! father!” 

whether she had heard thi wild wail voice, or whether it wa onli 
that she miss her husband and want him for some littl every-day 
question, or, as wa perhap more likely, she had discov owen’ 
escape, and come to inform her husband of it, I do not know, but on the 
rock, right abov hi head, as it seemed, owen heard hi stepmoth 
call her husband. 

He wa silent, and softli push the boat right under the rock till the 
side grate against the stones, and the overhang branch conceal 
him and it from all not on a level with the water. wet as he was, he lay 
down by hi dead father the better to conceal himself; and, somehow, the 
action recal those earli day of childhood—th first in the squire’ 
widowhood—when owen had share hi father’ bed, and use to waken him in 
the morn to hear one of the old welsh legends. how long he lay 
thus—bodi chilled, and brain hard-work through the heavi pressur of a 
realiti as terribl as a nightmare—h never knew; but at length he rous 
himself up to think of nest. 

draw out a great sail, he cover up the bodi of hi father with it 
where he lay in the bottom of the boat. then with hi numb hand he 
took the oars, and pull out into the more open sea toward criccaeth. 
He skirt along the coast till he found a shadow cleft in the dark 
rocks; to that point he rowed, and anchor hi boat close in land. then 
he mounted, staggering, half long to fall into the dark water and be 
at rest—half instinct find out the surest foot-rest on that 
precipit face of rock, till he wa high up, safe land on the turfi 
summit. He ran off, as if pursued, toward penmorfa; he ran with madden 
energy. suddenli he paused, turned, ran again with the same speed, and 
threw himself prone on the summit, look down into hi boat with 
strain eye to see if there had been ani movement of life—ani 
displac of a fold of sail-cloth. It wa all quiet deep down below, 
but as he gaze the shift light gave the appear of a slight 
movement. owen ran to a lower part of the rock, stripped, plung into 
the water, and swam to the boat. when there, all wa still—aw 
still! for a minut or two, he dare not lift up the cloth. then 
reflect that the same terror might beset him again—of leav hi 
father unaid while yet a spark of life lingered—h remov the 
shroud cover. the eye look into hi with a dead stare! He close 
the lid and bound up the jaw. again he looked. thi time he rais 
himself out of the water and kiss the brow. 

“it wa my doom, father! It would have been better if I had die at my 
birth!” 

daylight wa fade away. preciou daylight! He swam back, dressed, and 
set off afresh for penmorfa. when he open the door of Ty glas, elli 
pritchard look at him reproachfully, from hi seat in the 
darkly-shadow chimney-corner. 

“you’r come at last,” said he. “one of our kind (_i.e._, station) would 
not have left hi wife to mourn by herself over her dead child; nor would 
one of our kind have let hi father kill hi own true son. i’v a good 
mind to take her from you for ever.” 

“I did not tell him,” cri nest, look piteous at her husband; “he 
made me tell him part, and guess the rest.” 

she wa nurs her babe on her knee as if it wa alive. owen stood 
befor elli pritchard. 

“be silent,” said he, quietly. “neither word nor deed but what are 
decre can come to pass. I wa set to do my work, thi hundr year 
and more. the time wait for me, and the man wait for me. I have 
done what wa foretold of me for generations!” 

elli pritchard knew the old tale of the prophecy, and believ in it in 
a dull, dead kind of way, but somehow never thought it would come to pass 
in hi time. now, however, he understood it all in a moment, though he 
mistook owen’ natur so much as to believ that the deed wa 
intent done, out of reveng for the death of hi boy; and view 
it in thi light, elli thought it littl more than a just punish for 
the caus of all the wild despair sorrow he had seen hi onli child 
suffer dure the hour of thi long afternoon. but he knew the law 
would not so regard it. even the lax welsh law of those day could not 
fail to examin into the death of a man of squir griffith’ standing. 
So the acut elli thought how he could conceal the culprit for a time. 

“come,” said he; “don’t look so scared! It wa your doom, not your 
fault;” and he laid a hand on owen’ shoulder. 

“you’r wet,” said he, suddenly. “where have you been? nest, your 
husband is dripping, drookit wet. that’ what make him look so blue and 
wan.” 

nest softli laid her babi in it cradle; she wa half stupefi with 
crying, and had not understood to what owen alluded, when he spoke of hi 
doom be fulfilled, if inde she had heard the words. 

her touch thaw owen’ miser heart. 

“oh, nest!” said he, clasp her in hi arms; “do you love me still—can 
you love me, my own darling?” 

“whi not?” ask she, her eye fill with tears. “I onli love you more 
than ever, for you were my poor baby’ father!” 

“but, nest—oh, tell her, ellis! _you_ know.” 

“no need, no need!” said ellis. “she’ had enough to think on. bustle, 
my girl, and get out my sunday clothes.” 

“I don’t understand,” said nest, put her hand up to her head. “what 
is to tell? and whi are you so wet? god help me for a poor craze thing, 
for I cannot guess at the mean of your word and your strang looks! 
I onli know my babi is dead!” and she burst into tears. 

“come, nest! go and fetch him a change, quick!” and as she meekli obeyed, 
too languid to strive further to understand, elli said rapidli to owen, 
in a low, hurri voice— 

“are you mean that the squir is dead? speak low, lest she hear. 
well, well, no need to talk about how he died. It wa sudden, I see; and 
we must all of us die; and he’ll have to be buried. it’ well the night 
is near. and I should not wonder now if you’d like to travel for a bit; 
it would do nest a power of good; and then—there’ mani a one goe out of 
hi own hous and never come back again; and—i trust he’ not lie in 
hi own house—and there’ a stir for a bit, and a search, and a 
wonder—and, by-and-by, the heir just step in, as quiet as can be. and 
that’ what you’ll do, and bring nest to bodowen after all. nay, child, 
better stock nor those; find the blue woollen I bought at llanrwst 
fair. onli don’t lose heart. it’ done now and can’t be helped. It wa 
the piec of work set you to do from the day of the tudors, they say. 
and he deserv it. look in yon cradle. So tell us where he is, and 
i’ll take heart of grace and see what can be done for him.” 

but owen sat wet and haggard, look into the peat fire as if for 
vision of the past, and never heed a word elli said. nor did he 
move when nest brought the arm of dri clothes. 

“come, rous up, man!” said ellis, grow impatient. but he neither 
spoke nor moved. 

“what is the matter, father?” ask nest, bewildered. 

elli kept on watch owen for a minut or two, till on hi daughter’ 
repetit of the question, he said— 

“ask him yourself, nest.” 

“oh, husband, what is it?” said she, kneel down and bring her face 
to a level with his. 

“don’t you know?” said he, heavily. “you won’t love me when you do know. 
and yet it wa not my doing: it wa my doom.” 

“what doe he mean, father?” ask nest, look up; but she caught a 
gestur from elli urg her to go on question her husband. 

“I will love you, husband, whatev ha happened. onli let me know the 
worst.” 

A pause, dure which nest and elli hung breathless. 

“mi father is dead, nest.” 

nest caught her breath with a sharp gasp. 

“god forgiv him!” said she, think on her babe. 

“god forgiv _me_!” said owen. 

“you did not—” nest stopped. 

“yes, I did. now you know it. It wa my doom. how could I help it? 
the devil help me—h place the stone so that my father fell. I jump 
into the water to save him. I did, indeed, nest. I wa nearli drown 
myself. but he wa dead—dead—kil by the fall!” 

“then he is safe at the bottom of the sea?” said ellis, with hungri 
eagerness. 

“no, he is not; he lie in my boat,” said owen, shiver a little, more 
at the thought of hi last glimps at hi father’ face than from cold. 

“oh, husband, chang your wet clothes!” plead nest, to whom the death 
of the old man wa simpli a horror with which she had noth to do, 
while her husband’ discomfort wa a present trouble. 

while she help him to take off the wet garment which he would never 
have had energi enough to remov of himself, elli wa busi prepar 
food, and mix a great tumbler of spirit and hot water. He stood over 
the unfortun young man and compel him to eat and drink, and made 
nest, too, tast some mouthfuls—al the while plan in hi own mind 
how best to conceal what had been done, and who had done it; not 
altogeth without a certain feel of vulgar triumph in the reflect 
that nest, as she stood there, carelessli dressed, dishevel in her 
grief, wa in realiti the mistress of bodowen, than which elli pritchard 
had never seen a grander house, though he believ such might exist. 

By dint of a few dexter question he found out all he want to know 
from owen, as he ate and drank. In fact, it wa almost a relief to owen 
to dilut the horror by talk about it. befor the meal wa done, if 
meal it could be called, elli knew all he care to know. 

“now, nest, on with your cloak and haps. pack up what need to go with 
you, for both you and your husband must be half way to liverpool by 
to-morrow’ morn. i’ll take you past rhyl sand in my fishing-boat, with 
your in tow; and, onc over the danger part, i’ll return with my 
cargo of fish, and learn how much stir there is at bodowen. onc safe 
hidden in liverpool, no one will know where you are, and you may stay 
quiet till your time come for returning.” 

“I will never come home again,” said owen, doggedly. “the place is 
accursed!” 

“hoot! be guid by me, man. why, it wa but an accident, after all! 
and we’ll land at the holi island, at the point of llyn; there is an old 
cousin of mine, the parson, there—for the pritchard have known better 
days, squire—and we’ll buri him there. It wa but an accident, man. 
hold up your head! you and nest will come home yet and fill bodowen with 
children, and i’ll live to see it.” 

“never!” said owen. “I am the last male of my race, and the son ha 
murder hi father!” 

nest came in laden and cloaked. elli wa for hurri them off. the 
fire wa extinguished, the door wa locked. 

“here, nest, my darling, let me take your bundl while I guid you down 
the steps.” but her husband bent hi head, and spoke never a word. nest 
gave her father the bundl (alreadi load with such thing as he himself 
had seen fit to take), but clasp anoth softli and tightly. 

“no one shall help me with this,” said she, in a low voice. 

her father did not understand her; her husband did, and place hi strong 
help arm round her waist, and bless her. 

“we will all go together, nest,” said he. “but where?” and he look up 
at the storm-toss cloud come up from windward. 

“it is a dirti night,” said ellis, turn hi head round to speak to hi 
companion at last. “but never fear, we’ll weather it?” and he made for 
the place where hi vessel wa moored. then he stop and thought a 
moment. 

“stay here!” said he, address hi companions. “I may meet folk, and I 
shall, maybe, have to hear and to speak. you wait here till I come back 
for you.” So they sat down close togeth in a corner of the path. 

“let me look at him, nest!” said owen. 

she took her littl dead son out from under her shawl; they look at hi 
waxen face long and tenderly; kiss it, and cover it up rever and 
softly. 

“nest,” said owen, at last, “I feel as though my father’ spirit had been 
near us, and as if it had bent over our poor littl one. A strang 
chilli air met me as I stoop over him. I could fanci the spirit of our 
pure, blameless child guid my father’ safe over the path of the sky 
to the gate of heaven, and escap those accurs dog of hell that 
were dart up from the north in pursuit of soul not five minut 
since. 

“don’t talk so, owen,” said nest, curl up to him in the dark of 
the copse. “who know what may be listening?” 

the pair were silent, in a kind of nameless terror, till they heard elli 
pritchard’ loud whisper. “where are ye? come along, soft and steady. 
there were folk about even now, and the squir is missed, and madam in a 
fright.” 

they went swiftli down to the littl harbour, and embark on board 
ellis’ boat. the sea heav and rock even there; the torn cloud went 
hurri overhead in a wild tumultu manner. 

they put out into the bay; still in silence, except when some word of 
command wa spoken by ellis, who took the manag of the vessel. they 
made for the rocki shore, where owen’ boat had been moored. It wa not 
there. It had broken loos and disappeared. 

owen sat down and cover hi face. thi last event, so simpl and 
natur in itself, struck on hi excit and superstiti mind in an 
extraordinari manner. He had hope for a certain reconciliation, so to 
say, by lay hi father and hi child both in one grave. but now it 
appear to him as if there wa to be no forgiveness; as if hi father 
revolt even in death against ani such peac union. elli took a 
practic view of the case. If the squire’ bodi wa found drift 
about in a boat known to belong to hi son, it would creat terribl 
suspicion as to the manner of hi death. At one time in the evening, 
elli had thought of persuad owen to let him buri the squir in a 
sailor’ grave; or, in other words, to sew him up in a spare sail, and 
weight it well, sink it for ever. He had not broach the subject, 
from a certain fear of owen’ passion repugn to the plan; 
otherwise, if he had consented, they might have return to penmorfa, and 
passiv await the cours of events, secur of owen’ success to 
bodowen, sooner or later; or if owen wa too much overwhelm by what had 
happened, elli would have advis him to go away for a short time, and 
return when the buzz and the talk wa over. 

now it wa different. It wa absolut necessari that they should leav 
the countri for a time. through those stormi water they must plough 
their way that veri night. elli had no fear—would have had no fear, at 
ani rate, with owen as he had been a week, a day ago; but with owen wild, 
despairing, helpless, fate-pursued, what could he do? 

they sail into the toss darkness, and were never more seen of men. 

the hous of bodowen ha sunk into damp, dark ruins; and a saxon stranger 
hold the land of the griffiths. 




***end OF the project gutenberg ebook the doom OF the griffiths*** 


******* thi file should be name 2549-0.txt or 2549-0.zip ******* 


thi and all associ file of variou format will be found in: 
http://www.gutenberg.org/dirs/2/5/4/2549 


updat edit will replac the previou one--th old edit will 
be renamed. 

creat the work from print edit not protect by u.s. copyright 
law mean that no one own a unit state copyright in these works, 
so the foundat (and you!) can copi and distribut it in the unit 
state without permiss and without pay copyright 
royalties. special rules, set forth in the gener term of use part 
of thi license, appli to copi and distribut project 
gutenberg-tm electron work to protect the project gutenberg-tm 
concept and trademark. project gutenberg is a regist trademark, 
and may not be use if you charg for the ebooks, unless you receiv 
specif permission. If you do not charg anyth for copi of thi 
ebook, compli with the rule is veri easy. you may use thi ebook 
for nearli ani purpos such as creation of deriv works, reports, 
perform and research. they may be modifi and print and given 
away--y may do practic anyth in the unit state with ebook 
not protect by u.s. copyright law. redistribut is subject to the 
trademark license, especi commerci redistribution. 

start: full licens 

the full project gutenberg licens 
pleas read thi befor you distribut OR use thi work 

To protect the project gutenberg-tm mission of promot the free 
distribut of electron works, by use or distribut thi work 
(or ani other work associ in ani way with the phrase "project 
gutenberg"), you agre to compli with all the term of the full 
project gutenberg-tm licens avail with thi file or onlin at 
www.gutenberg.org/license. 

section 1. gener term of use and redistribut project 
gutenberg-tm electron work 

1.a. By read or use ani part of thi project gutenberg-tm 
electron work, you indic that you have read, understand, agre to 
and accept all the term of thi licens and intellectu properti 
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agre to abid by all 
the term of thi agreement, you must ceas use and return or 
destroy all copi of project gutenberg-tm electron work in your 
possession. If you paid a fee for obtain a copi of or access to a 
project gutenberg-tm electron work and you do not agre to be bound 
by the term of thi agreement, you may obtain a refund from the 
person or entiti to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 
1.e.8. 

1.b. "project gutenberg" is a regist trademark. It may onli be 
use on or associ in ani way with an electron work by peopl who 
agre to be bound by the term of thi agreement. there are a few 
thing that you can do with most project gutenberg-tm electron work 
even without compli with the full term of thi agreement. see 
paragraph 1.c below. there are a lot of thing you can do with project 
gutenberg-tm electron work if you follow the term of thi 
agreement and help preserv free futur access to project gutenberg-tm 
electron works. see paragraph 1.e below. 

1.c. the project gutenberg literari archiv foundat ("the 
foundation" or pglaf), own a compil copyright in the collect 
of project gutenberg-tm electron works. nearli all the individu 
work in the collect are in the public domain in the unit 
states. If an individu work is unprotect by copyright law in the 
unit state and you are locat in the unit states, we do not 
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing, 
display or creat deriv work base on the work as long as 
all refer to project gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope 
that you will support the project gutenberg-tm mission of promot 
free access to electron work by freeli share project gutenberg-tm 
work in complianc with the term of thi agreement for keep the 
project gutenberg-tm name associ with the work. you can easili 
compli with the term of thi agreement by keep thi work in the 
same format with it attach full project gutenberg-tm licens when 
you share it without charg with others. 

1.d. the copyright law of the place where you are locat also govern 
what you can do with thi work. copyright law in most countri are 
in a constant state of change. If you are outsid the unit states, 
check the law of your countri in addit to the term of thi 
agreement befor downloading, copying, displaying, performing, 
distribut or creat deriv work base on thi work or ani 
other project gutenberg-tm work. the foundat make no 
represent concern the copyright statu of ani work in ani 
countri outsid the unit states. 

1.e. unless you have remov all refer to project gutenberg: 

1.e.1. the follow sentence, with activ link to, or other 
immedi access to, the full project gutenberg-tm licens must appear 
promin whenev ani copi of a project gutenberg-tm work (ani work 
on which the phrase "project gutenberg" appears, or with which the 
phrase "project gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, 
performed, viewed, copi or distributed: 

thi ebook is for the use of anyon anywher in the unit state and 
most other part of the world at no cost and with almost no 
restrict whatsoever. you may copi it, give it away or re-us it 
under the term of the project gutenberg licens includ with thi 
ebook or onlin at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not locat in the 
unit states, you'll have to check the law of the countri where you 
are locat befor use thi ebook. 

1.e.2. If an individu project gutenberg-tm electron work is 
deriv from text not protect by u.s. copyright law (doe not 
contain a notic indic that it is post with permiss of the 
copyright holder), the work can be copi and distribut to anyon in 
the unit state without pay ani fee or charges. If you are 
redistribut or provid access to a work with the phrase "project 
gutenberg" associ with or appear on the work, you must compli 
either with the requir of paragraph 1.e.1 through 1.e.7 or 
obtain permiss for the use of the work and the project gutenberg-tm 
trademark as set forth in paragraph 1.e.8 or 1.e.9. 

1.e.3. If an individu project gutenberg-tm electron work is post 
with the permiss of the copyright holder, your use and distribut 
must compli with both paragraph 1.e.1 through 1.e.7 and ani 
addit term impos by the copyright holder. addit term 
will be link to the project gutenberg-tm licens for all work 
post with the permiss of the copyright holder found at the 
begin of thi work. 

1.e.4. Do not unlink or detach or remov the full project gutenberg-tm 
licens term from thi work, or ani file contain a part of thi 
work or ani other work associ with project gutenberg-tm. 

1.e.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribut or redistribut thi 
electron work, or ani part of thi electron work, without 
promin display the sentenc set forth in paragraph 1.e.1 with 
activ link or immedi access to the full term of the project 
gutenberg-tm license. 

1.e.6. you may convert to and distribut thi work in ani binary, 
compressed, mark up, nonproprietari or proprietari form, includ 
ani word process or hypertext form. however, if you provid access 
to or distribut copi of a project gutenberg-tm work in a format 
other than "plain vanilla ascii" or other format use in the offici 
version post on the offici project gutenberg-tm web site 
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no addit cost, fee or expens 
to the user, provid a copy, a mean of export a copy, or a mean 
of obtain a copi upon request, of the work in it origin "plain 
vanilla ascii" or other form. ani altern format must includ the 
full project gutenberg-tm licens as specifi in paragraph 1.e.1. 

1.e.7. Do not charg a fee for access to, viewing, displaying, 
performing, copi or distribut ani project gutenberg-tm work 
unless you compli with paragraph 1.e.8 or 1.e.9. 

1.e.8. you may charg a reason fee for copi of or provid 
access to or distribut project gutenberg-tm electron work 
provid that 

* you pay a royalti fee of 20% of the gross profit you deriv from 
the use of project gutenberg-tm work calcul use the method 
you alreadi use to calcul your applic taxes. the fee is owe 
to the owner of the project gutenberg-tm trademark, but he ha 
agre to donat royalti under thi paragraph to the project 
gutenberg literari archiv foundation. royalti payment must be paid 
within 60 day follow each date on which you prepar (or are 
legal requir to prepare) your period tax returns. royalti 
payment should be clearli mark as such and sent to the project 
gutenberg literari archiv foundat at the address specifi in 
section 4, "inform about donat to the project gutenberg 
literari archiv foundation." 

* you provid a full refund of ani money paid by a user who notifi 
you in write (or by e-mail) within 30 day of receipt that s/he 
doe not agre to the term of the full project gutenberg-tm 
license. you must requir such a user to return or destroy all 
copi of the work possess in a physic medium and discontinu 
all use of and all access to other copi of project gutenberg-tm 
works. 

* you provide, in accord with paragraph 1.f.3, a full refund of 
ani money paid for a work or a replac copy, if a defect in the 
electron work is discov and report to you within 90 day of 
receipt of the work. 

* you compli with all other term of thi agreement for free 
distribut of project gutenberg-tm works. 

1.e.9. If you wish to charg a fee or distribut a project 
gutenberg-tm electron work or group of work on differ term than 
are set forth in thi agreement, you must obtain permiss in write 
from both the project gutenberg literari archiv foundat and the 
project gutenberg trademark llc, the owner of the project gutenberg-tm 
trademark. contact the foundat as set forth in section 3 below. 

1.f. 

1.f.1. project gutenberg volunt and employe expend consider 
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcrib and proofread 
work not protect by u.s. copyright law in creat the project 
gutenberg-tm collection. despit these efforts, project gutenberg-tm 
electron works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may 
contain "defects," such as, but not limit to, incomplete, inaccur 
or corrupt data, transcript errors, a copyright or other 
intellectu properti infringement, a defect or damag disk or 
other medium, a comput virus, or comput code that damag or 
cannot be read by your equipment. 

1.f.2. limit warranty, disclaim OF damag - except for the "right 
of replac or refund" describ in paragraph 1.f.3, the project 
gutenberg literari archiv foundation, the owner of the project 
gutenberg-tm trademark, and ani other parti distribut a project 
gutenberg-tm electron work under thi agreement, disclaim all 
liabil to you for damages, cost and expenses, includ legal 
fees. you agre that you have NO remedi for negligence, strict 
liability, breach OF warranti OR breach OF contract except those 
provid IN paragraph 1.f.3. you agre that the foundation, the 
trademark owner, and ani distributor under thi agreement will not BE 
liabl TO you for actual, direct, indirect, consequential, punit OR 
incident damag even IF you give notic OF the possibl OF such 
damage. 

1.f.3. limit right OF replac OR refund - If you discov a 
defect in thi electron work within 90 day of receiv it, you can 
receiv a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by send a 
written explan to the person you receiv the work from. If you 
receiv the work on a physic medium, you must return the medium 
with your written explanation. the person or entiti that provid you 
with the defect work may elect to provid a replac copi in 
lieu of a refund. If you receiv the work electronically, the person 
or entiti provid it to you may choos to give you a second 
opportun to receiv the work electron in lieu of a refund. If 
the second copi is also defective, you may demand a refund in write 
without further opportun to fix the problem. 

1.f.4. except for the limit right of replac or refund set forth 
in paragraph 1.f.3, thi work is provid to you 'as-is', with NO 
other warranti OF ani kind, express OR implied, includ but not 
limit TO warranti OF merchant OR fit for ani purpose. 

1.f.5. some state do not allow disclaim of certain impli 
warranti or the exclus or limit of certain type of 
damages. If ani disclaim or limit set forth in thi agreement 
violat the law of the state applic to thi agreement, the 
agreement shall be interpret to make the maximum disclaim or 
limit permit by the applic state law. the invalid or 
unenforc of ani provis of thi agreement shall not void the 
remain provisions. 

1.f.6. indemn - you agre to indemnifi and hold the foundation, the 
trademark owner, ani agent or employe of the foundation, anyon 
provid copi of project gutenberg-tm electron work in 
accord with thi agreement, and ani volunt associ with the 
production, promot and distribut of project gutenberg-tm 
electron works, harmless from all liability, cost and expenses, 
includ legal fees, that aris directli or indirectli from ani of 
the follow which you do or caus to occur: (a) distribut of thi 
or ani project gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or 
addit or delet to ani project gutenberg-tm work, and (c) ani 
defect you cause. 

section 2. inform about the mission of project gutenberg-tm 

project gutenberg-tm is synonym with the free distribut of 
electron work in format readabl by the widest varieti of 
comput includ obsolete, old, middle-ag and new computers. It 
exist becaus of the effort of hundr of volunt and donat 
from peopl in all walk of life. 

volunt and financi support to provid volunt with the 
assist they need are critic to reach project gutenberg-tm' 
goal and ensur that the project gutenberg-tm collect will 
remain freeli avail for gener to come. In 2001, the project 
gutenberg literari archiv foundat wa creat to provid a secur 
and perman futur for project gutenberg-tm and futur 
generations. To learn more about the project gutenberg literari 
archiv foundat and how your effort and donat can help, see 
section 3 and 4 and the foundat inform page at 
www.gutenberg.org 

section 3. inform about the project gutenberg literari 
archiv foundat 

the project gutenberg literari archiv foundat is a non profit 
501(c)(3) educ corpor organ under the law of the 
state of mississippi and grant tax exempt statu by the intern 
revenu service. the foundation' ein or feder tax identif 
number is 64-6221541. contribut to the project gutenberg literari 
archiv foundat are tax deduct to the full extent permit by 
u.s. feder law and your state' laws. 

the foundation' princip offic is in fairbanks, alaska, with the 
mail address: PO box 750175, fairbanks, AK 99775, but it 
volunt and employe are scatter throughout numer 
locations. it busi offic is locat at 809 north 1500 west, salt 
lake city, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. email contact link and up to 
date contact inform can be found at the foundation' web site and 
offici page at www.gutenberg.org/contact 

for addit contact information: 

dr. gregori B. newbi 
chief execut and director 
gbnewby@pglaf.org 

section 4. inform about donat to the project gutenberg 
literari archiv foundat 

project gutenberg-tm depend upon and cannot surviv without wide 
spread public support and donat to carri out it mission of 
increas the number of public domain and licens work that can be 
freeli distribut in machin readabl form access by the widest 
array of equip includ outdat equipment. mani small donat 
($1 to $5,000) are particularli import to maintain tax exempt 
statu with the irs. 

the foundat is commit to compli with the law regul 
chariti and charit donat in all 50 state of the unit 
states. complianc requir are not uniform and it take a 
consider effort, much paperwork and mani fee to meet and keep up 
with these requirements. We do not solicit donat in locat 
where we have not receiv written confirm of compliance. To send 
donat or determin the statu of complianc for ani particular 
state visit www.gutenberg.org/don 

while we cannot and do not solicit contribut from state where we 
have not met the solicit requirements, we know of no prohibit 
against accept unsolicit donat from donor in such state who 
approach us with offer to donate. 

intern donat are grate accepted, but we cannot make 
ani statement concern tax treatment of donat receiv from 
outsid the unit states. u.s. law alon swamp our small staff. 

pleas check the project gutenberg web page for current donat 
method and addresses. donat are accept in a number of other 
way includ checks, onlin payment and credit card donations. To 
donate, pleas visit: www.gutenberg.org/don 

section 5. gener inform about project gutenberg-tm electron works. 

professor michael S. hart wa the origin of the project 
gutenberg-tm concept of a librari of electron work that could be 
freeli share with anyone. for forti years, he produc and 
distribut project gutenberg-tm ebook with onli a loos network of 
volunt support. 

project gutenberg-tm ebook are often creat from sever print 
editions, all of which are confirm as not protect by copyright in 
the u.s. unless a copyright notic is included. thus, we do not 
necessarili keep ebook in complianc with ani particular paper 
edition. 

most peopl start at our web site which ha the main PG search 
facility: www.gutenberg.org 

thi web site includ inform about project gutenberg-tm, 
includ how to make donat to the project gutenberg literari 
archiv foundation, how to help produc our new ebooks, and how to 
subscrib to our email newslett to hear about new ebooks. 

