the project gutenberg ebook, the phantom ship, by captain frederick marryat 


thi ebook is for the use of anyon anywher at no cost and with 
almost no restrict whatsoever. you may copi it, give it away or 
re-us it under the term of the project gutenberg licens includ 
with thi ebook or onlin at www.gutenberg.net 





title: the phantom ship 

author: captain frederick marryat 

releas date: juli 19, 2004 [ebook #12954] 

language: english 


***start OF the project gutenberg ebook the phantom ship*** 


e-text prepar by ted garvin, josephin paolucci, and the project 
gutenberg onlin distribut proofread team 



the phantom ship 

by 

captain frederick marryat 

london 

mdcccxcvi 







content 


chapter I 
chapter II 
chapter iii 
chapter IV 
chapter V 
chapter VI 
chapter vii 
chapter viii 
chapter IX 
chapter X 
chapter XI 
chapter xii 
chapter xiii 
chapter xiv 
chapter XV 
chapter xvi 
chapter xvii 
chapter xviii 
chapter xix 
chapter XX 
chapter xxi 
chapter xxii 
chapter xxiii 
chapter xxiv 
chapter xxv 
chapter xxvi 
chapter xxvii 
chapter xxviii 
chapter xxix 
chapter xxx 
chapter xxxi 
chapter xxxii 
chapter xxxiii 
chapter xxxiv 
chapter xxxv 
chapter xxxvi 
chapter xxxvii 
chapter xxxviii 
chapter xxxix 
chapter XL 
chapter xli 
chapter xlii 




prefatori note 


_the phantom ship_ is the most notabl of the three novel construct 
by marryat on an histor basis, and like it predecessor in the 
same category, _snarleyyow_, depend larg for it interest on the 
element of _diablerie_, which is veri skil manipulated. here, 
however, the supernatur appear are never explain away, and 
the ghostli agenc are introduc in the spirit of serious, if 
somewhat melodramatic, romance. marryat' person experi enabl 
him, with littl research, to produc a life-lik pictur of old dutch 
seamanship, and hi power in raci narr have transform the 
vanderdecken legend into a stir tale of terror. the plot cannot 
be call original, but it is more care work out and, from the 
natur of the materi at hand, more effect than most of marryat' 
own. He ha put life into it, moreover, by the creation of some 
genuin characters, design for nobler end than to move the 
machinery. 

amine, indeed, as Mr hannay point out, "i by far hi nearest 
approach to an accept heroine." her romant and curious 
superstiti disposit is admir restrain by strength of will 
and true courage. the scene of the inquisit by which she meet 
her death are forcibl described. philip vanderdecken is a veri 
respect hero; daring, impetuous, and moody, without be too 
improb capable. the hand of destini lend him a digniti of which 
he is by no mean unworthy. krantz, the faith friend, belong to a 
familiar type, but the one-ey pilot is quit suffici weird 
for the part he ha to play. for the rest we have the usual excit 
adventur by sea and land; the usual "humours," in thi case 
certainli not overdone. the miser Dr poots; the bulki kloots, hi 
bear, and hi supercargo; barentz and hi crazi lady-lov the _vrow 
katerina_; and the littl portugues command provid the reader 
with a varieti of good-natur entertainment. It wa an act of 
doubt wisdom, perhaps, to introduc a second group of spirit from 
the hartz mountains, but the stori of the weir-wolv is told simply, 
without ani strain after effect. 

the gener success, however, is mar by certain obviou failur 
in detail. the attempt to produc an histor flavour by make the 
characters, dure their calmer moments, talk in would-b old english 
is more amus than culpable; but the author' philosophi of the 
unseen, as expound by amin or krantz, is both weak and tiresome, 
and hi religi discourses, colour by prejudic against the 
romanists, are convent and unconvincing. the close scene 
savour of the sunday-school. 

but these fault are not obtrusive, and the novel as a whole must take 
a high place among it author' second-best. 

_the phantom ship_ appear in _the new monthli magazine_, 1838, 1839. 
It is here reprint from the first edition, in three volumes. henri 
colburn, 1839. 

r.b.j. 




chapter I 

prefac 
about the middl of the seventeenth century, in the outskirt of the 
small but fortifi town of terneuse, situat on the right bank of 
the scheldt, and nearli opposit to the island of walcheren, there wa 
to be seen, in advanc of a few other even more humbl tenements, a 
small but neat cottage, built accord to the prevail tast of the 
time. the outsid front had, some year back, been paint of a deep 
orange, the window and shutter of a vivid green. To about three feet 
abov the surfac of the earth, it wa face altern with blue and 
white tiles. A small garden, of about two rod of our measur of land, 
surround the edifice; and thi littl plot wa flank by a low 
hedg of privet, and encircl by a moat full of water, too wide to be 
leap with ease. over that part of the moat which wa in front of 
the cottag door, wa a small and narrow bridge, with ornament 
iron hand-rails, for the secur of the passenger. but the colours, 
origin so bright, with which the cottag had been decorated, had 
now faded; symptom of rapid decay were evid in the window-sills, 
the door-jambs, and other wooden part of the tenement, and mani of 
the white and blue tile had fallen down, and had not been replaced. 
that much care had onc been bestow upon thi littl tenement, wa 
as evid as that latterli it had been equal neglected. 

the insid of the cottage, both on the basement and the floor above, 
wa divid into two larger room in front, and two smaller behind; 
the room in front could onli be call larg in comparison with the 
other two, as they were littl more than twelv feet square, with but 
one window to each. the upper floor was, as usual, appropri to the 
bedrooms; on the lower, the two smaller room were now use onli as a 
wash-hous and a lumber-room; while one of the larger wa fit up as 
a kitchen, and furnish with dressers, on which the metal utensil 
for cookeri shone clean and polish as silver. the room itself wa 
scrupul neat; but the furniture, as well as the utensils, were 
scanty. the board of the floor were of a pure white, and so clean 
that you might have laid anyth down without fear of soil it. A 
strong deal table, two wooden-s chairs, and a small easi couch, 
which had been remov from one of the bedroom upstairs, were all 
the movabl which thi room contained. the other front room had been 
fit up as a parlour; but what might be the style of it furnitur 
wa now unknown, for no eye had beheld the content of that room for 
nearli seventeen years, dure which it had been hermet sealed, 
even to the inmat of the cottage. 

the kitchen, which we have described, wa occupi by two persons. one 
wa a woman, appar about forti year of age, but worn down by 
pain and suffering. she had evid onc possess much beauty: 
there were still the regular outlines, the nobl forehead, and the 
larg dark eye; but there wa a tenuiti in her features, a wast 
appearance, such as to render the flesh transparent; her brow, when 
she mused, would sink into deep wrinkles, prematur though they were; 
and the occasion flash of her eye strongli impress you 
with the idea of insanity. there appear to be some deep-seated, 
irremovable, hopeless caus of anguish, never for one moment permit 
to be absent from her memory: a chronic oppression, fix and graven 
there, onli to be remov by death. she wa dress in the widow' 
coif of the time; but although clean and neat, her garment were fade 
from long wear. she wa seat upon the small couch which we have 
mentioned, evid brought down as a relief to her, in her declin 
state. 

On the deal tabl in the centr of the room sat the other person, a 
stout, fair-headed, florid youth of nineteen or twenti year old. hi 
featur were handsom and bold, and hi frame power to excess; hi 
eye denot courag and determination, and as he carelessli swung hi 
legs, and whistl an air in an emphat manner, it wa imposs 
not to form the idea that he wa a daring, adventurous, and reckless 
character. 

"do not go to sea, philip; oh, promis me _that_, my dear, dear 
child," said the female, clasp her hands. 

"and whi not go to sea, mother?" repli philip; "what' the use of my 
stay here to starve?--for, by heaven! it' littl better. I must do 
someth for myself and for you. and what els can I do? My uncl van 
brennen ha offer to take me with him, and will give me good wages. 
then I shall live happili on board, and my earn will be suffici 
for your support at home." 

"philip--philip, hear me. I shall die if you leav me. whom have I in 
the world but you? O my child, as you love me, and I know you _do_ 
love me, philip, don't leav me; but if you will, at all event do not 
go to sea." 

philip gave no immedi reply; he whistl for a few seconds, while 
hi mother wept. 

"i it," said he at last, "becaus my father wa drown at sea, that 
you beg so hard, mother?" 

"oh, no--no!" exclaim the sob woman. "would to god--" 

"would to god what, mother?" 

"nothing--nothing. Be merciful--b merciful, O god!" repli the 
mother, slide from her seat on the couch, and kneel by the side 
of it, in which attitud she remain for some time in fervent prayer. 

At last she resum her seat, and her face wore an aspect of more 
composure. 

philip, who, dure this, had remain silent and thoughtful, again 
address hi mother. 

"look ye, mother. you ask me to stay on shore with you, and 
starve,--rath hard conditions:--now hear what I have to say. that 
room opposit ha been shut up ever sinc I can remember--why, you 
will never tell me; but onc I heard you say, when we were without 
bread, and with no prospect of my uncle' return--y were then half 
frantic, mother, as you know you sometim are--" 

"well, philip, what did you hear me say?" enquir hi mother with 
tremul anxiety. 

"you said, mother, that there wa money in that room which would save 
us; and then you scream and raved, and said that you prefer 
death. now, mother, what is there in that chamber, and whi ha it been 
so long shut up? either I know that, or I go to sea." 

At the commenc of thi address of philip, hi mother appear 
to be transfixed, and motionless as a statue; gradual her lip 
separated, and her eye glared; she seem to have lost the power of 
reply; she put her hand to her right side, as if to compress it, then 
both her hands, as if to reliev herself from excruci torture: at 
last she sank, with her head forward, and the blood pour out of her 
mouth. 

philip sprang from the tabl to her assistance, and prevent her from 
fall on the floor. He laid her on the couch, watch with alarm 
the continu effusion. 

"oh! mother--mother, what is this?" cri he, at last, in great 
distress. 

for some time hi mother could make him no reply; she turn further 
on her side, that she might not be suffoc by the discharg from 
the ruptur vessel, and the snow-whit plank of the floor were soon 
crimson with her blood. 

"speak, dearest mother, if you can," repeat philip, in agony; "what 
shall I do? what shall I give you? god almighty! what is this?" 

"death, my child, death!" at length repli the poor woman, sink 
into a state of unconsciousness. 

philip, now much alarmed, flew out of the cottage, and call the 
neighbour to hi mother' assistance. two or three hasten to the 
call; and as soon as philip saw them occupi in restor hi mother, 
he ran as fast as he could to the hous of a medic man, who live 
about a mile off--on mynheer poots, a little, miserable, avarici 
wretch, but known to be veri skil in hi profession. philip found 
poot at home, and insist upon hi immedi attendance. 

"I will come--yes, most certainly," repli poots, who spoke the 
languag but imperfectly; "but mynheer vanderdecken, who will pay me?" 

"pay you! my uncl will, directli that he come home." 

"your uncl de skipper van brennen: no, he owe me four guilders, and 
he ha owe me for a long time. besides, hi ship may sink." 

"he shall pay you the four guilders, and for thi attend also," 
repli philip, in a rage; "come directly, while you are disput my 
mother may be dead." 

"but, Mr philip, I cannot come, now I recollect; I have to see the 
child of the burgomast at terneuse," repli mynheer poots. 

"look you, mynheer poots," exclaim philip, red with passion; "you 
have but to choose,--wil you go quietly, or must I take you there? 
you'll not trifl with me." 

here mynheer poot wa under consider alarm, for the charact of 
philip vanderdecken wa well known. 

"I will come by-and-bye, mynheer philip, if I can." 

"you'll come now, you wretch old miser," exclaim philip, seiz 
hold of the littl man by the collar, and pull him out of hi door. 

"murder! murder!" cri poots, as he lost hi legs, and wa drag 
along by the impetu young man. 

philip stopped, for he perceiv that poot wa black in the face. 

"must I then choke you, to make you go quietly? for, hear me, go you 
shall, aliv or dead." 

"well, then," repli poots, recov himself, "I will go, but i'll 
have you in prison to-night: and, as for your mother, i'll not--no, 
that I will not--mynh philip, depend upon it." 

"mark me, mynheer poots," repli philip, "a sure as there is a god 
in heaven, if you do not come with me, i'll choke you now; and when 
you arrive, if you do not do your best for my poor mother, i'll murder 
you there. you know that I alway do what I say, so now take my 
advice, come along quietly, and you shall certainli be paid, and well 
paid--if I sell my coat." 

thi last observ of philip, perhaps, had more effect than even 
hi threats. poot wa a miser littl atom, and like a child 
in the power grasp of the young man. the doctor' tenement wa 
isolated, and he could obtain no assist until within a hundr 
yard of vanderdecken' cottage; so mynheer poot decid that he 
would go, first, becaus philip had promis to pay him, and secondly, 
becaus he could not help it. 

thi point be settled, philip and mynheer poot made all hast to 
the cottage; and on their arrival, they found hi mother still in the 
arm of two of her femal neighbours, who were bath her templ 
with vinegar. she wa in a state of consciousness, but she could not 
speak. poot order her to be carri upstair and put to bed, and 
pour some acid down her throat, hasten away with philip to 
procur the necessari remedies. 

"you will give your mother that directly, mynheer philip," said poots, 
put a phial into hi hand; "I will now go to the child of the 
burgomaster, and will afterward come back to your cottage." 

"don't deceiv me," said philip, with a threaten look. 

"no, no, mynheer philip, I would not trust to your uncl van brennen 
for payment, but you have promised, and I know that you alway keep 
your word. In one hour I will be with your mother; but you yourself 
must now be quick." 

philip hasten home. after the potion had been administered, the 
bleed wa wholli stopped; and in half an hour, hi mother could 
express her wish in a whisper. when the littl doctor arrived, he 
care examin hi patient, and then went downstair with her son 
into the kitchen. 

"mynheer philip," said poots, "bi allah! I have done my best, but I 
must tell you that I have littl hope of your mother rise from her 
bed again. she may live one day or two days, but not more. It is not 
my fault, mynheer philip," continu poots, in a deprec tone. 

"no, no; it is the will of heaven," repli philip, mournfully. 

"and you will pay me, mynheer vanderdecken?" continu the doctor, 
after a short pause. 

"yes," repli philip in a voic of thunder, and start from a 
reverie. after a moment' silence, the doctor recommenced. 

"shall I come to-morrow, mynheer philip? you know that will be a 
charg of anoth guilder: it is of no use to throw away money or time 
either." 

"come to-morrow, come everi hour, charg what you please; you shall 
certainli be paid," repli philip, curl hi lip with contempt. 

"well, it is as you please. As soon as she is dead, the cottag and 
the furnitur will be yours, and you will sell them of course. yes, I 
will come. you will have plenti of money. mynheer philip, I would like 
the first offer of the cottage, if it is to let." 

philip rais hi arm in the air as if to crush mynheer poots, who 
retreat to the corner. 

"I did not mean until your mother wa buried," said poots, in a 
coax tone. 

"go, wretch, go!" said philip, cover hi face with hi hands, as he 
sank down upon the blood-stain couch. 

after a short interval, philip vanderdecken return to the bedsid 
of hi mother, whom he found much better; and the neighbours, have 
their own affair to attend to, left them alone. exhaust with the 
loss of blood, the poor woman slumber for mani hours, dure which 
she never let go the hand of philip, who watch her breath in 
mourn meditation. 

It wa about one o'clock in the morn when the widow awoke. she had 
in a great degre recov her voice, and thu she address her 
son:-- 

"mi dear, my impetu boy, and have I detain you here a prison so 
long?" 

"mi own inclin detain me, mother. I leav you not to other 
until you are up and well again." 

"that, philip, I shall never be. I feel that death claim me; and, O, 
my son, were it not for you, how should I quit thi world rejoicing! 
I have long been dying, philip,--and long, long have I pray for 
death." 

"and whi so, mother?" repli philip, bluntly; "i'v done my best." 

"you have, my child, you have: and may god bless you for it. often 
have I seen you curb your fieri temper--restrain yourself when 
justifi in wrath--to spare a mother' feelings. 'ti now some day 
that even hunger ha not persuad you to disobey your mother. and, 
philip, you must have thought me mad or foolish to insist so long, and 
yet to give no reason. i'll speak--again--directly." 

the widow turn her head upon the pillow, and remain quiet for some 
minutes; then, as if revived, she resumed: 

"I believ I have been mad at times--hav I not, philip? and god know 
I have had a secret in my heart enough to drive a wife to frenzy. It 
ha oppress me day and night, worn my mind, impair my reason, and 
now, at last, thank heaven! it ha overcom thi mortal frame: the 
blow is struck, philip,--i'm sure it is. I wait but to tell you 
all,--and yet I would not,--'twil turn your brain as it ha turn 
mine, philip." 

"mother," repli philip, earnestly, "I conjur you, let me hear thi 
kill secret. Be heaven or hell mix up with it, I fear not. heaven 
will not hurt me, and satan I defy." 

"I know thi bold, proud spirit, philip,--thi strength of mind. If 
anyon could bear the load of such a dread tale, thou couldst. My 
brain, alas! wa far too weak for it; and I see it is my duti to tell 
it to thee." 

the widow paus as her thought revert to that which she had to 
confide; for a few minut the tear rain down her hollow cheeks; 
she then appear to have summon resolution, and to have regain 
strength. 

"philip, it is of your father I would speak. It is supposed--that he 
was--drown at sea." 

"and wa he not, mother?" repli philip, with surprise. 

"O no!" 

"but he ha long been dead, mother?" 

"no,--yes,--and yet--no," said the widow, cover her eyes. 

her brain wanders, thought philip, but he spoke again: 

"then where is he, mother?" 

the widow rais herself, and a tremor visibl ran through her whole 
frame, as she replied-- 

"in live judgment." 

the poor woman then sank down again upon the pillow, and cover her 
head with the bedclothes, as if she would have hid herself from her 
own memory. philip wa so much perplex and astounded, that he could 
make no reply. A silenc of some minut ensued, when, no longer abl 
to beat the agoni of suspense, philip faintli whispered-- 

"the secret, mother, the secret; quick, let me hear it." 

"I can now tell all, philip," repli hi mother, in a solemn tone of 
voice. "hear me, my son. your father' disposit wa but too like 
your own;--o may hi cruel fate be a lesson to you, my dear, dear 
child! He wa a bold, a daring, and, they say, a first-rat seaman. 
He wa not born here, but in amsterdam; but he would not live there, 
becaus he still adher to the cathol religion. the dutch, you 
know, philip, are heretics, accord to our creed. It is now 
seventeen year or more that he sail for india, in hi fine ship 
the _amsterdammer_, with a valuabl cargo. It wa hi third voyag to 
india, philip, and it wa to have been, if it had so pleas god, 
hi last, for he had purchas that good ship with onli part of hi 
earnings, and one more voyag would have made hi fortune. O! how 
often did we talk over what we would do upon hi return, and how these 
plan for the futur consol me at the idea of hi absence, for I 
love him dearly, philip,--h wa alway good and kind to me; and 
after he had sailed, how I hope for hi return! the lot of a sailor' 
wife is not to be envied. alon and solitari for so mani months, 
watch the long wick of the candle, and listen to the howl of 
the wind--forebod evil and accident--wreck and widowhood. He had 
been gone about six months, philip, and there wa still a long dreari 
year to wait befor I could expect him back. one night, you, my 
child, were fast asleep; you were my onli solace--mi comfort in my 
loneliness. I had been watch over you in your slumbers; you smile 
and half pronounc the name of mother; and at last I kiss your 
unconsci lips, and I knelt and prayed--pray for god' bless on 
you, my child, and upon him too--littl thinking, at the time, that he 
wa so horribly, so fear cursed." 

the widow paus for breath, and then resumed. philip could not speak. 
hi lip were sundered, and hi eye rivet upon hi mother, as he 
devour her words. 

"I left you and went downstair into that room, philip, which sinc 
that dread night ha never been re-opened. I sate me down and read, 
for the wind wa strong, and when the gale blows, a sailor' wife can 
seldom sleep. It wa past midnight, and the rain pour down. I felt 
unusu fear,--i knew not why. I rose from the couch and dip my 
finger in the bless water, and I cross myself. A violent gust 
of wind roar round the house, and alarm me still more. I had a 
painful, horribl foreboding; when, of a sudden, the window and 
window-shutt were all blown in, the light wa extinguished, and 
I wa left in utter darkness. I scream with fright; but at last I 
recov myself, and wa proceed toward the window that I 
might reclos it, when whom should I behold, slowli enter at the 
casement, but--your father,--philip!--yes, philip,--it wa your 
father!" 

"merci god!" mutter philip, in a low tone almost subdu into a 
whisper. 

"I knew not what to think,--h wa in the room; and although the 
dark wa intense, hi form and featur were as clear and as 
defin as if it were noon-day. fear would have inclin me to recoil 
from,--hi love presenc to fli toward him. I remain on the spot 
where I was, choke with agonis sensations. when he had enter the 
room, the window and shutter close of themselves, and the candl 
wa relighted--then I thought it wa hi apparition, and I faint on 
the floor. 

"when I recov I found myself on the couch, and perceiv that 
a cold (O how cold!) and drip hand wa clasp in mine. thi 
reassur me, and I forgot the supernatur sign which accompani 
hi appearance. I imagin that he had been unfortunate, and had 
return home. I open my eyes, and beheld my love husband and threw 
myself into hi arms. hi cloth were satur with the rain: I 
felt as if I had embrac ice--but noth can check the warmth of a 
woman' love, philip. He receiv my caresses, but he caress 
not again: he spoke not, but look thought and unhappy. 
'william--william,' cri I! 'speak, vanderdecken, speak to your dear 
catherine.' 

"'i will,' repli he, solemnly, 'for my time is short.' 

"'no, no, you must not go to sea again: you have lost your vessel, but 
you are safe. have I not you again?' 

"'alas! no--b not alarmed, but listen, for my time is short. I have 
not lost my vessel, catherine, but I have lost!!! make no reply, but 
listen; I am not dead, nor yet am I alive. I hover between thi world 
and the world of spirits. mark me. 

"'for nine week did I tri to forc my passag against the element 
round the stormi cape, but without success; and I swore terribly. 
for nine week more did I carri sail against the advers wind and 
currents, and yet could gain no ground; and then I blasphemed,--ay, 
terribl blasphemed. yet still I persevered. the crew, worn out 
with long fatigue, would have had me return to the tabl bay; but I 
refused; nay, more, I becam a murderer,--unintentionally, it is true, 
but still a murderer. the pilot oppos me, and persuad the men to 
bind me, and in the excess of my fury, when he took me by the collar, 
I struck at him; he reeled; and, with the sudden lurch of the vessel, 
he fell overboard, and sank. even thi fear death did not restrain 
me; and I swore by the fragment of the holi cross, preserv in that 
relic now hang round your neck, that I would gain my point in 
defianc of storm and seas, of lightning, of heaven, or of hell, even 
if I should beat about until the day of judgment. 

"'mi oath wa regist in thunder, and in stream of sulphur 
fire. the hurrican burst upon the ship, the canva flew away in 
ribbons; mountain of sea swept over us, and in the centr of a deep 
o'erhang cloud, which shroud all in utter darkness, were written 
in letter of livid flame, these words--until the day OF judgment. 

"'listen to me, catherine, my time is short. _one hope_ alon remains, 
and for thi am I permit to come here. take thi letter.' He put a 
seal paper on the table. 'read it, catherine, dear, and tri if you 
can assist me. read it and now farewell--mi time is come.' 

"again the window and window-shutt burst open--again the light wa 
extinguished, and the form of my husband was, as it were, waft in 
the dark expanse. I start up and follow him with outstretch arm 
and frantic scream as he sail through the window;--mi glare eye 
beheld hi form born away like lightn on the wing of the wild 
gale, till it wa lost as a speck of light, and then it disappeared. 
again the window closed, the light burned, and I wa left alone! 

"heaven, have mercy! My brain!--mi brain!--philip!--philip!" shriek 
the poor woman; "don't leav me--don't--don't--pray don't!" 

dure these exclam the frantic widow had rais herself from 
the bed, and, at the last, had fallen into the arm of her son. she 
remain there some minut without motion. after a time philip felt 
alarm at her long quiescence; he laid her gentli down upon the bed, 
and as he did so her head fell back--her eye were turned--th widow 
vanderdecken wa no more. 




chapter II 


philip vanderdecken, strong as he wa in mental courage, wa almost 
paralys by the shock when he discov that hi mother' spirit had 
fled; and for some time he remain by the side of the bed with hi 
eye fix upon the corpse, and hi mind in a state of vacuity. 
gradual he recov himself; he rose, smooth down the pillow, 
close her eyelids, and then clasp hi hands, the tear trickl 
down hi manli cheeks. He impress a solemn kiss upon the pale white 
forehead of the departed, and drew the curtain round the bed. 

"poor mother!" said he, sorrowfully, as he complet hi task, "at 
length thou hast found rest,--but thou hast left thi son a bitter 
legacy." 

and as philip' thought revert to what had passed, the dread 
narr whirl in hi imagin and scath hi brain. He rais 
hi hand to hi temples, compress them with force, and tri to 
collect hi thoughts, that he might decid upon what measur he 
should take. He felt that he had no time to indulg hi grief. hi 
mother wa in peace: but hi father--wher wa he? 

He recal hi mother' words--"on hope alon remained." then there 
wa hope. hi father had laid a paper on the table--could it be there 
now? yes, it must be; hi mother had not had the courag to take it 
up. there wa hope in that paper, and it had lain unopen for more 
than seventeen years. 

philip vanderdecken resolv that he would examin the fatal 
chamber--at onc he would know the worst. should he do it now, or wait 
till daylight?--but the key, where wa it? hi eye rest upon an old 
japan cabinet in the room: he had never seen hi mother open it in 
hi presence: it wa the onli like place of conceal that he wa 
awar of. prompt in all hi decisions, he took up the candle, and 
proceed to examin it. It wa not locked; the door swung open, and 
drawer after drawer wa examined, but philip discov not the object 
of hi search; again and again did he open the drawers, but they were 
all empty. It occur to philip that there might be secret drawers, 
and he examin for some time in vain. At last he took out all the 
drawers, and laid them on the floor, and lift the cabinet off it 
stand he shook it. A rattl sound in one corner told him that in all 
probabl the key wa there concealed. He renew hi attempt to 
discov how to gain it, but in vain. daylight now stream through 
the casements, and philip had not desist from hi attempts: at last, 
weari out, he resolv to forc the back panel of the cabinet; he 
descend to the kitchen, and return with a small chopping-knif and 
hammer, and wa on hi knee busili employ forc out the panel, 
when a hand wa place upon hi shoulder. 

philip started; he had been so occupi with hi search and hi wild 
chase thoughts, that he had not heard the sound of an approach 
footstep. He look up and beheld the father seysen, the priest of the 
littl parish, with hi eye sternli fix upon him. the good man had 
been inform of the danger state of the widow vanderdecken, and 
had risen at daylight to visit and afford her spiritu comfort. 

"how now, my son," said the priest: "fearest thou not to disturb thi 
mother' rest? and wouldst thou pilfer and purloin even befor she is 
in her grave?" 

"I fear not to disturb my mother' rest, good father," repli philip, 
rise on hi feet, "for she now rest with the blessed. neither do I 
pilfer or purloin. It is not gold I seek, although if gold there were, 
that gold would now be mine. I seek but a key, long hidden, I believe, 
within thi secret drawer, the open of which is a mysteri beyond my 
art." 

"thi mother is no more, sayest thou, my son? and dead without 
receiv the rite of our most holi church! whi didst thou not send 
for me?" 

"she died, good father, suddenly--most suddenly, in these arms, about 
two hour ago. I fear not for her soul, although I can but griev you 
were not at her side." 

the priest gentli open the curtains, and look upon the corpse. He 
sprinkl holi water on the bed, and for a short time hi lip were 
seen to move in silent prayer. He then turn round to philip. 

"whi do I see thee thu employed? and whi so anxiou to obtain that 
key? A mother' death should call forth filial tear and prayer for 
her repose. yet are thine eye dry, and thou art employ upon an 
indiffer search while yet the tenement is warm which but now held 
her spirit. thi is not seemly, philip. what is the key thou seekest?" 

"father, I have no time for tears--no time to spare for grief or 
lamentation. I have much to do and more to think of than thought can 
well embrace. that I love my mother, you know well." 

"but the key thou seekest, philip?" 

"father, it is the key of a chamber which ha not been unlock for 
years, which I must--wil open; even if--" 

"if what, my son?" 

"I wa about to say what I should not have said. forgiv me, father; I 
meant that I must search that chamber." 

"I have long heard of that same chamber be closed; and that thi 
mother would not explain wherefore, I know well, for I have ask 
her, and have been denied. nay, when, as in duti bound, I press the 
question, I found her reason wa disord by my importunity, and 
therefor I abandon the attempt. some heavi weight wa on thi 
mother' mind, my son, yet would she never confess or trust it with 
me. tell me, befor she died, hadst thou thi secret from her?" 

"I had, most holi father." 

"wouldst thou not feel comfort if thou didst confid to me, my son? I 
might advise--assist--" 

"father, I would indeed--i could confid it to thee, and ask for thi 
assistance--i know 'ti not from curiou feel thou wouldst have it, 
but from a better motive. but of that which ha been told it is not 
yet manifest--wheth it is as my poor mother says, or but the phantom 
of a heat brain. should it inde be true, fain would I share the 
burthen with you--yet littl you might thank me for the heavi load. 
but no--at least not now--it must not, cannot be revealed. I must do 
my work--ent that hate room alone." 

"fearest thou not?" 

"father, I fear nothing. I have a duti to perform--a dread one, I 
grant; but I pray thee, ask no more; for, like my poor mother, I feel 
as if the probe of the wound would half unseat my reason." 

"I will not press thee further, philip. the time may come when I may 
prove of service. farewell, my child; but I pray thee to discontinu 
thi unseemli labour, for I must send in the neighbour to perform the 
duti to thi depart mother, whose soul I trust is with it god." 

the priest look at philip; he perceiv that hi thought were 
elsewhere; there wa a vacanc and appear of mental stupefaction, 
and as he turn away, the good man shook hi head. 

"he is right," thought philip, when onc more alone; and he took up 
the cabinet, and place it upon the stand. "A few hour more can make 
no difference: I will lay me down, for my head is giddy." 

philip went into the adjoin room, threw himself upon hi bed, and 
in a few minut wa in a sleep as sound as that permit to the 
wretch a few hour previou to hi execution. 

dure hi slumber the neighbour had come in, and had prepar 
everyth for the widow' interment. they had been care not to 
wake the son, for they held as sacr the sleep of those who must 
wake up to sorrow. among others, soon after the hour of noon arriv 
mynheer poots; he had been inform of the death of the widow, but 
have a spare hour, he thought he might as well call, as it would 
rais hi charg by anoth guilder. He first went into the room 
where the bodi lay, and from thenc he proceed to the chamber of 
philip, and shook him by the shoulder. 

philip awoke, and, sit up, perceiv the doctor stand by him. 

"well, mynheer vanderdecken," commenc the unfeel littl man, "so 
it' all over. I knew it would be so, and recollect you owe me now 
anoth guilder, and you promis faith to pay me; altogether, 
with the potion, it will be three guilder and a half--that is, 
provid you return my phial." 

philip, who at first wake wa confused, gradual recov hi 
sens dure thi address. 

"you shall have your three guilder and a half, and your phial to 
boot, Mr poots," repli he, as he rose from off the bed. 

"yes, yes; I know you mean to pay me--if you can. but look you, 
mynheer philip, it may be some time befor you sell the cottage. you 
may not find a customer. now, I never wish to be hard upon peopl who 
have no money, and i'll tell you what i'll do. there is a someth 
on your mother' neck. It is of no value, none at all, but to a good 
catholic. To help you in your strait, I will take that thing, and then 
we shall be quits. you will have paid me, and there will be an end of 
it." 

philip listen calmly: he knew to what the littl miser had 
referred,--th relic on hi mother' neck--that veri relic upon which 
hi father swore the fatal oath. He felt that million of guilder 
would not have induc him to part with it. 

"leav the house," answer he abruptly. "leav it immediately. your 
money shall be paid." 

now, mynheer poots, in the first place, knew that the set of the 
relic, which wa in a squar frame of pure gold, wa worth much more 
than the sum due to him: he also knew that a larg price had been paid 
for the relic itself, and as at that time such a relic wa consid 
veri valuable, he had no doubt but that it would again fetch a 
consider sum. tempt by the sight of it when he enter the 
chamber of death, he had taken it from the neck of the corpse, and it 
wa then actual conceal in hi bosom, so he replied-- 

"mi offer is a good one, mynheer philip, and you had better take it. 
Of what use is such trash?" 

"I tell you, no," cri philip, in a rage. 

"well, then, you will let me have it in my possess till I am paid, 
mynheer vanderdecken--that is but fair. I must not lose my money. when 
you bring me my three guilder and a half and the phial, I will return 
it to you." 

philip' indign wa now without bounds. He seiz mynheer poot 
by the collar, and threw him out of the door. "away immediately," 
cri he, "or by--" 

there wa no occas for philip to finish the imprecation. the doctor 
had hasten away with such alarm, that he fell down half the step 
of the staircase, and wa limp away across the bridge. He almost 
wish that the relic had not been in hi possession; but hi sudden 
retreat had prevent him, even if so inclined, from replac it on 
the corpse. 

the result of thi convers natur turn philip' thought to 
the relic, and he went into hi mother' room to take possess of 
it. He open the curtains--th corps wa laid out--h put forth hi 
hand to unti the black ribbon. It wa not there. "gone!" exclaim 
philip. "they hardli would have remov it--nev would--. It must 
be that villain poots--wretch; but I will have it, even if he ha 
swallow it, though I tear him limb from limb!" 

philip dart down the stairs, rush out of the house, clear the 
moat at one bound, and without coat or hat, flew away in the direct 
of the doctor' lone residence. the neighbour saw him as he pass 
them like the wind; they wondered, and they shook their heads. mynheer 
poot wa not more than half-way to hi home, for he had hurt hi 
ankle. apprehens of what might possibl take place should hi theft 
be discovered, he occasion look behind him; at length, to hi 
horror, he beheld philip vanderdecken at a distanc bound on in 
pursuit of him. frighten almost out of hi senses, the wretch 
pilfer hardli knew how to act; to stop and surrend up the stolen 
properti wa hi first thought, but fear of vanderdecken' violenc 
prevent him; so he decid on take to hi heels, thu hope to 
gain hi house, and barricad himself in, by which mean he would be 
in a condit to keep possess of what he had stolen, or at least 
make some term ere he restor it. 

mynheer poot had need to run fast, and so he did; hi thin leg 
bear hi shrivel form rapidli over the ground; but philip, who, 
when he wit the doctor' attempt to escape, wa fulli convinc 
that he wa the culprit, redoubl hi exertions, and rapidli came up 
with the chase. when within a hundr yard of hi own door, mynheer 
poot heard the bound step of philip gain upon him, and he sprang 
and leap in hi agony. nearer and nearer still the step, until at 
last he heard the veri breath of hi pursuer, and poot shriek in 
hi fear, like the hare in the jaw of the greyhound. philip wa not 
a yard from him; hi arm wa outstretched, when the miscreant drop 
down paralys with terror, and the impetu of vanderdecken wa so 
great that he pass over hi body, tripped, and after tri in vain 
to recov hi equilibrium, he fell and roll over and over. thi 
save the littl doctor; it wa like the doubl of a hare. In a second 
he wa again on hi legs, and befor philip could rise and again exert 
hi speed, poot had enter hi door and bolt it within. philip 
was, however, determin to repossess the import treasure; and as 
he panted, he cast hi eye around, to see if ani mean offer for 
hi forc hi entranc into the house. but as the habit of the 
doctor wa lonely, everi precaut had been taken by him to render 
it secur against robbery; the window below were well barricad and 
secured, and those on the upper stori were too high for anyon to 
obtain admitt by them. 

We must here observe, that although mynheer poot was, from hi 
known abilities, in good practice, hi reput as a hard-hearted, 
unfeel miser wa well established. No one wa ever permit to 
enter hi threshold, nor, indeed, did ani one feel inclined. He wa as 
isol from hi fellow-creatur as wa hi tenement, and wa onli 
to be seen in the chamber of diseas and death. what hi establish 
consist of no one knew. when he first settl in the neighbourhood, 
an old decrepit woman occasion answer the knock given at the 
door by those who requir the doctor' services; but she had been 
buri some time, and, ever since, all call at the door had been 
answer by mynheer poot in person, if he were at home, and if not, 
there wa no repli to the most importun summons. It wa then 
surmis that the old man live entir by himself, be too 
niggardli to pay for ani assistance. thi philip also imagined; and as 
soon as he had recov hi breath, he began to devis some scheme by 
which he would be enabl not onli to recov the stolen property, but 
also to wreak a dire revenge. 

the door wa strong, and not to be forc by ani mean which present 
themselv to the eye of vanderdecken. for a few minut he paus 
to consider, and as he reflected, so did hi anger cool down, and 
he decid that it would be suffici to recov hi relic without 
have recours to violence. So he call out in a loud voice:-- 

"mynheer poots, I know that you can hear me. give me back what you 
have taken, and I will do you no hurt; but if you will not, you must 
take the consequence, for your life shall pay the forfeit befor I 
leav thi spot." 

thi speech wa inde veri plainli heard by mynheer poots, but the 
littl miser had recov from hi fright, and, think himself 
secure, could not make up hi mind to surrend the relic without a 
struggle; so the doctor answer not, hope that the patienc of 
philip would be exhausted, and that by some arrangement, such as 
the sacrific of a few guilders, no small matter to one so needi as 
philip, he would be abl to secur what he wa satisfi would sell at 
a high price. 

vanderdecken, find that no answer wa returned, indulg in strong 
invective, and then decid upon measur certainli in themselv by 
no mean undecided. 

there wa part of a small stack of dri fodder stand not far from 
the house, and under the wall a pile of wood for firing. with these 
vanderdecken resolv upon set fire to the house, and thus, if he 
did not gain hi relic, he would at least obtain ampl revenge. He 
brought sever arm of fodder and laid them at the door of the 
house, and upon that he pile the fagot and log of wood, until the 
door wa quit conceal by them. He then procur a light from the 
steel, flint, and tinder, which everi dutchman carri in hi pocket, 
and veri soon he had fan the pile into a flame. the smoke ascend 
in column up to the rafter of the roof while the fire rage below. 
the door wa ignited, and wa ad to the furi of the flames, and 
philip shout with joy at the success of hi attempt. 

"now, miser despoil of the dead--now, wretch thief, now you 
shall feel my vengeance," cri philip, with a loud voice. "if you 
remain within, you perish in the flames; if you attempt to come out 
you shall die by my hands. Do you hear, mynheer poots--do you hear?" 

hardli had philip conclud thi address when the window of the upper 
floor furthest from the burn door wa thrown open. 

"ay,--you come now to beg and to entreat; but no--no," cri 
philip--who stop as he beheld at the window what seem to be an 
apparition, for, instead of the wretch littl miser, he beheld 
one of the loveliest form natur ever deign to mould--an angel 
creature, of about sixteen or seventeen, who appear calm and 
resolut in the midst of the danger by which she wa threatened. her 
long black hair wa braid and twine round her beautifully-form 
head; her eye were large, intens dark, yet soft; her forehead high 
and white, her chin dimpled, her rubi lip arch and delic 
fine, her nose small and straight. A loveli face could not be well 
imagined; it remind you of what the best of painter have sometimes, 
in their more fortun moments, succeed in embodying, when they 
would repres a beauteou saint. and as the flame wreath and the 
smoke burst out in column and swept past the window, so might she 
have remind you in her calm of demeanour of some martyr at the 
stake. 

"what wouldst thou, violent young man? whi are the inmat of thi 
hous to suffer death by your means?" said the maiden, with composure. 

for a few second philip gazed, and could make no reply; then the 
thought seiz him that, in hi vengeance, he wa about to sacrific 
so much loveliness. He forgot everyth but her danger, and seiz 
one of the larg pole which he had brought to feed the flame, he 
threw off and scatter in everi direct the burn masses, until 
noth wa left which could hurt the build but the ignit door 
itself; and this, which as yet--for it wa of thick oak plank--had not 
suffer veri materi injury, he soon reduced, by beat it, with 
clod of earth, to a smoke and harmless state. dure these activ 
measur on the part of philip, the young maiden watch him in 
silence. 

"all is safe now, young lady," said philip. "god forgiv me that I 
should have risk a life so precious. I thought but to wreak my 
vengeanc upon mynheer poots." 

"and what caus can mynheer poot have given for such dread 
vengeance?" repli the maiden calmly. 

"what cause, young lady? He came to my house--despoil the dead--took 
from my mother' corps a relic beyond price." 

"despoil the dead!--h sure cannot--y must wrong him, young 
sir." 

"no, no. It is the fact, lady,--and that relic--forg me--but that 
relic I must have. you know not what depend upon it." 

"wait, young sir," repli the maiden; "I will soon return." 

philip wait sever minutes, lost in thought and admiration: so fair 
a creatur in the hous of mynheer poots! who could she be? while thu 
ruminating, he wa accost by the silver voic of the object of hi 
reveries, who, lean out of the window, held in her hand the black 
ribbon to which wa attach the articl so dearli coveted. 

"here is your relic, sir," said the young female; "I regret much that 
my father should have done a deed which well might justifi your anger: 
but here it is," continu she, drop it down on the ground by 
philip; "and now you may depart." 

"your father, maiden! can he be your _father_?" said philip, 
forget to take up the relic which lay at hi feet. 

she would have retir from the window without reply, but philip spoke 
again-- 

"stop, lady, stop one moment, until I beg your forgiv for my 
wild, foolish act. I swear by thi sacr relic," continu he, take 
it from the ground and rais it to hi lips, "that had I known that 
ani unoffend person had been in thi house, I would not have done 
the deed, and much do I rejoic that no harm hath happened. but there 
is still danger, lady; the door must be unbarred, and the jambs, which 
still are glowing, be extinguished, or the hous may yet be burnt. 
fear not for your father, maiden, for had he done me a thousand time 
more wrong, you will protect each hair upon hi head. He know me well 
enough to know I keep my word. allow me to repair the injuri I have 
occasioned, and then I will depart." 

"no, no; don't trust him," said mynheer poots, from within the 
chamber. 

"yes, he may be trusted," repli the daughter; "and hi servic are 
much needed, for what could a poor weak girl like me, and a still 
weaker father, do in thi strait? open the door, and let the hous be 
made secure." the maiden then address philip--"h shall open the 
door, sir, and I will thank you for your kind service. I trust 
entir to your promise." 

"I never yet wa known to break my word, maiden," repli philip; "but 
let him be quick, for the flame are burst out again." 

the door wa open by the trembl hand of mynheer poots, who then 
made a hasti retreat upstairs. the truth of what philip had said wa 
then apparent. mani were the bucket of water which he wa oblig to 
fetch befor the fire wa subdued; but dure hi exert neither 
the daughter nor the father made their appearance. 

when all wa safe, philip close the door, and again look up at the 
window. the fair girl made her appearance, and philip, with a low 
obeisance, assur her that there wa then no danger. 

"I thank you, sir," repli she--"i thank you much. your conduct, 
although hasti at first, ha yet been most considerate." 

"assur your father, maiden, that all animos on my part hath 
ceased, and that in a few day I will call and satisfi the demand he 
hath against me." 

the window closed, and philip, more excited, but with feel 
altogeth differ from those with which he had set out, look at 
it for a minute, and then bent hi step to hi own cottage. 




chapter iii 


the discoveri of the beauti daughter of mynheer poot had made a 
strong impress upon philip vanderdecken, and now he had anoth 
excit to combin with those which alreadi overcharg hi bosom. 
He arriv at hi own house, went upstairs, and threw himself on the 
bed from which he had been rous by mynheer poots. At first, he 
recal to hi mind the scene we have just described, paint in hi 
imagin the portrait of the fair girl, her eyes, her expression, 
her silver voice, and the word which she had uttered; but her 
pleas imag wa soon chase away by the recollect that hi 
mother' corps lay in the adjoin chamber, and that hi father' 
secret wa hidden in the room below. 

the funer wa to take place the next morning, and philip, who, sinc 
hi meet with the daughter of mynheer poots, appear even to 
himself not so anxiou for immedi examin of the room, resolv 
that he would not open it until after the melancholi ceremony. with 
thi resolut he fell asleep; and exhaust with bodili and mental 
excitement, he did not wake until the next morning, when he wa 
summon by the priest to assist at the funer rites. In an hour all 
wa over; the crowd dispersed, and philip, return to the cottage, 
bolt the door that he might not be interrupted, and felt happi that 
he wa alone. 

there is a feel in our natur which will aris when we again find 
ourselv in the tenement where death ha been, and all trace of 
it have been removed. It is a feel of satisfact and relief at 
have rid ourselv of the memento of mortality, the silent evid 
of the futil of our pursuit and anticipations. We know that we 
must one day die, but we alway wish to forget it. the continu 
remembr would be too great a check upon our mundan desir and 
wishes; and although we are told that we ever should have futur in 
our thoughts, we find that life is not to be enjoy if we are not 
permit occasion forgetfulness. for who would plan what rare 
he is permit to execute, if each moment of the day he thought of 
death? We either hope that we may live longer than others, or we 
forget that we may not. 

If thi buoyant feel had not been plant in our nature, how littl 
would the world have been improv even from the deluge! philip walk 
into the room where hi mother had lain one short hour before, and 
unwittingli felt relief. take down the cabinet, he now recommenc 
hi task; the back panel wa soon removed, and a secret drawer 
discovered; he drew it out, and it contain what he presum to be 
the object of hi search,--a larg key with a slight coat of rust upon 
it, which came off upon it be handled. under the key wa a paper, 
the write on which wa somewhat discoloured; it wa in hi mother' 
hand, and ran as follows:-- 

"it is now two night sinc a horribl event took place which ha 
induc me to close the lower chamber, and my brain is still burst 
with terror. should I not, dure my lifetime, reveal what occurred, 
still thi key will be required, as at my death the room will be 
opened. when I rush from it I hasten upstairs, and remain that 
night with my child; the next morn I summon up suffici courag 
to go down, turn the key, and bring it up into my chamber. It is now 
close till I close my eye in death. No privation, no suffering, 
shall induc me to open it, although in the iron cupboard under the 
buffet farthest from the window, there is money suffici for all my 
wants; that money will remain there for my child, to whom, if I do not 
impart the fatal secret, he must be satisfi that it is one which it 
were better should be concealed,--on so horribl as to induc me to 
take the step which I now do. the key of the cupboard and buffet 
were, I think, lie on the table, or in my workbox, when I quit 
the room. there is a letter on the table, at least I think so. It 
is sealed. let not the seal be broken but by my son, and not by him 
unless he know the secret. let it be burnt by the priest,--for it 
is cursed;--and even should my son know all that I do, oh! let him 
pause,--let him reflect well befor he break the seal,--for 'twere 
better he should know NO more!" 

"not know more!" thought philip, as hi eye were still fix upon the 
paper. "yes, but I must and will know more! so forgiv me, dearest 
mother, if I wast no time in reflection. It would be but time thrown 
away, when one is resolv as I am." 

philip press hi lip to hi mother' signature, fold up the 
paper, and put it into hi pocket; then, take the key, he proceed 
downstairs. 

It wa about noon when philip descend to open the chamber; the sun 
shone bright, the sky wa clear, and all without wa cheer and 
joyous. the front door of the cottag be closed, there wa not much 
light in the passag when philip put the key into the lock of the 
long-clos door, and with some difficulti turn it round. To say 
that when he push open the door he felt no alarm, would not be 
correct; he did feel alarm, and hi heart palpitated; but he felt more 
than wa requisit of determin to conquer that alarm, and to 
conquer more, should more be creat by what he should behold. He 
open the door, but did not immedi enter the room: he paus 
where he stood, for he felt as if he wa about to intrud into the 
retreat of a disembodi spirit, and that that spirit might reappear. 
He wait a minute, for the effort of open the door had taken away 
hi breath, and, as he recov himself, he look within. 

He could but imperfectli distinguish the object in the chamber, but 
through the joint of the shutter there were three brilliant beam of 
sunshin forc their way across the room, which at first induc him 
to recoil as if from someth supernatural; but a littl reflect 
reassur him. after about a minute' pause, philip went into the 
kitchen, light a candle, and, sigh deepli two or three time 
as if to reliev hi heart, he summon hi resolution, and walk 
toward the fatal room. He first stop at the threshold, and, by the 
light of the candle, took a hasti survey. all wa still: and the 
tabl on which the letter had been left, be behind the door, wa 
conceal by it be opened. It must be done, thought philip: and 
whi not at once? continu he, resum hi courage; and, with a firm 
step, he walk into the room and went to unfasten the shutters. If 
hi hand trembl a littl when he call to mind how supernatur 
they had last been opened, it is not surprising. We are but mortal, 
and we shrink from contact with aught beyond thi life. when the 
fasten were remov and the shutter unfolded, a stream of light 
pour into the room so vivid as to dazzl hi eyesight; strang to 
say, thi veri light of a brilliant day overthrew the resolut of 
philip more than the previou gloom and dark had done; and with 
the candl in hi hand, he retreat hastili into the kitchen to 
re-summon hi courage, and there he remain for some minutes, with 
hi face covered, and in deep thought. 

It is singular that hi reveri at last end by revert to the 
fair daughter of mynheer poots, and her first appear at the 
window; and he felt as if the flood of light which had just driven 
him from the one, wa not more impress and startl than her 
enchant form at the other. hi mind dwell upon the beauteou 
vision appear to restor philip' confidence; he now rose and boldli 
walk into the room. We shall not describ the object it contain 
as they chanc to meet the eye of philip, but attempt a more lucid 
arrangement. 

the room wa about twelv or fourteen feet square, with but one 
window; opposit to the door stood the chimney and fireplace, with a 
high buffet of dark wood on each side. the floor of the room wa not 
dirty, although about it upper part spider had run their cobweb 
in everi direction. In the centr of the ceiling, hung a quicksilv 
globe, a common ornament in those days, but the major part of it had 
lost it brilliancy, the spiders' web enclos it like a shroud. 
over the chimney piec were hung two or three draw frame and 
glazed, but a dusti mildew wa spot over the glass, so that littl 
of them could be distinguished. In the centr of the mantel-piec wa 
an imag of the virgin mary, of pure silver, in a shrine of the same 
metal, but it wa tarnish to the colour of bronz or iron; some 
indian figur stood on each side of it. the glass door of the 
buffet on each side of the chimney-piec were also so dim that 
littl of what wa within could be distinguished; the light and heat 
which had been pour into the room, even for so short a time, had 
alreadi gather up the damp of mani years, and it lay as a mist and 
mingl with the dust upon the pane of glass: still here and there a 
glitter of silver vessel could be discerned, for the glass door 
had protect them from turn black, although much dim in lustre. 

On the wall face the window were other prints, in frame equal 
veil in damp and cobwebs, and also two bird-cages. the bird-cag 
philip approached, and look into them. the occupants, of course, had 
long been dead; but at the bottom of the cage wa a small heap of 
yellow feathers, through which the littl white bone of the skeleton 
were to be seen, prove that they had been brought from the canari 
isles; and, at that period, such bird were highli valued. philip 
appear to wish to examin everyth befor he sought that which 
he most dreaded, yet most wished, to find. there were sever chair 
round the room: on one of them wa some linen; he took it up. It wa 
some that must have belong to him when he wa yet a child. At last, 
philip turn hi eye to the wall not yet examin (that opposit the 
chimney-piece), through which the door wa pierced, and behind the 
door as it lay open, he wa to find the table, the couch, the workbox, 
and the fatal letter. As he turn round, hi pulse, which had 
gradual recov it regular motion, beat more quickly; but he made 
the effort, and it wa over. At first he examin the walls, against 
which were hung sword and pistol of variou sorts, but chiefli 
asiat bow and arrows, and other implement of destruction. philip' 
eye gradual descend upon the table, and littl couch behind it, 
where hi mother state herself to have been seat when hi father 
made hi aw visit. the workbox and all it implement were on the 
table, just as she had left them. the key she mention were also 
lie there, but philip looked, and look again; there wa no letter. 
He now advanc nearer, examin closely--ther wa none that he could 
perceive, either on the couch or on the table--or on the floor. He 
lift up the workbox to ascertain if it wa beneath--but no. He 
examin among it contents, but no letter wa there. He turn over 
the pillow of the couch, but still there wa no letter to be found. 
and philip felt as if there had been a heavi load remov from hi 
pant chest. "surely, then," thought he, as he leant against the 
wall, "thi must have been the vision of a heat imagination. My poor 
mother must have fallen asleep, and dreamt thi horrid tale. I thought 
it wa impossible, at least I hope so. It must have been as I 
suppose; the dream wa too powerful, too like a fear reality, 
partial unseat my poor mother' reason." philip reflect again, 
and wa then satisfi that hi supposit were correct. 

"yes, it must have been so, poor dear mother! how much thou hast 
suffered! but thou art now rewarded, and with god." 

after a few minut (dure which he survey the room again and 
again with more coolness, and perhap some indifference, now that he 
regard the supernatur histori as not true), philip took out of hi 
pocket the written paper found with the key, and read it over--"th 
iron cupboard under the buffet farthest from the window." "'ti well." 
He took the bunch of key from off the table, and soon fit one to 
the outsid wooden door which conceal the iron safe. A second 
key on the bunch open the iron doors; and philip found himself in 
possess of a consider sum of money, amounting, as near as he 
could reckon, to ten thousand guilders, in littl yellow sacks. "mi 
poor mother!" thought he; "and ha a mere dream scare thee to penuri 
and want, with all thi wealth in thi possession?" philip replac the 
sacks, and lock up the cupboards, after have taken out of one, 
alreadi half emptied, a few piec for hi immedi wants. hi 
attent wa next direct to the buffet above, which, with one 
of the keys, he opened; he found that they contain china, silver 
flagons, and cup of consider value. the lock were again turned, 
and the bunch of key thrown upon the table. 

the sudden possess of so much wealth ad to the conviction, to 
which philip had now arrived, that there had been no supernatur 
appearance, as suppos by hi mother, natur reviv and compos 
hi spirits; and he felt a reaction which amount almost to hilarity. 
seat himself on the couch, he wa soon in a reverie, and as before, 
revert to the love daughter of mynheer poots, indulg in variou 
castle-buildings, all ending, as usual, when we choos for ourselves, 
in compet and felicity. In thi pleas occup he remain 
for more than two hours, when hi thought again revert to hi poor 
mother and her fear death. 

"dearest, kindest mother!" apostrophis philip aloud, as he rose from 
hi lean position, "here thou wert, tire with watch over my 
infant slumbers, think of my absent father and hi dangers, work 
up thi mind and anticip evil, till thi fever sleep conjur up 
thi apparition. yes, it must have been so, for see here, lie on the 
floor, is the embroidery, as it fell from thi unconsci hands, 
and with that labour ceas thi happi in thi life. dear, dear 
mother!" continu he, a tear roll down hi cheek as he stoop to 
pick up the piec of muslin, "how much hast thou suffer when--god of 
heaven!" exclaim philip, as he lift up the embroidery, start 
back with violence, and overturn the table, "god of heaven and of 
judgment, there is--ther _is_," and philip clasp hi hands, and 
bow hi head in awe and anguish, as in a chang and fear tone he 
mutter forth--"th letter!" 

It wa but too true,--underneath the embroideri on the floor had lain 
the fatal letter of vanderdecken. had philip seen it on the tabl when 
he first went into the room, and wa prepar to find it, he would 
have taken it up with some degre of composure; but to find it now, 
when he had persuad himself that it wa all an illus on the part 
of hi mother; when he had made up hi mind that there had been no 
supernatur agency; after he had been indulg in vision of futur 
bliss and repose, wa a shock that transfix him where he stood, and 
for some time he remain in hi attitud of surpris and terror. down 
at onc fell the airi fabric of happi which he had built up dure 
the last two hours; and as he gradual recov from hi alarm, hi 
heart fill with melancholi forebodings. At last he dash forward, 
seiz the letter, and burst out of the fatal room. 

"I cannot, dare not, read it here," exclaim he: "no, no, it must be 
under the vault of high and offend heaven, that the messag must be 
received." philip took hi hat, and went out of the house; in calm 
despair he lock the door, took out the key, and walk he knew not 
whither. 




chapter IV 


If the reader can imagin the feel of a man who, sentenc 
to death, and have resign himself to hi fate, find himself 
unexpectedli reprieved; who, have recompos hi mind after the 
agit aris from a renew of those hope and expect which 
he had abandoned, onc more dwell upon futur prospects, and indulg 
in pleas anticipations: we say, that if the reader can imagin 
this, and then what would be that man' feel when he find that 
the repriev is revoked, and that he is to suffer, he may then form 
some idea of the state of philip' mind when he quit the cottage. 

long did he walk, careless in which direction, with the letter in hi 
clench hand, and hi teeth firmli set. gradual he becam more 
composed: and out of breath with the rapid of hi motion, he sat 
down upon a bank, and there he long remained, with hi eye rivet 
upon the dread paper, which he held with both hi hand upon hi 
knees. 

mechan he turn the letter over; the seal wa black. philip 
sighed.--"i cannot read it now," thought he, and he rose and continu 
hi deviou way. 

for anoth half-hour did philip keep in motion, and the sun wa not 
mani degre abov the horizon. philip stop and look at it till 
hi vision failed. "I could imagin that it wa the eye of god," 
thought philip, "and perhap it may be. whi then, merci creator, am 
I thu select from so mani million to fulfil so dire a task?" 

philip look about him for some spot where he might be conceal from 
observation--wher he might break the seal, and read thi mission from 
a world of spirits. A small cops of brushwood, in advanc of a grove 
of trees, wa not far from where he stood. He walk to it, and sat 
down, so as to be conceal from ani passers-by. philip onc more 
look at the descend orb of day, and by degre he becam 
composed. 

"it is thi will," exclaim he; "it is my fate, and both must be 
accomplished." 

philip put hi hand to the seal,--hi blood thrill when he call 
to mind that it had been deliv by no mortal hand, and that it 
contain the secret of one in judgment. He rememb that that one 
wa hi father; and that it wa onli in the letter that there wa 
hope,--hop for hi poor father, whose memori he had been taught to 
love, and who appeal for help. 

"coward that I am, to have lost so mani hours!" exclaim philip; "yon 
sun appear as if wait on the hill, to give me light to read." 

philip muse a short time; he wa onc more the dare vanderdecken. 
calmli he broke the seal, which bore the initi of hi father' 
name, and read as follows:-- 

"to catherine. 

"one of those piti spirit whose eye rain tear for mortal 
crime ha been permit to inform me by what mean alon my 
dread doom may be averted. 

"could I but receiv on the deck of my own ship the holi relic 
upon which I swore the fatal oath, kiss it in all humility, and 
shed one tear of deep contrit on the sacr wood, I then might 
rest in peace. 

"how thi may be effected, or by whom so fatal a task will be 
undertaken, I know not. O catherine, we have a son--but, no, no, 
let him not hear of me. pray for me, and now, farewell. 

"i. vanderdecken." 

"then it is true, most horribl true," thought philip; "and my father 
is even now IN live judgment. and he point to me--to whom els 
should he? Am I not hi son, and is it not my duty? 

"yes, father," exclaim philip aloud, fall on hi knees, "you have 
not written these line in vain. let me perus them onc more." 

philip rais up hi hand; but although it appear to him that he had 
still hold of the letter, it wa not there--h grasp nothing. He 
look on the grass to see if it had fallen--but no, there wa no 
letter, it had disappeared. wa it a vision?--no, no, he had read 
everi word. "then it must be to me, and me alone, that the mission wa 
intended. I accept the sign. 

"hear me, dear father,--if thou art so permitted,--and deign to hear 
me, graciou heaven--hear the son who, by thi sacr relic, swear 
that he will avert your doom, or perish. To that will he devot hi 
days; and have done hi duty, he will die in hope and peace. heaven, 
that record my rash father' oath, now regist hi son' upon 
the same sacr cross, and may perjuri on my part be visit with 
punish more dire than his! receiv it, heaven, as at the last I 
trust that in thi merci thou wilt receiv the father and the son! and 
if too bold, O pardon my presumption." 

philip threw himself forward on hi face, with hi lip to the sacr 
symbol. the sun went down, and twilight gradual disappeared; night 
had, for some time, shroud all in darkness, and philip yet remain 
in altern prayer and meditation. 

but he wa disturb by the voic of some men, who sat down upon the 
turf but a few yard from where he wa concealed. the convers he 
littl heeded; but it had rous him, and hi first feel wa to 
return to the cottage, that he might reflect over hi plans; but 
although the men spoke in a low tone, hi attent wa soon arrest 
by the subject of their conversation, when he heard the name mention 
of mynheer poots. He listen attentively, and discov that they 
were four disband soldiers, who intend that night to attack the 
hous of the littl doctor, who had, they knew, much money in hi 
possession. 

"what I have propos is the best," said one of them; "he ha no one 
with him but hi daughter." 

"I valu her more than hi money," repli another; "so, recollect 
befor we go, it is perfectli understood that she is to be my 
property." 

"yes, if you choos to purchas her, there' no objection," repli a 
third. 

"agreed; how much will you in conscienc ask for a pule girl?" 

"I say five hundr guilders," repli another. 

"well, be it so, but on thi condition, that if my share of the booti 
doe not amount to so much, I am to have her for my share, whatev it 
may be." 

"that' veri fair," repli the other; "but i'm much mistaken if 
we don't turn more than two thousand guilder out of the old man' 
chest." 

"what do you two say--i it agreed--shal baeten have her?" 

"O yes," repli the others. 

"well, then," repli the one who had stipul for mynheer poots' 
daughter, "now I am with you, heart and soul. I love that girl, and 
tri to get her,--i posit offer to marri her, but the old 
hunk refus me, an ensign, an officer; but now i'll have revenge. We 
must not spare him." 

"no, no," repli the others. 

"shall we go now, or wait till it is later? In an hour or more the 
moon will be up,--w may be seen." 

"who is to see us? unless, indeed, some one is sent for him. the later 
the better, I say." 

"how long will it take us to get there? not half an hour, if we walk. 
suppos we start in half an hour hence, we shall just have the moon to 
count the guilder by." 

"that' all right. In the meantim i'll put a new flint in my lock, 
and have my carbin loaded. I can work in the dark." 

"you are use to it, jan." 

"yes, I am,--and I intend thi ball to go through the old rascal' 
head." 

"well, i'd rather you should kill him than i," repli one of the 
others, "for he save my life at middleburgh, when everyon made sure 
i'd die." 

philip did not wait to hear ani more; he crawl behind the bush 
until he gain the grove of trees, and pass through them, made 
a detour, so as not to be seen by these miscreants. that they were 
disband soldiers, mani of whom were infest the country, he 
knew well. all hi thought were now to save the old doctor and hi 
daughter from the danger which threaten them; and for a time he 
forgot hi father, and the excit revel of the day. although 
philip had not been awar in what direct he had walk when he set 
off from the cottage, he knew the countri well; and now that it wa 
necessari to act, he rememb the direct in which he should find 
the lone hous of mynheer poots: with the utmost speed he made hi 
way for it, and in less than twenti minut he arriv there, out of 
breath. 

As usual, all wa silent, and the door fastened. philip knocked, but 
there wa no reply. again and again he knocked, and becam impatient. 
mynheer poot must have been summoned, and wa not in the house; 
philip therefor call out, so as to be heard within. "maiden, if 
your father is out, as I presum he must be, listen to what I have to 
say--i am philip vanderdecken. but now I overheard four wretch who 
have plan to murder your father, and rob him of hi gold. In one 
hour or less they will be here, and I have hasten to warn and to 
protect you, if I may. I swear upon the relic that you deliv to me 
thi morn that what I state is true." 

philip wait a short time, but receiv no answer. 

"maiden," resum he, "answer me, if you valu that which is more dear 
to you, than even your father' gold to him. open the casement above, 
and listen to what I have to say. In so do there is no risk; and 
even if it were not dark, alreadi have I seen you." 

A short time after thi second address, the casement of the upper 
window wa unbarred, and the slight form of the fair daughter of 
mynheer poot wa to be distinguish by philip through the gloom. 

"what wouldst thou, young sir, at thi unseemli hour? and what is it 
thou wouldst impart, but imperfectli heard by me, when thou spokest 
thi minut at the door?" 

philip then enter into a detail of all that he had overheard, and 
conclud by beg her to admit him, that he might defend her. 

"think, fair maiden, of what I have told you. you have been sold 
to one of those reprobates, whose name I think they mentioned, wa 
baetens. the gold, I know, you valu not; but think of thine own dear 
self--suff me to enter the house, and think not for one moment that 
my story' feigned. I swear to thee, by the soul of my poor dear 
mother, now, I trust, in heaven, that everi word is true." 

"baetens, said you, sir?" 

"if I mistook them not, such wa the name; he said he love you once." 

"that name I have in memory--i know not what to do or what to say--mi 
father ha been summon to a birth, and may be yet away for mani 
hours. yet how can I open the door to you--at night--h is not at 
home--i alone? I ought not--cannot--yet do I believ you. you sure 
never could be so base as to invent thi tale." 

"no--upon my hope of futur bliss I could not, maiden! you must not 
trifl with your life and honour, but let me in." 

"and if I did, what could you do against such numbers? they are four 
to one--would soon overpow you, and one more life would be lost." 

"not if you have arms; and I think your father would not be left 
without them. I fear them not--you know that I am resolute." 

"I do indeed--and now you'd risk your life for those you did assail. I 
thank you--thank you kindly, sir--but dare not open the door." 

"then, maiden, if you'll not admit me, here will I now remain; without 
arms, and but ill abl to contend with four arm villains; but still, 
here will I remain and prove my truth to one I will protect against 
ani odds--yes, even here!" 

"then shall I be thi murderer!--but that must not be. oh! sir--swear, 
swear by all that' holy, and by all that' pure, that you do not 
deceiv me." 

"I swear by thyself, maiden, than all to me more sacred!" 

the casement closed, and in a short time a light appear above. In a 
minut or two more the door wa open to philip by the fair daughter 
of mynheer poots. she stood with the candl in her right hand, the 
colour in her cheek varying--now flush red, and again deadli pale. 
her left hand wa down by her side, and in it she held a pistol half 
concealed. philip perceiv thi precaut on her part but took no 
notic of it; he wish to reassur her. 

"maiden!" said he, not entering, "if you still have doubts--if you 
think you have been ill-advis in give me admission--ther is yet 
time to close the door against me: but for your own sake I entreat you 
not. befor the moon is up, the robber will be here. with my life I 
will protect you, if you will but trust me. who inde could injur 
one like you?" 

she wa inde (a she stood irresolut and perplex from the 
peculiar of her situation, yet not want in courag when, it wa 
to be call forth) an object well worthi of gaze and admiration. her 
featur thrown into broad light and shade by the candl which at 
time wa half extinguish by the wind--her symmetri of form and 
the grace and singular of her attire--wer matter of 
astonish to philip. her head wa without covering, and her long 
hair fell in plait behind her shoulders; her statur wa rather 
under the middl size, but her form perfect; her dress wa simpl but 
becoming, and veri differ from that usual worn by the young women 
of the district. not onli her featur but her dress would at onc 
have indic to a travel that she wa of arab blood, as wa the 
fact. 

she look in philip' face as she spoke--earnestly, as if she would 
have penetr into hi inmost thoughts; but there wa a frank 
and honesti in hi bearing, and a sincer in hi manli countenance, 
which reassur her. after a moment' hesit she replied-- 

"come in, sir; I feel that I can trust you." 

philip entered. the door wa then close and made secure. 

"we have no time to lose, maiden," said philip: "but tell me your 
name, that I may address you as I ought." 

"mi name is amine," repli she, retreat a little. 

"I thank you for that littl confidence; but I must not dally. what 
arm have you in the house, and have you ammunition?" 

"both. I wish that my father would come home." 

"and so do i," repli philip, "devoutli wish he would, befor these 
murder come; but not, I trust, while the attack is making, for 
there' a carbin load expressli for hi head, and if they make 
him prisoner, they will not spare hi life, unless hi gold and your 
person are given in ransom. but the arms, maiden--wher are they?" 

"follow me," repli amine, lead philip to an inner room on the 
upper floor. It wa the sanctum of her father, and wa surround with 
shelv fill with bottl and box of drugs. In one corner wa an 
iron chest, and over the mantel-piec were a brace of carbin and 
three pistols. 

"they are all loaded," observ amine, point to them, and lay on 
the tabl the one which she had held in her hand. 

philip took down the arms, and examin all the primings. He then took 
up from the tabl the pistol which amin had laid there, and threw 
open the pan. It wa equal well prepared. philip close the pan, and 
with a smile observed, 

"so thi wa meant for me, amine?" 

"no--not for you--but for a traitor, had one gain admittance." 

"now, maiden," observ philip, "I shall station myself at the 
casement which you opened, but without a light in the room. you may 
remain here, and can turn the key for your security." 

"you littl know me," repli amine. "in that way at least I am not 
fearful; I must remain near you and reload the arms--a task in which I 
am well practised." 

"no, no," repli philip; "you might be hurt." 

"I may. but think you I will remain here idly, when I can assist one 
who risk hi life for me? I know my duty, sir, and I shall perform 
it." 

"you must not risk your life, amine," repli philip; "mi aim will not 
be steady, if I know that you'r in danger. but I must take the arm 
into the other chamber, for the time is come." 

philip, assist by amine, carri the carbin and pistol into the 
adjoin chamber; and amin then left philip, carri with her the 
light. philip, as soon as he wa alone, open the casement and look 
out--ther wa no one to be seen; he listened, but all wa silent. the 
moon wa just rise abov the distant hill, but her light wa dim 
by fleeci clouds, and philip watch for a few minutes; at length he 
heard a whisper below. He look out, and could distinguish through 
the dark the four expect assailants, stand close to the door of 
the house. He walk away softli from the window, and went into the 
next room to amine, whom he found busi prepar the ammunition. 

"amine, they are at the door, in consultation. you can see them now, 
without risk. I thank them, for they will convinc you that I have 
told the truth." 

amine, without reply, went into the front room and look out of the 
window. she returned, and lay her hand upon philip' arm, she 
said-- 

"grant me your pardon for my doubts. I fear noth now but that my 
father may return too soon, and they seiz him." 

philip left the room again, to make hi reconnaissance. the robber 
did not appear to have made up their mind--th strength of the door 
defi their utmost efforts, so they attempt stratagem. they 
knocked, and as there wa no reply, they continu to knock louder and 
louder: not meet with success they held anoth consultation, and 
the muzzl of a carbin wa then put to the keyhole, and the piec 
discharged. the lock of the door wa blown off, but the iron bar 
which cross the door within, abov and below, still held it fast. 

although philip would have been justifi in fire upon the robber 
when he first perceiv them in consult at the door, still there 
is that feel in a gener mind which prevent the take away of 
life, except from stern necessity; and thi feel made him withhold 
hi fire until hostil had actual commenced. He now level one 
of the carbin at the head of the robber nearest to the door, who wa 
busi examin the effect which the discharg of the piec had made, 
and what further obstacl intervened. the aim wa true, and the 
man fell dead, while the other start back with surpris at the 
unexpect retaliation. but in a second or two a pistol wa discharg 
at philip, who still remain lean out of the casement, fortun 
without effect; and the next moment he felt himself drawn away, so as 
to be protect from their fire. It wa amine, who, unknown to philip, 
had been stand by hi side. 

"you must not expos yourself, philip," said she, in a low tone. 

she call me philip, thought he, but made no reply. 

"they will be watch for you at the casement now," said amine. "take 
the other carbine, and go below in the passage. If the lock of the 
door is blown off, they may put their arm in perhaps, and remov the 
bars. I do not think they can, but i'm not sure; at all events, it is 
there you should now be, as there they will not expect you." 

"you are right," repli philip, go down. 

"but you must not fire more than onc there; if anoth fall, there 
will be but two to deal with, and they cannot watch the casement and 
forc admitt to. go--i will reload the carbine." 

philip descend softli and without a light. He went up to the door 
and perceiv that one of the miscreants, with hi arm through the 
hole where the lock wa blown off, wa work at the upper iron bar, 
which he could just reach. He present hi carbine, and wa about to 
fire the whole charg into the bodi of the man under hi rais arm, 
when there wa a report of fire-arm from the robber outside. 

"amin ha expos herself," thought philip, "and may be hurt." 

the desir of vengeanc prompt him first to fire hi piec through 
the man' body, and then he flew up the stair to ascertain the state 
of amine. she wa not at the casement; he dart into the inner room, 
and found her deliber load the carbine. 

"mi god! how you frighten me, amine. I thought by their fire that 
you had shown yourself at the window." 

"inde I did not; but I thought that when you fire through the door 
they might return your fire, and you be hurt; so I went to the side of 
the casement and push out on a stick some of my father' clothes, 
and they who were watch for you fire immediately." 

"indeed, amine! who could have expect such courag and such cool 
in one so young and beautiful?" exclaim philip, with surprise. 

"are none but ill-favour peopl brave, then?" repli amine, 
smiling. 

"I did not mean that, amine--but I am lose time. I must to the door 
again. give me that carbine, and reload this." 

philip crept downstair that he might reconnoitre, but befor he had 
gain the door he heard at a distanc the voic of mynheer poots. 
amine, who also heard it, wa in a moment at hi side with a load 
pistol in each hand. 

"fear not, amine," said philip, as he unbar the door, "there are 
but two, and your father shall be saved." 

the door wa opened, and philip, seiz hi carbine, rush out; he 
found mynheer poot on the ground between the two men, one of whom 
had rais hi knife to plung it into hi body, when the ball of the 
carbin whizz through hi head. the last of the robber close with 
philip, and a desper struggl ensued; it was, however, soon decid 
by amin step forward and fire one of the pistol through the 
robber' body. 

We must here inform our reader that mynheer poots, when come home, 
had heard the report of fire-arm in the direct of hi own house. 
the recollect of hi daughter and of hi money--for to do him 
justic he did love her best--had lent him wings; he forgot that he 
wa a feebl old man and without arms; all he thought of wa to gain 
hi habitation. On he came, reckless, frantic, and shouting, and 
rush into the arm of the two robbers, who seiz and would have 
despatch him, had not philip so opportun come to hi assistance. 

As soon as the last robber fell, philip disengag himself and went to 
the assist of mynheer poots, whom he rais up in hi arms, and 
carri into the hous as if he were an infant. the old man wa still 
in a state of delirium from fear and previou excitement. 

In a few minut mynheer poot wa more coherent. 

"mi daughter!" exclaim he--"mi daughter! where is she?" 

"she is here, father, and safe," repli amine. 

"ah! my child is safe," said he, open hi eye and staring. "yes, 
it is even so--and my money--mi money--wher is my money?" continu 
he, start up. 

"quit safe, father." 

"quit safe--y say quit safe--ar you sure of it?--let me see." 

"there it is, father, as you may perceive, quit safe--thank to one 
whom you have not treat so well." 

"who--what do you mean?--ah, yes, I see him now--'ti philip 
vanderdecken--h owe me three guilder and a half, and there is a 
phial--did he save you--and my money, child?" 

"he did, indeed, at the risk of hi life." 

"well, well, I will forgiv him the whole debt--yes, the whole of it; 
but--th phial is of no use to him--h must return that. give me some 
water." 

It wa some time befor the old man could regain hi perfect reason. 
philip left him with hi daughter, and, take a brace of load 
pistols, went out to ascertain the fate of the four assailants. the 
moon have climb abov the bank of cloud which had obscur her, 
wa now high in the heavens, shine bright, and he could distinguish 
clearly. the two men lie across the threshold of the door were quit 
dead. the others, who had seiz upon mynheer poots, were still 
alive, but one wa expir and the other bled fast. philip put a few 
question to the latter, but he either would not or could not make ani 
reply; he remov their weapon and return to the house, where he 
found the old man attend by hi daughter, in a state of compar 
composure. 

"I thank you, philip vanderdecken--i thank you much. you have save my 
dear child, and my money--that is little, veri little--for I am poor. 
may you live long and happily!" 

philip mused; the letter and hi vow were, for the first time sinc he 
fell in with the robbers, recal to hi recollection, and a shade 
pass over hi countenance. 

"long and happily--no, no," mutter he, with an involuntari shake of 
the head. 

"and I must thank you," said amine, look inquiringli in philip' 
face. "o, how much have I to thank you for!--and inde I am 
grateful." 

"yes, yes, she is veri grateful," interrupt the old man; "but we are 
poor--veri poor. I talk about my money becaus I have so little, 
and I cannot afford to lose it; but you shall not pay me the three 
guilder and a half--i am content to lose that, Mr philip." 

"whi should you lose even that, mynheer poots?--i promis to pay you, 
and will keep my word. I have plenti of money--thousand of guilders, 
and know not what to do with them." 

"you--you--thousand of guilders!" exclaim poots. "pooh, nonsense, 
that won't do." 

"I repeat to you, amine," said philip, "that I have thousand of 
guilders: you know I would not tell you a falsehood." 

"I believ you when you said so to my father," repli amine. 

"then perhaps, as you have so much, and I am so veri poor, Mr 
vanderdecken--" 

but amin put her hand upon her father' lips, and the sentenc wa 
not finished. 

"father," said amine, "it is time that we retire. you must leav us 
for to-night, philip." 

"I will not," repli philip; "nor, you may depend upon it, will I 
sleep. you may both to bed in safety. It is inde time that you 
retire--good-night, mynheer poots. I will but ask a lamp, and then I 
leav you--amine, good-night." 

"good-night," said amine, extend her hand, "and many, mani thanks." 

"thousand of guilders!" mutter the old man, as philip left the room 
and went below. 




chapter V 


philip vanderdecken sat down at the porch of the door; he swept hi 
hair from hi forehead, which he expos to the fan of the breeze; 
for the continu excit of the last three day had left a fever 
on hi brain which made him restless and confused. He long for 
repose, but he knew that for him there wa no rest. He had hi 
forebodings--h perceiv in the vista of futur a long-continu 
chain of danger and disaster, even to death; yet he beheld it without 
emot and without dread. He felt as if it were onli three day 
that he had begun to exist; he wa melancholy, but not unhappy. hi 
thought were constantli recur to the fatal letter--it strang 
supernatur disappear seem pointedli to establish it 
supernatur origin, and that the mission had been intend for him 
alone; and the relic in hi possess more fulli substanti the 
fact. 

It is my fate, my duty, thought philip. have satisfactorili made up 
hi mind to these conclusions, hi thought revert to the beauty, 
the courage, and presenc of mind shown by amine. and, thought he, 
as he watch the moon soar high in the heavens, is thi fair 
creature' destini to be interwoven with mine? the event of the last 
three day would almost warrant the supposition. heaven onli knows, 
and heaven' will be done. I have vowed, and my vow is registered, 
that I will devot my life to the releas of my unfortun 
father--but doe that prevent my love amine?--no, no; the sailor on 
the indian sea must pass month and month on shore befor he can 
return to hi duty. My search must be on the broad ocean, but how 
often may I return? and whi am I to be debar the solac of a 
smile hearth?--and yet--do I right in win the affect of one 
who, if she loves, would, I am convinced, love so dearly, fondly, 
truly--ought I to persuad her to mate herself with one whose life 
will be so precarious? but is not everi sailor' life precarious, 
dare the angri waves, with but an inch of plank 'tween him and 
death? besides, I am chosen to fulfil a task--and if so, what can hurt 
me, till in heaven' own time it is accomplished? but then how soon, 
and how is it to end? in death! I wish my blood were cooler, that I 
might reason better. 

such were the medit of philip vanderdecken, and long did he 
revolv such chanc in hi mind. At last the day dawned, and as he 
perceiv the blush upon the horizon, less care of hi watch he 
slumber where he sat. A slight pressur on the shoulder made him 
start up and draw the pistol from hi bosom. He turn round and 
beheld amine. 

"and that pistol wa intend for me," said amine, smiling, repeat 
philip' word of the night before. 

"for you, amine?--yes, to defend you, if 'twere necessary, onc more." 

"I know it would--how kind of you to watch thi tediou night after so 
much exert and fatigue! but it is now broad day." 

"until I saw the dawn, amine, I kept a faith watch." 

"but now retir and take some rest. My father is risen--y can lie 
down on hi bed." 

"I thank you, but I feel no wish for sleep. there is much to do. We 
must to the burgomast and state the facts, and these bodi must 
remain where they are until the whole is known. will your father go, 
amine, or shall i?" 

"mi father sure is the more proper person, as the proprietor of the 
house. you must remain; and if you will not sleep, you must take some 
refreshment. I will go in and tell my father; he ha alreadi taken hi 
morning' meal." 

amin went in, and soon return with her father, who had consent 
to go to the burgomaster. He salut philip kindli as he came out; 
shudder as he pass on one side to avoid step over the dead 
bodies, and went off at a quick pace to the adjac town, where the 
burgomast resided. 

amin desir philip to follow her, and they went into her father' 
room, where, to hi surprise, he found some coffe readi for him--at 
that time a rarity, and one which philip did not expect to find in the 
hous of the penuri mynheer poots; but it wa a luxuri which, from 
hi former life, the old man could not dispens with. 

philip, who had not tast food for nearli twenty-four hours, wa not 
sorri to avail himself of what wa place befor him. amin sat down 
opposit to him, and wa silent dure hi repast. 

"amine," said philip at last, "I have had plenti of time for 
reflect dure thi night, as I watch at the door. may I speak 
freely?" 

"whi not?" repli amine. "I feel assur that you will say noth 
that you should not say, or should not meet a maiden' ear." 

"you do me justice, amine. My thought have been upon you and your 
father. you cannot stay in thi lone habitation." 

"I feel it is too lonely; that is, for hi safety--perhap for 
mine--but you know my father--th veri loneli suit him, the price 
paid for rent is little, and he is care of hi money." 

"the man who would be care of hi money should place it in 
security--her it is not secure. now hear me, amine. I have a cottag 
surrounded, as you may have heard, by mani others, which mutual 
protect each other. that cottag I am about to leave--perhap for 
ever; for I intend to sail by the first ship to the indian seas." 

"the indian seas! whi so?--did you not last night talk of thousand of 
guilders?" 

"I did, and they are there; but, amine, I must go--it is my duty. ask 
me no more, but listen to what I now propose. your father must live in 
my cottage; he must take care of it for me in my absence; he will do 
me a favour by consenting; and you must persuad him. you will there 
be safe. He must also take care of my money for me. I want it not at 
present--i cannot take it with me." 

"mi father is not to be trust with the money of other people." 

"whi doe your father hoard? He cannot take hi money with him when 
he is call away. It must be all for you--and is not then my money 
safe?" 

"leav it then in my charge, and it will be safe; but whi need you go 
and risk your life upon the water, when you have such ampl means?" 

"amine, ask not that question. It is my duti as a son, and more I 
cannot tell, at least at present." 

"if it is your duty, I ask no more. It wa not womanish curiosity--no, 
no--it wa a better feeling, I assur you, which prompt me to put 
the question." 

"and what wa the better feeling, amine?" 

"I hardli know--mani good feel perhap mix up 
together--gratitude, esteem, respect, confidence, good-will. are not 
these sufficient?" 

"yes, indeed, amine, and much to gain upon so short an acquaintance; 
but still I feel them all, and more, for you. if, then, you feel so 
much for me, do oblig me by persuad your father to leav thi 
lone hous thi day, and take up hi abod in mine." 

"and where do you intend to go yourself?" 

"if your father will not admit me as a boarder for the short time I 
remain here, I will seek some shelter elsewhere; but if he will, I 
will indemnifi him well--that is, if you rais no object to my 
be for a few day in the house?" 

"whi should I? our habit is no longer safe, and you offer us a 
shelter. It were, indeed, unjust and most ungrat to turn you out 
from beneath your own roof." 

"then persuad him, amine. I will accept of nothing, but take it as 
a favour; for I should depart in sorrow if I saw you not in 
safety.--wil you promis me?" 

"I do promis to use my best endeavours--nay, I may as well say at 
onc it shall be so; for I know my influence. here is my hand upon it. 
will that content you?" 

philip took the small hand extend toward him. hi feel overcam 
hi discretion; he rais it to hi lips. He look up to see if amin 
wa displeased, and found her dark eye fix upon him, as onc befor 
when she admit him, as if she would see hi thoughts--but the hand 
wa not withdrawn. 

"indeed, amine," said philip, kiss her hand onc more, "you may 
confid in me." 

"I hope--i think--nay, I am sure I may," at last repli she. 

philip releas her hand. amin return to the seat, and for some 
time remain silent and in a pensiv attitude. philip also had hi 
own thoughts, and did not open hi lips. At last amin spoke. 

"I think I have heard my father say that your mother wa veri poor--a 
littl deranged; and that there wa a chamber in the hous which had 
been shut up for years." 

"it wa shut up till yesterday." 

"and there you found your money? did your mother not know of the 
money?" 

"she did, for she spoke of it on her death-bed." 

"there must have been some potent reason for not open the 
chamber." 

"there were." 

"what were they, philip?" said amine, in a soft and low tone of voice. 

"I must not tell, at least I ought not. thi must satisfi you--'twa 
the fear of an apparition." 

"what apparition?" 

"she said that my father had appear to her." 

"and did he, think you, philip?" 

"I have no doubt that he did. but I can answer no more questions, 
amine. the chamber is open now, and there is no fear of hi 
reappearance." 

"I fear not that," repli amine, musing. "but," continu she, "i 
not thi connect with your resolut of go to sea?" 

"so far will I answer you, that it ha decid me to go to sea; but I 
pray you ask no more. It is pain to refus you, and my duti forbid 
me to speak further." 

for some minut they were both silent, when amin resumed-- 

"you were so anxiou to possess that relic, that I cannot help 
think it ha connect with the mystery. Is it not so?" 

"for the last time, amine, I will answer your question--it ha to do 
with it: but now no more." 

philip' blunt and almost rude manner of finish hi speech wa not 
lost upon amine, who replied, 

"you are so engross with other thoughts, that you have not felt the 
compliment shown you by my take such interest about you, sir." 

"yes, I do--i feel and thank you too, amine. forgiv me, if I have 
been rude; but recollect, the secret is not mine--at least, I feel as 
if it were not. god knows, I wish I never had known it, for it ha 
blast all my hope in life." 

philip wa silent; and when he rais hi eyes, he found that amine' 
were fix upon him. 

"would you read my thoughts, amine, or my secret?" 

"your thought perhaps--your secret I would not; yet do I griev 
that it should oppress you so heavili as evid it does. It must, 
indeed, be one of awe to bear down a mind like yours, philip." 

"where did you learn to be so brave, amine?" said philip, chang the 
conversation. 

"circumst make peopl brave or otherwise; those who are 
accustom to difficulti and danger fear them not." 

"and where have you met with them, amine?" 

"in the countri where I wa born, not in thi dank and muddi land." 

"will you trust me with the stori of your former life, amine? I can be 
secret, if you wish." 

"that you can be secret perhaps, against my wish, you have alreadi 
prove to me," repli amine, smiling; "and you have a claim to know 
someth of the life you have preserved. I cannot tell you much, but 
what I can will be sufficient. My father, when a lad on board of a 
trade vessel, wa taken by the moors, and sold as a slave to a 
hakim, or physician, of their country. find him veri intelligent, 
the moor brought him up as an assistant, and it wa under thi man 
that he obtain a knowledg of the art. In a few year he wa equal 
to hi master; but, as a slave, he work not for himself. you know, 
inde it cannot be concealed, my father' avarice. He sigh to 
becom as wealthi as hi master, and to obtain hi freedom; he becam 
a follow of mahomet, after which he wa free, and practis for 
himself. He took a wife from an arab family, the daughter of a chief 
whom he had restor to health, and he settl in the country. I wa 
born; he amass wealth, and becam much celebrated; but the son of a 
bey die under hi hand wa the excus for persecut him. hi head 
wa forfeited, but he escaped; not, however, without the loss of all 
hi belov wealth. My mother and I went with him; he fled to the 
bedouins, with whom we remain some years. there I wa accustom 
to rapid marches, wild and fierc attacks, defeat and flight, and 
oftentim to indiscrimin slaughter. but the bedouin paid not well 
for my father' services, and gold wa hi idol. hear that the 
bey wa dead, he return to cairo, where he again practised. He wa 
allow onc more to amass until the heap wa suffici to excit 
the cupid of the new bey; but thi time he wa fortun made 
acquaint with the intent of the ruler. He again escaped, with 
a portion of hi wealth, in a small vessel, and gain the spanish 
coast; but he never ha been abl to retain hi money long. befor he 
arriv in thi countri he had been rob of almost all, and ha now 
been for these three year lay up again. We were but one year 
at middleburgh, and from thenc remov to thi place. such is the 
histori of my life, philip." 

"and doe your father still hold the mahomedan faith, amine?" 

"I know not. I think he hold no faith whatever: at least he hath 
taught me none. hi god is gold." 

"and yours?" 

"i the god who made thi beauti world, and all which it 
contains--th god of nature--nam him as you will. thi I feel, 
philip, but more I fain would know; there are so mani faiths, but 
sure they must be but differ path lead alik to heaven. your 
is the christian faith, philip. Is it the true one? but everyon call 
hi own the true one, whatev hi creed may be." 

"it is the true and onli one, amine. could I but reveal--i have such 
dread proofs--" 

"that your faith is true; then is it not your duti to reveal these 
proofs? tell me, are you bound by ani solemn oblig never to 
reveal?" 

"no, I am not; yet do I feel as if I were. but I hear voices--it must 
be your father and the authorities--i must go down and meet them." 

philip rose, and went downstairs. amine' eye follow him as he 
went, and she remain look toward the door. 

"i it possible," said she, sweep the hair from off her brow, "so 
soon,--yes, yes, 'ti even so. I feel that I would sooner share hi 
hidden woe--hi dangers--even death itself were prefer with him, 
than eas and happi with ani other. and it shall be strang inde 
if I do not. thi night my father shall move into hi cottage: I will 
prepar at once." 

the report of philip and mynheer poot wa taken down by the 
authorities, the bodi examined, and one or two of them recognis 
as well-known marauders. they were then remov by the order of the 
burgomaster. the author broke up their council, and philip and 
mynheer poot were permit to return to amine. It will not be 
necessari to repeat the convers which ensued: it will be 
suffici to state that poot yield to the argument employ by 
amin and philip, particularli the one of pay no rent. A convey 
for the furnitur and medicin wa procured, and in the afternoon 
most of the effect were taken away. It wa not, however, till dusk 
that the strong box of the doctor wa put into the cart, and philip 
went with it as a protector. amin also walk by the side of the 
vehicle, with her father. As may be supposed, it wa late that night 
befor they had made their arrangements, and had retir to rest. 




chapter VI 


"this, then, is the chamber which ha so long been closed," said 
amine, on enter it the next morning, long befor philip had 
awaken from the sound sleep produc by the watch of the night 
before. "yes, indeed, it ha the air of have long been closed." 
amin look around her, and then examin the furniture. her eye 
were attract to the bird-cages; she look into them:--"poor littl 
things!" continu she, "and here it wa hi father appear unto hi 
mother. well, it may be so,--philip saith that he hath proofs; and 
whi should he not appear? were philip dead, I should rejoic to 
see hi spirit,--at least it would be something. what am I 
saying--unfaith lips, thu to betray my secret?--th tabl thrown 
over;--that look like the work of fear; a workbox, with all it 
implement scattered,--onli a woman' fear: a mous might have caus 
all this; and yet there is someth solemn in the simpl fact that, 
for so mani years, not a live be ha cross these boards. even 
that a tabl thu overthrown could thu remain for years, seem 
scarc natural, and therefor ha it power on the mind. I wonder 
not that philip feel there is so heavi a secret belong to thi 
room--but it must not remain in thi condition--it must be occupi at 
once." 

amine, who had long been accustom to attend upon her father, and 
perform the household duties, now commenc her intend labours. 

everi part of the room, and everi piec of furnitur in it, were 
cleaned; even the cobweb and dust were clear away, and the sofa 
and tabl brought from the corner to the centr of the room; the 
melancholi littl prison were removed; and when amine' work of 
neat wa complete, and the sun shone brightli into the open 
window, the chamber wore the appear of cheerfulness. 

amin had the intuit good sens to feel that strong impress 
wear away when the object connect with them are removed. she 
resolv then to make philip more at ease; for, with all the fire and 
warmth of blood inher in her race, she had taken hi imag to her 
heart, and wa determin to win him. again and again did she resum 
her labour, until the pictur about the room, and everi other 
article, look fresh and clean. 

not onli the bird-cages, but the workbox, and all the implements, were 
removed; and the piec of embroidery, the take up of which had made 
philip recoil, as if he had touch an adder, wa put away with the 
rest. philip had left the key on the floor. amin open the buffets, 
clean the glaze doors, and wa busi rub up the silver flagon 
when her father came into the room. 

"merci on me!" exclaim mynheer poots; "and is all that silver?--then 
it must be true, and he ha thousand of guilders; but where are 
they?" 

"never do you mind, father; your are now safe, and for that you have 
to thank philip vanderdecken." 

"yes, veri true; but as he is to live here--do he eat much--what 
will he pay me? He ought to pay well, as he ha so much money." 

amine' lip were curl with a contemptu smile, but she made no 
reply. 

"I wonder where he keep hi money; and he is go to sea as soon as 
he can get a ship? who will have charg of hi money when he goes?" 

"I shall take charg of it, father," repli amine. 

"ah--yes--well--w will take charg of it; the ship may be lost." 

"no, _we_ will not take charg of it, father; you will have noth to 
do with it. look after your own." 

amin place the silver in the buffets, lock the doors, and took the 
key with her when she went out to prepar breakfast, leav the old 
man gaze through the glaze door at the preciou metal within. hi 
eye were rivet upon it, and he could not remov them. everi minut 
he muttered, "yes, all silver." 

philip came downstairs; and as he pass by the room, intend to go 
into the kitchen, he perceiv mynheer poot at the buffet, and he 
walk into the room. He wa surpris as well as pleas with the 
alteration. He felt whi and by whom it wa done, and he wa grateful. 
amin came in with the breakfast, and their eye spoke more than their 
lip could have done; and philip sat down to hi meal with less of 
sorrow and gloom upon hi brow. 

"mynheer poots," said philip, as soon as he had finished, "I intend 
to leav you in possess of my cottage, and I trust you will find 
yourself comfortable. what littl arrang are necessary, I will 
confid to your daughter previou to my departure." 

"then you leav us, Mr philip, to go to sea? It must be pleasant to go 
and see strang countries--much better than stay at home. when do 
you go?" 

"I shall leav thi even for amsterdam," repli philip, "to make 
my arrang about a ship, but I shall return, I think, befor I 
sail." 

"ah! you will return. yes--you have your money and your good to see 
to; you must count your money--w will take good care of it. where is 
your money, Mr vanderdecken?" 

"that I will commun to your daughter thi forenoon, befor I 
leave. In three week at the furthest you may expect me back." 

"father," said amine, "you promis to go and see the child of the 
burgomaster; it is time you went." 

"yes, yes--by-and-bye--al in good time; but I must wait the pleasur 
of Mr philip first--h ha much to tell me befor he goes." 

philip could not help smile when he rememb what had pass when 
he first summon mynheer poot to the cottage, but the remembr 
end in sorrow and a cloud brow. 

amine, who knew what wa pass in the mind of both her father and 
philip, now brought her father' hat, and led him to the door of the 
cottage; and mynheer poots, veri much against hi inclination, but 
never disput the will of hi daughter, wa oblig to depart. 

"so soon, philip?" said amine, return to the room. 

"yes, amine, immediately. but I trust to be back onc more befor I 
sail; if not, you must now have my instructions. give me the keys." 

philip open the cupboard below the buffet, and the door of the iron 
safe. 

"there, amine, is my money; we need not count it, as your father would 
propose. you see that I wa right when I assert that I had thousand 
of guilders. At present they are of no use to me, as I have to learn 
my profession. should I return some day, they may help me to own a 
ship. I know not what my destini may be." 

"and should you not return?" repli amine, gravely. 

"then they are yours--a well as all that is in thi cottage, and the 
cottag itself." 

"you have relations, have you not?" 

"but one, who is rich; an uncle, who help us but littl in our 
distress, and who ha no children. I owe him but little, and he want 
nothing. there is but one be in thi world who ha creat an 
interest in thi heart, amine, and it is you. I wish you to look upon 
me as a brother--i shall alway love you as a dear sister." 

amin made no reply. philip took some more money out of the bag which 
had been opened, for the expens of hi journey, and then lock up 
the safe and cupboard, gave the key to amine. He wa about to address 
her, when there wa a slight knock at the door, and in enter father 
seysen, the priest. 

"save you, my son; and you, my child, whom as yet I have not seen. you 
are, I suppose, the daughter of mynheer poots?" 

amin bow her head. 

"I perceive, philip, that the room is now opened, and I have heard of 
all that ha passed. I would now talk with thee, philip, and must beg 
thi maiden to leav us for awhil alone." 

amin quit the room, and the priest, sit down on the couch, 
beckon philip to hi side. the convers which ensu wa too 
long to repeat. the priest first question philip rel to hi 
secret, but on that point he could not obtain the inform which he 
wished; philip state as much as he did to amine, and no more. He 
also declar hi intent of go to sea, and that, should he not 
return, he had bequeath hi property--th extent of which he did 
not make known--to the doctor and hi daughter. the priest then made 
inquiri rel to mynheer poots, ask philip whether he knew 
what hi creed was, as he had never appear at ani church, and report 
said that he wa an infidel. To thi philip, as usual, gave hi frank 
answer, and intim that the daughter, at least, wa anxiou to 
be enlightened, beg the priest to undertak a task to which he 
himself wa not adequate. To thi request father seysen, who perceiv 
the state of philip' mind with regard to amine, readili consented. 
after a convers of nearli two hours, they were interrupt by the 
return of mynheer poots, who dart out of the room the instant he 
perceiv father seysen. philip call amine, and have beg her as 
a favour to receiv the priest' visits, the good old man bless them 
both and departed. 

"you did not give him ani money, Mr philip?" said mynheer poots, when 
father seysen had left the room. 

"I did not," repli philip; "I wish I had thought of it." 

"no, no--it is better not--for money is better than what he can give 
you; but he must not come here." 

"whi not, father," repli amine, "if Mr philip wish it? It is hi 
own house." 

"O yes, if Mr philip wish it; but you know he is go away." 

"well, and suppos he is--whi should not the father come here? He 
shall come here to see me." 

"see you, my child!--what can he want with you? well, then, if he 
comes, I will not give him one stiver--and then he'll soon go away." 

philip had no opportun of further convers with amine; inde he 
had noth more to say. In an hour he bade her farewel in presenc 
of her father, who would not leav them, hope to obtain from philip 
some commun about the money which he wa to leav behind him. 

In two day philip arriv at amsterdam, and have made the necessari 
inquiries, found that there wa no chanc of vessel sail for the 
east indi for some months. the dutch east india compani had long 
been formed, and all privat trade wa at an end. the company' 
vessel left onli at what wa suppos to be the most favour 
season for round the cape of storms, as the cape of good hope wa 
design by the earli adventurers. one of the ship which were to 
sail with the next fleet wa the _ter schilling_, a three-mast 
vessel, now laid up and unrigged. 

philip found out the captain, and state hi wish to sail with him, 
to learn hi profess as a seaman; the captain wa pleas with hi 
appearance, and as philip not onli agre to receiv no wage dure 
the voyage, but to pay a premium as an apprentic learn hi duty, 
he wa promis a berth on board as the second mate, to mess in the 
cabin; and he wa told that he should be inform whenev the vessel 
wa to sail. philip have now done all that he could in obedi to 
hi vow, determin to return to the cottage; and onc more he wa in 
the compani of amine. 

We must now pass over two months, dure which mynheer poot continu 
to labour at hi vocation, and wa seldom within doors, and our two 
young friend were left for hour together. philip' love for amin 
wa fulli equal to her for him. It wa more than love--it wa a 
devot on both sides, each day increasing. who, indeed, could be 
more charming, more attract in all way than the high-spirited, yet 
tender amine? occasion the brow of philip would be cloud when he 
reflect upon the dark prospect befor him; but amine' smile would 
chase away the gloom, and, as he gaze on her, all would be forgotten. 
amin made no secret of her attachment; it wa shown in everi word, 
everi look, and everi gesture. when philip would take her hand, or 
encircl her waist with hi arm, or even when he press her coral 
lips, there wa no pretenc of coy on her part. she wa too noble, 
too confiding; she felt that her happi wa centr in hi love, 
and she live but in hi presence. two month had thu pass away, 
when father seysen, who often called, and had paid much attent 
to amine' instruction, one day came in as amin wa encircl in 
philip' arms. 

"mi children," said he, "I have watch you for some time: thi is not 
well. philip, if you intend marriage, as I presum you do, still it is 
dangerous. I must join your hands." 

philip start up. 

"sure I am not deceiv in thee, my son," continu the priest, in a 
sever tone. 

"no, no, good father; but I pray you leav me now: to-morrow you may 
come, and all will be decided. but I must talk with amine." 

the priest quit the room, and amin and philip were again alone. 
the colour in amine' cheek vari and her heart beat, for she felt 
how much her happi wa at stake. 

"the priest is right, amine," said philip, sit down by her. "thi 
cannot last;--would that I could ever stay with you: how hard a fate 
is mine! you know I love the veri ground you tread upon, yet I dare 
not ask thee to wed to misery." 

"to wed with thee would not be wed misery, philip," repli amine, 
with downcast eyes. 

"'twere not kind on my part, amine. I should inde be selfish." 

"I will speak plainly, philip," repli amine. "you say you love 
me,--i know not how men love,--but thi I know, how I can love. I feel 
that to leav me now were inde unkind and selfish on your part; for, 
philip, i--i should die. you say that you must go away,--that fate 
demand it,--and your fatal secret. Be it so;--but cannot I go with 
you?" 

"go with me, amine--unto death?" 

"yes, death; for what is death but a release? I fear not death, 
philip; I fear but lose thee. nay, more; is not your life in the 
hand of him who made all? then whi so sure to die? you have hint to 
me that you are chosen--select for a task;--if chosen, there is less 
chanc of death; for until the end be fulfilled, if chosen, you must 
live. I would I knew your secret, philip: a woman' wit might serv 
you well: and if it did not serv you, is there no comfort, no 
pleasure, in share sorrow as well as joy with one you say you dote 
upon?" 

"amine, dearest amine; it is my love, my ardent love alone, which 
make me pause: for, O amine, what pleasur should I feel if we were 
thi hour united! I hardli know what to say, or what to do. I could 
not withhold my secret from you if you were my wife, nor will I wed 
you till you know it. well, amine, I will cast my all upon the die. 
you shall know thi secret, learn what a doom wretch I am, though 
from no fault of mine, and then you yourself shall decide. but 
remember, my oath is regist in heaven, and I must not be dissuad 
from it; keep that in mind, and hear my tale,--then if you choos to 
wed with one whose prospect are so bitter, be it so,--a short-liv 
happi will then be mine, but for you, amine--" 

"at onc the secret, philip," cri amine, impatiently. 

philip then enter into a detail of what our reader are acquaint 
with. amin listen in silence; not a chang of featur wa to be 
observ in her counten dure the narrative. philip wound up 
with state the oath which he had taken. "I have done," said philip, 
mournfully. 

"'ti a strang story, philip," repli amine: "and now hear me;--but 
give me first that relic,--i wish to look upon it. and can there be 
such virtue--i had nigh said, such mischief--in thi littl thing? 
strange; forgiv me, philip,--but i'v still my doubt upon thi tale 
of _eblis_. you know I am not yet strong in the new belief which 
you and the good priest have late taught me. I do not say that it 
_cannot_ be true: but still, one so unsettl as I am may be allow 
to waver. but, philip, i'll assum that all is true. then, if it be 
true, without the oath you would be do but your duty; and think not 
so meanli of amin as to suppos she would restrain you from what is 
right. no, philip, seek your father, and, if you can, and he requir 
your aid, then save him. but, philip, do you imagin that a task like 
this, so high, is to be accomplish at one trial? O! no;--if you have 
been so chosen to fulfil it, you will be preserv through difficulti 
and danger until you have work out your end. you will be preserved, 
and you will again and again return;--b comforted--consoled--b 
cherished--and be love by amin as your wife. and when it pleas him 
to call you from thi world, your memory, if she surviv you, philip, 
will equal be cherish in her bosom. philip, you have given me to 
decide;--dearest philip, I am thine." 

amin extend her arms, and philip press her to hi bosom. that 
even philip demand hi daughter of the father, and mynheer poots, 
as soon as philip open the iron safe and display the guilders, 
gave hi immedi consent. 

father seysen call the next day and receiv hi answer; and three 
day afterwards, the bell of the littl church of terneus were 
ring a merri peal for the union of amin poot and philip 
vanderdecken. 




chapter vii 


It wa not until late in the autumn that philip wa rous from hi 
dream of love (for what, alas! is everi enjoy of thi life but a 
dream?) by a summon from the captain of the vessel with whom he had 
engag to sail. strang as it may appear, from the first day which 
put him in possess of hi amine, philip had no longer brood over 
hi futur destiny: occasion it wa recal to hi memory, but 
immedi rejected, and, for the time, forgotten. suffici he 
thought it to fulfil hi engag when the time should come; and 
although the hour flew away, and day succeed day, week week, and 
month month, with the rapid accompani a life of quiet and 
unvari bliss, philip forgot hi vow in the arm of amine, who wa 
care not to revert to a topic which would cloud the brow of her 
ador husband. once, indeed, or twice, had old poot rais the 
question of philip' departure, but the indign frown and the 
imperi command of amin (who knew too well the sordid motiv which 
actuat her father, and who, at such times, look upon him with 
abhorrence) made him silent, and the old man would spend hi leisur 
hour in walk up and down the parlour with hi eye rivet upon 
the buffets, where the silver tankard now beam in all their 
pristin brightness. 

one morning, in the month of october, there wa a tap with the 
knuckl at the cottag door. As thi precaut impli a stranger, 
amin obey the summons, "I would speak with master philip 
vanderdecken," said the stranger, in a half-whisp sort of voice. 

the parti who thu address amin wa a littl meagr personage, 
dress in the garb of the dutch seamen of the time, with a cap made 
of badger-skin hang over hi brow. hi featur were sharp and 
diminutive, hi face of a deadli white, hi lip pale, and hi hair 
of a mixtur between red and white. He had veri littl show of 
beard--indeed, it wa almost difficult to say what hi age might be. 
He might have been a sickli youth earli sink into decrepitude, or 
an old man, hale in constitution, yet carri no flesh. but the most 
import feature, and that which immedi rivet the attent of 
amine, wa the eye of thi peculiar personage--for he had but one; the 
right eye-lid wa closed, and the ball within had evid wast 
away; but hi left eye was, for the size of hi face and head, of 
unusu dimensions, veri protuberant, clear and watery, and most 
unpleas to look upon, be reliev by no fring of eyelash either 
abov or below it. So remark wa the feature, that when you look 
at the man, you saw hi eye and look at noth else. It wa not a 
man with one eye, but one eye with a man attach to it: the bodi wa 
but the tower of the lighthouse, of no further value, and command 
no further attention, than doe the structur which hold up the 
beacon to the ventur mariner; and yet, upon examination, you would 
have perceiv that the man, although small, wa neatli made; that hi 
hand were veri differ in textur and colour from those of common 
seamen; that hi featur in general, although sharp, were regular; 
and that there wa an air of superior even in the obsequi manner 
of the littl personage, and an indescrib someth about hi 
whole appear which almost impress you with awe. amine' dark 
eye were for a moment fix upon the visitor, and she felt a chill at 
her heart for which she could not account, as she request that he 
would walk in. 

philip wa greatli surpris at the appear of the stranger, who, 
as soon as he enter the room, without say a word, sat down on the 
sofa by philip in the place which amin had just left. To philip there 
wa someth omin in thi person take amine' seat; all that 
had pass rush into hi recollection, and he felt that there wa a 
summon from hi short exist of enjoy and repos to a life of 
futur activity, danger, and suffering. what peculiarli struck philip 
was, that when the littl man sat besid him, a sensat of sudden 
cold ran through hi whole frame. the colour fled from philip' 
cheek, but he spoke not. for a minut or two there wa a silence. the 
one-ey visitor look round him, and turn from the buffet he 
fix hi eye on the form of amine, who stood befor him; at last the 
silenc wa broken by a sort of giggl on the part of the stranger, 
which end in-- 

"philip vanderdecken--he! he!--philip vanderdecken, you don't know 
me?" 

"I do not," repli philip, in a half-angri tone. 

the voic of the littl man wa most peculiar--it wa a sort of 
subdu scream, the note of which sound in your ear long after he 
had ceas to speak. 

"I am schriften, one of the pilot of the _ter schilling_," continu 
the man; "and i'm come--he! he!"--and he look hard at amine--"to 
take you away from love"--and look at the buffets--"he! he! from 
comfort, and from thi also," cri he, stamp hi foot on the floor 
as he rose from the sofa--"from terra firma--he! he!--to a wateri 
grave perhaps. pleasant!" continu schriften, with a giggle; and with 
a counten full of mean he fix hi one eye on philip' face. 

philip' first impuls wa to put hi new visitor out of the door; but 
amine, who read hi thoughts, fold her arm as she stood befor the 
littl man, and eye him with contempt, as she observed:-- 

"we all must meet our fate, good fellow; and, whether by land or sea, 
death will have hi due. If death stare him in the face, the cheek of 
philip vanderdecken will never turn as white as your is now." 

"indeed!" repli schriften, evid annoy at thi cool 
determin on the part of one so young and beautiful; and 
then fix hi eye upon the silver shrine of the virgin on the 
mantel-piece--"y are a catholic, I perceive--he!" 

"I am a catholic," repli philip; "but doe that concern you? when 
doe the vessel sail?" 

"in a week--he! he!--onli a week for preparation--onli seven day to 
leav all--short notice!" 

"more than sufficient," repli philip, rise up from the sofa. "you 
may tell your captain that I shall not fail. come, amine, we must lose 
no time." 

"no, indeed," repli amine, "and our first duti is hospitality: 
mynheer, may we offer you refresh after your walk?" 

"thi day week," said schriften, address philip, and without make 
a repli to amine. philip nod hi head, the littl man turn on hi 
heel and left the room, and in a short time wa out of sight. 

amin sank down on the sofa. the breaking-up of her short hour of 
happi had been too sudden, too abrupt, and too cruelli brought 
about for a fondli doting, although heroic, woman. there wa an 
evid malign in the word and manner of the one-ey messenger, 
an appear as if he knew more than others, which awe and confus 
both philip and herself. amin wept not, but she cover her face with 
her hand as philip, with no steadi pace, walk up and down the small 
room. again, with all the vivid of colouring, did the scene 
half forgotten recur to hi memory. again did he penetr the fatal 
chamber--again wa it obscure. the embroideri lay at hi feet, and 
onc more he start as when the letter appear upon the floor. 

they had both awaken from a dream of present bliss, and shudder at 
the aw futur which present itself. A few minut were suffici 
for philip to resum hi natur self-possession. He sat down by the 
side of hi amine, and clasp her in hi arms. they remain silent. 
they knew too well each other' thoughts; and, excruci as wa 
the effort, they were both summon up their courag to bear, and 
steel their heart against the convict that, in thi world, they 
must now expect to be for a time, perhap for ever, separated. 

amin wa the first to speak: remov her arms, which had been wound 
round her husband, she first put hi hand to her heart, as if to 
compress it pain throbbings, and then observed-- 

"sure that wa no earthli messenger, philip! did you not feel 
chill to death when he sat by you? I did, as he came in." 

philip, who had the same thought as amine, but did not wish to alarm 
her, answer confusedly-- 

"nay, amine, you fancy--that is, the sudden of hi appear and 
hi strang conduct have made you imagin this; but I saw in him but a 
man who, from hi peculiar deformity, ha becom an enviou outcast 
of society--debar from domest happiness, from the smile of the 
other sex; for what woman could smile upon such a creature? hi 
bile rais at so much beauti in the arm of another, he enjoy a 
malign pleasur in give a messag which he felt would break upon 
those pleasur from which he is cut off. Be assured, my love, that it 
wa noth more." 

"and even if my conjectur were correct, what doe it matter?" repli 
amine. "there can be noth more--noth which can render your 
posit more aw and more desperate. As your wife, philip, I feel 
less courag than I did when I gave my will hand. I knew not then 
what would be the extent of my loss; but fear not, much as I feel 
here," continu amine, put her hand to her heart--"i am prepared, 
and proud that he who is select for such a task is my husband." 
amin paused. "you cannot sure have been mistaken, philip?" 

"no! amine, I have not been mistaken, either in the summon or in 
my own courage, or in my select of a wife," repli philip, 
mournfully, as he embrac her. "it is the will of heaven." 

"then may it will be done," repli amine, rise from her seat. "the 
first pang is over. I feel better now, philip. your amin know her 
duty." 

philip made no reply; when, after a few moments, amin continued: 

"but one short week, philip--" 

"I would it had been but one day;" repli he; "it would have been 
long enough. He ha come too soon--th one-ey monster." 

"nay, not so, philip. I thank him for the week--'ti but a short time 
to wean myself from happiness. I grant you, that were I to tease, to 
vex, to unman you with my tears, my prayers, or my upbraid (a 
some wive would do, philip), one day would be more than suffici 
for such a scene of weak on my part, and miseri on yours. but, no, 
philip, your amin know her duti better. you must go like some knight 
of old to peril encounter, perhap to death; but amin will arm 
you, and show her love by close care each rivet to protect you 
in your peril, and will see you depart full of hope and confidence, 
anticip your return. A week is not too long, philip, when 
employ as I trust I shall employ it--a week to interchang our 
sentiments, to hear your voice, to listen to your word (each of which 
will be engraven on my heart' memory), to ponder on them, and feed my 
love with them in your absenc and in my solitude. no! no! philip; I 
thank god that there is yet a week." 

"and so do I, then, amine; and, after all, we knew that thi must 
come." 

"yes! but my love wa so potent, that it banish memory." 

"and yet dure our separ your love must feed on memory, amine." 

amin sighed. here their convers wa interrupt by the entranc 
of mynheer poots, who, struck with the alter in amine' radiant 
features, exclaimed, "holi prophet! what is the matter now?" 

"noth more than what we all knew before," repli philip; "I am 
about to leav you--th ship will sail in a week." 

"oh! you will sail in a week?" 

there wa a curiou express in the face of the old man as he 
endeavour to suppress, befor amin and her husband, the joy which 
he felt at philip' departure. gradual he subdu hi featur into 
gravity, and said-- 

"that is veri bad news, indeed." 

No answer wa made by amin or philip, who quit the room together. 

We must pass over thi week, which wa occupi in prepar for 
philip' departure. We must pass over the heroism of amine, who 
control her feelings, rack as she wa with intens agoni at the 
idea of separ from her ador husband. We cannot dwell upon the 
conflict emot in the breast of philip, who left competence, 
happiness, and love, to encount danger, privation, and death. now, 
at one time, he would almost resolv to remain, and then at others, 
as he took the relic from hi bosom and rememb hi vow regist 
upon it, he wa nearli as anxiou to depart. amine, too, as she fell 
asleep in her husband' arms, would count the few hour left them; 
or she would shudder, as she lay awak and the wind howled, at the 
prospect of what philip would have to encounter. It wa a long week to 
both of them, and, although they thought that time flew fast, it wa 
almost a relief when the morn came that wa to separ them; for 
to their feelings, which, from regard to each other, had been pent up 
and controlled, they could then give vent; their surcharg bosom 
could be relieved; certainti had driven away suspense, and hope wa 
still left to cheer them and brighten up the dark horizon of the 
future. 

"philip," said amine, as they sat togeth with their hand entwined, 
"I shall not feel so much when you are gone. I do not forget that all 
thi wa told me befor we were wed, and that for my love I took the 
hazard. My fond heart often tell me that you will return; but it may 
deceiv me--return you _may_, but not in life. In thi room I shall 
await you; on thi sofa, remov to it former station, I shall sit; 
and if you cannot appear to me alive, O refus me not, if it be 
possible, to appear to me when dead. I shall fear no storm, no 
burst open of the window. O no! I shall hail the presenc even of 
your spirit. onc more; let me but see you--let me be assur that you 
are dead--and then I shall know that I have no more to live for in 
thi world, and shall hasten to join you in a world of bliss. promis 
me, philip." 

"I promis all you ask, provid heaven will so permit; but, amine," 
and philip' lip trembled, "I cannot--merci god! I am inde 
tried. amine, I can stay no longer." 

amine' dark eye were fix upon her husband--sh could not 
speak--her featur were convulsed--natur could no longer hold 
up against her excess of feeling--sh fell into hi arms, and lay 
motionless. philip, about to impress a last kiss upon her pale lips, 
perceiv that she had fainted. 

"she feel not now," said he, as he laid her upon the sofa; "it is 
better that it should be so--too soon will she awak to misery." 

summon to the assist of hi daughter mynheer poots, who wa 
in the adjoin room, philip caught up hi hat, imprint one more 
fervent kiss upon her forehead, burst from the house, and wa out of 
sight long befor amin had recov from her swoon. 




chapter viii 


befor we follow philip vanderdecken in hi ventur career, it 
will be necessari to refresh the memori of our reader by a succinct 
recapitul of the circumst that had direct the enterpris 
of the dutch toward the countri of the east, which wa now prove to 
them a sourc of wealth which they consid as inexhaustible. 

let us begin at the beginning. charl the fifth, after have 
possess the major part of europe, retir from the world, for 
reason best known to himself, and divid hi kingdom between 
ferdinand and philip. To ferdinand he gave austria and it 
dependencies; to philip spain; but to make the divis more equal 
and palat to the latter, he threw the low countries, with the few 
million veget upon them, into the bargain. have thu dispos 
of hi fellow-mort much to hi own satisfaction, he went into a 
convent, reserv for himself a small income, twelv men, and a pony. 
whether he afterward repent hi hobby, or mount hi pony, is not 
recorded; but thi is certain--that in two year he died. 

philip thought (a mani have thought befor and since) that he had a 
right to do what he pleas with hi own. He therefor took away from 
the holland most of their liberties: to make amends, however, he 
gave them the inquisition; but the dutch grumbled, and philip, to stop 
their grumbling, burnt a few of them. upon which, the dutch, who are 
aquat in their propensities, protest against a religion which wa 
much too warm for their constitutions. In short, heresi made great 
progress; and the duke of alva wa despatch with a larg army, to 
prove to the holland that the inquisit wa the veri best of all 
possibl arrangements, and that it wa infinit better that a man 
should be burnt for half-an-hour in thi world than for etern in 
the next. 

thi slight differ of opinion wa the occas of a war, which 
last about eight years, and which, after have save some hundr 
of thousand the troubl of die in their beds, at length end in 
the seven unit provinc be declar independent. now we must go 
back again. 

for a centuri after vasco de gama had discov the passag round the 
cape of good hope, the portugues were not interf with by other 
nations. At last the adventur spirit of the english nation wa 
roused. the passag to india by the cape had been claim by the 
portugues as their sole right, and they defend it by force. for a 
long time no privat compani ventur to oppos them, and the trade 
wa not of that appar valu to induc ani govern to embark in 
a war upon the question. the english adventurers, therefore, turn 
their attent to the discoveri of a north-west passag to india, 
with which the portugues could have no right to interfere, and in 
vain attempt to discov that passage, the best part of the fifteenth 
centuri wa employed. At last they abandon their endeavours, and 
resolv no longer to be deter by the portugues pretensions. 

after one or two unsuccess expeditions, an armament wa fit out 
and put under the order of drake. thi courag and success 
navig accomplish more than the most sanguin had anticipated. He 
return to england in the month of may, 1580, after a voyag which 
occupi him nearli three years; bring home with him great riches, 
and have made most favour arrang with the king of the 
molucca islands. 

hi success wa follow up by cavendish and other in 1600. the 
english east india company, in the meanwhile, receiv their first 
charter from the government, and had now been with variou success 
carri on the trade for upward of fifti years. 

dure the time that the dutch were vassal to the crown of spain, it 
wa their custom to repair to lisbon for the product of the east, 
and afterward to distribut them through europe; but when they 
quarrel with philip, they were no longer admit as retail of 
hi indian produce: the consequ was, that, while asserting, and 
fight for, their independence, they had also fit out expedit 
to india. they were successful; and in 1602 the variou specul 
were, by the government, form into a company, upon the same 
principl and arrang as those which had been charter in 
england. 

At the time, therefore, to which we are reverting, the english and 
dutch had been trade in the indian sea for more than fifti years; 
and the portugues had lost nearli all their power, from the allianc 
and friendship which their rival had form with the potent of 
the east, who had suffer from the portugues avaric and cruelty. 

whatev may have been the sum of oblig which the dutch owe to 
the english for the assist they receiv from them dure their 
struggl for independence, it doe not appear that their gratitud 
extend beyond the cape; for, on the other side of it, the 
portuguese, english, and dutch fought and captur each other' 
vessel without ceremony; and there wa no law but that of main force. 
the mother countri were occasion call upon to interfere, but 
the interfer up to the abov time had produc noth more than a 
paper war; it be veri evid that all parti were in the wrong. 

In 1650, cromwel usurp the throne of england, and the year 
afterwards, having, among other points, vainli demand of the dutch 
satisfact for the murder of hi regicid ambassador, which took 
place in thi year, and some compens for the cruelti exercis 
on the english at amboyn some thirti year befor he declar war 
with holland. To prove that he wa in earnest, he seiz more than two 
hundr dutch vessels, and the dutch then (veri unwillingly) prepar 
for war. blake and van tromp met, and the naval combat were most 
obstinate. In the "histori of england" the victori is almost 
invari given to the english, but in that of holland to the dutch. 
By all accounts, these engag were so obstinate, that in each 
case they were both well beaten. however, in 1654, peac wa signed; 
the dutchman promis "to take hi hat off" whenev he should meet 
an englishman on the high seas--a mere act of polit which mynheer 
did not object to, as it _cost nothing_. and now, have detail 
the state of thing up to the time of philip' embarkation, we shall 
proceed with our story. 

As soon as philip wa clear of hi own threshold, he hasten away as 
though he were attempt to escap from hi own pain thoughts. 
In two day he arriv at amsterdam, where hi first object wa to 
procur a small, but strong, steel chain to replac the ribbon by 
which the relic had hitherto been secur round hi neck. have done 
this, he hasten to embark with hi effect on board of the _ter 
schilling_. philip had not forgotten to bring with him the money which 
he had agre to pay the captain, in consider of be receiv 
on board as an apprentic rather than a sailor. He had also furnish 
himself with a further sum for hi own exigencies. It wa late in the 
even when he arriv on board of the _ter schilling_, which lay at 
singl anchor, surround by the other vessel compos the indian 
fleet. the captain, whose name wa kloots, receiv him with kindness, 
show him hi berth, and then went below in the hold to decid a 
question rel to the cargo, leav philip on deck to hi own 
reflections. 

and this, then, thought philip, as he lean against the taffrail and 
look forward--this, then, is the vessel in which my first attempt is 
to be made. first and--perhaps, last. how littl do those with whom I 
am about to sail imagin the purport of my embarkation? how differ 
are my view from those of others? Do _i_ seek a fortune? no! Is it to 
satisfi curios and a truant spirit? no! I seek communion with the 
dead. can I meet the dead without danger to myself and those who sail 
with me? I should think not, for I cannot join it but in death. did 
they surmis my wish and intentions, would they permit me to remain 
one hour on board? superstiti as seamen are said to be, they might 
find a good excuse, if they knew my mission, not onli for their 
superstition, but for rid themselv of one on such an aw 
errand. aw indeed! and how to be accomplished? heaven alone, with 
persever on my part, can solv the mystery. and philip' 
thought revert to hi amine. He fold hi arm and, entranc in 
meditation, with hi eye rais to the firmament, he appear to 
watch the fli scud. 

"had you not better go below?" said a mild voice, which made philip 
start from hi reverie. 

It wa that of the first mate, whose name wa hillebrant, a short, 
well-set man of about thirti year of age. hi hair wa flaxen, and 
fell in long flake upon hi shoulders, hi complexion fair, and hi 
eye of a soft blue; although there wa littl of the sailor in hi 
appearance, few knew or did their duti better. 

"I thank you," repli philip; "I had, indeed, forgotten myself, and 
where I was: my thought were far away. good-night, and mani thanks." 

the _ter schilling_, like most of the vessel of that period, wa veri 
differ in her build and fit from those of the present day. she 
wa ship-rigged, and of about four hundr ton burden. her bottom wa 
nearli flat, and her side fell in (a she rose abov the water), so 
that her upper deck were not half the width of the hold. 

all the vessel employ by the compani be armed, she had her main 
deck clear of goods, and carri six nine-pound on each broadside; 
her port were small and oval. there wa a great spring in all her 
decks,--that is to say, she ran with a curv forward and aft. On her 
forecastl anoth small deck ran from the knight-heads, which wa 
call the top-gal forecastle. her quarter-deck wa broken with a 
poop, which rose high out of the water. the bowsprit stave veri much, 
and wa to appear almost as a fourth mast: the more so, as she 
carri a squar spritsail and sprit-topsail. On her quarter-deck and 
poop-bulwark were fix in socket implement of warfar now long 
in disuse, but what were then known by the name of cohorn and 
patteraroes; they turn round on a swivel, and were point by 
an iron handl fix to the breech. the sail abaft the mizen-mast 
(correspond to the driver or spanker of the present day) wa 
fix upon a lateen-yard. It is hardli necessari to add (after thi 
description) that the danger of a long voyag were not a littl 
increas by the peculiar structur of the vessels, which (although 
with such top hamper, and so much wood abov water, they could make 
good way befor a favour breeze) could hold no wind, and had but 
littl chanc if caught upon a lee-shore. 

the crew of the _ter schilling_ were compos of the captain, two 
mates, two pilots, and forty-f men. the supercargo had not yet 
come on board. the cabin (under the poop) wa appropri to the 
supercargo; but the main-deck cabin to the captain and mates, who 
compos the whole of the cabin mess. 

when philip awok the next morn he found that the topsail were 
hoisted, and the anchor short-stay apeak. some of the other vessel of 
the fleet were under weigh and stand out. the weather wa fine 
and the water smooth, and the bustl and novelti of the scene were 
cheer to hi spirits. the captain, mynheer kloots, wa stand 
on the poop with a small telescope, made of pasteboard, to hi eye, 
anxious look toward the town. mynheer kloots, as usual, had hi 
pipe in hi mouth, and the smoke which he puf from it for a time 
obscur the lens of hi telescope. philip went up the poop ladder 
and salut him. 

mynheer kloot wa a person of no moder dimensions, and the 
quantiti of garment which he wore ad no littl to hi appar 
bulk. the outer garment expos to view were, a rough fox-skin cap 
upon hi head, from under which appear the edg of a red worst 
nightcap; a red plush waistcoat, with larg metal buttons; a jacket of 
green cloth, over which he wore anoth of larger dimens of coars 
blue cloth, which came down as low as what would be call a spencer. 
below he had black plush breeches, light blue worst stockings, 
shoes, and broad silver buckles; round hi waist wa girded, with a 
broad belt, a canva apron which descend in thick fold nearli to 
hi knee. In hi belt wa a larg broad-blad knife in a sheath of 
shark' skin. such wa the attir of mynheer kloots, captain of the 
_ter schilling_. 

He wa as tall as he wa corpulent. hi face wa oval, and hi 
featur small in proport to the size of hi frame. hi grizzli 
hair flutter in the breeze, and hi nose (although quit straight) 
was, at the tip, fieri red from frequent applic to hi bottl of 
schnapps, and the heat of a small pipe which seldom left hi lips, 
except for _him_ to give an order, or for _it_ to be replenished. 

"good morning, my son," said the captain, take hi pipe out of hi 
mouth for a moment. "we are detain by the supercargo, who appear 
not over-wil to come on board; the boat ha been on shore thi 
hour wait for him, and we shall be last of the fleet under weigh. I 
wish the compani would let us sail without these _gentlemen_, who 
are (_in my opinion)_ a great hindranc to business; but they think 
otherwis on shore." 

"what is their duti on board?" repli philip. 

"their duti is to look after the cargo and the traffic, and if 
they kept to that, it would not be so bad; but they interfer with 
everyth els and everybody, studi littl except their own 
comforts; in fact, they play the king on board, know that we dare 
not affront them, as a word from them would prejudic the vessel when 
again to be chartered. the compani insist upon their be receiv 
with all honours. We salut them with five gun on their arriv on 
board." 

"do you know anyth of thi one whom you expect?" 

"nothing, but from report. A brother captain of mine (with whom he ha 
sailed) told me that he is most fear of the danger of the sea, and 
much taken up with hi own importance." 

"I wish he would come," repli philip; "I am most anxiou that we 
should sail." 

"you must be of a wander disposition, my son: I hear that you leav 
a comfort home, and a pretti wife to boot." 

"I am most anxiou to see the world," repli philip; "and I must 
learn to sail a ship befor I purchas one, and tri to make the 
fortun that I covet." (alas! how differ from my real wishes, 
thought philip, as he made thi reply.) 

"fortun are made, and fortun are swallow up too, by the ocean," 
repli the captain. "if I could turn thi good ship into a good 
house, with plenti of guilder to keep the hous warm, you would not 
find me stand on thi poop. I have doubl the cape twice, which is 
often enough for ani man; the third time may not be so lucky." 

"i it so dangerous, then?" said philip. 

"a danger as tide and currents, rock and sand-banks, hard gale 
and heavi seas, can make it,--no more! even when you anchor in the 
bay, on thi side of the cape, you ride in fear and trembling, for you 
may be blown away from your anchor to sea, or be driven on shore among 
the savages, befor the men can well put on their clothing. but when 
onc you'r well on the other side of the cape, then the water danc 
to the beam of the sun as if it were merry, and you may sail for 
week with a cloudless sky and a flow breeze, without start tack 
or sheet, or have to take your pipe out of your mouth." 

"what port shall we go into, mynheer?" 

"of that I can say but little. gambroon, in the gulf of persia, will 
probabl be the first rendezv of the whole fleet. then we shall 
separate: some will sail direct for bantam, in the island of java; 
other will have order to trade down the strait for camphor, gum, 
benzoin, and wax; they have also gold and the teeth of the eleph to 
barter with us: there (should we be sent thither) you must be 
care with the natives, mynheer vanderdecken. they are fierc and 
treacherous, and their curv knive (or creeses, as they, call them) 
are sharp and deadli poisoned. I have had hard fight in those 
strait both with portugues and english." 

"but we are all at peac now." 

"true, my son; but when round the cape, we must not trust to paper 
sign at home: and the english press us hard, and tread upon our 
heel wherev we go. they must be checked; and I suspect our fleet is 
so larg and well appoint in expect of hostilities." 

"how long do you expect your voyag may occupi us?" 

"that' as may be: but I should say about two years;--nay, if not 
detain by the factors, as I expect we shall be, for some hostil 
service, it may be less." 

two years, thought philip, two year from amine! and he sigh deeply, 
for he felt that their separ might be for ever. 

"nay, my son, two year is not so long," said mynheer kloots, who 
observ the pass cloud on philip' brow. "I wa onc five year 
away, and wa unfortunate, for I brought home nothing, not even my 
ship. I wa sent to chittagong, on the east side of the great bay of 
bengala, and lay for three month in the river. the chief of the 
countri would detain me by force; they would not barter for my cargo, 
or permit me to seek anoth market. My powder had been landed, and 
I could make no resistance. the worm ate through the bottom of my 
vessel, and she sank at her anchors. they knew it would take place, 
and that then they would have my cargo at their own price. anoth 
vessel brought us home. had I not been so treacher served, I 
should have had no need to sail thi time; and now my gain are small, 
the compani forbid all privat trading. but here he come at last; 
they have hoist the ensign on the staff in the boat; there--they 
have shove off. mynheer hillebrant, see the gunner readi with their 
linstock to salvo the supercargo." 

"what duti do you wish me to perform?" observ philip. "in what can I 
be useful?" 

"at present you can be of littl use, except in those heavi gale in 
which everi pair of hand is valuable. you must look and learn for 
some time yet; but you can make a fair copi of the journal kept for 
the inspect of the company, and may assist me in variou ways, as 
soon as the unpleas nausea, felt by those who first embark, ha 
subsided. As a remedy, I should propos that you gird a handkerchief 
tight round your bodi so as to compress the stomach, and make frequent 
applic of my bottl of schnapps, which you will find alway at 
your service. but now to receiv the factor of the most puissant 
company. mynheer hillebrant, let them discharg the cannon." 

the gun were fired, and soon after the smoke had clear away, 
the boat, with it long ensign trail on the water, wa pull 
alongside. philip watch the appear of the supercargo, but he 
remain in the boat until sever of the box with the initi 
and arm of the compani were first hand on the deck; at last the 
supercargo appeared. 

He wa a small, spare, wizen-fac man, with a three-corn cock 
hat, bound with broad gold lace, upon hi head, under which appear a 
full-bottom flow wig, the curl of which descend low upon hi 
shoulders. hi coat wa of crimson velvet, with broad flaps: hi 
waistcoat of white silk, work in colour flowers, and descend 
half-way down to hi knees. hi breech were of black satin, and hi 
leg were cover with white silk stockings. add to this, gold buckl 
at hi knee and in hi shoes, lace ruffl to hi wrists, and a 
silver-mount cane in hi hand, and the reader ha the entir dress 
of mynheer jacob janz von stroom, the supercargo of the hon. company, 
appoint to the good ship _ter schilling_. 

As he look round him, surround at a respect distanc by the 
captain, officers, and men of the ship, with their cap in their 
hands, the reader might be remind of the pictur of the "monkey who 
had seen the world" surround by hi tribe. there wa not, however, 
the least inclin on the part of the seamen to laugh, even at hi 
flowing, full-bottom wig: respect wa at that period paid to dress; 
and although mynheer von stroom could not be mistaken for a sailor, he 
wa known to be the supercargo of the company, and a veri great man. 
He therefor receiv all the respect due to so import a personage. 

mynheer von stroom did not, however, appear veri anxiou to remain 
on deck. He request to be shown into hi cabin, and follow the 
captain aft, pick hi way among the coil of rope with which 
hi path wa encumbered. the door wa opened, and the supercargo 
disappeared. the ship wa then got under weigh, the men had left the 
windlass, the sail had been trimmed, and they were secur the 
anchor on board, when the bell of the poop-cabin (appropri to the 
supercargo) wa pull with great violence. 

"what can that be?" said mynheer kloot (who wa forward), take the 
pipe out of hi mouth. "mynheer vanderdecken, will you see what is the 
matter?" 

philip went aft, as the peal of the bell continued, and open 
the cabin door, discov the supercargo perch upon the tabl and 
pull the bell-rope, which hung over it centre, with everi mark of 
fear in hi countenance. hi wig wa off, and hi bare skull gave him 
an appear peculiarli ridiculous. 

"what is the matter, sir?" inquir philip. 

"matter!" splutter mynheer von stroom; "call the troop in with 
their firelocks. quick, sir. Am I to be murdered, torn to pieces, and 
devoured? for mercy' sake, sir, don't stare, but do something--look, 
it' come to the table! O dear! O dear!" continu the supercargo, 
evid terrifi out of hi wits. 

philip, whose eye had been fix on mynheer von stroom, turn them 
in the direct point out, and, much to hi astonish perceiv 
a small bear upon the deck who wa amus himself with the 
supercargo' flow wig, which he held in hi paws, toss it about, 
and now and then buri hi muzzl in it. the unexpect sight of the 
anim wa at first a shock to philip, but a moment' consider 
assur him that the anim must be harmless, or it never would have 
been permit to remain loos in the vessel. 

nevertheless, philip had no wish to approach the animal, whose 
disposit he wa unacquaint with, when the appear of mynheer 
kloot put an end to hi difficulty. 

"what is the matter, mynheer?" said the captain. "o! I see: it is 
johannes," continu the captain, go up to the bear, and salut 
him with a kick, as he recov the supercargo' wig. "out of the 
cabin, johannes! out, sir!" cri mynheer kloots, kick the breech 
of the bear till the anim had escap through the door. "mynheer 
von stroom, I am veri sorry--her is your wig. shut the door, mynheer 
vanderdecken, or the beast may come back, for he is veri fond of me." 

As the door wa shut between mynheer von stroom and the object of hi 
terror, the littl man slid off the tabl to the high-back chair 
near it, shook out the damag curl of hi wig, and replac it on 
hi head; pull out hi ruffles, and, assum an air of magisteri 
importance, struck hi cane on the deck, and then spoke. 

"mynheer kloots, what is the mean of thi disrespect to the 
supercargo of the puissant company?" 

"god in heaven! no disrespect, mynheer;--th anim is a bear, as you 
see; he is veri tame, even with strangers. He belong to me. I have 
had him sinc he wa three month old. It wa all a mistake. the mate, 
mynheer hillebrant, put him in the cabin, that he might be out of the 
way while the duti wa carri on, and he quit forgot that he wa 
here. I am veri sorry, mynheer von stroom; but he will not come here 
again, unless you wish to play with him." 

"play with him! I! supercargo to the company, play with a bear! 
mynheer kloots, the anim must be thrown overboard immediately." 

"nay, nay; I cannot throw overboard an anim that I hold in much 
affection, mynheer von stroom; but he shall not troubl you." 

"then, captain kloots, you will have to deal with the company, to whom 
I shall repres the affair. your charter will be cancelled, and your 
freight-money will be forfeited." 

kloot was, like most dutchmen, not a littl obstinate, and thi 
imper behaviour on the part of the supercargo rais hi bile. 
"there is noth in the charter that prevent my have an anim on 
board," repli kloots. 

"bi the regul of the company," repli von stroom, fall back 
in hi chair with an import air, and cross hi thin legs, "you 
are requir to receiv on board strang and curiou animals, 
sent home by the governor and factor to be present to crown 
heads,--such as lions, tigers, elephants, and other product of 
the east;--but in no instanc is it permit to the command of 
charter ship to receiv on board, on their own account, anim of 
ani description, which must be consid under the offenc of privat 
trading." 

"mi bear is not for sale, mynheer von stroom." 

"it must immedi be sent out of the ship, mynheer kloots; I order 
you to send it away,--on your peril to refuse." 

"then we will drop the anchor again, mynheer von stroom, and send on 
shore to head-quart to decid the point. If the compani insist 
that the brute be put on shore, be it so; but recollect, mynheer von 
stroom, we shall lose the protect of the fleet, and have to sail 
alone. shall I drop the anchor, mynheer?" 

thi observ soften down the pertinac of the supercargo; he 
had no wish to sail alone, and the fear of thi conting wa more 
power than the fear of the bear. 

"mynheer kloots, I will not be too severe; if the anim is chained, 
so that it doe not approach me, I will consent to it remain on 
board." 

"I will keep it out of your way as much as I can; but as for chain 
up the poor animal, it will howl all day and night, and you will have 
no sleep, mynheer von stroom," repli kloots. 

the supercargo, who perceiv that the captain wa positive, and that 
hi threat were disregarded, did all that a man could do who could 
not help himself. He vow vengeanc in hi own mind, and then, with 
an air of condescension, observed: "upon those conditions, mynheer 
kloots, your anim may remain on board." 

mynheer kloot and philip then left the cabin; the former, who wa in 
no veri good humour, mutter as he walk away--"if the compani send 
their _monkeys_ on board, I think I may well have my _bear_" and, 
pleas with hi joke, mynheer kloot recov hi good humour. 




chapter IX 


We must allow the indian fleet to pursu it way to the cape with 
everi varieti of wind and weather. some had part company; but 
the rendezv wa tabl bay, from which they were again to start 
together. 

philip vanderdecken wa soon abl to render some servic on board. 
He studi hi duti diligently, for employ prevent him from 
dwell too much upon the caus of hi embarkation, and he work 
hard at the duti of the ship, for the exercis procur for him that 
sleep which otherwis would have been denied. 

He wa soon a favourit of the captain, and intim with hillebrant, 
the first mate; the second mate, struys, wa a moros young man, with 
whom he had littl intercourse. As for the supercargo, mynheer jacob 
janz von stroom, he seldom ventur out of hi cabin. the bear 
johann wa not confined, and therefor mynheer von stroom confin 
himself; hardli a day pass that he did not look over a letter which 
he had frame upon the subject, all readi to forward to the company; 
and each time that he perus it he made some alteration, which he 
consid would give addit forc to hi complaint, and would 
prove still more injuri to the interest of captain kloots. 

In the meantime, in happi ignor of all that wa pass in the 
poop-cabin, mynheer kloot smoke hi pipe, drank hi schnapps, and 
play with johannes. the anim had also contract a great affect 
for philip, and use to walk the watch with him. 

there wa anoth parti in the ship whom we must not lose sight 
of--th one-ey pilot, schriften, who appear to have imbib a 
great animos toward our hero, as well as to hi dumb favourit 
the bear. As philip held the rank of an officer, schriften dare not 
openli affront, though he took everi opportun of annoy him, and 
wa constantli inveigh against him befor the ship' company. To 
the bear he wa more openli inveterate, and seldom pass it without 
bestow upon it a sever kick, accompani with a horrid curse. 
although no one on board appear to be fond of thi man, everybodi 
appear to be afraid of him, and he had obtain a control over the 
seamen which appear unaccountable. 

such wa the state of affair on board the good ship _ter schilling_, 
when, in compani with two others, she lay becalm about two days' 
sail to the cape. the weather wa intens hot, for it wa the summer 
in those southern latitudes, and philip, who had been lie down under 
the awn spread over the poop, wa so overcom with the heat that he 
had fallen asleep. He awok with a shiver sensat of cold over 
hi whole body, particularli at hi chest, and half-open hi eyes, 
he perceiv the pilot, schriften, lean over him, and hold 
between hi finger and hi thumb a portion of the chain which had not 
been concealed, and to which wa attach the sacr relic. philip 
close them again, to ascertain what were the man' intentions: he 
found that he gradual drag out the chain, and, when the relic wa 
clear, attempt to pass the whole over hi head, evid to gain 
possess of it. upon hi attempt philip start up and seiz him by 
the waist. 

"indeed!" cri philip, with an indign look, as he releas the 
chain from the pilot' hand. 

but schriften appear not in the least confus at be detect 
in hi attempt: look with hi malici one eye at philip, he 
mockingli observed: 

"doe that chain hold her picture?--he! he!" 

vanderdecken rose, push him away, and fold hi arms. 

"I advis you not to be quit so curious, master pilot, or you may 
repent it." 

"or perhaps," continu the pilot, quit regardless of philip' wrath, 
"it may be a child' caul, a sovereign remedi against drowning." 

"go forward to your duty, sir," cri philip. 

"or, as you are a catholic, the finger-nail of a saint; or, yes, I 
have it--a piec of the holi cross." 

philip started. 

"that' it! that' it!" cri schriften, who now went forward to where 
the seamen were stand at the gangway. "new for you, my lads!" said 
he; "we'v a bit of the holi cross aboard, and so we may defi the 
devil!" 

philip, hardli know why, had follow schriften as he descend the 
poop-ladder, and wa forward on the quarter-deck, when the pilot made 
thi remark to the seamen. 

"ay! ay!" repli an old seaman to the pilot; "not onli the devil, but 
the _fli dutchman_ to boot." 

"the _fli dutchman_" thought philip, "can that refer to--?" and 
philip walk a step or two forward, so as to conceal himself behind 
the mainmast, hope to obtain some information, should they continu 
the conversation. In thi he wa not disappointed. 

"they say that to meet with him is wors than meet with the devil," 
observ anoth of the crew. 

"who ever saw him?" said another. 

"he ha been seen, that' sartain, and just as sartain that ill-luck 
follow the vessel that fall in with him." 

"and where is he to be fallen in with?" 

"o! they say that' not so sartain--but he cruis off the cape." 

"I should like to know the whole long and short of the story," said a 
third. 

"I can onli tell what i'v heard. it' a doom vessel; they were 
pirates, and cut the captain' throat, I believe." 

"no! no!" cri schriften, "the captain is in her now--and a villain 
he was. they say that, like somebodi els on board of us now, he left 
a veri pretti wife, and that he wa veri fond of her." 

"how do they know that, pilot?" 

"becaus he alway want to send letter home when he board vessel 
that he fall in with. but, woe to the vessel that take charg of 
them!--sh is sure to be lost, with everi soul on board!" 

"I wonder where you heard all this," said one of the men. "did you 
ever see the vessel?" 

"yes, I did!" scream schriften; but, as if recov himself, hi 
scream subsid into hi usual giggle, and he added, "but we need not 
fear her, boys; we'v a bit of the true cross on board." schriften 
then walk aft as if to avoid be questioned, when he perceiv 
philip by the mainmast. 

"so, i'm not the onli one curious?--he! he! pray did you bring that on 
board, in case we should fall in with the _fli dutchman?_" 

"I fear no _fli dutchman_," repli philip, confused. 

"now I think of it, you are of the same name; at least they say that 
hi name wa vanderdecken--eh?" 

"there are mani vanderdecken in the world besid me," repli 
philip, who had recov hi composure; and have made thi reply, 
he walk away to the poop of the vessel. 

"one would almost imagin thi malign one-ey wretch wa awar of 
the caus of my embarkation," muse philip; "but no! that cannot be. 
whi do I feel such a chill whenev he approach me? I wonder if 
other do; or whether it is a mere fanci on the part of amin and 
myself. I dare ask no questions.--strange, too, that the man should 
feel such malic toward me. I never injur him. what I have just 
overheard confirm all; but there need no confirmation. oh, amine! 
amine! but for thee, and I would rejoic to solv thi riddl at the 
expens of life. god in merci check the current of my brain," mutter 
philip, "or my reason cannot hold it seat!" 

In three day the _ter schilling_ and her consort arriv at tabl 
bay, where they found the remaind of the fleet at anchor wait for 
them. just at that period the dutch had form a settlement at the 
cape of good hope, where the indian fleet use to water and obtain 
cattl from the hottentot tribe who live on the coast, and who for 
a brass button or a larg nail would willingli offer a fat bullock. A 
few day were occupi in complet the water of the squadron, and 
then the ships, have receiv from the admir their instruct 
as to the rendezv in case of part company, and made everi 
prepar for the bad weather which they anticipated, again weigh 
their anchors, and proceed on their voyage. 

for three day they beat against light and baffl winds, make but 
littl progress; on the third, the breez sprang up strong from the 
southward, until it increas to a gale, and the fleet were blown down 
to the northward of the bay. On the seventh day the _ter schilling_ 
found herself alone, but the weather had moderated. sail wa again 
made upon the vessel, and her head put to the eastward, that she might 
run in for the land. 

"we are unfortun in thu part with all our consorts," observ 
mynheer kloot to philip, as they were stand at the gangway; "but 
it must be near meridian, and the sun will enabl me to discov our 
latitude. It is difficult to say how far we may have been swept by the 
gale and the current to the northward. boy, bring up my cross-staff, 
and be mind that you do not strike it against anyth as you come 
up." 

the cross-staff at that time wa the simpl instrument use to 
discov the latitude, which it would give to a nice observ to 
within five or ten miles. quadrant and sextant were the invent 
of a much later period. indeed, consid that they had so littl 
knowledg of navig and the variat of the compass, and that 
their east and west could onli be comput by dead reckoning, 
it is wonder how our ancestor travers the ocean in the way they 
did, with compar so few accidents. 

"we are full three degre to the northward of the cape," observ 
mynheer kloots, after he had comput hi latitude. "the current must 
be run strong; the wind is go down fast, and we shall have a 
change, if I mistak not." 

toward the even it fell calm, with a heavi swell set toward 
the shore; shoal of seal appear on the surface, follow the 
vessel as she drove befor the swell; the fish dart and leap in 
everi direction, and the ocean around them appear to be full of life 
as the sun slowli descend to the horizon. 

"what is that nois we hear?" observ philip; "it sound like distant 
thunder." 

"I hear it," repli mynheer kloots. "aloft there; do you see the 
land?" 

"yes," repli the man, after a paus in ascend the topmast 
shrouds. "it is right ahead--low sand-hills, and the sea break 
high." 

"then that must be the nois we hear. We sweep in fast with thi heavi 
ground-swell. I wish the breez would spring up." 

the sun wa dip under the horizon, and the calm still continued: 
the swell had driven the _ter schilling_ so rapidli on the shore that 
now they could see the breakers, which fell over with the nois of 
thunder. 

"do you know the coast, pilot?" observ the captain to schriften, who 
stood by. 

"know it well," repli schriften; "the sea break in twelv 
fathom at least. In half an hour the good ship will be beaten into 
toothpicks, without a breez to help us." and the littl man giggl 
as if pleas at the idea. 

the anxieti of mynheer kloot wa not to be concealed; hi pipe wa 
everi moment in and out of hi mouth. the crew remain in group 
on the forecastl and gangway, listen with dismay to the fear 
roar of the breakers. the sun had sunk down below the horizon, and 
the gloom of night wa gradual ad to the alarm of the crew of 
the _ter schilling_. 

"we must lower down the boats," said mynheer kloot to the first mate, 
"and tri to tow her off. We cannot do much good, i'm afraid; but at 
all event the boat will be readi for the men to get into befor she 
drive on shore. get the tow rope out and lower down the boats, while 
I go in to acquaint the supercargo." 

mynheer von stroom wa sit in all the digniti of hi office, and 
it be sunday had put on hi veri best wig. He wa onc more read 
over the letter to the company, rel to the bear, when mynheer 
kloot made hi appearance, and inform him in a few word that they 
were in a situat of peculiar danger, and that in all probabl 
the ship would be in piec in less than half an hour. At thi 
alarm intelligence, mynheer von stroom jump up from hi chair, 
and in hi hurri and fear knock down the candl which had just been 
lighted. 

"in danger! mynheer kloots!--why, the water is smooth and the wind 
down! My hat--wher is my hat and my cane? I will go on deck. quick! A 
light--mynh kloots, if you pleas to order a light to be brought; I 
can find noth in the dark. mynheer kloots, whi do you not answer? 
merci on me! he is gone and ha left me." 

mynheer kloot had gone to fetch a light, and now return with it. 
mynheer von stroom put on hi hat, and walk out of the cabin. the 
boat were down and the ship' head had been turn round from the 
land; but it wa now quit dark, and noth wa to be seen but the 
white line of foam creat by the breaker as they dash with an 
aw nois against the shore. 

"mynheer kloots, if you please, i'll leav the ship directly. let my 
boat come alongside--i must have the largest boat for the honour 
company' service--for the paper and myself." 

"i'm afraid not, mynheer von stroom," repli kloots; "our boat will 
hardli hold the men as it is, and everi man' life is as valuabl to 
himself as your is to you." 

"but, mynheer, I am the company' supercargo. I order you--i will have 
one--refus if you dare." 

"I dare, and do refuse," repli the captain, take hi pipe out of 
hi mouth. 

"well, well," repli mynheer von stroom, who now lost all presenc of 
mind--"w will, sir as soon as we arrive--lord help us!--w are lost. 
O lord! O lord!" and here mynheer von stroom, not know why, hurri 
down to the cabin, and in hi hast tumbl over the bear johannes, 
who cross hi path, and in hi fall hi hat and flow wig part 
compani with hi head. 

"O mercy! where am I? help--help here! for the company' honour 
supercargo!" 

"cast off there in the boats, and come on board," cri mynheer 
kloots; "we have no time to spare. quick now, philip, put in the 
compass, the water, and the biscuit; we must leav her in five 
minutes." 

So appal wa the roar of the breakers, that it wa with difficulti 
that the order could be heard. In the meantim mynheer von stroom lay 
upon the deck, kicking, sprawling, and cri for help. 

"there is a light breez off the shore," cri philip, hold up hi 
hand. 

"there is, but i'm afraid it is too late. hand the thing into the 
boats, and be cool, my men. We have yet a chanc of save her, if the 
wind freshens." 

they were now so near to the breaker that they felt the swell in 
which the vessel lay becalm turn over here and there on it long 
line, but the breez freshened, and the vessel wa stationary! the 
men were all in the boats, with the except of mynheer kloots, the 
mates, and mynheer von stroom. 

"she goe through the water now," said philip. 

"yes, I think we shall save her," repli the captain: "steadi as you 
go, hillebrant," continu he to the first mate, who wa at the helm. 
"we leav the breaker now--onli let the breez hold ten minutes." 

the breez wa steady, the _ter schilling_ stood off from the land, 
again it fell calm, and again she wa swept toward the breakers; at 
last the breez came off strong, and the vessel cleav through the 
water. the men were call out of the boats; mynheer von stroom wa 
pick up along with hi hat and wig, carri into the cabin, and in 
less than an hour the _ter schilling_ wa out of danger. 

"now we will hoist up the boats," said mynheer kloots, "and let us 
all, befor we lie down to sleep, thank god for our deliverance." 

dure that night the _ter schilling_ made an of of twenti miles, 
and then stood to the southward; toward the morn the wind again 
fell, and it wa nearli calm. 

mynheer kloot had been on deck about an hour, and had been talk 
with hillebr upon the danger of the evening, and the selfish 
and pusillanim of mynheer von stroom, when a loud nois wa heard 
in the poop-cabin. 

"what can that be?" said the captain; "ha the good man lost hi 
sens from the fright? why, he is knock the cabin to pieces." 

At thi moment the servant of the supercargo ran out of the cabin. 

"mynheer kloots, hasten in--help my master--h will be killed--th 
bear!--th bear!" 

"the bear! what; johannes?" cri mynheer kloots. "why, the anim is 
as tame as a dog. I will go and see." 

but befor mynheer kloot could walk into the cabin, out flew in 
hi shirt the affright supercargo. "mi god! my god! am I to be 
murdered?--eaten alive?" cri he, run forward, and attempt to 
climb the fore-rigging. 

mynheer kloot follow the motion of mynheer von stroom with 
surprise, and when he found him attempt to mount the rigging, he 
turn aft and walk into the cabin, when he found to hi surpris 
that johann wa inde do mischief. 

the panel of the state cabin of the supercargo had been beaten 
down, the wig box lay in fragment on the floor, the two spare wig 
were lie by them, and upon them were strew fragment of broken 
pot and mass of honey, which johann wa lick up with peculiar 
gusto. 

the fact was, that when the ship anchor at tabl bay, mynheer von 
stroom, who wa veri partial to honey, had obtain some from the 
hottentots. the honey hi care servant had stow away in jars, 
which he had place at the bottom of the two long boxes, readi for hi 
master' use dure the remaind of the voyage. that morning, the 
servant fanci that the wig of the previou night had suffer when 
hi master tumbl over the bear, open one of the box to take out 
another. johann happen to come near the door, and scent the 
honey. now, partial as mynheer von stroom wa to honey, all bear are 
still more so, and will ventur everyth to obtain it. johann had 
yield to the impuls of hi species, and, follow the scent, had 
come into the cabin, and wa about to enter the sleeping-berth of 
mynheer stroom, when the servant slam the door in hi face; 
whereupon johann beat in the panels, and found an entrance. He then 
attack the wig-boxes, and, by show a most formid set of 
teeth, prove to the servant, who attempt to drive him off, that he 
would not be trifl with. In the meanwhile, mynheer von stroom wa in 
the utmost terror: not awar of the purport of the bear' visit, he 
imagin that the animal' object wa to attack him. hi servant took 
to hi heel after a vain effort to save the last box, and mynheer 
von stroom, then find himself alone, at length sprang out of hi 
bed-place, and escap as we have mention to the forecastle, leav 
johann master of the field, and luxuri upon the _spolia opima_. 
mynheer kloot immedi perceiv how the case stood. He went up 
to the bear and spoke to him, then kick him, but the bear would not 
leav the honey, and growl furious at the interruption. "thi is 
a bad job for you, johannes," observ mynheer kloots; "now you will 
leav the ship, for the supercargo ha just ground of complaint. oh, 
well! you must eat the honey, becaus you will." So saying, mynheer 
kloot left the cabin, and went to look after the supercargo, who 
remain on the forecastle, with hi bald head and meagr body, 
harangu the men in hi shirt, which flutter in the breeze. 

"I am veri sorry, mynheer von stroom," said kloots, "but the bear 
shall be sent out of the vessel." 

"yes, yes, mynheer kloots, but thi is an affair for the most puissant 
company--th live of their servant are not to be sacrif to the 
folli of a sea-captain. I have nearli been torn to pieces." 

"the anim did not want you; all he want wa the honey," repli 
kloots. "he ha got it, and I myself cannot take it from him. there is 
no alter the natur of an animal. will you be pleas to walk down 
into my cabin until the beast can be secured? He shall not go loos 
again." 

mynheer von stroom, who consid hi digniti at varianc with hi 
appearance, and who perhap wa awar that majesti depriv of it 
extern wa onli a jest, thought it advis to accept the offer. 
after some trouble, with the assist of the seamen, the bear wa 
secur and drag away from the cabin, much against hi will, for he 
had still some honey to lick off the curl of the full-bottom wigs. 
He wa put into duranc vile, have been caught in the flagrant act 
of burglari on the high seas. thi new adventur wa the topic of the 
day, for it wa again a dead calm, and the ship lay motionless on the 
glassi wave. 

"the sun look red as he sinks," observ hillebr to the captain, 
who with philip wa stand on the poop; "we shall have wind befor 
to-morrow, if I mistak not." 

"I am of your opinion," repli mynheer kloots. "it is strang that 
we do not fall in with ani of the vessel of the fleet. they must all 
have been driven down here." 

"perhap they have kept a wider offing." 

"it had been as well if we had done the same," said kloots. "that wa 
a narrow escap last night. there is such a thing as have too littl 
as well as have too much wind." 

A confus nois wa heard among the seamen who were collect 
together, and look in the direct of the vessel' quarter, "A 
ship! no--yes, it is!" wa repeat more than once. 

"they think they see a ship," said schriften, come on the poop. "he! 
he!" 

"where?" 

"there in the gloom!" said the pilot, point to the darkest quarter 
in the horizon, for the sun had set. 

the captain, hillebrant, and philip direct their eye to the quarter 
point out, and thought they could perceiv someth like a vessel. 
gradual the gloom seem to clear away, and a lambent pale blaze to 
light up that part of the horizon. not a breath of wind wa on the 
water--th sea wa like a mirror--mor and more distinct did the 
vessel appear, till her hull, mast and yard were clearli visible. 
they look and rub their eye to help their vision, for scarc 
could they believ that which they did see. In the centr of the pale 
light, which extend about fifteen degre abov the horizon, there 
wa inde a larg ship about three mile distant; but, although it 
wa a perfect calm, she wa to all appear buffet in a violent 
gale, plung and lift over a surfac that wa smooth as glass, 
now careen to her bearing, then recov herself. her topsail 
and mainsail were furled, and the yard point to the wind; she had 
no sail set, but a close-reef fore-sail, a storm stay-sail, and 
trysail abaft. she made littl way through the water, but appar 
near them fast, driven down by the forc of the gale. each minut 
she wa plainer to the view. At last, she wa seen to wear, and in so 
doing, befor she wa brought to the wind on the other tack, she wa 
so close to them that they could distinguish the men on board: they 
could see the foam water as it wa hurl from her bows; hear the 
shrill whistl of the boatswain' pipes, the creak of the ship' 
timbers, and the complain of her masts; and then the gloom 
gradual rose, and in a few second she had total disappeared. 

"god in heaven!" exclaim mynheer kloots. 

philip felt a hand upon hi shoulder, and the cold dart through hi 
whole frame. He turn round and met the one eye of schriften, 
who scream in hi ear--"philip vanderdecken--that' the _fli 
dutchman!_" 




chapter X 


the sudden gloom which had succeed to the pale light had the effect 
of render everi object still more indistinct to the astonish crew 
of the _ter schilling_. for a moment or more not a word wa utter by 
a soul on board. some remain with their eye still strain toward 
the point where the apparit had been seen, other turn away full 
of gloomi and forebod thoughts. hillebr wa the first who spoke: 
turn round to the eastern quarter, and observ a light on the 
horizon, he started, and seiz philip by the arm, cri out, "what' 
that?" 

"that is onli the moon rise from the bank of clouds," repli 
philip, mournfully. 

"well!" observ mynheer kloots, wipe hi forehead, which wa damp 
with perspiration, "I _have_ been told of thi before, but I have 
mock at the narration." 

philip made no reply. awar of the realiti of the vision, and how 
deepli it interest him, he felt as if he were a guilti person. 

the moon had now risen abov the clouds, and wa pour her mild pale 
light over the slumber ocean. with a simultan impulse, everyon 
direct hi eye to the spot where the strang vision had last been 
seen; and all wa a dead, dead calm. 

sinc the apparition, the pilot, schriften, had remain on the poop; 
he now gradual approach mynheer kloots, and look round, said-- 

"mynheer kloots, as pilot of thi vessel, I tell you that you must 
prepar for veri bad weather." 

"bad weather!" said kloots, rous himself from a deep reverie. 

"yes, bad weather, mynheer kloots. there never wa a vessel which 
fell in with--what we have just seen, but met with disast soon 
afterwards. the veri name of vanderdecken is unlucky--he! he!" 

philip would have repli to the sarcasm, but he could not, hi tongu 
wa tied. 

"what ha the name of vanderdecken to do with it?" observ kloots. 

"have you not heard, then? the captain of that vessel we have just 
seen is a mynheer vanderdecken--h is the fli dutchman!" 

"how know you that, pilot?" inquir hillebrant. 

"I know that, and much more, if I chose to tell," repli schriften; 
"but never mind, I have warn you of bad weather, as is my duty;" 
and, with these words, schriften went down the poop-ladder. 

"god in heaven! I never wa so puzzl and so frighten in my life," 
observ kloots. "I don't know what to think or say.--what think you, 
philip? wa it not supernatural?" 

"yes," repli philip, mournfully. "I have no doubt of it." 

"I thought the day of miracl had passed," said the captain, "and 
that we were now left to our own exertions, and had no other warn 
but those the appear of the heaven gave us." 

"and they warn us now," observ hillebrant. "see how that bank of 
cloud ha risen within these five minutes--th moon ha escap from 
it, but it will soon catch her again--and see, there is a flash of 
lightn in the north-west." 

"well, my sons, I can brave the element as well as ani man, and do my 
best. I have care littl for gale or stress of weather; but I like 
not such a warn as we have had to-night. My heart' as heavi as 
lead, and that' the truth. philip, send down for the bottl of 
schnapps, if it is onli to clear my brain a little." 

philip wa glad of an opportun to quit the poop; he wish to have 
a few minut to recov himself and collect hi own thoughts. the 
appear of the phantom ship had been to him a dread shock--not 
that he had not fulli believ in it existence; but still, to have 
beheld, to have been so near that vessel--that vessel in which hi 
father wa fulfil hi aw doom--that vessel on board of which he 
felt sure that hi own destini wa to be work out--had given a whirl 
to hi brain. when he had heard the sound of the boatswain' whistl 
on board of her, eagerli had he stretch hi hear to catch the 
order given--and given, he wa convinced, in hi father' voice. nor 
had hi eye been less call to aid in hi attempt to discov the 
featur and dress of those move on her decks. As soon, then, as he 
had sent the boy up to mynheer kloots, philip hasten to hi 
cabin and buri hi face in the coverlet of hi bed, and then he 
prayed--pray until he had recov hi usual energi and courage, 
and had brought hi mind to that state of composur which could enabl 
him to look forward calmli to danger and difficulty, and feel prepar 
to meet it with the heroism of a martyr. 

philip remain below not more than half an hour. On hi return to the 
deck, what a chang had taken place! He had left the vessel float 
motionless on the still waters, with her lofti sail hang down 
listlessli from the yards. the moon then soar aloft in her beauty, 
reflect the mast and sail of the ship in extend line upon the 
smooth sea. now all wa dark: the water rippl short and broke in 
foam; the smaller and lofti sail had been taken in, and the vessel 
wa cleav through the water; and the wind, in fit gust and 
angri moanings, proclaim too sure that it had been awaken up to 
wrath, and wa gather it strength for destruction. the men 
were still busi reduc the sails, but they work gloomili and 
discontentedly. what schriften, the pilot, had said to them, philip 
knew not, but that they avoid him and appear to look upon him with 
feel of ill-will, wa evident. and each minut the gale increased. 

"the wind is not steady," observ hillebrant; "there is no say 
from which quarter the storm may blow: it ha alreadi veer round 
five points. philip, I don't much like the appear of things, and I 
may say with the captain that my heart is heavy." 

"and, indeed, so is mine," repli philip; "but we are in the hand of 
a merci providence." 

"hard a-port! flatten in forward! brail up the trysail, my men! 
Be smart!" cri kloots, as from the wind' chop round to the 
northward and westward, the ship wa taken aback, and careen low 
befor it. the rain now came down in torrents, and it wa so dark that 
it wa with difficulti they could perceiv each other on the deck. 

"we must clew up the topsails, while the men can get upon the yards. 
see to it forward, Mr hillebrant." 

the lightn now dart athwart the firmament, and the thunder 
pealed. 

"quick! quick, my men, let' furl all!" 

the sailor shook the water from their stream clothes, some worked, 
other took advantag of the night to hide themselv away, and 
commun with their own fears. 

all canva wa now taken off the ship, except the fore-staysail, and 
she flew to the southward with the wind on her quarter. the sea had 
now risen, and roar as it curl in foam, the rain fell in torrents, 
the night wa dark as erebus, and the wet and frighten sailor 
shelter themselv under the bulwarks. although mani had desert 
from their duty, there wa not one who ventur below that night. they 
did not collect togeth as usual--everi man prefer solitud and 
hi own thoughts. the phantom ship dwelt on their imaginations, and 
oppress their brains. 

It wa an intermin long and terribl night--they thought the day 
would never come. At last the dark gradual chang to a settl 
sullen grey gloom--which wa day. they look at each other, but found 
no comfort in meet each other' eyes. there wa no one counten 
in which a beam of hope could be found lurking. they were all 
doomed--they remain crouch where they had shelter themselv 
dure the night, and said nothing. 

the sea had now risen mountain high, and more than onc had struck 
the ship abaft. kloot wa at the binnacle, hillebr and philip at 
the helm, when a wave curl high over the quarter, and pour itself 
in resistless forc upon the deck. the captain and hi two mate were 
swept away, and dash almost senseless against the bulwarks--th 
binnacl and compass were broken into fragments--no one ran to the 
helm--th vessel broach to--th sea broke clear over her, and the 
mainmast went by the board. 

all wa confusion. captain kloot wa stunned, and it wa with 
difficulti that philip could persuad two of the men to assist him 
down below. hillebr had been more unfortunate--hi right arm wa 
broken, and he wa otherwis sever bruised; philip assist him to 
hi berth, and then went on deck again to tri and restor order. 

philip vanderdecken wa not yet much of a seaman, but, at all events, 
he exercis that moral influenc over the men which is ever possess 
by resolut and courage. obey willingli they did not, but they did 
obey, and in half an hour the vessel wa clear of the wreck. eas by 
the loss of her heavi mast, and steer by two of her best seamen, she 
again flew befor the gale. 

where wa mynheer von stroom dure all thi work of destruction? In 
hi bed-place, cover up with the clothes, trembl in everi limb, 
and vow that if ever again he put hi foot on shore, not all the 
compani in the world should induc him to trust to salt-wat again. 
It certainli wa the best plan for the poor man. 

but although for a time the men obey the order of philip, they 
were soon seen talk earnestli with the one-ey pilot, and after a 
consult of a quarter of an hour, they all left the deck, with the 
except of the two at the helm. their reason for so do were soon 
apparent--sever return with can full of liquor, which they had 
obtain by forc the hatch of the spirit-room. for about an 
hour philip remain on deck, persuad the men not to intox 
themselves, but in vain; the can of grog offer to the men at the 
wheel were not refused, and, in a short time, the yaw of the vessel 
prove that the liquor had taken it effect. philip then hasten down 
below to ascertain if mynheer kloot wa suffici recov to 
come on deck. He found him sunk into a deep sleep, and with difficulti 
it wa that he rous him, and made him acquaint with the 
distress intelligence. mynheer kloot follow philip on deck, but 
he still suffer from hi fall: hi head wa confused, and he reel 
as he walked, as if he also had been make free with the liquor. when 
he had been on deck a few minutes, he sank down on one of the gun in 
a state of perfect helplessness; he had, in fact, receiv a sever 
concuss of the brain. hillebr wa too sever injur to 
be abl to move from hi bed, and philip wa now awar of the 
helpless of their situation. daylight gradual disappeared, and, 
as dark came upon them, so did the scene becom more appalling. 
the vessel still ran befor the gale, but the men at the helm had 
evid chang her course, as the wind that wa on the starboard 
wa now on the larboard quarter. but compass there wa none on deck, 
and, even if there had been, the men in their drunken state would have 
refus to listen to philip' order or expostulations. "he," they 
said, "wa no sailor, and wa not to teach them how to steer the ship" 
the gale wa now at it height. the rain had ceased, but the wind had 
increased, and it roar as it urg on the vessel, which, steer so 
wide by the drunken sailors, ship sea over each gunnel; but the 
men laugh and join the choru of their song to the howl of the 
gale. 

schriften, the pilot, appear to be the leader of the ship' company. 
with the can of liquor in hi hand, he danc and sang, snap hi 
fingers, and, like a demon, peer with hi one eye upon philip; and 
then would he fall and roll with scream of laughter in the scuppers. 
more liquor wa hand up as fast as it wa call for. oaths, 
shrieks, laughter, were mingl together; the men at the helm lash 
it amidships, and hasten to join their companions, and the _ter 
schilling_ flew befor the gale; the fore-staysail be the onli 
sail set, check her as she yaw to starboard or to port. philip 
remain on deck by the poop-ladder. "strange," thought he, "that I 
should stand here, the onli one left now capabl of acting,--that 
I should be fate to look by myself upon thi scene of horror and 
disgust--should here wait the sever of thi vessel' timbers,--th 
loss of life which must accompani it,--th onli one calm and 
collected, or awar of what must soon take place. god forgiv me, but 
I appear, useless and impot as I am, to stand here like the master 
of the storm,--separ as it were from my brother mortal by my 
own peculiar destiny. It must be so. thi wreck then must not be for 
me,--i feel that it is not,--that I have a charm life, or rather a 
protract one, to fulfil the oath I regist in heaven. but the 
wind is not so loud, sure the water is not so rough: my forebod 
may be wrong, and all may yet be saved. heaven grant it! for how 
melancholy, how lament is it, to behold men creat in god' own 
image, leav the world, disgrac below the brute creation!" 

philip wa right in suppos that the wind wa not so strong, nor 
the sea so high. the vessel, after run to the southward till past 
tabl bay, had, by the alter made in her course, enter into 
fals bay, where, to a certain degree, she wa shelter from the 
violenc of the wind and waves. but, although the water wa smoother, 
the wave were still more than suffici to beat to piec ani vessel 
that might be driven on shore at the bottom of the bay, to which point 
the _ter schilling_ wa now running. the bay so far offer a fair 
chanc of escape, as, instead of the rocki coast outsid (against 
which, had the vessel run, a few second would have insur her 
destruction), there wa a shelv beach of loos sand. but of thi 
philip could, of course, have no knowledge, for the land at the 
entranc of the bay had been pass unperceiv in the dark of the 
night. about twenti minut more had elapsed, when philip observ 
that the whole sea around them wa one continu foam. He had hardli 
time for conjectur befor the ship struck heavili on the sands, and 
the remain mast fell by the board. 

the crash of the fall masts, the heavi beat of the ship on the 
sands, which caus mani of her timber to part, with a whole sea 
which swept clean over the fate vessel, check the song and drunken 
revelri of the crew. anoth minute, and the vessel wa swung round on 
her broadsid to the sea, and lay on her beam ends. philip, who wa 
to windward, clung to the bulwark, while the intox seamen 
flounder in the water to leeward, and attempt to gain the other 
side of the ship. much to philip' horror, he perceiv the bodi of 
mynheer kloot sink down in the water (which now wa sever feet deep 
on the lee side of the deck) without ani appar effort on the part 
of the captain to save himself. He wa then gone, and there were no 
hope for him. philip thought of hillebrant, and hasten down below; 
he found him still in hi bed-place, lie against the side. He lift 
him out, and with difficulti climb with him on deck, and laid him in 
the long-boat on the booms, as the best chanc of save hi life. To 
thi boat, the onli one which could be made available, the crew had 
also repaired; but they repuls philip, who would have got into her; 
and, as the sea made clean breaker over them, they cast loos the 
lash which confin her. with the assist of anoth heavi sea 
which lift her from the chocks, she wa born clear of the boom 
and dash over the gunnel into the water, to leeward, which wa 
compar smooth--not, however, without be fill nearli up to 
the thwarts. but thi wa littl care for by the intox seamen, 
who, as soon as they were afloat, again rais their shout and song 
of revelri as they were born away by the wind and sea toward the 
beach. philip, who held on by the stump of the mainmast, watch them 
with an anxiou eye, now perceiv them born aloft on the foam 
surf, now disappear in the trough. more and more distant were the 
sound of their mad voices, till, at last, he could hear them no 
more,--h beheld the boat balanc on an enorm roll sea, and 
then he saw it not again. 

philip knew that now hi onli chanc wa to remain with the vessel, 
and attempt to save himself upon some fragment of the wreck. that the 
ship would long hold togeth he felt wa impossible; alreadi she had 
part her upper decks, and each shock of the wave divid her more 
and more. At last, as he clung to the mast, he heard a nois abaft, 
and he then recollect that mynheer von stroom wa still in hi 
cabin. philip crawl aft, and found that the poop-ladd had been 
thrown against the cabin door, so as to prevent it be opened. He 
remov it and enter the cabin, where he found mynheer von stroom 
cling to windward with the grasp of death,--but it wa not death, 
but the paralysi of fear. He spoke to him, but could obtain no reply; 
he attempt to move him, but it wa imposs to make him let go the 
part of the bulk-head that he grasped. A loud nois and the rush of a 
mass of water told philip that the vessel had part amidships, and he 
unwillingli abandon the poor supercargo to hi fate, and went out 
of the cabin door. At the after-hatchway he observ someth 
struggling,--it wa johann the bear, who wa swimming, but still 
fasten by a cord which prevent hi escape. philip took out hi 
knife, and releas the poor animal, and hardli had he done thi act 
of kind when a heavi sea turn over the after part of the vessel, 
which separ in mani pieces, and philip found himself struggl in 
the waves. He seiz upon a part of the deck which support him, and 
wa born away by the surf toward the beach. In a few minut he wa 
near to the land, and shortli afterward the piec of plank to 
which he wa cling struck on the sand, and then, be turn over 
by the forc of the run wave, philip lost hi hold, and wa left 
to hi own exertions. He struggl long, but, although so near to the 
shore, could not gain a footing; the return wave drag him back, 
and thu wa he hurl to and fro until hi strength wa gone. He wa 
sink under the wave to rise no more, when he felt someth touch 
hi hand. He seiz it with the grasp of death. It wa the shaggi 
hide of the bear johannes, who wa make for the shore, and who soon 
drag him clear of the surf, so that he could gain a footing. philip 
crawl up the beach abov the reach of the waves, and, exhaust with 
fatigue, sank down in a swoon. 

when philip wa recal from hi state of lethargy, hi first feel 
wa intens pain in hi still close eyes, aris from have been 
mani hour expos to the ray of an ardent sun. He open them, but 
wa oblig to close them immediately, for the light enter into them 
like the point of a knife. He turn over on hi side, and cover 
them with hi hand, remain some time in that position, until, by 
degrees, he found that hi eyesight wa restored. He then rose, and, 
after a few second could distinguish the scene around him. the sea 
wa still rough, and toss about in the surf fragment of the vessel; 
the whole sand wa strew with her cargo and contents. near him wa 
the bodi of hillebrant, and the other bodi who were scatter on the 
beach told him that those who had taken to the boat had all perished. 

It was, by the height of the sun, about three o'clock in the 
afternoon, as near as he could estimate; but philip suffer such an 
oppress of mind, he felt so wearied, and in such pain, that he took 
but a slight survey. hi brain wa whirling, and all he demand wa 
repose. He walk away from the scene of destruction, and have found 
a sandhill, behind which he wa defend from the burn ray of the 
sun, he again lay down, and sank into a deep sleep, from which he did 
not wake until the ensu morning. 

philip wa rous a second time by the sensat of someth prick 
him on the chest. He start up, and beheld a figur stand over 
him. hi eye were still feeble, and hi vision indistinct; he rub 
them for a time, for he first thought it wa the bear johannes, and 
again that it wa the supercargo von stroom who had appear befor 
him; he look again, and found that he wa mistaken, although he had 
warrant for suppos it to be either or both. A tall hottentot, with 
an assagai in hi hand, stood by hi side; over hi shoulder he had 
thrown the fresh-sev skin of the poor bear, and on hi head, 
with the curl descend to hi waist, wa one of the wig of the 
supercargo von stroom. such wa the graviti of the black' appear 
in thi strang costum (for in everi other respect he wa naked), 
that, at ani other time, philip would have been induc to laugh 
heartily, but hi feel were now too acute. He rose upon hi feet 
and stood by the side of the hottentot, who still continu immovable, 
but certainli without the slightest appear of hostil intentions. 

A sensat of overpow thirst now seiz upon philip, and he 
made sign that he wish to drink. the hottentot motion to him 
to follow, and led over the sand-hil to the beach, where philip 
discov upward of fifti men, who were busi select variou 
articl from the scatter store of the vessel. It wa evid by 
the respect paid to philip' conductor, that he wa the chief of 
the kraal. A few words, utter with the greatest solemnity, were 
suffici to produce, though not exactli what philip required, a 
small quantiti of dirti water from a calabash, which, however, was, to 
him, delicious. hi conductor then wave to him to take a seat on the 
sand. 

It wa a novel and appalling, and nevertheless a ludicr scene: 
there wa the white sand, render still more white by the strong 
glare of the sun, strew with the fragment of the vessel, with cask 
and bale of merchandise; there wa the run surg with it foam, 
throw about particl of the wreck; there were the bone of whale 
which had been driven on shore in some former gale, and which now, 
half-buri in the sand, show portion of huge skeletons; there were 
the mangl bodi of philip' late companions, whose clothes, it 
appeared, had been untouch by the savages, with the except of 
the buttons, which had been eagerli sought after; there were nake 
hottentot (for it wa summer time, and they wore not their sheepskin 
krosses) grave step up and down the sand, pick up everyth 
that wa of no value, and leav all that civilis peopl most 
coveted;--to crown all, there wa the chief, sit in the still 
bloodi skin of johann and the broad-bottom wig of mynheer stroom, 
with all the graviti of a vice-chancellor in hi countenance, and 
without the slightest idea that he wa in ani way ridiculous. the 
whole presented, perhaps, one of the most strang and chaotic tableaux 
that ever wa witnessed. 

although, at that time, the dutch had not veri long form their 
settlement at the cape, a consider traffic had been, for mani 
years, carri on with the nativ for skin and other african 
productions. the hottentot were therefor no stranger to vessels, 
and, as hitherto they had been treat with kindness, were 
well-dispos toward europeans. after a time, the hottentot began 
to collect all the wood which appear to have iron in it, made it up 
into sever piles, and set them on fire. the chief then made a 
sign to philip, to ask him if he wa hungry; philip repli in the 
affirmative, when hi new acquaint put hi hand into a bag made 
of goat-skin, and pull out a hand of veri larg beetles, and 
present them to him. philip refus them with mark of disgust, 
upon which the chief veri sedat crack and ate them; and have 
finish the whole handful, rose, and made a sign to philip to follow 
him. As philip rose, he perceiv float on the surf hi own chest; 
he hasten to it, and made sign that it wa his, took the key out of 
hi pocket, and open it, and then made up a bundl of articl 
most useful, not forget a bag of guilders. hi conductor made no 
objection, but call to one of the men near, point out the lock 
and hing to him, and then set off, follow by philip, across the 
sand-hills. In about an hour they arriv at the kraal, consist of 
low hut cover with skins, and were met by the women and children, 
who appear to be in high admir at their chief' new attire: 
they show everi kind to philip, bring him milk, which he 
drank eagerly. philip survey these daughter of eve, and, as he 
turn from their offensive, greasi attire, their strang forms, and 
hideou features, he sigh and thought of hi charm amine. 

the sun wa now setting, and philip still felt fatigued. He made 
sign that he wish to repose. they led him into a hut, and, though 
surround as he wa with filth, and hi nose assail by everi 
varieti of bad smell, attack moreov by insects, he laid hi head 
on hi bundle, and utter a short prayer of thanksgiving, wa soon 
in a sound sleep. 

the next morn he wa awaken by the chief of the kraal, 
accompani by anoth man who spoke a littl dutch. He state hi 
wish to be taken to the settlement where the ship came and anchored, 
and wa fulli understood; but the man said that there were no ship in 
the bay at the time. philip nevertheless request he might be taken 
there, as he felt that hi best chanc of get on board of ani 
vessel would be by remain at the settlement, and, at all events, 
he would be in the compani of european until a vessel arrived. the 
distanc he discov wa but one day' march, or less. after some 
littl convers with the chief, the man who spoke dutch desir 
philip to follow him, and he would take him there. philip drank 
plenti from a bowl of milk brought him by one of the women, and 
again refus a hand of beetl offer by the chief, he took up 
hi bundle, and follow hi new acquaintance. 

toward even they arriv at the hills, from which philip had a 
view of tabl bay, and the few hous erect by the dutch. To hi 
delight, he perceiv that there wa a vessel under sail in the 
offing. On hi arriv at the beach, to which he hastened, he found 
that she had sent a boat on shore for fresh provisions. He accost 
the people, told them who he was, told them also of the fatal wreck of 
the _ter schilling_, and of hi wish to embark. 

the offic in charg of the boat willingli consent to take him on 
board, and inform philip that they were homeward bound. philip' 
heart leap at the intelligence. had she been outward bound, he would 
have join her; but now he had a prospect of again see hi dear 
amine, befor he re-embark to follow out hi peculiar destiny. He 
felt that there wa still some happi in store for him, that hi 
life wa to be chequer with altern privat and repose, and that 
hi futur prospect wa not to be one continu chain of suffer 
until death. 

He wa kindli receiv by the captain of the vessel, who freeli gave 
him a passag home; and in three months, without ani event worth 
narrating, philip vanderdecken found himself onc more at anchor 
befor the town of amsterdam. 




chapter XI 


It need hardli be observed, that philip made all possibl hast to hi 
own littl cottage, which contain all that he valu in thi world. 
He promis to himself some month of happiness, for he had done hi 
duty; and he felt that, howev desir of fulfil hi vow, he 
could not again leav home till the autumn, when the next fleet 
sailed, and it wa now but the commenc of april. much, too, as he 
regret the loss of mynheer kloot and hillebrant, as well as the 
death of the unfortun crew, still there wa some solac in the 
remembr that he wa for ever rid of the wretch schriften, who had 
share their fate; and besides, he almost bless the wreck, so fatal 
to others, which enabl him so soon to return to the arm of hi 
amine. 

It wa late in the even when philip took a boat from flushing, and 
went over to hi cottag at terneuse. It wa a rough even for the 
season of the year. the wind blew fresh, and the sky wa cover with 
flaki clouds, fring here and there with broad white edges, for the 
light of the moon wa high in the heavens, and she wa at her full. At 
time her light would be almost obscur by a dark cloud pass over 
her disc; at others, she would burst out in all her brightness. philip 
landed, and wrap hi cloak round him, hasten up to hi cottage. 
As with a beat heart he approached, he perceiv that the window of 
the parlour wa open, and that there wa a femal figur lean 
out. He knew that it could be no other than hi amine, and, after he 
cross the littl bridge, he proceed to the window, instead of 
go to the door. amin (for it wa she who stood at the window) wa 
so absorb in contempl of the heaven abov her, and so deep in 
communion with her own thoughts, that she neither saw nor heard the 
approach of her husband. philip perceiv her abstraction, and paus 
when within four or five yard of her. He wish to gain the door 
without be observed, as he wa afraid of alarm her by hi too 
sudden appearance, for he rememb hi promise, "that if dead he 
would, if permitted, visit her as hi father had visit hi mother." 
but while he thu stood in suspense, amine' eye were turn upon 
him: she beheld him, but a thick cloud now obscur the moon' disc, 
and the dim light gave to hi form, indistinctli seen, an unearthli 
and shadowi appearance. she recognis her husband; but have no 
reason to expect hi return, she recognis him as an inhabit of 
the world of spirits. she started, part the hair away from her 
forehead with both hands, and again earnestli gaze on him. 

"it is I, amine, do not be afraid," cri philip, hastily. 

"I am not afraid," repli amine, press her hand to her heart. "it 
is over now: spirit of my dear husband--for such I think thou art, I 
thank thee! welcome, even in death, philip, welcome!" and amin wave 
her hand mournfully, invit philip to enter, as she retir from the 
window. 

"mi god! she think me dead," thought philip, and hardli know how 
to act, he enter in at the window, and found her sit on the 
sofa. philip would have spoken; but amine, whose eye were fix upon 
him as he entered, and who wa fulli convinc that he wa but a 
supernatur appearance, exclaimed-- 

"so soon--so soon! O god! thi will be done: but it is hard to bear. 
philip, belov philip! I feel that I soon shall follow you." 

philip wa now more alarmed: he wa fear of ani sudden reaction 
when amin should discov that he wa still alive. 

"amine, dear, hear me. I have appear unexpectedly, and at an unusu 
hour; but throw yourself into my arms, and you will find that your 
philip is not dead." 

"not dead!" cri amine, start up. 

"no, no, still warm in flesh and blood, amine--stil your fond and 
dote husband," repli philip, catch her in hi arms, and 
press her to hi heart. 

amin sank from hi embrac down upon the sofa, and fortun wa 
reliev by a burst of tears, while philip, kneel by her, support 
her. 

"O god! O god! I thank thee," repli amine, at last. "I thought it 
wa your spirit, philip. O I wa glad to see even that," continu 
she, weep on hi shoulder. 

"can you listen to me, dearest?" said philip, after a silenc of a few 
moments. 

"O speak, speak, love; I can listen for ever." 

In a few word philip then recount what had taken place, and the 
occas of hi unexpect return, and felt himself more than repaid 
for all that he had suffer by the fond endear of hi still 
agit amine. 

"and your father, amine?" 

"he is well--w will talk of him to-morrow." 

"yes," thought philip, as he awok next morning, and dwelt upon the 
love featur of hi still slumber wife: "yes, god is merciful. 
I feel that there is still happi in store for me; nay more, that 
that happi also depend upon my due perform of my task, and 
that I should be punish if I were to forget my solemn vow. Be it 
so,--through danger and to death will I perform my duty, trust to 
hi merci for a reward both here below and in heaven above. Am I not 
repaid for all that I have suffered? O yes, more than repaid," thought 
philip, as, with a kiss, he disturb the slumber of hi wife, and met 
her full dark eye fix upon him, beam with love and joy. 

befor philip went downstairs, he inquir about mynheer poots. 

"mi father ha inde troubl me much," repli amine. "I am oblig 
to lock the parlour when I leav it, for more than onc I have found 
him attempt to forc the lock of the buffets. hi love of gold is 
insatiable: he dream of noth else. He ha caus me much pain, 
insist that I never should see you again, and that I should 
surrend to him all your wealth. but he fear me, and he fear your 
return much more." 

"i he well in health?" 

"not ill, but still evid wast away,--lik a candl burnt down 
to the socket, flit and flare alternately; at one time almost 
imbecile, at others, talk and plan as if he were in the vigour 
of hi youth. O what a curs it must be--that love of money! I 
believe--i'm shock to say so, philip,--that that poor old man, 
now on the brink of a grave into which he can take nothing, would 
sacrific your life and mine to have possess of those guilders, the 
whole of which I would barter for one kiss from thee." 

"indeed, amine, ha he then attempt anyth in my absence?" 

"I dare not speak my thoughts, philip, nor will I ventur 
upon surmises, which it were difficult to prove. I watch him 
carefully;--but talk no more about him. you will see him soon, and do 
not expect a hearti welcome, or believ that, if given, it is sincere. 
I will not tell him of your return, as I wish to mark the effect." 

amin then descend to prepar breakfast, and philip walk out for 
a few minutes. On hi return, he found mynheer poot sit at the 
tabl with hi daughter. 

"merci allah! am I right?" cri the old man: "i it you, mynheer 
vanderdecken?" 

"even so," repli philip, "I return last night." 

"and you did not tell me, amine." 

"I wish that you should be surprised," repli amine. 

"I am surprised! when do you sail again, mynheer philip? veri soon, I 
suppose? perhap to-morrow?" said mynheer poots. 

"not for mani months, I trust," repli philip. 

"not for mani months!--that is a long while to be idle. you must make 
money. tell me, have you brought back plenti thi time?" 

"no," repli philip; "I have been wrecked, and veri nearli lost my 
life." 

"but you will go again?" 

"yes, in good time I shall go again." 

"veri well, we will take care of your hous and your guilders." 

"I shall perhap save you the troubl of take care of my guilders," 
repli philip, to annoy the old man, "for I mean to take them with 
me." 

"to take them with you! for what, pray?" repli poots, in alarm. 

"to purchas good where I go, and make more money." 

"but you may be wreck again, and then the money will be all lost. 
no, no; go yourself, mynheer philip; but you must not take your 
guilders." 

"inde I will," repli philip; "when I leav this, I shall take all 
my money with me." 

dure thi convers it occur to philip that, if mynheer poot 
could onli be led to suppos that he took away hi money with him, 
there would be more quiet for amine, who wa now obliged, as she had 
inform him, to be constantli on the watch. He determined, therefore, 
when he next departed, to make the doctor believ that he had taken 
hi wealth with him. 

mynheer poot did not renew the conversation, but sank into gloomi 
thought. In a few minut he left the parlour, and went up to hi own 
room, when philip state to hi wife what had induc him to make the 
old man believ that he should embark hi property. 

"it wa thought of you, philip, and I thank you for your kind 
feel toward me; but I wish you had said noth on the subject. 
you do not know my father; I must now watch him as an enemy." 

"we have littl to fear from an infirm old man," repli philip, 
laughing. but amin thought otherwise, and wa ever on her guard. 

the spring and summer pass rapidli away, for they were happy. mani 
were the convers between philip and amine, rel to what had 
passed--th supernatur appear of hi father' ship, and the 
fatal wreck. 

amin felt that more danger and difficulti were prepar for her 
husband, but she never onc attempt to dissuad him from renew 
hi attempt in fulfil of hi vow. like him, she look forward 
with hope and confidence, awar that, at some time, hi fate must be 
accomplished, and trust onli that that hour would be long delayed. 

At the close of the summer, philip again went to amsterdam, to procur 
for himself a berth in one of the vessel which were to sail at the 
approach of winter. 

the wreck of the _ter schilling_ wa well known; and the circumst 
attend it, with the except of the appear of the phantom 
ship, had been drawn up by philip on hi passag home, and 
commun to the court of directors. not onli on account of the 
veri credit manner in which that report had been prepared, but 
in consider of hi peculiar suffer and escape, he had been 
promis by the compani a berth, as second mate, on board of one of 
their vessels, should he be again inclin to sail to the east indies. 

have call upon the directors, he receiv hi appoint to the 
_batavia_, a fine vessel of about 400 ton burden. have effect hi 
purpose, philip hasten back to terneuse, and, in the presenc of 
mynheer poots, inform amin of what he had done. 

"so you go to sea again?" observ mynheer poots. 

"yes, but not for two months, I expect," repli philip. 

"ah!" repli poots, "in two months!" and the old man mutter to 
himself. 

how true it is that we can more easili bear up against a real evil 
than against suspense! let it not be suppos that amin fret 
at the thought of her approach separ from her husband; she 
lament it, but feel hi departur to be an imperi duty, and 
have it ever in her mind, she bore up against her feelings, and 
submitted, without repining, to what could not be averted. there was, 
however, one circumstance, which caus her much uneasiness--that wa 
the temper and conduct of her father. amine, who knew hi charact 
well, perceiv that he alreadi secretli hate philip, whom he 
regard as an obstacl to hi obtain possess of the money in 
the house; for the old man wa well awar that, if philip were dead, 
hi daughter would care littl who had possess of, or what becam 
of it. the thought that philip wa about to take that money with him 
had almost turn the brain of the avarici old man. He had been 
watch by amine, and she had seen him walk for hour mutter to 
himself, and not, as usual, attend to hi profession. 

A few even after hi return from amsterdam, philip, who had taken 
cold, complain of not be well. 

"not well!" cri the old man, start up; "let me see--yes, your 
puls is veri quick. amine, your poor husband is veri ill. He must go 
to bed, and I will give him someth which will do him good. I shall 
charg you nothing, philip--noth at all." 

"I do not feel so veri unwell, mynheer poots," repli philip; I have 
had a bad headach certainly." 

"yes, and you have fever also, philip, and prevent is better than 
cure; so go to bed, and take what I send you, and you will be well 
to-morrow." 

philip went upstairs, accompani by amine; and mynheer poot went 
into hi own room to prepar the medicine. So soon as philip wa in 
bed, amin went downstairs, and wa met by her father, who put a 
powder into her hand to give to her husband, and then left the 
parlour. 

"god forgiv me if I wrong my father," thought amine; "but I have my 
doubts. philip is ill, more so than he will acknowledge; and if he 
doe not take some remedies, he may be worse--but my heart misgiv 
me--i have a foreboding. yet sure he cannot be so diabol 
wicked." 

amin examin the content of the paper: it wa a veri small quantiti 
of dark brown powder, and, by the direct of mynheer poots, to be 
given in a tumbler of warm wine. mynheer poot had offer to heat the 
wine. hi return from the kitchen broke amine' meditations. 

"here is the wine, my child; now give him a whole tumbler of wine, and 
the powder, and let him be cover up warm, for the perspir will 
soon burst out, and it must not be checked. watch him, amine, and keep 
the cloth on, and he will be well to-morrow morning." and mynheer 
poot quit the room, saying, "good-night, my child." 

amin pour out the powder into one of the silver mug upon the 
table, and then proceed to mix it up with the wine. her suspicion 
had, for the time, been remov by the kind tone of her father' 
voice. To do him justic as a medic practitioner, he appear alway 
to be most care of hi patients. when amin mix the powder, she 
examin and perceiv that there wa no sediment, and the wine wa as 
clear as before. thi wa unusual, and her suspicion revived. 

"I like it not," said she; "I fear my father--god help me!--i hardli 
know what to do--i will not give it to philip. the warm wine may 
produc perspir sufficient." 

amin paused, and again reflected. she had mix the powder with so 
small a portion of wine that it did not fill a quarter of the cup; she 
put it on one side, fill anoth up to the brim with the warm wine, 
and then went up to the bedroom. 

On the landing-plac she wa met by her father, whom she suppos to 
have retir to rest. 

"take care you do not spill it, amine. that is right, let him have a 
whole cupful. stop, give it to me; I will take it to him myself." 

mynheer poot took the cup from amine' hands, and went into philip' 
room. 

"here, my son, drink thi off, and you will be well," said mynheer 
poots, whose hand trembl so that he spilt the wine on the coverlet. 
amine, who watch her father, wa more than ever pleas that she had 
not put the powder into the cup. philip rose on hi elbow, drank off 
the wine, and mynheer poot then wish him good-night. 

"do not leav him, amine, I will see all right," said mynheer poots, 
as he left the room. and amine, who had intend to go down for the 
candl left in the parlour, remain with her husband, to whom she 
confid her feelings, and also the fact that she had not given him 
the powder. 

"I trust that you are mistaken, amine," repli philip, "inde I 
feel sure that you must be. No man can be so bad as you suppos your 
father." 

"you have not live with him as I have; you have not seen what I have 
seen," repli amine. "you know not what gold will tempt peopl to do 
in thi world--but, however, I may be wrong. At all events, you must 
go to sleep, and I shall watch you, dearest. pray do not speak--i feel 
I cannot sleep just now--i wish to read a little--i will lie down 
by-and-bye." 

philip made no further objections, and wa soon in a sound sleep, and 
amin watch him in silenc till midnight long had passed. 

"he breath heavily," thought amine; "but had I given him that 
powder, who know if he had ever awok again? My father is so deepli 
skill in the eastern knowledge, that I fear him. too often ha he, 
I well know, for a purs well fill with gold, prepar the sleep of 
death. anoth would shudder at the thought; but he, who ha dealt out 
death at the will of hi employers, would scrupl littl to do so even 
to the husband of hi own daughter; and I have watch him in hi 
moods, and know hi thought and wishes. what a forebod of mishap 
ha come over me thi evening!--what a fear of evil! philip is ill, 
'ti true, but not so veri ill. no! no! besides, hi time is not yet 
come; he ha hi dread task to finish. I would it were morning. how 
soundli he sleeps! and the dew is on hi brow. I must cover him 
up warm, and watch that he remain so. some one knock at the 
entrance-door. now will they wake him. 'ti a summon for my father." 

amin left the room, and hasten downstairs. It was, as she supposed, 
a summon for mynheer poot to a woman taken in labour. 

"he shall follow you directly," said amine; "I will now call him up." 
amin went upstair to the room where her father slept, and knocked; 
hear no answer, as usual, she knock again. 

"mi father is not use to sleep in thi way," thought amine, when she 
found no answer to her second call. she open the door and went in. 
To her surprise, her father wa not in bed. "strange," thought she; 
"but I do not recollect have heard hi footstep come up after he 
went down to take away the lights." and amin hasten to the parlour, 
where, stretch on the sofa, she discov her father appar 
fast asleep; but to her call he gave no answer. "merci heaven! is 
he dead?" thought she, approach the light to her father' face. 
yes, it wa so! hi eye were fix and glazed--hi lower jaw had 
fallen. 

for some minutes, amin leant against the wall in a state of 
bewilderment; her brain whirled; at last she recov herself. 

"'ti to be prove at once," thought she, as she went up to the table, 
and look into the silver cup in which she had mix the powder--it 
wa empty! "the god of righteous hath punish him!" exclaim 
amine; "but, O! that thi man should have been my father! yes! it is 
plain. frighten at hi own wicked, damn intentions, he pour out 
more wine from the flagon, to blunt hi feel of remorse; and not 
know that the powder wa still in the cup, he fill it up, and 
drank himself--th death he meant for another! for another!--and for 
whom? one wed to hi own daughter!--philip! my husband! wert thou 
not my father," continu amine, look at the dead body, "I would 
spit upon thee, and curs thee! but thou art punished, and may god 
forgiv thee! thou poor, weak, wick creature!" 

amin then left the room, and went upstairs, where she found philip 
still fast asleep, and in a profus perspiration. most women would 
have awaken their husbands, but amin thought not of herself; philip 
wa ill, and amin would not arous him to agit him. she sat down 
by the side of the bed, and with her hand press upon her forehead, 
and her elbow rest on her knees, she remain in deep thought 
until the sun had risen and pour hi bright beam through the 
casement. 

she wa rous from her reflect by anoth summon at the door of 
the cottage. she hasten down to the entrance, but did not open the 
door. 

"mynheer poot is requir immediately," said the girl, who wa the 
messenger. 

"mi good therese," repli amine, "mi father ha more need of 
assist than the poor woman; for hi travail in thi world, I fear, 
is well over. I found him veri ill when I went to call him, and he 
ha not been abl to quit hi bed. I must now entreat you to do my 
message, and desir father seysen to come hither; for my poor father 
is, I fear, in extremity." 

"merci on me!" repli therese. "i it so? fear not but I will do your 
bidding, mistress amine." 

the second knock had awaken philip, who felt that he wa much 
better, and hi headach had left him. He perceiv that amin had not 
taken ani rest that night, and he wa about to expostul with her, 
when she at onc told him what had occurred. 

"you must dress yourself, philip," continu she, "and must assist me 
to carri up hi body, and place it in hi bed, befor the arriv of 
the priest. god of mercy! had I given you that powder, my dearest 
philip--but let us not talk about it. Be quick, for father seysen will 
be here soon." 

philip wa soon dressed, and follow amin down into the parlour. the 
sun shone bright, and hi ray were dart upon the haggard face of 
the old man, whose fist were clenched, and hi tongu fix between 
the teeth on one side of hi mouth. 

"alas! thi room appear to be fatal. how mani more scene of horror 
are to pass within it?" 

"none, I trust," repli amine; "thi is not, to my mind, the scene of 
horror. It wa when that old man (now call away--and a victim of hi 
own treachery) stood by your bedside, and with everi mark of interest 
and kindness, offer you the cup--_that_ wa the scene of horror," 
said amine, shuddering--"on which long will haunt me." 

"god forgiv him! as I do," repli philip, lift up the body, and 
carri it up the stair to the room which had been occupi by 
mynheer poots. 

"let it at least be suppos that he die in hi bed, and that hi 
death wa natural," said amine. "mi pride cannot bear that thi 
should be known, or that I should be point at as the daughter of a 
murderer! O philip!" 

amin sat down, and burst into tears. 

her husband wa attempt to consol her, when father seysen knock 
at the door. philip hasten down to open it. 

"good morning, my son. how is the sufferer?" 

"he ha ceas to suffer, father." 

"indeed!" repli the good priest, with sorrow in hi countenance; "am 
I then too late? yet have I not tarried." 

"he went off suddenly, father, in a convulsion," repli philip, 
lead the way upstairs. 

father seysen look at the bodi and perceiv that hi offic were 
needless, and then turn to amine, who had not yet check her tears. 

"weep, my child, weep! for you have cause," said the priest. "the 
loss of a father' love must be a sever trial to a duti and 
affection child. but yield not too much to your grief, amine; you 
have other duties, other ties, my child--you have your husband." 

"I know it, father," repli amine; "still must I weep, for I wa 
_his_ daughter." 

"did he not go to bed last night, then, that hi cloth are still 
upon him? when did he first complain?" 

"the last time that I saw him, father," repli philip, "he came into 
my room, and gave me some medicine, and then he wish me good-night. 
upon a summon to attend a sick-bed, my wife went to call him, and 
found him speechless." 

"it ha been sudden," repli the priest; "but he wa an old man, and 
old men sink at once. were you with him when he died?" 

"I wa not, sir," repli philip; "befor my wife had summon me and 
I had dress myself, he had left thi world." 

"I trust, my children, for a better." amin shuddered. "tell me, 
amine," continu the priest, "did he show sign of grace befor 
he died? for you know full well that he ha long been look on as 
doubt in hi creed, and littl attent to the rite of our holi 
church." 

"there are times, holi father," repli amine, "when even a sincer 
christian can be excused, even if he give no sign. look at hi 
clench hands, wit the agoni of death on hi face, and could you, 
in that state, expect a sign?" 

"alas! 'ti but too true, my child; we must then hope for the best. 
kneel with me, my children, and let us offer up a prayer for the soul 
of the departed." 

philip and amin knelt with the priest, who pray fervently; and 
as they rose, they exchang a glanc which fulli reveal what wa 
pass in the mind of each. 

"I will send the peopl to do their offic for the dead, and prepar 
the bodi for interment," said father seysen; "but it were as well not 
to say that he wa dead befor I arrived, or to let it be suppos 
that he wa call away without receiv the consol of our holi 
creed." 

philip motion hi head in assent as he stood at the foot of the 
bed, and the priest departed. there had alway been a strong feel 
against mynheer poot in the village;--hi neglect of all religi 
duties--th doubt whether he wa even a member of the church--hi 
avaric and extortion--had creat for him a host of enemies; but, at 
the same time, hi great medic skill, which wa fulli acknowledged, 
render him of importance. had it been known that hi creed (if he 
had any) wa mahometan, and that he had die in attempt to poison 
hi son-in-law, it is certain that christian burial would have been 
refus him, and the finger of scorn would have been point at hi 
daughter. but as father seysen, when questioned, said, in a mild 
voice, that "he had depart in peace," it wa presum that mynheer 
poot had die a good christian, although he had act littl up to 
the tenet of christian dure hi life. the next day the remain 
of the old man were consign to the earth with the usual rites; 
and philip and amin were not a littl reliev in their mind at 
everyth have pass off so quietly. 

It wa not until after the funer had taken place that philip, in 
compani with amine, examin the chamber of hi father-in-law. the 
key of the iron chest wa found in hi pocket; but philip had not yet 
look into thi darl repositori of the old man. the room wa full 
of bottl and box of drugs, all of which were either thrown away, 
or, if the util of them wa known to amine, remov to a spare 
room. hi tabl contain mani drawers, which were now examined, 
and among the heterogen content were mani write in 
arabic--prob prescriptions. box and paper were also found, with 
arab charact written upon them; and in the box which they first 
took up wa a powder similar to that which mynheer poot had given to 
amine. there were mani articl and write which made it appear that 
the old man had dabbl in the occult sciences, as they were practis 
at that period, and those they hasten to commit to the flames. 

"had all these been seen by father seysen!" observ amine, 
mournfully. "but here are some print papers, philip!" 

philip examin them, and found that they were acknowledg of 
share in the dutch east india company. 

"no, amine, these are money, or what is as good--thes are eight 
share in the company' capital, which will yield us a handsom incom 
everi year. I had no idea that the old man made such use of hi money. 
I had some intent of do the same with a part of mine befor I 
went away, instead of allow it to remain idle." 

the iron chest wa now to be examined. when philip first open it, he 
imagin that it contain but little; for it wa larg and deep, and 
appear to be almost empty; but when he put hi hand down to the 
bottom, he pull out thirti or forti small bags, the content of 
which, instead of be silver guilders, were all coin of gold; there 
wa onli one larg bag of silver money. but thi wa not all: sever 
small box and packet were also discovered, which, when opened, were 
found to contain diamond and other preciou stones. when everyth 
wa collected, the treasur appear to be of great value. 

"amine, my love, you have inde brought me an unexpect dower," said 
philip. 

"you may well say _unexpected_" repli amine. "these diamond and 
jewel my father must have brought with him from egypt. and yet how 
penuri we were live until we came to thi cottage! and with all 
thi treasur he would have poison my philip for more! god forgiv 
him!" 

have count the gold, which amount to nearli fifti thousand 
guilders, the whole wa replaced, and they left the room. 

"I am a rich man," thought philip, after amin had left him; "but 
of what use are rich to me? I might purchas a ship and be my own 
captain, but would not the ship be lost? that certainli doe not 
follow; but the chanc are against the vessel; therefor I will have 
no ship. but is it right to sail in the vessel of other with thi 
feeling?--i know not; this, however, I know, that I have a duti to 
perform, and that all our live are in the hand of a kind providence, 
which call us away when he think fit. I will place most of my money 
in the share of the company, and if I sail in their vessels, and they 
come to misfortun by meet with my poor father, at least I shall 
be a common suffer with the rest. and now to make my amin more 
comfortable." 

philip immedi made a great alter in their style of living. 
two femal servant were hired: the room were more comfort 
furnished; and in everyth in which hi wife' comfort and 
conveni were concerned, he spare no expense. He wrote to 
amsterdam and purchas sever share in the company' stock. the 
diamond and hi own money he still left in the hand of amine. In 
make these arrang the two month pass rapidli away, and 
everyth wa complet when philip again receiv hi summons, by 
letter, to desir that he would join hi vessel. amin would have 
wish philip to go out as a passeng instead of go as an officer, 
but philip prefer the latter, as otherwis he could give no reason 
for hi voyag to india. 

"I know not why," observ philip, the even befor hi departure, 
"but I do not feel as I did when I last went away; I have no 
forebod of evil thi time." 

"nor have i," repli amine; "but I feel as if you would be long away 
from me, philip; and is not that an evil to a fond and anxiou wife?" 

"yes, love, it is; but--" 

"O yes, I know it is your duty, and you must go," repli amine, 
buri her face in hi bosom. 

the next day philip part from hi wife, who behav with more 
fortitud than on their first separation. "_all_ were lost, but _he_ 
wa saved," thought amine. "I feel that he will return to me. god of 
heaven, thi will be done!" 

philip soon arriv at amsterdam; and have purchas mani thing 
which he thought might be advantag to him in case of accident, to 
which he now look forward as almost certain, he embark on board 
the _batavia_, which wa lie at singl anchor, and readi for sea. 




chapter xii 


philip had not been long on board, ere he found that they were not 
like to have a veri comfort passage; for the _batavia_ wa 
charter to convey a larg detach of troop to ceylon and java, 
for the purpos of recruit and strengthen the company' forc 
at those places. she wa to quit the fleet off madagascar, and run 
direct for the island of java; the number of soldier on board be 
presum suffici to insur the ship against ani attack or accid 
from pirat or enemies' cruisers. the _batavia_, moreover, mount 
thirti guns, and had a crew of seventy-f men. besid militari 
stores, which form the princip part of her cargo, she had on board 
a larg quantiti of speci for the indian market. the detach of 
soldier wa embark when philip went on board, and in a few minut 
the deck were so crowd that it wa hardli possibl to move. philip, 
who had not yet spoken to the captain, found out the first mate, 
and immedi enter upon hi duty, with which, from hi close 
applic to it dure hi former voyag and passag home, he wa 
much better acquaint than might have been imagined. 

In a short time all trace of hurri and confus began to disappear, 
the baggag of the troop wa stow away, and the soldier have 
been told off in parties, and station with their mess utensil 
between the gun of the main deck, room wa thu afford for work 
the ship. philip show great activ as well as method in the 
arrang proposed, and the captain, dure a paus in hi own 
arduou duties, said to him-- 

"I thought you were take it veri easy, Mr vanderdecken, in not 
join the ship before, but, now you are on board, you are make up 
for lost time. you have done more dure the forenoon than I could 
have expected. I am glad that you are come, though veri sorri you were 
not here when we were stow the hold, which, I am afraid, is not 
arrang quit so well as it might be. mynheer struys, the first mate, 
ha had more to do than he could well give attent to." 

"I am sorri that I should not have been here, sir," repli philip; 
"but I came as soon as the compani sent me word." 

"yes, and as they know that you are a marri man, and do not forget 
that you are a great shareholder, they would not troubl you too soon. 
I presum you will have the command of a vessel next voyage. In fact, 
you are certain of it, with the capit you have invest in their 
funds. I had a convers with one of the senior account on the 
subject thi veri morning." 

philip wa not veri sorri that hi money had been put out to such 
good interest, as to be the captain of a ship wa what he earnestli 
desired. He replied, that, "he certainli did hope to command a ship 
after the next voyage, when he trust that he should feel himself 
quit compet to the charge." 

"no doubt, no doubt, Mr vanderdecken. I can see that clearly. you must 
be veri fond of the sea." 

"I am," repli philip; "I doubt whether I shall ever give it up." 

"_never_ give it up! you think so now. you are young, active, and full 
of hope: but you will tire of it by-and-bye, and be glad to lay by for 
the rest of your days." 

"how mani troop do we embark?" inquir philip. 

"two hundr and forty-f rank and file, and six officers. poor 
fellows! there are but few of them will ever return: nay, more than 
one-half will not see anoth birthday. It is a dread climate. I 
have land three hundr men at that horrid hole, and in six months, 
even befor I had sailed, there were not one hundr left alive." 

"it is almost murder to send them there," observ philip. 

"psha! they must die somewhere, and if they die a littl sooner, what 
matter? life is a commod to be bought and sold like ani other. We 
send so much manufactur good and so much money to barter for indian 
commodities. We also send out so much life, and it give a good return 
to the company." 

"but not to the poor soldiers, I am afraid." 

"no; the compani buy it cheap and sell it dear," repli the captain, 
who walk forward. 

true, thought philip, they do purchas human life cheap, and make a 
rare profit of it, for without these poor fellow how could they hold 
their possess in spite of nativ and foreign enemies? for what a 
paltri and cheap annuiti do these men sell their lives? for what a 
miser pittanc do they dare all the horror of a most deadli 
climate, without a chance, a hope of return to their nativ land, 
where they might hapli repair their exhaust energies, and take a 
new leas of life! good god! if these men may be thu heartlessli 
sacrif to mammon, whi should I feel remors if, in the fulfil 
of a sacr duti impos on me by him who deal with us as He think 
meet, a few mortal perish? not a sparrow fall to the ground without 
hi knowledge, and it is for him to sacrific or save. I am but the 
creatur of hi will, and I but follow my duty,--but obey the command 
of one whose way are inscrutable. still, if for my sake thi ship 
be also doomed, I cannot but wish that I had been appoint to some 
other, in which the wast of human life might have been less. 

It wa not until a week after philip arriv on board that the 
_batavia_ and the remaind of the fleet were readi for sea. 

It would be difficult to analys the feel of philip vanderdecken 
on thi hi second embarkation. hi mind wa so continu direct 
to the object of hi voyage, that although he attend to hi 
religi duty, yet the busi of life pass befor him as a dream. 
assur of again meet with the phantom ship, and almost equal 
assur that the meet would be follow by some untoward event, in 
all probabl by the sacrific of those who sail with him, hi 
thought prey upon him, and wore him down to a shadow. He hardli 
ever spoke, except in the execut of hi duty. He felt like a 
criminal; as one who, by embark with them, had doom all around 
him to death, disaster, and peril; and when _one_ talk of hi 
wife, and _another_ of hi children--when they would indulg in 
anticipations, and canvass happi projects, philip would feel sick at 
heart, and would rise from the tabl and hasten to the solitud of the 
deck. At one time he would tri to persuad himself that hi sens had 
been work upon in some moment of excitement, that he wa the victim 
of an illusion; at anoth he would call to mind all the past--h 
would feel it terribl reality--and then the thought would suggest 
itself that with thi supernatur vision heaven had noth to do; 
that it wa but the work and juggleri of satan. but then the relic--bi 
such mean the devil would not have worked. A few day after he had 
sailed, he bitterli repent that he had not state the whole of 
hi circumst to father seysen, and taken hi advic upon the 
proprieti of follow up hi search; but it wa now too late; alreadi 
wa the good ship _batavia_ more than a thousand mile from the port 
of amsterdam, and hi duty, whatev it might be, _must_ be fulfilled. 

As the fleet approach the cape, hi anxieti increas to such a 
degre that it wa remark by all who were on board. the captain and 
offic command the troop embarked, who all felt interest in 
him, vainli attempt to learn the caus of hi anxiety. philip would 
plead ill-health; and hi haggard counten and sunken eye silent 
prove that he wa under acut suffering. the major part of the night 
he pass on deck, strain hi eye in everi quarter, and watch 
each chang in the horizon, in anticip of the appear of the 
phantom ship; and it wa not till the day dawn that he sought a 
perturb repos in hi cabin. after a favour passage, the fleet 
anchor to refresh at tabl bay, and philip felt some small relief, 
that up to the present time the supernatur visit had not again 
occurred. 

As soon as the fleet had watered, they again made sail, and again 
did philip' agit becom perceptible. with a favour breeze, 
however, they round the cape, pass by madagascar, and arriv in 
the indian seas, when the _batavia_ part compani with the rest of 
the fleet, which steer to cambroon and ceylon. "and now," thought 
philip, "will the phantom ship make her appearance. It ha onli wait 
till we should be left without a consort to assist us in distress." but 
the _batavia_ sail in a smooth sea and under a cloudless sky, and 
noth wa seen. In a few week she arriv off java, and, previou 
to enter the splendid road of batavia, hove-to for the night. thi 
wa the last night they would be under sail, and philip stir not 
from the deck, but walk to and fro, anxious wait for the 
morning. the morn broke--th sun rose in splendour, and the 
_batavia_ steer into the roads. befor noon she wa at anchor, and 
philip, with hi mind relieved, hasten down to hi cabin, and took 
that repos which he so much required. 

He awok refreshed, for a great weight had been taken off hi mind. 
"it doe not follow, then," thought he, "that becaus I am on board 
the vessel therefor the crew are doom to perish; it doe not follow 
that the phantom ship is to appear becaus I seek her. If so, I have 
no further weight upon my conscience. I seek her, it is true, and wish 
to meet with her; I stand, however, but the same chanc as others; and 
it is no way certain that becaus I seek, I am sure to find. that she 
bring disast upon all she meets, may be true, but not that I bring 
with me the disast of meet her. heaven I thank thee! now I can 
prosecut my search without remorse." 

philip, restor to composur by these reflections, went on deck. the 
debark of the troop wa alreadi take place, for they were as 
anxiou to be reliev from their long confin as the seamen were 
to regain a littl space and comfort. He survey the scene. the town 
of batavia lay about one mile from them, low on the beach; from behind 
it rose a lofti chain of mountains, brilliant with verdure, and, here 
and there, peopl with countri seats, belong to the residents, 
delight embosom in forest of trees. the panorama wa 
beautiful; the veget wa luxuriant, and, from it vivid green, 
refresh to the eye. near to the town lay larg and small vessels, 
a forest of masts; the water in the bay wa of a bright blue, and 
rippl to a soft breeze; here and there small islet (like tuft of 
fresh verdure) broke the uniform of the water-line; even the town 
itself wa pleas to the eye, the white colour of the hous be 
oppos to the dark foliag of the trees, which grew in the gardens, 
and line the streets. 

"can it be possible," observ philip to the captain of the _batavia_, 
who stood by him, "that thi beauti spot can be so unhealthy? I 
should form a veri differ opinion from it appearance." 

"even," repli the captain, "a the venom snake of the countri 
start up from among it flowers, so doe death stalk about in thi 
beauti and luxuri landscape. Do you feel better, mynheer 
vanderdecken?" 

"much better," repli philip. 

"still, in your enfeebl state, I should recommend you to go on 
shore." 

"I shall avail myself of your permission, with thanks. how long shall 
we stay here?" 

"not long, as we are order to run back. our cargo is all readi for 
us, and will be on board soon after we have discharged." 

philip took the advic of hi captain; he had no difficulti in find 
himself receiv by a hospit merchant, who had a hous at some 
distanc from the town, and in a healthi situation. there he remain 
two months, dure which he re-establish hi health, and then 
re-embark a few day previou to the ship be readi for sea. the 
return voyag wa fortunate, and in four month from the date of their 
quit batavia, they found themselv abreast of St helena; for 
vessels, at that period, gener made what is call the eastern 
passage, run down the coast of africa, instead of keep toward 
the american shores. again they had pass the cape without meet 
with the phantom ship; and philip wa not onli in excel health, 
but in good spirits. As they lay becalmed, with the island in sight, 
they observ a boat pull toward them, and in the cours of three 
hour she arriv on board. the crew were much exhaust from have 
been two day in the boat, dure which time they had never ceas 
pull to gain the island. they state themselv to be the crew of a 
small dutch indiaman, which had founder at sea two day before; she 
had start one of her planks, and fill so rapidli that the men had 
hardli time to save themselves. they consist of the captain, mates, 
and twenti men belong to the ship, and an old portugues cathol 
priest, who had been sent home by the dutch governor, for have 
oppos the dutch interest in the island of japan. He had live with 
the natives, and been secret by them for some time, as the japanes 
govern wa equal desir of captur him, with the intent 
of take away hi life. eventu he found himself oblig to throw 
himself into the arm of the dutch, as be the less cruel of hi 
enemies. 

the dutch govern decid that he should be sent away from the 
country; and he had, in consequence, been put on board of the indiaman 
for a passag home. By the report of the captain and crew, one person 
onli had been lost; but he wa a person of consequence, have for 
mani year held the situat of presid in the dutch factori at 
japan. He wa return to holland with the rich which he had 
amassed. By the evid of the captain and crew, he had insisted, 
after he wa put into the boat, upon go back to the ship to secur 
a casket of immens value, contain diamond and other preciou 
stones, which he had forgotten; they added, that while they were 
wait for him the ship suddenli plung her bowsprit under, and 
went down head foremost, and that it wa with difficulti they had 
themselv escaped. they had wait for some time to ascertain if he 
would rise again to the surface, but he appear no more. 

"I knew that someth would happen," observ the captain of the 
sunken vessel, after he had been sit a short time in the cabin 
with philip and the captain of the _batavia_; "we saw the fiend or 
devil' ship, as they call her, but three day before." 

"what! the _fli dutchman_, as they name her?" ask philip. 

"yes; that, I believe, is the name they give her," repli the 
captain. "I have often heard of her; but it never wa my fate to fall 
in with her before, and I hope it never will be again; for I am a 
ruin man, and must begin the world afresh." 

"I have heard of that vessel," observ the captain of the _batavia_. 
"pray, how did she appear to you?" 

"why, the fact is, I did not see anyth but the loom of her hull," 
repli the other. "it wa veri strange; the night wa fine, and the 
heaven clear; we were under top-gal sails, for I do not carri on 
dure the night, or els we might have put the royal on her; she 
would have carri them with the breeze. I had turn in, when about 
two o'clock in the morn the mate call me to come on deck. I 
demand what wa the matter, and he repli he could hardli tell, but 
that the men were much frightened, and that there wa a ghost ship, as 
the sailor term it, in sight. I went on deck; all the horizon wa 
clear, but on our quarter wa a sort of fog, round as a ball, and not 
more than two cables' length from us. We were go about four knot 
and a half free, and yet we could not escap from thi mist. 'look 
there,' said the mate. 'why, what the devil can it be?' said I, 
rub my eyes. 'no bank up to windward, and yet a fog in the middl 
of a clear sky, with a fresh breeze, and with water all around it;' 
for you see the fog did not cover more than a dozen cables' length, as 
we could perceiv by the horizon on each side of it. 'hark, sir!' 
said the mate--'they are speak again.' 'speaking!' said I, and I 
listened; and from out thi ball of fog I heard voices. At last, one 
cri out, 'keep a sharp look-out forward, d'ye hear?' 'ay, ay, sir!' 
repli anoth voice. 'ship on the starboard bow, sir.' 'veri well; 
strike the bell there forward.' and then we heard the bell toll. 'it 
must be a vessel,' said I to the mate. 'not of thi world, sir,' 
repli he. 'hark!' 'A gun readi forward.' 'ay, ay, sir!' wa now 
heard out of the fog, which appear to near us; 'all ready, sir.' 
'fire!' the report of the gun sound on our ear like thunder, and 
then--" 

"well, and then?" said the captain of the _batavia_, breathless. 

"and then," repli the other captain, solemnly, "the fog and all 
disappear as if by magic, the whole horizon wa clear, and there wa 
noth to be seen." 

"i it possible?" 

"there are twenti men on deck to tell the story," repli the captain. 
"and the old cathol priest to boot, for he stood by me the whole 
time I wa on deck. the men said that some accid would happen; and 
in the morn watch, on sound the well, we found four feet water. 
We took to the pumps, but it gain upon us, and we went down, as I 
have told you. the mate say that the vessel is well known--it is 
call the _fli dutchman_." 

philip made no remark at the time, but he wa much pleas at what 
he had heard. "if," thought he, "the phantom ship of my poor father 
appear to other as well as to me, and they are sufferers, my be 
on board can make no difference. I do but take my chanc of fall 
in with her, and do not risk the live of those who sail in the same 
vessel with me. now my mind is relieved, and I can prosecut my search 
with a quiet conscience." 

the next day philip took an opportun of make the acquaint of 
the cathol priest, who spoke dutch and other languag as well as 
he did portuguese. He wa a vener old man, appar about sixti 
year of age, with a white flow beard, mild in hi demeanour, and 
veri pleas in hi conversation. 

when philip kept hi watch that night, the old man walk with him, 
and it wa then, after a long conversation, that philip confid to 
him that he wa of the cathol persuasion. 

"indeed, my son, that is unusu in a hollander." 

"it is so," repli philip; "nor is it known on board--not that I am 
asham of my religion, but I wish to avoid discussion." 

"you are prudent, my son. alas! if the reform religion produc no 
better fruit than what I have wit in the east, it is littl 
better than idolatry." 

"tell me, father," said philip--"they talk of a miracul vision--of 
a ship not man by mortal men. did you see it?" 

"I saw what other saw," repli the priest; "and certainly, as far as 
my sens would enabl me to judge, the appear wa most unusual--i 
may say supernatural; but I had heard of thi phantom ship before, and 
moreov that it appear wa the precursor of disaster. So did it 
prove in our case, although, indeed, we had one on board, now no more, 
whose weight of guilt wa more than suffici to sink ani vessel; 
one, the swallow up of whom, with all that wealth from which he 
anticip such enjoy in hi own country, ha manifest that 
the almighti will, even in thi world, sometim wreak just and aw 
retribut on those who have merit hi vengeance." 

"you refer to the dutch presid who went down with the ship when it 
sank." 

"I do; but the tale of that man' crime is long; to-morrow night I 
will walk with you, and narrat the whole. peac be with you, my son, 
and good-night." 

the weather continu fine, and the _batavia_ hove-to in the even 
with the intent of anchor the next morn in the roadstead of 
St helena. philip, when he went on deck to keep the middl watch, 
found the old priest at the gangway wait for him. In the ship all 
wa quiet; the men slumber between the guns, and philip, with hi 
new acquaintance, went aft, and seat themselv on a hencoop, the 
priest commenc as follows:-- 

"you are not, perhaps, awar that the portuguese, although anxiou to 
secur for themselv a countri discov by their enterpris and 
courage, and the possess of which, I fear, ha cost them mani 
crimes, have still never lost sight of one point dear to all good 
catholics--that of spread wide the true faith, and plant the 
banner of christ in the region of idolatry. some of our countrymen 
have been wreck on the coast, we were made acquaint with the 
island of japan; and seven year afterwards, our holi and bless St 
francis, now with god, land on the island of ximo, where he remain 
for two year and five months, dure which he preach our religion 
and made mani converts. He afterward embark for china, hi origin 
destination, but wa not permit to arriv there; he die on hi 
passage, and thu close hi pure and holi life. after hi death, 
notwithstand the mani obstacl thrown in our way by the priest of 
idolatry, and the persecut with which they occasion visit 
the member of our faith, the convert to our holi religion increas 
greatli in the japanes islands. the religion spread fast, and mani 
thousand worship the true god. 

"after a time, the dutch form a settlement at japan, and when they 
found that the japanes christian around the factori would deal 
onli with the portuguese, in whom they had confidence, they becam our 
enemies; and the man of whom we have spoken, and who at that period 
wa the head of the dutch factory, determined, in hi lust for gold, 
to make the christian religion a sourc of suspicion to the emperor 
of the country, and thu to ruin the portugues and their adherents. 
such, my son, wa the conduct of one who profess to have embrac 
the reform religion as be of greater puriti than our own. 

"there wa a japanes lord of great wealth and influenc who live 
near us, and who, with two of hi sons, had embrac christianity, and 
had been baptised. He had two other sons, who live at the emperor' 
court. thi lord had made us a present of a hous for a colleg and 
school of instruction: on hi death, however, hi two son at court, 
who were idolaters, insist upon our quit thi property. We 
refused, and thu afford the dutch princip an opportun of 
inflam these young noblemen against us: by thi mean he persuad 
the japanes emperor that the portugues and christian had form a 
conspiraci against hi life and throne; for, be it observed, that when 
a dutchman wa ask if he wa a christian, he would reply, 'no; I am 
a hollander.' 

"the emperor, believ in thi conspiracy, gave an immedi order 
for the extirp of the portuguese, and then of all the japanes 
who had embrac the christian faith. He rais an armi for thi 
purpose, and gave the command of it to the young noblemen I have 
mentioned, the son of the lord who had given us the college. the 
christians, awar that resist wa their onli chance, flew to arms, 
and chose as their gener the other two son of the japanes lord, 
who, with their father, had embrac christianity. thu were the two 
armi command by four brothers, two on the one side and two on the 
other. 

"the christian armi amount to more than 40,000 men, but of thi the 
emperor wa not aware, and he sent a forc of about 25,000 to conquer 
and extermin them. the armi met, and after an obstin combat 
(for the japanes are veri brave) the victori wa on the part of the 
christians, and, with the except of a few who save themselv in 
the boats, the armi of the emperor wa cut to pieces. 

"thi victori wa the occas of make more converts, and our armi 
wa soon increas to upward of 50,000 men. On the other hand, the 
emperor, perceiv that hi troop had been destroyed, order new 
levi and rais a forc of 150,000 men, give direct to hi 
gener to give no quarter to the christians, with the except 
of the two young lord who command them, whom he wish to secur 
alive, that he might put them to death by slow torture. all offer of 
accommod were refused, and the emperor took the field in person. 
the armi again met, and on the first day' battl the victori wa on 
the part of the christians; still they had to lament the loss of one 
of their generals, who wa wound and taken prisoner, and, no quarter 
have been given, their loss wa severe. 

"the second day' combat wa fatal to the christians. their gener 
wa killed; they were overpow by numbers, and fell to a man. the 
emperor then attack the camp in the rear, and put to the sword everi 
old man, woman, and child. On the field of battle, in the camp, and by 
subsequ torture, more than 60,000 christian perished. but thi 
wa not all; a rigor search for christian wa made throughout the 
island for mani years; and they were, when found, put to death by 
the most cruel torture. It wa not until fifteen year ago that 
christian wa entir root out of the japanes empire, and 
dure a persecut of somewhat more than sixteen years, it is 
suppos that upward of 400,000 christian were destroyed; and all 
thi slaughter, my son, wa occas by the falsehood and avaric 
of that man who met hi just punish but a few day ago. the dutch 
company, pleas with hi conduct, which procur for them such 
advantages, continu him for mani year as the presid of their 
factori at japan. He wa a young man when he first went there, but hi 
hair wa grey when he thought of return to hi own country. He had 
amass immens wealth,--immense, indeed, must it have been to have 
satisfi avaric such as his! all ha now perish with him, and he 
ha been summon to hi account. reflect a little, my son. Is it 
not better to follow up our path of duty, to eschew the rich and 
pleasur of thi world, and, at our summon hence, to feel that we 
have hope of bliss hereafter?" 

"most true, holi father," repli philip, musing. 

"I have but a few year to live," continu the old man, "and god 
know I shall quit thi world without reluctance." 

"and so could i," repli philip. 

"_you_, my son!--no. you are young, and should be full of hopes. you 
have still to do your duti in that station to which it shall pleas 
god to call you." 

"I know that I have a duti to perform," repli philip. "father, the 
night air is too keen for one so age as you. retir to your bed, and 
leav me to my watch and my own thoughts." 

"I will, my son! may heaven guard you! take an old man' blessing. 
good-night." 

"good-night," repli philip, glad to be alone. "shall I confess all 
to him?" thought philip. "I feel I could confess to him.--but no. I 
would not to father seysen,--whi to him? I should put myself in hi 
power, and he might order me--no, no! my secret is my own. I need no 
advisers." and philip pull out the relic from hi bosom, and put it 
rever to hi lips. 

the _batavia_ wait a few day at St helena, and then continu her 
voyage. In six week philip again found himself at anchor in the 
zuyder zee, and have the captain' permission, he immedi set 
off for hi own home, take with him the old portugues priest 
mathias, with whom he had form a great intimacy, and to whom he had 
offer hi protect for the time he might wish to remain in the low 
countries. 




chapter xiii 


"far be it from me to wish to annoy you, my son," said father mathias, 
as with difficulti he kept pace with the rapid stride of philip, who 
wa now within a quarter of a mile of hi home; "but still recollect 
that thi is but a transitori world, and that much time ha elaps 
sinc you quit thi spot. for that reason I would fain desir you, 
if possible, to check these bound aspir after happiness, 
these joy anticip in which you have indulg sinc we quit 
the vessel. I hope and trust in the merci of god, that all will be 
right, and that in a few minut you will be in the arm of your 
much-lov wife: but still, in proport as you allow your hope 
to be raised, so will you inevit have them crush should 
disappoint cross your path. At flush we were told that there 
ha been a dread visit in thi land, and death may not have 
spare even one so young and fair." 

"let us hast on, father," repli philip. "what you say is true, and 
suspens becom most dreadful." 

philip increas hi speed, leav the old man to follow him: he 
arriv at the bridg with it wooden gate. It wa then about seven 
o'clock in the morning, for they had cross the scheldt at the dawn 
of day. 

philip observ that the lower shutter were still closed. 

"they might have been up and stir befor this," thought he, as he 
put hi hand to the latch of the door. It wa not fastened. philip 
entered! there wa a light burn in the kitchen; he push open 
the door, and beheld a maid-serv lean back in her chair in a 
profound sleep. befor he had time to go in and awaken her, he heard a 
voic at the top of the stairs, saying, "marie, is that the doctor?" 

philip wait no longer; in three bound he wa on the landing-plac 
above, and brush by the person who had spoken, he open the door 
of amine' room. 

A float wick in a tumbler of oil gave but a faint and glimmer 
light; the curtain of the bed were drawn, and by the side of it 
wa kneel a figur that wa well known to philip--that of father 
seysen. philip recoiled; the blood retreat to hi heart; he could 
not speak: pant for breath, he support himself against the wall, 
and at last vent hi agoni of feel by a deep groan, which arous 
the priest, who turn hi head, and perceiv who it was, rose from 
hi knees, and extend hi hand in silence. 

"she is dead, then!" at last exclaim philip. 

"no, my son, not dead; there is yet hope. the crisi is at hand; 
in one more hour her fate will be decided: then either will she be 
restor to your arms, or follow the mani hundr whom thi fatal 
epidem ha consign to the tomb." 

father seysen then led philip to the side of the bed, and withdrew the 
curtain. amin lay insensible, but breath heavily; her eye were 
closed. philip seiz her burn hand, knelt down, press it to hi 
lips, and burst into a paroxysm of tears. As soon as he had becom 
somewhat composed, father seysen persuad him to rise and sit with 
him by the side of the bed. 

"thi is a melancholi sight to wit at your return, philip," said 
he; "and to you who are so ardent, so impetuous, it must be doubli so; 
but god' will be done. rememb there is yet hope--not strong hope, I 
grant, but still there is hope, for so told me the medic man who ha 
attend her, and who will return, I expect, in a few minutes. her 
diseas is a typhu fever, which ha swept off whole famili within 
these last two months, and still rage violently; fortunate, indeed, 
is the hous which ha to mourn but one victim. I would that you had 
not arriv just now, for it is a diseas easili communicated. mani 
have fled from the countri for security. To add to our misfortunes, 
we have suffer from the want of medic advice, for physician and 
patient have been swept away together." 

the door wa now slowli opened, and a tall, dark man, in a brown 
cloak, hold to hi nose a spong satur with vinegar, enter 
the room. He bow hi head to philip and the priest, and then went 
to the bedside. for a minut he held hi finger to the puls of the 
sufferer, then lay down her arm, he put hi hand to her forehead, 
and cover her up with the bedclothes. He hand to philip the spong 
and vinegar, make a sign that he should use it, and beckon father 
seysen out of the room. 

In a minut the priest returned. "I have receiv hi directions, my 
son; he think that she may be saved. the cloth must be kept on her, 
and replac if she should throw them off; but everyth will depend 
upon quiet and calm after she recov her senses." 

"sure we can promis her that," repli philip. 

"it is not the knowledg of your return, or even the sight of you, 
which alarm me. joy seldom kills, even when the shock is great, but 
there are other caus for uneasiness." 

"what are they, holi father?" 

"philip, it is now thirteen day that amin ha raved, and dure 
that period I have seldom quit her but to perform the duti of my 
offic to other who requir it. I have been afraid to leav her, 
philip, for in her rave she ha told such a tale, even unconnect 
as it ha been, as ha thrill my soul with horror. It evid ha 
long lain heavili on her mind, and must retard her recovery. philip 
vanderdecken, you may rememb that I would onc have had the secret 
from you--th secret which forc your mother to her tomb, and which 
now may send your young wife to follow her, for it is evid that she 
know all. Is it not true?" 

"she doe know all," repli philip, mournfully. 

"and she ha in her delirium told all. nay, I trust she ha told more 
than all; but of that we will not speak now: watch her, philip. I will 
return in half an hour, for by that time, the doctor tell me, the 
symptom will decid whether she will return to reason, or be lost to 
you for ever." 

philip whisper to the priest that he had been accompani by father 
mathias, who wa to remain as hi guest, and request him to explain 
the circumst of hi present posit to him, and see that he wa 
attend to. father seysen then quit the room, when philip sat down 
by the bedside, and drew back the curtain. 

perhap there is no situat in life so agonis to the feel 
as that in which philip wa now placed. hi joy emot when 
expect to embrac in health and beauti the object of hi warmest 
affections, and of hi continu thought dure hi long absence, 
suddenli check by disappointment, anxiety, and grief, at find 
her lie emaciated, changed, corrupt with disease--h mind 
overthrown--h eye unconsci of hi presence--h exist 
hang by a singl hair--her frame prostrat befor the king of 
terror who hover over her with uplift dart, and long for the fiat 
which should permit him to pierc hi unconsci victim. 

"alas!" thought philip, "i it thu we meet, amine? truli did father 
mathia advis me, as I hurri so impetu along, not (a I fondli 
thought) to happiness, but to misery. god of heaven! be merci and 
forgiv me. If I have love thi angel creatur of thi formation, 
even more than I have thee--spar her--good heaven, spare her--or I am 
lost for ever." 

philip cover up hi face, and remain for some time in prayer. He 
then bent over hi amine, and impress a kiss upon her burn lips. 
they were burning, but still there wa moistur upon them, and philip 
perceiv that there wa also moistur on her forehead. He felt her 
hand, and the palm of it wa moist; and care cover her with 
the bedclothes, he watch her with anxieti and hope. 

In a quarter of an hour he had the delight of perceiv that amin 
wa in a profus perspiration; gradual her breath becam less 
heavy, and instead of the passiv state in which she had remained, she 
moved, and becam restless. philip watched, and replac the cloth 
as she threw them off, until she at last appear to have fallen into 
a profound and sweet sleep. shortli after, father seysen and the 
physician made their appearance. philip stated, in few words, what 
had occurred. the doctor went to the bedside, and in half a minut 
returned. 

"your wife is spare to you, mynheer, but it is not advis that she 
should see you so unexpectedly; the shock may be too great in her 
weak state; she must be allow to sleep as long as possible; on her 
awak she will have return to reason. you must leav her then to 
father seysen." 

"may I not remain in the room until she wakes? I will then hasten away 
unobserved." 

"that will be useless; the diseas is contagious, and you have been 
here too long already. remain below; you must chang your clothes, and 
see that they prepar a bed for her in anoth room, to which she must 
be transport as soon as you think she can bear it; and then 
let these window be thrown open, that the room may be properli 
ventilated. It will not do to have a wife just rescu from the 
jaw of death run the risk of fall a sacrific to the attent 
necessari to a sick husband." 

philip perceiv the prudenc of thi advice, and quit the room 
with the medic man, he went and chang hi clothes, and then join 
father mathias, whom he found in the parlour below. 

"you were right, father," said philip, throw himself on the sofa. 

"I am old and suspicious, you are young and buoyant, philip; but I 
trust all may yet be well." 

"I trust so too," repli philip. He then remain silent and absorb 
in thought, for now that the immin danger wa over, he wa 
reflect upon what father seysen had commun to him rel 
to amine' have reveal the secret whilst in a state of mental 
aberration. the priest perceiv that hi mind wa occupied, did not 
interrupt him. An hour had thu passed, when father seysen enter the 
room. 

"return thank to heaven, my son. amin ha awakened, and is perfectli 
sensibl and collected. there is now littl doubt of her recovery. she 
ha taken the restor order by the doctor, though she wa so 
anxiou to repos onc more, that she could hardli be persuad to 
swallow it. she is now again fast asleep, and watch by one of the 
maidens, and in all probabl will not move for mani hours; but 
everi moment of such sleep is precious, and she must not be disturbed. 
I will now see to some refreshment, which must be need to us all. 
philip, you have not introduc me to your companion, who, I perceive, 
is of my own calling." 

"forgiv me, sir," repli philip; "you will have great pleasur in 
make acquaint with father mathias, who ha promis to resid 
with me, I trust, for some time. I will leav you together, and see to 
the breakfast be prepared, for the delay of which I trust father 
mathia will accept my apology." 

philip then left the room, and went into the kitchen. have order 
what wa requisite, to be taken into the parlour, he put on hi hat 
and walk out of the house. He could not eat; hi mind wa in a state 
of confusion; the event of the morn had been too harass and 
exciting, and he felt as if the fresh air wa necessari to hi 
existence. 

As he proceeded, careless in which direction, he met mani with whom he 
had been acquainted, and from whom he had receiv condol at hi 
suppos bereavement, and congratul when they learnt from him 
that the danger wa over; and from them he also learnt how fatal had 
been the pestilence. 

not one-third of the inhabit of terneus and the surround 
countri remain alive, and those who had recov were in a state 
of exhaust which prevent them from return to their accustom 
occupations. they had combat disease, but remain the prey of 
miseri and want; and philip mental vow that he would appropri 
all hi save to the relief of those around him. It wa not until 
more than two hour had pass away that philip return to the 
cottage. 

On hi arriv he found that amin still slumbered, and the two 
priest were in convers below. 

"mi son," said father seysen, "let us now have a littl explanation. 
I have had a long confer with thi good father, who hath much 
interest me with hi account of the extens of our holi religion 
among the pagans. He hath commun to me much to rejoic at and 
much to griev for; but, among other question put to him, I have (in 
consequ of what I have learnt dure the mental alien of your 
wife) interrog him upon the point of a supernatur appear of 
a vessel in the eastern seas. you observe, philip, that your secret is 
known to me, or I could not have put that question. To my surprise, he 
hath state a visit of the kind to which he wa eye-witness, 
and which cannot reason be account for, except by supernatur 
interposition. A strang and certainli most aw visitation! philip, 
would it not be better (instead of leav me in a maze of doubt) that 
you now confid to us both all the fact connect with thi strang 
history, so that we may ponder on them, and give you the benefit of 
the advic of those who are older than yourself, and who, by their 
call may be abl to decid more correctli whether thi supernatur 
power ha been exercis by a good or evil intelligence?" 

"the holi father speak well, philip vanderdecken," observ mathias. 

"if it be the work of the almighty, to whom should you confid and by 
whom should you be guided, but by those who do hi servic on thi 
earth? If of the evil one, to whom but to those whose duti and wish it 
is to counteract hi bane influence? and reflect, philip, that thi 
secret may sit heavili on the mind of your cherish wife, and may bow 
her to the grave, as it did your (I trust) saint mother. with you, 
and support by your presence, she may bear it well; but, recollect 
how mani are the lone day and night that she must pass dure your 
absence, and how much she must requir the consol and help of 
others. A secret like thi must be as a gnaw worm, and, strong as 
she may be in courage, must shorten her existence, but for the support 
and the balm she may receiv from the minist of our faith. It wa 
cruel and selfish of you, philip, to leav her, a lone woman, to bear 
up against your absence, and at the same time oppress with so fatal 
a knowledge." 

"you have convinc me, holi father," repli philip. "I feel that 
I should, befor this, have made you acquaint with thi strang 
history. I will now state the whole of the circumst which have 
occurred, but with littl hope your advic can help me, in a case so 
difficult, and in a duti so peremptory, yet so perplexing." 

philip then enter into a minut detail of all that had pass from 
the few day previou to hi mother' death, until the present time, 
and when he had concluded, he observed-- 

"you see, father, that I have bound myself by a solemn vow--that that 
vow ha been record and accepted; and it appear to me that I have 
noth now to do but to follow my peculiar destiny." 

"mi son, you have told us strang and startl things--th not of 
thi world--if you are not deceived. leav us now. father mathia and 
I will consult upon thi seriou matter, and when we are agreed, you 
shall know our decision." 

philip went upstair to see amine; she wa still in a deep sleep: he 
dismiss the servant, and watch by the bedside. for nearli two 
hour did he remain there, when he wa summon down to meet the two 
priests. 

"we have had a long conversation, my son," said father seysen, "upon 
thi strange, and perhap supernatur occurrence. I say _perhaps_, 
for I would have reject the frenzi commun of your mother, 
as the imagin of a heat brain; and for the same reason I 
should have been equal inclin to suppos that the high state 
of excit that you were in at the time of her death may have 
disord your intellect; but, as father mathia posit asserts, 
that a strange, if not supernatural, appear of a vessel did take 
place, on hi passag home, and which appear talli with and 
corrobor the legend, if so I may call it, to which you have 
given evidence; I say that it is not imposs but that it is 
supernatural." 

"recollect that the same appear of the phantom ship ha been 
permit to me and to mani others," repli philip. 

"yes," repli father seysen; "but who is there aliv of those who saw 
it but yourself? but that is of littl importance. We will admit 
that the whole affair is not the work of man, but of a superior 
intelligence." 

"superior, indeed!" repli philip. "it is the work of heaven!" 

"that is a point not so easili admitted; there is anoth power as 
well as that which is divine--that of the devil!--th arch-enemi of 
mankind! but as that power, inferior to the power of god, cannot act 
without hi permission, we may indirectli admit that it is the will of 
heaven that such sign and portent should be allow to be given on 
certain occasions." 

"then our opinion are the same, good father." 

"nay, not exactly, my son. elymas, the sorcerer, wa permit to 
practis hi arts--gain from the devil--that it might be proved, by 
hi overthrow and blindness, how inferior wa hi master to the divin 
ruler; but it doe not therefor follow that sorceri gener wa 
permitted. In thi instanc it may be true that the evil one ha been 
permit to exercis hi power over the captain and crew of that 
ship, and, as a warn against such heavi offences, the supernatur 
appear of the vessel may be permitted. So far we are justifi 
in believing. but the great question are, first, whether it be your 
father who is thu doomed? and, secondly, how far you are necessit 
to follow up thi mad pursuit, which, it appear to me--although it 
may end in your destruction--cannot possibl be the mean of rescu 
your father from hi state of unhallow abeyance? Do you understand 
me, philip?" 

"I certainli understand what you would say, father; but--" 

"answer me not yet. It is the opinion of thi holi father as well 
as of myself, that, allow the fact to be as you suppose, the 
revel made to you are not from on high, but the suggest of 
the devil, to lead you into danger and ultim to death; for if it 
were your task, as you suppose, whi did not the vessel appear on thi 
last voyage, and how can you (allow that you met her fifti times) 
have commun with that, or with those which are but phantom and 
shadows, thing not of thi world? now what we propos is, that you 
should spend a proport of the money left by your father, in mass 
for the repos of hi soul, which your mother, in other circumstances, 
would certainli have done; and that have so done, you should remain 
quietli on shore until some new sign should be given to you which may 
warrant our suppos that you are realli chosen for thi strang 
pursuit?" 

"but my oath, father--mi record vow?" 

"from that, my son, the holi church hath power to absolv you; and 
that absolut you shall receive. you have put yourself into our 
hands, and by our decis you must be guided. If there be wrong, it 
is we, and not you, who are responsible; but, at present, let us say 
no more. I will now go up, and so soon as your wife awakens, prepar 
her for your meeting." 

when father seysen had quit the room, father mathia debat 
the matter with philip. A long discuss ensued, in which similar 
argument were made use of by the priest; and philip, although not 
convinced, was, at least, doubt and perplexed. He left the cottage. 

"A new sign--a corrobor sign," thought philip; "sure there have 
been sign and wonder enough. still it may be true that mass for 
my father' soul may reliev him from hi state of torture. At all 
events, if they decid for me, I am not to blame. well then, let us 
wait for a new sign of the divin will--if so it must be;" and philip 
walk on, occasion think on the argument of father seysen, 
and often think of amine. 

It wa now evening, and the sun wa fast descending. philip wander 
on, until at last he arriv at the veri spot where he had knelt down 
and pronounc hi solemn vow. He recognis it; he look at the 
distant hills. the sun wa just at the same height; the whole scene, 
the place, and the time were befor him. again philip knelt down, took 
the relic from hi bosom and kiss it. He watch the sun; he bow 
himself to the earth. He wait for a sign; but the sun sank down and 
the veil of night spread over the landscape. there wa no sign; and 
philip rose and walk home toward the cottage, more inclin than 
befor to follow the suggest of father seysen. 

On hi return, philip went softli upstair and enter the room of 
amine, whom he found awak and in convers with the priests. the 
curtain wa closed, and he wa not perceived. with a beat heart he 
remain near the wall at the head of the bed. 

"reason to believ that my husband ha arrived!" said amine, in a 
faint voice. "oh tell me, whi so?" 

"hi ship is arrived, we know; and one who had seen her said that all 
were well." 

"and whi is he not here, then? who should bring the news of hi return 
but himself? father seysen, either he ha not arriv or he is here--i 
know he must be, if he is safe and well. I know my philip too well. 
say! is he not here? fear not, if you say yes; but if you say no, you 
kill me!" 

"he is here, amine," repli father seysen--"her and well." 

"O god! I thank you; but where is he? If he is here, he must be in 
thi room, or els you deceiv me. oh, thi suspens is death!" 

"I am here," cri philip, open the curtains. 

amin rose with a shriek, held out her arms, and then fell senseless 
back. In a few seconds, however, she wa restored, and prove the 
truth of the good father' assertion, "that joy doe not kill." 

We must now pass over the few day dure which philip watch the 
couch of hi amine, who rapidli regain her strength. As soon as she 
wa well enough to enter upon the subject, philip narrat all that 
had pass sinc hi departure; the confess which he had made to 
father seysen, and the result. amine, too glad that philip should 
remain with her, ad her persuas to those of the priests, and, 
for some littl time, philip talk no more of go to sea. 




chapter xiv 


six week had flown away, and amine, restor to health, wander over 
the country, hang on the arm of her ador philip, or nestl by 
hi side in their comfort home. father mathia still remain 
their guest; the mass for the repos of the soul of vanderdecken had 
been paid for, and more money had been confid to the care of father 
seysen to reliev the suffer of the afflict poor. It may be 
easili suppos that one of the chief topic of convers between 
philip and amin wa the decis of the two priest rel to the 
conduct of philip. He had been absolv from hi oath, but, at the 
same time that he submit to hi cleric advisers, he wa by no 
mean satisfied. hi love for amine, her wish for hi remain 
at home, certainli ad weight to the fiat of father seysen; but, 
although he in consequ obey it more willingly, hi doubt of the 
proprieti of hi conduct remain the same. the argument of amine, 
who, now that she wa support by the opinion of the priests, had 
becom oppos to philip' departure; even her caresses, with which 
those argument were mingled, were effect but for the moment. No 
sooner wa philip left to himself, no sooner wa the question, for 
a time, dismissed, than he felt an inward accus that he wa 
neglect a sacr duty. amin perceiv how often the cloud wa 
upon hi brow; she knew too well the cause, and constantli did she 
recomm her argument and caresses, until philip forgot that there 
wa aught but amin in the world. 

one morning, as they were seat upon a green bank pick the flower 
that blossom round them, and toss them away in pure listlessness, 
amin took the opportun that she had often wait for, to enter 
upon a subject hitherto unmentioned. 

"philip," said she, "do you believ in dreams? think you that we may 
have supernatur commun by such means?" 

"of cours we may," repli philip; "we have proof abund of it in 
the holi writings." 

"why, then, do you not satisfi your scrupl by a dream?" 

"mi dearest amine, dream come unbidden; we cannot command or prevent 
them--" 

"we can command them, philip; say that you would dream upon the 
subject nearest to your heart, and you _shall_!" 

"I shall?" 

"yes! I have that power, philip, although I have not spoken of it. 
I had it from my mother, with much more that of late I have never 
thought of. you know, philip, I never say that which is not. I tell 
you, that, if you choose, you shall dream upon it." 

"and to what good, amine? If you have power to make me dream, that 
power must be from somewhere." 

"it is, of course: there are agenc you littl think of, which, in 
my country, are still call into use. I have a charm, philip, which 
never fails." 

"A charm, amine! do you, then, deal in sorcery? for such power cannot 
be from heaven." 

"I cannot tell. I onli know the power is given." 

"it must be from the devil, amine." 

"and whi so, philip? may I not use the argument of your own priests, 
who say, 'that the power of the devil is onli permit to be use 
by divin intelligence, and that it cannot be use without that 
permission?' allow it then to be sorcery, or what you please, unless 
by heaven permitted, it would fail. but I cannot see whi we should 
suppos that it is from an evil source. We ask for a warn in a 
dream to guid our conduct in doubt circumstances. sure the evil 
one would rather lead us wrong than right!" 

"amine, we may be warn in a dream, as the patriarch were of old; 
but to use mystic or unholi charm to procur a vision, is make a 
compact with the devil." 

"which compact the devil could not fulfil if not permit by a higher 
power. philip, your reason is false. We are told that, by certain 
means, duli observed, we may procur the dream we wish. our 
observ of these mean is certainli the least we can attend to, to 
prove our sincerity. forgiv me, philip, but are not observ as 
necessari in your religion--which I have embraced? are we not told 
that the omiss of the mere ceremoni of water to the infant will 
turn all futur chanc of happi to miseri eternal?" 

philip answer not for some time. "I am afraid, amine," said he, at 
last, in a low tone; "i--" 

"I fear nothing, philip, when my intent are good," repli amine. 
"I follow certain mean to obtain an end. what is that end? It is 
to find out (if possible) what may be the will of heaven in thi 
perplex case. If it should be through the agenc of the devil--what 
then? He becom my servant, and not my master; he is permit by 
heaven to act against himself;" and amine' eye dart fire, as she 
thu boldli express herself. 

"did your mother often exercis her art?" inquir philip, after a 
pause. 

"not to my knowledge; but it wa said that she wa most expert. she 
die young (a you know), or I should have known much more. think 
you, philip, that thi world is sole peopl by such dross as 
we are?--th of clay--perish and corruptible? lord over 
beasts--and ourselv but littl better. have you not, from your 
own sacr writings, repeat acknowledg and proof of higher 
intellig mix up with mankind, and act here below? whi 
should what wa then, not be now! and what more harm is there to appli 
for their aid now, than a few thousand year ago? whi should you 
suppos that they were permit on the earth then--and not permit 
now? what ha becom of them? have they perished? have they been 
order back--to where--to heaven? If to heaven--th world and mankind 
have been left to the merci of the devil and hi agents. Do you 
suppos that we, poor mortals, have been thu abandoned? I tell you 
plainly, I think not. We no longer have the commun with 
those intellig that we onc had, because, as we becom more 
enlightened, we becom more proud, and seek them not; but that they 
still exist--a host of good against a host of evil, invis oppos 
each other--i my conviction. but, tell me, philip, do you in your 
conscienc believ that all that ha been reveal to you is a mere 
dream of the imagination?" 

"I do not believ so, amine: you know well I wish I could." 

"then is my reason proved: for if such commun can be made 
to you, whi cannot others? you cannot tell by what agency; your 
priest say it is that of the evil one; you think it is from on high. 
By the same rule, who is to decid from whenc the dream shall come?" 

"'ti true, amine; but are you certain of your power?" 

"certain of this: that if it pleas superior intellig to 
commun with you, _that_ commun may be reli upon. either 
you will not dream, but pass away the hour in deep sleep, or what you 
dream will be connect with the question at issue." 

"then, amine, I have made up my mind--i will dream: for at present 
my mind is rack by contend and perplex doubts. I would know 
whether I am right or wrong. thi night your art shall be employed." 

"not thi night, nor yet to-morrow night, philip. think you one moment 
that, in propos this, I serv you against my own wishes? I feel as 
if the dream will decid against me, and that you will be command 
to return to your duty; for I tell you honestly, I think not with the 
priests; but I am your wife, philip, and it is my duti that you should 
not be deceived. have the means, as I suppose, to decid your 
conduct, I offer them. promis me that, if I do this, you will grant 
me a favour which I shall ask as my reward." 

"it is promised, amine, without it be known," repli philip, 
rise from the turf; "and now let us go home." 

We observ that philip, previou to hi sail in the _batavia_, had 
invest a larg proport of hi fund in dutch east india stock: 
the interest of the money wa more than suffici for the want of 
amine, and, on hi return, he found that the fund left in her charg 
had accumulated. after pay to father seysen the sum for the 
masses, and for the relief of the poor, there wa a consider 
residue, and philip had employ thi in the purchas of more share 
in the india stock. 

the subject of their convers wa not renewed. philip wa rather 
avers to amin practis those mystic arts, which, if known to the 
priests, would have obtain for her, in all probability, the anathema 
of the church. He could not but admir the bold and power of 
amine' reasonings, but still he wa avers to reduc them into 
practice. the third day had pass away, and no more had been said 
upon the subject. 

philip retir to bed, and wa soon fast asleep; but amin slept not. 
So soon as she wa convinc that philip would not be awakened, she 
slip from the bed and dress herself. she left the room, and in a 
quarter of an hour returned, bring in her hand a small brazier of 
light charcoal, and two small piec of parchment, roll up and 
fix by a knot to the centr of a narrow fillet. they exactli 
resembl the philacteri that were onc worn by the jewish nation, 
and were similarli applied. one of them she gentli bound upon the 
forehead of her husband, and the other upon hi left arm. she threw 
perfum into the brazier, and as the form of her husband wa becom 
indistinct from the smoke which fill the room, she mutter a few 
sentences, wave over him a small sprig of some shrub which she held 
in her white hand, and then close the curtains, and remov the 
brazier she sat down by the side of the bed. 

"if there be harm," thought amine, "at least the deed is not his--'ti 
mine; they cannot say that he ha practis art that are unlaw 
and forbidden by hi priests. On my head be it!" and there wa a 
contemptu curl on amine' beauti arch lip, which did not say 
much for her devot to her new creed. 

morn dawned, and philip still slumbered. "'ti enough," said amine, 
who had been watch the rise of the sun, as she beheld hi upper 
limb appear abov the horizon. again she wave her arm over philip, 
hold the sprig in her hand; and cried, "philip, awake!" 

philip start up, open hi eyes, and shut them again to avoid the 
glare of the broad daylight, rest upon hi elbow, and appear to be 
collect hi thoughts. 

"where am i?" exclaim he. "in my own bed? yes!" He pass hi hand 
across hi forehead, and felt the scroll. "what is this?" continu 
he, pull it off, and examin it. "and amine, where is she? good 
heavens, what a dream! another?" cri he, perceiv the scroll tie 
to hi arm. "I see it now. amine, thi is your doing." and philip 
threw himself down, and buri hi face in the pillow. 

amine, in the meantime, had slip into bed, and had taken her place 
by philip' side. "sleep, philip, dear! sleep!" said she, put her 
arm round him; "we will talk when we wake again." 

"are you there, amine?" repli philip, confused. "I thought I wa 
alone; I have dreamed--" and philip again wa fast asleep befor 
he could complet hi sentence. amine, too, tire with watching, 
slumber and wa happy. 

father mathia had to wait a long while for hi breakfast that 
morning; it wa not till two hour later than usual that philip and 
amin made their appearance. 

"welcome, my children," said he; "you are late." 

"we are, father," repli amine; "for philip slept, and I watch till 
break of day." 

"he hath not been ill, I trust," repli the priest. 

"no, not ill; but I could not sleep," repli amine. 

"then didst thou do well to pass the night--a I doubt not thou hast 
done, my child--in holi watchings." 

philip shuddered; he knew that the watching, had it caus been known, 
would have been, in the priest' opinion, anyth but holy. amin 
quickli replied-- 

"I have, indeed, commun with higher powers, as far as my poor 
intellect hath been able." 

"the bless of our holi church upon thee, my child!" said the old 
man, put hi hand upon her head; "and on thee too, philip." 

philip, confused, sat down to the table; amin wa collect as ever. 
she spoke little, it is true, and appear to commun with her own 
thoughts. 

As soon as the repast wa finished, the old priest took up hi 
breviary, and amin beckon to philip, they went out together. they 
walk in silenc until they arriv at the green spot where amin had 
first propos to him that she should use her mystic power. she sat 
down, and philip, fulli awar of her purpose, took hi seat by her in 
silence. 

"philip," said amine, take hi hand, and look earnestli in hi 
face, "last night you dreamed." 

"I did, indeed, amine," repli philip, gravely. 

"tell me your dream; for it will be for me to expound it." 

"I fear it need but littl exposition, amine. all I would know is, 
from what intellig the dream ha been received?" 

"tell me your dream," repli amine, calmly. 

"I thought," repli philip, mournfully, "that I wa sail as 
captain of a vessel round the cape: the sea wa calm and the breez 
light; I wa abaft; the sun went down, and the star were more than 
usual brilliant; the weather wa warm, and I lay down on my cloak, 
with my face to the heavens, watch the gem twinkl in the sky 
and the occasion fall meteors. I thought that I fell asleep, 
and awok with a sensat as if sink down. I look around me; the 
masts, the rigging, the hull of the vessel--_all_ had disappeared, and 
I wa float by myself upon a large, beauti shape shell on the 
wide wast of waters. I wa alarmed, and afraid to move, lest I should 
overturn my frail bark and perish. At last, I perceiv the fore-part 
of the shell press down, as if a weight were hang to it; and 
soon afterward a small white hand, which grasp it. I remain 
motionless, and would have call out that my littl bark would sink, 
but I could not. gradual a figur rais itself from the waters, and 
lean with both arm over the fore-part of the shell, where I first 
had seen but the hand. It wa a female, in form beauti to excess; 
the skin wa white as driven snow; her long loos hair cover her, 
and the end float in the water; her arm were round and like 
ivory: she said, in a soft sweet voice-- 

"'philip vanderdecken, what do you fear? have you not a charm life?' 

"'i know not,' repli I, 'whether my life be charm or not; but thi 
I know, that it is in danger.' 

"'in danger!' repli she; 'it might have been in danger when you were 
trust to the frail work of men, which the wave love to rend to 
fragments--your _good_ ships, as you call them, which but float about 
upon sufferance; but where can be the danger when in a mermaid' 
shell, which the mountain wave respects, and upon which the crest 
surg dare not throw it spray? philip vanderdecken, you have come to 
seek your father?' 

"'i have,' repli I; 'i it not the will of heaven?' 

"'it is your destiny--and destini rule all abov and below. shall we 
seek him together? thi shell is mine; you know not how to navig 
it; shall I assist you?' 

"'will it bear us both?' 

"'you will see," repli she, laughing, as she sank down from the 
fore-part of the shell, and immedi afterward appear at the 
side, which wa not more than three inch abov the water. To my 
alarm, she rais herself up, and sat upon the edge, but her weight 
appear to have no effect. As soon as she wa seat in thi way--for 
her feet still remain in the water--th shell move rapidli along, 
and each moment increas it speed, with no other propel power 
than that of her volition. 

"'do you fear now, philip vanderdecken?' 

"'no!' repli I. 

"she pass her hand across her forehead, threw asid the tress 
which had partli conceal her face, and said-- 

"'then look at me.' 

"I looked, amine, and I beheld you!" 

"me!" observ amine, with a smile upon her lips. 

"yes, amine, it wa you. I call you by your name, and threw my arm 
round you. I felt that I could remain with you and sail about the 
world for ever." 

"proceed, philip," said amine, calmly. 

"I thought we ran thousand and thousand of miles--w pass by 
beauti islands, set like gem on the ocean bed; at one time 
bound against the rippl current, at other close to the 
shore--skim on the murmur wave which rippl on the sand, 
whilst the cocoa-tre on the beach wave to the cool breeze." 

"'it is not in smooth sea that your father must be sought,' said she, 
'we must tri elsewhere.' 

"bi degre the wave rose, until at last they were rage in their 
fury, and the shell wa toss by the tumultu waters; but still not 
a drop entered, and we sail in secur over billow which would 
have swallow up the proudest vessel. 

"'do you fear now, philip?' said you to me. 

"'no,' repli I; 'with you, amine, I fear nothing.' 

"'we are now off the cape again,' said she; 'and here you may find 
your father. let us look well round us, for if we meet a ship it must 
be _his_. none but the phantom ship could swim in a gale like this.' 

"away we flew over the mountain waves--skim from crest to crest 
between them, our littl bark sometim wholli out of the water; 
now east, now west, north, south, in everi quarter of the compass, 
chang our cours each minute. We pass over hundr of miles: at 
last we saw a vessel, toss by the furiou gale. 

"'there,' cri she, point with her finger, 'there is your father' 
vessel, philip.' 

"rapidli did we approach--they saw us from on board, and brought 
the vessel to the wind. We were alongside--th gangway wa clear 
away--for though no boat could have boarded, our shell wa safe. I 
look up. I saw my father, amine! yes, saw him, and heard him as he 
gave hi orders. I pull the relic from my bosom, and held it out 
to him. He smiled, as he stood on the gunnel, hold on by the main 
shrouds. I wa just rise to mount on board, for they had hand to 
me the man-ropes, when there wa a loud yell, and a man jump from 
the gangway into the shell. you shrieked, slip from the side, and 
disappear under the wave, and in a moment the shell, guid by the 
man who had taken your place, flew away from the vessel with the 
rapid of thought. I felt a deadli chill pervad my frame. I turn 
round to look at my new companion--it wa the pilot schriften!--th 
one-ey wretch who wa drown when we were wreck in tabl bay! 

"'no! no! not yet!' cri he. 

"in an agoni of despair and rage I hurl him off hi seat on the 
shell, and he float on the wild waters. 

"'philip vanderdecken,' said he, as he swam, 'we shall meet again!' 

"I turn away my head in disgust, when a wave fill my bark, and 
down it sank. I wa struggl under the water, sink still deeper 
and deeper, but without pain, when I awoke. 

"now, amine," said philip, after a pause, "what think you of my 
dream?" 

"doe it not point out that I am your friend, philip, and that the 
pilot schriften is your enemy?" 

"I grant it; but he is dead." 

"i that so certain?" 

"he hardli could have escap without my knowledge." 

"that is true, but the dream would impli otherwise. philip, it is 
my opinion that the onli way in which thi dream is to be expound 
is--that you remain on shore for the present. the advic is that of 
the priests. In either case you requir some further intimation. In 
your dream, _i_ wa your safe guide--b guid now by me again." 

"be it so, amine. If your strang art be in opposit to our holi 
faith, you expound the dream in conform with the advic of it 
ministers." 

"I do. and now, philip, let us dismiss the subject from our thoughts. 
should the time come, your amin will not persuad you from your duty; 
but recollect, you have promis to grant _one_ favour when I ask it." 

"I have: say, then, amine, what may be your wish?" 

"o! noth at present. I have no wish on earth but what is gratified. 
have I not you, dear philip?" repli amine, fondli throw herself 
on her husband' shoulder. 




chapter XV 

It wa about three month after thi convers that amin and 
philip were again seat upon the mossi bank which we have mentioned, 
and which had becom their favourit resort. father mathia had 
contract a great intimaci with father seysen, and the two priest 
were almost as insepar as were philip and amine. have determin 
to wait a summon previou to philip' again enter upon hi strang 
and fear task; and, happi in the possess of each other, the 
subject wa seldom revived. philip, who had, on hi return, express 
hi wish to the director of the compani for immedi employment, 
and, if possible, to have the command of a vessel, had, sinc that 
period, taken no further steps, nor had ani commun with 
amsterdam. 

"I am fond of thi bank, philip," said amine; "I appear to have form 
an intimaci with it. It wa here, if you recollect, that we debat 
the subject of the law of induc dreams; and it wa here, 
dear philip, that you told me your dream, and that I expound it." 

"you did so, amine; but if you ask the opinion of father seysen, you 
will find that he would give rather a strong decis against you--h 
would call it heret and damnable." 

"let him, if he pleases. I have no object to tell him." 

"I pray not, amine; let the secret remain with ourselv only." 

"think you father mathia would blame me?" 

"I certainli do." 

"well, I do not; there is a kind and liber about the old man 
that I admire. I should like to argu the question with him." 

As amin spoke, philip felt someth touch hi shoulder, and a sudden 
chill ran through hi frame. In a moment hi idea revert to the 
probabl cause: he turn round hi head, and, to hi amazement, 
beheld the (suppos to be drowned) mate of the _ter schilling_, the 
one-ey schriften, who stood behind him, with a letter in hi hand. 
the sudden appear of thi malign wretch induc philip to 
exclaim, "merci heaven! is it possible?" 

amine, who had turn her head round at the exclam of philip, 
cover up her face, and burst into tears. It wa not fear that caus 
thi unusu emot on her part, but the convict that her husband 
wa never to be at rest but in the grave. 

"philip vanderdecken," said schriften, "he! he! i'v a letter for 
you--it is from the company." 

philip took the letter, but, previou to open it, he fix hi eye 
upon schriften. "I thought," said he, "that you were drown when the 
ship wa wreck in fals bay. how did you escape?" 

"how did I escape?" repli schriften. "allow me to ask how did you 
escape?" 

"I wa thrown up by the waves," repli philip; "but--" 

"but," interrupt schriften, "he! he! the wave ought _not_ to have 
thrown me up." 

"and whi not, pray? I did not say that." 

"no! but I presum you wish it had been so; but, on the contrary, 
I escap in the same way that you did--i wa thrown up by the 
waves--he! he! but I can't wait here. I have done my bidding." 

"stop," repli philip; answer me one question. "do you sail in the 
same vessel with me thi time?" 

"i'd rather be excused," repli schriften; "I am not look for the 
phantom ship, mynheer vanderdecken;" and, with thi reply, the littl 
man turn round and went away at a rapid pace. 

"i not thi a summons, amine?" said philip, after a pause, still 
hold the letter in hi hand, with the seal unbroken. 

"I will not deni it, dearest philip. It is most sure so; the hate 
messeng appear to have risen from the grave that he might deliv 
it. forgiv me, philip; but I wa taken by surprise. I will not again 
annoy you with a woman' weakness." 

"mi poor amine," repli philip, mournfully. "alas! whi did I not 
perform my pilgrimag alone? It wa selfish of me to link you with 
so much wretchedness, and join you with me in bear the fardel of 
never-end anxieti and suspense." 

"and who should bear it with you, my dearest philip, if it is not the 
wife of your bosom? you littl know my heart if you think I shrink 
from the duty. no, philip, it is a pleasure, even in it most acut 
pangs; for I consid that I am, by partak with, reliev you of a 
portion of your sorrow, and I feel proud that I am the wife of one who 
ha been select to be so peculiarli tried. but, dearest, no more of 
this. you must read the letter." 

philip did not answer. He broke the seal, and found that the letter 
intim to him that he wa appoint as first mate to the _vrow 
katerina_, a vessel which sail with the next fleet; and request 
he would join as quickli as possible, as she would soon be readi to 
receiv her cargo. the letter which wa from the secretary, further 
inform him that, after thi voyage, he might be certain of have 
the command of a vessel as captain, upon condit which would be 
explain when he call upon the board. 

"I thought, philip, that you had request the command of a vessel for 
thi voyage," observ amine, mournfully. 

"I did," repli philip; "but not have follow up my application, 
it appear not to have been attend to. It ha been my own fault." 

"and now it is too late?" 

"yes, dearest, most assuredli so: but it matter not; I would as 
willingly, perhap rather, sail thi voyag as first mate." 

"philip, I may as well speak now. that I am disappointed, I must 
confess; I fulli expect that you would have had the command of a 
vessel, and you may rememb that I exact a promis from you, on 
thi veri bank upon which we now sit, at the time that you told me 
your dream. that promis I shall still exact, and I now tell you what 
I had intend to ask. It was, my dear philip, permiss to sail 
with you. with you, I care for nothing. I can be happi under everi 
privat or danger; but to be left alon for so long, brood over 
my pain thoughts, devour by suspense, impatient, restless, and 
incap of appli to ani one thing--that, dear philip, is the 
height of misery, and that is what I feel when you are absent. 
recollect, I have your promise, philip. As captain, you have the mean 
of receiv your wife on board. I am bitterli disappoint in be 
left thi time; do, therefore, to a certain degree, consol me by 
promis that I shall sail with you next voyage, if heaven permit 
your return." 

"I promis it, amine, sinc you are so earnest. I can refus you 
nothing; but I have a forebod that your and my happi will be 
wreck for ever. I am not a visionary, but it doe appear to me that, 
strang mix up as I am, at onc with thi world and the next, some 
littl portion of futur is open to me. I have given my promise, 
amine, but from it I would fain be released." 

"and if ill _do_ come, philip, it is our destiny. who can avert fate?" 

"amine, we are free agents, and to a certain extent are permit to 
direct our own destinies." 

"ay, so would father seysen fain have made me believe; but what he 
said in support of hi assert wa to me incomprehensible. and yet 
he said that it wa a part of the cathol faith. It may be so--i am 
unabl to understand mani other points. I wish your faith were made 
more simple. As yet the good man--for good he realli is--ha onli led 
me into doubt." 

"pass through doubt, you will arriv at conviction, amine." 

"perhap so," repli amine; "but it appear to me that I am as yet 
but on the outset of my journey. but come, philip, let us return. you 
must to amsterdam, and I will go with you. after your labour of the 
day, at least until you sail, your amine' smile must still enliven 
you. Is it not so?" 

"yes, dearest, I would have propos it. I wonder much how schriften 
could come here. I did not see hi bodi it is certain, but hi escap 
is to me miraculous. whi did he not appear when saved? where could he 
have been? what think you, amine?" 

"what I have long thought, philip. He is a ghoul with an evil eye, 
permit for some caus to walk the earth in human form; and, is, 
certainly, in some way, connect with your strang destiny. If it 
requir anyth to convinc me of the truth of all that ha passed, 
it is hi appearance--th wretch afrit! oh, that I had my mother' 
powers!--but I forget; it displeas you, philip, that I ever talk of 
such things, and I am silent." 

philip repli not; and absorb in their own medit they walk 
back in silenc to the cottage. although philip had made up hi own 
mind, he immedi sent the portugues priest to summon father 
seysen, that he might commun with them and take their opinion as 
to the summon he had received. have enter into a fresh detail of 
the suppos death of schriften, and hi reappear as a messenger, 
he then left the two priest to consult together, and went upstair to 
amine. It wa more than two hour befor philip wa call down, and 
father seysen appear to be in a state of great perplexity. 

"mi son," said he, "we are much perplexed. We had hope that our idea 
upon thi strang commun were correct, and that, allow all 
that you have obtain from your mother and have seen yourself to have 
been no deception, still that it wa the work of the evil one; and, if 
so, our prayer and mass would have destroy thi power. We advis 
you to wait anoth summons, and you have receiv it. the letter 
itself is of cours nothing, but the reappear of the bearer of the 
letter is the question to be considered. tell me, philip, what is your 
opinion on thi point? It is possibl he might have been saved--whi 
not as well as yourself?" 

"I acknowledg the possibility, father," repli philip; "he may have 
been cast on shore and have wander in anoth direction. It is 
possible, although anyth but probable; but sinc you ask me 
my opinion, I must say candidli that I consid he is no earthli 
messenger--nay, I am sure of it. that he is mysteri connect 
with my destini is certain. but who he is, and what he is, of cours I 
cannot tell." 

"then, my son, we have come to the determination, in thi instance, 
not to advise. you must act now upon your own respons and your 
own judgment. In what way soever you may decid we shall not blame 
you. our prayer shall be that heaven may still have you in it holi 
keeping." 

"mi decision, holi father, is to obey the summons." 

"be it so, my son; someth may occur which may assist to work 
out the mystery,--a mysteri which I acknowledg to be beyond my 
comprehension, and of too pain a natur for me to dwell upon." 

philip said no more, for he perceiv that the priest wa not at all 
inclin to converse. father mathia took thi opportun of thank 
philip for hi hospit and kindness, and state hi intent of 
return to lisbon by the first opportun that might offer. 

In a few day amin and philip took leav of the priests, and quit 
for amsterdam--fath seysen take charg of the cottag until 
amine' return. On hi arrival, philip call upon the director of 
the company, who promis him a ship on hi return from the voyag he 
wa about to enter upon, make a condit that he should becom part 
owner of the vessel. To thi philip consented, and then went down to 
visit the _vrow katerina_, the ship to which he had been appoint as 
first mate. she wa still unrigged, and the fleet wa not expect 
to sail for two months. onli part of the crew were on board, and the 
captain, who live at dort, had not yet arrived. 

So far as philip could judge, the _vrow katerina_ wa a veri inferior 
vessel; she wa larger than mani of the others, but old, and badli 
constructed; nevertheless, as she had been sever voyag to the 
indies, and had return in safety, it wa to be presum that she 
would not have been taken up by the compani if they had not been 
satisfi as to her seaworthiness. have given a few direct to 
the men who were on board, philip return to the hostelri where he 
had secur apart for himself and amine. 

the next day, as philip wa superintend the fit of the rigging, 
the captain of the _vrow katerina_ arrived, and, step on board of 
her by the plank which commun with the quay, the first thing 
that he did wa to run to the mainmast and embrac it with both arms, 
although there wa no small portion of tallow on it to smear the cloth 
of hi coat. "oh; my dear vrow, my katerina!" cri he, as if he were 
speak to a female. "how do you do? i'm glad to see you again; you 
have been quit well, I hope? you do not like be laid up in thi 
way. never mind, my dear creature! you shall soon be handsom again." 

the name of thi personag who thu made love to hi vessel, wa 
wilhelm barentz. He wa a young man, appar not thirti year of 
age, of diminut statur and delic proportions. hi face wa 
handsome, but womanish. hi movement were rapid and restless, and 
there wa that appear in hi eye which would have warrant the 
supposit that he wa a littl flighty, even if hi conduct had not 
fulli prove the fact. 

No sooner were the ecstaci of the captain over than philip 
introduc himself to him, and inform him of hi appointment. "oh! 
you are the first mate of the _vrow katerina_. sir, you are a veri 
fortun man. next to be captain of her, first mate is the most 
enviabl situat in the world." 

"certainli not on account of her beauty," observ philip; "she may 
have mani other good qualities." 

"not on account of her beauty! why, sir, I say (a my father ha said 
befor me, and it wa hi vrow befor it wa mine) that she is the 
handsomest vessel in the world. At present you cannot judge; and 
besid be the handsomest vessel, she ha everi good qualiti under 
the sun." 

"I am glad to hear it, sir," repli philip; "it prove that one 
should never judg by appearances. but is she not veri old?" 

"old! not more than twenty-eight years--just in her prime. stop, my 
dear sir, till you see her danc on the waters, and then you will do 
noth all day but discours with me upon her excellence, and I have 
no doubt that we shall have a veri happi time together." 

"provid the subject be not exhausted," repli philip. 

"that it never will be, on my part: and, allow me to observe, Mr 
vanderdecken, that ani offic who find fault with the _vrow 
katerina_ quarrel with me. I am her knight, and I have alreadi fought 
three men in her defence,--i trust, I shall not have to fight a 
fourth." 

philip smiled: he thought that she wa not worth fight for; but 
he act upon the suggestion, and, from that time forward, he never 
ventur to express an opinion against the beauti _vrow katerina_. 

the crew were soon complete, the vessel rigged, her sail bent, 
and she wa anchor in the stream, surround by the other ship 
compos the fleet about to be despatched. the cargo wa then 
receiv on board, and, as soon as her hold wa full, there came, to 
philip' great vexation, an order to receiv on board 150 soldier and 
other passengers, mani of whom were accompani by their wive and 
families. philip work hard, for the captain did noth but prais 
the vessel, and, at last, they had embark everything, and the fleet 
wa readi to sail. 

It wa now time to part with amine, who had remain at the hostelry, 
and to whom philip had dedic everi spare moment that he could 
obtain. the fleet wa expect to sail in two days, and it wa 
decided, that on the morrow they should part. amin wa cool and 
collected. she felt convinc that she should see her husband again, 
and with that feeling, she embrac him as they separ on the 
beach, and he step into the boat in which he wa to be pull on 
board. 

"yes," thought amine, as she watch the form of her husband, as the 
distanc between them increased--"yes, I know that we shall meet 
again. It is not thi voyag which is to be fatal to you or me; but I 
have a dark forebod that the next, in which I shall join you, will 
separ us for ever--in which way, I know not--but it is destined. 
the priest talk of free-will. Is it free-wil which take him away 
from me? would he not rather remain on shore with me? yes. but he is 
not permitted, for he must fulfil hi destiny. free-will! why, if it 
were not destini it were tyranny. I feel, and have felt, as if these 
priest are my enemies; but whi I know not: they are both good men, 
and the creed they teach is good. good-wil and charity, love to all, 
forgiv of injuries, not judg others. all thi is good; and yet 
my heart whisper to me that--but the boat is alongside, and philip 
is climb up the vessel. farewell, farewell, my dearest husband. I 
would I were a man! no, no! 'ti better as it is." 

amin watch till she could no longer perceiv philip, and then 
walk slowli to the hostelry. the next day, when she arose, she found 
that the fleet had sail at daylight, and the channel, which had been 
so crowd with vessels, wa now untenanted. 

"he is gone," mutter amine; "now for mani month of patient, calm 
enduring,--i cannot say of living, for I exist but in hi presence." 




chapter xvi 


We must leav amin to her solitude, and follow the fortun of 
philip. the fleet had sail with a flow sheet, and bore gallantli 
down the zuyder zee; but they had not been under way an hour befor 
the _vrow katerina_ wa left a mile or two astern. mynheer barentz 
found fault with the set and trim of the sails, and with the 
man at the helm, who wa repeatedli changed; in short, with everyth 
but hi dear _vrow katerina_: but all would not do; she still drop 
astern, and prove to be the worst-sail vessel in the fleet. 

"mynheer vanderdecken," said he, at last, "the _vrow_, as my father 
use to say, is not so veri _fast before_ the wind. vessel that are 
good on a wind seldom are: but thi I will say, that, in everi other 
point of sailing, there is no other vessel in the fleet equal to the 
_vrow katerina_." 

"besides," observ philip, who perceiv how anxiou hi captain wa 
on the subject, "we are heavili laden, and have so mani troop on 
deck." 

the fleet clear the sand and were then close-hauled, when the _vrow 
katerina_ prove to sail even more slowli than before. 

"when we are so _very_ close-hauled," observ mynheer barentz, "the 
_vrow_ doe not do so well; but a point free, and then you will see 
how she will show her stern to the whole fleet. she is a fine vessel, 
mynheer vanderdecken, is she not?" 

"A veri fine, roomi vessel," repli philip, which wa all that, in 
conscience, he could say. 

the fleet sail on, sometim on a wind, sometim free, but let the 
point of sail be what it might, the _vrow katerina_ wa invari 
astern, and the fleet had to heave-to at sunset to enabl her to keep 
company; still, the captain continu to declar that the point of 
sail on which they happen to be, wa the onli point in which the 
_vrow katerina_ wa deficient. unfortunately, the vessel had other 
point quit as bad as her sailing; she wa crank, leaky, and did not 
answer the helm well: but mynheer barentz wa not to be convinced. He 
ador hi ship, and, like all men desper in love, he could 
see no fault in hi mistress. but other were not so blind, and the 
admiral, find the voyag so much delay by the bad sail of one 
vessel, determin to leav her to find her way by herself so soon 
as they had pass the cape. He was, however, spare the cruelti of 
desert her, for a heavi gale came on which dispers the whole 
fleet, and on the second day the good ship _vrow katerina_ found 
herself alone, labour heavili in the trough of the sea, leak so 
much as to requir hand constantli at the pumps, and drift befor 
the gale as fast to leeward almost as she usual sailed. for a 
week the gale continued, and each day did her situat becom more 
alarming. crowd with troops, encumb with heavi stores, she 
groan and laboured, while whole sea wash over her, and the men 
could hardli stand at the pumps. philip wa active, and exert 
himself to the utmost, encourag the worn-out men, secur where 
aught had given way, and littl interf with by the captain, who 
wa himself no sailor. 

"well," observ the captain to philip, as they held on by the 
belaying-pins, "you'll acknowledg that she is a fine weatherli vessel 
in a gale--i she not? softly, my beauty, softly," continu he, 
speak to the vessel, as she plung heavili into the waves, and 
everi timber groaned. "softly, my dear, softly! how those poor 
devil in the other ship must be knock about now. heh! mynheer 
vanderdecken, we have the start of them thi time: they must be a 
terribl long way down to leeward. don't you think so?" 

"I realli cannot pretend to say," repli philip, smiling. 

"why, there' not one of them in sight. yes, by heavens, there is! 
look on our lee beam. I see one now. well, she must be a capit 
sailor at all events: look there, a point abaft the beam. merci on me! 
how stiff she must be to carri such a press of canvas!" 

philip had alreadi seen her. It wa a larg ship on a wind, and on the 
same tack as they were. In a gale in which no vessel could carri the 
topsails, the _vrow katerina_ be under close-reef foresail and 
staysails, the ship seen to leeward wa stand under a press of 
sail--top-gallant-sail, royals, flying-jib, and everi stitch of canva 
which could be set in a light breeze. the wave were run mountain 
high, bear each minut the _vrow katerina_ down to the gunwale: and 
the ship seen appear not to be affect by the tumultu waters, 
but sail steadili and smoothli on an even keel. At onc philip knew 
it must be the phantom ship, in which hi father' doom wa be 
fulfilled. 

"veri odd, is it not?" observ mynheer barentz. 

philip felt such an oppress on hi chest that he could not reply. 
As he held on with one hand, he cover up hi eye with the other. 

but the seamen had now seen the vessel, and the legend wa too well 
known. mani of the troop had climb on deck when the report wa 
circulated, and all eye were now fix upon the supernatur vessel; 
when a heavi squall burst over the _vrow katerina_, accompani with 
peal of thunder and heavi rain, render it so thick that noth 
could be seen. In a quarter of an hour it clear away, and, when they 
look to leeward, the stranger wa no longer in sight. 

"merci heaven! she must have been upset, and ha gone down in the 
squall," said mynheer barentz. "I thought as much, carri such a 
press of sail. there never wa a ship that could carri more than the 
_vrow katerina_. It wa mad on the part of the captain of that 
vessel; but I suppos he wish to keep up with us. heh, mynheer 
vanderdecken?" 

philip did not repli to these remarks, which fulli prove the mad 
of hi captain. He felt that hi ship wa doomed, and when he thought 
of the number on board who might be sacrificed, he shuddered. after a 
pause, he said-- 

"mynheer barentz, thi gale is like to continue, and the best ship 
that ever wa built cannot, in my opinion, stand such weather. I 
should advis that we bear up, and run back to tabl bay to refit. 
depend upon it, we shall find the whole fleet there befor us." 

"never fear for the good ship, _vrow katerina_," repli the captain; 
"see what weather she make of it." 

"curs bad," observ one of the seamen, for the seamen had gather 
near to philip to hear what hi advic might be. "if I had known that 
she wa such an old, crazi beast, I never would have trust myself on 
board. mynheer vanderdecken is right; we must back to tabl bay ere 
wors befal us. that ship to leeward ha given us warning--sh is not 
seen for nothing,--ask Mr vanderdecken, captain; he know that well, 
for he _is_ a sailor." 

thi appeal to philip made him start; it was, however, made without 
ani knowledg of philip' interest in the phantom ship. 

"I must say," repli philip, "that, whenev I have fallen in with 
that vessel, mischief ha ever followed." 

"vessel! why, what wa there in that vessel to frighten you? she 
carri too much sail, and she ha gone down." 

"she never goe down," repli one of the seamen. 

"no! no!" exclaim mani voices; "but we shall, if we do not run 
back." 

"pooh! nonsense! mynheer vanderdecken, what say you?" 

"I have alreadi state my opinion," repli philip, who wa anxious, 
if possible, to see the ship onc more in port, "that the best thing 
we can do, is to bear up for tabl bay." 

"and, captain," continu the old seaman who had just spoken, "we are 
all determin that it shall be so, whether you like it or not; so 
up with the helm, my hearty, and mynheer vanderdecken will trim the 
sails." 

"why! what is this?" cri captain barentz. "A mutini on board of the 
_vrow katerina_? impossible! the _vrow katerina_ the best ship, the 
fastest in the whole fleet!" 

"the dullest old rotten tub," cri one of the seamen. 

"what!" cri the captain, "what do I hear? mynheer vanderdecken, 
confin that lie rascal for mutiny." 

"pooh! nonsense! he' mad," repli the old seaman. "never mind him; 
come, mynheer vanderdecken, we will obey you; but the helm must be up 
immediately." 

the captain stormed, but philip, by acknowledg the superior 
of hi vessel, at the same time that he blame the seamen for their 
panic, point out to him the necess of compliance, and mynheer 
barentz at last consented. the helm wa put up, the sail trimmed, 
and the _vrow katerina_ roll heavili befor the gale. toward the 
even the weather moderated, and the sky clear up; both sea and 
wind subsid fast; the leak decreased, and philip wa in hope 
that in a day or two they would arriv safe in the bay. 

As they steer their course, so did the wind gradual decrease, 
until, at last, it fell calm; noth remain of the tempest but a 
long heavi swell which set to the westward, and befor which the _vrow 
katerina_ wa gradual drifting. thi wa a respit to the worn-out 
seamen, and also to the troop and passengers, who had been coop 
below or drench on the main-deck. 

the upper deck wa crowded; mother bask in the warm sun with their 
children in their arms; the rig wa fill with the wet clothes, 
which were hung up to dri on everi part of the shrouds; and the seamen 
were busili employ in repair the injuri of the gale. By their 
reckoning, they were not more than fifti mile from tabl bay, and 
each moment they expect to see the land to the southward of it. all 
wa again mirth, and everyon on board, except philip, consid that 
danger wa no more to be apprehended. 

the second mate, whose name wa krantz, wa an active, good seaman, 
and a great favourit with philip, who knew that he could trust to 
him, and it wa on the afternoon of thi day that he and philip were 
walk togeth on the deck. 

"what think you, vanderdecken, of the strang vessel we saw?" 

"I have seen her before, krantz; and--" 

"and what?" 

"whatev vessel I have been in when I have seen her, that vessel ha 
never return into port--oth tell the same tale." 

"i she, then, the ghost of a vessel?" 

"I am told so; and there are variou stori afloat concern her: 
but of this, I assur you--that I am fulli persuad than some 
accid will happen befor we reach port, although everything, at 
thi moment, appear so calm, and our port is so near at hand." 

"you are superstitious," repli krantz; "and yet I must say that, to 
me, the appear wa not like a reality. No vessel could carri such 
sail in the gale; but yet, there are madmen afloat who will sometim 
attempt the most absurd things. If it wa a vessel, she must have gone 
down, for when it clear up she wa not to be seen. I am not veri 
credulous, and noth but the occurr of the consequ 
which you anticip will make me believ that there wa anyth 
supernatur in the affair." 

"well! I shall not be sorri if the event prove me wrong," repli 
philip; "but I have my forebodings--w are not in port yet." 

"no! but we are but a trifl distanc from it, and there is everi 
prospect of a continu of fine weather." 

"there is no say from what quarter the danger may come," repli 
philip; "we have other thing to fear than the violenc of the gale." 

"true," repli krantz; "but, nevertheless, don't let us croak. 
notwithstand all you say, I prophesi that in two days, at the 
farthest, we are safe anchor in tabl bay." 

the convers here dropped, and philip wa glad to be left alone. A 
melancholi had seiz him--a depress of spirit even greater than 
he had ever felt before. He leant over the gangway and watch the 
heav of the sea. 

"merci heaven!" ejacul he, "be pleas to spare thi vessel; 
let not the wail of women, the shriek of the poor children, now 
embarked, be heard; the numer bodi of men, trust to her 
planks,--let them not be sacrif for my father' crimes." and 
philip mused. "the way of heaven are inde mysterious," thought 
he.--"whi should other suffer becaus my father ha sinned? and yet, 
is it not so everywhere? how mani thousand fall on the field of 
battl in a war occas by the ambit of a king, or the influenc 
of a woman! how mani million have been destroy for hold a 
differ creed of faith! _he_ work in hi own way, leav us to 
wonder and to doubt." 

the sun had set befor philip had quit the gangway and gone down 
below. commend himself and those embark with him to the care of 
providence, he at last fell asleep; but, befor the bell wa struck 
eight time to announc midnight, he wa awaken by a rude shove of 
the shoulder, and perceiv krantz, who had the first watch, stand 
by him. 

"bi the heaven abov us! vanderdecken, you have prophesi right! 
up--quick! _the ship' on fire_!" 

"on fire!" exclaim vanderdecken, jump out of hi berth--"where?" 

"the main-hold." 

"I will up immediately, krantz. In the meantime, keep the hatch on 
and rig the pumps." 

In less than a minut philip wa on deck, where he found captain 
barentz, who had also been inform of the case by the second 
mate.--in a few word all wa explain by krantz: there wa a strong 
smell of fire proceed from the main-hold; and, on remov one of 
the hatches, which he had done without call for ani assistance, 
from a knowledg of the panic it would create, he found that the hold 
wa full of smoke; he had put it on again immediately, and had onli 
made it known to philip and the captain. 

"thank for your presenc of mind," repli philip; "we have now time 
to reflect quietli on what is to be done. If the troop and the poor 
women and children knew their danger, their alarm would have much 
imped us: but how could she have taken fire in the main-hold?" 

"I never heard of the _vrow katerina_ take fire before," observ 
the captain; "I think it is impossible. It must be some mistake--sh 
is--" 

"I now recollect that we have, in our cargo, sever case of vitriol 
in bottles," interrupt philip. "in the gale, they must have been 
disturb and broken. I kept them abov all, in case of accident: thi 
rolling, gunwal under, for so long a time must have occas one of 
them to fetch way." 

"that' it, depend upon it," observ krantz. 

"I did object to receiv them, state that they ought to go out in 
some vessel which wa not so encumb with troops, so that they 
might remain on the main-deck; but they replied, that the invoic 
were made out and could not be altered. but now to act. My idea is to 
keep the hatch on, so as to smother it if possible." 

"yes," repli krantz; and, at the same time, cut a hole in the deck 
just larg enough to admit the hose, and pump as much water as we can 
down into the hold." 

"you are right, krantz; send for the carpenter, and set him to work. I 
will turn the hand up and speak to the men. I smell the fire now veri 
strong; there is no time to lose.--if we can onli keep the troop and 
the women quiet we may do something." 

the hand were turn up, and soon made their appear on deck, 
wonder whi they were summoned. the men had not perceiv the state 
of the vessel, for, the hatch have been kept on, the littl smoke 
that issu ascend the hatchway and did not fill the lower deck. 

"mi lads," said philip, "I am sorri to say that we have reason to 
suspect that there is some danger of fire in the main-hold." 

"I smell it!" cri one of the seamen. 

"so do i," cri sever others, with everi show of alarm, and move 
away as if to go below. 

"silence, and remain where you are, my men. listen to what I say: if 
you frighten the troop and passeng we shall do nothing; we must 
trust to ourselves; there is no time to be lost.--mr krantz and the 
carpent are do all that can be done at present; and now, my men, 
do me the favour to sit down on the deck, everi one of you, while I 
tell you what we must do." 

thi order of philip' wa obeyed, and the effect wa excellent: it 
gave the men time to compos themselv after the first shock; for, 
perhaps, of all shock to the human frame, there is none which creat 
a greater panic than the first intim of fire on board of a 
vessel--a situation, indeed, pitiable, when it is consid that you 
have to choos between the two element seek your destruction. 
philip did not speak for a minut or two. He then point out to the 
men the danger of their situation, what were the measur which he 
and krantz had decid upon taking, and how necessari it wa that all 
should be cool and collected. He also remind them that they had but 
littl powder in the magazine, which wa far from the site of the 
fire, and could easili be remov and thrown overboard; and that, if 
the fire could not be extinguished, they had a quantiti of spar on 
deck to form a raft, which, with the boats, would receiv all on 
board, and that they were but a short distanc from land. 

philip' address had the most benefici effects; the men rose up when 
he order them; one portion went down to the magazine, and hand up 
the powder, which wa pass along and thrown overboard; anoth went 
to the pumps; and krantz, come up, report the hole to have been 
cut in the plank of the deck abov the main-hold: the hose were 
fixed, and a quantiti of water soon pour down, but it wa imposs 
that the danger could be kept secret. the troop were sleep on 
the deck, and the veri employ of the seamen point out what had 
occurred, even if the smoke, which now increas veri much, and fill 
the lower deck, had not betray it. In a few minut the alarm of 
_fire_! wa heard throughout the vessel, and men, women, and children 
were seen, some hurri on their clothes, some run frighten 
about the decks, some shrieking, some praying, and the confus and 
terror were hardli to be described. 

the judici conduct of philip wa then made evident: had the sailor 
been awaken by the appal cry, they would have been equal 
incap of acting, as were the troop and passengers. all 
subordin would have ceased: some would have seiz the boats, 
and left the major to perish: other would have hasten to the 
spirit-room, and, by their drunkenness, ad to the confus and 
horror of the scene: noth would have been effected, and almost all 
would, in all probability, have perish miserably. but thi had been 
prevent by the presenc of mind shown by philip and the second mate, 
for the captain wa a cypher:--not want in courag certainly, but 
without conduct or a knowledg of hi profession. the seamen continu 
steadi to their duty, push the soldier out of the way as they 
perform their allot tasks: and philip perceiv this, went 
down below, leav krantz in charge; and by reason with the most 
collected, by degre he brought the major of the troop to a state 
of compar coolness. 

the powder had been thrown overboard, and anoth hole have been cut 
in the deck on the other side, the other pump wa rigged, and doubl 
the quantiti of water pour into the hold; but it wa evid to 
philip that the combust increased. the smoke and steam now burst 
through the interstic of the hatchway and the hole cut in the 
deck, with a violenc that prove the extent of the fire which rage 
below, and philip thought it advis to remov all the women and 
children to the poop and quarter-deck of the ship, desir the 
husband of the women to stay with them. It wa a melancholi sight, 
and the tear stood in philip' eye as he look upon the group of 
females--som weep and strain their children to their bosoms; 
some more quiet and more collect than the men: the elder children 
mute or cri becaus their mother cried, and the younger ones, 
unconsci of danger, play with the first object which attract 
their attention, or smile at their parents. the offic command 
the troop were two ensign newli entered, and veri young men, 
ignor of their duti and without ani authority--for men in case 
of extrem danger will not obey those who are more ignor than 
themselves--and, at philip' request, they remain with and 
superintend the women and children. 

So soon as philip had given hi order that the women and children 
should be properli cloth (which mani of them were not), he went 
again forward to superintend the labour of the seamen, who alreadi 
began to show symptom of fatigue, from the excess of their exertions; 
but mani of the soldier now offer to work at the pumps, and their 
servic were willingli accepted. their effort were in vain. In about 
half an hour more the hatch were blown up with a loud noise, and a 
column of intens and search flame dart up perpendicularli from 
the hold, high as the lower mast-head. then wa heard the loud shriek 
of the women, who press their children in agoni to their breasts, 
as the seamen and soldier who had been work the pumps, in their 
precipit retreat from the scorch flames, rush aft, and fell 
among the huddl crowd. 

"be steady, my lads--steady, my good fellows," exclaim philip; 
"there is no danger yet. recollect, we have our boat and raft, and 
although we cannot subdu the fire, and save the vessel, still we 
may, if you are cool and collected, not onli save ourselves, but 
everyone--even the poor infants, who now appeal to you as men to 
exert yourselv in their behalf. come, come, my lads, let us do our 
duty--w have the mean of escap in our power if we lose no time. 
carpenter, get your axes, and cut away the boom-lashings. now, my men, 
let us get our boat out, and make a raft for these poor women and 
children; we are not ten mile from the land. krantz, see to the boat 
with the starboard watch; larboard watch with me, to launch over the 
booms. gunners, take ani of the cordag you can, readi for lashing. 
come, my lads, there is no want of light--w can work without 
lanterns." 

the men obeyed, as philip, to encourag them, had almost jocularli 
remark (for a joke is often well-timed, when appar on the 
threshold of eternity), there wa no want of light. the column of fire 
now ascend abov the main-top--lick with it forki tongu the 
top-mast rigging--and embrac the mainmast in it folds: and the 
loud roar with which it ascend prove the violenc and rapid of 
the combust below, and how littl time there wa to be lost. the 
lower and main deck were now so fill with smoke that no one could 
remain there: some few poor fellows, sick in their cots, had long been 
smothered, for they had been forgotten. the swell had much subsided, 
and there wa not a breath of wind: the smoke which rose from the 
hatchway ascend straight up in the air, which, as the vessel had 
lost all steerag way, wa fortunate. the boat were soon in the 
water, and trusti men place in them: the spar were launch over, 
arrang by the men in the boats, and lash together. all the 
grate were then collect and firmli fix upon the spar for the 
peopl to sit upon; and philip' heart wa glad at the prospect which 
he now had of save the number which were embarked. 




chapter xvii 


but their difficulti were not surmounted--th fire now had 
commun to the main-deck, and burst out of the port-hol 
amidships--and the raft which had been form alongsid wa oblig 
to be drift astern, where it wa more expos to the swell. thi 
retard their labour, and, in the meantime, the fire wa make rapid 
progress; the mainmast, which had long been burning, fell over the 
side with the lurch of the vessel, and the flame out of the 
main-deck port soon show their point abov the bulwarks, 
while volum of smoke were pour in upon the upper deck, 
almost suffoc the number which were crowd there; for all 
commun with the fore-part of the ship had been, for some time, 
cut off by the flames, and everyon had retreat aft. the women and 
children were now carri on to the poop; not onli to remov them 
farther from the suffoc smoke, but that they might be lower 
down to the raft from the stern. 

It wa about four o'clock in the morn when all wa ready, and by 
the exert of philip and the seamen, notwithstand the swell, 
the women and children were safe place on the raft, where it wa 
consid that they would be less in the way, as the men could 
reliev each other in pull when they were tired. 

after the women and children had been lower down, the troop were 
next order to descend by the ladders; some few were lost in the 
attempt, fall under the boat' bottom and not reappearing; but 
two-third of the men were safe put in the berth they were order 
to take by krantz, who had gone down to superintend thi import 
arrangement. such had been the vigil of philip, who had request 
captain barentz to stand over the spirit-room hatch, with pistols, 
until the smoke on the main-deck render the precaut unnecessary, 
that not a singl person wa intoxicated, and to thi might be 
ascrib the order and regular which had prevail dure thi 
tri scene. but befor one-third of the soldier had descend by 
the stern ladder, the fire burst out of the stern window with a 
violenc that noth could withstand; spout of vivid flame extend 
sever feet from the vessel, roar with the forc of a blow-pipe; 
at the same time, the flame burst through all the after-port of the 
main-deck, and those remain on board found themselv encircl 
with fire, and suffoc with smoke and heat. the stern ladder were 
consum in a minut and drop into the sea; the boat which had 
been receiv the men were obliged, also, to back astern from the 
intens heat of the flames; even those on the raft shriek as they 
found themselv scorch by the ignit fragment which fell on them 
as they were envelop in an opaqu cloud of smoke, which hid from 
them those who still remain on the deck of the vessel. philip 
attempt to speak to those on board, but he wa not heard. A scene 
of confus took place which end in great loss of life. the onli 
object appear to be who should first escape; though, except by 
jump overboard, there wa no escape. had they waited, and (a 
philip would have point out to them) have one by one thrown 
themselv into the sea, the men in the boat were fulli prepar 
to pick them up; or had they climb out to the end of the lateen 
mizen-yard which wa lower down, they might have descend safe by 
a rope, but the scorch of the flame which surround them and the 
suffoc from the smoke wa overpowering, and most of the soldier 
sprang over the taffrail at once, or as nearli so as possible. the 
consequ wa that there were thirti or forti in the water at the 
same time, and the scene wa as heart-rend as it wa appalling; the 
sailor in the boat drag them in as fast as they could--th women 
on the raft, throw to them loos garment to haul them in; at one 
time a wife shriek as she saw her husband struggl and sink 
into eternity;--at another, curs and execr from the swimmer 
who wa grappl with by the drown man, and drag with him under 
the surface. Of eighti men who were left of the troop on board at the 
time of the burst out of the flame from the stern windows, but 
twenty-f were saved. there were but few seamen left on board with 
philip, the major part have been employ in make the raft or 
man the three boats; those who were on board remain by hi side, 
regul their motion by his. after allow full time for the 
soldier to be pick up, philip order the men to climb out to the 
end of the lateen yard which hung on the taffrail, and either to lower 
themselv down on the raft if it wa under, or to give notic to the 
boat to receiv them. the raft had been drop farther astern by the 
seamen, that those on board of it might not suffer from the smoke and 
heat; and the sailors, one after another, lower themselv down 
and were receiv by the boats. philip desir captain barentz to go 
befor him, but the captain refused. He wa too much choke with smoke 
to say why, but no doubt but that it would have been someth in 
prais of the _vrow katerina_. philip then climb out; he wa 
follow by the captain, and they were both receiv into one of the 
boats. 

the rope which had hitherto held the raft to the ship, wa now cast 
off, and it wa taken in by the boats; and in a short time the _vrow 
katerina_ wa born to leeward of them; and philip and krantz now made 
arrang for the better dispos of the people. the sailor were 
almost all put into boats, that they might reliev one anoth in 
pulling; the remaind were place on the raft, along with the 
soldiers, the women, and the children. notwithstand that the boat 
were all as much load as they could well bear, the number on the 
raft were so great that it sunk nearli a foot under water when the 
swell of the sea pour upon it; but stanchion and rope to support 
those on board had been fixed, and the men remain at the sides, 
while the women and children were crowd togeth in the middle. 

As soon as these arrang were made, the boat took the raft in 
tow, and just as the dawn of day appeared, pull in the direct of 
the land. 

the _vrow katerina_ was, by thi time, one volum of flame; she had 
drift about half a mile to leeward, and captain barentz, who wa 
watch her as he sat in the boat with philip, exclaimed--"well, 
there goe a love ship, a ship that could do everyth but 
speak--i'm sure that not a ship in the fleet would have made such a 
bonfir as she has--do she not burn beautifully--nobly? My poor 
_vrow katerina_! perfect to the last, we never shall see such a ship 
as you again! well, i'm glad my father did not live to see thi sight, 
for it would have broken hi heart, poor man." 

philip made no reply, he felt a respect even for captain barentz' 
misplac regard for the vessel. they made but littl way, for the 
swell wa rather against them, and the raft wa deep in the water. the 
day dawned, and the appear of the weather wa not favourable; it 
promis the return of the gale. alreadi a breez ruffl the surfac 
of the water, and the swell appear to increas rather than go down. 
the sky wa overcast and the horizon thick. philip look out for the 
land but could not perceiv it, for there wa a haze on the horizon, 
so that he could not see more than five miles. He felt that to gain 
the shore befor the come night wa necessari for the preserv 
of so mani individuals, of whom more than sixti were women and 
children, who, without ani nourishment, were sit on a frail raft, 
immers in the water. No land in sight--a gale come on, and in 
all probability, a heavi sea and dark night. the chanc wa inde 
desperate, and philip wa miserable--most miserable--when he reflect 
that so mani innoc be might, befor the next morning, 
be consign to a wateri tomb,--and why?--yes, there wa the 
feeling--that although philip could reason against, he never could 
conquer; for hi own life he care nothing--even the idea of hi 
belov amin wa noth in the balanc at these moments. the onli 
point which sustain him, wa the knowledg that he had hi duti to 
perform, and, in the full exercis of hi duty, he recov himself. 

"land ahead!" wa now cri out by krantz, who wa in the headmost 
boat, and the news wa receiv with a shout of joy from the raft and 
the boats. the anticip and the hope the news gave wa like manna 
in the wilderness; and the poor women on the raft, drench sometim 
abov the waist by the swell of the sea, clasp the children in their 
arm still closer, and cried--"mi darling, you shall be saved." 

philip stood upon the stern-sheet to survey the land, and he had the 
satisfact of find that it wa not five mile distant, and a ray 
of hope warm hi heart. the breez now had gradual increased, and 
rippl the water. the quarter from which the wind came wa neither 
favour nor adverse, be on the beam. had they had sail for the 
boats, it would have been otherwise, but they had been stow away and 
could not be procured. the sight of land natur rejoic them all, 
and the seamen in the boat cheered, and double-bank the oar to 
increas their way; but the tow of a larg raft sunk under water 
wa no easi task; and they did not, with all their exertions, advanc 
more than half a mile an hour. 

until noon they continu their exertions, not without success; 
they were not three mile from the land; but, as the sun pass the 
meridian, a chang took place; the breez blew strong; the swell of 
the sea rose rapidly; and the raft wa often so deepli immers in the 
wave as to alarm them for the safeti of those upon her. their way 
wa proport retarded, and by three o'clock they had not gain 
half-a-mil from where they had been at noon. the men not have had 
refresh of ani kind dure the labour and excit of so mani 
hours, began to flag in their exertions. the wish for water wa 
express by all--from the child who appeal to it mother, to the 
seaman who strain at the oar. philip did all he could to encourag 
the men; but find themselv so near to the land, and so overcom 
with fatigue, and that the raft in tow would not allow them to 
approach their haven, they murmured, and talk of the necess of 
cast loos the raft and look out for themselves. A feel of 
self prevailed, and they were mutinous: but philip expostul with 
them, and out of respect for him, they continu their exert for 
anoth hour, when a circumst occur which decid the question, 
upon which they had recommenc a debate. 

the increas swell and the fresh breez had so beat about and toss 
the raft, that it wa with difficulty, for some time, that it 
occup could hold themselv on it. A loud shout, mingl with 
screams, attract the attent of those in the boats, and philip, 
look back, perceiv that the lash of the raft had yield to 
the forc of the waves, and that it had separ amidships. the 
scene wa agonising; husband were separ from their wive and 
children--each float away from each other--for the part of the raft 
which wa still tow by the boat had alreadi left the other far 
astern. the women rose up and screamed, and held up their children; 
some, more frantic, dash into the water between them, and attempt 
to gain the float wreck upon which their husband stood, and sank 
befor they could be assisted. but the horror increased--on lash 
have given way, all the rest soon followed; and, befor the boat 
could turn and give assist the sea wa strew with the spar 
which compos the raft, with men, women, and children cling to 
them. loud were the yell of despair, and the shriek of the women, 
as they embrac their offspring, and in attempt to save them were 
lost themselves. the spar of the raft still close together, were 
hurl one upon the other by the swell, and mani found death by 
be jam between them. although all the boat hasten to their 
assistance, there wa so much difficulti and danger in forc them 
between the spars, that but few were saved, and even those few were 
more than the boat could well take in. the seamen and a few soldier 
were pick up, but all the femal and the children had sank beneath 
the waves. 

the effect of thi catastroph may be imagined, but hardli described. 
the seamen who had debat as to cast them adrift to perish, wept 
as they pull toward the shore. philip wa overcome, he cover hi 
face, and remained, for some time, without give directions, and 
heedless of what passed. 

It wa now five o'clock in the evening; the boat had cast off the 
tow-lines, and vie with each other in their exertions. befor the sun 
had set they all had arriv at the beach, and were safe land in 
the littl sand bay into which they had steered; for the wind wa off 
the shore, and there wa no surf. the boat were haul up, and the 
exhaust men lay down on the sands, till warm with the heat of the 
sun, and forget that they had neither eaten nor drank for so long 
a time, they were soon fast asleep. captain barentz, philip, and 
krantz, as soon as they had seen the boat secured, held a short 
consultation, and were then glad to follow the exampl of the seamen; 
harass and worn out with the fatigu of the last twenty-four hours, 
their sens were soon drown in oblivion. 

for mani hour they all slept soundly, dreamt of water, and awok to 
the sad realiti that they were torment with thirst, and were on a 
sandi beach with the salt wave mock them; but they reflect how 
mani of their late companion had been swallow up, and felt thank 
that they had been spared. It wa earli dawn when they all rose from 
the form which they had impress on the yield sand; and, by the 
direct of philip, they separ in everi direction, to look for 
the mean of quench their agoni of thirst. As they proceed over 
the sand-hills, they found grow in the sand a low spongy-leaf 
sort of shrub, someth like what in our greenhous is term the 
ice-plant; the thick leav of which were cover with larg drop 
of dew. they sank down on their knees, and proceed from one to the 
other lick off the moistur which wa abundant, and soon felt 
a temporari relief. they continu their search till noon without 
success, and hunger wa now ad to their thirst; they then 
return to the beach to ascertain if their companion had been more 
successful. they had also quench their thirst with the dew of 
heaven, but had found no water or mean of subsistence; but some of 
them had eaten the leav of the plant which had contain the dew in 
the morning, and had found them, although acid, full of wateri sap and 
grate to the palate. the plant in question is the one provid by 
bounteou provid for the support of the camel and other beast 
in the arid desert, onli to be found there, and devour by all 
rumin anim with avidity. By the advic of philip they 
collect a quantiti of thi plant and put it into the boats, and then 
launched. 

they were not more than fifti mile from tabl bay, and although they 
had no sails, the wind wa in their favour. philip point out to them 
how useless it wa to remain, when befor morn they would, in all 
probability, arriv at where they would obtain all they required. the 
advic wa approv of and act upon; the boat were shove off and 
the oar resumed. So tire and exhaust were the men, that their oar 
dip mechan into the water, for there wa no strength left to 
be applied; it wa not until the next morn at daylight, that they 
had arriv opposit fals bay, and they had still mani mile to pull. 
the wind in their favour had done almost all--th men could do littl 
or nothing. 

encouraged, however, by the sight of land which they knew, they 
rallied; and at about noon they pull exhaust to the beach at the 
bottom of tabl bay, near to which were the houses, and the fort 
protect the settler who had for some few year resid there. they 
land close to where a broad rivulet at that season (but a torrent 
in the winter) pour it stream into the bay. At the sight of fresh 
water, some of the men drop their oars, threw themselv into the 
sea when out of their depth--oth when the water wa abov their 
waists--yet they did not arriv so soon as those who wait till the 
boat struck the beach, and jump out upon dri land. and then they 
threw themselv into the rivulet, which cours over the shingle, 
about five or six inch in depth, allow the refresh stream to 
pour into their mouth till they could receiv no more, immers 
their hot hands, and roll in it with delight. 

despot and fanat have exert their ingenu to invent torment 
for their victims--how useless!--th rack, the boot, fire,--al that 
they have imagin are not to be compar to the tortur of extrem 
thirst. In the extrem of agoni the suffer cri for water and 
it is not refused: they might have spare themselv their refin 
ingenu of torment and the disgust exhibit of it, had they 
onli confin the prison in hi cell, and refus him _water_. 

As soon as they had satisfi the most press of all wants, they 
rose drip from the stream, and walk up to the hous of the 
factory; the inhabit of which, perceiv that boat had landed, 
when there wa no vessel in the bay, natur conclud that some 
disast had happened, and were walk down to meet them.--their 
tragic histori wa soon told. the thirty-six men that stood befor 
them were all that were left of nearli three hundr soul embarked, 
and they had been more than two day without food. At thi intim 
no further question were ask by the consider settlers, until the 
hunger of the suffer had been appeased, when the narr of their 
suffer wa fulli detail by philip and krantz. 

"I have an idea that I have seen you before," observ one of the 
settlers; "did you come on shore when the fleet anchored?" 

"I did not," repli philip; "but I have been here." 

"I recollect, now," repli the man; "you were the onli survivor of 
the _ter schilling_, which wa lost in fals bay." 

"not the onli survivor," repli philip; "I thought so myself, but I 
afterward met the pilot, a one-ey man, of the name of schriften, 
who wa my shipmate--h must have arriv here after me. you saw him, 
of course?" 

"no, I did not; no one belong to the _ter schilling_ ever came here 
after you, for I have been a settler here ever since, and it is not 
like that I should forget such a circumstance." 

"he must, then, have return to holland by some other means." 

"I know not how.--our ship never go near the coast after they leav 
the bay; it is too dangerous." 

"nevertheless, I saw him," repli philip, musing. 

"if you saw him, that is sufficient: perhap some vessel had been 
blown down to the eastern side, and pick him up; but the nativ in 
that part are not like to have spare the life of a european. the 
caffr are a cruel people." 

the inform that schriften had not been seen at the cape, wa a 
subject of medit to philip. He had alway an idea, as the reader 
knows, that there wa someth supernatur about the man, and thi 
opinion wa corrobor by the report of the settler. 

We must pass over the space of two months, dure which the wreck 
seamen were treat with kind by the settlers, and, at the 
expir of which, a small brig arriv at the bay, and took in 
refreshments: she wa homeward bound, with a full cargo, and be 
charter by the company, could not refus to receiv on board the 
crew of the _vrow katerina_. philip, krantz, and the seamen embarked, 
but captain barentz remain behind to settl at the cape. 

"should I go home," said he to philip, who argu with him, "I have 
noth in thi world to return for. I have no wife--no children--i 
had but one dear object, my _vrow katerina_, who wa my wife, my 
child, my everything--sh is gone, and I never shall find anoth 
vessel like her; and if I could, I should not love it as I did her. 
no, my affect are buri with her; are entomb in the deep sea. 
how beauti she burnt! she went out of the world like a phoenix, 
as she was. no! no! I will be faith to her--i will send for what 
littl money I have, and live as near to her tomb as I can--i never 
shall forget her as long as I live. I shall mourn over her, and 'vrow 
katerina,' when I die, will be found engraven on my heart." 

philip could not help wish that hi affect had been fix upon 
a more deserv object, as then, probably, the tragic loss had 
not taken place; but he chang the subject, feel that, be no 
sailor, captain barentz wa much better on shore, than in the command 
of a vessel. they shook hand and parted--philip promis to execut 
barentz' commission, which wa to turn hi money into articl most 
use to a settler, and have them sent out by the first fleet which 
should sail from the zuyder zee. but thi commiss it wa not 
philip' good fortun to execute. the brig, name the _wilhelmina_, 
sailed, and soon arriv at St helena. after water she proceed on 
her voyage. they had made the western isles, and philip wa consol 
himself with the anticip of soon join hi amine, when to the 
northward of the islands, they met with a furiou gale, befor which 
they were oblig to scud for mani days, with the vessel' head to the 
south-east; and as the wind abat and they were abl to haul to it, 
they fell in with a dutch fleet, of five vessels, command by an 
admiral, which had left amsterdam more than two months, and had been 
buffet about, by contrari gales, for the major part of that period. 
cold, fatigue, and bad provis had brought on the scurvy, and the 
ship were so weakli man that they could hardli navig them. when 
the captain of the _wilhelmina_ report to the admir that he had 
part of the crew of the _vrow katerina_ on board, he wa order 
to send them immedi to assist in navig hi crippl 
fleet--remonstr wa useless--philip had but time to write to 
amine, acquaint her with hi misfortun and disappointment; and, 
confid the letter to hi wife, as well as hi narr of the loss 
of the _vrow katerina_ for the directors, to the charg of the captain 
of the _wilhelmina_, he hasten to pack up hi effects, and repair 
on board of the admiral' ship, with krantz and the crew. To them were 
ad six of the men belong to the _wilhelmina_, which the admir 
insist on retaining; and the brig, have receiv the admiral' 
despatches, wa then permit to continu her voyage. 

perhap there is noth more tri to the seaman' feelings, than 
be unexpectedli forc to recomm anoth seri of trials, at 
the veri time when they anticip repos from the former; yet, how 
often doe thi happen! philip wa melancholy. "it is my destiny," 
thought he, use the word of amine, "and whi should I not submit?" 
krantz wa furious, and the seamen discont and mutinous--but 
it wa useless. might is right on the vast ocean, where there is no 
appeal--no trial or injunct to be obtained. 

but hard as their case appear to them, the admir wa fulli 
justifi in hi proceeding. hi ship were almost unmanag with 
the few hand who could still perform their duty; and thi small 
increas of physic power might be the mean of save hundr who 
lay helpless in their hammocks. In hi own vessel, the _lion_, which 
wa man with two hundr and fifti men, when she sail from 
amsterdam, there were not more than seventi capabl of do duty; and 
the other ship had suffer in proportion. 

the first captain of the _lion_ wa dead, the second captain in hi 
hammock, and the admir had no one to assist him but the mate of the 
vessel, some of whom crawl up to their duti more dead than alive. 
the ship of the second in command, the _dort_, wa even in a more 
deplor plight. the commodor wa dead; the first captain wa still 
do hi duty; but he had but one more offic capabl of remain 
on deck. 

the admir sent for philip into hi cabin, and have heard hi 
narr of the loss of the _vrow katerina_, he order him to go on 
board of the commodore' ship as captain, give the rank of commodor 
to the captain at present on board of her; krantz wa retain on 
board hi own vessel, as second captain; for, by philip' narrative, 
the admir perceiv at onc that they were both good offic and 
brave men. 




chapter xviii 


the fleet under admir rymelandt' command wa order to proceed to 
the east indi by the western route, through the strait of magellan 
into the pacif ocean--it be still imagined, notwithstand 
previou failures, that thi rout offer facil which might 
shorten the passag of the spice islands. 

the vessel compos the fleet were the _lion_ of forty-four guns, 
bear the admiral' flag; the _dort_ of thirty-six guns, with the 
commodore' pendant--to which philip wa appointed; the _zuyder zee_ 
of twenty; the _young frau_ of twelve, and a ketch of four guns, 
call the _schevelling_. 

the crew of the _vrow katerina_ were divid between the two larger 
vessels; the others, be smaller, were easier work with fewer 
hands. everi arrang have been made, the boat were hoist 
up, and the ship made sail. for ten day they were baffl by light 
winds, and the victim to the scurvi increas consider on board 
of philip' vessel. mani die and were thrown overboard, and other 
were carri down to their hammocks. 

the newly-appoint commodore, whose name wa avenhorn, went on board 
of the admiral, to report the state of the vessel, and to suggest, as 
philip had propos to him, that they should make the coast of south 
america, and endeavour, by briberi or by force, to obtain suppli 
either from the spanish inhabit or the natives. but to thi the 
admir would not listen. He wa an imperious, bold, and obstin 
man, not to be persuad or convinced, and with littl feel for 
the suffer of others. tenaci of be advised, he immedi 
reject a proposit which, had it origin with himself, would 
probabl have been immedi act upon; and the commodor return 
on board hi vessel, not onli disappointed, but irrit by the 
languag use toward him. 

"what are we to do, captain vanderdecken? you know too well our 
situation--it is imposs we can continu long at sea; if we do, the 
vessel will be drift at the merci of the waves, while the crew die 
a wretch death in their hammocks. At present, we have forti men 
left; in ten day more we shall probabl have but twenty; for as the 
labour becom more severe, so do they drop down the faster. Is it not 
better to risk our live in combat with the spaniards, than die here 
like rotten sheep?" 

"I perfectli agre with you, commodore," repli philip; "but still we 
must obey orders. the admir is an inflex man." 

"and a cruel one. I have a great mind to part compani in the night, 
and, if he find fault, I will justifi myself to the director on my 
return." 

"do noth rashly--perhaps, when day by day he find hi own ship' 
compani more weakened, he will see the necess of follow your 
advice." 

A week had pass away after thi conversation, and the fleet had made 
littl progress. In each ship the ravag of the fatal diseas becam 
more serious, and, as the commodor had predicted, he had but twenti 
men realli abl to do duty. nor had the admiral' ship and the other 
vessel suffer less. the commodor again went on board to reiter 
hi proposition. 

admir rymelandt wa not onli a stern, but a vindict man. He 
wa awar of the proprieti of the suggest made by hi second in 
command, but, have refus it, he would not acquiesce; and he felt 
reveng against the commodore, whose counsel he must now either 
adopt, or by refus it be prevent from take the step so 
necessari for the preserv of hi crew, and the success of hi 
voyage. too proud to acknowledg himself in error, again did he 
decidedli refuse, and the commodor went back to hi own ship. the 
fleet wa then within three day of the coast, steer to the 
southward for the strait of magellan, and that night, after philip 
had retir to hi cot, the commodor went on deck and order the 
cours of the vessel to be alter some point more to the westward. 
the night wa veri dark, and the _lion_ wa the onli ship which 
carri a poop-lantern, so that the part compani of the _dort_ wa 
not perceiv by the admir and the other ship of the fleet. when 
philip went on deck next morning, he found that their consort were 
not in sight. He look at the compass, and, perceiv that the 
cours wa altered, inquir at what hour and by whose directions. 
find that it wa by hi superior officer, he of cours said 
nothing. when the commodor came on deck, he state to philip that he 
felt himself warrant in not compli with the admiral' orders, as 
it would have been sacrif the whole ship' company. thi was, 
indeed, true. 

In two day they made the land, and, run into the shore, perceiv 
a larg town and spaniard on the beach. they anchor at the mouth of 
the river, and hoist english colours, when a boat came on board to 
ask them who they were and what they required? the commodor repli 
that the vessel wa english, for he knew that the hatr of the 
spanish to the dutch wa so great that, if known to belong to that 
nation, he would have had no chanc of procur ani supplies, except 
by force. He state that he had fallen in with a spanish vessel, a 
complet wreck, from the whole of the crew be afflict with the 
scurvy; that he had taken the men out, who were now in their 
hammock below, as he consid it cruel to leav so mani of hi 
fellow-creatur to perish, and that he had come out of hi cours to 
land them at the first spanish fort he could reach. He request that 
they would immedi send on board veget and fresh provis 
for the sick men, whom it would be death to remove, until after a few 
days, when they would be a littl restored; and added, that in return 
for their assist the spaniards, he trust the governor would also 
send suppli for hi own people. 

thi well made-up stori wa confirm by the offic sent on board by 
the spanish governor. be request to go down below and see the 
patients, the sight of so mani poor fellow in the last stage of that 
horrid disease--their teeth fallen out, gum ulcerated, bodi full 
of tumour and sores--wa quit sufficient, and, hurri up from the 
lower deck, as he would have done from a charnel-house, the offic 
hasten on shore and made hi report. 

In two hour a larg boat wa sent off with fresh beef and veget 
suffici for three days' suppli for the ship' company, and these 
were immedi distribut among the men. A letter of thank wa 
return by the commodore, state that hi health wa so indiffer 
as to prevent hi come on shore in person to thank the governor, and 
forward a pretend list of the spaniard on board, in which he 
mention some offic and peopl of distinction, whom he imagin 
might be connect with the famili of the governor, whose name and 
titl he had receiv from the messeng sent on board; for the dutch 
knew full well the major of the nobl spanish families--indeed, 
allianc had continu taken place between them, previou to their 
assert of their independence. the commodor conclud hi letter by 
express a hope that, in a day or two, he should be abl to pay hi 
respect and make arrang for the land of the sick, as he wa 
anxiou to proceed on hi voyag of discovery. 

On the third day, a fresh suppli of provis wa sent on board, and, 
so soon as they were received, the commodore, in an english uniform, 
went on shore and call upon the governor, gave a long detail of the 
suffer of the peopl he had rescued, and agre that they should 
be sent on shore in two days, and they would, by that time, be well 
enough to be moved. after mani compliments, he went on board, the 
governor have state hi intent to return hi visit on the 
follow day, if the weather were not too rough. fortunately, the 
weather wa rough for the next two days, and it wa not until the 
third that the governor made hi appearance. thi wa precis what 
the commodor wished. 

there is no disease, perhaps, so dread or so rapid in it effect 
upon the human frame, and at the same time so instantan checked, 
as the scurvy, if the remedi can be procured. A few day were 
suffici to restor those, who were not abl to turn in their 
hammocks, to their former vigour. In the cours of the six day nearli 
all the crew of the _dort_ were convalesc and abl to go on deck; 
but still they were not cured. the commodor wait for the arriv of 
the governor, receiv him with all due honours, and then, so soon 
as he wa in the cabin, told him veri polit that he and all 
hi offic with him were prisoners. that the vessel wa a dutch 
man-of-war, and that it wa hi own people, and not spaniards, who had 
been die of the scurvy. He consol him, however, by point out 
that he had thought it prefer to obtain provis by thi _ruse_, 
than to sacrific live on both side by take them by force, and 
that hi excellency' captiv would endur no longer than until he 
had receiv on board a suffici number of live bullock and fresh 
veget to insur the recoveri of the ship' company; and, in the 
meantime, not the least insult would be offer to him. whereupon the 
spanish governor first look at the commodor and then at the file of 
arm men at the cabin door, and then to hi distanc from the town; 
and then call to mind the possibl of hi be taken out to sea. 
weigh all these point in hi mind, and the veri moder ransom 
demand (for bullock were not worth a dollar apiec in that 
country), he resolved, as he could not help himself, to compli with 
the commodore' terms. He call for pen and ink, and wrote an order 
to send on board immedi all that wa demanded. befor sunset the 
bullock and veget were brought off, and, so soon as they were 
alongside, the commodore, with mani bow and mani thanks, escort the 
governor to the gangway, compliment him with a salvo of great guns, 
as he had done before, on hi arrival. the peopl on shore thought 
that hi excel had paid a long visit, but, as he did not like to 
acknowledg that he had been deceived, noth wa said about it at 
least, in hi hearing, although the fact were soon well known. As 
soon as the boat were cleared, the commodor weigh anchor and made 
sail, well satisfi with have preserv hi ship' company; and, as 
the falkland islands, in case of part company, had been name as 
the rendezvous, he steer for them. In a fortnight he arrived, and 
found that hi admir wa not yet there. hi crew were now all 
recovered, and hi fresh beef wa not yet expended, when he perceiv 
the admir and the three other vessel in the offing. 

It appear that so soon as the _dort_ had part company, the admir 
had immedi act upon the advic that the commodor had given 
him, and had run for the coast. not be so fortun in a _ruse_ 
as hi second in command, he had land an arm forc from the four 
vessels, and had succeed in obtain sever head of cattle, at the 
expens of an equal number of men kill and wounded. but at the same 
time they had collect a larg quantiti of veget of one sort or 
another, which they had carri on board and distribut with great 
success to the sick, who were gradual recovering. 

immedi that the admir had anchored, he made the signal for 
the commodor to repair on board, and tax him with disobedi of 
order in have left the fleet. the commodor did not deni that he 
had so done, but excus himself upon the plea of necessity, offer 
to lay the whole matter befor the court of director so soon as they 
returned; but the admir wa vest with most extens powers, not 
onli of the trial, but the _condemnation_ and punish of ani person 
guilti of mutini and insubordin in hi fleet. In reply, he told 
the commodor that he wa a prisoner, and, to prove it, he confin 
him in iron under the half-deck. 

A signal wa then made for all the captains: they went on board, and 
of cours philip wa of the number. On their arriv the admir held 
a summari court-martial, prove to them by hi instruct that he 
wa so warrant to do. the result of the court-marti could be but 
one,--condemn for a breach of discipline, to which philip wa 
oblig reluctantli to sign hi name. the admir then gave philip the 
appoint of second in command, and the commodore' pendant, much to 
the annoy of the captain command the other vessels,--but in 
thi the admir prove hi judgment, as there wa no one of them so 
fit for the task as philip. have so done, he dismiss them. philip 
would have spoken to the late commodore, but the sentri oppos it, 
as against hi orders; and with a friendli nod, philip wa oblig to 
leav him without the desir communication. 

the fleet remain three week at the falkland islands, to recruit the 
ships' companies. although there wa no fresh beef, there wa plenti 
of scurvy-grass and penguins. these bird were in myriad on some 
part of the island, which, from the propinqu of their nests, built 
of mud, went by the name of _towns_. there they sat, close togeth 
(the whole area which they cover be bare of grass), hatch 
their egg and rear their young. the men had but to select as mani 
egg and bird as they pleased, and so numer were they, that, when 
they had suppli themselves, there wa no appar diminut of the 
numbers. thi food, although in a short time not veri palat to the 
seamen, had the effect of restor them to health, and, befor the 
fleet sailed, there wa not a man who wa afflict with the scurvy. 
In the meantim the commodor remain in irons, and mani were the 
conjectur concern hi ultim fate. the power of life and death 
wa known to be in the admiral' hands, but no one thought that such 
power would be exert upon a delinqu of so high a grade. the other 
captain kept aloof from philip, and he knew littl of what wa the 
gener idea. occasion when on board of the admiral' ship, he 
ventur to bring up the question, but wa immedi silenced; and 
feel that he might injur the late commodor (for whom he had a 
regard), he would risk noth by importunity; and the fleet sail 
for the strait of magellan, without anybodi be awar of what might 
be the result of the court-martial. 

It wa about a fortnight after they had left the falkland islands, 
that they enter the straits. At first they had a lead wind which 
carri them half through, but thi did not last, and they then had to 
contend not onli against the wind, but against the current, and they 
daili lost ground. the crew of the ship also began to sicken from 
fatigu and cold. whether the admir had befor made up hi mind, or 
whether, irrit by hi fruitless endeavour to continu hi voyage, 
it is imposs to say; but, after three weeks' useless struggl 
against the wind and currents, he hove-to and order all the captain 
on board, when he propos that the prison should receiv hi 
punishment--and that punish was--_to be deserted_--that is, to be 
sent on shore with a day' food, where there wa no mean of obtain 
support, so as to die miser of hunger. thi wa a punish 
frequent resort to by the dutch at that period, as will be seen by 
read an account of their voyages: but, at the same time, seldom, if 
ever, award to one of so high a rank as that of commodore. 

philip immedi protest against it, and so did krantz, although 
they were both aware, that by so do they would make the admir 
their enemy; but the other captains, who view both of them with a 
jealou eye, and consid them as interlop and interf with 
their advancement, side with the admiral. notwithstand thi 
majority, philip thought it hi duti to expostulate. 

"you know well, admiral," said he, "that I join in hi condemn 
for a breach of discipline: but, at the same time, there wa much in 
extenuation. He commit a breach of disciplin to save hi ship' 
company, but not an error in judgment, as you yourself proved, by 
take the same measur to save your own men. Do not, therefore, visit 
an offenc of so doubt a natur with such cruelty. let the compani 
decid the point when you send him home, which you can do so soon 
as you arriv in india. He is suffici punish by lose hi 
command: to do what you propos will be ascrib to feel of 
reveng more than to those of justice. what success can we deserv if 
we commit an act of such cruelty; and how can we expect a merci 
provid to protect us from the wind and wave when we are thu 
barbar toward each other?" 

philip' argument were of no avail. the admir order him to return 
on board hi ship, and had he been abl to find an excuse, he would 
have depriv him of hi command. thi he could not well do; but 
philip wa awar that the admir wa now hi inveter enemy. the 
commodor wa taken out of iron and brought into the cabin, and hi 
sentenc wa made known to him. 

"be it so, admiral," repli avenhorn; "for, to attempt to turn you 
from your purpose, I know would be unavailing. I am not punish for 
disobedi of orders, but for having, by my disobedience, point 
out to you your duty--a duti which you were forc to perform 
afterward by necessity. then be it so; let me perish on these black 
rocks, as I shall, and my bone be whiten by the chilli blast which 
howl over their desolation. but mark me, cruel and vindict man! I 
shall not be the onli one whose bone will bleach there. I prophesi 
that mani other will share my fate, and even you, admiral, _may_ be 
of the number,--if I mistak not, we shall lie side by side." 

the admir made no reply, but gave a sign for the prison to be 
removed. He then had a confer with the captain of the three 
smaller vessels; and, as they had been all along retard by the 
heavier sail of hi own ship and the _dort_ command by philip, he 
decid that they should part company, and proceed on as fast as they 
could to the indies--send on board of the two larger vessel all 
the provis they could spare, as they alreadi began to run short. 

philip had left the cabin with krantz after the prison had been 
removed. He then wrote a few line upon a slip of paper--"do not leav 
the beach when you are put on shore, until the vessel are out of 
sight;" and, request krantz to find an opportun to deliv thi 
to the commodore, he return on board of hi own ship. 

when the crew of the _dort_ heard of the punish about to be 
inflict upon their old commander, they were much excited. they felt 
that he had sacrif himself to save them, and they murmur much at 
the cruelti of the admiral. 

about an hour after philip' return to hi ship, the prison wa sent 
on shore and land on the desol and rocki coast, with a suppli of 
provis for two days. not a singl articl of extra clothing, or 
the mean of strike a light wa permit him. when the boat' keel 
graze the beach, he wa order out. the boat shove off, and the men 
were not permit even to bid him farewell. 

the fleet, as philip expected, remain hove-to, shift the 
provisions, and it wa not till after dark that everyth wa 
arranged. thi opportun wa not lost. philip wa awar that it 
would be consid a breach of discipline, but to that he wa 
indifferent; neither did he think it like that it would come to the 
ear of the admiral, as the crew of the _dort_ were partial both to 
the commodor and to him. He had desir a seaman whom he could trust, 
to put into one of the boat a coupl of musket and a quantiti of 
ammunition, sever blankets, and variou other articles, besid 
provis for two or three month for one person, and, as soon as it 
wa dark, the men pull on shore with the boat, found the commodor 
on the beach wait for them, and suppli him with all these 
necessaries. they then rejoin their ship, without the admiral' 
have the least suspicion of what had been done, and shortli after 
the fleet made sail on a wind, with their head off shore. the next 
morning, the three smaller vessel part company, and by sunset had 
gain mani mile to windward, after which they were not again seen. 

the admir had sent for philip to give him hi instructions, which 
were veri severe, and evid frame so as to be abl to afford him 
hereaft some excus for depriv him of hi command. among others, 
hi order were, as the _dort_ drew much less water than the admiral' 
ship, to sail ahead of him dure the night, that, if they approach 
too near the land as they beat across the channel, time notic might 
be given to the admiral, if in too shallow water. thi respons 
wa the occas of philip' be alway on deck when they approach 
the land of either side of the straits. It wa the second night after 
the fleet had separ that philip had been summon on deck as they 
were near the land of terra del fuego; he wa watch the man in 
the chain heav the lead, when the offic of the watch report 
to him that the admiral' ship wa ahead of them instead of astern. 
philip made enquiri as to when he passed, but could not discover; he 
went forward, and saw the admiral' ship with her poop-light, which, 
when the admir wa astern, wa not visible. "what can be the 
admiral' reason for this?" thought philip; "ha he run ahead on 
purpos to make a charg against me of neglect of duty? it must be so. 
well, let him do as he pleases; he must wait now till we arriv 
in india, for I shall not allow him to _desert_ me; and, with the 
company, I have as much, and I rather think, as a larg proprietor, 
more interest than he has. well, as he ha thought proper to go ahead, 
I have noth to do but follow. 'you may come out of the chain 
there.'" 

philip went forward: they were now, as he imagined, veri near to the 
land, but the night wa dark and they could not distinguish it. for 
half an hour they continu their course, much to philip' surprise, 
for he now thought he could make out the loom of the land, dark as it 
was. hi eye were constantli fix upon the ship ahead, expect 
everi minut that she would go about; but no, she continu her 
course, and philip follow with hi own vessel. 

"we are veri close to the land, sir," observ vander hagen, the 
lieutenant, who wa the offic of the watch. 

"so it appear to me: but the admir is closer, and draw much more 
water than we do," repli philip. 

"I think I see the rock on the beam to leeward, sir." 

"I believ you are right," repli philip: "I cannot understand this. 
readi about, and get a gun ready--they must suppos us to be ahead of 
them, depend upon it." 

hardli had philip given the order, when the vessel struck heavili on 
the rocks. philip hasten aft; he found that the rudder had been 
unshipped, and the vessel wa immov fixed. hi thought then 
revert to the admiral. "wa he on shore?" He ran forward, and the 
admir wa still sail on, with hi poop-light, about two cables' 
length ahead of him. 

"fire the gun, there," cri philip, perplex beyond measure. 

the gun wa fired, and immedi follow up by the flash and report 
of anoth gun close astern of them. philip look with astonish 
over the quarter and perceiv the admiral' ship close astern to him, 
and evid on shore as well as hi own. 

"merci heaven!" exclaim philip, rush forward, "what can thi 
be?" He beheld the other vessel with her light ahead, still sail on 
and leav them. the day wa now dawning, and there wa suffici 
light to make out the land. the _dort_ wa on shore not fifti yard 
from the beach, and surround by the high and barren rocks; yet the 
vessel ahead wa appar sail on over the land. the seamen 
crowd on the forecastl watch thi strang phenomenon; at last it 
vanish from their sight. 

"that' the _fli dutchman_, by all that' holy!" cri one of the 
seamen, jump off the gun. 

hardli had the man utter these word when the vessel disappeared. 

philip felt convinc that it wa so, and he walk away aft in a veri 
perturb state. It must have been hi father' fatal ship which had 
decoy them to probabl destruction. He hardli knew how to act. the 
admiral' wrath he did not wish, just at that moment, to encounter. He 
sent for the offic of the watch, and, have desir him to select 
a crew for the boat, out of those men who had been on deck, and could 
substanti hi assertions, order him to go on board of the admir 
and state what had happened. 

As soon as the boat had shove off, philip turn hi attent to 
the state of hi own vessel. the daylight had increased, and philip 
perceiv that they were surround by rocks, and had run on shore 
between two reefs, which extend half a mile from the mainland. He 
sound round hi vessel, and discov that she wa fix from 
forward to aft, and that, without lighten her, there wa no chanc 
of get her off. He then turn to where the admiral' ship lay 
aground, and found that, to all appearance, she wa in even a wors 
plight, as the rock to leeward of her were abov the water, and she 
wa much more exposed, should bad weather come on. never, perhaps, wa 
there a scene more cheerless and appalling: a dark wintri sky--a sky 
load with heavi clouds--th wind cold and piercing--th whole 
line of the coast one mass of barren rocks, without the slightest 
appear of vegetation; the inland part of the countri present 
an equal sombr appearance, and the higher point were cap with 
snow, although it wa not yet the winter season. sweep the coast 
with hi eye, philip perceived, not four mile to leeward of them (so 
littl progress had they made), the spot where they had _deserted_ the 
commodore. 

"sure thi ha been a judgment on him for hi cruelty," thought 
philip, "and the propheci of poor avenhorn will come true--mor bone 
than hi will bleach on those rocks." philip turn round again to 
where the admiral' ship wa on shore, and start back, as he beheld 
a sight even more dread than all that he had viewed--th bodi of 
vander hagen, the offic sent on board of the admiral, hang at the 
main-yard-arm. "mi god! is it possible?" exclaim philip, stamp 
with sorrow and indignation. 

hi boat wa return on board, and philip await it with 
impatience. the men hasten up the side, and breathlessli inform 
philip that the admiral, as soon as he had heard the lieutenant' 
report, and hi acknowledg that he wa offic of the watch, had 
order him to be hung, and that he had sent them back with a summon 
for him to repair on board immediately, and that they had seen anoth 
rope prepar at the other yard-arm. 

"but not for you, sir," cri the men; "that shall never be--you shall 
not go on board--and we will defend you with our lives." 

the whole ship' compani join in thi resolution, and express 
their determin to resist the admiral. philip thank them 
kindly--st hi intent of not go on board, and request 
that they would remain quiet, until it wa ascertain what step the 
admir might take. He then went down to hi cabin, to reflect upon 
what plan he should pursue. As he look out of the stern-windows, and 
perceiv the bodi of the young man still swing in the wind, he 
almost wish that he wa in hi place, for then there would be an end 
to hi wayward fate: but he thought of amine, and felt that, for her, 
he wish to live. that the phantom ship should have decoy him to 
destruct wa also a sourc of much pain feeling, and philip 
meditated, with hi hand press to hi temples. "it is my destiny," 
thought he at last, "and the will of heaven must be done: we could not 
have been so deceiv if heaven had not permit it." and then hi 
thought revert to hi present situation. 

that the admir had exceed hi power in take the life of the 
offic wa undeniable, as, although hi instruct gave him power 
of life and death, still it wa onli to be decid by the sentenc of 
the court-marti held by the captain command the vessel of the 
fleet; he therefor felt himself justifi in resistance. but philip 
wa troubl with the idea that such resist might lead to much 
bloodshed; and he wa still debat how to act, when they report to 
him that there wa a boat come from the admiral' ship. philip went 
upon deck to receiv the officer, who state that it wa the admiral' 
order that he should immedi come on board, and that he must 
consid himself now under arrest, and deliv up hi sword. 

"no! no!" exclaim the ship' compani of the _dort_. He shall not go 
on board. We will stand by our captain to the last." 

"silence, men! silence!" cri philip. "you must be aware, sir," said 
he to the officer, "that in the cruel punish of that innoc 
young man, the admir ha exceed hi powers: and, much as I 
regret to see ani symptom of mutini and insubordination, it must be 
rememb that, if those in command disobey the order they have 
received, by exceed them, they not onli set the example, but give 
an excus for those who otherwis would be bound to obey them, to do 
the same. tell the admir that hi murder of that innoc man ha 
determin me no longer to consid myself under hi authority, and 
that I will hold myself, as well as him, answer to the compani 
whom we serve, for our conduct. I do not intend to go on board and 
put myself in hi power, that he might gratifi hi resent by my 
ignomini death. It is a duti that I owe these men under my command 
to preserv my life, that I may, if possible, preserv their in thi 
strait; and you may also add, that a littl reflect must point out 
to him that thi is no time for us to war with, but to assist each 
other with all our energies. We are here, ship-wreck on a barren 
coast, with provis insuffici for ani lengthen stay, no 
prospect of succour, and littl of escape. As the commodor truli 
prophesied, mani more are like to perish as well as him--and even 
the admir himself may be of the number. I shall wait hi answer; 
if he choos to lay asid all animosity, and refer our conduct to 
a higher tribunal, I am will to join with him in render that 
assist to each other which our situat requires--if not, you 
must perceive, and of cours will tell him, that I have those with me 
who will defend me against ani attempt at force. you have my answer, 
sir, and may go on board." 

the offic went to the gangway, but found that none of hi crew, 
except the bowman, were in the boat; they had gone up to gain from the 
men of the _dort_ the true histori of what they had but imperfectli 
heard: and, befor they were summon to return, had receiv full 
intelligence. they coincid with the seamen of the _dort_, that the 
appear of the phantom ship, which had occas their present 
disaster, wa a judgment upon the admiral, for hi conduct in have 
so cruelli _deserted_ the poor commodore. 

upon the return of the offic with philip' answer, the rage of the 
admir wa beyond all bounds. He order the gun aft, which would 
bear upon the _dort_, to be double-shotted, and fire into her; but 
krantz point out to him that they could not bring more gun to bear 
upon the _dort_, in their present situation, than the _dort_ 
could bring to bear upon them; that their superior forc wa thu 
neutralised, and that no advantag could result from take such a 
step. the admir immedi put krantz under arrest, and proceed 
to put into execut hi insan intentions. In thi he was, however, 
prevent by the seamen of the _lion_, who neither wish to fire upon 
their consort, nor to be fire at in return. the report of the boat' 
crew had been circul through the ship, and the men felt too much 
ill-wil against the admiral, and perceiv at the same time the 
extrem difficulti of their situation, to wish to make it worse. they 
did not proceed to open mutiny, but they went down below, and when 
the offic order them up, they refus to go upon deck; and the 
officers, who were equal disgust with the admiral' conduct, 
mere inform him of the state of the ship' company, without 
name individuals, so as to excit hi resent against ani one 
in particular. such wa the state of affair when the sun went down. 
noth had been done on board the admiral' ship, for krantz wa 
under arrest, and the admir had retir in a state of furi to hi 
cabin. 

In the meantim philip and the ship' compani had not been idle--they 
had laid an anchor out astern, and hove taut: they had start all 
the water, and were pump it out, when a boat pull alongside, and 
krantz made hi appear on deck. 

"captain vanderdecken, I have come to put myself under your orders, if 
you will receiv me--if not, render me your protection; for, as 
sure as fate, I should have been hang to-morrow morning, if I had 
remain in my own ship. the men in the boat have come with the same 
intention--that of join you, if you will permit them." 

although philip would have wish it had been otherwise, he could not 
well refus to receiv krantz, under the circumst of the case. He 
wa veri partial to him, and to save hi life, which certainli wa in 
danger, he would have done much more. He desir that the boat' crew 
should return; but when krantz had state to him what had occur on 
board the _lion_, and the crew earnestli beg him not to send them 
back to almost certain death, which their have effect the escap 
of krantz would have assured, philip reluctantli allow them to 
remain. 

the night wa tempestuous, but the wind be now off shore, the water 
wa not rough. the crew of the _dort_, under the direct of philip 
and krantz, succeed in lighten the vessel so much dure the 
night that the next morn they were abl to haul her off, and found 
that her bottom had receiv no seriou injury. It wa fortun for 
them that they had not discontinu their exertions, for the wind 
shift a few hour befor sunrise, and by the time that they had 
ship their rudder, it came on to blow fresh down the straits, the 
wind be accompani with a heavi swell. 

the admiral' ship still lay aground, and appar no exert were 
use to get her off. philip wa much puzzl how to act: leav the 
crew of the _lion_ he could not; nor inde could he refuse, or did he 
wish to refus the admiral, if he propos come on board; but he now 
made up hi mind that it should onli be as a passenger, and that he 
would himself retain the command. At present he content himself with 
drop hi anchor outside, clear of the reef, where he wa shelter 
by a bluff cape, under which the water wa smooth, about a mile 
distant from where the admiral' ship lay on shore; and he employ 
hi crew in replenish hi water-cask from a rivulet close to where 
the ship wa anchored. He wait to see if the other vessel got off, 
be convinc that if she did not some commun must soon take 
place. As soon as the water wa complete, he sent one of the boat to 
the place where the commodor had been landed, have resolv to take 
him on board, if they could find him; but the boat return without 
have seen anyth of him, although the men had clamber over the 
hill to a consider distance. 

On the second morn after philip had haul hi vessel off, they 
observ that the boat of the admiral' ship were pass and 
repass from the shore, land her store and provisions; and the 
next day, from the tent pitch on shore, it wa evid that she wa 
abandoned, although the boat were still employ in take articl 
out of her. that night it blew fresh, and the sea wa heavy; the next 
morn her mast were gone, and she turn on her broadside; she wa 
evid a wreck, and philip now consult with krantz how to act. To 
leav the crew of the _lion_ on shore wa impossible: they must all 
perish when the winter set in upon such a desol coast. On the 
whole, it wa consid advis that the first commun should 
come from the other party, and philip resolv to remain quietli at 
anchor. 

It wa veri plain that there wa no longer ani subordin among the 
crew of the _lion_, who were to be seen, in the day-time, climb 
over the rock in everi direction, and at night, when their larg 
fire were lighted, carous and drinking. thi wast of provis 
wa a subject of much vexat to philip. He had not more than 
suffici for hi own crew, and he took it for grant that, so soon 
as what they had taken on shore should be expended, the crew of the 
_lion_ would ask to be receiv on board of the _dort_. 

for more than a week did affair continu in thi state, when, one 
morning, a boat wa seen pull toward the ship, and, in the 
stern-sheet philip recognis the offic who had been sent on board 
to put him under arrest. when the offic came on deck, he took off 
hi hat to philip. 

"you do, then, acknowledg me as in command," observ philip. 

"yes, sir, most certainly; you were second in command, but now you are 
first--for the admir is dead." 

"dead!" exclaim philip; "and how?" 

"he wa found dead on the beach, under a high cliff, and the bodi 
of the commodor wa in hi arms; indeed, they were both grappl 
together. It is supposed, that in hi walk up to the top of the hill, 
which he use to take everi day, to see if ani vessel might be in 
the straits, he fell in with the commodore--that they had come to 
contention, and had both fallen over the precipic together. No one 
saw the meeting, but they must have fallen over the rocks, as the 
bodi are dread mangled." 

On inquiry, philip ascertain that all chanc of save the _lion_ 
had been lost after the second night, when she had beat in her 
larboard streak, and had six feet of water in the hold--that the crew 
had been veri insubordinate, and had consum almost all the spirits; 
and that not onli all the sick had alreadi perished, but also 
mani other who had either fallen over the rock when they were 
intoxicated, or had been found dead in the morning, from their 
exposur dure the night. 

"then the poor commodore' propheci ha been fulfilled!" observ 
philip to krantz. "mani others, and even the admir himself, have 
perish with him--peac be with them! and now let us get away from 
thi horribl place as soon as possible." 

philip then gave order to the offic to collect hi men, and the 
provis that remained, for immedi embarkation. krantz follow 
soon after with all the boats, and befor night everyth wa on 
board. the bodi of the admir and commodor were buri where they 
lay, and the next morn the _dort_ wa under weigh, and, with a 
slant wind, wa lay a fair cours through the straits. 




chapter xix 


It appear as if their misfortun were to cease, after the tragic 
death of the two commanders. In a few days, the _dort_ had pass 
through the strait of magellan, and wa sail in the pacif ocean, 
with a blue sky and quiet sea. the ship' compani recov their 
health and spirits, and the vessel be now well manned, the duti wa 
carri on with cheerfulness. 

In about a fortnight, they had gain well up on the spanish coast, 
but although they had seen mani of the inhabit on the beach, they 
had not fallen in with ani vessel belong to the spaniards. awar 
that if he met with a spanish ship of superior forc it would attack 
him, philip had made everi preparation, and had train hi men to the 
guns. He had now, with the joint crew of the vessels, a well-man 
ship, and the anticip of prize-money had made hi men veri eager 
to fall in with some spaniard, which they knew that philip would 
captur if he could. light wind and calm detain them for a month 
on the coast, when philip determin upon run for the isl St 
marie, where, though he knew it wa in possess of the spaniards, he 
yet hope to be abl to procur refresh for the ship' company, 
either by fair mean or by force. the _dort_ was, by their reckoning, 
about thirti mile from the island, and have run in until after 
dark, they had hove-to till the next morning. krantz wa on deck; 
he leant over the side, and as the sail flap to the masts, he 
attempt to defin the line of the horizon. It wa veri dark, but as 
he watched, he thought that he perceiv a light for a moment, and 
which then disappeared. fix hi eye on the spot, he soon made out 
a vessel, hove-to, and not two cables' length distant. He hasten 
down to appris philip, and procur a glass. By the time philip wa 
on deck, the vessel had been distinctli made out to be a three-mast 
xebeque, veri low in the water. after a short consultation, it wa 
agre that the boat on the quarter should be lower down, and 
man and arm without noise, and that they should steal gentli 
alongsid and surpris her. the men were call up, silenc enjoined, 
and in a few minut the boats' crew had possess of the vessel; 
have board her and secur the hatch befor the alarm could be 
given by the few who were on deck. more men were then taken on board 
by krantz, who, as agre upon, lay to under the lee of the _dort_ 
until the daylight made it appearance. the hatch were then taken 
off, and the prison sent on board of the _dort_. there were sixti 
peopl on board, a larg number for a vessel of that description. 

On be interrogated, two of the prisoners, who were well-dress and 
gentlemanlik persons, step forward and state that the vessel wa 
from St mary's, bound to lima, with a cargo of flour and passengers; 
that the crew and captain consist of twenty-f men, and all the 
rest who were on board, had taken that opportun of go to lima. 
that they themselv were among the passengers, and trust that the 
vessel and cargo would be immedi released, as the two nation 
were not at war. 

"not at war at home, I grant," repli philip, "but in these seas, the 
constant aggress of your arm ship compel me to retaliate, and 
I shall therefor make a prize of your vessel and cargo. At the same 
time, as I have no wish to molest privat individuals, I will land all 
the passeng and crew at St mary's, to which place I am bound in 
order to obtain refreshments, which now I shall expect will be given 
cheer as your ransom, so as to reliev me from resort to 
force." the prison protest strongli against this, but without 
avail. they then request leav to ransom the vessel and cargo, 
offer a larger sum than they both appear to be worth; but philip, 
be short of provisions, refus to part with the cargo, and the 
spaniard appear much disappoint at the unsuccess issu of 
their request. find that noth would induc him to part with the 
provisions, they then beg hard to ransom the vessel; and to this, 
after a consult with krantz, philip gave hi assent. the two 
vessel then made sail, and steer on for the island, then about four 
leagu distant. although philip had not wish to retain the vessel, 
yet, as they stood in together, her superior speed becam so manifest 
that he almost repent that he had agre to ransom her. 

At noon, the _dort_ wa anchor in the roads, out of gunshot, and a 
portion of the passeng allow to go on shore and make arrang 
for the ransom of the remainder, while the prize wa haul alongside, 
and her cargo hoist into the ship. toward evening, three larg 
boat with live stock and veget and the sum agre upon for the 
ransom of the xebeque, came alongside; and as soon as one of the boat 
wa cleared, the prison were permit to go on shore in it, with 
the except of the spanish pilot, who, at the suggest of krantz, 
wa retained, with a promis of be releas directli the _dort_ wa 
clear of the spanish seas. A negro slave wa also, at hi own 
request, allow to remain on board, much to the annoy of the two 
passeng befor mentioned, who claim the man as their property, 
and insist that it wa an infract of the agreement which had been 
enter into. "you prove my right by your own words," repli philip; 
"I agre to deliv up all the passengers, but no _property_; the 
slave will remain on board." 

find their endeavour ineffectual, the spaniard took a haughti 
leave. the _dort_ remain at anchor that night to examin her 
rigging, and the next morn they discov that the xebequ had 
disappeared, have sail unperceiv by them dure the night. 

As soon as the anchor wa up and sail made on the ship, philip went 
down to hi cabin with krantz, to consult as to their best course. 
they were follow by the negro slave, who, shut the door and 
look watch round, said that he wish to speak with them. hi 
inform wa most important, but given rather too late. the vessel 
which had been ransom wa a govern advice-boat, the fastest 
sailer the spaniard possessed. the two pretend passeng were 
offic of the spanish navy, and the other were the crew of the 
vessel. she had been sent down to collect the bullion and take it 
to lima, and at the same time to watch for the arriv of the dutch 
fleet, intellig of whose sail had been some time befor 
receiv overland. when the dutch fleet made it appearance, she 
wa to return to lima with the news, and a spanish forc would be 
despatch against it. they further learnt that some of the suppos 
cask of flour contain 2000 gold doubloon each, other bar of 
silver; thi precaut have been taken in case of capture. that the 
vessel had now sail for lima there wa no doubt. the reason whi 
the spaniard were so anxiou not to leav the negro on board of the 
_dort_, was, that they knew that he would disclos what he now had 
done. As for the pilot, he wa a man whom the spaniard knew they 
could trust, and for that reason they had better be care of him, or 
he would lead the _dort_ into some difficulty. 

philip now repent that he had ransom the vessel, as he would, in 
all probability, have to meet and cope with a superior force, befor 
he could make hi way clear out of these seas; but there wa no help 
for it. He consult with krantz, and it wa agre that they should 
send for the ship' compani and make them acquaint with these facts; 
argu that a knowledg of the valuabl captur which they had made, 
would induc the men to fight well, and stimul them with the hope 
of further success. the ship' compani heard the intellig with 
delight, profess themselv readi to meet doubl their force, and 
then, by the direct of philip, the cask were brought up on the 
quarter-deck, opened, and the bullion taken out. the whole, when 
collected, amount to about half a million of dollars, as near as 
they could estim it, and a distribut of the coin money wa 
made from the capstan the veri next day; the bar of metal be 
reserv until they could be sold, and their valu ascertained. 

for six week philip work hi vessel up the coast, without 
fall in with ani vessel under sail. notic had been given by the 
advice-boat, as it appeared, and everi craft, larg and small, wa at 
anchor under the batteries. they had nearli run up the whole coast, 
and philip had determin that the next day he would stretch across to 
batavia, when a ship wa seen in-shor under a press of sail, run 
toward lima. chase wa immedi given, but the water shoaled, 
and the pilot wa ask if they could stand on. He repli in the 
affirmative, state that they were now in the shallowest water, and 
that it wa deeper within. the leadsman wa order into the chains, 
but at the first heav the lead-lin broke; anoth wa sent for, and 
the _dort_ still carri on under a heavi press of sail. just then, 
the negro slave went up to philip, and told him that he had seen the 
pilot with hi knife in the chains, and that he thought he must have 
cut the lead-lin so far through as to occas it be carri away, 
and told philip not to trust him. the helm wa immedi put down; 
but as the ship went round she touch on the bank, dragged, and wa 
again clear.--"scoundrel!" cri philip. "so you cut the lead-line? 
the negro saw you, and ha save us." 

the spaniard leap down from off the gun, and, befor he could be 
prevented, had buri hi knife in the heart of the negro. "maldetto, 
take that for your pains!" cri he, in a fury, grind hi teeth and 
flourish hi knife. 

the negro fell dead. the pilot wa seiz and disarm by the crew 
of the _dort_, who were partial to the negro, as it wa from hi 
inform that they had becom rich. 

"let them do with him as they please," said krantz to philip. 

"yes," repli philip; "summari justice." 

the crew debat a few minutes, and then lash the pilot to the 
negro, and carri him off to the taffrail. there wa a heavi plunge, 
and he disappear under the eddi water in the wake of the vessel. 

philip now determin to shape hi cours for batavia. He wa within a 
few days' sail of lima, and had everi reason to believ that vessel 
had been sent out to intercept him. with a favour wind he now 
stood away from the coast, and for three day made a rapid passage. 
On the fourth, at daylight, two vessel appear to windward, bear 
down upon him. that they were larg arm vessel wa evident; and the 
display of spanish ensign and pennants, as they round to, about a 
mile to windward, soon show that they were enemies. they prove 
to be a frigat of a larger size than the _dort_, and a corvett of 
twenty-two guns. 

the crew of the _dort_ show no alarm at thi dispar of force: 
they clink their doubloon in their pockets; vow not to return 
them to their law owners, if they could help it; and flew with 
alacr to their guns. the dutch ensign wa display in defiance, 
and the two spanish vessels, again put their head toward the 
_dort_, that they might lessen their distance, receiv some rake 
shot, which somewhat discompos them; but they round to at a 
cable' length, and commenc the action with great spirit, the 
frigat lie on the beam, and the corvett on the bow of philip' 
vessel. after half an hour' determin exchang of broadsides, the 
foremast of the spanish frigat fell, carri away with it the 
maintop-mast; and thi accid imped her firing. the _dort_ 
immedi made sail, stood on to the corvette, which she crippl 
with three or four broadsides, then tacked, and fetch alongsid of 
the frigate, whose lee-gun were still imped with the wreck of the 
foremast. the two vessel now lay head and stern, within ten feet of 
each other, and the action recommenc to the disadvantag of the 
spaniard. In a quarter of an hour the canvas, hang overside, caught 
fire from the discharg of the guns, and veri soon commun to the 
ship, the _dort_ still pour in a most destruct broadside, which 
could not be effectu returned. after everi attempt to extinguish 
the flames, the captain of the spanish vessel resolv that both 
vessel should share the same fate. He put hi helm up, and, run 
her on to the _dort_, grappl with her, and attempt to secur 
the two vessel together. then rage the conflict; the spaniard 
attempt to pass their grappling-chain so as to prevent the escap 
of their enemy, and the dutch endeavour to frustrat their attempt. 
the chain and side of both vessel were crowd with men fight 
desperately; those struck down fall between the two vessels, which 
the wreck of the foremast still prevent from come into actual 
collision. dure thi conflict, philip and krantz were not idle. 
By squar the after-yards, and put all sail on forward they 
contriv that the _dort_ should pay off befor the wind with her 
antagonist, and by thi manoeuvr they clear themselv of the smoke 
which so incommod them; and, have good way on the two vessels, 
they then round to so as to get on the other tack, and bring the 
spaniard to leeward. thi gave them a manifest advantage, and soon 
termin the conflict. the smoke and flame were beat back on the 
spanish vessel--th fire which had commun to the _dort_ wa 
extinguished--th spaniard were no longer abl to prosecut their 
endeavour to fasten the two vessel together, and retreat to within 
the bulwark of their own vessel; and, after great exertions, the 
_dort_ wa disengaged, and forg ahead of her opponent, who wa soon 
envelop in a sheet of flame. the corvett remain a few cables' 
length to windward, occasion fire a gun. philip pour in a 
broadside, and she haul down her colours. the action might now be 
consid at an end, and the object wa to save the crew of the 
burn frigate. the boat of the _dort_ were hoist out, but onli 
two of them could swim. one of them wa immedi despatch to the 
corvette, with order for her to send all her boat to the assist 
of the frigate, which wa done, and the major part of the surviv 
crew were saved. for two hour the gun of the frigate, as they were 
heat by the flames, discharg themselves; and then, the fire have 
commun to the magazine, she blew up, and the remaind of her 
hull sank slowli and disappeared. among the prison in the uniform 
of the spanish servic philip perceiv the two pretend passengers, 
thi prove the correct of the negro' statement. the two 
men-of-war had been sent out of lima on purpos to intercept him, 
anticipating, with such a preponder force, an easi victory. after 
some consult with krantz, philip agre that, as the corvett wa 
in such a crippl state, and the nation were not actual at war, 
it would be advis to releas her with all the prisoners. thi wa 
done, and the _dort_ again made sail for batavia, and anchor in 
the road three week after the combat had taken place. He found the 
remaind of the fleet, which had been despatch befor them, and had 
arriv there some weeks, had taken in their cargoes, and were 
readi to sail for holland. philip wrote hi despatches, in which he 
commun to the director the event of the voyage; and then went 
on shore, to resid at the hous of the merchant who had formerli 
receiv him, until the _dort_ could be freight for her voyag home. 




chapter XX 


We must return to amine, who is seat on the mossi bank where she and 
philip convers when they were interrupt by schriften the pilot. 
she is in deep thought, with her eye cast down, as if tri to 
recal the past. "alas! for my mother' power," exclaim she; "but it 
is gone--gon for ever! thi torment and suspens I cannot bear--thos 
foolish priest too!" and amin rose from the bank and walk toward 
her cottage. 

father mathia had not return to lisbon. At first he had not found 
an opportunity, and afterwards, hi debt of gratitud toward philip 
induc him to remain by amine, who appear each day to hold more in 
avers the tenet of the christian faith. mani and mani were the 
consult with father seysen, mani were the exhort of both 
the good old men to amine, who, at times, would listen without reply, 
and at others, argu boldli against them. It appear to them that she 
reject their religion with an obstinaci as unpardon as it wa 
incomprehensible. but to her the case wa more simple: she refus to 
believe, she said, that which she could not understand. she went so 
far as to acknowledg the beauti of the principles, the puriti of the 
doctrine; but when the good priest would enter into the articl of 
their faith, amin would either shake her head or attempt to turn 
the conversation. thi onli increas the anxieti of the good father 
mathia to convert and save the soul of one so young and beautiful; 
and he now no longer thought of return to lisbon, but devot hi 
whole time to the instruct of amine, who, weari by hi incess 
importunities, almost loath hi presence. 

upon reflection, it will not appear surpris that amin reject a 
creed so disson to her wish and intentions. the human mind is of 
that proud nature, that it requir all it humil to be call into 
action befor it will bow, even to the deity. 

amin knew that her mother had possess superior knowledge, and an 
intimaci with unearthli intelligences. she had seen her practis her 
art with success, although so young at the time that she could not now 
call to mind the mystic prepar by which her mother had succeed 
in her wishes; and it wa now that her thought were wholli bent upon 
recov what she had forgotten, that father mathia wa exhort 
her to a creed which posit forbad even the attempt. the peculiar 
and aw mission of her husband strengthen her opinion in the 
law of call in the aid of supernatur agencies; and the 
argument brought forward by these worthy, but not over-talented, 
professor of the christian creed, had but littl effect upon a mind 
so strong and so decid as that of amine--a mind which, bent as it 
wa upon one object, reject with scorn tenets, in proof of which 
they could offer no visibl manifestation, and which would have bound 
her blindli to believ what appear to her contrari to common sense. 
that her mother' art could bring evid of _its_ truth she had 
alreadi shown, and satisfi herself in the effect of the dream 
which she had prove upon philip;--but what proof could they bring 
forward?--records--_which they would not permit her to read_! 

"oh! that I had my mother' art," repeat amin onc more, as she 
enter the cottage; "then would I know where my philip wa at thi 
moment. oh! for the black mirror in which I use to peer at her 
command, and tell her what pass in array befor me. how well do I 
rememb that time--th time of my father' absence, when I look 
into the liquid on the palm of my hand, and told her of the bedouin 
camp--of the skirmish--th hors without a rider--and the turban on 
the sand!" and again amin fell into deep thought. "yes," cri she, 
after a time, "thou canst assist me, mother! give me in a dream thi 
knowledge; thi daughter beg it as a boon. let me think again. the 
word--what wa the word? what wa the name of the spirit--turshoon? 
yes, methink it wa turshoon. mother! mother! help your daughter." 

"dost thou call upon the bless virgin, my child?" said father 
mathias, who had enter the room as she pronounc the last words. 
"if so, thou dost well, for she may appear to thee in thi dreams, and 
strengthen thee in the true faith." 

"I call upon my own mother, who is in the land of spirits, good 
father," repli amine. 

"yes; but, as an infidel; not, I fear, in the land of the bless 
spirits, my child." 

"she hardli will be punish for follow the creed of her fathers, 
live where she did, where no other creed wa known?" repli amine, 
indignantly. "if the good on earth are bless in the next world--if 
she had, as you assert she had, a soul to be saved--an immort 
spirit--h who made that spirit will not destroy it becaus she 
worship as her father did.--her life wa good: whi should she 
be punish for ignor of that creed which she never had an 
opportun of rejecting?" 

"who shall disput the will of heaven, my child? Be thank that you 
are permit to be instructed, and to be receiv into the bosom of 
the holi church." 

"I am thank for mani things, father; but I am weary, and must wish 
you a good-night." 

amin retir to her room--but not to sleep. onc more did she attempt 
the ceremoni use by her mother, chang them each time, as 
doubt of her success. again the censer wa lighted--th charm 
essayed; again the room wa fill with smoke as she threw in the 
variou herb which she had knowledg of, for all the paper thrown 
asid at her father' death had been care collected, and on mani 
were direct found as to the use of those herbs. "the word! the 
word! I have the first--th second word! help me, mother!" cri 
amine, as she sat by the side of the bed, in the room, which wa now 
so full of smoke that noth could be distinguished. "it is of no 
use," thought she at last, let her hand fall at her side; "I have 
forgotten the art. mother! mother! help me in my dream thi night." 

the smoke gradual clear away, and, when amin lift up her eyes, 
she perceiv a figur stand befor her. At first she thought she 
had been success in her charm; but, as the figur becam more 
distinct, she perceiv that it wa father mathias, who wa look at 
her with a sever frown and contract brow, hi arm fold befor 
him. 

"unholi child! what dost thou?" 

amin had rous the suspicion of the priests, not onli by her 
conversation, but by sever attempt which she had befor made to 
recov her lost art; and on one occasion, in which she had defend 
it, both father mathia and father seysen had pour out the bitterest 
anathema upon her, or anyon who had resort to such practices. the 
smell of the fragrant herb thrown into the censer, and the smoke, 
which afterward had escap through the door and ascend the stairs, 
had awaken the suspicion of father mathias, and he had crept up 
silently, and enter the room without her perceiv it. amin at 
onc perceiv her danger. had she been single, she would have dare 
the priest; but, for philip' sake, she determin to mislead him. 

"I do no wrong, father," repli she, calmly; "but it appear to me 
not seemli that you should enter the chamber of a young woman dure 
her husband' absence. I might have been in my bed. It is a strang 
intrusion." 

"thou canst not mean this, woman! My age--mi profession--ar a 
suffici warranty," repli father mathias, somewhat confus at 
thi unexpect attack. 

"not always, father, if what I have been told of monk and priest 
be true," repli amine. "I ask again, whi comest thou here into an 
unprotect woman' chamber?" 

"becaus I felt convinc that she wa practis unholi arts." 

"unholi arts!--what mean you? Is the leech' skill unholy? is it 
unholi to administ relief to those who suffer?--to charm the 
fever and the agu which rack the limb of those who live in thi 
unwholesom climate?" 

"all charm are most unholy." 

"when I said charms, father, I meant not what you mean; I simpli would 
have said a remedy. If a knowledg of certain wonder herbs, 
which, properli combin will form a specif to eas the suffer 
wretch--an art well known unto my mother, and which I now would fain 
recall--if that knowledge, or a wish to regain that knowledge, be 
unholy, then are you correct." 

"I heard thee call upon thi mother for her help." 

"I did, for she well knew the ingredients; but I, I fear have not the 
knowledg that she had. Is that sinful, good father?" 

"'tis, then, a remedi that you would find?" repli the priest; "I 
thought that thou didst practis that which is most unlawful." 

"can the burn of a few weed be then unlawful? what did you expect 
to find? look you, father, at these ashes--they may, with oil, be 
rub into the pore and give relief--but can they do more? what do 
you expect from them--a ghost?--a spirit?--lik the prophet rais for 
the king of israel?" and amin laugh aloud. 

"I am perplexed, but not convinced," repli the priest. 

"i, too, am perplex and not convinced," respond amine, scornfully. 
"I cannot satisfi myself that a man of your discret could realli 
suppos that there wa mischief in burn weeds; nor am I convinc 
that such wa the occas of your visit at thi hour of the night to 
a lone woman' chamber. there may be natur charm more power than 
those you call supernatural. I pray you, father, leav thi chamber. 
It is not seemly. should you again presume, you leav the house. I 
thought better of you. In future, I will not be left at ani time 
alone." 

thi attack of amine' upon the reput of the old priest wa too 
severe. father mathia immedi quit the room, saying, as he 
went out, "may god forgiv you for your fals suspicion and great 
injustice! I came here for the caus I have stated, and no more." 

"yes!" soliloquis amine, as the door closed, "I know you did; but I 
must rid myself of your unwelcom company. I will have no spi upon my 
actions--no meddler to thwart me in my will. In your zeal you have 
commit yourself, and I will take the advantag you have given me. 
Is not the privaci of a woman' chamber to be held sacr by you 
sacr men? In return for assist in distress--for food and 
shelter--y would becom a spy. how grateful, and how worthi of the 
creed which you profess!" amin open her door as soon as she had 
remov the censer, and summon one of the women of the hous to 
stay that night in her room, state that the priest had enter her 
chamber, and she did not like the intrusion. 

"holi father! is it possible?" repli the woman. 

amin made no reply, but went to bed; but father mathia heard all 
that pass as he pace the room below. the next day he call upon 
father seysen, and commun to him what had occurred, and the 
fals suspicion of amine. 

"you have act hastily," repli father seysen, "to visit a woman' 
chamber at such an hour of the night." 

"I had my suspicions, good father seysen." 

"and she will have hers. she is young and beautiful." 

"now, by the bless virgin--" 

"I absolv you, good mathias," repli father seysen; "but still, if 
known, it would occas much scandal to our church." 

and known it soon was; for the woman who had been summon by amin 
did not fail to mention the circumstance; and father mathia found 
himself everywher so coldli received, and, besides, so ill at eas 
with himself, that he veri soon afterward quit the country, and 
return to lisbon; angri with himself for hi imprudence, but still 
more angri with amin for her unjust suspicions. 




chapter xxi 


the cargo of the _dort_ wa soon ready, and philip sail and arriv 
at amsterdam without ani further adventure. that he reach hi 
cottage, and wa receiv with delight by amine, need hardli be said. 
she had been expect him; for the two ship of the squadron, which 
had sail on hi arriv at batavia, and which had charg of hi 
despatches, had, of course, carri letter to her from philip, the 
first letter she had ever receiv from him dure hi voyages. six 
week after the letter philip himself made hi appearance, and amin 
wa happy. the director were, of course, highli satisfi with 
philip' conduct, and he wa appoint to the command of a larg arm 
ship, which wa to proceed to india in the spring, and one-third of 
which, accord to agreement, wa purchas by philip out of the 
fund which he had in the hand of the company. He had now five month 
of quiet and repos to pass away, previou to hi onc more trust 
to the elements; and thi time, as it wa agreed, he had to make 
arrang on board for the recept of amine. 

amin narrat to philip what had occur between her and the priest 
mathias, and by what mean she had rid herself of hi unwished-for 
surveillance. 

"and were you practis your mother' arts, amine?" 

"nay, not practis them, for I could not recal them, but I wa 
tri to recov them." 

"whi so, amine? thi must not be. It is, as the good father said, 
'unholy.' promis me you will abandon them, now and for ever." 

"if that act be unholy, philip, so is your mission. you would deal 
and co-oper with the spirit of anoth world--i would do no more. 
abandon your terrif mission--abandon your seek after disembodi 
spirits--stay at home with your amine, and she will cheer compli 
with your request." 

"mine is an aw summon from the most high." 

"then the most high permit your communion with those who are not of 
thi world?" 

"he does; you know even the priest do not gainsay it, although they 
shudder at the veri thought." 

"if then He permit to one, He will to another; nay, aught that I can 
do is but with hi permission." 

"yes, amine, so doe He permit evil to stalk on the earth, but He 
counten it not." 

"he counten your seek after your doom father, your attempt 
to meet him; nay, more, He command it. If you are thu permitted, whi 
may not I be? I am your wife, a portion of yourself; and when I am 
left over a desol hearth, while you pursu your cours of danger, 
may not I appeal also to the immateri world to give me that 
intellig which will sooth my sorrow, lighten my burden, and 
which, at the same time, can hurt no live creature? did I attempt to 
practis these art for evil purposes, it were just to deni them me, 
and wrong to continu them; but I would but follow in the step of my 
husband, and seek as he seeks, with a good intent." 

"but it is contrari to our faith." 

"have the priest declar your mission contrari to their faith? or, 
if they have, have they not been convinc to the contrary, and been 
awe to silence? but whi argue, my dear philip? shall I not now be 
with you? and while with you I will attempt no more. you have my 
promise; but if separated, I will not say, but I shall then requir of 
the invis a knowledg of my husband' motions, when in search of 
the invis also." 

the winter pass rapidli away, for it wa pass by philip in quiet 
and happiness; the spring came on, the vessel wa to be fit out, 
and philip and amin repair to amsterdam. 

the _utrecht_ wa the name of the vessel to which he had been 
appointed, a ship of 400 tons, newli launched, and pierc for 
twenty-four guns. two more month pass away, dure which philip 
superintend the fit and load of the vessel, assist by hi 
favourit krantz, who serv in her as first mate. everi conveni 
and comfort that philip could think of wa prepar for amine; and 
in the month of may he started, with order to stop at gambroon and 
ceylon, run down the strait of sumatra, and from thenc to forc hi 
way into the china seas, the compani have everi reason to expect 
from the portugues the most determin opposit to the attempt. hi 
ship' compani wa numerous, and he had a small detach of soldier 
on board to assist the supercargo, who carri out mani thousand 
dollar to make purchas at port in china, where their good might 
not be appreciated. everi care had been taken in the equip of the 
vessel, which wa perhap the finest, the best manned, and freight 
with the most valuabl cargo, which had been sent out by the india 
company. 

the _utrecht_ sail with a flow sheet, and wa soon clear of the 
english channel; the voyag promis to be auspicious, favour gale 
bore them without accid to within a few hundr mile of the cape 
of good hope, when, for the first time, they were becalmed. amin wa 
delighted: in the even she would pace the deck with philip; then 
all wa silent, except the splash of the wave as it wash against 
the side of the vessel--al wa in repos and beauty, as the bright 
southern constel sparkl over their heads. 

"whose destini can be in these stars, which appear not to those who 
inhabit the northern regions?" said amine, as she cast her eye above, 
and watch them in their brightness; "and what doe that fall 
meteor portend? what caus it rapid descent from heaven?" 

"do you, then, put faith in stars, amine?" 

"in arabi we do; and whi not? they were not spread over the sky to 
give light--for what then?" 

"to beautifi the world. they have their uses, too." 

"then you agre with me--they have their uses, and the destini of 
men are there concealed. My mother wa one of those who could read 
them well. alas! for me they are a seal book." 

"i it not better so, amine?" 

"better!--say better to grovel on thi earth with our selfish, 
humbl race, wander in mystery, and awe, and doubt, when we can 
commun with the intellig above! doe not the soul leap at 
her admiss to confer with superior powers? doe not the proud heart 
bound at the feel that it owner is one of those more gift than 
the usual race of mortals? Is it not a nobl ambition?" 

"A danger one--most dangerous." 

"and therefor most noble. they seem as if they would speak to me: 
look at yon bright star--it beckon to me." 

for some time amine' eye were rais aloft; she spoke not, and 
philip remain at her side. she walk to the gangway of the vessel, 
and look down upon the placid wave, pierc by the moonbeam far 
below the surface. 

"and doe your imagination, amine, conjur up a race of be gift 
to live beneath that deep blue wave, who sport amid the coral rocks, 
and braid their hair with pearls?" said philip, smiling. 

"I know not, but it appear to me that it would be sweet to live 
there. you may call to mind your dream, philip; I wa then, accord 
to your description, one of those same beings." 

"you were," repli philip, thoughtfully. 

"and yet I feel as if water would reject me, even if the vessel were 
to sink. In what manner thi mortal frame of mine may be resolv 
into it elements, I know not; but thi I do feel, that it never will 
becom the sport of, or be toss by, the mock waves. but come in, 
philip, dearest; it is late, and the deck are wet with dew." 

when the day dawned, the look-out man at the mast-head report that 
he perceiv someth float on the still surfac of the water, on 
the beam of the vessel. krantz went up with hi glass to examine, and 
made it out to be a small boat, probabl cut adrift from some vessel. 
As there wa no appear of wind, philip permit a boat to be sent 
to examin it, and after a long pull, the seamen return on board, 
tow the small boat astern. 

"there is a bodi of a man in it, sir," said the second mate to krantz, 
as he gain the gangway; "but whether he is quit dead, or not, I 
cannot tell." 

krantz report thi to philip, who was, at that time, sit at 
breakfast with amin in the cabin, and then proceed to the gangway, 
to where the bodi of the man had been alreadi hand up by the seamen. 
the surgeon, who had been summoned, declar that life wa not yet 
extinct, and wa order him to be taken below for recovery, when, to 
their astonishment, the man turn as he lay, sat up, and ultim 
rose upon hi feet and stagger to a gun, when, after a time, he 
appear to be fulli recovered. In repli to question put to him, he 
said that he wa in a vessel which had been upset in a squall, that he 
had time to cut away the small boat astern, and that all the rest of 
the crew had perished. He had hardli made thi answer, when philip 
with amin came out of the cabin, and walk up to where the seamen 
were crowd round the man; the seamen retreat so as to make an 
opening, when philip and amine, to their astonish and horror, 
recognis their old acquaintance, the one-ey pilot schriften. 

"he! he! captain vanderdecken, I believe--glad to see you in command, 
and you too, fair lady." 

philip turn away with a chill at hi heart; amine' eye flash as 
she survey the wast form of the wretch creature. after a few 
seconds, she turn round and follow philip into the cabin, where 
she found him with hi face buri in hi hands. 

"courage, philip, courage!" said amine; "it wa inde a heavi shock, 
and I fear me forbod evil--but what then; it is our destiny." 

"it is--it ought perhap to be mine," repli philip, rais hi 
head; "but you, amine, whi should you be a partner--" 

"I am your partner, philip, in life and in death. I would not die 
first, philip, becaus it would griev you; but your death will be the 
signal for mine, and I will join you quickly." 

"surely, amine, you would not hasten your own?" 

"yes! and requir but one moment for thi littl steel to do it 
duty." 

"nay! amine, that is not lawful--our religion forbid it." 

"it may do so, but I cannot tell why. I came into thi world without 
my own consent--sur I may leav it without ask the leav of 
priests! but let that pass for the present: what will you do with that 
schriften?" 

"put him on shore at the cape; I cannot bear the odiou wretch' 
presence. did you not feel the chill, as before, when you approach 
him?" 

"I did--i knew that he wa there befor I saw him; but still, I know 
not why, I feel as if I would not send him away." 

"whi not?" 

"I believ it is becaus I am inclin to brave destiny, not to quail 
at it. the wretch can do no harm." 

"yes, he can--much: he can render the ship' compani mutin and 
disaffected;--besides, he attempt to depriv me of my relic." 

"I almost wish he had done so; then must you have discontinu thi 
wild search." 

"nay, amine, say not so; it is my duty, and I have taken my solemn 
oath--" 

"but thi schriften--y cannot well put him ashor at the cape; be 
a company' officer, you might send him home if you found a ship there 
homeward-bound; still, were I you, I would let destini work. He is 
woven in with ours, that is certain. courage, philip, and let him 
remain." 

"perhap you are right, amine; I may retard, but cannot escape, 
whatev may be my intend fate." 

"let him remain, then, and let him do hi worst. treat him with 
kindness--who know what we may gain from him?" 

"true, true, amine; he ha been my enemi without cause. who can 
tell?--perhap he may becom my friend." 

"and if not, you will have done your duty. send for him now." 

"no, not now--to-morrow; in the meantime, I will order him everi 
comfort." 

"we are talk as if he were one of us, which I feel that he is not," 
repli amine; "but still, mundan or not, we cannot but offer mundan 
kindness, and what thi world, or rather what thi ship affords. I 
long now to talk with him, to see if I can produc ani effect upon hi 
ice-lik frame. shall I make love to the ghoul?" and amin burst into 
a bitter laugh. 

here the convers dropped, but it substanc wa not disregarded. 
the next morning, the surgeon have report that schriften wa 
appar quit recovered, he wa summon into the cabin. hi frame 
wa wast away to a skeleton, but hi motion and hi languag were 
as sharp and petul as ever. 

"I have sent for you, schriften, to know if there is anyth that I 
can do to make you more comfortable. Is there anyth that you want?" 

"want?" repli schriften, eye first philip and then amine.--"he! 
he! I think I want fill out a little." 

"that you will, I trust, in good time; my steward ha my order to 
take care of you." 

"poor man," said amine, with a look of pity, "how much he must have 
suffered! Is not thi the man who brought you the letter from the 
company, philip?" 

"he! he! yes! not veri welcome, wa it, lady?" 

"no, my good fellow, it' never a welcom messag to a wife, that 
send her husband away from her. but that wa not your fault." 

"if a husband will go to sea and leav a handsom wife, when he has, 
as they say, plenti of money to live upon on shore, he! he!" 

"yes, indeed, you may well say that," repli amine. 

"better give it up. all folly, all madness--eh, captain?" 

"I must finish thi voyage, at all events," repli philip to amine, 
"whatev I may do afterwards. I have suffer much, and so have you, 
schriften. you have been twice wrecked; now tell me what do you wish 
to do? Go home in the first ship, or go ashor at the cape--or--" 

"or do anything, so I get out of thi ship--he! he!" 

"not so. If you prefer sail with me, as I know you are a good 
seaman, you shall have your rate and pay of pilot--that is, if you 
choos to follow my fortunes." 

"follow?--must follow. yes! i'll sail with you, mynheer vanderdecken, 
I wish to be alway near you--he! he!" 

"be it so, then: as soon as you are strong again, you will go to your 
duty; till then, I will see that you want for nothing." 

"nor I, my good fellow. come to me if you do, and I will be your 
help," said amine. "you have suffer much, but we will do what we can 
to make you forget it." 

"veri good! veri kind!" repli schriften, survey the love face 
and figur of amine. after a time, shrug up hi shoulders, he 
added--"a pity! ye it is!--must be, though." 

"farewell," continu amine, hold out her hand to schriften. 

the man took it, and a cold shudder went to her heart; but she, 
expect such a result, would not appear to feel it. schriften held 
her hand for a second or two in hi own, look at it earnestly, and 
then at amine' face.--"so fair, so good! mynheer vanderdecken, I 
thank you. lady, may heaven preserv you!"--then, squeez the hand 
of amin which he had not released, schriften hasten out of the 
cabin. 

So great wa the sudden ici shock which pass through amine' frame 
when schriften press her hand, that when with difficulti she gain 
the sofa she fell upon it. after remain with her hand press 
against her heart for some time, dure which philip bent over her, 
she said in a breathless voice, "that creatur must be supernatural, 
I am sure of it, I am now convinced.--well," continu she, after a 
paus of some littl while, "all the better, if we can make him a 
friend; and if I can I will." 

"but think you, amine, that those who are not of thi world have 
feel of kindness, gratitude, and ill-will, as we have? can they be 
made subservient?" 

"most sure so. If they have ill-will, as we know they have, they 
must also be endow with the better feelings. whi are there good and 
evil intelligences? they may have disencumb themselv of their 
mortal clay, but the soul must be the same. A soul without feel 
were no soul at all. the soul is activ in thi world and must be so 
in the next. If angel can pity, they must feel like us. If demon can 
vex, they must feel like us. our feel change, then whi not theirs? 
without feelings, there were no heaven, no hell. here our soul are 
confined, cribbed, and overladen, born down by the heavi flesh by 
which they are, for the time, polluted; but the soul that ha wing 
it flight from clay is, I think, not one jot more pure, more bright, 
or more perfect than those within ourselves. can they be made 
subservient, say you! yes! they can; they can be forced, when mortal 
possess the mean and power. the evil-inclin may be forc to good, 
as well as to evil. It is not the good and perfect spirit that we 
subject by art, but those that are inclin to wrong. It is over them 
that mortal have the power. our art have no power over the perfect 
spirits, but over those which are ever work evil, and which are 
bound to obey and do good, if those who master them requir it." 

"you still resort to forbidden arts, amine. Is that right?" 

"right! If we have power given to us, it is right to use it." 

"yes, most certainly, for good--but not for evil." 

"mortal in power, possess noth but what is mundane, are 
answer for the use of that power; so those gift by superior 
means, are answer as they employ those means. doe the god abov 
make a flower to grow, intend that it should not be gathered? no! 
neither doe He allow supernatur aid to be given, if He did not 
intend that mortal should avail themselv of it." 

As amine' eye beam upon philip's, he could not for the moment 
subdu the idea rise in hi mind, that she wa not like other 
mortals, and he calmli observed, "am I sure, amine, that I am wed 
to one mortal as myself?" 

"yes! yes! philip, compos yourself, I am but mortal; would to heaven 
I were not. would to heaven I were one of those who could hover over 
you, watch you in all your perils, save and protect you in thi your 
mad career; but I am but a poor weak woman, whose heart beat fondly, 
devotedli for you--who, for you, would dare all and everything--who, 
chang in her nature, ha becom courag and dare from her love; 
and who reject all creed which would prevent her from call upon 
heaven, or earth, or hell, to assist her in retain with her her 
soul' existence?" 

"nay! nay! amine, say not you reject the creed. doe not this,"--and 
philip pull from hi bosom the holi relic, "doe not this, and the 
messag sent by it, prove our creed is true?" 

"I have thought much of it, philip. At first it startl me almost 
into a belief, but even your own priest help to undec me. they 
would not answer you; they would have left you to guid yourself; the 
messag and the holi word, and the wonder sign given were not in 
unison with their creed, and they halted. may I not halt, if they 
did? the relic may be as mystic, as power as you describe; but 
the agenc may be fals and wicked, the power given to it may have 
fallen into wrong hands--th power remain the same, but it is appli 
to use not intended." 

"the power, amine, can onli be exercis by those who are friend to 
him who die upon it." 

"then is it no power at all; or if a power, not half so great as that 
of the arch-fiend; for hi can work for good and evil both. but on 
thi point, dear philip, we do not well agree, nor can we convinc 
each other. you have been taught in one way, I another. that which 
our childhood ha imbibed, which ha grown up with our growth, and 
strengthen with our years, is not to be eradicated. I have seen my 
mother work great charms, and succeed. you have knelt to priests: I 
blame not you!--blam not then your amine. We both mean well--i trust, 
do well." 

"if a life of innoc and puriti were all that were required, my 
amin would be sure of futur bliss." 

"I think it is; and think so, it is my creed. there are mani 
creeds: who shall say which is the true one? and what matter it? they 
all have the same end in view--a futur heaven." 

"true, amine, true," repli philip, pace the cabin thoughtfully; 
"and yet our priest say otherwise." 

"what is the basi of their creed, philip?" 

"charity, and good-will." 

"doe chariti condemn to etern miseri those who have never heard 
thi creed, who have live and die worship the great be after 
their best endeavours, and littl knowledge?" 

"no, surely." 

amin made no further observations; and philip, after pace for a few 
minut in deep thought, walk out of the cabin. 

the _utrecht_ arriv at the cape, watered, and proceed on her 
voyag and, after two month of difficult navigation, cast anchor off 
gambroon. dure thi time, amin had been unceas in her attempt 
to gain the good-wil of schriften. she had often convers with him 
on deck, and had done him everi kindness, and had overcom that fear 
which hi near approach had gener occasioned. schriften gradual 
appear mind of thi kindness, and at last to be pleas with 
amine' company. To philip he wa at time civil and courteous, but 
not always; but to amin he wa alway deferent. hi languag wa 
mystical, she could not prevent hi chuckl laugh, hi occasion 
"he! he!" from break forth. but when they anchor at gambroon, he 
wa on such term with her, that he would occasion come into the 
cabin; and, although he would not sit down, would talk to amin for 
a few minutes, and then depart. while the vessel lay at anchor at 
gambroon, schriften one even walk up to amine, who wa sit on 
the poop. "lady," said he, after a pause, "yon ship sail for your own 
countri in a few days." 

"so I am told," repli amine. 

"will you take the advic of one who wish you well? return in that 
vessel, go back to your own cottage, and stay there till your husband 
come to you onc more." 

"whi is thi advic given?" 

"becaus I forbod danger, nay, perhap death, a cruel death, to one I 
would not harm." 

"to me!" repli amine, fix her eye upon schriften, and meet 
hi pierc gaze. 

"yes, to you. some peopl can see into futur farther than others." 

"not if they are mortal," repli amine. 

"yes, if they are mortal. but mortal or not, I do see that which I 
would avert. tempt not destini farther." 

"who can avert it? If I take your counsel, still wa it my destini to 
take your counsel. If I take it not, still it wa my destiny." 

"well, then, avoid what threaten you." 

"I fear not, yet do I thank you. tell me, schriften, hast thou not 
thi fate someway interwoven with that of my husband? I feel that thou 
hast." 

"whi think you so, lady?" 

"for mani reasons: twice you have summon him, twice have you been 
wrecked, and miracul reappear and recovered. you know, too, of 
hi mission, that is evident." 

"but prove nothing." 

"yes! it prove much; for it prove that you knew what wa suppos to 
be known but to him alone." 

"it wa known to you, and holi men debat on it," repli schriften 
with a sneer. 

"how knew you that, again?" 

"he! he!" repli schriften; "forgiv me, lady, I meant not to affront 
you." 

"you cannot deni that you are connect mysteri and 
incomprehens with thi mission of my husband's. tell me, is it as 
he believes, true and holy?" 

"if he think that it is true and holy, it becom so." 

"whi then do you appear hi enemy?" 

"I am not _his_ enemy, fair lady." 

"you are not hi enemy--whi then did you onc attempt to depriv him 
of the mystic relic by which the mission is to be accomplished?" 

"I would prevent hi further search, for reason which must not be 
told. doe that prove that I am hi enemy? would it not be better that 
he should remain on shore with compet and you, than be cross 
the wild sea on thi mad search? without the relic it is not to be 
accomplished. It were a kindness, then, to take it from him." 

amin answer not, for she wa lost in thought. 

"lady," continu schriften, after a time; "I wish you well. for your 
husband I care not, yet do I wish him no harm. now hear me; if you 
wish for your futur life to be one of eas and peace--if you wish to 
remain long in thi world with the husband of your choice--of your 
first and warmest love--if you wish that he should die in hi bed at a 
good old age, and that you should close hi eye with children' tear 
lamenting, and their smile reserv to cheer their mother--al thi I 
see and can promis is in futurity, if you will take that relic from 
hi bosom and give it up to me. but if you would that he should 
suffer more than man ha ever suffered, pass hi whole life in doubt, 
anxiety, and pain, until the deep wave receiv hi corpse, then let 
him keep it--if you would that your own day be shortened, and yet 
those remain be long in human sufferings, if you would be separ 
from him and die a cruel death, then let him keep it. I can read 
futurity, and such must be the destini of both. lady, consid well, I 
must leav you now. to-morrow I will have your answer." 

schriften walk away and left amin to her own reflections. for a 
long while she repeat to herself the convers and denunci 
of the man, whom she wa now convinc wa not of thi world, and wa 
in some way or anoth deepli connect with her husband' fate. 
"to me he wish well, no harm to my husband, and would prevent hi 
search. whi would he?--that he will not tell. He ha tempt me, 
tempt me most strangely. how easi 'twere to take the relic whilst 
philip sleep upon my bosom--but how treacherous! and yet a life of 
compet and ease, a smile family, a good old age; what offer to 
a fond and dote wife! and if not, toil, anxiety, and a wateri grave; 
and for me! pshaw! that' nothing. and yet to die separ from 
philip, is that nothing? oh, no, the thought is dreadful.--i do 
believ him. yes, he ha foretold the future, and told it truly. could 
I persuad philip? no! I know him well; he ha vowed, and is not to be 
changed. and yet, if the relic were taken without hi knowledge, he 
would not have to blame himself. who then would he blame? could I 
deceiv him? I, the wife of hi bosom tell a lie. no! no! it must not 
be. come what will, it is our destiny, and I am resigned. I would that 
schriften had not spoken. alas! we search into futurity, and then 
would fain retrac our steps, and wish we had remain in ignorance." 

"what make you so pensive, amine?" said philip, who some time 
afterward walk up to where she wa seated. 

amin repli not at first. "shall I tell him all?" thought she. "it 
is my onli chance--i will." amin repeat the convers between 
her and schriften. philip made no reply; he sat down by amin and took 
her hand. amin drop her head upon her husband' shoulder. "what 
think you, amine?" said philip, after a time. 

"I could not steal your relic, philip; perhap you'll give it to me." 

"and my father, amine, my poor father--hi dread doom to be 
eternal! He who appealed, wa permit to appeal to hi son, that 
that dread doom might be averted. doe not the convers of thi 
man prove to you that my mission is not false? doe not hi knowledg 
of it strengthen all? yet, whi would he prevent it?" continu philip, 
musing. 

"why, I cannot tell, philip, but I would fain prevent it. I feel that 
he ha power to read the future, and ha read aright." 

"be it so; he ha spoken, but not plainly. He ha promis me what I 
have long been prepar for--what I vow to heaven to suffer. alreadi 
have I suffer much, and am prepar to suffer more. I have long 
look upon thi world as a pilgrimage, and (select as I have been) 
trust that my reward will be in the other. but, amine, you are not 
bound by oath to heaven, you have made no compact. He advis you to 
go home. He talk of a cruel death. follow hi advic and avoid it." 

"I am not bound by oath, philip; but hear me; as I hope for futur 
bliss, I now bind myself--" 

"hold, amine!" 

"nay, philip, you cannot prevent me; for if you do now, I will repeat 
it when you are absent. A cruel death were a chariti to me, for I 
shall not see you suffer. then may I never expect futur bliss, may 
etern miseri be my portion, if I leav you as long as fate permit 
us to be together. I am yours--your wife; my fortunes, my present, my 
future, my all are embark with you, and destini may do it worst, 
for amin will not quail. I have no recreant heart to turn asid from 
danger or from suffering. In that one point, philip, at least, you 
chose, you wed well." 

philip rais her hand to hi lip in silence, and the convers 
wa not resumed. the next evening, schriften came up again to amine. 
"well, lady?" said he. 

"schriften, it cannot be," repli amine; "yet do I thank you much." 

"lady, if he must follow up hi mission, whi should you?" 

"schriften, I am hi wife--hi for ever, in thi world, and the next. 
you cannot blame me." 

"no," repli schriften, "I do not blame, I admir you. I feel sorry. 
but, after all, what is death? nothing. he! he!" and schriften 
hasten away, and left amin to herself. 



chapter xxii 


the _utrecht_ sail from gambroon, touch at ceylon, and proceed 
on her voyag in the eastern seas. schriften still remain on board, 
but sinc hi last convers with amin he had kept aloof, and 
appear to avoid both her and philip; still there wa not, as before, 
ani attempt to make the ship' compani disaffected, nor did he indulg 
in hi usual taunt and sneers. the commun he had made to amin 
had also it effect upon her and philip; they were more pensiv and 
thoughtful; each attempt to conceal their gloom from the other; and 
when they embraced, it wa with the mourn feel that perhap it 
wa an indulg they would soon be depriv of: at the same time, 
they steel their heart to endur and prepar to meet the worst. 
krantz wonder at the change, but of cours could not account for it. 
the _utrecht_ wa not far from the andaman isles, when krantz, who had 
watch the barometer, came in earli one morn and call philip. 

"we have everi prospect of a typhoon, sir," said krantz; "the glass 
and the weather are both threatening." 

"then we must make all snug. send down top-gal yard and small 
sail directly. We will strike top-gal masts. I will be out in a 
minute." 

philip hasten on deck. the sea wa smooth, but alreadi the moan 
of the wind gave notic of the approach storm. the vacuum in the 
air wa about to be fill up, and the convuls would be terrible; a 
white haze gather fast, thicker and thicker; the men were turn up, 
everyth of weight wa sent below, and the gun were secured. now 
came a blast of wind which careen the ship, pass over, and in a 
minut she right as before; then anoth and another, fiercer and 
fiercer still. the sea, although smooth, at last appear white as a 
sheet with foam, as the typhoon swept along in it impetu career; 
it burst upon the vessel, which bow down to her gunwal and there 
remained; in a quarter of an hour the hurrican had pass over, and 
the vessel wa relieved; but the sea had risen, and the wind wa 
strong. In anoth hour the blast again came, more wild, more furiou 
than the first, the wave were dash into their faces, torrent 
of rain descended, the ship wa thrown on her beam ends, and thu 
remain till the wild blast had pass away, to sweep destruct far 
beyond them, leav behind it a tumultu angri sea. 

"it is nearli over I believe, sir," said krantz. "it is clear up a 
littl to windward." 

"we have had the worst of it, I believe," said philip. 

"no! there is wors to come," said a low voic near to philip. It wa 
schriften who spoke. 

"A vessel to windward scud befor the gale," cri krantz. 

philip look to windward, and in the spot where the horizon wa 
clearest, he saw a vessel under topsail and foresail, stand right 
down. "she is a larg vessel; bring me my glass." the telescop wa 
brought from the cabin, but befor philip could use it, a haze had 
again gather up to windward, and the vessel wa not to be seen. 

"thick again," observ philip, as he shut in hi telescope; "we must 
look out for that vessel, that she doe not run too close to us." 

"she ha seen us, no doubt, sir," said krantz. 

after a few minut the typhoon again raged, and the atmospher wa of 
a murki gloom. It seem as if some heavi fog had been hurl along 
by the furiou wind; noth wa to be distinguish except the white 
foam of the sea, and that not the distanc of half a cable' length, 
where it wa lost in one dark gray mist. the storm-staysail yield 
to the forc of the wind, wa rent into strips, and flog and 
crack with a nois even louder than the gale. the furiou blast 
again blew over, and the mist clear up a little. 

"ship on the weather beam close aboard of us," cri one of the men. 

krantz and philip sprung upon the gunwale, and beheld the larg ship 
bear right down upon them, not three cables' length distant. 

"helm up! she doe not see us, and she will be aboard of us!" cri 
philip. "helm up, I say, hard up, quick!" 

the helm wa put up, as the men, perceiv their immin danger, 
climb upon the gun to look if the vessel alter her course; but 
no--down she came, and the head-sail of the _utrecht_ have been 
carri away, to their horror they perceiv that she would not answer 
her helm and pay off as they required. 

"ship, ahoy!" roar philip through hi trumpet--but the gale drove 
the sound back. 

"ship, ahoy!" cri krantz on the gunwale, wave hi hat. It wa 
useless--down she came, with the water foam under her bows, and 
wa now within pistol-shot of the _utrecht_. 

"ship, ahoy!" roar all the sailors, with a shout that must have been 
heard: it wa not attend to; down came the vessel upon them, and now 
her cutwat wa within ten yard of the _utrecht_. the men of the 
_utrecht_, who expect that their vessel would be sever in half by 
the concussion, climb upon the weather gunwale, all readi to catch 
at the rope of the other vessel and climb on board of her. amin who 
had been surpris at the nois on deck, had come out and had taken 
philip by the arm. 

"trust to me--th shock"--said philip. He said no more; the cutwat 
of the stranger touch their sides; one gener cri wa rais by the 
sailor of the _utrecht_, they sprang to catch at the rig of 
the other vessel' bowsprit which wa now point between their 
masts--they caught at nothing--nothing--ther wa no shock--no 
concuss of the two vessels--th stranger appear to cleav through 
them--her hull pass along in silence--no crack of timbers--no 
fall of masts--th foreyard pass through their mainsail, yet 
the canva wa unrent--th whole vessel appear to cut through the 
_utrecht_, yet left no trace of injury--not fast, but slowly, as if 
she were realli saw through her by the heav and toss of the 
sea with her sharp prow. the stranger' forechain had pass their 
gunwal befor philip could recov himself. "amine," cri he, at 
last, "the phantom ship! my father!" 

the seamen of the _utrecht_, more astound by the marvel result 
than by their former danger, threw themselv down upon deck; some 
hasten below, some prayed, other were dumb with astonish and 
fear. amin appear more calm than any, not except philip; she 
survey the vessel as it slowli forc it way through; she beheld 
the seamen on board of her coolli lean over her gunwale, as 
if derid the destruct they had occasioned; she look for 
vanderdecken himself, and on the poop of the vessel, with hi trumpet 
under hi arm, she beheld the imag of her philip--th same hardy, 
strong build--th same features--about the same age apparently--ther 
could be no doubt it wa the _doomed_ vanderdecken! 

"see, philip," said she, "see!--your father!" 

"even so--merci heaven! It is--it is"--and philip, overpow by 
hi feelings, sank upon deck. 

the vessel had now pass over the _utrecht_; the form of the elder 
vanderdecken wa seen to walk aft and look over the taffrail; amin 
perceiv it to start and turn away suddenly--sh look down, and 
saw schriften shake hi fist in defianc at the supernatur being! 
again the phantom ship flew to leeward befor the gale, and wa soon 
lost in the mist; but befor that, amin had turn and perceiv the 
situat of philip. No one but herself and schriften appear abl to 
act or move. she caught the pilot' eye, beckon to him, and with hi 
assist philip wa led into the cabin. 




chapter xxiii 


"I have then seen him," said philip, after he had lain down on the 
sofa in the cabin for some minut to recov himself, while amin 
bent over him. "I have at last seen him, amine! can you doubt now?" 

"no, philip, I have now no doubt," repli amine, mournfully; "but 
take courage, philip." 

"for myself, I want not courage--but for you, amine--y know that hi 
appear portend a mischief that will sure come." 

"let it come," repli amine, calmly; "I have long been prepar for 
it, and so have you." 

"yes, for myself; but not for you." 

"you have been wreck often, and have been saved--then whi should not 
i?" 

"but the sufferings!" 

"those suffer least, who have most courag to bear up against them. I 
am but a woman, weak and frail in body, but I trust I have that within 
me which will not make you feel asham of amine. no, philip, you will 
have no wailing, no express of despair from amine' lips; if she 
can consol you, she will; if she can assist you, she will; but, come 
what may, if she cannot serv you, at least, she will prove no burden 
to you." 

"your presenc in misfortun would un-nerv me, amine." 

"it shall not; it shall add to your resolution. let fate do it 
worst." 

"depend upon it, amine, that will be ere long." 

"be it so," repli amine; "but, philip, it were as well you show 
yourself on deck--th men are frightened, and your absenc will be 
observed." 

"you are right," said philip; and rise and embrac her, he left 
the cabin. 

"it is but too true, then," thought amine. "now to prepar for 
disast and death--th warn ha come. I would I could know more. 
oh! mother, mother, look down upon thi child, and in a dream reveal 
the mystic art which I have forgotten, then should I know more; but I 
have promis philip, that unless separated--yes, that idea is wors 
than death, and I have a sad foreboding; my courag fail me onli when 
I think of that!" 

philip, on hi return to the deck, found the crew of the vessel in 
great consternation. krantz himself appear bewildered--h had not 
forgotten the appear of the phantom ship off desol harbour, 
and the vessel follow her to their destruction. thi second 
appearance, more aw than the former, quit unman him; and when 
philip came out of the cabin, he wa lean in gloomi silenc against 
the weather bulkhead. 

"we shall never reach port again, sir," said he to philip, as he came 
up to him. 

"silence, silence; the men may hear you." 

"it matter not--they think the same," repli krantz. 

"but they are wrong," repli philip, turn to the seamen. "mi lads! 
that some disast may happen to us, after the appear of thi 
vessel, is most probable; I have seen her befor more than once, and 
disast did then happen; but here I am aliv and well, therefor it 
doe not prove that we cannot escap as I have befor done. We must do 
our best, and trust in heaven. the gale is break fast, and in a few 
hour we shall have fine weather. I have met thi phantom ship 
before, and care not how often I meet it again. Mr krantz, get up the 
spirits--th men have had hard work, and must be fatigued." 

the veri prospect of obtain liquor, appear to give courag to the 
men; they hasten to obey the order, and the quantiti serv out wa 
suffici to give courag to the most fearful, and induc other to 
defi old vanderdecken and hi whole crew of imps. the next morn the 
weather wa fine, the sea smooth, and the _utrecht_ went gaili on her 
voyage. 

mani day of gentl breez and favour wind gradual wore off the 
panic occas by the supernatur appearance, and if not forgotten, 
it wa refer to either in jest or with indifference. they now 
had run through the strait of malacca, and enter the polynesian 
archipelago. philip' order were to refresh and call for instruct 
at the small island of boton, then in possess of the dutch. they 
arriv there in safety, and after remain two days, again sail on 
their voyage, intend to make their passag between the celeb and 
the island of galago. the weather wa still clear and the wind light: 
they proceed cautiously, on account of the reef and currents, 
and with a care watch for the pirat vessels, which have for 
centuri infest those seas; but they were not molested, and had 
gain well up among the island to the north of galago, when it fell 
calm, and the vessel wa born to the eastward of it by the current. 
the calm last sever days, and they could procur no anchorage; at 
last they found themselv among the cluster of island near to the 
northern coast of new guinea. 

the anchor wa dropped, and the sail furl for the night; a 
drizzl small rain came on, the weather wa thick, and watch were 
station in everi part of the ship, that they might not be surpris 
by the pirat proas, for the current ran past the ship, at the rate 
of eight or nine mile per hour, and these vessels, if hid among the 
islands, might sweep down upon them unperceived. 

It wa twelv o'clock at night when philip, who wa in bed, wa 
awaken by a shock; he thought it might be a proa run alongside, 
and he start from hi bed and ran out. He found krantz, who had 
been awaken by the same cause, run up undressed--anoth shock 
succeeded, and the ship careen to port. philip then knew that the 
ship wa on shore. 

the thick of the night prevent them from ascertain where they 
were, but the lead wa thrown over the side, and they found that they 
were lie on shore on a sand bank, with not more than fourteen feet 
water on the deepest side, and that they were broadsid on, with 
a strong current press them further up on the bank; inde the 
current ran like a mill-race, and each minut they were swept into 
shallow water. 

On examin they found that the ship had drag her anchor, which, 
with the cable, wa still taut from the starboard bow, but thi did 
not appear to prevent the vessel from be swept further up on the 
bank. It wa suppos that the anchor had part at the shank, and 
anoth anchor wa let go. 

noth more could be done till daybreak, and impati did they 
wait till the next morning. As the sun rose, the mist clear away, 
and they discov that they were on shore on a sand bank, a small 
portion of which wa abov water, and round which the current ran with 
great impetuosity. about three mile from them wa a cluster of small 
island with cocoa-tre grow on them, but with no appear of 
inhabitants. 

"I fear we have littl chance," observ krantz to philip. "if we 
lighten the vessel the anchor may not hold, and we shall be swept 
further on, and it is imposs to lay out an anchor against the 
forc of thi current." 

"at all event we must try; but I grant that our situat is anyth 
but satisfactory. send all the hand aft." 

the men came aft, gloomi and dispirited. 

"mi lads!" said philip, "whi are you disheartened?" 

"we are doomed, sir; we knew it would be so." 

"I thought it probabl that the ship would be lost--i told you so; but 
the loss of the ship doe not involv that of the ship' company--nay, 
it doe not follow that the ship is to be lost, although she may be in 
great difficulty, as she is at present. what fear is there for us, my 
men?--th water is smooth--w have plenti of time befor us--w can 
make a raft and take to our boats--it never blow among these islands, 
and we have land close under our lee. let us first tri what we can do 
with the ship; if we fail, we must then take care of ourselves." 

the men caught at the idea and went to work willingly; the water cask 
were started, the pump set going, and everyth that could be spare 
wa thrown over to lighten the ship; but the anchor still drag from 
the strength of the current and bad holding-ground; and philip and 
krantz perceiv that they were swept further on the bank. 

night came on befor they quit their toil, and then a fresh breez 
sprung up and creat a swell, which occas the vessel to beat 
on the hard sand; thu did they continu until the next morning. At 
daylight the men resum their labours, and the pump were again 
man to clear the vessel of the water which had been started, but 
after a time they pump up sand. thi told them that a plank had 
started, and that their labour were useless; the men left their work, 
but philip again encourag them, and point out that they could 
easili save themselves, and all that they had to do wa to construct a 
raft, which would hold provis for them, and receiv that portion 
of the crew who could not be taken into the boats. 

after some repos the men again set to work; the topsail were struck, 
the yard lower down, and the raft wa commenc under the lee of 
the vessel, where the strong current wa checked. philip, recollect 
hi former disaster, took great pain in the construct of thi 
raft, and awar that as the water and provis were expend there 
would be no occas to tow so heavi a mass, he construct it in two 
parts, which might easili be severed, and thu the boat would have 
less to tow, as soon as circumst would enabl them to part with 
one of them. 

night again termin their labours, and the men retir to rest, the 
weather continu fine, with veri littl wind. By noon the next day 
the raft wa complete; water and provis were safe stow on 
board; a secur and dri place wa fit up for amin in the centr 
of one portion; spare ropes, sails, and everyth which could prove 
useful, in case of their be forc on shore, were put in. musket 
and ammunit were also provided, and everyth wa ready, when the 
men came aft and point out to philip that there wa plenti of money 
on board, which it wa folli to leave, and that they wish to carri 
as much as they could away with them. As thi intim wa given in 
a way that made it evid they intend that it should be compli 
with, philip did not refuse; but resolved, in hi own mind, that when 
they arriv at a place where he could exercis hi authority, the 
money should be reclaim for the compani to whom it belonged. the men 
went down below, and while philip wa make arrang with amine, 
hand the cask of dollar out of the hold, broke them open and 
help themselves--quarrel with each other for the first 
possession, as each cask wa opened. At last everi man had obtain as 
much as he could carry, and had place hi spoil on the raft with hi 
baggage, or in the boat to which he had been appointed. all wa now 
ready--amin wa lower down, and took her station--th boat took in 
tow the raft, which wa cast off from the vessel, and away they went 
with the current, pull with all their strength, to avoid be 
strand upon that part of the sand bank which appear abov water. 
thi wa the great danger which they had to encounter, and which they 
veri narrowli escaped. 

they number eighty-six soul in all: in the boat there were 
thirty-two; the rest were on the raft, which be well-built and full 
of timber, float high out of the water, now that the sea wa so 
smooth. It had been agre upon by philip and krantz, that one of them 
should remain on the raft and the other in one of the boats; but, at 
the time the raft quit the ship, they were both on the raft, as 
they wish to consult, as soon as they discov the direct of 
the current, which would be the most advis cours for them to 
pursue. It appear that as soon as the current had pass the bank, 
it took a more southerli direct toward new guinea. It wa then 
debat between them whether they should or should not land on that 
island, the nativ of which were known to be pusillanimous, yet 
treacherous. A long debat ensued, which ended, however, in their 
resolv not to decid as yet, but wait and see what might occur. In 
the meantime, the boat pull to the westward, while the current set 
them fast down in a southerli direction. 

night came on, and the boat drop the grapnels, with which they had 
been provided; and philip wa glad to find that the current wa not 
near so strong, and the grapnel held both boat and raft. cover 
themselv up with the spare sail with which they had provid 
themselves, and set a watch, the tire seamen were soon fast 
asleep. 

"had I not better remain in one of the boats?" observ krantz. 
"suppose, to save themselves, the boat were to leav the raft." 

"I have thought of that," repli philip, "and have, therefore, not 
allow ani provis or water in the boats; they will not leav us 
for that reason." 

"true, I had forgotten that." 

krantz remain on watch, and philip retir to the repos which he so 
much needed. amin met him with open arms. 

"I have no fear, philip," said she, "I rather like thi wild 
adventur change. We will go on shore and build our hut beneath 
the cocoa-trees, and I shall repin when the day come which bring 
succour, and releas us from our desert isle. what do I requir but 
you?" 

"we are in the hand of one above, dear, who will act with us as He 
pleases. We have to be thank that it is no worse," repli philip. 
"but now to rest, for I shall soon be oblig to watch." 

the morn dawned, with a smooth sea and a bright blue sky; the raft 
had been born to leeward of the cluster of uninhabit island of 
which we spoke, and wa now without hope of reach them; but to the 
westward were to be seen on the horizon the refract head and trunk 
of cocoa-nut trees, and in that direct it wa resolv that they 
should tow the raft. the breakfast had been serv out, and the men 
had taken to the oars, when they discov a proa, full of men, 
sweep after them from one of the island to windward. that it wa 
a pirat vessel there could be no doubt; but philip and krantz 
consid that their forc wa more than suffici to repel them, 
should an attack be made. thi wa point out to the men; arm were 
distribut to all in the boats, as well as to those on the raft; and 
that the seamen might not be fatigued, they were order to lie on 
their oars, and await the come up of the vessel. 

As soon as the pirat wa within range, have reconnoitr her 
antagonists, she ceas pull and commenc fire from a small 
piec of cannon, which wa mount on her bows. the grape and 
langridg which she pour upon them wound sever of the men, 
although philip had order them to lie down flat on the raft and 
in the boats. the pirat advanc nearer, and her fire becam 
more destructive, without ani opportun of return it by the 
_utrecht's_ people. At last it wa proposed, as the onli chanc of 
escape, that the boat should attack the pirate. thi wa agre to by 
philip--mor men were sent in the boats--krantz took the command--th 
raft wa cast off, and the boat pull away. but scarc had they 
clear the raft, when, as by one sudden thought, they turn round 
and pull away in the opposit direction. krantz' voic wa heard 
by philip, and hi sword wa seen to flash through the air--a moment 
afterward he plung into the sea, and swam to the raft. It appear 
that the peopl in the boats, anxiou to preserv the money which they 
had possess of, had agre among themselv to pull away and leav 
the raft to it fate. the propos for attack the pirat had been 
suggest with that view, and as soon as they were clear of the 
raft, they put their intent into execution. In vain had krantz 
expostul and threatened; they would have taken hi life; and when 
he found that hi effort were of no avail, he leap from the boat. 
"then are we lost, I fear," said philip. "our number are so reduced, 
that we cannot hope to hold out long. what think you, schriften?" 
ventur philip, address the pilot who stood near to him. 

"lost--but not lost by the pirates--no harm there. he! he!" 

the remark of schriften wa correct. the pirates, imagin that in 
take to their boat, the peopl had carri with them everyth that 
wa valuable, instead of fire at the raft, immedi gave chase to 
the boats. the sweep were now out, and the proa flew over the smooth 
water like a sea-bird, pass the raft, and wa at first evid 
gain on the boats; but their speed soon slackened, and as the day 
passed, the boats, and then the pirat vessel disappear in the 
southward; the distanc between them be appar much the same as 
at the commenc of the chase. 

the raft be now at the merci of the wind and waves, philip and 
krantz collect the carpenter' tool which had been brought from 
the ship, and select two spar from the raft, they made everi 
prepar for step a mast and set sail by the next morning. 

the morn dawned, and the first object that met their view, were 
the boat pull back toward the raft, follow close by the 
pirate. the men had pull the whole night, and were worn out with 
fatigue. It wa presum that a consult had been held, in which 
it wa agre that they should make a sweep, so as to return to the 
raft; as, if they gain it, they would be abl to defend themselves, 
and moreover, obtain provis and water, which they had not on board 
at the time of their desertion. but it wa fate otherwise; gradual 
the men drop from their oars, exhausted, into the bottom of the 
boat, and the pirat vessel follow them with renew ardour. the 
boat were captur one by one; the booti found wa more than the 
pirat anticipated, and it hardli need be said that not one man wa 
spared. all thi took place within three mile of the raft, and philip 
anticip that the next movement of the vessel would be toward 
them, but he wa mistaken. satisfi with their booty, and imagin 
that there could be no more on the raft, the pirat pull away to the 
eastward, toward the island from amongst which she had first made 
her appearance. thu were those who expect to escap and who had 
desert their companions, deservedli punished, whilst those who 
anticip everi disast from thi desertion, discov that it wa 
the caus of their be saved. 

the remain peopl on board the raft amount to about forty-five; 
philip, krantz, schriften, amine, the two mates, sixteen seamen, 
and twenty-four soldiers, who had been embark at amsterdam. Of 
provis they had suffici for three or four weeks, but of water 
they were veri short, alreadi not have suffici for more than 
three day at the usual allowance. As soon as the mast had been 
step and rigged, and the sail set (although there wa hardli a 
breath of wind), philip explain to the men the necess of reduc 
the quantiti of water, and it wa agre that it should be serv out 
so as to extend the suppli to twelv days, the allow be reduc 
to half a pint per day. 

there wa a debat at thi time, as the raft wa in two parts, whether 
it would not be better to cast off the smaller one and put all the 
peopl on board the other; but thi propos wa overruled, as in the 
first place, although the boat had desert them, the number on the 
raft had not much diminished, and moreover, the raft would steer much 
better under sail, now that it had length, than it would do if they 
reduc it dimens and alter it shape to a squar mass of 
float wood. 

for three day it wa a calm, the sun pour down hi hot beam upon 
them, and the want of water wa sever felt; those who continu to 
drink spirit suffer the most. 

On the fourth day the breez sprung up favourably, and the sail wa 
filled; it wa a relief to their burn brow and blister backs; 
and as the raft sail on at the rate of four mile an hour, the men 
were gay and full of hope. the land below the cocoa-nut tree wa now 
distinguishable, and they anticip that the next day they could 
land and procur the water, which they now so crave for. all night 
they carri sail, but the next morn they discov that the 
current wa strong against them, and that what they gain when the 
breez wa fresh, they lost from the advers current as soon as it 
went down; the breez wa alway fresh in the morning, but it fell 
calm in the evening. thu did they continu for four day more, everi 
noon be not ten mile from the land but the next morn swept away 
to a distance, and have their ground to retrace. eight day had now 
passed, and the men, worn out with exposur to the burn sun, becam 
discont and mutinous. At one time they insist that the raft 
should be divided, that they might gain the land with the other half; 
at another, that the provis which they could no longer eat should 
be thrown overboard to lighten the raft. the difficulti under which 
they lay, wa the have no anchor or grapnel to the raft, the boat 
have carri away with them all that had been taken from the ship. 
philip then propos to the men, that, as everi one of them had such a 
quantiti of dollars, the money should be sew up in canva bags, each 
man' properti separate; and that with thi weight to the rope they 
would probabl be enabl to hold the raft against the current for one 
night, when they would be abl the next day to gain the shore; but 
thi wa refused--they would not risk their money. no, no--fools! 
they would sooner part with their live by the most miser of 
all deaths. again and again wa thi propos to them by philip and 
krantz, but without success. 

In the meantime, amin had kept up her courag and her spirits; 
prove to philip a valuabl advis and a comfort in hi 
misfortunes. "cheer up, philip," would she say; "we shall yet build 
our cottag under the shade of those cocoa-nut trees, and pass a 
portion, if not the remaind of our live in peace; for who inde 
is there who would think to find us in these desol and untrodden 
regions?" 

schriften wa quiet and well-behaved; talk much with amine, but with 
nobodi else. inde he appear to have a stronger feel in favour 
of amin than he had ever shown before. He watch over her and 
attend her; and amin would often look up after be silent, and 
perceiv schriften' face wear an air of piti and melancholy, which 
she had believ it imposs that he could have exhibited. 

anoth day passed; again they near the land, and again did the 
breez die away, and they were swept back by the current. the men now 
rose, and in spite of the endeavour of philip and krantz, they roll 
into the sea all the provis and stores, everyth but one cask of 
spirit and the remain stock of water; they then sat down at the 
upper end of the raft with gloomy, threaten looks, and in close 
consultation. 

anoth night close in: philip wa full of anxiety. again he urg 
them to anchor with their money, but in vain; they order him away, 
and he return to the after part of the raft, upon which amine' 
secur retreat had been erected; he leant on it in deep thought and 
melancholy, for he imagin that amin wa asleep. 

"what disturb you, philip?" 

"what disturb me? the avaric and folli of these men. they will die, 
rather than risk their hate money. they have the mean of save 
themselv and us, and they will not. there is weight enough in 
bullion on the fore part of the raft to hold a dozen float mass 
such as this, yet they will not risk it. curs love of gold! it make 
men fools, madmen, villains. We have now but two days' water--dol 
out as it is drop by drop. look at their emaciated, broken down, 
wast forms, and yet see how they cling to money, which probabl 
they will never have occas for, even if they gain the land. I am 
distracted!" 

"you suffer, philip, you suffer from privation; but I have been 
careful, I thought that thi would come; I have save both water and 
biscuit--i have here four bottles;--drink, philip, and it will reliev 
you." 

philip drank; it did reliev him, for the excit of the day had 
press heavili on him. 

"thanks, amine--thanks, dearest! I feel better now.--good heaven! are 
there such fool as to valu the dross of metal abov one drop of 
water in a time of suffer and privat such as this?" 

the night close in as before; the star shone bright but there wa no 
moon, philip had risen at midnight to reliev krantz from the steerag 
of the raft. usual the men had lain about in everi part of the raft, 
but thi night the major of them remain forward. philip wa 
commun with hi own bitter thoughts, when he heard a scuffl 
forward, and the voic of krantz cri out to him for help. He 
quit the helm, and seiz hi cutlass ran forward, where he found 
krantz down, and the men secur him. He fought hi way to him, but 
wa himself seiz and disarmed. "cut away--cut away," wa call out 
by those who held him; and, in a few seconds, philip had the miseri to 
behold the after part of the raft, with amin upon it, drift apart 
from the one on which he stood. "for mercy' sake! my wife--mi 
amine--for heaven' sake save her!" cri philip, struggl in vain 
to disengag himself. amin also, who had run to the side of the raft, 
held out her arms--it wa in vain--they were separ more than a 
cable' length. philip made one more desper struggle, and then fell 
down depriv of sens and motion. 




chapter xxiv 


It wa not until the day had dawn that philip open hi eyes, and 
discov krantz kneel at hi side; at first hi thought were 
scatter and confused; he felt that some dread calam had 
happen to him, but he could not recal to mind what it was. At last 
it rush upon him, and he buri hi face in hi hands. 

"take comfort," said krantz; "we shall probabl gain the shore to-day, 
and we will go in search of her as soon as we can." 

"this, then, is the separ and the cruel death to her which that 
wretch schriften prophesi to us," thought philip; "cruel inde to 
wast away to a skeleton, under a burn sun, without one drop of 
water left to cool her parch tongue; at the merci of the wind and 
waves; drift about--alone--al alone--separ from her husband, 
in whose arm she would have die without regret; madden with 
suspens and with the thought of what I may be suffering, or what may 
have been my fate. pilot, you are right; there can be no more cruel 
death to a fond and dote wife. oh! my head reels. what ha philip 
vanderdecken to live for now?" 

krantz offer such consol as hi friendship could suggest, but 
in vain. He then talk of revenge, and philip rais hi head. 
after a few minutes' thought, he rose up. "yes," repli he, 
"revenge!--reveng upon those dastard and traitors! tell me, krantz, 
how mani can we trust?" 

"half of the men, I should think, at least. It wa a surprise." A spar 
had been fit as a rudder, and the raft had now gain nearer the 
shore than it ever had done before. the men were in high spirit at 
the prospect, and everi man wa sit on hi own store of dollars, 
which, in their eyes, increas in value, in proport as did their 
prospect of escape. 

philip discov from krantz, that it wa the soldier and the most 
indiffer seamen who had mutini on the night before, and cut away 
the other raft; and that all the best men had remain neuter. 

"and so they will be now, I imagine," continu krantz; "the prospect 
of gain the shore has, in a manner, reconcil them to the 
treacheri of their companions." 

"probably," repli philip, with a bitter laugh; "but I know what will 
rous them. send them here to me." 

philip talk to the seamen, whom krantz had sent over to him. He 
point out to them that the other men were traitors, not to be reli 
upon; that they would sacrific everyth and everybodi for their 
own gain; that they had alreadi done so for money, and that they 
themselv would have no security, either on the raft or on shore, 
with such people; that they dare not sleep for fear of have their 
throat cut, and that it were better at onc to get rid of those 
who could not be true to each other; that it would facilit their 
escape, and that they could divid between themselv the money which 
the other had secured, and by which they would doubl their own 
shares. that it had been hi intention, although he had said nothing, 
to enforc the restor of the money for the benefit of the 
company, as soon as they had gain a civilis port, where the 
author could interfere; but that, if they consent to join and 
aid him, he would now give them the whole of it for their own use. 

what will not the desir of gain effect? Is it, therefore, to be 
wonder at, that these men, who were inde but littl better than 
those who were thus, in hi desir of retaliation, denounc by 
philip, consent to hi proposal? It wa agreed, that if they did not 
gain the shore, the other should be attack that veri night, and 
toss into the sea. 

but the consult with philip had put the other parti on the alert; 
they, too, held council, and kept their arm by their sides. As the 
breez die away, they were not two mile from the land, and onc more 
they drift back into the ocean. philip' mind wa born down with 
grief at the loss of amine; but it recov to a certain degre when 
he thought of revenge: that feel stay him up, and he often felt 
the edg of hi cutlass, impati for the moment of retribution. 

It wa a love night; the sea wa now smooth as glass, and not a 
breath of air move in the heavens; the sail of the raft hung listless 
down the mast, and wa reflect upon the calm surfac by 
the brillianc of the starri night alone. It wa a night for 
contemplation--for examin of oneself, and ador of the deity; 
and here, on a frail raft, were huddl togeth more than forti 
be readi for combat, for murder, and for spoil. each parti 
pretend to repose; yet each were quietli watch the motion of the 
other, with their hand upon their weapons. the signal wa to be given 
by philip: it was, to let go the halyard of the yard, so that the 
sail should fall down upon a portion of the other party, and entangl 
them. By philip' directions, schriften had taken the helm, and krantz 
remain by hi side. 

the yard and sail fell clatter down, and then the work of death 
commenced; there wa no parley, no suspense; each man start upon hi 
feet and rais hi sword. the voic of philip and of krantz alon 
were heard, and philip' sword did it work. He wa nerv to hi 
revenge, and never could be satiat as long as one remain who had 
sacrif hi amine. As philip had expected, mani had been cover up 
and entangl by the fall of the sail, and their work wa therebi 
made easier. 

some fell where they stood; other reel back, and sunk down under 
the smooth water; other were pierc as they flounder under the 
canvas. In a few minutes, the work of carnag wa complete. schriften 
meanwhil look on, and ever and anon gave vent to hi chuckl 
laugh--hi demoniac "he! he!" 

the strife wa over, and philip stood against the mast to recov hi 
breath. "so far art thou revenged, my amine," thought he; "but, oh! 
what are these paltri live compar to thine?" and now that hi 
reveng wa satiated, and he could do no more, he cover hi face up 
in hi hands, and wept bitterly, while those who had assist him were 
alreadi collect the money of the slain for distribution. these men, 
when they found that three onli of their side had fallen, lament 
that there had not been more, as their own share of the dollar would 
have been increased. 

there were now but thirteen men besid philip, krantz, and schriften 
left upon the raft. As the day dawned, the breez again sprung up, 
and they share out the portion of water, which would have been the 
allow of their companion who had fallen. hunger they felt not; 
but the water reviv their spirits. 

although philip had had littl to say to schriften sinc the 
separ from amine, it wa veri evid to him and to krantz, that 
all the pilot' former bitter feel had returned. hi chuckle, 
hi sarcasms, hi "he! he!" were incessant; and hi eye wa now as 
malici direct to philip as it wa when they first met. It wa 
evid that amin alon had for the time conquer hi disposition; 
and that, with her disappearance, had vanish all the good-wil of 
schriften toward her husband. for thi philip care little; he had a 
much more seriou weight on hi heart--th loss of hi dear amine; and 
he felt reckless and indiffer concern anyth else. 

the breez now freshened, and they expect that, in two hours, they 
would run on the beach, but they were disappointed: the step of the 
mast gave way from the forc of the wind, and the sail fell upon the 
raft. thi occas great delay; and befor they could repair the 
mischief, the wind again subsided, and they were left about a mile 
from the beach. tire and worn out with hi feelings, philip at last 
fell asleep by the side of krantz, leav schriften at the helm. He 
slept soundly--h dreamt of amine--h thought she wa under a grove 
of cocoa-nut in a sweet sleep; that he stood by and watch her, and 
that she smile in her sleep, and murmur "philip," when suddenli he 
wa awaken by some unusu movement. half-dream still, he thought 
that schriften, the pilot, had in hi sleep been attempt to gain 
hi relic, had pass the chain over hi head, and wa remov 
quietli from underneath hi neck the portion of the chain which, in 
hi reclin posture, he lay upon. startl at the idea, he threw up 
hi hand to seiz the arm of the wretch, and found that he had realli 
seiz hold of schriften, who wa kneel by him, and in possess 
of the chain and relic. the struggl wa short, the relic wa 
recovered, and the pilot lay at the merci of philip, who held him down 
with hi knee on hi chest. philip replac the relic on hi bosom, 
and, excit to madness, rose from the bodi of the now breathless 
schriften, caught it in hi arms, and hurl it into the sea. 

"man or devil! I care not which," exclaim philip, breathless; 
"escap now, if you can!" 

the struggl had alreadi rous up krantz and others, but not in time 
to prevent philip from wreak hi vengeanc upon schriften. In few 
words, he told krantz what had passed; as for the men, they care not; 
they laid their head down again, and, satisfi that their money wa 
safe, inquir no further. 

philip watch to see if schriften would rise up again, and tri to 
regain the raft; but he did not make hi appear abov water, and 
philip felt satisfied. 




chapter xxv 


what pen could portray the feel of the fond and dote amine, when 
she first discov that she wa separ from her husband? In a 
state of bewilderment, she watch the other raft as the distanc 
between them increased. At last the shade of night hid it from her 
ach eyes, and she drop down in mute despair. 

gradual she recov herself, and turn round, she exclaimed, 
"who' here?" 

No answer. 

"who' here?" cri she in a louder voice; "alone--alone--and philip 
gone. mother, mother, look down upon your unhappi child!" and amin 
frantic threw herself down so near to the edg of the raft, that 
her long hair, which had fallen down, float on the wave. 

"ah me! where am i?" cri amine, after remain in a state of torpor 
for some hours. the sun glare fierc upon her, and dazzl her eye 
as she open them--sh cast them on the blue wave close by her, and 
beheld a larg shark motionless by the side of the raft, wait for 
hi prey. recoil from the edge, she start up. she turn round, 
and beheld the raft vacant, and the truth flash on her. "oh! philip, 
philip!" cri she, "then it is true, and you are gone for ever! I 
thought it wa onli a dream, I recollect all now. yes--all--all!" 
and amin sank down again upon her cot, which had been place in the 
centr of the raft, and remain motionless for some time. 

but the demand for water becam imperious; she seiz one of the 
bottles, and drank. "yet whi should I drink or eat? whi should I wish 
to preserv life?" she rose, and look round the horizon--"ski and 
water, noth more. Is thi the death I am to die--th cruel death 
prophesi by schriften--a linger death under a burn sun, while 
my vital are parch within? Be it so! fate I dare thee to thi 
worst--w can die but once--and without him, what care I to live! but 
yet I may see him again," continu amine, hurriedly, after a pause. 
"yes! I may--who knows? then welcom life, i'll nurs thee for that 
bare hope--bar inde with nought to feed on. let me see, is it here 
still?" amin look at her zone, and perceiv her dagger wa still 
in it. "well then, I will live sinc death is at my command, and be 
guard of life for my dear husband' sake." and amin threw herself 
on her resting-plac that she might forget everything. she did: from 
that morn till the noon of the next day, she remain in a state of 
torpor. 

when she again rose, she wa faint; again she look round her--ther 
wa but sky and water to be seen. "oh! thi solitude--it is horrible! 
death would be a release--but no, I must not die--i must live for 
philip." she refresh herself with water and a few piec of biscuit, 
and fold her arm across her breast. "A few more day without 
relief, and all must be over. wa ever woman situat as I am, and yet 
I dare to indulg hope? why, 'ti madness! and whi am I thu singl 
out: becaus I have wed with philip? It may be so; if so, I welcom 
it. wretches! who thu sever me from my husband; who, to save their 
own lives, sacrif a helpless woman! nay! they might have save me, 
if they had had the least pity;--but no, they never felt it. and these 
are christians! the creed that the old priest would have had me--yes! 
that philip would have had me embrace. chariti and good-will! they 
talk of it, but I have never seen them practis it! love one 
another!--forgiv one another!--say rather hate and prey upon 
one another! A creed never practised: why, if not practised, of what 
valu is it? ani creed were better--i abjur it, and if I be saved, 
will abjur it still for ever. shade of my mother! is it that I have 
listen to these men--that I have, to win my husband' love, tri to 
forget that which thou taughtest, even when a child at thi feet--that 
faith which our forefath for thousand of year live and die 
in--that creed prove by works, and obedi to the prophet' 
will--i it for thi that I am punished? tell me, mother--oh! tell me 
in my dreams." 

the night close in, and with the gloom rose heavi clouds; the 
lightn dart through the firmament, ever and anon light up 
the raft. At last, the flash were so rapid, not follow each 
other--but dart down from everi quarter at once, that the whole 
firmament appear as if on fire, and the thunder roll along the 
heavens, now near and loud, then rumbl in the distance. the breez 
rose up fresh, and the wave toss the raft, and wash occasion 
even to amine' feet, as she stood in the centr of it. 

"I like this--thi is far better than that calm and wither 
heat--thi rous me," said amine, as she cast her eye up, and 
watch the fork lightn till her vision becam obscured. "yes, 
thi is as it should be. lightning, strike me if you please--wav 
wash me off and buri me in a brini tomb--pour the wrath of the whole 
element upon thi devot head.--i care not, I laugh at, I defi it 
all. thou canst but kill, thi littl steel can do as much. let those 
who hoard up wealth--thos who live in splendour--thos that are 
happy--thos who have husbands, children, aught to love--let them 
tremble, I have nothing. elements! be ye fire, or water, or earth, or 
air, amin defi you! and yet--no, no, deceiv not thyself, amine, 
there is no hope; thu will I mount my funer bier, and wait the will 
of destiny." and amin regain the secur place which philip had 
fit up for her in the centr of the raft, threw herself down upon 
her bed, and shut her eyes. 

the thunder and lightn wa follow up by torrent of heavi rain, 
which fell till daylight; the wind still continu fresh, but the sky 
cleared, and the sun shone out. amin remain shiver in her wet 
garments; the heat of the sun prove too power for her exhaust 
state, and her brain wandered. she rose up in a sit posture, 
look around her, saw verdant field in everi direction, the 
cocoa-nut wave to the wind--imagin even that she saw her own 
philip in the distanc hasten to her; she held out her arms; strove 
to get up, and run to meet him, but her limb refus their office; 
she call to him, she screamed, and sank back exhaust on her 
resting-place. 




chapter xxvi 


We must for a time return to philip, and follow hi strang destiny. A 
few hour after he had thrown the pilot into the sea they gain the 
shore, so long look at with anxieti and suspense. the spar of the 
raft, jerk by the run swell, undul and rub against each 
other, as they rose and fell to the wave break on the beach. the 
breez wa fresh, but the surf wa trifling, and the land wa 
without difficulty. the beach wa shelving, of firm white sand, 
interspers and strew with variou brilliant-colour shells; and 
here and there, the bleach fragment and bone of some anim which 
had been forc out of it element to die. the island was, like all 
the others, cover with a thick wood of cocoa-nut trees, whose top 
wave to the breeze, or bow to the blast, produc a shade and a 
fresh which would have been duli appreci by ani other parti 
than the present, with the except onli of krantz; for philip 
thought of noth but hi lost wife, and the seamen thought of 
noth but of their sudden wealth. krantz support philip to the 
beach and led him to the shade; but after a minut he rose, and 
run down to the nearest point, look anxious for the portion 
of the raft which held amine, which wa now far, far away. krantz had 
followed, awar that, now the first paroxysm were past, there wa no 
fear of philip' throw away hi life. 

"gone, gone for ever!" exclaim philip, press hi hand to the 
ball of hi eyes. 

"not so, philip, the same provid which ha preserv us, will 
certainli assist her. It is imposs that she can perish among so 
mani islands, mani of which are inhabited; and a woman will be certain 
of kind treatment." 

"if I could onli think so," repli philip. 

"A littl reflect may induc you to think that it is rather an 
advantag than otherwise, that she is thu separated--not from you, 
but from so mani lawless companions, whose unit forc we could 
not resist. Do you think that, after ani lengthen sojourn on thi 
island, these peopl with us would permit you to remain in quiet 
possess of your wife? no!--they would respect no laws; and amin 
has, in my opinion, been miracul preserv from shame and 
ill-treatment, if not from death." 

"they durst not, surely! well, but krantz, we must make a raft and 
follow her; we must not remain here--i will seek her through the wide 
world." 

"be it so, if you wish, philip, and I will follow your fortunes," 
repli krantz, glad to find that there wa something, howev wild 
the idea, for hi mind to feed on. "but now let us return to the 
raft, seek the refresh we so much require, and after that we will 
consid what may be the best plan to pursue." 

To this, philip, who wa much exhausted, tacitli consented, and he 
follow krantz to where the raft had been beached. the men had left 
it, and were each of them sit apart from one anoth under the 
shade of hi own chosen cocoa-nut tree. the articl which had been 
save on the raft had not been landed, and krantz call upon them to 
come and carri the thing on shore--but no one would answer or obey. 
they each sat watch their money, and afraid to leav it, lest they 
should be dispossess of it by the others. now that their live were, 
compar speaking, safe, the demon of avaric had taken full 
possess of their souls; there they sat, exhausted, pine for 
water, and long for sleep, and yet they dare not move--they were 
fix as if by the wand of the enchanter. 

"it is the curs dollar which have turn their brains," observ 
krantz to philip; "let us tri if we cannot manag to remov what we 
most stand in need of, and then we will search for water." 

philip and krantz collect the carpenter' tools, the best arms, and 
all the ammunition, as the possess of the latter would give them 
advantag in case of necessity; they then drag on shore the sail 
and some small spars, all of which they carri up to a clump of 
cocoa-nut trees, about a hundr yard from the beach. 

In half an hour they had erect an humbl tent, and put into it what 
they had brought with them, with the except of the major part of 
the ammunition, which, as soon as he wa screen by the tent, krantz 
buri in a heap of dri sand behind it; he then, for their immedi 
wants, cut down with an axe a small cocoa-nut tree in full bearing. It 
must be for those who have suffer the agoni of prolong thirst, to 
know the extrem pleasur with which the milk of the nut were one 
after the other pour down the parch throat of krantz and philip. 
the men wit their enjoy in silence, and with gloat eyes. 
everi time that a fresh cocoa-nut wa seiz and it content quaf 
by their officers, more sharp and agonis wa their own devour 
thirst--stil closer did their dri lip glue themselv together--yet 
they move not, although they felt the tortur of the condemned. 

even close in; philip had thrown himself down on the spare sails, 
and had fallen asleep, when krantz set off to explor the island upon 
which they had been thrown. It wa small, not exceed three mile in 
length, and at no one part more than five hundr yard across. water 
there wa none, unless it were to be obtain by digging; fortun 
the young cocoa-nut prevent the absolut necess for it. On hi 
return, krantz pass the men in their respect stations. each wa 
awake, and rais himself on hi elbow to ascertain if it were an 
assailant; but perceiv krantz, they again drop down. krantz 
pass the raft--th water wa now quit smooth, for the wind had 
shift off shore, and the spar which compos the raft hardli 
jostl each other. He step upon it, and, as the moon wa bright in 
the heavens, he took the precaut of collect all the arm which 
had been left, and throw them as far as he could into the sea. He 
then walk to the tent, where he found philip still sleep soundly, 
and in a few minut he wa repos by hi side. and philip' dream 
were of amine; he thought that he saw the hate schriften rise again 
from the waters, and, climb up to the raft, seat himself by her 
side. He thought that he again heard hi unearthli chuckl and hi 
scorn laugh, as hi unwelcom word fell upon her distract ears. 
He thought that she fled into the sea to avoid schriften, and that the 
water appear to reject her--sh float on the surface. the storm 
rose, and onc more he beheld her in the sea-shel skim over the 
waves. again, she wa in a furiou surf on the beach, and her shell 
sank, and she wa buri in the waves; and then he saw her walk on 
shore without fear and without harm, for the water which spare 
no one, appear to spare her. philip tri to join her, but wa 
prevent by some unknown power, and amin wave her hand and said, 
"we shall meet again, philip; yes, onc more on thi earth shall we 
meet again." 

the sun wa high in the heaven and scorch in hi heat, when krantz 
first open hi eyes, and awaken philip. the axe again procur for 
them their morning' meal. philip, wa silent; he wa rumin upon 
hi dreams, which had afford him consolation. "we shall meet again!" 
thought he. "yes, onc more at least we shall meet again. providence! 
I thank thee." 

krantz then step out to ascertain the condit of the men. He 
found them faint, and so exhausted, that they could not possibl 
surviv much longer, yet still watch over their darl treasure. 
It wa melancholi to wit such pervers of intellect, and krantz 
thought of a plan which might save their lives. He propos to them 
each separately, that they should buri their money so deep, that it 
wa not to be recov without time: thi would prevent ani one from 
attack the treasur of the other, without it be perceiv 
and the attempt frustrated, and would enabl them to obtain their 
necessari food and refresh without danger of be robbed. 

To thi plan they acceded. krantz brought out of the tent the onli 
shovel in their possession, and they, one by one, buri their dollar 
mani feet deep in the yield sand. when they had all secur their 
wealth, he brought them one of the axes, and the cocoa-nut tree 
fell, and they were restor to new life and vigour. have satiat 
themselves, they then lay down upon the sever spot under which they 
had buri their dollars, and were soon enjoy that repos which 
they all so much needed. 

philip and krantz had now mani seriou consult as to the mean 
which should be taken for quit the island, and go in search 
of amine; for although krantz thought the latter part of philip' 
propos useless, he did not ventur to say so. To quit thi island 
wa necessary; and provid they gain one of those which were 
inhabited, it wa all that they could expect. As for amine, he 
consid that she wa dead befor this, either have been wash 
off the raft, or that her bodi wa lie on it expos to the 
decompos heat of a torrid sun. 

To cheer philip, he express himself otherwise; and whenev they 
talk about leav the island, it wa not to save their own lives, 
but invari to search after philip' lost wife. the plan which they 
propos and act upon was, to construct a light raft, the centr to 
be compos of three water-casks, saw in half, in a row behind each 
other, firmli fix by cross piec to two long spar on each side. 
this, under sail, would move quickli through the water, and be 
manag so as to enabl them to steer a course. the outsid spar 
had been select and haul on shore, and the work wa alreadi in 
progress; but they were left alon in their work, for the seamen 
appear to have no idea at present of quit the island. restor 
by food and repose, they were not content with the money which they 
had--they were anxiou for more. A portion of each party' wealth had 
been dug up, and they now gambl all day with pebbles, which they 
had collect on the beach, and with which they had invent a game. 
anoth evil had crept among them: they had cut step in the largest 
cocoa-nut trees, and with the activ of seamen had mount them, 
and by tap the top of the trees, and fix empti cocoa-nut 
underneath, had obtain the liquor, which in it first ferment 
is term toddy, and is afterward distil into arrack. but as 
toddy, it is quit suffici to intoxicate; and everi day the scene 
of violenc and intoxication, accompani with oath and execrations, 
becam more and more dreadful. the loser tore their hair, and rush 
like madmen upon those who had gain their dollars; but krantz had 
fortun thrown their weapon into the sea, and those he had saved, 
as well as the ammunition, he had secreted. 

blow and bloodshed, therefore, were continual, but loss of life there 
wa none, as the contend parti were separ by the others, who 
were anxiou that the play should not be interrupted. such had been 
the state of affair for now nearli a fortnight, while the work of the 
raft had slowli proceeded. some of the men had lost their all, and 
had, by the gener consent of those who had won their wealth, been 
banish to a certain distanc that they might not pilfer from them. 
these walk gloomili round the island, or on the beach, seek 
some instrument by which they might aveng themselves, and obtain 
repossess of their money. krantz and philip had propos to these 
men to join them, and leav the island, but they had sullenli refused. 

the axe wa now never part with by krantz. He cut down what 
cocoa-nut tree they requir for subsistence, and prevent the men 
from notch more trees, to procur the mean of inebriation. On the 
sixteenth day, all the money had pass into the hand of three men 
who had been more fortun than the rest. the loser were now by 
far the more numer party, and the consequ was, that the next 
morn these three men were found lie strangl on the beach; the 
money had been redivided, and the gambl had recommenc with more 
vigour than ever. 

"how can thi end?" exclaim philip to krantz, as he look upon the 
blacken counten of the murder men. 

"in the death of all," repli krantz. "we cannot prevent it. It is a 
judgment." 

the raft wa now ready; the sand had been dug from beneath it, so as 
to allow the water to flow in and float it, and it wa now made fast 
to a stake, and ride on the peac waters. A larg store of 
cocoa-nuts, old and young, had been procur and put on board of her, 
and it wa the intent of philip and krantz to have quit the 
island the next day. 

unfortunately, one of the men, when bathing, had perceiv the arm 
lie in the shallow water. He had dive down and procur a cutlass; 
other had follow hi example, and all had arm themselves. thi 
induc philip and krantz to sleep on board of the raft, and keep 
watch; and that night, as the play wa go on, a heavi loss on one 
side end in a gener fray. the combat wa furious, for all were 
more or less excit by intoxication. the result wa melancholy, for 
onli three were left alive. philip, with krantz, watch the issue; 
everi man who fell wound wa put to the sword, and the three left, 
who had been fight on the same side, rest pant on their 
weapons. after a pause, two of them commun with each other, and 
the result wa an attack upon the third man, who fell dead beneath 
their blows. 

"merci father! are these thi creatures?" exclaim philip. 

"no!" repli krantz, "they worship the devil as mammon. Do you 
imagin that those two, who could now divid more wealth than they 
could well spend if they return to their country, will consent to a 
division? never!--they must have all--yes, all." 

krantz had hardli express hi opinion, when one of the men, take 
advantag of the other turn round a moment from him, pass hi 
sword through hi back. the man fell with a groan, and the sword wa 
again pass through hi body. 

"said I not so? but the treacher villain shall not reap hi 
reward," continu krantz, level the musket which he held in hi 
hand, and shoot him dead. 

"you have done wrong, krantz; you have save him from the punish 
he deserved. left alon on the island, without the mean of obtain 
hi subsistence, he must have perish miser and by inches, with 
all hi money round him--that would have been tortur indeed!" 

"perhap I wa wrong. If so, may provid forgiv me, I could not 
help it. let us go ashore, for we are now on thi island alone. We 
must collect the treasur and buri it, so that it may be recovered; 
and, at the same time, take a portion with us--for who know but that 
we may have occas for it. to-morrow we had better remain here, for 
we shall have enough to do in buri the bodi of these infatu 
men, and the wealth which ha caus their destruction." 

philip agre to the proprieti of the suggestion; the next day they 
buri the bodi where they lay; and the treasur wa all collect 
in a deep trench, under a cocoa-nut tree, which they care mark 
with their axe. about five hundr piec of gold were select and 
taken on board of the raft, with the intent of secret them about 
their persons, and resort to them in case of need. 

the follow morn they hoist their sail and quit the island. 
need it be said in what direct they steered? As may be well 
imagined, in that quarter where they had last seen the raft with the 
isol amine. 




chapter xxvii 


the raft wa found to answer well; and although her progress through 
the water wa not veri rapid, she obey the helm and wa under 
command. both philip and krantz were veri care in take such mark 
and observ of the island as should enabl them, if necessary, 
to find it again. with the current to assist them, they now proceed 
rapidli to the southward, in order that they might examin a larg 
island which lay in that direction. their object, after seek for 
amine, wa to find out the direct of ternate; the king of which 
they knew to be at varianc with the portuguese, who had a fort and 
factori at tidore, not veri far distant from it; and from thenc to 
obtain a passag in one of the chines junks, which, on their way to 
bantam, call at that island. 

toward even they had near the larg island, and they soon ran 
down it close to the beach. philip' eye wander in everi direct 
to ascertain whether anyth on the shore indic the presenc of 
amine' raft, but he could perceiv noth of the kind, nor did he 
see ani inhabitants. 

that they might not pass the object of their search dure the night, 
they ran their raft on shore, in a small cove, where the water were 
quit smooth, and remain there until the next morning, when they 
again made sail and prosecut their voyage. krantz wa steer with 
the long sweep they had fit for the purpose, when he observ 
philip, who had been for some time silent, take from hi breast the 
relic which he wore, and gaze attent upon it. 

"i that your picture, philip?" observ krantz. 

"alas! no, it is my destiny," repli philip, answer without 
reflection. 

"your destiny! what mean you?" 

"did I say my destiny? I hardli know what I said," repli philip, 
replac the relic in hi bosom. 

"I rather think you said more than you intended," repli krantz, "but 
at the same time, someth near the truth. I have often perceiv you 
with that trinket in your hand, and I have not forgotten how anxiou 
schriften wa to obtain it, and the consequ of hi attempt upon 
it. Is there not some secret--som mysteri attach to it? surely, 
if so, you must now suffici know me as your friend, to feel me 
worthi of your confidence." 

"that you are my friend, krantz, I feel--mi sincer and much valu 
friend, for we have share much danger together, and that is 
suffici to make us friends--that I could trust you, I believe, but 
I feel as if I dare not trust anyone. there is a mysteri attach to 
thi relic (for a relic it is), which as yet ha been confid to my 
wife and holi men alone." 

"and if trust to holi men, sure it may be trust to sincer 
friendship, than which noth is more holy." 

"but I have a presenti that the knowledg of my secret would prove 
fatal to you. whi I feel such a presenti I know not; but I feel 
it, krantz; and I cannot afford to lose you, my valu friend." 

"you will not, then, make use of my friendship, it appears," repli 
krantz. "I have risk my life with you befor now, and I am not to 
be deter from the duti of friendship by a childish forebod on 
your part, the result of an agit mind and a weaken body. can 
anyth be more absurd than to suppose, that a secret confid to me 
can be pregnant with danger, unless it be, indeed, that my zeal 
to assist you may lead me into difficulties. I am not of a pri 
disposition; but we have been so long connect together, and are now 
so isol from the rest of the world, that it appear to me it would 
be a solac to you, were you to confid in one whom you can trust, 
what evid ha long prey upon your mind. the consol and 
advic of a friend, philip, are not to be despised, and you will feel 
reliev if abl to talk over with him a subject which evid 
oppress you. if, therefore, you valu my friendship, let me share 
with you in your sorrows." 

there are few who have pass through life so quietly, as not to 
recollect how much grief ha been assuag by confid it caus to, 
and listen to the counsel and consol of, some dear friend. 
It must not therefor appear surprising, that, situat as he was, and 
oppress with the loss of amine, philip should regard krantz as one 
to whom he might ventur to confid hi import secret. He commenc 
hi narr with no injunctions, for he felt that if krantz could 
not respect hi secret for hi secret' sake, or from good-wil 
toward him, he wa not like to be bound by ani promise; and as, 
dure the day, the raft pass by the variou small cape and 
headland of the island, he pour into krantz' ear the histori which 
the reader is acquaint with. "now you know all," said philip with 
a deep sigh, as the narr wa concluded. "what think you? Do you 
credit my strang tale, or do you imagine, as some well would, that it 
is a mere phantom of a disord brain?" 

"that it is not so, philip, I believe," repli krantz; "for I too 
have had ocular proof of the correct of a part of your history. 
rememb how often I have seen thi phantom ship--and if your father 
is permit to rang over the seas, whi should you not be select 
and permit to revers hi doom? I fulli believ everi word that you 
have told me, and sinc you have told me this, I can comprehend much 
that in your behaviour at time appear unaccountable; there are mani 
who would piti you, philip, but I envi you." 

"envi me?" cri philip. 

"yes! envi you: and gladli would I take the burden of your doom on my 
own shoulders, were it onli possible. Is it not a splendid thought 
that you are summon to so great a purpose,--that instead of roam 
through the world as we all do in pursuit of wealth, which possibl we 
may lose after year of cost and hardship, by the ventur of a day, 
and which, at all events, we must leav behind us,--you are select 
to fulfil a great and gloriou work--th work of angels, I may 
say--that of redeem the soul of a father, _suffering_ indeed, for 
hi human frailties, but not doom to perish for eternity; you have, 
indeed, an object of pursuit worthi of all the hardship and danger 
of a maritim life. If it end in your death, what then? where els 
end our futil cravings, our continu toil, after nothing? We all 
must die--but how few--who inde besid yourself--wa ever permit 
befor hi death to ransom the soul of the author of hi existence! 
yes, philip, I envi you!" 

"you think and speak like amine. she too is of a wild and ardent 
soul, that would mingl with the be of the other world, and hold 
intellig with disembodi spirits." 

"she is right," repli krantz; "there are event in my life, or 
rather connect with my family, which have often fulli convinc me 
that thi is not onli possibl but permitted. your stori ha onli 
corrobor what I alreadi believed." 

"indeed! krantz?" 

"indeed, yes; but of that hereafter: the night is close in, we must 
again put our littl bark in safeti for the night, and there is a cove 
which I think appear suit for the purpose." 

befor morning, a strong breez right on shore had sprung up, and the 
surf becam so high as to endang the raft; to continu their cours 
wa impossible; they could onli haul up their raft to prevent it 
be dash to piec by the forc of the waves, as the sea broke 
on the shore. philip' thought were, as usual, upon amine, and as he 
watch the toss waters, as the sunbeam lighten up their crests, 
he exclaimed, "ocean! hast thou my amine? If so, give up thi dead! 
what is that?" continu he, point to a speck on the horizon. 

"the sail of a small craft of some descript or another," repli 
krantz; "and appar come down befor the wind to shelter herself 
in the veri nook we have selected." 

"you are right; it is the sail of a vessel, of one of those peroqua 
which skim over these seas--how she rise on the swell!--sh is full 
of men, apparently." 

the peroqua rapidli approached, and wa soon close to the beach; the 
sail wa lowered, and she wa back in through the surf. 

"resist is useless should they prove enemies," observ philip. 
"we shall soon know our fate." 

the peopl in the peroqua took no notic of them, until the craft had 
been haul up and secured; three of them then advanc toward philip 
and krantz, with spear in their hands, but evid with no hostil 
intentions. one address them in portuguese, ask them who they 
were? 

"we are hollanders," repli philip. 

"A part of the crew of the vessel which wa wrecked?" inquir he. 

"yes!" 

"you have noth to fear--you are enemi to the portuguese, and so 
are we. We belong to the island of ternate--our king is at war with 
the portuguese, who are villains. where are your companions? on which 
island?" 

"they are all dead," repli philip; "may I ask you whether you have 
fallen in with a woman, who wa adrift on a part of the raft by 
herself? or have you heard of her?" 

"we have heard that a woman wa pick up on the beach to the 
southward, and carri away by the tidor peopl to the portugues 
settlement, on the supposit that she wa a portuguese." 

"then god be thanked, she is saved," cri philip. "merci heaven! 
accept my thanks.--to tidor you said?" 

"yes; we are at war with the portuguese, we cannot take you there." 

"no! but we shall meet again." 

the person who accost them wa evid of some consequence. hi 
dress was, to a certain degree, mahometan, but mix up with malay--h 
carri arm in hi girdl and a spear in hi hand; hi turban wa of 
print chintz; and hi deportment, like most person of rank in that 
country, wa courteou and dignified. 

"we are now return to ternate, and will take you with us. our king 
will be pleas to receiv ani hollanders, especi as you are 
enemi to the portugues dogs. I forgot to tell you that we have one 
of your companion with us in the boat; we pick him up at sea, much 
exhausted, but he is now do well." 

"who can it be?" observ krantz, "it must be some one belong to 
some other vessel." 

"no," repli philip, shuddering, "it must be schriften." 

"then my eye must behold him befor I believ it," repli krantz. 

"then believ your eyes," repli philip, point to the form of 
schriften, who wa now walk toward them. 

"mynheer vanderdecken, glad to see you. mynheer krantz, I hope you are 
well. how lucki that we should all be saved. he! he!" 

"the ocean ha then, indeed, given up it dead, as I requested," 
thought philip. 

In the meantime, schriften, without make ani refer to the way 
in which they had so unceremoni part company, address krantz 
with appar good-humour, and some slight ting of sarcasm. It wa 
some time befor krantz could rid himself of him. 

"what think you of him, krantz?" 

"that he is a part of the whole, and ha hi destini to fulfil as well 
as you. He ha hi part to play in thi wondrou mystery, and will 
remain until it is finished. think not of him. recollect, your amin 
is safe." 

"true," repli philip, "the wretch is not worth a thought; we have 
now noth to do but to embark with these people; hereaft we may 
rid ourselv of him, and strive then to rejoin my dearest amine." 




chapter xxviii 


when amin again came to her senses, she found herself lie on the 
leav of the palmetto, in a small hut. A hideou black child sat by 
her, brush off the flies. where wa she? 

the raft had been toss about for two days, dure which amin 
remain in a state of altern delirium and stupor. driven by the 
current and the gale, it had been thrown on shore on the eastern end 
of the coast of new guinea. she had been discov by some of the 
natives, who happen to be on the beach traffick with some of the 
tidor people. At first, they hasten to rid her of her garments, 
although they perceiv that she wa not dead; but befor they had 
left her as nake as themselves, a diamond of great value, which had 
been given to her by philip, attract the attent of one of the 
savages; fail in hi attempt to pull it off, he pull out a rusty, 
blunt knife, and wa busili saw at the finger, when an old woman of 
author interf and bade him desist. the tidor people, also, who 
were friend with the portuguese, point out, that to save one of 
that nation would ensur a reward; they state moreover, that they 
would, on their return, inform the peopl of the factori establish 
that one of their country-women had been thrown on shore on a 
raft.--to thi amin owe the care and attent that wa paid to 
her; that part of new guinea be somewhat civilis by occasion 
intercours with the tidor people, who came there to exchang 
european fineri and trash for the more use product of the 
island. 

the papoo woman carri amin into her hut, and there she lay for 
mani days, waver between life and death, care attended, but 
requir little, except the moisten of her parch lip with 
water, and the brush off of the mosquito and flies. 

when amin open her eyes, the littl papoo ran out to acquaint 
the woman who follow her into the hut. she wa of larg size, veri 
corpul and unwieldy, with littl cover on her body; her hair, 
which wa woolli in it texture, wa partli parted, partli frizzled; 
a cloth round her waist, and a piec of fade yellow silk on her 
shoulders, wa all her dress. A few silver ring on her fat fingers, 
and a necklac of mother-of-pearl, were her ornaments. her teeth were 
jet black, from the use of the betel-nut, and her whole appear wa 
such as to excit disgust in the breast of amine. 

she address amine, but her word were unintelligible: and the 
sufferer, exhaust with the slight effort she had made, fell back 
into her former position, and close her eyes. but if the woman wa 
disgusting, she wa kind; and by her attent and care amin wa 
able, in the cours of three weeks, to crawl out of the hut and enjoy 
the even breeze. the nativ of the island would at time surround 
her, but they treat her with respect, from fear of the old woman. 
their woolli hair wa frizzl or plaited, sometim powder white 
with chunam. A few palmetto leav round the waist and descend to 
the knee, wa their onli attire; ring through the nose and ears, 
and feather of birds, particularli the bird of paradise, were their 
ornaments: but their languag wa wholli unintelligble. amin felt 
grate for life; she sat under the shade of the trees, and watch 
the swift peroqua as they skim the blue sea which wa expand 
befor her; but her thought were elsewhere--they were on philip. 

one morn amin came out of the hut, with joy on her countenance, 
and took her usual seat under the trees. "yes, mother, dearest mother, 
I thank thee; thou hast appear to me; thou hast recal to me thi 
arts, which I had forgotten, and had I but the mean of convers 
with these people, even now would I know where my philip might be." 

for two month did amin remain under the care of the papoo woman. 
when the tidor peopl returned, they had an order to bring the white 
woman, who had been cast on shore, to the factory, and repay those who 
had taken charg of her. they made sign to amine, who had now quit 
recov her beauty, that she wa to go with them. ani chang wa 
prefer to stay where she was, and amin follow them down to a 
peroqua, on which she wa secur fixed, and wa soon dart through 
the water with her new companions; and, as they flew along the smooth 
seas, amin thought of philip' dream and the mermaid' shell. 

By the even they had arriv at the southern point of galolo, where 
they land for the night; the next day they gain the place of their 
destination, and amin wa led up to the portugues factory. 

that the curios of those who were station there wa rous is not 
to be wonder at, the histori given by the nativ of amine' escap 
appear so miraculous. from the command to the lowest servant, 
everi one wa wait to receiv her. the beauti of amine, her perfect 
form, astonish them. the command address a long compliment to 
her in portuguese, and wa astonish that she did not make a suitabl 
reply; but as amin did not understand a word that he said, it would 
have been more surpris if she had. 

As amin made sign that she could not understand the language, it wa 
presum that she wa either english or dutch, and an interpret wa 
sent for. she then explain that she wa the wife of a dutch captain, 
whose vessel had been wrecked, and that she did not know whether the 
crew had been save or not. the portugues were veri glad to hear 
that a dutch vessel had been wrecked, and veri glad that so love a 
creatur as amin had been saved. she wa inform by the command 
that she wa welcome, and that dure her stay there everyth should 
be done to make her comfortable; that in three month they expect 
a vessel from the chines seas, proceed to goa, and that, if 
inclined, she should have a passag to goa in that vessel, and from 
that citi she would easili find other vessel to take her wherev she 
might pleas to go; she wa then conduct to an apartment, and left 
with a littl negress to attend upon her. 

the portugues command wa a small, meagre, littl man, dri up to 
a chip, from long sojourn under a tropic sun. He had veri larg 
whiskers, and a veri long sword; these were the two most remark 
featur in hi person and dress. 

hi attent could not be misinterpreted, and amin would have 
laugh at him, had she not been fear that she might be detained. 
In a few weeks, by due attention, she gain the portugues languag 
so far as to ask for what she required, and befor she quit the 
island of tidor she could convers fluently. but her anxieti to 
leave, and to ascertain what had becom of philip, becam greater 
everi day; and at the expir of the three months, her eye were 
continu bent to seaward, to catch the first glimps of the vessel 
which wa expected. At last it appeared, and as amin watch the 
approach of the canva from the west, the command fell on hi 
knees, and declar hi passion, request her not to think of 
departure, but to unit her fate with his. 

amin wa cautiou in her reply, for she knew that she wa in hi 
power. "she must first receiv intellig of her husband' death, 
which wa not yet certain; she would proceed to goa, and if she 
discov that she wa single, she would write to him." 

thi answer, as it will be discovered, wa the caus of great 
suffer to philip: the commandant, fulli assur that he could 
compass philip' death, wa satisfied--declar that, as soon as he 
had ani posit intelligence, he would bring it to goa himself, and 
made a thousand protest of truth and fidelity. 

"fool!" thought amine, as she watch the ship, which wa now close to 
the anchorage. 

In half-an-hour the vessel had anchored, and the peopl had landed. 
amin observ a priest with them, as they walk up to the fort. she 
shuddered--sh knew not why; when they arrived, she found herself in 
the presenc of father mathias. 




chapter xxix 


both amin and father mathia started, and drew back with surpris at 
thi unexpect meeting. amin wa the first to extend her hand; 
she had almost forgotten at the moment how they had parted, in the 
pleasur she experienc in meet with a well-known face. 

father mathia coldli took her hand, and lay hi own upon her head, 
said: "may god bless thee, and forgiv thee, my daughter, as I have 
long done." then the recollect of what had passed, rush into 
amine' mind, and she colour deeply. 

had father mathia forgiven her? the event would show; but thi is 
certain, he now treat her as an old friend: listen with interest 
to her histori of the wreck, and agre with her upon the proprieti of 
her accompani him to goa. 

In a few day the vessel sailed, and amin quit the factori and it 
enamour commandant. they ran through the archipelago in safety, and 
were cross the mouth of the bay of bengal, without have had ani 
interrupt to fine weather. father mathia had return to lisbon, 
when he quit ternicore, and, tire of idleness, had again 
volunt to proceed as a missionari to india. He had arriv at 
formosa, and shortli after hi arrival, had receiv direct from 
hi superior to return on import busi to goa, and thu it wa 
that he fell in with amin at tidore. 

It would be difficult to analys the feel of father mathia 
toward amine--they vari so often. At one moment, he would call to 
mind the kind shown to him by her and philip--th regard he had 
for the husband, and the mani good qualiti which he acknowledg 
that she possessed--and _now_ he would recollect the disgrace, the 
unmerit disgrace, he had suffer through her means; and he would 
then canvass, whether she realli did believ him an intrud in her 
chamber for other motiv than those which actuat him, or whether 
she had taken advantag of hi indiscretion. these account were 
nearli balanc in hi mind; he could have forgiven all, if he had 
thought that amin wa a sincer convert to the church; but hi strong 
convict that she wa not onli an unbeliever, but that she practis 
forbidden arts, turn the scale against her. He watch her narrowly, 
and when, in her conversation, she shew ani religi feeling, hi 
heart warm toward her; but when, on the contrary, ani word escap 
her lip which seem to show that she thought lightli of hi creed, 
then the full tide of indign and vengeanc pour into hi bosom. 

It wa in cross the bay of bengal, to pass round the southern cape 
of ceylon, that they first met with bad weather; and when the storm 
increased, the superstiti seamen light candl befor the small 
imag of the saint which wa shrine on deck. amin observ it, 
and smile with scorn; and as she did so, almost unwittingly, she 
perceiv that the eye of father mathia wa earnestli fix upon her. 

"the papoos I have just left do no wors than worship their idols, 
and are term idolaters," mutter amine. "what then are these 
christians?" 

"would you not be better below?" said father mathias, come over to 
amine; "thi is no time for women to be on deck--they would be better 
employ in offer up prayer for safety." 

"nay, father, I can pray better here; I like thi conflict of the 
elements; and as I view, I bow down in admir of the deiti who 
rule the storm; who send the wind forth in their wrath, or sooth 
them into peace." 

"it is well said, my child," repli father mathias; "but the almighti 
is not onli to be worship in hi works, but, in the closet, with 
meditation, self-examination, and faith. hast thou follow up the 
precept which thou hast been taught? hast thou reverenc the sublim 
mysteri which have been unfold to thee?" 

"I have done my best, father," repli amine, turn away her head, 
and watch the roll wave. 

"hast thou call upon the holi virgin, and upon the saints--thos 
intercessor for mortal er like thyself?" 

amin made no answer; she did not wish to irrit the priest, neither 
would she tell an untruth. 

"answer me, child," continu the priest with severity. 

"father," repli amine, "I have appeal to god alone--th god of the 
christians--th god of the whole universe!" 

"who believ not everything, believ nothing, young woman. I thought 
as much! I saw thee smile with scorn just now; whi didst thou smile?" 

"at my own thoughts, good father." 

"say rather, at the true faith shown by others." 

amin made no answer. 

"thou art still an unbeliever, and a heretic. beware, young woman! 
beware!" 

"bewar of what, good father? whi should I beware? are there not 
million in these clime more unbelieving, and more heretic, perhaps, 
than I? how mani have you convert to your faith? what trouble, what 
toil, what danger have you not undergon to propag that creed--and 
whi do you succeed so ill? shall I tell you, father? It is becaus the 
peopl have alreadi had a creed of their own: a creed taught to them 
from their infancy, and acknowledg by all who live about them. Am I 
not in the same position? I wa brought up in anoth creed: and can 
you expect that that can be dismissed, and the prejudic of earli 
year at onc eradicated? I have thought much of what you have told 
me--hav felt that much is true--that the tenet of your creed are 
god-like--i not that much? and yet you are not content. you would 
have blind acknowledgment, blind obedience--i were then an unworthi 
convert. We shall soon be in port, then teach me, and convinc me, if 
you will; I am readi to examin and confess, but on convict only. 
have patience, good father, and the time may come when I _may_ feel, 
what now I _do not_;--that yon bit of paint wood is a thing to bow 
down to and adore." 

notwithstand thi taunt at the close of thi speech, there wa so 
much truth in the observ of amine, that father mathia felt 
their power. As the wife of a catholic, he had been accustom to view 
amin as one who had backslid from the church of rome--not as one 
who had been brought up in anoth creed. He now recal to mind, 
that she had never yet been receiv into the church, for father 
seysen had not consid her as in a proper state to be admitted, and 
had defer her baptism until he wa satisfi of her full belief. 

"you speak boldly; but you speak as you feel, my child," repli 
father mathia after a pause. "we will, when we arriv at goa, talk 
over these things, and with the bless of god, the new faith shall 
be made manifest to you." 

"so be it," repli amine. 

littl did the priest imagin that amine' thought were at that 
moment upon a dream she had had at new guinea, in which her mother 
appeared, and reveal to her her magic arts--and that amin wa 
long to arriv at goa that she might practis them. 

everi hour the gale increased, and the vessel labour and leaked; the 
portugues sailor were frightened, and invok their saints. father 
mathias, and the other passengers, gave themselv up for lost, for 
the pump could not keep the vessel free; and their cheek blanch as 
the wave wash furious over the vessel: they pray and trembled. 
father mathia gave them absolution; some cri like children, some 
tore their hair, some cursed, and curs the saint they had but the 
day befor invoked. but amin stood unmoved; and as she heard them 
curse, she smile in scorn. 

"mi child," said father mathias, check hi tremul voic that he 
might not appear agit befor one whom he saw so calm and unmov 
amidst the roar of the elements--"mi child, let not thi hour of 
peril pass away. befor thou art summoned, let me receiv thee into 
the bosom of our church--giv thee pardon for thi sins, and certainti 
of bliss hereafter." 

"good father, amin is not to be frighten into belief, even if she 
fear the storm," repli she; "nor will she credit your power to 
forgiv her sins, mere becaus she says, in fear, that which in her 
calm reason she might reject. If ever fear could have subject me, 
it wa when I wa alon upon the raft--that wa inde a trial of my 
strength of mind, the bare recollect of which is, at thi moment, 
more dread than the storm now raging, and the death which may await 
us. there is a god on high in whose merci I trust--in whose love I 
confide--to whose will I bow. let him do hi will." 

"die not, my child, in unbelief!" 

"father," repli amine, point to the passeng and seamen who 
were on the deck cri and wailing: "these are christians--thes men 
have been promis by you, but now, the inherit of perfect bliss. 
what is their faith, that it doe not give them strength to die like 
men? whi is it that a woman quail not, while they lie grovel on 
the deck?" 

"life is sweet, my child--they leav their wives, their children, and 
they dread hereafter. who is prepar to die?" 

"I am," repli amine. "I have no husband--at least I fear I have no 
husband. for me life ha no sweets; yet, one littl hope remains--a 
straw to the sink wretch. I fear not death, for I have nought to 
live for. were philip here, why, then indeed--but he is gone befor 
me, and now to follow him is all I ask." 

"he die in the faith, my child--if you would meet him, do the same." 

"he never die like these," repli amine, look with scorn at the 
passengers. 

"perhap he live not as they have lived," repli father mathias. "A 
good man die in peace, and hath no fear." 

"so die the good men of all creeds, father," repli amine; "and in 
all creed death is equal terribl to the wicked." 

"I will pray for thee, my child," said father mathias, sink on hi 
knees. 

"mani thanks--thi prayer will be heard, even though offer for one 
like me," repli amine, who, cling to the man-ropes, made her way 
up to the ladder, and gain the deck. 

"lost! signora, lost!" exclaim the captain, wring hi hand as he 
crouch under the bulwark. 

"no!" repli amine, who had gain the weather side, and held on by a 
rope; "not lost thi time." 

"how say you, signora?" repli the captain, look with admir 
at amine' calm and compos countenance. "how say you, signora?" 

"someth tell me, good captain, that you will not be lost, if you 
exert yourselves--someth tell it to me here," and amin laid her 
hand to her heart. amin had a convict that the vessel would not be 
lost, for it had not escap her observ that the storm wa less 
violent, although, in their terror, thi had been unnot by the 
sailors. 

the cool of amine, her beauty, perhaps, the unusu sight of a 
woman so young, calm and confiding, when all other were in despair, 
had it due effect upon the captain and seamen. suppos her to be 
a cathol they imagin that she had had some warrant for her 
assertion, for credul and superstit are close friends. they 
look upon amin with admir and respect, recov their 
energies, and appli to their duties. the pump were again worked; 
the storm abat dure the night, and the vessel was, as amin had 
predicted, saved. 

the crew and passeng look upon her almost as a saint, and talk 
of her to father mathias, who wa sadli perplexed. the courag which 
she had display wa extraordinary; even when he trembled, she show 
no sign of fear. He made no reply, but commun with hi own mind, 
and the result wa unfavour to amine. what had given her such 
coolness? what had given her the spirit of prophecy? not the god of 
the christians, for she wa no believer. who then? and father mathia 
thought of her chamber at terneuse, and shook hi head. 




chapter xxx 


We must now again return to philip and krantz, who had a long 
convers upon the strang reappear of schriften. all that they 
could agre upon was, that he should be care watched, and that 
they should dispens with hi compani as soon as possible. krantz had 
interrog him as to hi escape, and schriften had inform him, in 
hi usual sneer manner, that one of the sweep of the raft had been 
allow to get adrift dure the scuffle, and that he had float on 
it, until he had gain a small island; that on see the peroqua, he 
had onc more launch it and support himself by it, until he wa 
perceiv and pick up. As there wa noth imposs although much 
of the improb in thi account, krantz ask no more questions. the 
next morning, the wind have abated, they launch the peroqua, and 
made sail for the island of ternate. 

It wa four day befor they arrived: as everi night they land and 
haul up their craft on the sandi beach. philip' heart wa reliev 
at the knowledg of amine' safety, and he could have been happi at 
the prospect of again meet her, had he not been so constantli 
fret by the compani of schriften. 

there wa someth so strange, so contrari to human natur that the 
littl man, though diabol as he appear to be in hi disposition, 
should never hint at, or complain of, philip' attempt upon hi life. 
had he complained--had he accus philip of murder--had he vow 
vengeanc and demand justic on hi return to the authorities, it 
had been different; but no--ther he was, make hi uncalled-for and 
impertin observations, with hi etern chuckl and sarcasm, as if 
he had not the least caus of anger or ill-will. 

As soon as they arriv at the princip port and town of ternate, 
they were conduct to a larg cabin, built of palmetto leav and 
bamboo, and request not to leav it until their arriv had been 
announc to the king. the peculiar courtesi and good breed of 
these island wa the constant theme of remark of philip and krantz; 
their religion, as well as their dress, appear to be a compound of 
the mahometan and malayan. 

after a few hours, they were summon to attend the audienc of the 
king, held in the open air. the king wa seat under a portico, 
attend by a numer concours of priest and soldiers. there wa 
much company, but littl splendour. all who were about the king 
were robe in white, with white turbans, but he himself wa without 
ornament. the first thing that struck philip and krantz, when they 
were usher into the presenc of the king, wa the beauti 
cleanli which everywher prevailed; everi dress wa spotless and 
white, as the sun could bleach it. 

have follow the exampl of those who introduc them, and salut 
the king after the mahommedan custom, they were request to be 
seated; and through the portugues interpreters--for the former 
commun of the island with the portuguese, who had been 
driven from the place, made the portugues languag well known by 
many--a few question were put by the king, who bade them welcome, and 
then request to know how they had been wrecked. 

philip enter into a short detail, in which he state that hi wife 
had been separ from him, and was, he understood, in the hand of 
the portugues factori at tidore. He request to know if hi majesti 
could assist him in obtain her release, or in go to join her. 

"it is well said," repli the king. "let refresh be brought in 
for the strangers, and the audienc be broken up." 

In a few minut there remain of all the court but two or three 
of the king' confidenti friend and advisers; and a collat of 
curries, fish, and a varieti of other dish wa serv up. after it 
wa over, the king then said, "the portugues are dogs, they are our 
enemies--wil you assist us to fight them? We have larg guns, but do 
not understand the use of them as well as you do. I will send a 
fleet against the portugues at tidore, if you will assist me. say, 
hollanders, will you fight? you," address philip, "will then 
recov your wife." 

"I will give an answer to you to-morrow," repli philip; "I must 
consult with my friend. As I told you before, I wa the captain of the 
ship, and thi wa my second in command--w will consult together." 
schriften, whom philip had repres as a common seaman, had not 
been brought up into the presenc of the king. 

"it is good," repli the king; "to-morrow we will expect your reply." 

philip and krantz took their leave, and, on their return to the 
cabin, found that the king had sent them, as a present, two complet 
mahommedan dresses, with turbans. these were welcome, for their own 
garment were sadli tattered, and veri unfit for exposur to the 
burn sun of those climes. their peak hat too, collect the ray 
of heat, which were intolerable; and they gladli exchang them for 
the white turban. secret their money in the malayan sash, which 
form a part of the attire, they soon robe themselv in the nativ 
garments, the comfort of which wa immedi acknowledged. after a 
long consultation, it wa decid that they should accept the term 
offer by the king, as thi wa the onli feasibl way by which 
philip could hope to re-obtain possess of amine. their consent wa 
commun to the king on the follow day, and everi prepar 
wa made for the expedition. 

and now wa to be beheld a scene of bustl and activity. hundr and 
hundr of peroquas, of everi dimension, float close to the beach, 
side by side, form a raft extend nearli half a mile on the smooth 
water of the bay, teem with men, who were equip them for the 
service: some were fit the sails; other were carpent 
where required; the major portion were sharpen their swords, and 
prepar the deadli poison of the pineappl for their creezes. 
the beach wa a scene of confusion: water in jars, bag of rice, 
vegetables, salt-fish, fowl in coops, were everywher strew about 
among the arm natives, who were obey the order of the chiefs, 
who themselv walk up and down, dress in their gayest apparel, 
and glitter in their arm and ornaments. the king had six long 
brass four-pounders, a present from an indian captain; these, with 
a proportion quantiti of shot and cartridges, were (under the 
direct of philip and krantz) fit on some of the largest 
peroquas, and some of the nativ were instruct how to use them. At 
first the king, who fulli expect the reduct of the portugues 
fort, state hi determin to go in person; but in thi he wa 
overrul by hi confidenti advis and by the request of philip, 
who could not allow him to expos hi valuabl life. In ten day all 
wa ready, and the fleet, man by seven thousand men, made sail for 
the island of tidore. 

It wa a beauti sight, to behold the blue rippl sea, cover 
with nearli six hundr of these picturesqu craft, all under sail, 
and dart through the water like dolphin in pursuit of prey; all 
crowd with natives, whose white dress form a live contrast 
with the deep blue of the water. the larg peroquas, in which were 
philip and krantz with the nativ commanders, were gaili decor 
with streamer and pennon of all colours, that flow out and snap 
with the fresh breeze. It appear rather to be an expedit of 
mirth and merriment, than one which wa proceed to bloodsh and 
slaughter. 

On the even of the second day they had made the island of tidore, 
and run down to within a few mile of the portugues factori and 
fort. the nativ of the country, who disliked, though they fear 
to disobey the portuguese, had quit their hut near the beach and 
retir into the woods. the fleet, therefore, anchor and lay near 
the beach, without molestation, dure the night. the next morn 
philip and krantz proceed to reconnoitre. 

the fort and factori of tidor were built upon the same principl 
as almost all the portugues defenc in those seas. An outer 
fortification, consist of a ditch, with strong palisad embed 
in masonry, surround the factori and all the hous of the 
establishment. the gate of the outer wall were open all day for 
ingress and egress, and close onli at night. On the seaward side 
of thi enclosur wa what may be term the citadel or real 
fortification; it wa built of solid masonri with parapets, wa 
surround by a deep ditch, and wa onli access by a drawbridge, 
mount with cannon on everi side. it real strength however, could 
not well be perceived, as it wa hidden by the high palisad which 
surround the whole establishment. after a care survey, philip 
recommend that the larg peroqua with the cannon should attack by 
sea, while the men of the small vessel should land and surround the 
fort--tak advantag of everi shelter which wa afford them, to 
cover themselv while they harass the enemi with their matchlocks, 
arrows, and spears. thi plan have been approv of, one hundr and 
fifti peroqua made sail; the other were haul on the beach, and the 
men belong to them proceed by land. 

but the portugues had been warn of their approach, and were fulli 
prepar to receiv them; the gun mount to the seaward were of 
heavi calibr and well served. the gun of the peroquas, though 
render as effectu as they could be, under the direct of philip, 
were small, and did littl damag to the thick stone front of the 
fort. after an engag of four hours, dure which the ternat 
peopl lost a great number of men, the peroquas, by the advic of 
philip and krantz, haul off, and return to where the remaind of 
the fleet were stationed; and anoth council of war wa held. the 
force, which had surround the fort on the land side, was, however, 
not withdrawn, as it cut off ani suppli or assistance; and, at the 
same time, occasion brought down ani of the portugues who might 
expos themselves--a point of no small importance, as philip well 
knew, with a garrison so small as that in the fort. 

that they could not take the fort by mean of their cannon wa 
evident; on the sea-sid it wa for them impregnable; their effort 
must now be direct to the land. krantz, after the nativ chief had 
done speaking, advis that they should wait until dark, and then 
proceed to the attack in the follow way. when the breez set along 
shore, which it would do in the evening, he propos that the men 
should prepar larg bundl of dri palmetto and cocoa-nut leaves; 
that they should carri their bundl and stack them against the 
palisad to windward, and then set fire to them. they would thu burn 
down the palisades, and gain an entranc into the outer fortification: 
after which they could ascertain in what manner they should next 
proceed. thi advic wa too judici not to be followed. all the men 
who had not matchlock were set to collect fagots; a larg quantiti of 
dri wood wa soon got together, and befor night they were readi for 
the second attack. 

the white dress of the ternat were laid aside: with noth 
on them but their belts, and scimitars, and creezes, and blue 
under-drawers, they silent crept up to the palisades, there 
deposit their fagots, and then again returned, again to perform the 
same journey. As the breastwork of fagot increased, so did they more 
boldli walk up, until the pile wa completed; they then, with a loud 
shout, fire it in sever places. the flame mounted, the cannon 
of the fort roared, and mani fell under the discharg of grape and 
hand-grenade. but, stifl by the smoke, which pour in volum upon 
them, the peopl in the fort were soon compel to quit the rampart 
to avoid suffocation. the palisad were on fire, and the flame 
mount in the air, swept over, and began to attack the factori and 
houses. No resist wa now offered, and the ternat tore down the 
burn palisades, and forc their way into the entrenchment, and 
with their scimitar and creezes, put to death all who had been so 
unfortun as not to take refug in the citadel. these were chiefli 
nativ servants, whom the attack had surprised, and for whose live 
the portugues seem to care but little, for they paid no attent 
to their cri to lower the drawbridge, and admit them into the fort. 

the factory, built of stone, and all the other houses, were on fire, 
and the island wa light up for miles. the smoke had clear away, 
and the defenc of the fort were now plainli visibl in the broad 
glare of the flames. "if we had scaling-ladders," cri philip, "the 
fort would be ours; there is not a soul on the ramparts." "true, 
true," repli krantz, "but even as it is, the factori wall will 
prove an advantag post for us after the fire is extinguished; if 
we occupi it we can prevent them show themselv while the ladder 
are constructing. to-morrow night we may have them ready, and have 
first smoke the fort with a few more fagots, we may afterward mount 
the walls, and carri the place." 

"that will do," repli philip as he walk away. He then join 
the nativ chiefs, who were collect togeth outsid of the 
entrenchment, and commun to them hi plans. when he had made 
known hi views, and the chief had assent to them, schriften, who 
had come with the expedit unknown to philip, made hi appearance. 

"that won't do; you'll never take that fort, philip vanderdecken. he! 
he!" cri schriften. 

hardli had he said the words, when a tremend explos took place, 
and the air wa fill with larg stones, which flew and fell in everi 
direction, kill and maim hundreds. It wa the factori which had 
blown up, for in it vault there wa a larg quantiti of gunpowder, 
to which the fire had communicated. 

"so end that scheme, mynheer vanderdecken. he! he!" scream 
schriften; "you'll never take that fort." 

the loss of life and the confus caus by thi unexpect result, 
occas a panic, and all the ternat peopl fled down to the beach 
where their peroqua were lying. 

It wa in vain that philip and their chief attempt to ralli them. 
unaccustom to the terribl effect of gunpowd in ani larg 
quantities, they believ that someth supernatur had occurred, 
and mani of them jump into the peroqua and made sail, while the 
remaind were confused, trembling, and panting, all huddl together, 
on the beach. 

"you'll never take that fort, mynheer vanderdecken," scream the 
well-known voice. 

philip rais hi sword to cleav the littl man in two, but he let it 
fall again. "I fear he tell an unwelcom truth," thought philip; "but 
whi should I take hi life for that?" 

some few of the ternat chief still kept up their courage, but 
the major part were as much alarm as their people. after some 
consultation, it wa agre that the armi should remain where it wa 
till the next morning, when they should final decid what to do. 

when the day dawned, now that the portugues fort wa no longer 
surround by the other buildings, they perceiv that it wa more 
formid than they had at first supposed. the rampart were fill 
with men, and they were bring cannon to bear on the ternat forces. 
philip had a consult with krantz, and both acknowledged, that 
with the present panic noth more could be done. the chief were 
of the same opinion, and order were given for the return of the 
expedition: indeed, the ternat chief were fulli satisfi with their 
success; they had destroy the larg fort, the factory, and all the 
portugues buildings; a small fortif onli wa uninjured: that 
wa built of stone, and inaccessible, and they knew that the report of 
what had been done, would be taken and acknowledg by the king as a 
great victory. the order wa therefor given for embarkation, and in 
two hour the whole fleet, after a loss of about seven hundr men, 
wa again on it way to ternate. krantz and philip thi time embark 
in the same peroqua, that they might have the pleasur of each other' 
conversation. they had not, however, sail abov three hours, when it 
fell calm, and, toward the evening, there wa everi prospect of bad 
weather. when the breez again sprung up, it wa from an advers 
quarter, but these vessel steer so close to the wind, that thi wa 
disregarded: by midnight, however, the wind had increas to a gale, 
and befor they were clear of the n.e. headland of tidore, it blew a 
hurricane, and mani were wash off into the sea from the differ 
craft, and those who could not swim, sank, and were drowned. the sail 
were lowered, and the vessel lay at the merci of the wind and waves, 
everi sea wash over them. the fleet wa drift fast on the shore, 
and befor morn dawned, the vessel in which were philip and krantz 
wa among the roller on the beach off the northern end of the island. 
In a short time she wa dash to pieces, and everi one had to look 
out for himself. philip and krantz laid hold of one fragment, and were 
support by it till they gain the shore; here they found about 
thirti more companion who had suffer the same fate as themselves. 
when the day dawned, they perceiv that the major part of the fleet 
had weather the point, and that those who had not, would in all 
probabl escape, as the wind had moderated. 

the ternat peopl proposed, that as they were well armed, they 
should, as soon as the weather moderated, launch some of the craft 
belong to the islanders, and join the fleet; but philip, who had 
been consult with krantz, consid thi a good opportun for 
ascertain the fate of amine. As the portugues could prove noth 
against them, they could either deni that they had been among the 
assailants, or might plead that they had been forc to join them. At 
all risks, philip wa determin to remain, and krantz agre to share 
hi fate: and seem to agre with them, they allow the ternat 
peopl to walk to the tidor peroquas, and while they were launch 
them philip and krantz fell back into the jungl and disappeared. the 
portugues had perceiv the wreck of their enemies, and, irrit by 
the loss they had sustained, they had order the peopl of the island 
to go out and captur all who were driven on shore. now that they were 
no longer assailed, the tidor peopl obey them, and veri soon fell 
in with philip and krantz, who had quietli sat down under the shade of 
a larg tree, wait the issue. they were led away to the fort, where 
they arriv by nightfall. they were usher into the presenc of the 
commandant, the same littl man who had made love to amine, and as 
they were dress in mussulman' attire, he wa about to order them to 
be hung, when philip told him that they were dutchmen, who had been 
wrecked, and forc by the king of ternat to join hi expedition; 
that they had taken the earliest opportun of escaping, as wa veri 
evid sinc those who had been thrown on shore with them had got off 
in the island boats, while they chose to remain. whereupon the littl 
portugues command struck hi sword firm down on the pavement of 
the ramparts, _looked_ veri big, and then order them to prison for 
further examination. 




chapter xxxi 


As everi one descant upon the want of comfort in a prison, it is to 
be presum that there are no veri comfort ones. certainli that to 
which philip and krantz were ushered, had anyth rather than the air 
of an agreeabl residence. It wa under the fort, with a veri small 
apertur look toward the sea, for light and air. It wa veri hot, 
and moreov destitut of all those littl conveni which add 
so much to one' happi in modern hous and hotels. In fact, it 
consist of four bare walls, and a stone floor, and that wa all. 

philip, who wish to make some inquiri rel to amine, 
addressed, in portuguese, the soldier who brought them down. 

"mi good friend, I beg your pardon--" 

"I beg yours," repli the soldier go out of the door, and lock 
them in. 

philip leant gloomili against the wall; krantz, more mercurial, walk 
up and down three step each way and turn. 

"do you know what I am think of?" observ krantz, after a paus in 
hi walk. "it is veri fortun that (lower hi voice) we have all 
our doubloon about us; if they don't search us, we may yet get away 
by bribing." 

"and I wa thinking," rejoin philip, "that I would sooner be here 
than in compani with that wretch schriften, whose sight is poison to 
me." 

"I did not much admir the appear of the commandant, but I suppos 
we shall know more to-morrow." 

here they were interrupt by the turn of the key, and the entranc 
of a soldier with a chatti of water, and a larg dish of boil rice. 
He wa not the man who had brought them to the dungeon, and philip 
accost him. 

"you have had hard work within these last two days?" 

"yes, indeed! signor." 

"the nativ forc us to join the expedition, and we escaped." 

"so I heard you say, signor." 

"they lost nearli a thousand men," said krantz. 

"holi St francis! I am glad of it." 

"they will be care how they attack portugues in a hurry, I 
expect," rejoin krantz. 

"I think so," repli the soldier. 

"did you lose mani men?" ventur philip, perceiv that the man wa 
loquacious. 

"not ten of our own people. In the factori there were about a hundr 
of the natives, with some women and children; but that is of no 
consequence." 

"you had a young european woman here, I understand," said philip with 
anxiety; "one who wa wreck in a vessel--wa she among those who 
were lost?" 

"young woman!--holi St francis. yes, now I recollect. whi the fact 
is--" 

"pedro!" call a voic from above; the man stopped, put hi finger 
to hi lips, went out, and lock the door. 

"god of heaven! give me patience," cri philip; "but thi is too 
trying." 

"he will be down here again to-morrow morning," observ krantz. 

"yes! to-morrow morning; but what an endless time will suspens make 
of the interven hours." 

"I feel for you," repli krantz; "but what can be done? the hour 
must pass, though suspens draw them out into intermin years; but 
I hear footsteps." 

again the door wa unlocked, and the first soldier made hi 
appearance. "follow me--th command would speak with you." 

thi unexpect summon wa cheer compli with by philip and hi 
companion. they walk up the narrow stone steps, and at last found 
themselv in a small room, in presenc of the commandant, with whom 
our reader have been alreadi made acquainted. He wa loll on a 
small sofa, hi long sword lay on the tabl befor him, and two young 
nativ women were fan him, one at hi head, and the other at hi 
feet. 

"where did you get those dresses?" wa the first interrogatory. 

"the natives, when they brought us prison from the island on which 
we had save ourselves, took away our clothes, and gave us these as a 
present from their king." 

"and engag you to serv in their fleet, in the attack on thi fort?" 

"they forc us," repli krantz; "for as there wa no war between our 
nations, we object to thi service: notwithstand which, they put 
us on board, to make the common peopl believ that they were assist 
by europeans." 

"how am I to know the truth of this?" 

"you have our word in the first place, and our escap from them in the 
second." 

"you belong to a dutch east-indiaman. are you offic or common 
seamen?" 

krantz, who consid that they were less like to be detain if 
they conceal their rank on board, gave philip a slight touch with 
hi finger as he replied, "we are inferior officers. I wa third mate, 
and thi man wa pilot." 

"and your captain, where is he?" 

"i--i cannot say, whether he is aliv or dead." 

"had you no woman on board?" 

"yes! the captain had hi wife." 

"what ha becom of her?" 

"she is suppos to have perish on a portion of the raft which broke 
adrift." 

"ha!" repli the commandant, who remain silent for some time. 

philip look at krantz, as much as to say, "whi all thi subterfuge;" 
but krantz gave him a sign to leav him to speak. 

"you say you don't know whether your captain is aliv or dead?" 

"I do." 

"now, suppos I wa to give you your liberty, would you have ani 
object to sign a paper, state hi death, and swear to the 
truth of it?" 

philip stare at the commandant, and then at krantz. 

"I see no objection, exactly; except that if it were sent home to 
holland we might get into trouble. may I ask, signor commandant, whi 
you wish for such a paper?" 

"no!" roar the littl man, in a voic like thunder. "I will give 
no reason, but that I wish it; that is enough; take your choice--th 
dungeon, or liberti and a passag by the first vessel which calls." 

"I don't doubt--in fact--i'm sure, he must be dead by thi time," 
repli krantz, draw out the word in a muse manner. "commandant, 
will you give us till to-morrow morn to make our calculations?" 

"yes! you may go." 

"but not to the dungeon, commandant," repli krantz; "we are not 
prisoners, certainly; and, if you wish us to do you a favour, sure 
you will not ill-treat us?" 

"bi your own acknowledg you have taken up arm against the 
most christian king; however, you may remain at liberti for the 
night--to-morrow morn will decid whether or no you are prisoners." 

philip and krantz thank the littl command for hi kindness, and 
then hasten away to the ramparts. It wa now dark, and the moon had 
not yet made her appearance. they sat there on the parapet, enjoy 
the breeze, and feel the delight of liberty, even after their short 
incarceration; but, near to them, soldier were either stand or 
lying, and they spoke but in whispers. 

"what could he mean by requir us to give a certif of the 
captain' death; and whi did you answer as you did?" 

"philip vanderdecken, that I have often thought of the fate of your 
beauti wife, you may imagine; and, when I heard that she wa 
brought here, I then trembl for her. what must she appear, love as 
she is, when place in comparison with the women of thi country? and 
that littl commandant--i he not the veri person who would be taken 
with her charms? I deni our condition, becaus I thought he would 
be more like to allow us our liberti as humbl individuals, than as 
captain and first mate; particularli as he suspect that we led on the 
ternat peopl to the attack; and when he ask for a certif 
of your death, I immedi imagin that he want it in order to 
induc amin to marri him. but where is she? is the question. If we 
could onli find out that soldier, we might gain some information." 

"depend upon it, she is here," repli philip, clench hi hands. 

"I am inclin to think so," said krantz; "that she is alive, I feel 
assured." 

the convers wa continu until the moon rose, and threw her 
beam over the tumbl waters. philip and krantz turn their face 
toward the sea, and leant over the battlement in silence; after some 
time their reveri were disturb by a person come up to them with 
a "_bueno noctes, signor_." 

krantz immedi recognis the portugues soldier, whose 
convers with him had been interrupted. 

"good-night, my friend! We thank heaven that you have no longer to 
turn the key upon us." 

"yes, i'm surprised!" repli the soldier, in a low tone. "our 
command is fond of exercis hi power; he rule here without 
appeal, that I can tell you." 

"he is not within hear of us now," repli krantz. "it is a love 
spot thi to live in! how long have you been in thi country?" 

"now, thirteen years, signor, and i'm tire of it. I have a wife and 
children in oporto--that is, I _had_--but whether they are aliv or 
not, who can tell?" 

"do you not expect to return and see them?" 

"return--signor! no portugues soldier like me ever returns. We are 
enlist for five years, and we lay our bone here." 

"that is hard indeed." 

"hard, signor," repli the soldier in a low whisper; "it is cruel 
and treacherous. I have often thought of put the muzzl of my 
arquebus to my head; but while there' life there' hope." 

"I piti you, my good fellow," rejoin krantz; "look you, I have two 
gold piec left--tak one; you may be abl to send it home to your 
poor wife." 

"and here is one of mine, too, my good fellow," ad philip, put 
anoth in hi hand. 

"now may all the saint preserv you, signors," repli the soldier, 
"for it is the first act of kind shown to me for mani years--not 
that my wife and children have much chanc of ever receiv it." 

"you were speak about a young european woman when we were in the 
dungeon," observ krantz, after a pause. 

"yes, signor, she wa a veri beauti creature. our command wa 
veri much in love with her." 

"where is she now?" 

"she went away to goa, in compani with a priest who knew, her, father 
mathias, a good old man; he gave me absolut when he wa here." 

"father mathias!" exclaim philip; but a touch from krantz check 
him. 

"you say the command love her?" 

"O yes; the littl man wa quit mad about her; and had it not been 
for the arriv of father mathias, he would never have let her go, 
that i'm sure of, although she wa anoth man' wife." 

"sail for goa, you said?" 

"yes, in a ship which call here. she must have been veri glad to 
have got away, for our littl command persecut her all day long, 
and she evid wa griev for her husband. Do you know, signors, 
if her husband is alive?" 

"no, we do not; we have heard noth of him." 

"well, if he is, I hope he will not come here; for should the 
command have him in hi power, it would go hard with him. He is a 
man who stick at nothing. He is a brave littl fellow, _that_ cannot 
be denied; but to get possess of that lady, he would remov all 
obstacl at ani risk--and a husband is a veri seriou one, signors. 
well, signors," continu the soldier, after a pause, "I had better 
not be seen here too long; you may command me if you want anything; 
recollect, my name is pedro--good-night to you, and a thousand 
thanks," and the soldier walk away. 

"we have made one friend, at all events," said krantz, "and we have 
gain inform of no littl importance." 

"most important," repli philip. "amin then ha sail for goa with 
father mathias! I feel that she is safe, and in good hands. He is an 
excel man, that father mathias--mi mind is much relieved." 

"yes; but recollect you are in the power of your enemy. We must leav 
thi place as quick as we can--to-morrow we must sign the paper. It 
is of littl consequence, as we shall probabl be at goa befor it 
arrives, and even if we are not, the news of your death would not 
occas amin to marri thi littl wither piec of mortality." 

"that I feel assur of; but it may caus her great suffering." 

"not wors than her present suspense, believ me, philip; but it 
is useless canvass the past--it must be done. I shall sign as 
corneliu richter, our third mate; you, as jacob vantreat--recollect 
that." 

"agreed," repli philip, who then turn away, as if will to be 
left to hi own thoughts. krantz perceiv it, and laid down under the 
embrasure, and wa soon fast asleep. 




chapter xxxii 


tire out with the fatigu of the day before, philip had laid himself 
down by krantz and fallen asleep; earli the next morn he wa 
awaken by the sound of the commandant' voice, and hi long sword 
rattl as usual upon the pavement. He rose, and found the littl man 
rate the soldiers--threaten some with the dungeon, other with 
extra duty. krantz wa also on hi feet befor the command had 
finish hi morning' lecture. At last, perceiv them, in a stern 
voic he order them to follow him into hi apartment. they did so, 
and the command throw himself upon hi sofa, inquir whether 
they were readi to sign the requir paper, or go back to the 
dungeon.--krantz repli that they had been calcul chances, and 
that they were in consequ so perfectli convinc of the death of 
the captain, that they were will to sign ani paper to that effect; 
at which reply, the command immedi becam veri gracious, and 
have call for materials, he wrote out the document, which wa duli 
subscrib to by krantz and philip. As soon as they had sign it, and 
he had it in hi possession, the littl man wa so pleased, that he 
request them to partak of hi breakfast. 

dure the repast, he promis that they should leav the island by 
the first opportunity. although philip wa taciturn, yet as krantz 
made himself veri agreeable, the command invit them to dinner. 
krantz, as they becam more familiar, inform him that they had each 
a few piec of gold, and wish to be allow a room where they could 
keep their table. whether it wa the want of societi or the desir of 
obtain the gold, probabl both, the command offer that they 
should join hi tabl and pay their proport of the expenses; a 
propos which wa gladli acced to. the term were arranged, and 
krantz insist upon put down the first week' payment in advance. 
from that moment the command wa the best of friend with them, 
and did noth but caress them whom he had so polit shove into a 
dungeon below water. It wa on the even of the third day, as they 
were smoke their manilla cheroots, that krantz, perceiv the 
command in a peculiarli good humour, ventur to ask him whi he wa 
so anxiou for a certif of the captain' death; and in repli wa 
informed, much to the astonish of philip, that amin had agre to 
marri him upon hi produc such a document. 

"impossible," cri philip, start from hi seat. 

"impossible, signor, and whi impossible?" repli the command 
curl hi mustachio with hi fingers, with a surpris and angri 
air. 

"I should have said imposs too," interrupt krantz, who perceiv 
the consequ of philip' indiscretion, "for had you seen, 
commandant, how that woman dote upon her husband, how she fondl 
him, you would with us have said, it wa imposs that she could 
have transfer her affect so soon; but women are women, and 
soldier have a great advantag over other people; perhap she ha 
some excuse, commandant.--here' your health, and success to you." 

"it is exactli what I would have said," ad philip, act upon 
krantz' plan: "but she ha a great excuse, commandant, when I 
recollect her husband, and have you in my presence." 

sooth with the flattery, the command replied, "why, yes, they say 
militari men are veri success with the fair sex.--i presum it 
is becaus they look up to us for protection, and where can they 
be better assur of it, than with a man who wear a sword at hi 
thigh.--come, signors, we will drink her health. here' to the 
beauti amin vanderdecken." 

"to the beauti amin vanderdecken," cri krantz, toss off hi 
wine. 

"to the beauti amin vanderdecken," follow philip. "but, 
commandant, are you not afraid to trust her at goa, where there are 
so mani entic for a woman, so mani allur held out for her 
sex?" 

"no, not in the least--i am convinc that she love me--nay, between 
ourselves, that she doat upon me." 

"liar!" exclaim philip. 

"how, signor! is that address to me?" cri the commandant, seiz 
hi sword which lay on the table. 

"no, no," repli philip, recov himself; "it wa address to 
her; I have heard her swear to her husband, that she would exist for 
no other but him." 

"ha! ha! Is that all?" repli the commandant, "mi friend, you do not 
know women." 

"no, nor is he veri partial to them either," repli krantz, who then 
leant over to the command and whispered, "he is alway so when you 
talk of women. He wa cruelli jilt once, and hate the whole sex." 

"then we must be merci to him," repli the littl officer: 
"suppos we chang the subject." 

when they repair to their own room, krantz point out to philip the 
necess for hi command hi feelings, as otherwis they would 
again be immur in the dungeon. philip acknowledg hi rashness, but 
point out to krantz, that the circumst of amin have promis 
to marri the commandant, if he procur certain intellig of hi 
death, wa the caus of hi irritation. "can it be so? Is it possibl 
that she can have been so false," exclaim philip; "yet hi anxieti 
to procur that document seem to warrant the truth of hi assertion." 

"I think, philip, that in all probabl it is true," repli krantz, 
carelessly; "but of thi you may be assur that she ha been place 
in a situat of great peril, and ha onli done so to save herself 
for your sake. when you meet, depend upon it she will fulli prove to 
you that necess had compel her to deceiv him in that way, and 
that if she had not done so, she would, by thi time, have fallen a 
prey to hi violence." 

"it may be so," repli philip, gravely. 

"it is so, philip, my life upon it. Do not for a moment harbour a 
thought so injuri to one who live but in your love. suspect that 
fond and devot creature! I blush for you, philip vanderdecken." 

"you are right, and I beg her pardon for allow such feel or 
thought to have for one moment overpow me," respond philip; 
"but it is a hard case for a husband, who love as I do, to hear 
hi wife' name bandi about, and her charact assail by a 
contempt wretch like thi commandant." 

"it is, I grant; but still I prefer even that to a dungeon," repli 
krantz, "and so, good-night." 

for three week they remain in the fort, everi day becom more 
intim with the commandant, who often commun with krantz, when 
philip wa not present, turn the convers upon hi love for 
amine, and enter into a minut detail of all that had passed. 
krantz perceiv that he wa right in hi opinion, and that amin had 
onli been cajol the commandant, that she might escape. but the time 
pass heavili away with philip and krantz, for no vessel made it 
appearance. 

"when shall I see her again?" soliloquis philip one morn as he 
loll over the parapet, in compani with krantz. 

"see! who?" said the commandant, who happen to be at hi elbow. 

philip turn round, and stammer someth unintelligible. 

"we were talk of hi sister, commandant," said krantz, take hi 
arm, and lead him away.--"do not mention the subject to my friend, 
for it is a veri pain one, and form one reason whi he is so 
inim to the sex. she wa marri to hi intim friend, and ran 
away from her husband: it wa hi onli sister; and the disgrac broke 
hi mother' heart, and ha made him miserable. take no notic of it, 
I beg." 

"no, no, certainli not; I don't wonder at it: the honour of one' 
famili is a seriou affair," repli the commandant.--"poor young man, 
what with hi sister' conduct, and the falsehood of hi own intended, 
I don't wonder at hi be so grave and silent. Is he of good family, 
signor?" 

"one of the noblest in all holland," repli krantz;--"h is heir to 
a larg property, and independ by the fortun of hi mother; but 
these two unfortun event induc him to quit the state secretly, 
and he embark for these countri that he might forget hi grief." 

"one of the noblest families?" repli the commandant;--"then he 
is under an assum name--jacob vantreat is not hi true name, of 
course." 

"oh no," repli krantz;--"that it is not, I assur you; but my lip 
are seal on that point." 

"of course, except to a friend, who can keep a secret. I will not ask 
it now. So he is realli noble?" 

"one of the highest famili in the country, possess great wealth 
and influence-- to the spanish nobil by marriage." 

"indeed!" rejoin the commandant, musing--"i dare say he know mani 
of the portugues as well." 

"no doubt of it, they are all more or less connected." 

"he must prove to you a most valuabl friend, signor richter." 

"I consid myself provid for for life as soon as we return home. He 
is of a veri grateful, gener disposition, as he would prove to you, 
should you ever fall in with him again." 

"I have no doubt of it; and I can assur you that I am heartili tire 
of stay in thi country. here I shall remain probabl for two year 
more befor I am relieved, and then shall have to join my regiment at 
goa, and not be abl to obtain leav to return home without resign 
my commission. but he is come thi way." 

after thi convers with krantz, the alter in the manner of 
the portugues commandant, who had the highest respect for nobility, 
wa most marked. He treat philip with a respect, which wa 
observ to all in the fort; and which was, until krantz had 
explain the cause, a sourc of astonish to philip himself. the 
command often introduc the subject to krantz, and sound him as 
to whether hi conduct toward philip had been such, as to have made 
a favour impression; for the littl man now hoped, that, through 
such an influenti channel, he might reap some benefit. 

some day after thi conversation, as they were all three seat at 
table, a corpor entered, and salut the commandant, inform 
him that a dutch sailor had arriv at the fort, and wish to know 
whether he should be admitted. both philip and krantz turn pale at 
thi communication--they had a presenti of evil, but they said 
nothing. the sailor wa order in, and in a few minutes, who should 
make hi appear but their tormentor, the one-ey schriften. 
On perceiv philip and krantz seat at the tabl he immedi 
exclaimed, "oh! captain philip vanderdecken, and my good friend 
mynheer krantz, first mate of the good ship _utrecht_, I am glad to 
meet you again." 

"captain philip vanderdecken!" roar the commandant, as he sprung 
from hi chair. 

"yes, that is my captain, mynheer philip vanderdecken; and that is my 
first mate, mynheer krantz; both of the good ship _utrecht_: we were 
wreck together, were we not, mynheer? he! he!" 

"sangu de--vanderdecken! the husband? corpo del diavolo--i it 
possible?" cri the commandant, pant for breath, as he seiz hi 
long sword with both hands, and clench it with fury--"what then, I 
have been deceived, cajoled, laugh at!" then, after a pause--th 
vein of hi forehead distend so as almost to burst--h continued, 
with a suppress voice, "most nobl sir, I thank you; but now it is 
my turn.--what, ho! there! corporal--men, here instantly--quick!" 

philip and krantz felt convinc that all denial wa useless. philip 
fold hi arm and made no reply. krantz mere observed, "A littl 
reflect will prove to you, sir, that thi indign is not 
warranted." 

"not warranted!" rejoin the command with a sneer; "you have 
deceiv me; but you are caught in your own trap. I have the paper 
signed, which I shall not fail to make use of. _you_ are dead, you 
know, captain; I have your own hand to it, and your wife will be glad 
to believ it." 

"she ha deceiv you, commandant, to get out of your power, noth 
more," said vanderdecken. "she would spurn a contempt wither 
wretch like yourself, were she as free as the wind." 

"go on, go on; it will be my turn soon. corporal, throw these two men 
into the dungeon: a sentri at the door till further orders. away with 
them. most nobl sir, perhap your influenti friend in holland and 
spain will enabl you to get out again." 

philip and krantz were led away by the soldiers, who were veri much 
surpris at thi chang of treatment. schriften follow them; and 
as they walk across the rampart to the stair which led to their 
prison, krantz, in hi fury, burst from the soldiers, and bestow a 
kick upon schriften which sent him sever feet forward on hi face. 

"that wa a good one--he! he!" cri schriften, smile and look at 
krantz as he regain hi legs. 

there wa an eye, however, which met their with an intellig 
glance, as they descend the stair to the dungeon. It wa that of 
the soldier pedro. It told them that there wa one friend upon whom 
they could rely, and who would spare no endeavour to assist them in 
their new difficulty. It wa a consol to them both; a ray of hope 
which cheer them as they onc more descend the narrow steps, and 
heard the heavi key turn which again secur them in their dungeon. 




chapter xxxiii 


"thu are all our hope wrecked," said philip, mournfully; "what 
chanc have we now of escap from thi littl tyrant?" 

"chanc turn up," repli krantz; "at present, the prospect is not 
veri cheering. let us hope for the best." 

"I have an idea in my head which may probabl be turn to some 
account," ad krantz; "a soon as the littl man' furi is over." 

"which is--" 

"that, much as he like your wife, there is someth which he like 
quit as well--money. now, as we know where all the treasur is 
concealed, I think he may be tempt to offer us our liberty, if we 
were to promis to put it into hi possession." 

"that is not impossible. confound that littl malign wretch 
schriften; he certainli is not, as you say, of thi world. He ha been 
my persecutor through life, and appear to act from an impuls not hi 
own." 

"then must he be part and portion of your destiny. i'm think 
whether our nobl command intend to leav us without anyth to 
eat or drink." 

"I should not be surprised: that he will attempt my life I am 
convinc of, but not that he can take it; he may, however, add to it 
sufferings." 

As soon as the command had recov from hi fury, he order 
schriften in, to be examin more particularly; but after everi search 
made for him, schriften wa no where to be found. the sentri at the 
gate declar that he had not passed; and a new search wa ordered, 
but in vain. even the dungeon and galleri below were examined, but 
without success. 

"can he be lock up with the other prisoners?" thought the 
commandant: "impossible--but I will go and see." 

He descend and open the door of the dungeon, look in, and wa 
about to return without speaking, when krantz said, "well, signor, 
thi is kind treatment, after have live so long and so amic 
together; to throw us into prison mere becaus a fellow declar 
that we are not what we repres ourselv to be; perhap you will 
allow us a littl water to drink?" 

the commandant, confus by the extraordinari disappear of 
schriften, hardli knew how to reply. He at last said in a milder tone 
than wa to be anticipated, "I will order them to bring some, signor." 

He then close the door of the dungeon and disappeared. 

"strange," observ philip, "he appear more pacifi already." 

In a few minut the door wa again opened, and pedro came in with a 
chatti of water. 

"he ha disappear like magic, signors, and is no where to be found. 
We have search everywhere, but in vain." 

"who?--th littl old seaman?" 

"yes, he whom you kick as you were led to prison. the peopl all 
say, that it must have been a ghost. the sentri declar that he never 
left the fort, nor came near him; so, how he ha got away is a riddle, 
which I perceive, ha frighten our command not a little." 

krantz gave a long whistl as he look at philip. 

"are you to have charg of us, pedro?" 

"I hope so." 

"well, tell the command that when he is readi to listen to me, I 
have someth of import to communicate." 

pedro went out. 

"now, philip, I can frighten thi littl man into allow us to go 
free, if you will consent to say that you are not the husband of 
amine." 

"that I cannot do, krantz. I will not utter such a falsehood." 

"I wa afraid so, and yet it appear to me that we may avail ourselv 
of duplic to meet cruelti and injustice. unless you do as I 
propose, I hardli know how I can manag it; however, I will tri what I 
can do." 

"I will assist you in everi way, except disclaim my wife: that I 
never will do." 

"well then, I will see if I can make up a stori that will suit all 
parties: let me think." 

krantz continu muse as he walk up and down, and wa still 
occupi with hi own thought when the door opened, and the 
command made hi appearance. 

"you have someth to impart to me, I understand--what is it?" 

"first, sir, bring that littl wretch down here and confront him with 
us." 

"I see no occas for that," repli the commandant; "what, sir, may 
you have to say?" 

"do you know who you have in your compani when you speak to that 
one-ey deformity?" 

"A dutch sailor, I presume." 

"no--a spirit--a demon--who occas the loss of the vessel; and who 
bring misfortun wherev he appears." 

"holi virgin! what do you tell me, signor?" 

"the fact, signor commandant. We are oblig to you for confin us 
here, while he is in the fort; but bewar for yourself." 

"you are laugh at me." 

"I am not; bring him down here. thi nobl gentleman ha power over 
him. I wonder, indeed, at hi dare to stay while he is so near; he 
ha on hi heart that which will send him trembl away.--br 
him down here, and you shall at onc see him vanish with curs and 
screams." 

"heaven defend us!" cri the commandant, terrified. 

"send for him now, signor?" 

"he is gone--vanished--not to be found!" 

"I thought as much," repli philip, significantly. 

"he is gone--vanished--y say. then, commandant, you will probabl 
apologis to thi nobl gentleman for your treatment of him, and 
permit us to return to our former apartments. I will there explain to 
you thi most strang and interest history." 

the commandant, more confus than ever, hardli knew how to act. At 
last he bow to philip, and beg that he would consid himself at 
liberty; and, continu he to krantz, "I shall be most happi at an 
immedi explan of thi affair, for everyth appear so 
contradictory." 

"and must, until it is explained. I will follow you into your own 
room; a courtesi you must not expect from my nobl friend, who is not 
a littl indign at your treatment of him." 

the command went out, leav the door open. philip and krantz 
followed: the former retir to hi own apartment; the latter, 
bend hi step after the command to hi sitting-room. the 
confus which whirl in the brain of the commandant, made him 
appear most ridiculous. He hardli knew whether to be imper or 
civil; whether he wa realli speak to the first mate of the vessel, 
or to anoth party; or whether he had insult a noble, or been 
cajol by a captain of a vessel: he threw himself down on hi sofa, 
and krantz, take hi seat in a chair, state as follows: 

"you have been partli deceiv and partli not, commandant. when we 
first came here, not know what treatment we might receive, we 
conceal our rank; afterward I made known to you the rank of my 
friend on shore; but did not think it worth while to say anyth 
about hi situat on board of the vessel. the fact is, as you may 
well suppos of a person of hi dignity, he wa owner of the fine ship 
which wa lost through the intervent of that one-ey wretch; but 
of that by-and-bye. now for the story. 

"about ten year ago there wa a great miser in amsterdam; he live 
in the most miser way that a man could live in; wore noth but 
rags; and have been formerli a seaman, hi attir wa gener of 
the descript common to hi class. He had one son, to whom he deni 
the necessari of life, and whom he treat most cruelly. after 
vain attempt to possess a portion of hi father' wealth, the devil 
instig the son to murder the old man, who wa one day found dead 
in hi bed; but as there were no mark of violenc which could be 
sworn to, although suspicion fell upon the son, the affair wa hush 
up, and the young man took possess of hi father' wealth. It wa 
fulli expect that there would now be riot and squander on the 
part of the heir, as is usual the case; but, on the contrary, he 
never spent anything, but appear to be as poor--even poorer--than he 
ever was. instead of be gay and merry, he was, in appearance, the 
most miserable, downcast person in the world; and he wander about, 
seek a crust of bread wherev he could find it. some said that he 
had been inocul by hi father, and wa as great a miser as hi 
father had been; other shook their heads, and said that all wa not 
right. At last, after pine away for six or seven years, the young 
man die at an earli age, without confess or absolution; in fact, 
he wa found dead in hi bed. besid the bed there wa a paper, 
address to the authorities, in which he acknowledg that he had 
murder hi father for the sake of hi wealth; and that when he went 
to take some of it for hi expens on the day afterwards, he found 
hi father' spirit sit on the bag of money, and menac him 
with instant death, if he touch one piece. He return again and 
again, and found hi father a sentinel as before. At last, he gave 
up attempt to obtain it; hi crime made him miserable, and he 
continu in possession, without dare to expend one sixpenc of all 
the money. He request that, as hi end wa approaching, the money 
should be given to the church of hi patron saint, wherev that 
church might be found; if there wa not one, then that a church might 
be built and endowed. upon investigation, it appear that there wa 
no such church in either holland or the low countri (for you know 
that there are not mani cathol there); and they appli to the 
cathol countries, lisbon and spain, but there again they were at 
fault; and it wa discovered, that the onli church dedic to that 
saint wa one which had been erect by a portugues nobleman in the 
citi of goa, in the east indies. the cathol bishop determin that 
the money should be sent to goa; and, in consequence, it wa embark 
on board of my patron' vessel, to be deliv up to the first 
portugues author he might fall in with. 

"well, signor, the money, for better security, wa put down into the 
captain' cabin, which, of course, wa occupi by my nobl friend, 
and when he went to bed the first night he wa surpris to perceiv a 
littl one eye old man sit on the boxes." 

"merci saviour!" exclaim the commandant, "what, the veri same 
littl man who appear here thi day?" 

"the veri same," repli krantz. 

the command cross himself, and krantz proceeded:--"mi nobl 
patron was, as you may imagine, rather alarmed; but he is veri 
courag in disposition, and he inquir of the old man who he was, 
and how he had come on board? 

"'i came on board with my own money,' repli the spectre. It is all 
my own, and I shall keep it. the church shall never have one stiva of 
it if I can help it.' 

"whereupon, my patron pull out a famou relic, which he wear on 
hi bosom, and held it toward him; at which the old man howl and 
screamed, and then most unwillingli disappeared. for two more 
night the spectr wa obstinate, but at the sight of the relic, he 
invari went off howl as if in great pain; everi time that 
he went away, invari cri out 'lost--lost!' and dure the 
remaind of the voyag he did not troubl us ani more. 

"we thought, when our patron told us this, that he refer to the 
money be lost to him, but it appear he refer to the ship; 
inde it wa veri inconsider to have taken the wealth of a 
parricid on board; we could not expect ani good fortun with such a 
freight, and so it proved. when the ship wa lost, our patron wa veri 
anxiou to save the money; it wa put on the raft, and when we landed, 
it wa taken on shore and buried, that it might be restor and given 
to the church to which it had been bequeathed; but the men who buri 
it are all dead, and there is no one but my friend here, the patron, 
who know the spot.--i forgot to say, that as soon as the money wa 
land on the island and buried, the spectr appear as before, and 
seat himself over the spot where the money wa interred. I think, if 
thi had not been the case, the seamen would have taken possess of 
it. but, by hi appear here thi day, I presum he is tired, and 
ha desert hi charge, or els ha come here that the money might be 
sent for, though I cannot understand why." 

"strange--veri strange!--so there is a larg treasur buri in the 
sand?" 

"there is." 

"I should think, by the spectre' come here, that it ha abandon 
it." 

"of cours it has, or it would not be here." 

"what can you imagin to have been the caus of it coming?" 

"probabl to announc it intention, and request my friend to have the 
treasur sent for; but you know he wa interrupted." 

"veri true; but he call your friend vanderdecken." 

"it wa the name which he took on board of the ship." 

"and it wa the name of the lady." 

"veri true; he fell in with her at the cape of good hope and brought 
her away with him." 

"then she is hi wife?" 

"I must not answer that question. It is quit suffici that he 
treat her as hi wife." 

"ah! indeed. but about thi treasure. you say that no one know where 
it is buried, but the patron as you call him?" 

"no one." 

"will you express my regret at what ha passed, and tell him I will 
have the pleasur of see him to-morrow." 

"certainly, signor," repli krantz, rise from hi chair; and 
wish the command a good even as he retired. 

"I wa after one thing and have found another. A spectr that must 
have been; but he must be a bold spectr that can frighten me from 
doubloons--besides, I can call in the priests. now, let me see; if I 
let thi man go on condit that he reveal the site of the treasur 
to the authorities, that is to _me_, whi then I need not lose the fair 
young woman. If I forward thi paper to her, whi then I gain her--but 
I must first get rid of him. Of the two, I prefer--yes!--th gold! but 
I cannot obtain both. At all events, let me obtain the money first: I 
want it more than the church does: but, if I do get the money; these 
two men can expos me. I must get rid of them; silenc them for 
ever--and then perhap I may obtain the fair amin also. yes, their 
death will be necessari to secur either--that is, after I have the 
first in my possession.--let me think." 

for some minut the command walk up and down the room, 
reflect upon the best method of proceeding. "he say it wa a 
spectre, and he ha told a plausibl story," thought he; "but I don't 
know--i have my doubts--they may be trick me. well, be it so: 
if the money is there, I will have it; and if not, I will have my 
revenge. yes! I have it: not onli must they be removed, but by 
degre all the other too who assist in bring the treasur 
away;--then--but--who' there, pedro?" 

"yes, signor." 

"how long have you been here?" 

"but as you spoke, signor: I thought I heard you call." 

"you may go--i want nothing." 

pedro departed; but he had been some time in the room, and had 
overheard the whole of the commandant' soliloquy. 




chapter xxxiv 


It wa a bright morn when the portugues vessel on which amin wa 
on board enter into the bay and roadstead of goa. goa wa then at 
it zenith--a proud, luxurious, superb, wealthi city, the capit of 
the east, a citi of palaces, whose viceroy reign supreme. As they 
approach the river the two mouth of which form the island upon 
which goa is built, the passeng were all on deck; and the 
portugues captain, who had often been there, point out to amin the 
most remark buildings. when they had pass the fort they enter 
the river, the whole line of whose bank were cover with the countri 
seat of the nobil and hidalgos--splendid build embosom in 
grove of orang trees, whose perfum scent the air. 

"there, signora, is the countri palac of the viceroy," said the 
captain, point to a build which cover nearli three acr of 
ground. 

the ship sail on until they arriv nearli abreast of the town, when 
amine' eye were direct to the lofti spire of the church and 
other public edifices--for amin had seen but littl of citi dure 
her life, as may be perceiv when her histori is recollected. 

"that is the jesuits' church, with their establishment," said the 
captain, point to a magnific pile. "in the church, now open 
upon us, lay the canonis bone of the celebr saint francisco, 
who sacrif hi life in hi zeal for the propag of the gospel 
in these countries." 

"I have heard of him from father mathias," repli amine; "but what 
build is that?" 

"the augustin convent; and the other, to the right, is the 
dominican." 

"splendid, indeed!" observ amine. 

"the build you see now, on the water-side, is the viceroy' palace; 
that to the right, again, is the convent of the barefoot carmelites: 
yon lofti spire is the cathedr of St catherine, and that beauti 
and light piec of architectur is the church of our ladi of pity. you 
observ there a building, with a dome, rise behind the viceroy' 
palace?" 

"I do," repli amine. 

"that is the holi inquisition." 

although amin had heard philip speak of the inquisition, she knew 
littl about it properties; but a sudden tremor pass through her 
frame as the name wa mentioned, which she could not herself account 
for. 

"now we open upon the viceroy' palace, and you perceiv what a 
beauti build it is," continu the captain; "that larg pile a 
littl abov it is the custom-house, abreast of which we shall come to 
an anchor. I must leav you now, signora." 

A few minut afterward the ship anchor opposit the custom-house. 
the captain and passeng went on shore, with the except of amine, 
who remain in the vessel, while father mathia went in search of an 
elig place of abode. 

the next morn the priest return on board the ship, with the 
intellig that he had obtain a recept for amin in the 
ursulin convent, the abbess of which establish he wa acquaint 
with; and, befor amin went on shore, he caution her that the 
lady-abbess wa a strict woman, and would be pleas if she conformed, 
as much as possible, to the rule of the convent; that thi convent 
onli receiv young person of the highest and most wealthi families, 
and he trust that she would be happi there. He also promis to call 
upon her, and talk upon those subject so dear to hi heart, and so 
necessari to her salvation. the earnest and kind with which 
the old man spoke melt amin to tears, and the holi father quit 
her side to go down and collect her baggage, with a warmth of feel 
toward her which he had seldom felt before, and with greater hope 
than ever that hi endeavour to convert her would not ultim be 
thrown away. 

"he is a good man," thought amine, as she descended--and amin wa 
right. father mathia wa a good man, but, like all men, he wa 
not perfect. A zealot in the caus of hi religion, he would have 
cheer sacrif hi life as a martyr, but if oppos or thwart 
in hi views, he could then be cruel and unjust. 

father mathia had mani reason for place amin in the ursulin 
convent. He felt bound to offer her that protect which he had 
so long receiv under her roof; he wish her to be under the 
surveil of the abbess, for he could not help imagining, although 
he had no proof, that she wa still essay or practis forbidden 
arts. He did not state thi to the abbess, as he felt it would be 
unjust to rais suspicions; but he repres amin as one who would 
do honour to their faith, to which she wa not yet quit converted. 
the veri idea of effect a convers is to the tenant of a convent 
an object of surpass interest, and the abbess wa much better 
pleas to receiv one who requir her council and persuasions, than 
a realli piou christian who would give her no trouble. amin went on 
shore with father mathias; she refus the palanquin which had been 
prepar for her, and walk up to the convent. they land between 
the custom-hous and the viceroy' palace, pass through to the larg 
squar behind it, and then went up the strada diretta, or straight 
street, which led up to the church of pity, near to which the convent 
is situated. thi street is the finest on goa, and is call strada 
diretta, from the singular fact that almost all the street in goa are 
quadrant or segment of circles. amin wa astonished: the hous 
were of stone, lofti and massive; at each stori wa thrown out a 
balconi of marble, elabor carved; and over each door were the 
arm of the nobility, or hidalgos, to whom the hous belonged. the 
squar behind the palace, and the wide streets, were fill with 
live beings; eleph with gorgeou trappings; led or mount 
hors in superb housings; palanquins, carri by nativ in splendid 
liveries; run footmen; syces; everi varieti of nation, from the 
proud portugues to the half-cov native; mussulmans, arabs, 
hindoos, armenians; offic and soldier in their uniforms, all 
crowd and throng together: all wa bustl and motion. such wa 
the wealth, the splendour, and luxuri of the proud citi of goa--th 
empress of the east at the time we are now describing. 

In half an hour they forc their way through the crowd, and arriv 
at the convent, where amin wa well receiv by the abbess; and after 
a few minutes' conversation, father mathia took hi leave: upon which 
the abbess immedi set about her task of conversion. the first 
thing she did wa to order some dri sweetmeats--not a bad beginning, 
as they were palatable; but as she happen to be veri ignorant, and 
unaccustom to theolog disputes, her subsequ argument did not 
go down as well as the fruit. after a rambl discours of about an 
hour, the old ladi felt tired, and felt as if she had done wonders. 
amin wa then introduc to the nuns, most of whom were young and all 
of good family. her dormitori wa shown to her, and express a wish 
to be alone, she wa follow into her chamber by onli sixteen of 
them, which wa about as mani as the chamber could well hold. 

We must pass over the two month dure which amin remain in the 
convent. father mathia had taken everi step to ascertain if her 
husband had been save upon ani of the island which were under the 
portugues dominions, but could gain no information. amin wa soon 
weari of the convent; she wa persecut by the harangu of the old 
abbess, but more disgust at the conduct and convers of the 
nuns. they all had secret to confid to her--secret which had been 
confid to the whole convent before: such secrets, such stories, so 
differ from amine' chast ideas, such impur of thought that 
amin wa disgust at them. but how could it be otherwise; the poor 
creatur had been taken from the world in the full bloom of youth 
under a ripen sun, and had been immur in thi unnatur manner 
to gratifi the avaric and pride of their families. it inmat be 
wholli compos of the best families, the rule of thi convent were 
not so strict as others; licens were given--great licens were 
taken--and amine, to her surprise, found that in thi society, devot 
to heaven, there were exhibit more of the bad passion of human 
natur than she had befor met with. constantli watched, never allow 
a moment to herself, her exist becam unbearable: and after three 
month she request father mathia would find her some other place of 
refuge; tell him frankli that her resid in that place wa not 
veri like to assist her convers to the tenet of hi faith. 
father mathia fulli comprehend her, but replied, "I have no means." 

"here are means," repli amine, take the diamond ring from her 
finger: "thi is worth eight hundr ducat in our country; here I 
know not how much." 

father mathia took the ring. "I will call upon you to-morrow morning, 
and let you know what I have done. I shall acquaint the ladi abbess 
that you are go to your husband, for it would not be safe to let 
her suppos that you have reason for quit the convent. I have 
heard what you state mention before, but have treat it as scandal; 
but you, I know, are incap of falsehood." 

the next day father mathia returned, and had an interview with the 
abbess, who after a time sent for amine, and told her that it wa 
necessari that she should leav the convent. she consol her as well 
as she could at leav such a happi place, sent for some sweetmeat 
to make the part less trying, gave her her blessing, and made her 
over to father mathias; who, when they were alone, inform amin that 
he had dispos of the ring for eighteen hundr dollars, and had 
procur apart for her in the hous of a widow lady, with whom 
she wa to board. 

take leav of the nuns, amin quit the convent with father 
mathias, and wa soon instal in her new apartments, in a hous 
which form part of a spaciou squar call the terra di sabaio. 
after the introduct to her hostess, father mathia left her. amin 
found her apart front the square, airi and commodious. the 
landlady, who had escort her to view them, not have left her, she 
inquir "what larg church that wa on the other side of the square?" 

"it is the ascension," repli the lady; "the music is veri fine 
there; we will go and hear it to-morrow, if you please." 

"and that massiv build in face of us?" 

"that is the holi inquisition," said the widow, cross herself. 

amin again started, she knew not why. "i that your child?" said 
amine, as a boy of about twelv year old enter the room. 

"yes," repli the widow, "the onli one that is left me. may god 
preserv him." the boy wa handsom and intelligent, and amine, for 
her own reasons, did everyth she could to make friend with him, 
and wa successful. 




chapter xxxv 


amin had just return from an afternoon' walk through the street 
of goa; she had made some purchas at differ shop in the bazaar, 
and had brought them home under her mantilla. "here, at last, thank 
heaven, I am alon and not watched," thought amine, as she threw 
herself on the couch. "philip, philip, where are you?" exclaim she; 
"I have now the means, and I soon will know." littl pedro, the son of 
the widow, enter the room, ran up to amine, and kiss her. "tell 
me, pedro, where is your mother?" 

"she ha gone out to see her friend thi evening, and we are alone. I 
will stay with you." 

"do so, dearest. tell me, pedro, can you keep a secret?" 

"yes, I will--tel it me." 

"nay, I have noth to tell, but I wish to do something: I wish to 
make a play, and you shall see thing in your hand." 

"oh! yes, shew me, do shew me." 

"if you promis not to tell." 

"no, by the holi virgin, I will not." 

"then you shall see." 

amin light some charcoal in a chafe dish, and put it at her feet; 
she then took a reed pen, some ink from a small bottle, and a pair of 
scissors, and wrote down sever charact on a paper, singing, 
or rather chanting, word which were not intellig to her young 
companion. amin then threw frankincens and coriand seed into the 
chafe dish, which threw out a strong aromat smoke; and desir 
pedro to sit down by her on a small stool, she took the boy' right 
hand and held it in her own. she then drew upon the palm of hi hand 
a squar figur with charact on each side of it, and in the centr 
pour a small quantiti of the ink, so as to form a black mirror of 
the size of a half-a-crown. 

"now all is ready," said amine; "look, pedro, what see you in the 
ink?" 

"mi own face," repli the boy. 

she threw more frankincens upon the chafe dish, until the room wa 
full of smoke, and then chanted. 

"turshoon, turyo-shoon--com down, come down. 

"be present, ye servant of these names. 

"remov the veil, and be correct." 

the charact she had drawn upon the paper she had divid with the 
scissors, and now take one of the pieces, she drop it into the 
chafe dish, still hold the boy' hand. 

"tell me now, pedro, what do you see?" 

"I see a man sweeping," repli pedro, alarmed. 

"fear not, pedro, you shall see more. ha he done sweeping?" 

"yes, he has." 

and amin mutter words, which were unintelligible, and threw into 
the chafe dish the other half of the paper with the charact she 
had written down. "say now, pedro, philip vanderdecken, appear." 

"philip vanderdecken, appear!" respond the boy, trembling. 

"tell me what thou seest, pedro--tel me true?" said amine, anxiously. 

"I see a man lie down on the white sand; (I don't like thi play.)" 

"be not alarmed, pedro, you shall have sweetmeat directly. tell me 
what thou seest, how the man is dressed?" 

"he ha a short coat--h ha white trousers--h look about him--h 
take someth out of hi breast and kiss it." 

"'ti he! 'ti he! and he lives! heaven, I thank thee. look again, 
boy." 

"he get up (I don't like thi play; I am frightened; inde I am.)" 

"fear not." 

"oh, yes, I am--i cannot," repli pedro, fall on hi knees; "pray 
let me go," 

pedro had turn hi hand, and spilt the ink, the charm wa broken, 
and amin could learn no more. she sooth the boy with presents, made 
him repeat hi promis that he would not tell, and postpon further 
search into fate until the boy should appear to have recov from 
hi terror, and be will to resum the ceremonies. 

"mi philip lives--mother, dear mother, I thank you." 

amin did not allow pedro to leav the room until he appear to 
have quit recov from hi fright; for some day she did not say 
anyth to him, except to remind him of hi promis not to tell hi 
mother, or ani one else, and she load him with presents. 

one afternoon when hi mother wa gone out, pedro came in, and ask 
amin "whether they should not have the play over again?" 

amine, who wa anxiou to know more, wa glad of the boy' request, 
and soon had everyth prepared. again wa her chamber fill 
with the smoke of the frankincense: again wa she mutter her 
incantations: the magic mirror wa on the boy' hand, and onc more 
had pedro cri out, "philip vanderdecken, appear!" when the door 
burst open, and father mathias, the widow, and sever other peopl 
made their appearance. amin start up--pedro scream and ran to hi 
mother. 

"then I wa not mistaken at what I saw in the cottag at terneuse," 
cri father mathias, with hi arm fold over hi breast, and with 
look of indignation; "accurs sorceress! you are detected." 

amin return hi gaze with scorn, and coolli replied, "I am not of 
your creed--you know it. eaves-drop appear to be a portion of 
your religion. thi is my chamber--it is not the first time I have had 
to request you to leav it--i do so now--you--and those who have come 
in with you." 

"take up all those implement of sorceri first," said father mathia 
to hi companions. the chafe dish, and other articl use by amine, 
were taken away; and father mathia and the other quit the room, 
amin wa left alone. 

amin had a forebod that she wa lost; she knew that magic wa a 
crime of the highest degre in cathol countries, and that she had 
been detect in the veri act. "well, well;" thought amine; "it is my 
destiny, and I can brave the worst." 

To account for the appear of father mathia and the witnesses, it 
must be observed, that the littl boy pedro had, the day after amine' 
first attempt, forgotten hi promise, and narrat to hi mother all 
that had passed. the widow, frighten at what the boy had told her, 
thought it right to go to father mathias, and confid to him what her 
son had told her, as it was, in her opinion, sorcery. father mathia 
question pedro closely, and, convinc that such wa the case, 
determin to have wit to confront amine. He therefor propos 
that the boy should appear to be will to tri again, and had 
instruct him for the purpose, have previous arrang that they 
should break in upon amine, as we have described. 

about half-an-hour afterwards, two men dress in black gown came 
into amine' room, and request that she would follow them, or that 
forc would be used. amin made no resistance; they cross the 
square; the gate of a larg build wa opened; they desir her to 
walk in, and, in a few seconds, amin found herself in one of the 
dungeon of the inquisition. 




chapter xxxvi 


previou to continu our narrative, it may be as well to give 
our reader some littl insight into the nature, ceremonies, and 
regul of the inquisition; and in describ that of goa, we may 
be said to describ all others, with veri trifling, if any, variation. 

the santa casa, or inquisit of goa, is situat on one side of a 
larg square, call the terra di sabaio. It is a massiv handsom 
pile of stone buildings, with three door in the front: the centr one 
is larger than the two lateral, and it is through the centr door that 
you go into the hall of judgment. the side-door lead to spaciou and 
handsom apart for the inquisitors, and offic attach to the 
establishment. 

behind these apart are the cell and dungeon of the inquisition; 
they are in two long galleries, with doubl door to each, and are 
about ten feet square. there are about two hundr of them; some are 
much more comfort than the others, as light and air are admit 
into them: other are wholli dark. In the galleri the keeper watch, 
and not a word or a sound can proceed from ani cell without their 
be abl to overhear it. the treatment of those confin is, as 
far as respect their food, veri good: great care is taken that the 
nourish is of that natur that the prison may not suffer from 
the indigest aris from want of exercise. surgic attend 
is also permit them; but, unless on veri particular occasions, 
no priest are allow to enter. ani consol to be deriv from 
religion, even the offic of confessor and extrem unction, in case 
of dissolution, are deni them. should they die dure their 
confinement, whether prove guilti or not of the crime of which they 
are accused, they are buri without ani funer ceremony, and tri 
afterwards, if then found guilty, their bone are disinterred, and the 
execut of their sentenc is pass upon their remains. 

there are two inquisitor at goa: one the grand inquisitor, and 
the other hi second, who are invari chosen from the order 
of st-dominique; these two are assist in their judgment and 
examin by a larg number select from the religi orders, 
who are term deputi of the holi office, but who onli attend when 
summoned: they have other officers, whose duti it is to examin all 
publish books, and ascertain if there is anyth in their page 
contrari to the holi religion. there is also a public accuser, a 
procureur of the inquisition, and lawyers, who are permit to plead 
the case of the prisoners, but whose chief busi and interest it is 
to obtain their secret and betray them. what are term _familiars_ 
of the inquisition, are, in fact, noth but thi descript of 
people: but thi disgrac offic is taken upon themselv by the 
highest nobility, who think it an honour as well as a security, to be 
enrol among the familiar of the inquisition, who are thu to 
be found dispers throughout society; and everi careless word, or 
expression, is certain to be repeat to the holi office. A summon 
to attend at the inquisit is never opposed; if it were, the whole 
populac would rise and enforc it. those who are confin in the 
dungeon of the inquisit are kept separate; it is a veri uncommon 
thing to put two together: it is onli done when it is consid that 
the prolong solitud of the dungeon ha creat such a depress 
of spirit as to endang the life of the party. perpetu silenc is 
enjoin and strictli kept. those who wail or weep, or even pray, in 
their utter darkness, are forc by blow to be quiet. the cri 
and shriek of those who suffer from thi chastisement, or from 
the torture, are carri along the whole length of the corridors, 
terrifi those who, in solitud and darkness, are anticip the 
same fate. 

the first question put to a person arrest by the inquisition, is 
a demand, "what is hi property?" He is desir to make an exact 
declar of everyth that he is worth, and swear to the truth of 
hi assertions; be inform that, if there is ani reserv on 
hi part (although he may be at that time innoc of the charg 
produc against him),--h will, by hi concealment, have incur the 
wrath of the inquisition; and that, if discharg for the crime he is 
accus of, he will again be arrest for have taken a fals oath to 
the inquisition; that, if innocent, hi properti will be safe, and not 
interf with. It is not without reason that thi demand is made. If 
a person accus confess hi crime, he is, in most cases, eventu 
allow to go free, but all hi properti becom confiscated. 

By the rule of the inquisition, it is made to appear as if those 
condemn have the show of justice; for, although two wit are 
suffici to warrant the apprehens of ani individual, seven are 
necessari to convict him; but as the wit are never confront 
with the prisoners, and tortur is often appli to the witnesses, it 
is not difficult to obtain the number required. mani a life is fals 
sworn away by the witness, that he may save hi own. the chief crime 
which are notic by the inquisit are those of sorcery, heresy, 
blasphemy, and what is call judaism. 

To comprehend the mean of thi last crime, for which more peopl 
have suffer from the inquisit than for ani other, the reader must 
be informed, that when ferdinand and isabella of castil drove all the 
jew out of spain, they fled to portugal, where they were receiv on 
the sole condit that they should embrac christianity: thi they 
consented, or appear to consent, to do; but these convert were 
despis by the portugues people, who did not believ them to 
be sincere. they obtain the titl of _new_ christians, in 
contradistinct to that of _old_ christians. after a time the two 
were occasion intermingl in marriage; but when so, it wa alway 
a reproach to the old families; and descend from these allianc 
were long termed, by way of reproach, as have a portion of the new 
christian in them. 

the descend of the old famili thu intermingled, not onli lost 
_caste_, but, as the genealog of everi famili wa well known, they 
were look upon with suspicion, and were alway at the merci of the 
holi office, when denounc for judaism,--that is, for return 
to the old jewish practic of keep the passover, and the other 
ceremoni enforc by moses. 

let us see how an accus of thi kind work in the hand of the 
inquisition. A realli sincer catholic, descend from one of these 
unhappi families, is accus and arrest by the order of the 
inquisition; he is order to declar hi property, which,--convinc 
of hi innocence, and expect soon to be released, he doe without 
reservation. but hardli ha the key of the dungeon turn upon him, 
when all hi effect are seiz and sold by public auction; it be 
well understood that they never will be restor to him. after some 
months' confinement, he is call into the hall of justice, and ask 
if he know whi he is in prison; they advis him earnestli to confess 
and to conceal nothing, as it is the onli way by which he can obtain 
hi liberty. He declar hi ignorance, and be sent for sever 
times, persist in it. the period of the _auto da fé_, or act of 
faith, which take place everi two or three year (that is, the public 
execut of those who have been found guilti by the inquisition), 
approaches. the public accus then come forward, state that the 
prison ha been accus by a number of wit of judaism. they 
persuad him to acknowledg hi guilt; he persist in hi innocence; 
they then pass a sentenc on him, which they term _convicto invotivo_, 
which mean "found guilty, but will not confess hi crime;" and he is 
sentenc to be burnt at the approach celebration. after thi they 
follow him to hi cell, and exhort him to confess hi guilt, and 
promis that if he doe confess he shall be pardoned; and these 
appeal are continu until the even of the day befor hi 
execution. terrifi at the idea of a pain death, the wretch, 
at last, to save hi life, consents. He is call into the hall of 
judgment, confess the crime that he ha not committed, and imagin 
that he is now saved.--alas! no; he ha entangl himself, and cannot 
escape. 

"you acknowledg that you have been guilti of observ the law of 
moses. these ceremoni cannot be perform alone; you cannot have 
eaten the paschal lamb _alone_; tell us immediately, who were those 
who assist at those ceremonies, or your life is still forfeited, and 
the stake is prepar for you." 

thu ha he accus himself without gain anything, and if he wish 
to save hi life he must accus others; and who can be accus but 
hi own friend and acquaintances? nay, in all probability, hi own 
relations--hi brothers, sisters, wife, son or daughters--for it is 
natur to suppos that in all such practic a man will trust onli 
hi own family. whether a man confess hi guilt, or die assert 
hi innocence, hi worldli properti is in either case confiscated; but 
it is of great consequ to the inquisit that he should confess, 
as hi act of confession, with hi signatur annexed, is publicli 
read, and serv to prove to the world that the inquisit is 
imparti and just; nay, more, even merciful, as it pardon those who 
have been prove to be guilty. 

At goa the accus of sorceri and magic were much more frequent 
than at the inquisit at other places, aris from the custom 
and ceremoni of the hindoo be veri much mix up with absurd 
superstitions. these people, and the slave from other parts, veri 
often embrac christian to pleas their masters; but since, if 
they had been baptis and were afterward convict of ani crime, 
they were sentenc to the punish by fire; whereas, if they had 
not been baptised, they were onli punish by whipping, imprisonment, 
or the galleys; upon thi ground alon mani refus to embrac 
christianity. 

We have now detail all that we consider, up to the present, 
necessari for the inform of the reader; all that is omit he 
will gather as we proceed with our history. 




chapter xxxvii 


A few hour after amin had been in the dungeon, the jailor entered: 
without speak to her they let down her soft silki hair, and cut 
it close off. amine, with her lip curl in contempt, and without 
resist and expostulation, allow them to do their work. they 
finished, and she wa again left to her solitude. 

the next day the jailor enter her cell, and order her to bare her 
feet, and follow them. she look at them, and they at her. "if you do 
not, we must," observ one of the men, who wa move by her youth 
and beauty. amin did as she wa desir and wa led into the hall of 
justice, where she found onli the grand inquisitor and the secretary. 

the hall of justic wa a long room with lofti window on each side, 
and also at the end opposit to the door through which she had been 
led in. In the centre, on a rais dais, wa a long tabl cover with 
a cloth of altern blue and fawn-colour stripes; and at the 
end opposit to where amin wa brought in wa rais an enorm 
crucifix, with a carv imag of our saviour. the jailor point to a 
small bench, and intim to amin that she wa to sit down. 

after a scrutini of some moments, the secretari spoke:-- 

"what is your name?" 

"amin vanderdecken." 

"of what country?" 

"mi husband is of the low countries; I am from the east." 

"what is your husband?" 

"the captain of a dutch indiaman." 

"how came you here?" 

"hi vessel wa wrecked, and we were separated." 

"whom do you know here?" 

"father mathias." 

"what properti have you?" 

"none; it is my husband's." 

"where is it?" 

"in the custodi of father mathias." 

"are you awar whi you are brought here?" 

"how should I be?" repli amine, evasively; "tell me what I am 
accus of." 

"you must know whether you have done wrong or not. you had better 
confess all your conscienc accus you of." 

"mi conscienc doe not accus me of do wrong." 

"then you will confess nothing?" 

"bi your own showing, I have noth to confess." 

"you say you are from the east: are you a christian?" 

"I reject your creed." 

"you are marri to a catholic?" 

"yes! a true catholic." 

"who marri you?" 

"father seysen, a cathol priest." 

"did you enter into the bosom of the church?--did he ventur to marri 
you without your be baptised?" 

"some ceremoni did take place which I consent to." 

"it wa baptism, wa it not?" 

"I believ it wa so termed." 

"and now you say that you reject the creed?" 

"sinc I have wit the conduct of those who profess it, I do: at 
the time of my marriag I wa dispos toward it." 

"what is the amount of your properti in the father mathias' hands?" 

"some hundr of dollars--h know exactly." 

the grand inquisitor rang a bell; the jailor entered, and amin wa 
led back to her dungeon. 

"whi should they ask so often about my money?" muse amine; "if they 
requir it, they may take it. what is their power? what would they do 
with me? well, well, a few day will decide." A few days!--no, no, 
amine; year perhap would have pass without decision, but that in 
four month from the date of your incarceration, the _auto da fé_, 
which had not been celebr for upward of three years, wa to take 
place, and there wa not a suffici number of those who were to 
undergo the last punish to render the ceremoni imposing. A few 
more were requir for the stake, or you would not have escap from 
those dungeon so soon. As it was, a month of anxieti and suspense, 
almost insupportable, had to be pass away, befor amin wa again 
summon to the hall of justice. 

amine, at the time we have specified, wa again introduc to the hall 
of justice, and wa again ask if she would confess. irrit at her 
long confinement, and the injustic of the proceedings, she replied, 
"I have told you onc for all, that I have noth to confess; do with 
me as you will; but be quick." 

"will tortur oblig you to confess?" 

"tri me," repli amine, firmly--"tri me, cruel men; and if you gain 
but one word from me, then call me craven: I am but a woman--but I 
dare you--i defi you." 

It wa seldom that such express fell upon the ear of her judges, 
and still more seldom that a counten wa light up with such 
determination. but the tortur wa never appli until after the 
accus had been made and answered. 

"we shall see," said the grand inquisitor: "take her away." 

amin wa led back to her cell. In the meantime, father mathia had 
had sever confer with the inquisitor. although, in hi wrath he 
had accus amine, and had procur the necessari wit against 
her, he now felt uneasi and perplexed. hi long resid with 
her--her invari kind till the time of hi dismissal--hi 
knowledg that she had never embrac the faith--her bold and 
courage, nay, her beauti and youth--al work strongli in her favour. 
hi onli object now was, to persuad her to confess that she wa 
wrong, induc her to embrac the faith, and save her. with thi view 
he had obtain permiss from the holi offic to enter her dungeon, 
and reason with her--a special favour which for mani reason they 
could not well refus him. It wa on the third day after her second 
examination, that the bolt were remov at an unusu hour, and 
father mathia enter the cell, which wa again barred, and he wa 
left alon with amine. "mi child! my child!" exclaim father mathias, 
with sorrow in hi countenance. 

"nay, father, thi is mockery. It is you who brought me here--leav 
me." 

"I brought you here, 'ti true; but I would now remov you, if you 
will permit me, amine." 

"most willingly; i'll follow you." 

"nay, nay! there is much to talk over, much to be done. thi is not a 
dungeon from which peopl can escap so easily." 

"then tell me what have you to say; and what is it must be done?" 

"I will." 

"but, stop; befor you say one word answer me one question as you hope 
for bliss: have you heard aught of philip?" 

"yes, I have. He is well." 

"and where is he?" 

"he will soon be here." 

"god, I thank you! shall I see him, father?" 

"that must depend upon yourself." 

"upon myself. then tell me, quickly, what would they have me do?" 

"confess your sins--your crimes." 

"what sins?--what crimes?" 

"have you not dealt with evil beings, invok the spirits, and gain 
the assist of those who are not of thi world?" 

amin made no reply. 

"answer me. Do you not confess?" 

"I do not confess to have done anyth wrong." 

"thi is useless. you were seen by me and others. what will avail your 
denial? are you awar of the punishment, which most sure await you, 
if you do not confess, and becom a member of our church?" 

"whi am I to becom a member of your church? Do you, then, punish 
those who refuse?" 

"no: had you not alreadi consent to receiv baptism, you would not 
have been ask to becom so; but have been baptised, you must now 
becom a member, or be suppos to fall back into heresy." 

"I knew not the natur of your baptism at that time." 

"granted: but you consent to it." 

"be it so. but, pray, what may be the punishment, if I refuse?" 

"you will be burnt aliv at the stake; noth can save you. hear me, 
amin vanderdecken: when next summoned, you must confess all; and, 
ask pardon, request to be receiv into the church; then will you 
be saved, and you will--" 

"what?" 

"again be clasp in philip' arms." 

"mi philip! my philip! you, indeed, press me hard; but, father, if I 
confess I am wrong, when I feel that I am not" 

"feel that you are not!" 

"yes. I invok my mother' assistance; she gave it me in a dream. 
would a mother have assist her daughter, if it were wrong?" 

"it wa not your mother, but a fiend who took the likeness." 

"it wa my mother. again you ask me to say that I believ that which I 
cannot." 

"that which you cannot! amin vanderdecken, be not obstinate." 

"I am not obstinate, good father. have you not offer me, what is to 
me beyond all price, that I should again be in the arm of my husband? 
can I degrad myself to a lie? not for life, or liberti or even for my 
philip." 

"amin vanderdecken, if you will confess your crime, befor you are 
accused, you will have done much; after your accus ha been made, 
it will be of littl avail." 

"it will not be done either befor or after, father. what I have done 
I have done, but a crime it is not to me and mine; with you it may be, 
but I am not of yours." 

"recollect also that you peril your husband, for have wed with a 
sorceress. forget not: to-morrow I will see you again." 

"mi mind is troubled," repli amine. "leav me, father, it will be a 
kindness." 

father mathia quit the cell, pleas with the last word of amine. 
the idea of her husband' danger seem to have startl her. 

amin threw herself down on the mattress, in the corner of the cell, 
and hid her face. 

"burnt alive!" exclaim she after a time, sit up, and pass her 
hand over her forehead. "burnt alive! and these are christians. 
this, then, wa the cruel death foretold by that creature, 
schriften--foretold--yes, and therefor must be: it is my destiny: 
I cannot save myself. If I confess, then, I confess that philip is 
wed to a sorceress, and he will be punish too. no, never--never: 
I can suffer, 'ti cruel--'ti horribl to think of--but 'twill soon 
be over. god of my fathers, give me strength against these wick men, 
and enabl me to bear all, for my dear philip' sake." 

the next even father mathia again made hi appearance. He found 
amin calm and collected: she refus to listen to hi advice, or 
follow hi injunctions. hi last observation, that "her husband would 
be in peril, if she wa found guilti of sorcery," had steel her 
heart, and she had determin that neither tortur nor the stake 
should make her confess the act. the priest left the cell, sick at 
heart; he now felt miser at the idea of amine' perish by so 
dread a death; accus himself of precipitation, and wish that he 
had never seen amine, whose constanc and courage, although in error, 
excit hi admir and hi pity. and then he thought of philip, 
who had treat him so kindly--how could he meet him? and if he ask 
for hi wife--what answer could he give? 

anoth fortnight passed, when amin wa again summon to the hall 
of judgment, and again ask if she confess her crimes. upon her 
refusal, the accus against her were read. she wa accus by 
father mathia with practis forbidden arts, and the deposit of 
the boy pedro, and the other witnesses, were read. In hi zeal, father 
mathia also state that he had found her guilti of the same practic 
at terneuse; and moreover, that in the violent storm when all expect 
to perish, she had remain calm and courageous, and told the captain 
that they would be saved; which could onli have been known by an undu 
spirit of prophecy, given by evil spirits. amine' lip curl in 
deris when she heard the last accusation. she wa ask if she had 
ani defenc to make. 

"what defenc can be offered," repli she, "to such accus 
as these? wit the last--becaus I wa not so craven as the 
christians, I am accus of sorcery. the old dotard! but I will expos 
him. tell me, if one know that sorceri is used, and conceal or 
allow it, is he not a particip and equal guilty?" 

"he is," repli the inquisitor, anxious await the result. 

"then I denounce" and amin wa about to reveal that philip' mission 
wa known, and not forbidden by father mathia and seysen; when 
recollect that philip would be implicated, she stopped. 

"denounc whom?" inquir the inquisitor. 

"no one," repli amine, fold her arm and droop her head. 

"speak, woman." 

amin made no answer. 

"the tortur will make you speak." 

"never!" repli amine. "never! tortur me to death, if you choose; I 
prefer it to a public execution." 

the inquisitor and the secretari consult a short time. convinc 
that amin would adher to her resolution, and requir her for 
public execution, they abandon the idea of the torture. 

"do you confess?" inquir the inquisitor. 

"no," repli amine, firmly. 

"then take her away." 

the night befor the _auto da fé_, father mathia again enter the 
cell of amine, but all hi endeavour to convert her were useless. 

"to-morrow will end it all, father," repli amine; "leav me--i would 
be alone." 




chapter xxxviii 


We must now return to philip and krantz. when the latter retir from 
the presenc of the portugues commandant, he commun to philip 
what had taken place, and the fabul tale which he had invent to 
deceiv the commandant. "I said that you alon knew where the treasur 
wa concealed," continu krantz, "that you might be sent for, for in 
all probabl he will keep me as a hostage: but never mind that, I 
must take my chance. Do you contriv to escap somehow or another, and 
rejoin amine." 

"not so," repli philip, "you must go with me, my friend: I feel that 
should I part with you, happi would no longer be in store for me." 

"nonsense--that is but an idl feeling; besides, I will evad him 
somehow or another." 

"I will not show the treasure, unless you go with me." 

"well--you may tri it at all events." 

A low tap at the door wa heard. philip rose and open it (for they 
had retir to rest), and pedro came in. look care round him, 
and then shut the door softly, he put hi finger on hi lip to 
enjoin them to silence. He then in a whisper told them what he had 
overheard. "contrive, if possible, that I go with you," continu he; 
"I must leav you now; he still pace hi room." and pedro slip out 
of the door, and crawl stealthili away along the ramparts. 

"the treacher littl rascal! but we will circumv him, if 
possible," said krantz, in a low tone. "yes, philip, you are right, we 
must both go, for you will requir my assistance. I must persuad him 
to go himself. i'll think of it--so philip, good-night." 

the next morn philip and krantz were summon to breakfast; the 
command receiv them with smile and urbanity. To philip he 
wa peculiarli courteous. As soon as the repast wa over, he thu 
commun to him hi intent and wishes:-- 

"signor, I have been reflect upon what your friend told me, and the 
appear of the spectr yesterday, which creat such confusion; it 
induc me to behav with a rash for which I must now offer my 
most sincer apologies. the reflect which I have made, join with 
the feel of devot which must be in the heart of everi true 
catholic, have determin me, with your assistance, to obtain thi 
treasur dedic to the holi church. It is my propos that you 
should take a parti of soldier under your orders, proceed to the 
island on which it is deposited, and have obtain it, return here. 
I will detain ani vessel which may in the meantim put into the 
roadstead, and you shall then be the bearer of the treasur and of my 
letter to goa. thi will give you an honour introduct to the 
authorities, and enabl you to pass away your time there in the most 
agreeabl manner. you will also, signor, be restor to your wife, 
whose charm had such an effect upon me; and for mention of whose name 
in the veri unceremoni manner which I did, I must excus myself 
upon the ground of total ignor of who she was, or of her be in 
ani way connect with your honour person. If these measur suit 
you, signor, I shall be most happi to give order to that effect." 

"a a good cathol myself," repli philip, "I shall be most happi to 
point out the spot where the treasur is concealed, and restor it to 
the church. your apolog rel to my wife I accept with pleasure, 
be awar that your conduct proceed from ignor of her 
situat and rank; but I do not exactli see my way clear. you propos 
a parti of soldiers. will they obey me?--ar they to be trusted?--i 
shall, have onli myself and friend against them, and will they be 
obedient?" 

"no fear of that, signor, they are well disciplined; there is not even 
occas for your friend to go with you. I wish to retain him with me, 
to keep me compani dure your absence." 

"nay! that I must object to," repli philip; "I will not trust myself 
alone." 

"perhap I may be allow to give an opinion on thi subject," 
observ krantz; "I see no reason, if my friend goe accompani with 
a parti of soldier only, whi I should not go with him; but I consid 
it would be unadvis that he proceed in the way the command 
proposes, either with or without me. you must recollect, commandant, 
that it is no trifl sum which is to be carri away; that it will 
be open to view, and will meet the eye of your men; that these men 
have been detain mani year in thi country, and are anxiou to 
return home. when, therefore, they find themselv with onli two 
stranger with them--away from your authority, and in possess of a 
larg sum of money--wil not the temptat be too strong? they will 
onli have to run down the southern channel, gain the port of bantam, 
and they will be safe; have obtain both freedom and wealth. To 
send, therefore, my friend and me, would be to send us to almost 
certain death; but if you were to go, commandant, then the danger 
would no longer exist. your presenc and your author would control 
them; and, whatev their wish or thought might be, they would 
quail befor the flash of your eye." 

"veri true--veri true," repli philip--"al thi did not occur to 
me." 

nor had it occur to the commandant, but when point out, the forc 
of these suggest immedi struck him, and long befor krantz 
had finish speaking, he had resolv to go himself. 

"well, signors," repli he; "I am alway readi to acced to your 
wishes; and sinc you consid my presenc necessary, and as I do not 
think there is ani chanc of anoth attack from the ternat peopl 
just now, I will take upon myself the respons of leav the 
fort for a few day under the charg of my lieutenant, while we do 
thi servic to holi mother church. I have alreadi sent for one of the 
nativ vessels, which are larg and commodious, and will, with your 
permission, embark to-morrow." 

"two vessel will be better," observ krantz; "in the first place, in 
case of an accident; and next becaus we can embark all the treasur 
in one with ourselves, and put a portion of the soldier in the other; 
so that we may be in greater force, in case of the sight of so much 
wealth stimul them to insubordination." 

"true, signor, we will have two vessels; your advic is good." 

everyth wa thu satisfactorili arranged, with the except of 
their wish that pedro should, accompani them on their expedition. 
they were debat how thi should be brought on the tapis, when the 
soldier came to them, and state that the command had order him 
to be of the party, and that he wa to offer hi servic to the two 
strangers. 

On the ensu day everyth wa prepared. ten soldier and a 
corpor had been select by the commandant; and it requir but 
littl time to put into the vessel the provis and other articl 
which were required. At daylight they embarked--th command and 
philip in one boat; krantz, with the corpor and pedro, in the 
other. the men, who had been kept in ignor of the object of the 
expedition, were now made acquaint with it by pedro, and a long 
whisper took place between them, much to the satisfact of 
krantz, who wa awar that the mutini would soon be excited, when 
it wa understood that those who compos the expedit were to be 
sacrif to the avaric of the commandant. the weather be fine, 
they sail on dure the night: pass the island of ternat at ten 
leagues' distance; and befor morn were among the cluster of isles, 
the southernmost of which wa the one on which the treasur had been 
buried. On the second night the vessel were beach upon a small 
island; and then, for the first time, a commun took place 
between the soldier who had been in the boat with pedro and krantz, 
and those who had been embark with the commandant. philip and krantz 
had also an opportun of commun apart for a short time. 

when they made sail the next morning, pedro spoke openly; he told 
krantz that the soldier in the boat had made up their minds, and that 
he had no doubt that the other would do so befor night; although 
they had not decidedli agre upon join them in the morn when 
they had re-embarked. that they would despatch the commandant, and 
then proceed to batavia, and from thenc obtain a passag home to 
europe. 

"cannot you accomplish your end without murder?" 

"yes, we could; but not our revenge. you do not know the treatment 
which we have receiv from hi hands; and sweet as the money will be 
to us, hi death will be even sweeter. besides, ha he not determin 
to murder us all in some way or another? It is but justice. no, no; if 
there wa no other knife ready--min is." 

"and so are all ours!" cri the other soldiers, put their hand 
to their weapons. 

one more day' sail brought them within twenti mile of the island; 
for philip knew hi landmark well. again they landed, and all retir 
to rest, the command dream of wealth and revenge; while it wa 
arrang that the dig up of the treasur which he covet should 
be the signal for hi death. 

onc more did they embark, and the command heed not the dark and 
lower face with which he wa surrounded. He wa all gaieti and 
politeness. swiftli did they skim over the dark blue sea, between the 
beauti island with which it wa studded, and befor the sun wa 
three hour high, philip recognis the one sought after, and point 
out to the command the notch cocoa-nut tree, which serv as a 
guid to the spot where the money had been concealed. they land on 
the sandi beach, and the shovel were order to be brought on shore 
by the impati littl officer; who littl thought that everi moment 
of time gain wa but so much _time_ lost to him, and that while he 
wa smile and medit treachery, that other could do the same. 

the parti arriv under the tree--th shovel soon remov the light 
sand, and, in a few minutes, the treasur wa expos to view. bag 
after bag wa hand up, and the loos dollar collect into heaps. 
two of the soldier had been sent to the vessel for sack to put the 
loos dollar in, and the men had desist from their labour; they 
laid asid their spades, look were exchanged, and all were ready. 

the command turn round to call to and hasten the movement of 
the men who had been sent for the sacks, when three or four knive 
simultan pierc him through the back; he fell, and wa 
expostul when they were again buri in hi bosom, and he lay a 
corpse. philip and krantz remain silent spectators--th knive were 
drawn out, wiped, and replac in their sheathes. 

"he ha met hi reward," said krantz. 

"yes," exclaim the portugues soldiers--"justice, noth but 
justice." 

"signors, you shall have your share," observ pedro. "shall they not, 
my men?" 

"yes! yes!" 

"not one dollar, my good friends," repli philip; "take all the 
money, and may you be happy; all we ask is, your assist to proceed 
on our way to where we are about to go. and now befor you divid your 
money, oblig me by buri the bodi of that unfortun man." 

the soldier obeyed. resum their shovels, they soon scoop out a 
shallow grave; the commandant' bodi wa thrown in, and cover up 
from sight. 




chapter xxxix 


scarc had the soldier perform their task, and thrown down their 
shovels, when they commenc an altercation. It appear that thi 
money wa to be again the caus of slaughter and bloodshed. philip 
and krantz determin to sail immedi in one of the peroquas, 
and leav them to settl their disput as they pleased. He ask 
permiss of the soldier to take from the provis and water, 
of which there wa ampl supply, a larger proport than wa their 
share; stating, that he and krantz had a long voyag and would requir 
it, and point out to them that there were plenti of cocoa-nut 
for their support. the soldiers, who thought of noth but their 
newly-acquir wealth, allow him to do as he pleased; and have 
hastili collect as mani cocoa-nut as they could, to add to their 
stock of provisions, befor noon philip and krantz had embarked, and 
made sail in the peroqua, leav the soldier with their knive again 
drawn, and so busi in their angri alterc as to be heedless of 
their departure. 

"there will be the same scene over again, I expect," observ krantz, 
as the vessel part swiftli from the shore. 

"I have littl doubt of it; observe, even now they are at blow and 
stabs." 

"if I were to name that spot, it should be the '_accurs isle_.'" 

"would not ani other be the same, with so much to inflam the passion 
of men?" 

"assuredly: what a curs is gold!" 

"and what a blessing!" repli krantz. "I am sorri pedro is left with 
them." 

"it is their destiny," repli philip; "so let' think no more of 
them. now what do you propose? with thi vessel, small as she is, we 
may sail over these sea in safety; and we have, I imagine, provis 
suffici for more than a month." 

"mi idea is to run into the track of the vessel go to the 
westward, and obtain a passag to goa." 

"and if we do not meet with any, we can at all event proceed up the 
strait as far as pulo penang without risk. there we may safe remain 
until a vessel passes." 

"I agre with you; it is our best, nay our onli place; unless, indeed, 
we were to proceed to cochin, where junk are alway leav for goa." 

"but that would be out of our way, and the junk cannot well pass us 
in the strait without their be seen by us." 

they had no difficulti in steer their course; the island by day, 
and the clear star by night, were their compass. It is true that 
they did not follow the more direct track, but they follow the more 
secure, work up through the smooth waters, and gain to the 
northward more than to the west. mani time were they chase by the 
malay proas, which infest the islands, but the swift of their 
littl peroqua wa their security; inde the chase was, gener 
speaking, abandoned, as soon as the small of the vessel wa made 
out by the pirates, who expect that littl or no booti wa to be 
gained. 

that amin and philip' mission wa the constant theme of their 
discourse, may easili be imagined. one morning, as they were sail 
between the isles, with less wind than usual, philip observed:-- 

"krantz, you said that there were event in your own life, or 
connect with it, which would corrobor the mysteri tale I 
confid to you. will you now tell me to what you referred?" 

"certainly," repli krantz; "I have often thought of do so, but 
one circumst or anoth ha hitherto prevent me; thi is, 
however, a fit opportunity. prepar therefor to listen to a 
strang story, quit as strange, perhaps, as your own. 

"I take it for granted, that you have heard peopl speak of the hartz 
mountains," observ krantz. 

"I have never heard peopl speak of them that I can recollect," 
repli philip; "but I have read of them in some book, and of the 
strang thing which have occur there." 

"it is inde a wild region," rejoin krantz, "and mani strang tale 
are told of it; but, strang as they are, I have good reason for 
believ them to be true. I have told you, philip, that I fulli 
believ in your communion with the other world--that I credit the 
histori of your father, and the law of your mission; for that 
we are surrounded, impelled, and work upon by be differ in 
their natur from ourselves, I have had full evidence, as you will 
acknowledge, when I state what ha occur in my own family. whi such 
malevol be as I am about to speak of should be permit to 
interfer with us, and punish, I may say, compar unoffend 
mortals, is beyond my comprehension; but that they are so permit is 
most certain." 

"the great principl of all evil fulfil hi work of evil; why, then, 
not the other minor spirit of the same class?" inquir philip. "what 
matter it to us, whether we are tri by, and have to suffer from, 
the enmiti of our fellow-mortals, or whether we are persecut by 
be more power and more malevol than ourselves? We know 
that we have to work out our salvation, and that we shall be judg 
accord to our strength; if then there be evil spirit who delight 
to oppress man, there sure must be, as amin asserts, good spirits, 
whose delight is to do him service. whether, then, we have to struggl 
against our passion only, or whether we have to struggl not onli 
against our passions, but also the dire influenc of unseen enemies, 
we ever struggl with the same odd in our favour, as the good are 
stronger than the evil which we combat. In either case we are on the 
'vantag ground, whether, as in the first, we fight the good caus 
single-handed, or as in the second, although opposed, we have the host 
of heaven rang on our side. thu are the scale of divin justic 
evenli balanced, and man is still a free agent, as hi own virtuou or 
viciou propens must ever decid whether he shall gain or lose 
the victory." 

"most true," repli krantz, "and now to my history. 

"mi father wa not born, or origin a resident, in the hartz 
mountains; he wa the serf of an hungarian nobleman, of great 
possessions, in transylvania; but, although a serf, he wa not by 
ani mean a poor or illiter man. In fact, he wa rich, and hi 
intellig and respect were such, that he had been rais 
by hi lord to the stewardship; but, whoever may happen to be born a 
serf, a serf must he remain, even though he becom a wealthi man; such 
wa the condit of my father. My father had been marri for about 
five years; and, by hi marriage, had three children--mi eldest 
brother caesar, myself (hermann), and a sister name marcella. you 
know, philip, that latin is still the languag spoken in that country; 
and that will account for our high sound names. My mother wa a 
veri beauti woman, unfortun more beauti than virtuous: she 
wa seen and admir by the lord of the soil; my father wa sent away 
upon some mission; and, dure hi absence, my mother, flatter by 
the attentions, and won by the assiduities, of thi nobleman, 
yield to hi wishes. It so happen that my father return veri 
unexpectedly, and discov the intrigue. the evid of my mother' 
shame wa positive: he surpris her in the compani of her seducer! 
carri away by the impetuos of hi feelings, he watch the 
opportun of a meet take place between them, and murder both 
hi wife and her seducer. consciou that, as a serf, not even the 
provoc which he had receiv would be allow as a justif 
of hi conduct, he hastili collect togeth what money he could lay 
hi hand upon, and, as we were then in the depth of winter, he put 
hi hors to the sleigh, and take hi children with him, he set 
off in the middl of the night, and wa far away befor the tragic 
circumst had transpired. awar that he would be pursued, and that 
he had no chanc of escap if he remain in ani portion of hi nativ 
countri (in which the author could lay hold of him), he continu 
hi flight without intermiss until he had buri himself in the 
intricaci and seclus of the hartz mountains. Of course, all that 
I have now told you I learn afterwards. My oldest recollect are 
knit to a rude, yet comfort cottage, in which I live with my 
father, brother, and sister. It wa on the confin of one of those 
vast forest which cover the northern part of germany; around it were 
a few acr of ground, which, dure the summer months, my father 
cultivated, and which, though they yield a doubt harvest, were 
suffici for our support. In the winter we remain much in doors, 
for, as my father follow the chase, we were left alone, and the 
wolves, dure that season, incessantli prowl about. My father 
had purchas the cottage, and land about it, of one of the rude 
foresters, who gain their livelihood partli by hunting, and partli 
by burn charcoal, for the purpos of smelt the ore from the 
neighbour mines; it wa distant about two mile from ani other 
habitation. I can call to mind the whole landscap now: the tall pine 
which rose up on the mountain abov us, and the wide expans of forest 
beneath, on the topmost bough and head of whose tree we look down 
from our cottage, as the mountain below us rapidli descend into the 
distant valley. In summertim the prospect wa beautiful; but dure 
the sever winter, a more desol scene could not well be imagined. 

"I said that, in the winter, my father occupi himself with the 
chase; everi day he left us, and often would he lock the door, that we 
might not leav the cottage. He had no one to assist him, or to take 
care of us--indeed, it wa not easi to find a femal servant who would 
live in such a solitude; but, could he have found one, my father would 
not have receiv her, for he had imbib a horror of the sex, as the 
differ of hi conduct toward us, hi two boys, and my poor littl 
sister, marcella, evid proved. you may suppos we were sadli 
neglected; indeed, we suffer much, for my father, fear that we 
might come to some harm, would not allow us fuel, when he left the 
cottage; and we were obliged, therefore, to creep under the heap of 
bears'-skins, and there to keep ourselv as warm as we could until he 
return in the evening, when a blaze fire wa our delight. that my 
father chose thi restless sort of life may appear strange, but the 
fact wa that he could not remain quiet; whether from remors for 
have commit murder, or from the miseri consequ on hi chang 
of situation, or from both combined, he wa never happi unless he 
wa in a state of activity. children, however, when left much to 
themselves, acquir a thought not common to their age. So it 
wa with us; and dure the short cold day of winter we would sit 
silent, long for the happi hour when the snow would melt, and the 
leav burst out, and the bird begin their songs, and when we should 
again be set at liberty. 

"such wa our peculiar and savag sort of life until my brother caesar 
wa nine, myself seven, and my sister five, year old, when the 
circumst occur on which is base the extraordinari narr 
which I am about to relate. 

"one even my father return home rather later than usual; he had 
been unsuccessful, and, as the weather wa veri severe, and mani feet 
of snow were upon the ground, he wa not onli veri cold, but in a veri 
bad humour. He had brought in wood, and we were all three of us gladli 
assist each other in blow on the ember to creat the blaze, 
when he caught poor littl marcella by the arm and threw her aside; 
the child fell, struck her mouth, and bled veri much. My brother ran 
to rais her up. accustom to ill usage, and afraid of my father, 
she did not dare to cry, but look up in hi face veri piteously. 
My father drew hi stool nearer to the hearth, mutter someth 
in abus of women, and busi himself with the fire, which both my 
brother and I had desert when our sister wa so unkindli treated. A 
cheer blaze wa soon the result of hi exertions; but we did not, 
as usual, crowd round it. marcella, still bleeding, retir to a 
corner, and my brother and I took our seat besid her, while my 
father hung over the fire gloomili and alone. such had been our 
posit for about half-an-hour, when the howl of a wolf, close under 
the window of the cottage, fell on our ears. My father start up, and 
seiz hi gun: the howl wa repeated, he examin the priming, and 
then hastili left the cottage, shut the door after him. We all 
wait (anxious listening), for we thought that if he succeed in 
shoot the wolf, he would return in a better humour; and although 
he wa harsh to all of us, and particularli so to our littl sister, 
still we love our father, and love to see him cheer and happy, 
for what els had we to look up to? and I may here observe, that 
perhap there never were three children who were fonder of each other; 
we did not, like other children, fight and disput together; and if, 
by chance, ani disagr did aris between my elder brother and me, 
littl marcella would run to us, and kiss us both, seal, through 
her entreaties, the peac between us. marcella wa a lovely, amiabl 
child; I can recal her beauti featur even now--alas! poor littl 
marcella." 

"she is dead then?" observ philip. 

"dead! yes, dead!--but how did she die?--but I must not anticipate, 
philip; let me tell my story. 

"we wait for some time, but the report of the gun did not reach us, 
and my elder brother then said, 'our father ha follow the wolf, and 
will not be back for some time. marcella, let us wash the blood from 
your mouth, and then we will leav thi corner, and go to the fire and 
warm ourselves.' 

"we did so, and remain there until near midnight, everi minut 
wondering, as it grew later, whi our father did not return. We had 
no idea that he wa in ani danger, but we thought that he must have 
chase the wolf for a veri long time. 'I will look out and see if 
father is coming,' said my brother caesar, go to the door. 'take 
care,' said marcella, 'the wolv must be about now, and we cannot 
kill them, brother.' My brother open the door veri cautiously, and 
but a few inches; he peep out.--'i see nothing,' said he, after a 
time, and onc more he join us at the fire. 'we have had no supper,' 
said I, for my father usual cook the meat as soon as he came 
home; and dure hi absenc we had noth but the fragment of the 
preced day. 

"'and if our father come home after hi hunt, caesar,' said marcella, 
'he will be pleas to have some supper; let us cook it for him and 
for ourselves.' caesar climb upon the stool, and reach down some 
meat--i forget now whether it wa venison or bear' meat; but we cut 
off the usual quantity, and proceed to dress it, as we use to do 
under our father' superintendence. We were all busi put it into 
the platter befor the fire, to await hi coming, when we heard the 
sound of a horn. We listened--ther wa a nois outside, and a minut 
afterward my father entered, usher in a young female, and a larg 
dark man in a hunter' dress. 

"perhap I had better now relate, what wa onli known to me mani year 
afterwards. when my father had left the cottage, he perceiv a larg 
white wolf about thirti yard from him; as soon as the anim saw 
my father, it retreat slowly, growl and snarling. My father 
followed; the anim did not run, but alway kept at some distance; 
and my father did not like to fire until he wa pretti certain that 
hi ball would take effect: thu they went on for some time, the wolf 
now leav my father far behind, and then stop and snarl 
defianc at him, and then again, on hi approach, set off at 
speed. 

"anxiou to shoot the anim (for the white wolf is veri rare), my 
father continu the pursuit for sever hours, dure which he 
continu ascend the mountain. 

"you must know, philip, that there are peculiar spot on those 
mountain which are supposed, and, as my stori will prove, truli 
supposed, to be inhabit by the evil influences; they are well known 
to the huntsmen, who invari avoid them. now, one of these spots, 
an open space in the pine forest abov us, had been point out to my 
father as danger on that account. but, whether he disbeliev 
these wild stories, or whether, in hi eager pursuit of the chase, he 
disregard them, I know not; certain, however, it is, that he wa 
decoy by the white wolf to thi open space, when the anim appear 
to slacken her speed. My father approached, came close up to her, 
rais hi gun to hi shoulder, and wa about to fire; when the wolf 
suddenli disappeared. He thought that the snow on the ground must have 
dazzl hi sight, and he let down hi gun to look for the beast--but 
she wa gone; how she could have escap over the clearance, without 
hi see her, wa beyond hi comprehension. mortifi at the ill 
success of hi chase, he wa about to retrac hi steps, when he heard 
the distant sound of a horn. astonish at such a sound--at such 
an hour--in such a wilderness, made him forget for the moment hi 
disappointment, and he remain rivet to the spot. In a minut the 
horn wa blown a second time, and at no great distance; my father 
stood still, and listened: a third time it wa blown. I forget the 
term use to express it, but it wa the signal which, my father well 
knew, impli that the parti wa lost in the woods. In a few minut 
more my father beheld a man on horseback, with a femal seat on the 
crupper, enter the clear space, and ride up to him. At first, my 
father call to mind the strang stori which he had heard of the 
supernatur be who were said to frequent these mountains; but the 
nearer approach of the parti satisfi him that they were mortal 
like himself. As soon as they came up to him, the man who guid the 
hors accost him. 'friend hunter, you are out late, the better 
fortun for us: we have ridden far, and are in fear of our lives, 
which are eagerli sought after. these mountain have enabl us to 
elud our pursuers; but if we find not shelter and refreshment, that 
will avail us little, as we must perish from hunger and the inclem 
of the night. My daughter, who ride behind me, is now more dead than 
alive,--say, can you assist us in our difficulty?' 

"'mi cottag is some few mile distant,' repli my father, 'but I 
have littl to offer you besid a shelter from the weather; to the 
littl I have you are welcome. may I ask whenc you come?' 

"'yes, friend, it is no secret now; we have escap from transylvania, 
where my daughter' honour and my life were equal in jeopardy!' 

"thi inform wa quit enough to rais an interest in my father' 
heart. He rememb hi own escape: he rememb the loss of 
hi wife' honour, and the tragedi by which it wa wound up. He 
immediately, and warmly, offer all the assist which he could 
afford them. 

"'there is no time to be lost, then, good sir,' observ the horseman; 
'mi daughter is chill with the frost, and cannot hold out much 
longer against the sever of the weather.' 

"'follow me,' repli my father, lead the way toward hi home. 

"'i wa lure away in pursuit of a larg white wolf,' observ my 
father; 'it came to the veri window of my hut, or I should not have 
been out at thi time of night.' 

"'the creatur pass by us just as we came out of the wood,' said the 
femal in a silveri tone. 

"I wa nearli discharg my piec at it,' observ the hunter; 'but 
sinc it did us such good service, I am glad that I allow it to 
escape.' 

"in about an hour and a half, dure which my father walk at a rapid 
pace, the parti arriv at the cottage, and, as I said before, came 
in. 

"'we are in good time, apparently,' observ the dark hunter, catch 
the smell of the roast meat, as he walk to the fire and survey 
my brother and sister, and myself. 'you have young cook here, 
mynheer.' 'I am glad that we shall not have to wait,' repli my 
father. 'come, mistress, seat yourself by the fire; you requir warmth 
after your cold ride.' 'and where can I put up my horse, mynheer?' 
observ the huntsman.' 'I will take care of him,' repli my father, 
go out of the cottag door. 

"the femal must, however, be particularli described. she wa young, 
and appar twenti year of age. she wa dress in a travel 
dress, deepli border with white fur, and wore a cap of white ermin 
on her head. her featur were veri beautiful, at least I thought so, 
and so my father ha sinc declared. her hair wa flaxen, glossi and 
shining, and bright as a mirror; and her mouth, although somewhat 
larg when it wa open, show the most brilliant teeth I have ever 
beheld. but there wa someth about her eyes, bright as they were, 
which made us children afraid; they were so restless, so furtive; I 
could not at that time tell why, but I felt as if there wa cruelti in 
her eye; and when she beckon us to come to her, we approach her 
with fear and trembling. still she wa beautiful, veri beautiful. she 
spoke kindli to my brother and myself, pat our heads, and caress 
us; but marcella would not come near her; on the contrary, she slunk 
away, and hid herself in the bed, and would not wait for the supper, 
which half an hour befor she had been so anxiou for. 

"mi father, have put the hors into a close shed, soon returned, 
and supper wa place upon the table. when it wa over, my father 
request that the young ladi would take possess of hi bed, and 
he would remain at the fire, and sit up with her father. after some 
hesit on her part, thi arrang wa agre to, and I and my 
brother crept into the other bed with marcella, for we had as yet 
alway slept together. 

"but we could not sleep; there wa someth so unusual, not onli 
in see strang people, but in have those peopl sleep at the 
cottage, that we were bewildered. As for poor littl marcella, she wa 
quiet, but I perceiv that she trembl dure the whole night, and 
sometim I thought that she wa check a sob. My father had brought 
out some spirits, which he rare used, and he and the strang hunter 
remain drink and talk befor the fire. our ear were readi to 
catch the slightest whisper--so much wa our curios excited. 

"'you said you came from transylvania?' observ my father. 

"'even so, mynheer,' repli the hunter. 'I wa a serf to the nobl 
hous of ----; my master would insist upon my surrend up my fair 
girl to hi wishes; it end in my give him a few inch of my 
hunting-knife.' 

"'we are countrymen, and brother in misfortune,' repli my father, 
take the huntsman' hand, and press it warmly. 

"'indeed! are you, then, from that country?' 

"'yes; and I too have fled for my life. but mine is a melancholi 
tale.' 

"'your name?' inquir the hunter. 

"'krantz.' 

"'what! krantz of ---- I have heard your tale; you need not renew your 
grief by repeat it now. welcome, most welcome, mynheer, and, I 
may say, my worthi kinsman. I am your second cousin, wilfr of 
barnsdorf,' cri the hunter, rise up and embrac my father. 

"they fill their horn mug to the brim, and drank to one another, 
after the german fashion. the convers wa then carri on in a 
low tone; all that we could collect from it was, that our new rel 
and hi daughter were to take up their abod in our cottage, at least 
for the present. In about an hour they both fell back in their chairs, 
and appear to sleep. 

"'marcella, dear, did you hear?' said my brother in a low tone. 

"'yes,' repli marcella, in a whisper; 'I heard all. oh! brother, I 
cannot bear to look upon that woman--i feel so frightened.' 

"mi brother made no reply, and shortli afterward we were all three 
fast asleep. 

"when we awok the next morning, we found that the hunter' daughter 
had risen befor us. I thought she look more beauti than ever. 
she came up to littl marcella and caress her; the child burst into 
tears, and sob as if her heart would break. 

"but, not to detain you with too long a story, the huntsman and hi 
daughter were accommod in the cottage. My father and he went 
out hunt daily, leav christina with us. she perform all the 
household duties; wa veri kind to us children; and, gradually, the 
dislik even of littl marcella wore away. but a great chang took 
place in my father; he appear to have conquer hi avers to the 
sex, and wa most attent to christina. often, after her father and 
we were in bed, would he sit up with her, convers in a low tone by 
the fire. I ought to have mentioned, that my father and the huntsman 
wilfred, slept in anoth portion of the cottage, and that the bed 
which he formerli occupied, and which wa in the same room as ours, 
had been given up to the use of christina. these visitor had been 
about three week at the cottage, when, one night, after we children 
had been sent to bed, a consult wa held. My father had ask 
christina in marriage, and had obtain both her own consent and that 
of wilfred; after thi a convers took place, which was, as nearli 
as I can recollect, as follows:-- 

"'you may take my child, mynheer krantz, and my bless with her, 
and I shall then leav you and seek some other habitation--it matter 
littl where.' 

"'whi not remain here, wilfred?' 

"'no, no, I am call elsewhere; let that suffice, and ask no more 
questions. you have my child.' 

"'i thank you for her, and will duli valu her; but there is one 
difficulty.' 

"'i know what you would say; there is no priest here in thi wild 
country: true; neither is there ani law to bind; still must some 
ceremoni pass between you, to satisfi a father. will you consent to 
marri her after my fashion? if so, I will marri you directly.' 

"'i will,' repli my father. 

"'then take her by the hand. now, mynheer, swear.' 

"'i swear,' repeat my father. 

"'bi all the spirit of the hartz mountains--' 

"'nay, whi not by heaven?' interrupt my father. 

"'becaus it is not my humour,' rejoin wilfred; 'if I prefer that 
oath, less bind perhaps, than another, sure you will not thwart 
me.' 

"'well, be it so then; have your humour. will you make me swear by 
that in which I do not believe?' 

"'yet mani do so, who in outward appear are christians,' rejoin 
wilfred; 'say, will you be married, or shall I take my daughter away 
with me?' 

"'proceed,' repli my father, impatiently. 

"'i swear by all the spirit of the hartz mountains, by all their 
power for good or for evil, that I take christina for my wed wife; 
that I will ever protect her, cherish her, and love her; that my hand 
shall never be rais against her to harm her.' 

"mi father repeat the word after wilfred. 

"'and if I fail in thi my vow, may all the vengeanc of the spirit 
fall upon me and upon my children; may they perish by the vulture, by 
the wolf, or other beast of the forest; may their flesh be torn from 
their limbs, and their bone blanch in the wilderness; all thi I 
swear.' 

"mi father hesitated, as he repeat the last words; littl marcella 
could not restrain herself, and as my father repeat the last 
sentence, she burst into tears. thi sudden interrupt appear to 
discompos the party, particularli my father; he spoke harshli to the 
child, who control her sobs, buri her face under the bedclothes. 

"such wa the second marriag of my father. the next morning, the 
hunter wilfr mount hi horse, and rode away. 

"mi father resum hi bed, which wa in the same room as ours; and 
thing went on much as befor the marriage, except that our new 
mother-in-law did not show ani kind toward us; indeed, dure 
my father' absence, she would often beat us, particularli littl 
marcella, and her eye would flash fire, as she look eagerli upon 
the fair and love child. 

"one night, my sister awok me and my brother. 

"'what is the matter?' said caesar. 

"'she ha gone out,' whisper marcella. 

"'gone out!' 

"'yes, gone out at the door, in her night-clothes,' repli the child; 
'I saw her get out of bed, look at my father to see if he slept, and 
then she went out at the door.' 

"what could induc her to leav her bed, and all undress to go out, 
in such bitter wintri weather, with the snow deep on the ground, wa 
to us incomprehensible; we lay awake, and in about an hour we heard 
the growl of a wolf, close under the window. 

"'there is a wolf,' said caesar; 'she will be torn to pieces.' 

"'oh, no!' cri marcella. 

"in a few minut afterward our mother-in-law appeared; she wa in 
her night-dress, as marcella had stated. she let down the latch of the 
door, so as to make no noise, went to a pail of water, and wash her 
face and hands, and then slip into the bed where my father lay. 

"we all three trembled, we hardli knew why, but we resolv to watch 
the next night: we did so--and not onli on the ensu night, but 
on mani others, and alway at about the same hour, would our 
mother-in-law rise from her bed, and leav the cottage--and after she 
wa gone, we invari heard the growl of a wolf under our window, 
and alway saw her, on her return, wash herself befor she retir to 
bed. We observed, also, that she seldom sat down to meals, and that 
when she did, she appear to eat with dislike; but when the meat wa 
taken down, to be prepar for dinner, she would often furtiv put a 
raw piec into her mouth. 

"mi brother caesar wa a courag boy; he did not like to speak to 
my father until he knew more. He resolv that he would follow her 
out, and ascertain what she did. marcella and I endeavour to 
dissuad him from thi project; but he would not be controlled, and, 
the veri next night he lay down in hi clothes, and as soon as our 
mother-in-law had left the cottage, he jump up, took down my 
father' gun, and follow her. 

"you may imagin in what a state of suspens marcella and I remained, 
dure hi absence. after a few minutes, we heard the report of a gun. 
It did not awaken my father, and we lay trembl with anxiety. In 
a minut afterward we saw our mother-in-law enter the cottage--h 
dress wa bloody. I put my hand to marcella' mouth to prevent her 
cri out, although I wa myself in great alarm. our mother-in-law 
approach my father' bed, look to see if he wa asleep, and then 
went to the chimney, and blew up the ember into a blaze. 

"'who is there?' said my father, wake up. 

"'lie still, dearest,' repli my mother-in-law, 'it is onli me; I 
have light the fire to warm some water; I am not quit well.' 

"mi father turn round and wa soon asleep; but we watch our 
mother-in-law. she chang her linen, and threw the garment she had 
worn into the fire; and we then perceiv that her right leg wa 
bleed profusely, as if from a gun-shot wound. she bandag it up, 
and then dress herself, remain befor the fire until the break of 
day. 

"poor littl marcella, her heart beat quick as she press me to her 
side--so inde did mine. where wa our brother, caesar? how did my 
mother-in-law receiv the wound unless from hi gun? At last my father 
rose, and then, for the first time I spoke, saying, 'father, where is 
my brother, caesar?' 

"'your brother!' exclaim he, 'why, where can he be?' 

"'merci heaven! I thought as I lay veri restless last night,' 
observ our mother-in-law, 'that I heard somebodi open the latch of 
the door; and, dear me, husband, what ha becom of your gun?' 

"mi father cast hi eye up abov the chimney, and perceiv that hi 
gun wa missing. for a moment he look perplexed, then seiz a 
broad axe, he went out of the cottag without say anoth word. 

"he did not remain away from us long: in a few minut he returned, 
bear in hi arm the mangl bodi of my poor brother; he laid it 
down, and cover up hi face. 

"mi mother-in-law rose up, and look at the body, while marcella and 
I threw ourselv by it side wail and sob bitterly. 

"'go to bed again, children,' said she sharply. 'husband,' continu 
she, 'your boy must have taken the gun down to shoot a wolf, and the 
anim ha been too power for him. poor boy! he ha paid dearli for 
hi rashness.' 

"mi father made no reply; I wish to speak--to tell all--but 
marcella, who perceiv my intention, held me by the arm, and look 
at me so imploringly, that I desisted. 

"mi father, therefore, wa left in hi error; but marcella and 
I, although we could not comprehend it, were consciou that our 
mother-in-law wa in some way connect with my brother' death. 

"that day my father went out and dug a grave, and when he laid the 
bodi in the earth, he pile up stone over it, so that the wolv 
should not be abl to dig it up. the shock of thi catastroph wa 
to my poor father veri severe; for sever day he never went to the 
chase, although at time he would utter bitter anathema and vengeanc 
against the wolves. 

"but dure thi time of mourn on hi part, my mother-in-law' 
nocturn wander continu with the same regular as before. 

"at last, my father took down hi gun, to repair to the forest; but he 
soon returned, and appear much annoyed. 

"'would you believ it, christina, that the wolves--perdit to the 
whole race--hav actual contriv to dig up the bodi of my poor boy, 
and now there is noth left of him but hi bones?' 

"'indeed!' repli my mother-in-law. marcella look at me, and I saw 
in her intellig eye all she would have uttered. 

"'a wolf growl under our window everi night, father,' said I. 

"'aye, indeed?--whi did you not tell me, boy?--wak me the next time 
you hear it.' 

"I saw my mother-in-law turn away; her eye flash fire, and she 
gnash her teeth. 

"mi father went out again, and cover up with a larger pile of stone 
the littl remnant of my poor brother which the wolv had spared. 
such wa the first act of the tragedy. 

"the spring now came on: the snow disappeared, and we were permit 
to leav the cottage; but never would I quit, for one moment, my dear 
littl sister, to whom, sinc the death of my brother, I wa more 
ardent attach than ever; inde I wa afraid to leav her alon 
with my mother-in-law, who appear to have a particular pleasur in 
ill-treat the child. My father wa now employ upon hi littl 
farm, and I wa abl to render him some assistance. 

"marcella use to sit by us while we were at work, leav my 
mother-in-law alon in the cottage. I ought to observ that, as the 
spring advanced, so did my mother-in-law decreas her nocturn 
rambles, and that we never heard the growl of the wolf under the 
window after I had spoken of it to my father. 

"one day, when my father and I were in the field, marcella be with 
us, my mother-in-law came out, say that she wa go into the 
forest, to collect some herb my father wanted, and that marcella 
must go to the cottag and watch the dinner. marcella went, and my 
mother-in-law soon disappear in the forest, take a direct quit 
contrari to that in which the cottag stood, and leav my father and 
I, as it were, between her and marcella. 

"about an hour afterward we were startl by shriek from the 
cottage, evid the shriek of littl marcella. 'marcella ha burnt 
herself, father,' said I, throw down my spade. My father threw down 
his, and we both hasten to the cottage. befor we could gain the 
door, out dart a larg white wolf, which fled with the utmost 
celerity. My father had no weapon; he rush into the cottage, and 
there saw poor littl marcella expiring: her bodi wa dread 
mangled, and the blood pour from it had form a larg pool on the 
cottag floor. My father' first intent had been to seiz hi gun 
and pursue, but he wa check by thi horrid spectacle; he knelt down 
by hi die child, and burst into tears: marcella could just look 
kindli on us for a few seconds, and then her eye were close in 
death. 

"mi father and I were still hang over my poor sister' body, when 
my mother-in-law came in. At the dread sight she express much 
concern, but she did not appear to recoil from the sight of blood, as 
most women do. 

"'poor child!' said she, 'it must have been that great white wolf 
which pass me just now, and frighten me so--she' quit dead, 
krantz.' 

"I know it--i know it!' cri my father in agony. 

"I thought my father would never recov from the effect of thi 
second tragedy: he mourn bitterli over the bodi of hi sweet child, 
and for sever day would not consign it to it grave, although 
frequent request by my mother-in-law to do so. At last he yielded, 
and dug a grave for her close by that of my poor brother, and took 
everi precaut that the wolv should not violat her remains. 

"I wa now realli miserable, as I lay alon in the bed which I had 
formerli share with my brother and sister. I could not help think 
that my mother-in-law wa implic in both their deaths, although I 
could not account for the manner; but I no longer felt afraid of her: 
my littl heart wa full of hatr and revenge. 

"the night after my sister had been buried, as I lay awake, I 
perceiv my mother-in-law get up and go out of the cottage. I wait 
some time, then dress myself, and look out through the door, which 
I half opened. the moon shone bright, and I could see the spot where 
my brother and my sister had been buried; and what wa my horror, 
when I perceiv my mother-in-law busili remov the stone from 
marcella' grave. 

"she wa in her white night-dress, and the moon shone full upon her. 
she wa dig with her hands, and throw away the stone behind 
her with all the feroc of a wild beast. It wa some time befor 
I could collect my sens and decid what I should do. At last, I 
perceiv that she had arriv at the body, and rais it up to the 
side of the grave. I could bear it no longer; I ran to my father and 
awok him. 

"'father! father!' cri I, 'dress yourself, and get your gun.' 

"'what!' cri my father, 'the wolv are there, are they?' 

"he jump out of bed, threw on hi clothes, and in hi anxieti did 
not appear to perceiv the absenc of hi wife. As soon as he wa 
ready, I open the door, he went out, and I follow him. 

"imagin hi horror, when (unprepar as he wa for such a sight) he 
beheld, as he advanc toward the grave, not a wolf, but hi wife, in 
her night-dress, on her hand and knees, crouch by the bodi of my 
sister, and tear off larg piec of the flesh, and devour them 
with all the avid of a wolf. she wa too busi to be awar of our 
approach. My father drop hi gun, hi hair stood on end; so did 
mine; he breath heavily, and then hi breath for a time stopped. I 
pick up the gun and put it into hi hand. suddenli he appear as if 
concentr rage had restor him to doubl vigour; he level hi 
piece, fired, and with a loud shriek, down fell the wretch whom he had 
foster in hi bosom. 

"'god of heaven!' cri my father, sink down upon the earth in a 
swoon, as soon as he had discharg hi gun. 

"I remain some time by hi side befor he recovered. 'where am i?' 
said he, 'what ha happened?--oh!--yes, yes! I recollect now. heaven 
forgiv me!' 

"he rose and we walk up to the grave; what again wa our 
astonish and horror to find that instead of the dead bodi of my 
mother-in-law, as we expected, there wa lie over the remain of my 
poor sister, a large, white she wolf. 

"'the white wolf!' exclaim my father, 'the white wolf which decoy 
me into the forest--i see it all now--i have dealt with the spirit of 
the hartz mountains.' 

"for some time my father remain in silenc and deep thought. He then 
care lift up the bodi of my sister, replac it in the grave, 
and cover it over as before, have struck the head of the dead 
anim with the heel of hi boot, and rave like a madman. He walk 
back to the cottage, shut the door, and threw himself on the bed; I 
did the same, for I wa in a stupor of amazement. 

"earli in the morn we were both rous by a loud knock at the 
door, and in rush the hunter wilfred. 

"'mi daughter!--man--mi daughter!--wher is my daughter!' cri he in 
a rage. 

"'where the wretch, the fiend, should be, I trust,' repli my father, 
start up and display equal choler; 'where she should be--in 
hell!--leav thi cottag or you may fare worse.' 

"'ha--ha!' repli the hunter, 'would you harm a potent spirit of the 
hartz mountains. poor mortal, who must need wed a weir wolf.' 

"'out demon! I defi thee and thi power.' 

"'yet shall you feel it; rememb your oath--your solemn oath--nev 
to rais your hand against her to harm her.' 

"'i made no compact with evil spirits.' 

"'you did; and if you fail in your vow, you were to meet the 
vengeanc of the spirits. your children were to perish by the vulture, 
the wolf--' 

"'out, out, demon!' 

"'and their bone blanch in the wilderness. ha!--ha!' 

"mi father, frantic with rage, seiz hi axe, and rais it over 
wilfred' head to strike. 

"'all thi I swear,' continu the huntsman, mockingly. 

"the axe descended; but it pass through the form of the hunter, and 
my father lost hi balance, and fell heavili on the floor. 

"'mortal!' said the hunter, stride over my father' body, 'we have 
power over those onli who have commit murder. you have been guilti 
of a doubl murder--y shall pay the penalti attach to your 
marriag vow. two of your children are gone; the third is yet to 
follow--and follow them he will, for your oath is registered. go--it 
were kind to kill thee--your punish is--that you live!' 

"with these word the spirit disappeared. My father rose from the 
floor, embrac me tenderly, and knelt down in prayer. 

"the next morn he quit the cottag for ever. He took me with him 
and bent hi step to holland, where we safe arrived. He had some 
littl money with him; but he had not been mani day in amsterdam 
befor he wa seiz with a brain fever, and die rave mad. I wa 
put into the asylum, and afterward wa sent to sea befor the mast. 
you now know all my history. the question is, whether I am to pay the 
penalti of my father' oath? I am myself perfectli convinc that, in 
some way or another, I shall." 

On the twenty-second day the high land of the south of sumatra wa in 
view; as there were no vessel in sight, they resolv to keep their 
cours through the straits, and run for pulo penang, which they 
expected, as their vessel laid so close to the wind, to reach in seven 
or eight days. By constant exposure, philip and krantz were now so 
bronzed, that with their long beard and mussulman dresses, they might 
easili have pass off for natives. they had steer dure the whole 
of the day expos to a burn sun; they had lain down and slept in 
the dew of night, but their health had not suffered. but for sever 
days, sinc he had confid the histori of hi famili to philip, 
krantz had becom silent and melancholy; hi usual flow of spirit had 
vanished, and philip had often question him as to the cause. As they 
enter the straits, philip talk of what they should do upon their 
arriv at goa. when krantz grave replied, "for some days, philip, I 
have had a presenti that I shall never see that city." 

"you are out of health, krantz," repli philip. 

"no; I am in sound health, bodi and mind. I have endeavour to shake 
off the presentiment, but in vain; there is a warn voic that 
continu tell me that I shall not be long with you. philip, will 
you oblig me by make me content on one point: I have gold about 
my person which may be use to you; oblig me by take it, and 
secur it on your own." 

"what nonsense, krantz." 

"it is no nonsense, philip. have you not had your warnings? whi should 
I not have mine? you know that I have littl fear in my composition, 
and that I care not about death; but I feel the presenti which I 
speak of more strongli everi hour. It is some kind spirit who would 
warn me to prepar for anoth world. Be it so. I have live long 
enough in thi world to leav it without regret; although to part 
with you and amine, the onli two now dear to me, is painful, I 
acknowledge." 

"may not thi aris from over-exert and fatigue, krantz? consid 
how much excit you have labour under within these last four 
months. Is not that enough to creat a correspond depression? 
depend upon it, my dear friend, such is the fact." 

"I wish it were--but I feel otherwise, and there is a feel of 
glad connect with the idea that I am to leav thi world, 
aris from anoth presentiment, which equal occupi my mind." 

"which is?" 

"I hardli can tell you; but amin and you are connect with it. In my 
dream I have seen you meet again; but it ha appear to me, as if a 
portion of your trial wa purpos shut from my sight in dark clouds; 
and I have asked, 'may not I see what is there concealed?'--and an 
invis ha answered, 'no! 'twould make you wretched. befor these 
trial take place, you will be summon away'--and then I have thank 
heaven, and felt resigned." 

"these are the imagin of a disturb brain, krantz; that I am 
destin to suffer may be true; but whi amin should suffer, or whi 
you, young, in full health and vigour, should not pass your day in 
peace, and live to a good old age, there is no caus for believing. 
you will be better to-morrow." 

"perhap so," repli krantz;--"but still you must yield to my whim, 
and take the gold. If I am wrong, and we do arriv safe, you know, 
philip, you can let me have it back," observ krantz, with a faint 
smile--"but you forget, our water is nearli out, and we must look out 
for a rill on the coast to obtain a fresh supply." 

"I wa think of that when you commenc thi unwelcom topic. We 
had better look out for the water befor dark, and as soon as we have 
replenish our jars, we will make sail again." 

At the time that thi convers took place, they were on the 
eastern side of the strait, about forti mile to the northward. 
the interior of the coast wa rocki and mountainous, but it slowli 
descend to low land of altern forest and jungles, which continu 
to the beach: the countri appear to be uninhabited. keep close in 
to the shore, they discovered, after two hours' run, a fresh stream 
which burst in a cascad from the mountains, and swept it deviou 
cours through the jungle, until it pour it tribut into the water 
of the strait. 

they ran close in to the mouth of the stream, lower the sails, and 
pull the peroqua against the current, until they had advanc far 
enough to assur them that the water wa quit fresh. the jar were 
soon filled, and they were again think of push off; when, 
entic by the beauti of the spot, the cool of the fresh water, 
and weari with their long confin on board of the peroqua, they 
propos to bathe--a luxuri hardli to be appreci by those who 
have not been in a similar situation. they threw off their mussulman 
dresses, and plung into the stream, where they remain for some 
time. krantz wa the first to get out; he complain of feel 
chilled, and he walk on to the bank where their cloth had been 
laid. philip also approach nearer to the beach, intend to follow 
him. 

"and now, philip," said krantz, "thi will be a good opportun for 
me to give you the money. I will open my sash, and pour it out, and 
you can put it into your own befor you put it on." 

philip wa stand in the water, which wa about level with hi 
waist. 

"well, krantz," said he, "I suppos if it must be so, it must; but it 
appear to me an idea so ridiculous--however, you shall have your own 
way." 

philip quit the run, and sat down by krantz, who wa alreadi busi 
in shake the doubloon out of the fold of hi sash; at last he 
said-- 

"I believe, philip, you have got them all, now?--i feel satisfied." 

"what danger there can be to you, which I am not equal expos to, I 
cannot conceive," repli philip; "however--" 

hardli had he said these words, when there wa a tremend roar--a 
rush like a mighti wind through the air--a blow which threw him on 
hi back--a loud cry--and a contention. philip recov himself, and 
perceiv the nake form of krantz carri off with the speed of 
an arrow by an enorm tiger through the jungle. He watch with 
distend eyeballs; in a few second the anim and krantz had 
disappeared! 

"god of heaven! would that thou hadst spare me this," cri philip, 
throw himself down in agoni on hi face. "oh! krantz, my friend--mi 
brother--too sure wa your presentiment. merci god! have pity--but 
thi will be done;" and philip burst into a flood of tears. 

for more than an hour did he remain fix upon the spot, careless 
and indiffer to the danger by which he wa surrounded. At last, 
somewhat recovered, he rose, dress himself, and then again sat 
down--hi eye fix upon the cloth of krantz, and the gold which 
still lay on the sand. 

"he would give me that gold. He foretold hi doom. yes! yes! it wa 
hi destiny, and it ha been fulfilled. _hi bone will bleach in 
the wilderness_, and the spirit-hunt and hi wolfish daughter are 
avenged." 

the shade of even now set in, and the low growl of the beast 
of the forest recal philip to a sens of hi own danger. He thought 
of amine; and hastili make the cloth of krantz and the doubloon 
into a package, he step into the peroqua, with difficulti shove it 
off, and with a melancholi heart, and in silence, hoist the sail, 
and pursu hi course. 

"yes, amine," thought philip, as he watch the star twinkl and 
corruscating. "yes, you are right, when you assert that the destini 
of men are foreknown, and may by some be read. My destini is, alas! 
that I should be sever from all I valu upon earth, and die 
friendless and alone. then welcom death, if such is to be the case; 
welcom a thousand welcomes! what a relief wilt thou be to me! what 
joy to find myself summon to where the weari are at rest! I have my 
task to fulfil. god grant that it may soon be accomplished, and let 
not my life be embitt by ani more trial such as this." 

again did philip weep, for krantz had been hi long-tried, valu 
friend, hi partner in all hi danger and privations, from the period 
that they had met when the dutch fleet attempt the passag round 
cape horn. 

after seven day of pain watch and brood over bitter 
thoughts, philip arriv at pulo penang, where he found a vessel about 
to sail for the citi to which he wa destined. He ran hi peroqua 
alongsid of her, and found that she wa a brig under the portugues 
flag, having, however, but two portugues on board, the rest of the 
crew be natives. repres himself as an englishman in the 
portugues service, who had been wrecked, and offer to pay for 
hi passage, he wa willingli received, and in a few day the vessel 
sailed. 

their voyag wa prosperous; in six week they anchor in the road 
of goa; the next day they went up the river. the portugues captain 
inform philip where he might obtain lodging; and pass him off as 
one of hi crew, there wa no difficulti rais as to hi landing. 
have locat himself at hi new lodging, philip commenc some 
inquiri of hi host rel to amine, design her mere as a 
young woman who had arriv there in a vessel some week before; but 
he could obtain no inform concern her. "signor," said the 
host, "to-morrow is the grand _auto da fé_; we can do noth until 
that is over; afterwards, I will put you in the way to find out what 
you wish. In the meantime, you can walk about the town; to-morrow I 
will take you to where you can behold the grand procession, and then 
we will tri what we can do to assist you in your search." 

philip went out, procur a suit of clothes, remov hi beard, and 
then walk about the town, look up at everi window to see if he 
could perceiv amine. At a corner of one of the streets, he thought he 
recognis father mathias, and ran up to him; but the monk had drawn 
hi cowl over hi head, and when address by that name, made no 
reply. 

"I wa deceived," thought philip; "but I realli thought it wa him." 
and philip wa right; it wa father mathias, who thu screen himself 
from philip' recognition. 

tired, at last he return to hi hotel, just befor it wa dark. the 
compani there were numerous; everybodi for mile distant had come to 
goa to wit the _auto da fé_,--and everybodi wa discuss the 
ceremony. 

"I will see thi grand procession," said philip to himself, as he 
threw himself on hi bed. "it will drive thought from me for a time, 
and god know how pain my thought have now become. amine, dear 
amine, may angel guard thee!" 




chapter XL 


although to-morrow wa to end all amine' hope and fears--al her 
short happiness--h suspens and misery--yet amin slept until 
her last slumber in thi world wa disturb by the unlock and 
unbar of the door of her cell, and the appear of the head 
jailor with a light. amin start up--sh had been dream of her 
husband--of happiness! she awok to the sad reality. there stood the 
jailor, with a dress in hi hand, which he desir she would put on. 
He light a lamp for her, and left her alone. the dress wa of black 
serge, with white stripes. 

amin put on the dress, and threw herself down on the bed, tri if 
possibl to recal the dream from which she had been awakened, but 
in vain. two hour pass away, and the jailor again entered, and 
summon her to follow him. perhap one of the most appal custom 
of the inquisit is, that after accusation, whether the accus 
parti confess their guilt or not, they return to their dungeons, 
without the least idea of what may have been their sentence, and when 
summon on the morn of the execut they are equal kept in 
ignorance. 

the prison were all summon by the jailors, from the variou 
dungeons, and led into a larg hall, where they found their 
fellow-suffer collected. 

In thi spacious, dimli light hall were to be seen about two hundr 
men, stand up as if for support, against the walls, all dress in 
the same black and white serge; so motionless, so terrifi were they, 
that if it had not been for the roll of their eyes, as they watch 
the jailors, who pass and repassed, you might have imagin them to 
be petrified. It wa the agoni of suspense, wors than the agoni of 
death. after a time, a wax candle, about five feet long, wa put into 
the hand of each prisoner, and then some were order to put on 
over their dress the _sanbenitos_--oth the _samarias_! those who 
receiv these dresses, with flame paint on them, gave themselv 
up for lost; and it wa dread to perceiv the anguish of each 
individu as the dress were one by one brought forward, and with 
the heavi drop of perspir on hi brows, he watch with terror 
lest one should be present to him. all wa doubt, fear, and horror! 

but the prison in thi hall were not those who were to suffer 
death. those who wore the sanbenito had to walk in the process and 
receiv but slight punishment; those who wore the samaria had 
been condemned, but had been save from the consum fire, by an 
acknowledg of their offence; the flame paint on their dress 
were _reversed_, and signifi that they were not to suffer; but thi 
the unfortun wretch did not know, and the horror of a cruel 
death stare them in the face! 

anoth hall, similar to the one in which the men had been 
collected, wa occupi by femal culprits. the same ceremoni were 
observed--th same doubt, fear, and agoni were depict upon everi 
countenance. but there wa a third chamber, smaller than the other 
two, and thi chamber wa reserv for those who had been sentenced, 
and who were to suffer at the stake. It wa into thi chamber that 
amin wa led, and there she found seven other prison dress in 
the same manner as herself: two onli were europeans, the other five 
were negro slaves. each of these had their confessor with them, and 
were earnestli listen to hi exhortation. A monk approach amine, 
but she wave him away with her hand: he look at her, spat on the 
floor, and curs her. the head jailor now made hi appear with 
the dress for those who were in thi chamber; these were samarias, 
onli differ from the others, inasmuch as the flame were paint on 
them _upwards_ instead of down. these dress were of grey stuff, and 
loose, like a waggoner' frock; at the lower part of them, both befor 
and behind, wa paint the like of the wearer, that is, the face 
only, rest upon a burn faggot, and surround with flame and 
demons. under the portrait wa written the crime for which the parti 
suffered. sugar-loaf caps, with flame paint on them, were also 
brought and put on their heads, and the long wax candl were place 
into their hands. 

amin and the other condemn be array in these dresses, 
remain in the chambers, for some hour befor it wa time for the 
process to commence, for they had been all summon up by the 
jailor at about two o'clock in the morning. 

the sun rose brilliantly, much to the joy of the member of the holi 
office, who would not have had the day obscur on which they were to 
vindic the honour of the church, and prove how well they act up 
to the mild doctrin of the saviour--thos of charity, good-will, 
forbear one another, forgiv one another. god of heaven! and not 
onli did those of the holi inquisit rejoice, but thousand and 
thousand more who had flock from all part to wit the dread 
ceremony, and to hold a jubilee--mani inde actuat by fanaticism, 
superstition, but more attend from thoughtless and the love of 
pageantry. the street and squar through which the process wa 
to pass were fill at an earli hour. silks, tapestries, and cloth of 
gold and silver were hung over the balconies, and out of the windows, 
in honour of the procession. everi balconi and window wa throng 
with ladi and cavali in their gayest attire, all wait 
anxious to see the wretch parad befor they suffered; but the 
world is fond of excitement, and where is anyth so excit to a 
superstiti peopl as an _auto da fé_? 

As the sun rose, the heavi bell of the cathedr tolled, and all the 
prison were led down to the grand hall, that the order of the 
process might be arranged. At the larg entranc door, on a rais 
throne, sat the grand inquisitor, encircl by mani of the most 
consider nobil and gentri of goa. By the grand inquisitor stood 
hi secretary, and as the prison walk past the throne, and their 
name were mentioned, the secretary, after each, call out the name 
of one of those gentlemen, who immedi step forward, and took 
hi station by the prisoner. these peopl are term the godfathers; 
their duti is to accompani and be answer for the prisoner, who is 
under their charge, until the ceremoni is over. It is reckon a high 
honour confer on those whom the grand inquisitor appoint to thi 
office. 

At last the process commenced. first wa rais on high the 
standard of the dominican order of monks, for the dominican order 
were the founder of the inquisition, and claim thi privilege, by 
prescript right. after the banner the monk themselv followed, 
in two lines. and what wa the motto of their banner? "justitia et 
misericordia!" then follow the culprits, to the number of three 
hundred, each with hi godfath by hi side, and hi larg wax candl 
light in hi hand. those whose offenc have been most venial walk 
first; all are bareheaded, and barefooted. after thi portion, who 
wore onli the dress of black and white serge, came those who carri 
the sanbenitos; then those who wore the samarias, with the flame 
reversed. here there wa a separ in the procession, caus by a 
larg cross, with the carv imag of our saviour nail to it, the 
face of the imag carri forward. thi wa intend to signify, that 
those in advanc of the crucifix, and upon whom the saviour look 
down, were not to suffer; and that those who were behind, and upon 
whom hi back wa turned, were cast away, to perish for ever in thi 
world, and the next. behind the crucifix follow the seven condemned; 
and, as the greatest criminal, amin walk the last. but the 
process did not close here. behind amin were five effigies, rais 
high on poles, cloth in the same dresses, paint with flame and 
demons. behind each effigi wa born a coffin, contain a skeleton; 
the effigi were of those who had die in their dungeon, or expir 
under the torture, and who had been tri and condemn after their 
death, and sentenc to be burnt. these skeleton had been dug up, 
and were to suffer the same sentenc as, had they still been live 
beings, they would have undergone. the effigi were to be tie to the 
stakes, and the bone were to be consumed. then follow the member 
of the inquisition; the familiars, monks, priests, and hundr of 
penitents, in black dresses, which conceal their faces, all with the 
light taper in their hands. 

It wa two hour befor the procession, which had parad through 
almost everi import street in goa, arriv at the cathedr in 
which the further ceremoni were to be gone through. the barefoot 
culprit could now scarc walk, the small sharp flint have so 
wound their feet, that their track up the step of the cathedr 
were mark with blood. 

the grand altar of the cathedr wa hung with black cloth, and 
light up with thousand of tapers. On one side of it wa a throne 
for the grand inquisitor, on the other, a rais platform for the 
viceroy of goa, and hi suite. the centr aisl had bench for the 
prisoners, and their godfathers; the other portion of the process 
fall off to the right and left, to the side aisles, and mix for 
the time with the spectators. As the prison enter the cathedral, 
they were led into their seats, those least guilti sit nearest to 
the altar, and those who were condemn to suffer at the stake be 
place the farthest from it. 

the bleed amin totter to her seat, and long for the hour which 
wa to sever her from a christian world. she thought not of herself, 
nor of what she wa to suffer; she thought but of philip; of hi be 
safe from these merciless creatures--of the happi of die first, 
and of meet him again in bliss. 

worn with long confinement, with suspens and anxiety, fatigu and 
suffer from her pain walk, and the exposur to the burn sun, 
after so mani months' incarcer in a dungeon, she no longer shone 
radiant with beauty; but still there wa someth even more touch 
in her care-worn, yet still perfect features. the object of univers 
gaze, she had walk with her eye cast down, and nearli closed; but 
occasionally, when she did look up, the fire that flash from them 
spoke the proud soul within, and mani fear and wondered, while more 
piti that one so young, and still so lovely, should be doom to 
such an aw fate. amin had not taken her seat in the cathedr more 
than a few seconds, when, overpow by her feel and by fatigue, 
she fell back in a swoon. 

did no one step forward to assist her? to rais her up, and offer her 
restoratives? no--not one. hundr would have done so, but they dare 
not: she wa an outcast, excommunicated, abandoned, and lost; and 
should ani one, move by compass for a suffer fellow-creature, 
have ventur to rais her up, he would have been look upon with 
suspicion, and most probabl have been arraigned, and have had to 
settl the affair of conscienc with the holi inquisition. 

after a short time two of the offic of the inquisit went to 
amin and rais her again in her seat, and she recov suffici 
to enabl her to retain her posture. 

A sermon wa then preach by a dominican monk, in which he pourtray 
the tender mercies, the patern love of the holi office. He compar 
the inquisit to the ark of noah, out of which all the anim 
walk after the deluge; but with thi difference, highli in favour of 
the holi office, that the anim went forth from the ark no better 
than they went in, wherea those who had gone into the inquisit 
with all the cruelti of disposition, and with the heart of wolves, 
came out as mild and patient as lambs. 

the public accus then mount the pulpit, and read from it all the 
crime of those who had been condemned, and the punish which they 
were to undergo. each prisoner, as the sentenc wa read, wa brought 
forward to the pulpit by the officers, to hear their sentence, 
stand up, with their wax candl light in their hands. As soon as 
the sentenc of all those whose live had been spare were read, the 
grand inquisitor put on hi priestli robe and, follow by sever 
others, took off from them the ban of excommun (which they were 
suppos to have fallen under), by throw holi water on them with a 
small broom. 

As soon as thi portion of the ceremoni wa over, those who were 
condemn to suffer, and the effigi of those who had escap by 
death, were brought up one by one, and their sentenc read; the 
wind up of the condemn of all wa in the same words, "that the 
holi inquisit found it imposs on account of the hard of 
their heart and the magnitud of their crimes, to pardon them. with 
great concern it hand them over to secular justic to undergo the 
penalti of the laws; exhort the author at the same time to 
show clemenc and merci toward the unhappi wretches, and if they 
_must_ suffer death, that at all event it might be without the 
_spill of blood_." what mockeri wa thi appar intercession, not 
to shed blood, when to compli with their request, they substitut the 
torment and the agoni of the stake! 

amin wa the last who wa led forward to the pulpit, which wa fix 
against one of the massiv column of the centr aisle, close to the 
throne occupi by the grand inquisitor. "you, amin vanderdecken," 
cri the public accuser. At thi moment an unusu bustl wa heard 
in the crowd under the pulpit, there wa struggl and expostulation, 
and the offic rais their wand for silenc and decorum--but it 
continued. 

"you, amin vanderdecken, be accused--" 

anoth violent struggle; and from the crowd dart a young man, who 
rush to where amin wa standing, and caught her in hi arms. 

"philip! philip!" scream amine, fall on hi bosom; as he caught 
her, the cap of flame fell off her head and roll along the marbl 
pavement. "mi amine--mi wife--mi ador one--i it thu we meet? My 
lord, she is innocent. stand off, men," continu he to the offic 
of the inquisition, who would have torn them asunder. "stand off, or 
your live shall answer for it." 

thi threat to the officers, and the defianc of all rules, were not 
to be borne; the whole cathedr wa in a state of commotion, and the 
solemn of the ceremoni wa about to be compromised. the viceroy and 
hi follow had risen from their chair to observ what wa passing, 
and the crowd wa press on, when the grand inquisitor gave hi 
directions, and other offic hasten to the assist of the 
two who had led amin forward, and proceed to disengag her from 
philip' arms. the struggl wa severe. philip appear to be endu 
with the strength of twenti men; and it wa some minut befor they 
could succeed in separ him, and when they had so done, hi 
struggl were dreadful. 

amine, also, held by two of the familiars, shrieked, as she attempt 
onc more, but in vain, to rush into her husband' arms. At last, by 
a tremend effort, philip releas himself, but as soon as he wa 
released, he sank down helpless on the pavement; the exert had 
caus the burst of a blood-vessel, and he lay without motion. 

"oh god! Oh god! they have kill him--monsters--murderers--let me 
embrac him but onc more," cri amine, frantically. 

A priest now step forward--it wa father mathias--with sorrow in 
hi countenance; he desir some of the bystand to carri out philip 
vanderdecken, and philip, in a state of insensibility, wa born away 
from the sight of amine, the blood stream from hi mouth. 

amine' sentenc wa read--sh heard it not, her brain wa bewildered. 
she wa led back to her seat, and then it wa that all her courage, 
all her constanc and fortitud gave way; and dure the remaind 
of the ceremony, she fill the cathedr with her wild hyster 
sobbing; all entreati or threat be wholli lost upon her. 

all wa now over, except the last and most tragic scene of the 
drama. the culprit who had been spare were led back to the 
inquisit by their godfathers, and those who had been sentenc were 
taken down to the bank of the river to suffer. It wa on a larg open 
space, on the left of the custom-house, that thi ceremoni wa to be 
gone through. As in the cathedral, rais throne were prepar for 
the grand inquisitor and the viceroy, who, in state, head the 
procession, follow by an immens concours of people. thirteen 
stake had been set up, eight for the living, five for the dead. the 
execution were sit on, or stand by, the pile of wood and 
faggots, wait for their victims. amin could not walk; she wa at 
first support by the familiars, and then carri by them, to the 
stake which had been assign for her. when they put her on her feet 
opposit to it, her courag appear to revive, she walk boldli up, 
fold her arms, and leant against it. 

the execution now commenc their office: the chain were pass 
round amine' body--th wood and faggot pile around her. the same 
prepar had been made with all the other culprits, and the 
confessor stood by the side of each victim. amin wave her hand 
indignantli to those who approach her, when father mathias, almost 
breathless, made hi appear from the crowd, through which he had 
forc hi way. 

"amin vanderdecken--unhappi woman! had you been counsel by me thi 
would not have been. now it is too late, but not too late to save your 
soul. away then with thi obstinacy--thi hard of heart; call upon 
the bless saviour, that He may receiv your spirit--cal upon hi 
wound for mercy. It is the eleventh hour, but not too late. amine," 
continu the old man, with tears, "I implore, I conjur you. At 
least, may thi load of troubl be taken from my heart." 

"'unhappi woman!' you say?" repli she, "say rather, 'unhappi 
priest:' for amine' suffer will soon be over, while you must 
still endur the torment of the damned. unhappi wa the day when my 
husband rescu you from death. still more unhappi the compass 
which prompt him to offer you an asylum and a refuge. unhappi the 
knowledg of you from the _first_ day to the _last_. I leav you to 
your conscience--if conscienc you retain--nor would I chang thi 
cruel death for the pang which you in your futur life will suffer. 
leav me--_i die in the faith of my forefathers_, and scorn a creed 
that warrant such a scene as this." 

"amin vanderdecken," cri the priest on hi knees, clasp hi 
hand in agony. 

"leav me, father." 

"there is but a minut left--for the love of god--" 

"I tell you then, leav me--that minut is my own." 

father mathia turn away in despair, and the tear cours down the 
old man' cheeks. As amin said, hi miseri wa extreme. 

the head execution now inquir of the confessor whether the 
culprit die in the _true_ faith? If answer in the affirmative, a 
rope wa pass round their neck and twist to the stake, so that 
they were strangl befor the fire wa kindled. all the other 
culprit had die in thi manner; and the head execution inquir of 
father mathias, whether amin had a claim to so much mercy. the old 
priest answer not, but shook hi head. 

the execution turn away. after a moment' pause, father mathia 
follow him, and seiz him by the arm, saying, in a falter voice, 
"let her not suffer long." 

the grand inquisitor gave the signal, and the fire were all light 
at the same moment. In complianc with the request of the priest, the 
execution had thrown a quantiti of wet straw upon amine' pile, 
which threw up a dens smoke befor it burnt into flames. 

"mother! mother! I come to thee!" were the last word heard from 
amine' lips. 

the flame soon rage furiously, ascend high abov the top of the 
stake to which she had been chained. gradual they sunk down; and 
onli when the burn ember cover the ground, a few fragment of 
bone hang on the chain were all that remain of the onc peerless 
and high-mind amine. 




chapter xli 


year have pass away sinc we relat amine' suffer and cruel 
death; and now onc more we bring philip vanderdecken on the scene. 
and dure thi time, where ha he been? A lunatic--at one time 
frantic, chained, coerc with blows; at others, mild and peaceable. 
reason occasion appear to burst out again, as the sun on a 
cloudi day, and then it wa again obscured. for mani year there wa 
one who watch him carefully, and live in hope to wit hi return 
to a sane mind; he watch in sorrow and remorse,--h die without hi 
desir be gratified. thi wa father mathias! 

the cottag at terneus had long fallen into ruin; for mani year it 
wait the return of it owners, and at last the heirs-at-law claim 
and recov the substanc of philip vanderdecken. even the fate of 
amin had pass from the recollect of most people; although her 
portrait, over burn coals, with her crime announc beneath it, still 
hangs--a is the custom in the church of the inquisition--attracting, 
from it express beauty, the attent of the most careless 
passers-by. 

but many, mani year have roll away--philip' hair is white--hi 
once-pow frame is broken down--and he appear much older than he 
realli is. He is now sane; but hi vigour is gone. weari of life, all 
he wish for is to execut hi mission--and then to welcom death. 

the relic ha never been taken from him: he ha been discharg from 
the lunat asylum, and ha been provid with the mean of return 
to hi country. alas! he ha now no country--no home--noth in the 
world to induc him to remain in it. all he ask is--to do hi duti 
and to die. 

the ship wa readi to sail for europe; and philip vanderdecken went on 
board--hardli care whither he went. To return to terneus wa not 
hi object; he could not bear the idea of revisit the scene of so 
much happi and so much misery. amine' form wa engraven on hi 
heart, and he look forward with impati to the time when he 
should be summon to join her in the land of spirits. 

He had awaken as from a dream, after so mani year of aberr of 
intellect. He wa no longer the sincer cathol that he had been; 
for he never thought of religion without hi amine' cruel fate be 
brought to hi recollection. still he clung on to the relic--h 
believ in that--and that only. It wa hi god--hi creed--hi 
everything--th passport for himself and for hi father into the next 
world--th mean wherebi he should join hi amine--and for hour would 
he remain hold in hi hand that object so valued--gaz upon 
it--recal everi import event in hi life, from the death of hi 
poor mother, and hi first sight of amine; to the last dread scene. 
It wa to him a journal of hi existence, and on it were fix all hi 
hope for the future. 

"when! oh when is it to be accomplished!" wa the constant subject 
of hi reveries. "blessed, indeed, will be the day when I leav thi 
world of hate, and seek that other in which 'the weari are at rest.'" 

the vessel on board of which philip wa embark as a passeng wa 
the _nostra señora da monte_, a brig of three hundr tons, bound for 
lisbon. the captain wa an old portuguese, full of superstition, and 
fond of arrack--a fond rather unusu with the peopl of hi 
nation. they sail from goa, and philip wa stand abaft, and sadli 
contempl the spire of the cathedral, in which he had last part 
with hi wife, when hi elbow wa touched, and he turn round. 

"fellow-passenger, again!" said a well-known voice--it wa that of the 
pilot schriften. 

there wa no alter in the man' appearance; he show no mark of 
declin years; hi one eye glare as keenli as ever. 

philip started, not onli at the sight of the man, but at the 
reminisc which hi unexpect appear brought to hi mind. It 
wa but for a second, and he wa again calm and pensive. 

"you here again, schriften?" observ philip. "I trust your appear 
forebod the accomplish of my task." 

"perhap it does," repli the pilot; "we both are weary." 

philip made no reply; he did not even ask schriften in what manner he 
had escap from the fort; he wa indiffer about it; for he felt 
that the man had a charm life. 

"mani are the vessel that have been wrecked, philip vanderdecken, and 
mani the soul summon to their account by meet with your father' 
ship, while you have been so long shut up," observ the pilot. 

"may our next meet with him be more fortunate--may it be the last!" 
repli philip. 

"no, no! rather may he fulfil hi doom, and sail till the day of 
judgment," repli the pilot with emphasis. 

"vile caitiff! I have a forebod that you will not have your 
detest wish. away!--leav me! or you shall find, that although 
thi head is blanch by misery, thi arm ha still some power." 

schriften scowl as he walk away; he appear to have some fear 
of philip, although it wa not equal to hi hate. He now resum hi 
former attempt of stir up the ship' compani against philip, 
declar that he wa a jonas, who would occas the loss of the 
ship, and that he wa connect with the _fli dutchman_. 
philip veri soon observ that he wa avoided; and he resort to 
counter-statements, equal injuri to schriften, whom he declar 
to be a demon. the appear of schriften wa so much against him, 
while that of philip, on the contrary, wa so prepossessing, that the 
peopl on board hardli knew what to think. they were divided: some 
were on the side of philip--som on that of schriften; the captain and 
mani other look with equal horror upon both, and long for the 
time when they could be sent out of the vessel. 

the captain, as we have befor observed, wa veri superstitious, and 
veri fond of hi bottle. In the morn he would be sober and pray; in 
the afternoon he would be drunk, and swear at the veri saint whose 
protect he had invok but a few hour before. 

"may holi saint antonio preserv us, and keep us from temptation," 
said he, on the morn after a convers with the passeng about 
the phantom ship. "all the saint protect us from harm," continu he, 
take off hi hat reverentially, and cross himself. "let me but 
rid myself of these two danger men without accident, and I will 
offer up a hundr wax candles, of three ounc each, to the shrine 
of the virgin, upon my safe anchor off the tower of belem." In the 
even he chang hi language. 

"now, if that maldetto saint antonio don't help us, may he feel the 
coal of hell yet; damn him and hi pig too; if he ha the courag to 
do hi duty, all will be well; but he is a cowardli wretch, he care 
for nobody, and will not help those who call upon him in trouble. 
carambo! that for you," exclaim the captain, look at the small 
shrine of the saint at the bittacle, and snap hi finger at the 
image--"that for you, you useless wretch, who never help us in our 
trouble. the pope must canonis some better saint for us, for all we 
have now are worn out. they could do someth formerly, but now I 
would not give two ounc of gold for the whole calendar; as for you, 
you lazi old scoundrel,"--continu the captain, shake hi fist at 
poor saint antonio. 

the ship had now gain off the southern coast of africa, and wa 
about one hundr mile from the lagulla coast; the morn wa 
beautiful, a slight rippl onli turn over the waves, the breez wa 
light and steady, and the vessel wa stand on a wind, at the rate 
of about four mile an hour. 

"bless be the holi saints," said the captain, who had just gain 
the deck; "anoth littl slant in our favour, and we shall lay our 
course.--again I say, bless be the holi saints, and particularli 
our worthi patron saint antonio, who ha taken under hi peculiar 
protect the _nostra señora da monte_. We have a prospect of fine 
weather; come, signors, let us down to breakfast, and after breakfast 
we will enjoy our cigarro upon the deck." 

but the scene wa soon changed; a bank of cloud rose up from the 
eastward, with a rapid that, to the seamen' eyes, wa unnatural, 
and it soon cover the whole firmament; the sun wa obscured, and all 
wa one deep and unnatur gloom; the wind subsided, and the ocean wa 
hushed. It wa not exactli dark, but the heaven were cover with one 
red haze, which gave an appear as if the world wa in a state of 
conflagration. 

In the cabin the increas dark wa first observ by philip, who 
went on deck; he wa follow by the captain and passengers, who were 
in a state of amazement. It wa unnatur and incomprehensible. "now, 
holi virgin, protect us--what can thi be?" exclaim the captain in a 
fright. "holi saint antonio, protect us--but thi is awful." 

"there! there!" shout the sailors, point to the beam of the 
vessel. everi eye look over the gunnel to wit what had 
occas such exclamations. philip, schriften, and the captain were 
side by side. On the beam of the ship, not more than two cables' 
length distant, they beheld, slowli rise out of the water, the 
taper mast-head and spar of anoth vessel. she rose, and rose 
gradually; her topmast and top-sail yards, with the sail set, next 
made their appearance; higher and higher she rose up from the element. 
her lower mast and rigging, and, lastly, her hull show itself abov 
the surface. still she rose up till her ports, with her guns, and at 
last the whole of her floatag wa abov water, and there she remain 
close to them, with her main-yard squared, and hove-to. 

"holi virgin!" exclaim the captain, breathless; "I have known ship 
to _go down_, but never to _come up_ before. now will I give one 
thousand candles, of ten ounc each, to the shrine of the virgin to 
save us in thi trouble. one thousand wax candles! hear me, bless 
lady; ten ounc each. gentlemen," cri the captain to the 
passengers, who stood aghast--"whi don't you promise?--promise, I say; 
_promise_, at all events." 

"the phantom ship--_th fli dutchman_" shriek schriften; "I told 
you so, philip vanderdecken; there is your father--he! he!" 

philip' eye had remain fix on the vessel; he perceiv that they 
were lower down a boat from her quarter. "it is possible," thought 
he, "I shall now be permitted!" and philip put hi hand into hi bosom 
and grasp the relic. 

the gloom now increased, so that the strang vessel' hull could 
but just be discov through the murki atmosphere. the seamen and 
passeng threw themselv down on their knees, and invok their 
saints. the captain ran down for a candle, to light befor the imag 
of St antonio, which he took out of it shrine, and kiss with much 
appar affect and devotion, and then replaced. 

shortli afterward the splash of oar wa heard alongside, and a voic 
call out, "I say, my good people, give us a rope from forward." 

No one answered, or compli with the request. schriften onli went up 
to the captain, and told him that if they offer to send letter they 
must not be receiv or the vessel would be doomed, and all would 
perish. 

A man now made hi appear from over the gunnel, at the gangway. 
"you might as well have let me had a side rope, my hearties," said he, 
as he step on deck; "where is the captain?" 

"here," repli the captain, trembl from head to foot. the man who 
accost him appear a weather-beaten seaman, dress in a fur cap 
and canva petticoats; he held some letter in hi hand. 

"what do you want?" at last scream the captain. 

"yes--what do you want?" continu schriften. "he! he!" 

"what, you here, pilot?" observ the man; "well--i thought you had 
gone to davy' locker, long enough ago." 

"he! he!" repli schriften, turn away. 

"whi the fact is, captain, we have had veri foul weather, and we wish 
to send letter home; I do believ that we shall never get round thi 
cape." 

"I can't take them," cri the captain. 

"can't take them! well, it' veri odd--but everi ship refus to 
take our letters; it' veri unkind--seamen should have a feel for 
brother seamen, especi in distress. god knows, we wish to see our 
wive and famili again; and it would be a matter of comfort to them, 
if they onli could hear from us." 

"I cannot take your letters--th saint preserv us;" repli the 
captain. 

"we have been a long while out," said the seaman, shake hi head. 

"how long?" inquir the captain, not know what to say. 

"we can't tell; our almanack wa blown overboard, and we have lost our 
reckoning. We never have our latitud exact now, for we cannot tell 
the sun' declin for the right day." 

"let _me_ see your letters," said philip, advancing, and take them 
out of the seaman' hands. 

"they must not be touched," scream schriften. 

"out, monster!" repli philip, "who dare interfer with me?" 

"doomed--doomed--doomed!" shriek schriften, run up and down the 
deck, and then break into a wild fit of laughter. 

"touch not the letters," said the captain, trembl as if in an agu 
fit. 

philip made no reply, but held hi hand out for the letters. 

"here is one from our second mate, to hi wife at amsterdam, who live 
on waser quay." 

"waser quay ha long been gone, my good friend; there is now a larg 
dock for ship where it onc was," repli philip. 

"impossible!" repli the man; "here is anoth from the boatswain to 
hi father, who live in the old market-place." 

"the old market-plac ha long been pull down, and there now stand 
a church upon the spot." 

"impossible!" repli the seaman; "here is anoth from myself to my 
sweetheart, vrow ketser--with money to buy her a new brooch." 

philip shook hi head--"i rememb see an old ladi of that name 
buri some thirti year ago." 

"impossible! I left her young and blooming. here' one for the hous 
of slutz & co., to whom the ship belongs." 

"there' no such hous now," repli philip; "but I have heard, that 
mani year ago there wa a firm of that name." 

"impossible! you must be laugh at me. here is a letter from our 
captain to hi son" 

"give it me," cri philip, seiz the letter, he wa about to break 
the seal, when schriften snatch it out of hi hand, and threw it 
over the lee gunnel. 

"that' a scurvi trick for an old shipmate," observ the seaman. 
schriften made no reply, but catch up the other letter which 
philip had laid down on the capstan, he hurl them after the first. 

the strang seaman shed tears, and walk again to the side:--"it is 
veri hard--veri unkind," observ he, as he descended; "the time may 
come when you may wish that your famili should know your situation;" 
so saying, he disappeared: in a few second wa heard the sound of the 
oars, retreat from the ship. 

"holi St antonio!" exclaim the captain, "I am lost in wonder and 
fright. steward, bring me up the arrack." 

the steward ran down for the bottle; be as much alarm as hi 
captain, he help himself befor he brought it up to hi commander. 
"now," said the captain, after keep hi mouth for two minut to 
the bottle, and drain it to the bottom, "what is to be done next?" 

"i'll tell you," said schriften, go up to him. "that man there ha 
a charm hung round hi neck; take it from him and throw it overboard, 
and your ship will be saved; if not, it will be lost, with everi soul 
on board." 

"yes, yes, it' all right depend upon it;" cri the sailors. 

"fools," repli philip, "do you believ that wretch? did you not hear 
the man who came on board recognis him, and call him shipmate? He is 
the parti whose presenc on board will prove so unfortunate." 

"yes, yes," cri the sailors, "it' all right, the man did call him 
shipmate." 

"I tell you it' all wrong," cri schriften; "that is the man, let 
him give up the charm." 

"yes, yes; let him give up the charm," cri the sailors, and they 
rush upon philip. 

philip start back to where the captain stood. "mad-men, know ye what 
ye are about? It is the holi cross that I wear round my neck. throw it 
overboard if you dare, and your soul are lost for ever;" and philip 
took the relic from hi bosom and show it to the captain. 

"no, no, men;" exclaim the captain, who wa now more settl in hi 
nerves; "that won't do--th saint protect us." 

the seamen, however, becam clamorous; one portion were for throw 
schriften overboard, the other for throw philip; at last, the point 
wa decid by the captain, who direct the small skiff, hang 
astern, to be lower down, and order both philip and schriften to 
get into it. the seamen approv of thi arrangement, as it satisfi 
both parties. philip made no objection; schriften scream and fought, 
but he wa toss into the boat. there he remain trembl in the 
stern sheets, while philip, who had seiz the sculls, pull away 
from the vessel in the direct of the phantom ship. 




chapter xlii 


In a few minut the vessel which philip and schriften had left wa no 
longer to be discern through the thick haze; the phantom ship wa 
still in sight, but at a much greater distanc from them than she wa 
before. philip pull hard toward her, but although hove-to, she 
appear to increas her distanc from the boat. for a short time he 
paus on hi oars, to regain hi breath, when schriften rose up and 
took hi seat in the stern sheet of the boat. "you may pull and pull, 
philip vanderdecken," observ schriften; "but you will not gain that 
ship--no, no, that cannot be--w may have a long cruis together, but 
you will be as far from your object at the end of it, as you are now 
at the commencement.--whi don't you throw me overboard again? you 
would be all the lighter--he! he!" 

"I threw you overboard in a state of frenzy," repli philip, "when 
you attempt to forc from me my relic." 

"and have I not endeavour to make other take it from you thi veri 
day?--hav I not--he! he!" 

"you have," rejoin philip; "but I am now convinced, that you are 
as unhappi as myself, and that in what you are doing, you are onli 
follow your destiny, as I am mine. why, and wherefor I cannot 
tell, but we are both engag in the same mystery;--if the success of 
my endeavour depend upon guard the relic, the success of your 
depend upon your obtain it, and defeat my purpos by so doing. 
In thi matter we are both agents, and you have been, as far as my 
mission is concerned, my most activ enemy. but, schriften, I have 
not forgotten, and never will, that you kindlili _did advise_ my poor 
amine; that you prophesi to her what would be her fate, if she did 
not listen to your counsel; that you were no enemi of hers, although 
you have been, and are still mine. although my enemy, for her sake _I 
forgiv you_, and will not attempt to harm you." 

"you do then _forgiv your enemy_, philip vanderdecken?" repli 
schriften, mournfully, "for such, I acknowledg myself to be." 

"I do, with _all my heart, with all my soul_," repli philip. 

"then have you conquer me, philip vanderdecken; you have now made me 
your friend, and your wish are about to be accomplished. you would 
know who I am. listen:--when your father, defi the almighty' will, 
in hi rage took my life, he wa vouchsaf a chanc of hi doom be 
cancelled, through the merit of hi son. I had also my appeal, which 
wa for _vengeance_; it wa grant that I should remain on earth, 
and thwart your will. that as long as we were enemies, you should not 
succeed; but that when you had conform to the highest attribut 
of christianity, prove on the holi cross, that of _forgiv your 
enemy_, your task should be fulfilled. philip vanderdecken, you have 
forgiven your enemy, and both our destini are now accomplished." 

As schriften spoke, philip' eye were fix upon him. He extend hi 
hand to philip--it wa taken; and as it wa pressed, the form of the 
pilot wast as it were into the air, and philip found himself alone. 

"father of mercy, I thank thee," said philip, "that my task is done, 
and that I again may meet my amine." 

philip then pull toward the phantom ship, and found that she no 
longer appear to leav him; on the contrary, everi minut he wa 
nearer and nearer, and at last he threw in hi oars, climb up her 
sides, and gain her deck. 

the crew of the vessel crowd round him. 

"your captain," said philip; "I must speak with your captain." 

"who shall I say, sir?" demand one, who appear to be the first 
mate. 

"who?" repli philip; "tell him hi son would speak to him, hi son 
philip vanderdecken." 

shout of laughter from the crew, follow thi answer of philip's; 
and the mate, as soon as they ceased, observ with a smile, 

"you forget, sir, perhap you would say hi father." 

"tell him hi son, if you please," repli philip, "take no note of 
grey hairs." 

"well, sir, here he is come forward," repli the mate, step 
aside, and point to the captain. 

"what is all this?" inquir the captain. 

"are you philip vanderdecken, the captain of thi vessel?" 

"I am, sir," repli the other. 

"you appear not to know me! but how can you? you saw me but when I wa 
onli three year old; yet may you rememb a letter which you gave to 
your wife." 

"ha!" repli the captain; "and who then are you?" 

"time ha stop with you, but with those who live in the world he 
stop not! and for those who pass a life of misery, he hurri on 
still faster. In me, behold your son, philip vanderdecken, who ha 
obey your wishes; and after a life of such peril and miseri as few 
have passed, ha at last fulfil hi vow, and now offer to hi 
father the preciou relic that he requir to kiss." 

philip drew out the relic, and held it toward hi father. As if a 
flash of lightn had pass through hi mind, the captain of the 
vessel start back, clasp hi hands, fell on hi knees, and wept. 

"mi son, my son!" exclaim he, rising, and throw himself into 
philip' arms, "mi eye are opened--th almighti know how long they 
have been obscured." embrac each other, they walk aft, away from 
the men, who were still crowd at the gangway. 

"mi son, my nobl son, befor the charm is broken--befor we resolve, 
as we must, into the elements, oh! let me kneel in thanksgiv 
and contrition: my son, my nobl son, receiv a father' thanks," 
exclaim vanderdecken. then with tear of joy and penit he humbl 
address himself to that being, whom he onc so aw defied. 

the elder vanderdecken knelt down: philip did the same; still 
embrac each other with one arm, while they rais on high the 
other, and prayed. 

for the last time the relic wa taken from the bosom of philip and 
hand to hi father--and hi father rais hi eye to heaven and 
kiss it. and as he kiss it, the long taper upper spar of the 
phantom vessel, the yard and sail that were set, fell into dust, 
flutter in the air and sank upon the wave. then mainmast, foremast, 
bowsprit, everyth abov the deck, crumbl into atom and 
disappeared. 

again he rais the relic to hi lips, and the work of destruct 
continued, the heavi iron gun sank through the deck and disappeared; 
the crew of the vessel (who were look on) crumbl down into 
skeletons, and dust, and fragment of rag garments; and there were 
none left on board the vessel in the semblanc of life but the father 
and the son. 

onc more did he put the sacr emblem to hi lips, and the beam 
and timber separated, the deck of the vessel slowli sank, and the 
remnant of the hull float upon, the water; and as the father and 
son--th one young and vigorous, the other old and decrepit--stil 
kneeling, still embracing, with their hand rais to heaven, sank 
slowli under the deep blue wave, the lurid sky wa for a moment 
illumin by a lightn cross. 

then did the cloud which obscur the heaven roll away swift as 
thought--th sun again burst out in all hi splendour--th rippl 
wave appear to danc with joy. the scream sea-gul again whirl 
in the air, and the scare albatross onc more slumber on the wing. 
the porpois tumbl and toss in hi sportiv play, the albicor and 
dolphin leap from the sparkl sea.--al natur smile as if it 
rejoic that the charm wa dissolv for ever, and that "the phantom 
ship" wa NO more. 



***end OF the project gutenberg ebook the phantom ship*** 


******* thi file should be name 12954-8.txt or 12954-8.zip ******* 


thi and all associ file of variou format will be found in: 
http://www.gutenberg.net/1/2/9/5/12954 



updat edit will replac the previou one--th old edit 
will be renamed. 

creat the work from public domain print edit mean that no 
one own a unit state copyright in these works, so the foundat 
(and you!) can copi and distribut it in the unit state without 
permiss and without pay copyright royalties. special rules, 
set forth in the gener term of use part of thi license, appli to 
copi and distribut project gutenberg-tm electron work to 
protect the project gutenberg-tm concept and trademark. project 
gutenberg is a regist trademark, and may not be use if you 
charg for the ebooks, unless you receiv specif permission. If you 
do not charg anyth for copi of thi ebook, compli with the 
rule is veri easy. you may use thi ebook for nearli ani purpos 
such as creation of deriv works, reports, perform and 
research. they may be modifi and print and given away--y may do 
practic anyth with public domain ebooks. redistribut is 
subject to the trademark license, especi commerci 
redistribution. 



*** start: full licens *** 

the full project gutenberg licens 
pleas read thi befor you distribut OR use thi work 

To protect the project gutenberg-tm mission of promot the free 
distribut of electron works, by use or distribut thi work 
(or ani other work associ in ani way with the phrase "project 
gutenberg"), you agre to compli with all the term of the full project 
gutenberg-tm licens (avail with thi file or onlin at 
http://gutenberg.net/license). 


section 1. gener term of use and redistribut project gutenberg-tm 
electron work 

1.a. By read or use ani part of thi project gutenberg-tm 
electron work, you indic that you have read, understand, agre to 
and accept all the term of thi licens and intellectu properti 
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agre to abid by all 
the term of thi agreement, you must ceas use and return or destroy 
all copi of project gutenberg-tm electron work in your possession. 
If you paid a fee for obtain a copi of or access to a project 
gutenberg-tm electron work and you do not agre to be bound by the 
term of thi agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or 
entiti to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.e.8. 

1.b. "project gutenberg" is a regist trademark. It may onli be 
use on or associ in ani way with an electron work by peopl who 
agre to be bound by the term of thi agreement. there are a few 
thing that you can do with most project gutenberg-tm electron work 
even without compli with the full term of thi agreement. see 
paragraph 1.c below. there are a lot of thing you can do with project 
gutenberg-tm electron work if you follow the term of thi agreement 
and help preserv free futur access to project gutenberg-tm electron 
works. see paragraph 1.e below. 

1.c. the project gutenberg literari archiv foundat ("the foundation" 
or pglaf), own a compil copyright in the collect of project 
gutenberg-tm electron works. nearli all the individu work in the 
collect are in the public domain in the unit states. If an 
individu work is in the public domain in the unit state and you are 
locat in the unit states, we do not claim a right to prevent you from 
copying, distributing, performing, display or creat deriv 
work base on the work as long as all refer to project gutenberg 
are removed. Of course, we hope that you will support the project 
gutenberg-tm mission of promot free access to electron work by 
freeli share project gutenberg-tm work in complianc with the term of 
thi agreement for keep the project gutenberg-tm name associ with 
the work. you can easili compli with the term of thi agreement by 
keep thi work in the same format with it attach full project 
gutenberg-tm licens when you share it without charg with others. 

1.d. the copyright law of the place where you are locat also govern 
what you can do with thi work. copyright law in most countri are in 
a constant state of change. If you are outsid the unit states, check 
the law of your countri in addit to the term of thi agreement 
befor downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distribut or 
creat deriv work base on thi work or ani other project 
gutenberg-tm work. the foundat make no represent concern 
the copyright statu of ani work in ani countri outsid the unit 
states. 

1.e. unless you have remov all refer to project gutenberg: 

1.e.1. the follow sentence, with activ link to, or other immedi 
access to, the full project gutenberg-tm licens must appear promin 
whenev ani copi of a project gutenberg-tm work (ani work on which the 
phrase "project gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "project 
gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed, 
copi or distributed: 

thi ebook is for the use of anyon anywher at no cost and with 
almost no restrict whatsoever. you may copi it, give it away or 
re-us it under the term of the project gutenberg licens includ 
with thi ebook or onlin at www.gutenberg.net 

1.e.2. If an individu project gutenberg-tm electron work is deriv 
from the public domain (doe not contain a notic indic that it is 
post with permiss of the copyright holder), the work can be copi 
and distribut to anyon in the unit state without pay ani fee 
or charges. If you are redistribut or provid access to a work 
with the phrase "project gutenberg" associ with or appear on the 
work, you must compli either with the requir of paragraph 1.e.1 
through 1.e.7 or obtain permiss for the use of the work and the 
project gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraph 1.e.8 or 
1.e.9. 

1.e.3. If an individu project gutenberg-tm electron work is post 
with the permiss of the copyright holder, your use and distribut 
must compli with both paragraph 1.e.1 through 1.e.7 and ani addit 
term impos by the copyright holder. addit term will be link 
to the project gutenberg-tm licens for all work post with the 
permiss of the copyright holder found at the begin of thi work. 

1.e.4. Do not unlink or detach or remov the full project gutenberg-tm 
licens term from thi work, or ani file contain a part of thi 
work or ani other work associ with project gutenberg-tm. 

1.e.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribut or redistribut thi 
electron work, or ani part of thi electron work, without 
promin display the sentenc set forth in paragraph 1.e.1 with 
activ link or immedi access to the full term of the project 
gutenberg-tm license. 

1.e.6. you may convert to and distribut thi work in ani binary, 
compressed, mark up, nonproprietari or proprietari form, includ ani 
word process or hypertext form. however, if you provid access to or 
distribut copi of a project gutenberg-tm work in a format other than 
"plain vanilla ascii" or other format use in the offici version 
post on the offici project gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net), 
you must, at no addit cost, fee or expens to the user, provid a 
copy, a mean of export a copy, or a mean of obtain a copi upon 
request, of the work in it origin "plain vanilla ascii" or other 
form. ani altern format must includ the full project gutenberg-tm 
licens as specifi in paragraph 1.e.1. 

1.e.7. Do not charg a fee for access to, viewing, displaying, 
performing, copi or distribut ani project gutenberg-tm work 
unless you compli with paragraph 1.e.8 or 1.e.9. 

1.e.8. you may charg a reason fee for copi of or provid 
access to or distribut project gutenberg-tm electron work provid 
that 

- you pay a royalti fee of 20% of the gross profit you deriv from 
the use of project gutenberg-tm work calcul use the method 
you alreadi use to calcul your applic taxes. the fee is 
owe to the owner of the project gutenberg-tm trademark, but he 
ha agre to donat royalti under thi paragraph to the 
project gutenberg literari archiv foundation. royalti payment 
must be paid within 60 day follow each date on which you 
prepar (or are legal requir to prepare) your period tax 
returns. royalti payment should be clearli mark as such and 
sent to the project gutenberg literari archiv foundat at the 
address specifi in section 4, "inform about donat to 
the project gutenberg literari archiv foundation." 

- you provid a full refund of ani money paid by a user who notifi 
you in write (or by e-mail) within 30 day of receipt that s/he 
doe not agre to the term of the full project gutenberg-tm 
license. you must requir such a user to return or 
destroy all copi of the work possess in a physic medium 
and discontinu all use of and all access to other copi of 
project gutenberg-tm works. 

- you provide, in accord with paragraph 1.f.3, a full refund of ani 
money paid for a work or a replac copy, if a defect in the 
electron work is discov and report to you within 90 day 
of receipt of the work. 

- you compli with all other term of thi agreement for free 
distribut of project gutenberg-tm works. 

1.e.9. If you wish to charg a fee or distribut a project gutenberg-tm 
electron work or group of work on differ term than are set 
forth in thi agreement, you must obtain permiss in write from 
both the project gutenberg literari archiv foundat and michael 
hart, the owner of the project gutenberg-tm trademark. contact the 
foundat as set forth in section 3 below. 

1.f. 

1.f.1. project gutenberg volunt and employe expend consider 
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcrib and proofread 
public domain work in creat the project gutenberg-tm 
collection. despit these efforts, project gutenberg-tm electron 
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain 
"defects," such as, but not limit to, incomplete, inaccur or 
corrupt data, transcript errors, a copyright or other intellectu 
properti infringement, a defect or damag disk or other medium, a 
comput virus, or comput code that damag or cannot be read by 
your equipment. 

1.f.2. limit warranty, disclaim OF damag - except for the "right 
of replac or refund" describ in paragraph 1.f.3, the project 
gutenberg literari archiv foundation, the owner of the project 
gutenberg-tm trademark, and ani other parti distribut a project 
gutenberg-tm electron work under thi agreement, disclaim all 
liabil to you for damages, cost and expenses, includ legal 
fees. you agre that you have NO remedi for negligence, strict 
liability, breach OF warranti OR breach OF contract except those 
provid IN paragraph f3. you agre that the foundation, the 
trademark owner, and ani distributor under thi agreement will not BE 
liabl TO you for actual, direct, indirect, consequential, punit OR 
incident damag even IF you give notic OF the possibl OF such 
damage. 

1.f.3. limit right OF replac OR refund - If you discov a 
defect in thi electron work within 90 day of receiv it, you can 
receiv a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by send a 
written explan to the person you receiv the work from. If you 
receiv the work on a physic medium, you must return the medium with 
your written explanation. the person or entiti that provid you with 
the defect work may elect to provid a replac copi in lieu of a 
refund. If you receiv the work electronically, the person or entiti 
provid it to you may choos to give you a second opportun to 
receiv the work electron in lieu of a refund. If the second copi 
is also defective, you may demand a refund in write without further 
opportun to fix the problem. 

1.f.4. except for the limit right of replac or refund set forth 
in paragraph 1.f.3, thi work is provid to you 'as-is', with NO other 
warranti OF ani kind, express OR implied, includ but not limit TO 
warranti OF merchant OR fit for ani purpose. 

1.f.5. some state do not allow disclaim of certain impli 
warranti or the exclus or limit of certain type of damages. 
If ani disclaim or limit set forth in thi agreement violat the 
law of the state applic to thi agreement, the agreement shall be 
interpret to make the maximum disclaim or limit permit by 
the applic state law. the invalid or unenforc of ani 
provis of thi agreement shall not void the remain provisions. 

1.f.6. indemn - you agre to indemnifi and hold the foundation, the 
trademark owner, ani agent or employe of the foundation, anyon 
provid copi of project gutenberg-tm electron work in accord 
with thi agreement, and ani volunt associ with the production, 
promot and distribut of project gutenberg-tm electron works, 
harmless from all liability, cost and expenses, includ legal fees, 
that aris directli or indirectli from ani of the follow which you do 
or caus to occur: (a) distribut of thi or ani project gutenberg-tm 
work, (b) alteration, modification, or addit or delet to ani 
project gutenberg-tm work, and (c) ani defect you cause. 


section 2. inform about the mission of project gutenberg-tm 

project gutenberg-tm is synonym with the free distribut of 
electron work in format readabl by the widest varieti of comput 
includ obsolete, old, middle-ag and new computers. It exist 
becaus of the effort of hundr of volunt and donat from 
peopl in all walk of life. 

volunt and financi support to provid volunt with the 
assist they need, is critic to reach project gutenberg-tm' 
goal and ensur that the project gutenberg-tm collect will 
remain freeli avail for gener to come. In 2001, the project 
gutenberg literari archiv foundat wa creat to provid a secur 
and perman futur for project gutenberg-tm and futur generations. 
To learn more about the project gutenberg literari archiv foundat 
and how your effort and donat can help, see section 3 and 4 
and the foundat web page at http://www.pglaf.org. 


section 3. inform about the project gutenberg literari archiv 
foundat 

the project gutenberg literari archiv foundat is a non profit 
501(c)(3) educ corpor organ under the law of the 
state of mississippi and grant tax exempt statu by the intern 
revenu service. the foundation' ein or feder tax identif 
number is 64-6221541. it 501(c)(3) letter is post at 
http://pglaf.org/fundraising. contribut to the project gutenberg 
literari archiv foundat are tax deduct to the full extent 
permit by u.s. feder law and your state' laws. 

the foundation' princip offic is locat at 4557 melan dr. S. 
fairbanks, ak, 99712., but it volunt and employe are scatter 
throughout numer locations. it busi offic is locat at 
809 north 1500 west, salt lake city, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email 
business@pglaf.org. email contact link and up to date contact 
inform can be found at the foundation' web site and offici 
page at http://pglaf.org 

for addit contact information: 
dr. gregori B. newbi 
chief execut and director 
gbnewby@pglaf.org 

section 4. inform about donat to the project gutenberg 
literari archiv foundat 

project gutenberg-tm depend upon and cannot surviv without wide 
spread public support and donat to carri out it mission of 
increas the number of public domain and licens work that can be 
freeli distribut in machin readabl form access by the widest 
array of equip includ outdat equipment. mani small donat 
($1 to $5,000) are particularli import to maintain tax exempt 
statu with the irs. 

the foundat is commit to compli with the law regul 
chariti and charit donat in all 50 state of the unit 
states. complianc requir are not uniform and it take a 
consider effort, much paperwork and mani fee to meet and keep up 
with these requirements. We do not solicit donat in locat 
where we have not receiv written confirm of compliance. To 
send donat or determin the statu of complianc for ani 
particular state visit http://pglaf.org 

while we cannot and do not solicit contribut from state where we 
have not met the solicit requirements, we know of no prohibit 
against accept unsolicit donat from donor in such state who 
approach us with offer to donate. 

intern donat are grate accepted, but we cannot make 
ani statement concern tax treatment of donat receiv from 
outsid the unit states. u.s. law alon swamp our small staff. 

pleas check the project gutenberg web page for current donat 
method and addresses. donat are accept in a number of other 
way includ includ checks, onlin payment and credit card 
donations. To donate, pleas visit: http://pglaf.org/don 


section 5. gener inform about project gutenberg-tm electron 
works. 

professor michael S. hart is the origin of the project gutenberg-tm 
concept of a librari of electron work that could be freeli share 
with anyone. for thirti years, he produc and distribut project 
gutenberg-tm ebook with onli a loos network of volunt support. 

project gutenberg-tm ebook are often creat from sever print 
editions, all of which are confirm as public domain in the u.s. 
unless a copyright notic is included. thus, we do not necessarili 
keep ebook in complianc with ani particular paper edition. 

most peopl start at our web site which ha the main PG search facility: 

http://www.gutenberg.net 

thi web site includ inform about project gutenberg-tm, 
includ how to make donat to the project gutenberg literari 
archiv foundation, how to help produc our new ebooks, and how to 
subscrib to our email newslett to hear about new ebooks. 
