the project gutenberg ebook of the invaders, by benjamin ferri 

thi ebook is for the use of anyon anywher at no cost and with 
almost no restrict whatsoever. you may copi it, give it away or 
re-us it under the term of the project gutenberg licens includ 
with thi ebook or onlin at www.gutenberg.org 


title: the invad 

author: benjamin ferri 

releas date: novemb 18, 2007 [ebook #23535] 

language: english 


*** start OF thi project gutenberg ebook the invad *** 




produc by greg weeks, mari meehan and the onlin 
distribut proofread team at http://www.pgdp.net 









the invad 

_bi benjamin ferris_ 

head by vincent napoli 

[transcrib note: thi etext wa produc from weird tale march 1951. 
extens research did not uncov ani evid that the u.s. copyright 
on thi public wa renewed.] 

[illustration: _magic--there' no such thing. but the crop were 
begin to grow backwards...._] 

prefac 
big joe merklo wa the first of them. He appear at the wide bend 
nation bank one day, cash in hand. the charm of him, hi flash 
smile, the easi strength in hi big body, were persuas 
recommendations. but the bank' apprais scarc got that far. wasn't 
he the first buyer in fifteen year for that bone-yard of lone dreams, 
dark valley? 

the counti seat of wide bend presid over three valleys, correspond 
to the fork of the sallinook river. once, dark valley had been the 
richest of these. solid hous and barn stood among orchard laden with 
fruit, field chock-ful of heavy-beard grain ... till, one spring, 
the middl fork of the river had dri up. 

the farmer call in specialist who sank well and pilot holes, 
measur the slopes. they heard much talk about water tables, about 
spring undercut rock formations. but when it wa done the fact 
remained: dark valley' water suppli wa choke off beyond man' abil 
to restor it. In the end the farmer gave up, left their dusti hous 
and shrivel orchards, and dark valley died. 

boy hike over there occasionally. men scout for fenc post or pipe. 
young coupl pass quickli through on moonlight nights. and at least 
two stubborn old-tim still squat at the upper end. 

now that joe merklo had bought it, of course, they would have to move. 

"well, won't they?" henderson asked. 

jerri bronson look around at the other member of the wide bend 
businessmen' club. "doesn't take a lawyer to answer that, hen." 

"dam' shame," said caruso, the barber, who alway champion underdogs. 

"they'v had no equiti in that land for years. the bank just let them 
stay on." 

"they can move on over the hill." 

jerri nodded. "mayb somebodi ought to suggest that to them." 

"don't look at me," caruso said. "those old coot ain't been near my 
shop for years." 

when the chuckl died, macallister, the druggist, voic the thought 
that rest unspoken on all their minds. "I wonder if that fellow 
realiz what a worthless piec of land he' bought." 

"he look it over." thi wa hammond, of the bank. 

"'course, you didn't tri to talk him out of it!" 

"would you have?" hammond retort indignantly. 

henderson jab the air with hi cigar. "I think he wa a coal miner, 
back east. save up hi money to get on the land." 

"_i_ think he' a gypsy," caruso said. 

"you ought to know," tipton, the grocer, laughed. caruso got fine for 
hi reply, and with the tinkl of coin in the luncheon club kitti the 
men dispersed. 

* * * * * 

joe merklos' rel arriv that night. henderson, who told jerri 
bronson about it, had made an earli morn deliveri of feed nearby, and 
driven on to take a look at merklos' purchase. from the ridge, he view 
dark valley' three mile of width and six or so of length. figur were 
move about the gaunt and windowless farm buildings. At least one plow 
wa in operation, and the good blue friendli of smoke aros here and 
there. 

"look like a lot of people, jerry. but you know--i didn't see ani car 
or truck around." 

jerry' blue eye crinkled. human natur didn't like puzzl ani more 
than it like strangers. He return to the tediou civil case he wa 
work on. about three o'clock, he decid he wa tire and bore 
enough to call it a day. He got into hi car and head for dark valley. 

asid from hi curiosity, he thought he might talk to the two old 
squatter at the far end. the carver were independ and truculent. 
now that joe merklos' rel had arriv in full force, there wa 
danger of a clash. 

As the road top the ridge, it left green field and orchard abruptli 
behind. but dark valley had a wild sort of beauty, cup as it wa 
between two row of hill which curv togeth as higher, jumbl 
foothil to the west. 

jerry' car trail a plume of dust as it slid down to the dri riverbed. 
He made a left turn and start up the valley road. At the first farm he 
saw dark, plump women in billow dresses, wear peasant scarv over 
their heads. they move about the barnyard, rake dead leav and 
scratch busili at the bake earth of the old truck gardens. chicken 
and duck strayed, and jerri caught a glimps of children. He wave to 
the group and wa answer by nod and flash smiles. 

then he had a shock. one of the women wa work the handl of a pump 
that had been bone-dri for fifteen years--and a slender stream of clear 
water spill into her wooden tub! 

somewhat dazedly, jerri drove on. He saw more of the merklo peopl at 
other farms. men were work in the wither orchards. new fenc post 
and rail were go up; bright axe flash in the dri and scraggli 
wood lots. 

jerry' thought kept return to the water in that first pump. could 
it be that they had learn the valley had a suppli again? that would be 
a mighti joke on hammond and the first nation bank. 

the road, badli rut by eros and drift over with sand and dri 
leaves, began to rise. jerri shift into low gear. then, suddenly, he 
stopped. he'd had anoth shock. He had just realiz thi road wa 
_unused_. He recal the twin ruts, pattern with rabbit and bird 
tracks, clear back to the turn-off. without question, hi car had been 
the first to mark the road sinc winter. 

then how had these dozen of peopl come, with their chicken and duck 
and children and tools? He had seen no cars, no wagons, no carts. _how 
had these peopl come?_ 

jerri sat back in the seat and grinned. He fish out hi tobacco pouch 
and fill hi pipe. there were time when he consid himself fairli 
mature, fairli well balanced. yet he wa as readi as the next to build a 
hous of mysteri out of the insubstanti timber of ignorance. 

Of cours there wa a reason explanation. they must have walk from 
the railroad. It wa a good mani miles, but it wa perfectli possible. 

feel better, jerri follow the tortuou road to the western crest. 
hi long leg hadn't taken him far from the car when he heard a harsh, 
"hold up!" 

first one, then the other carver brother step out from a scrub oak 
thicket--short, leatheri old men, with rag whisker and dirt seam 
into their face and wrists. they eye him malevol over rais 
shotguns. 

"came to talk to you," jerri said mildly. 

one of them--h thought it wa ed--spat. 

"ah, now," jerri went on in an aggriev tone, "that' a fine way to 
treat a son of jack bronson." 

the carver brother glanc at one another, then the shotgun lowered. 
"come along," they said gruffly. In the litter yard by their cabin, 
they point to a bench and squat down befor it on their thin old 
shanks. 

"new peopl in dark valley." 

they nodded. 

"they'v bought it from the bank. they own it clear to the ridg line, 
includ your place, here." 

"we been here forti years," said ed. 

"if I own it you could stay forti more." 

"they send you?" the voic wa sharp, suspicious. 

jerri shook hi head. "I just thought you'd like to know about it." 

for a coupl of minut the carver brother chew tobacco in unison. 
they stood up, reach for their guns. "we'll see," they said. 

jerri nodded. they walk besid him, kick thought at the 
leaves. the brother name mike rub hi whiskers. "get much of a look 
at 'em when ye pass through?" 

"some." 

"they furriners?" 

jerri sigh inwardly. "maybe. they look like hard workers." 

the carver brother cackl suddenly. "they better be! To farm that 
land." 

jerri pass back through the valley. A man knock out stump wave to 
him. A woman in a barnyard swish out her big skirts, shoo chickens. 
At that first farm, a trickl of water still ran from the pump.... 

* * * * * 

wide bend wa a normal community. along with it natur curios there 
wa a genuin feel of neighborliness--heighten by the convict 
that these hardwork stranger had thrown their money away on a 
hopeless venture. so, one way and another, a fair percentag of the 
town' popul found excus in the next few day to get out to dark 
valley. bit by bit the report filter back to jerry, and they all 
ad up about the same. 

joe merklo and hi peopl were incred industrious. alreadi they had 
clean up the yards, repair sag barn and roofless sheds. 
curtain flutter at the windows. cow had appeared, and sheep, even a 
few horses. somehow, perhap from accumul seepage, they were still 
bring water from the rusti pumps. and--though it wa sure an 
illusion--dark valley seem to have taken on a ting of green again. 

wide bend' womenfolk brought gift of home-mad preserves, jelly, 
can veget ... and came away puzzled. no, they hadn't been badli 
received. all wa polit and smiles. but there was--well, a sort of 
remot about these people. the kid went out of sight the minut you 
turn into a place. and you just couldn't get close to the grown-ups. 
dark, they were, and heavy-looking. they smile a lot, jabber in an 
unknown language. they had beauti white teeth, but no jewelri or 
ornaments, such as gypsi might wear. they alway appear pleas that 
you brought them something. but on the way home you discov you still 
had your presents, after all. 

the best guess as to the number in the tribe (somehow, that seem the 
best way to describ them) wa sixty, give or take a few. 

the gener verdict wa express by henderson at the next club 
luncheon. "they'r odd, but they'r hard workers. darn good thing for 
the community." 

miller, the jeweler, agre vigorously. 

"self-interest," jerri murmured, "i a wonder thing." 

they turn on him. "they haven't bought a thing from us! and what if 
they did?" 

"kidding, boys. i'v got someth to sell, too." then jerri frowned. 
"they haven't bought _anything_?" 

around the table, head shook. 

"probably," caruso growled, "they wear their hair long, too." 

In the laughter, the matter wa forgotten. 

but jerri rememb it that night, sit on the porch of hi house. 
there must be hundr of items--tool and nail and hing and glass 
and wire and sandpap and oil and rope and seed and salt and 
sugar--that the tribe needed. how could they--? 

there wa a step on the path. "you there?" caruso called. 

"yep." 

the barber sat in the other chair, hoist hi feet to the railing. "you 
know how kid are." 

"um." 

"that boy of mine, he couldn't stand it about dark valley. He wa out 
there with a coupl of pals, poke around." 

"yes?" jerri didn't realiz hi voic wa sharp. 

"oh, no trouble. but the middl fork of the river' start to run 
again!" 

* * * * * 

for a long time after caruso had gone, jerri sat with hi cold pipe in 
hi mouth. there were reason explan for everi one of the small 
odditi that had crop up with joe merklo and hi people. but he 
couldn't shake a grow feel of uneasiness. 

jerri went to bed muttering, for he wa a man train to keep emot 
and fact well separate. but the feel wa still with him when he 
awoke, and he recogn it later on henderson' face. 

"we got to get the boy togeth and talk thi thing over," the feed and 
fuel owner said. 

"what' up?" 

"thi stuff that' missin'." 

jerri gave a start. He had just spent at least half an hour look for 
thi garag lock. 

"everi day of thi week," henderson went on heavily, "i'v had peopl in 
to replac some littl thing that wa lost. hatchet and feed trough 
and spare part and pane of glass and thing like that. A coupl of old 
chicken brooder that wa stored. ten salt block anderson had in hi 
barn." 

just then macallist step over from hi drugstor to join them. 
"dammit," he said plaintively, dust off hi store jacket, "I been in 
the basement the last hour look for an old pipe wrench. I swear I 
left it there!" 

jerri met henderson' glance. "all right," he said. "let' get the gang 
togeth for lunch today." 

sheriff watson join them in the back room of the restaurant. when the 
coffe came jerri rose to explain the purpos of the meeting. "our 
problem," he began, "may amount to noth at all. Or it could turn out 
to be mighti nasty. hen and I thought it wa time to talk it over." 

briefli he recapitul dark valley' reawakening. He describ joe 
merklo and hi people--their odd clothing, their independence, their 
alien language. 

"point one," he said, "most peopl don't like strangers." 

He describ the tribe' arriv without car or wagons, without even a 
mark on the abandon road. He spoke of the pump that came to life, the 
river that now ran again. the progress the tribe had made seem almost 
beyond human capacity. 

"point two," jerri said, "most peopl don't like mysteries." He turned. 
"okay, hen." 

first henderson explain that none of the tribe had bought suppli of 
ani kind in wide bend. He got corrobor from other businessmen 
present. then, as he summar the miss articles, head began to 
nod. face got red and list were clenched. jerri got to hi feet again. 
"point three, I don't need to spell out. much more of thi and carload 
of men with gun will be head for the ridge. there'l be the kind of 
troubl we don't want on wide bend' conscience." 

"should we let 'em rob us blind?" shout tipton. 

"no wonder they do so good!" caruso cried. 

"how about the water?" hammond ask sarcastically. "you think they 
stole that, too?" 

someon shout back, and a heat discuss raged. jerri final 
bang on the tabl with a sugar bowl. "let' hear from the sheriff." 

watson hoist hi big frame, and sighed. "jerry' right, boys. We got a 
nasti situat build up. right now, my old woman' so mad at the 
dark valley peopl she could spit. and why? onli becaus she can't 
figger 'em out." 

He brush hi mustach and look at tipton. "them peopl are human 
bein's, ain't they?" 

tipton scowled, but nodded. 

"anyth they done that couldn't be explain by natur causes, no 
matter how silli or complicated?" 

tipton thought about it, and had to shake hi head. 

"believ me, boys, the onli thing to get excit about is the stuff 
that' missin'. If they'r pinchin' it, we can catch 'em, and punish 
'em. they may be foreign but they sure as hell have to obey the law 
of the land!" 

"now," hammond said, "we'r talk sense." 

"give me a list of what' missin'," watson added, "an' i'll go to dark 
valley thi afternoon and take a look around the place." 

"everybodi satisfied?" jerri asked. 

everybodi was. 

* * * * * 

sheriff watson frown at the list as jerri drove into the first 
barnyard. they scatter chickens, ducks, and children--seen blurrili as 
they scrambl to hide. they remain a few minutes, ostens 
visiting, then went on to the next farm, and the next.... 

beyond the last one, on the rise that led to the carver cabin, jerri 
stop the car. they look at one another. watson rub hi face 
irritably. "i'm beat, jerry. there' somethin' here I can't get my hand 
nor my head onto." 

"I know." 

the sheriff bang one big hand against the crumpl list. "that butter 
churn of mulford's. By god, I saw it! same brand, same color. even had 
scratch around the base where that old cat of hi sharpen her 
claws." 

"I know," jerri said again. "but it had a letter 'z' cut into it. worn 
and weathered, so you'd swear it had been there for year and years." 

"that spring-tooth harrow of zimmerman's." 

"except the one we saw had twelv teeth instead of fifteen. and even the 
man who made it couldn't find where it had been alter or tamper 
with." 

It had been the same with a score of other things. each one slightli 
changed, just differ enough to make identif imposs to 
prove. 

slowly, jerri said, "wood get weathered, metal oxidizes, honest wear is 
unmistakable. and these all take time, which can't be faked." 

hi implic hung in the air. If the thing had been stolen, then 
alter to avoid identification, whoever did it had more than human 
ability. 

"magic," watson muttered. 

"there' ... no ... such ... thing!" 

"no, there absolut ain't." 

they sat look with troubl eye out over dark valley, till jerri 
said abruptly, "i'm go on up to see the carvers." 

watson reach for the door handle. "they don't have no use for me. i'll 
wait here. I got plenti to think about." 

jerri nodded. the sheriff would be rememb the seed alreadi 
sprout in the kitchen gardens. the leav that had jump out on the 
old fruit trees. the lamb and calv caper in pastur wash with 
the green of new grass. 

the road wa smooth, it ditch clear and deepened. bright cloth 
nap on shini new clotheslin (those were on the list, but how can 
you identifi a roll of wire?). cordwood wa stack in everi yard. new 
shingl spot the roofs, the window held glass again, fresh paint 
glisten on porches. In the fields, corn and oat and hay were shoot 
upward.... 

jerri found the carver wait for him, their wrinkl old face tense. 
they didn't answer hi greeting, just jerk their heads. they led him 
past the cabin, through open brush, and halt at a bare place. slowly, 
jerri sank to hi knees. 

except for it size, it could have been a splayed-out cougar print. but 
it wa two feet across, and press more than an inch into the hard, dri 
soil. 

final Ed carver nudg jerry. the gnarl finger point to a twig of 
wild lilac eight feet off the ground. caught on the twig were sever 
coars black hairs, six inch long. jerri look from them back to the 
carvers, then down at the ground again. He didn't speak. what wa there 
to say? 

As they start back toward the cabin, Ed carver said harshly, "we found 
that two night ago." 

jerri brood for some distance, then he said, "ned ame ha the best 
hunt dog in the country." 

they look at him disgustedly. 

"dammit, you have to do something! come back to town with me. we'll get 
some of the boy together, and hunt it down." 

they had pass the cabin and reach the car. the carver brother 
look out over dark valley and shook their heads. "we'v live alone," 
Ed said. "we'll fight alone." 

when jerri told the sheriff about the giant spoor, watson gave a 
deris snort. "those old coot got bat in their belfries!" 

"but I saw the print." 

watson dismiss such evid with a wave of hi hand. "they made it 
up, probably. forget it till you see the anim itself. you'll have time 
to believ it then. We got enough to worri about already." 

jerri couldn't forget it. but there wa a kind of reassur in such 
hearti skepticism. with each pass minute, that huge print seem more 
unreal. 

* * * * * 

halfway through the valley they stop to look at the river. the bed 
wa half full--muddy, debris-laden, with a sheen of dust on the surface. 
but it wa water--wet, tangible, undeniable. 

watson took off hi hat and rub hi head and swore. 

"good afternoon." 

they turned. joe merklo wa smile at them. 

"hello," jerri said. watson just glowered. 

merklo move besid them and look down. hi brilliant teeth flashed. 
"good, is it not?" the guttur word came out flat, one at a time, as 
though shape carefully. 

"better than money, in thi part of the world." jerry' eye narrowed. 
"did you know about the water when you bought the valley?" 

merklo smile again. He wa bare-headed, dress in dark trouser and a 
loose, short-sleev blouse. hi neck and muscular forearm gleam 
bronz in the sunlight. "you like what we do here?" he ask in hi 
deep, hesit manner. 

"you'v done wonders," watson said shortly. 

merklos' smoki eye held jerry's. "mi peopl are use to work." 

slowly, significantly, watson said, "the thing we don't understand is 
how you manag to bring so much equipment. the exact thing you 
needed--right down to the last nail." 

merklos' inscrut gaze swung around. the smile linger on hi face. 
"we are a care people. We plan a long way ahead." 

watson open hi mouth for anoth question--and shut it. merklos' 
attent had left them. the man wa listening, hi head slightli 
cocked. after a moment he turned. "I am happi to see you make a visit. 
I hope you come again." He nod and walk swiftli away. 

wordlessly, jerri and the sheriff got back in the car. "could you hear 
what he wa listen to?" jerri muttered. 

"I didn't hear a thing." 

"notic anyth els about dark valley?" 

* * * * * 

watson shook hi head. 

"no flowers. not one dog." jerry' hand tighten on the steering-wheel. 
"and who ha ever gotten a single, clear look at one of the kids?" 

jerri spent a restless night. On the way to hi offic the next morn 
he met watson, talk to a farmer on the courthous steps. 

"listen to carson, here," the sheriff said grimly. 

carson' straw hat bob as he talked. "i'm waitin' to see the farm 
adviser. somethin' gone wrong out at my place on the south fork. i'm on 
good bottom land--highest yield in the county. but in the last two, 
three week my corn, my wheat, even my berri ha _stop growin'_!" 

jerry' eye jump to watson. 

"yep," carson went on, "everi singl ear o' corn is still a nubbin." He 
threw out hi arms. "and, by god, even my wife' radish ha stood 
still. ain't anyth on earth that'll slow up a radish." 

"how about other stuff? how about eggs?" 

"same thing. cut right down. hen lay one in ten now, mebbe. an' my 
alfalfa ha turn a funni gray-green. even the fruit--" 

"what about the river?" watson broke in. "you still got water in the 
south fork?" 

"way down for thi time o' year. but we got enough." 

sever peopl had stop to listen. one of them, a big, tow-head 
swede, burst out excitedly. "mister, you got the same troubl as my 
cousin. hi crops, they'r growin' _backwards_!" 

there wa more of the same imposs talk. jerri made an excus to get 
away to hi office. He sat at hi desk and stare out the window. 

there wasn't ani problem, he tri to tell himself. anyth he could 
not measur by experi and logic wa out. and that had to includ 
giant paw-print and mysteri miss object as well as radish 
that wouldn't grow. 

dark valley wa take on life and freshness. fact. the south fork, and 
portion of the north fork, seem to be lose fertility. fact. but to 
conclud from thi that dark valley wa gain at the expens of the 
others--that wa the road no reason man could allow himself to take. 

from hi window, he saw the huge old tree that shade wide bend. they 
look suddenli wrong. weren't they less green, less thick than before? 
the build and street look dingier, too. and when did all those 
broken fences, crack windows, miss shingl show up...? 

jerri lung from hi chair and strode up and down the room. then the 
telephon bell tore through hi nerves. He grab the instrument. 

"watson. I just want to tell you, two boy have been report 
missin'." 

"no!" 

"the simmon kids. but they'v run away before. they'll be back." 

jerry' hand went slowli down. the sheriff' voic echo hollowli from 
the lower receiver. "well, won't they?" 

* * * * * 

It wa after midnight when the doorbel rang. It didn't wake jerry--h 
wa sit in bed, stare into the darkness. there wa a pile of book 
besid him; he knock them over get up to answer the door. 

mike carver stumbl in. He drop into a chair, panting. jerri went 
for a bottl and glass. carver gulp the drink, then held the tumbler 
out for another. 

"I run all the way down the ridge," he gasped, "till I catch a ride. I 
figger you ought to know what happened. It got my brother ed." 

jerry' lean face hardened. 

"yeah. It wa prowlin' around. We went after it, an' shot it." 

"but you said ..." 

"I said it kill ed." the old lip tightened. "we gave it one slug 
through the heart and one through the head. they didn't even slow it 
down." 

"you mean," jerri ask carefully, "that they didn't have ani effect at 
all?" 

mike nodded. He tip the glass, wipe hi rag sleev across hi 
face, and rose. 

"where are you going?" 

"back to the cabin." 

"mike, you can't go there!" 

"that' where my brother' bodi is." 

"look," jerri said evenly, "you can't help him now. stay here with me, 
and we'll go up in the morning." 

carver shook hi head. "mi brother' there at the cabin. I got to set up 
with him." there wa no argu against that tone of simpl and utter 
finality. 

"all right. wait till I get some cloth on, and i'll drive you back." 

A few minut later they pass through wide bend' desert street and 
start out the road to the valley. carver roll down hi window and 
spat tobacco juice. "feller wa up to see us," he said gloomily. "told 
us peopl wa losin' thing all over the county--includin' two kids. 
said crop ha shrunk. said water in the fork is way down." 

"he' right." 

"said peopl were gettin' the idea dark valley wa livin' off the rest 
of the land. feedin' on it, like a parasite. how crazi you think that 
is?" 

* * * * * 

slowly, jerri said, "i'm not sure it' crazi at all." 

carver brooded. "I shot that thing tonight. should 'a been dead if a 
critter ever was. then I seen it go after ed." 

"you know what all thi means, don't you? witchcraft. someth peopl 
haven't believ in for hundr of years." 

"mebb they better get start again." 

they were near the divid that overlook dark valley. "mike, i'v 
been read up on it, for hours. everyth I could find. and it fits. 
it' been the hardest struggl I ever had--admit such a thing 
existed. but it wa either acknowledg that or lose my mind." 

the night seem colder as they start downward. unaccountably, the 
headlight dimmed. 

"somethin' watchin' us," carver said suddenly, as the car bore on 
through the thick and swirl darkness. 

jerri nodded. hi hand grip the wheel until the knuckl were white. 
sweat began to glisten on hi forehead. 

the headlight pick out a dark spot, that look like a yawn hole. 
jerri stamp on the brake, skid slightly. but there wa onli a 
shallow rut, deform by shadows. He press the acceler ... and the 
motor died. hurriedly, he jab the starter button, pump the ga 
pedal. again he push it, and again, as the light fade from the drain 
on the battery. 

"what' the matter?" carver' old voic wa thin. 

"flooded, maybe. better let her sit a minute." 

the dark press close around them, shift and danced. chill air 
move over their faces. 

"mike." 

"yeah." 

"whi didn't that anim come after, you, too?" 

carver breath heavili for a moment. then he took someth from hi 
shirt pocket and held it out. jerry' finger move over it. A crucifix. 

"mi mother give it to me a long time ago." 

"that' probabl the onli thing that could have save you. from what I 
read, they can't stand a cross. and silver' got someth to do with 
it." jerri reach into hi own pocket. "feel this." 

carver' rough hand fumbl over the object. 

"made it thi evening. took a cold chisel and hammer to an old silver 
tray. not fancy, but it wa all I had." 

"you done that, befor I came and told you about ed?" 

jerri nod grimly. "i'm convinc we'r up against someth terrible. 
and believ me, mike, i'm scared." 

* * * * * 

the shadow drew closer, thicker still. they seem charg with menace. 

with a catch in hi voice, jerri said, "mayb now' the time to tri it." 

carver' head jerk around. 

"I mean smash merklo and hi tribe for good." 

"how?" 

"with fire, and the silver crosses." 

after a long pause, carver said, "what about ed?" 

"we'll get to your cabin. we'r not far from the first farm. We can go 
right up the valley. If it works." 

"and if it don't?" 

"we might end up like ed." 

carver turn and spat out the window. "I don't want to, but I will." 

they got out of the car, into the hum darkness. they took gunni 
sack and rag from the trunk compart and soak them in oil from 
the crankcase. they wire a bundl on the extens handl of the jack, 
and anoth on the radio aerial rod which jerri unscrewed. 

they tri to start the car onc more, without success. So they turn 
off the light and left it. with one torch burning, they start up the 
road for the first gate. 

dark valley' shadowi legion close in. there wa a rustl and a 
whisper all around them. there were shini glint where none ought to 
be. there wa an overwhelm feel that someth fright 
waited--just beyond the edg of darkness. 

"the gate," carver said hoarsely. 

jerri unclench hi jaw and lit the second torch. the flare-up 
reflect from the blank window ahead. 

"what about the wimmen? what about the kids?" 

jerri spoke jerkily, hi eye on the house. "there aren't ani kids. what 
we saw wa someth else. the women are the same as the men, the same 
as the thing that kill ed. don't worri about them. hold the cross in 
front of you, and for god' sake hang onto it!" 

the dark swell like a live thing. It sway and clutch at the 
torches. somewher a high whine began, like a keen wind. 

there were sudden sound from the house--bang and scramblings. 
carver faltered. 

"on!" jerri said savagely, and began to run. He touch hi home-mad 
crucifix to the wood of the porch, and with the other hand brought the 
torch down. blue spark jump out at him. the dri wood hiss and 
blaze up furiously. 

A fright scream rang out. there wa the tinkl of break glass. 
formless figur thud to the ground and scuttl away on all fours, 
head up the valley. 

within minut the farmhous wa a mass of roar flame. jerri back 
away from it. He saw carver outlin against the glow barn, which he 
had fired. they came togeth and hurri back to the road. there they 
stop to watch the pillar of flame and smoke, boil upward. 

"it worked," carver said. 

jerri nodded. "we can't kill them. but we can drive them out." 

"wimmen and kids," carver said bitterly. "did you see them thing that 
came out?" 

"yes." jerri wa drench in sweat and the torch trembl in hi hand. 
"let' get on to the next one, mike." 

they went on to the neighbor farm, and to the one after that, while 
the shadow puls in an unholi turmoil. the night swarm with 
malign invis forces, that tri to blow the flame from their 
torches, that flay them with the nake sword of fear. there were 
hideou shapes, half-seen. there were wave of terror like a physic 
shock. there were puff of ordure, so rank they gagged. 

but they plod through it, face set, sweat and agonized. till, 
halfway up the valley _it_ came.... 

carver knew it first. hi leatheri face paled; hi hand fumbl 
instinct for the gun he wa not carrying. 

then jerri said hoarsely, "mike, did you hear that?" 

carver nod dumbly. 

clearly, now, came the sound of those huge paws, pad first on one 
side of them, then the other. jerri clutch hi cross till the rough 
edg bit deep into hi hand. 

It seem that hi veri life wa bound up with the torch that now smoke 
and struggl to burn. If it feebl flame went out, that meant 
extinction, black and final. 

then he becam awar that carver wa no longer besid him. He whirled. 
ten yard behind, the other wa bend down, scrabbl frantic in 
the dust. 

"I drop it!" he shouted. "I can't find it!" 

jerri tri to reach him, but the other thing wa quicker. A whirlpool 
of black engulf carver, blot him out. then jerri wa confront 
by an unbeliev sight--a great, savag head, tower over him, it 
eye glow redli and foam cream over gigantic, open jaws. 

* * * * * 

desperately, he shove hi cross straight at it. the thing spat and 
roar deafeningly. the thud of it paw shook the ground. It lash out 
with monstrou claw that slice hi skin. half-stunned, jerri kept 
lung toward it, till final hi cross touch it coars hide. there 
wa a crackl of blue flame, a shriek that split the night, and the 
thing disintegr in roil cloud of bitter smoke. 

jerri swayed. the hand that held the cross wa numb and tingling. like 
an automaton, he turned, went back, and knelt besid the crumpl shape 
that had been mike carver. then he rose, still carri the feebli 
flicker torch, and plod on.... 

they met him as he wa come back--watson, henderson, caruso, miller, 
hammond and the rest. they had flashlight and gun and tear gas, and 
their face were grim and desperate. 

"we found your car," they said. "we could see the flame from wide bend. 
what in hell ha been go on?" 

jerri stare at them. He drop the dead torch. one hand tri to put 
the cross back into hi pocket. hi face wa black, hi hair singed, hi 
side wet with blood. 

"it' all over," he croaked. "they'r gone. dark valley is free again." 

_big joe merklo wa the first of them. He appear at the rocki 
mountain trust compani one day, cash in hand. the charm of him, hi 
flash smile, the easi strength in hi big body, were persuas 
recommendations. but the company' apprais scarc got that far. 
wasn't he the first buyer they had ever had for that suburban 
real-est fiasco, hidden acres...?_ 





end of the project gutenberg ebook of the invaders, by benjamin ferri 

*** end OF thi project gutenberg ebook the invad *** 

***** thi file should be name 23535.txt or 23535.zip ***** 
thi and all associ file of variou format will be found in: 
http://www.gutenberg.org/2/3/5/3/23535/ 

produc by greg weeks, mari meehan and the onlin 
distribut proofread team at http://www.pgdp.net 


updat edit will replac the previou one--th old edit 
will be renamed. 

creat the work from public domain print edit mean that no 
one own a unit state copyright in these works, so the foundat 
(and you!) can copi and distribut it in the unit state without 
permiss and without pay copyright royalties. special rules, 
set forth in the gener term of use part of thi license, appli to 
copi and distribut project gutenberg-tm electron work to 
protect the project gutenberg-tm concept and trademark. project 
gutenberg is a regist trademark, and may not be use if you 
charg for the ebooks, unless you receiv specif permission. If you 
do not charg anyth for copi of thi ebook, compli with the 
rule is veri easy. you may use thi ebook for nearli ani purpos 
such as creation of deriv works, reports, perform and 
research. they may be modifi and print and given away--y may do 
practic anyth with public domain ebooks. redistribut is 
subject to the trademark license, especi commerci 
redistribution. 



*** start: full licens *** 

the full project gutenberg licens 
pleas read thi befor you distribut OR use thi work 

To protect the project gutenberg-tm mission of promot the free 
distribut of electron works, by use or distribut thi work 
(or ani other work associ in ani way with the phrase "project 
gutenberg"), you agre to compli with all the term of the full project 
gutenberg-tm licens (avail with thi file or onlin at 
http://gutenberg.org/license). 


section 1. gener term of use and redistribut project gutenberg-tm 
electron work 

1.a. By read or use ani part of thi project gutenberg-tm 
electron work, you indic that you have read, understand, agre to 
and accept all the term of thi licens and intellectu properti 
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agre to abid by all 
the term of thi agreement, you must ceas use and return or destroy 
all copi of project gutenberg-tm electron work in your possession. 
If you paid a fee for obtain a copi of or access to a project 
gutenberg-tm electron work and you do not agre to be bound by the 
term of thi agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or 
entiti to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.e.8. 

1.b. "project gutenberg" is a regist trademark. It may onli be 
use on or associ in ani way with an electron work by peopl who 
agre to be bound by the term of thi agreement. there are a few 
thing that you can do with most project gutenberg-tm electron work 
even without compli with the full term of thi agreement. see 
paragraph 1.c below. there are a lot of thing you can do with project 
gutenberg-tm electron work if you follow the term of thi agreement 
and help preserv free futur access to project gutenberg-tm electron 
works. see paragraph 1.e below. 

1.c. the project gutenberg literari archiv foundat ("the foundation" 
or pglaf), own a compil copyright in the collect of project 
gutenberg-tm electron works. nearli all the individu work in the 
collect are in the public domain in the unit states. If an 
individu work is in the public domain in the unit state and you are 
locat in the unit states, we do not claim a right to prevent you from 
copying, distributing, performing, display or creat deriv 
work base on the work as long as all refer to project gutenberg 
are removed. Of course, we hope that you will support the project 
gutenberg-tm mission of promot free access to electron work by 
freeli share project gutenberg-tm work in complianc with the term of 
thi agreement for keep the project gutenberg-tm name associ with 
the work. you can easili compli with the term of thi agreement by 
keep thi work in the same format with it attach full project 
gutenberg-tm licens when you share it without charg with others. 

1.d. the copyright law of the place where you are locat also govern 
what you can do with thi work. copyright law in most countri are in 
a constant state of change. If you are outsid the unit states, check 
the law of your countri in addit to the term of thi agreement 
befor downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distribut or 
creat deriv work base on thi work or ani other project 
gutenberg-tm work. the foundat make no represent concern 
the copyright statu of ani work in ani countri outsid the unit 
states. 

1.e. unless you have remov all refer to project gutenberg: 

1.e.1. the follow sentence, with activ link to, or other immedi 
access to, the full project gutenberg-tm licens must appear promin 
whenev ani copi of a project gutenberg-tm work (ani work on which the 
phrase "project gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "project 
gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed, 
copi or distributed: 

thi ebook is for the use of anyon anywher at no cost and with 
almost no restrict whatsoever. you may copi it, give it away or 
re-us it under the term of the project gutenberg licens includ 
with thi ebook or onlin at www.gutenberg.org 

1.e.2. If an individu project gutenberg-tm electron work is deriv 
from the public domain (doe not contain a notic indic that it is 
post with permiss of the copyright holder), the work can be copi 
and distribut to anyon in the unit state without pay ani fee 
or charges. If you are redistribut or provid access to a work 
with the phrase "project gutenberg" associ with or appear on the 
work, you must compli either with the requir of paragraph 1.e.1 
through 1.e.7 or obtain permiss for the use of the work and the 
project gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraph 1.e.8 or 
1.e.9. 

1.e.3. If an individu project gutenberg-tm electron work is post 
with the permiss of the copyright holder, your use and distribut 
must compli with both paragraph 1.e.1 through 1.e.7 and ani addit 
term impos by the copyright holder. addit term will be link 
to the project gutenberg-tm licens for all work post with the 
permiss of the copyright holder found at the begin of thi work. 

1.e.4. Do not unlink or detach or remov the full project gutenberg-tm 
licens term from thi work, or ani file contain a part of thi 
work or ani other work associ with project gutenberg-tm. 

1.e.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribut or redistribut thi 
electron work, or ani part of thi electron work, without 
promin display the sentenc set forth in paragraph 1.e.1 with 
activ link or immedi access to the full term of the project 
gutenberg-tm license. 

1.e.6. you may convert to and distribut thi work in ani binary, 
compressed, mark up, nonproprietari or proprietari form, includ ani 
word process or hypertext form. however, if you provid access to or 
distribut copi of a project gutenberg-tm work in a format other than 
"plain vanilla ascii" or other format use in the offici version 
post on the offici project gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org), 
you must, at no addit cost, fee or expens to the user, provid a 
copy, a mean of export a copy, or a mean of obtain a copi upon 
request, of the work in it origin "plain vanilla ascii" or other 
form. ani altern format must includ the full project gutenberg-tm 
licens as specifi in paragraph 1.e.1. 

1.e.7. Do not charg a fee for access to, viewing, displaying, 
performing, copi or distribut ani project gutenberg-tm work 
unless you compli with paragraph 1.e.8 or 1.e.9. 

1.e.8. you may charg a reason fee for copi of or provid 
access to or distribut project gutenberg-tm electron work provid 
that 

- you pay a royalti fee of 20% of the gross profit you deriv from 
the use of project gutenberg-tm work calcul use the method 
you alreadi use to calcul your applic taxes. the fee is 
owe to the owner of the project gutenberg-tm trademark, but he 
ha agre to donat royalti under thi paragraph to the 
project gutenberg literari archiv foundation. royalti payment 
must be paid within 60 day follow each date on which you 
prepar (or are legal requir to prepare) your period tax 
returns. royalti payment should be clearli mark as such and 
sent to the project gutenberg literari archiv foundat at the 
address specifi in section 4, "inform about donat to 
the project gutenberg literari archiv foundation." 

- you provid a full refund of ani money paid by a user who notifi 
you in write (or by e-mail) within 30 day of receipt that s/he 
doe not agre to the term of the full project gutenberg-tm 
license. you must requir such a user to return or 
destroy all copi of the work possess in a physic medium 
and discontinu all use of and all access to other copi of 
project gutenberg-tm works. 

- you provide, in accord with paragraph 1.f.3, a full refund of ani 
money paid for a work or a replac copy, if a defect in the 
electron work is discov and report to you within 90 day 
of receipt of the work. 

- you compli with all other term of thi agreement for free 
distribut of project gutenberg-tm works. 

1.e.9. If you wish to charg a fee or distribut a project gutenberg-tm 
electron work or group of work on differ term than are set 
forth in thi agreement, you must obtain permiss in write from 
both the project gutenberg literari archiv foundat and michael 
hart, the owner of the project gutenberg-tm trademark. contact the 
foundat as set forth in section 3 below. 

1.f. 

1.f.1. project gutenberg volunt and employe expend consider 
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcrib and proofread 
public domain work in creat the project gutenberg-tm 
collection. despit these efforts, project gutenberg-tm electron 
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain 
"defects," such as, but not limit to, incomplete, inaccur or 
corrupt data, transcript errors, a copyright or other intellectu 
properti infringement, a defect or damag disk or other medium, a 
comput virus, or comput code that damag or cannot be read by 
your equipment. 

1.f.2. limit warranty, disclaim OF damag - except for the "right 
of replac or refund" describ in paragraph 1.f.3, the project 
gutenberg literari archiv foundation, the owner of the project 
gutenberg-tm trademark, and ani other parti distribut a project 
gutenberg-tm electron work under thi agreement, disclaim all 
liabil to you for damages, cost and expenses, includ legal 
fees. you agre that you have NO remedi for negligence, strict 
liability, breach OF warranti OR breach OF contract except those 
provid IN paragraph f3. you agre that the foundation, the 
trademark owner, and ani distributor under thi agreement will not BE 
liabl TO you for actual, direct, indirect, consequential, punit OR 
incident damag even IF you give notic OF the possibl OF such 
damage. 

1.f.3. limit right OF replac OR refund - If you discov a 
defect in thi electron work within 90 day of receiv it, you can 
receiv a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by send a 
written explan to the person you receiv the work from. If you 
receiv the work on a physic medium, you must return the medium with 
your written explanation. the person or entiti that provid you with 
the defect work may elect to provid a replac copi in lieu of a 
refund. If you receiv the work electronically, the person or entiti 
provid it to you may choos to give you a second opportun to 
receiv the work electron in lieu of a refund. If the second copi 
is also defective, you may demand a refund in write without further 
opportun to fix the problem. 

1.f.4. except for the limit right of replac or refund set forth 
in paragraph 1.f.3, thi work is provid to you 'as-is' with NO other 
warranti OF ani kind, express OR implied, includ but not limit TO 
warranti OF merchant OR fit for ani purpose. 

1.f.5. some state do not allow disclaim of certain impli 
warranti or the exclus or limit of certain type of damages. 
If ani disclaim or limit set forth in thi agreement violat the 
law of the state applic to thi agreement, the agreement shall be 
interpret to make the maximum disclaim or limit permit by 
the applic state law. the invalid or unenforc of ani 
provis of thi agreement shall not void the remain provisions. 

1.f.6. indemn - you agre to indemnifi and hold the foundation, the 
trademark owner, ani agent or employe of the foundation, anyon 
provid copi of project gutenberg-tm electron work in accord 
with thi agreement, and ani volunt associ with the production, 
promot and distribut of project gutenberg-tm electron works, 
harmless from all liability, cost and expenses, includ legal fees, 
that aris directli or indirectli from ani of the follow which you do 
or caus to occur: (a) distribut of thi or ani project gutenberg-tm 
work, (b) alteration, modification, or addit or delet to ani 
project gutenberg-tm work, and (c) ani defect you cause. 


section 2. inform about the mission of project gutenberg-tm 

project gutenberg-tm is synonym with the free distribut of 
electron work in format readabl by the widest varieti of comput 
includ obsolete, old, middle-ag and new computers. It exist 
becaus of the effort of hundr of volunt and donat from 
peopl in all walk of life. 

volunt and financi support to provid volunt with the 
assist they need, is critic to reach project gutenberg-tm' 
goal and ensur that the project gutenberg-tm collect will 
remain freeli avail for gener to come. In 2001, the project 
gutenberg literari archiv foundat wa creat to provid a secur 
and perman futur for project gutenberg-tm and futur generations. 
To learn more about the project gutenberg literari archiv foundat 
and how your effort and donat can help, see section 3 and 4 
and the foundat web page at http://www.pglaf.org. 


section 3. inform about the project gutenberg literari archiv 
foundat 

the project gutenberg literari archiv foundat is a non profit 
501(c)(3) educ corpor organ under the law of the 
state of mississippi and grant tax exempt statu by the intern 
revenu service. the foundation' ein or feder tax identif 
number is 64-6221541. it 501(c)(3) letter is post at 
http://pglaf.org/fundraising. contribut to the project gutenberg 
literari archiv foundat are tax deduct to the full extent 
permit by u.s. feder law and your state' laws. 

the foundation' princip offic is locat at 4557 melan dr. S. 
fairbanks, ak, 99712., but it volunt and employe are scatter 
throughout numer locations. it busi offic is locat at 
809 north 1500 west, salt lake city, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email 
business@pglaf.org. email contact link and up to date contact 
inform can be found at the foundation' web site and offici 
page at http://pglaf.org 

for addit contact information: 
dr. gregori B. newbi 
chief execut and director 
gbnewby@pglaf.org 


section 4. inform about donat to the project gutenberg 
literari archiv foundat 

project gutenberg-tm depend upon and cannot surviv without wide 
spread public support and donat to carri out it mission of 
increas the number of public domain and licens work that can be 
freeli distribut in machin readabl form access by the widest 
array of equip includ outdat equipment. mani small donat 
($1 to $5,000) are particularli import to maintain tax exempt 
statu with the irs. 

the foundat is commit to compli with the law regul 
chariti and charit donat in all 50 state of the unit 
states. complianc requir are not uniform and it take a 
consider effort, much paperwork and mani fee to meet and keep up 
with these requirements. We do not solicit donat in locat 
where we have not receiv written confirm of compliance. To 
send donat or determin the statu of complianc for ani 
particular state visit http://pglaf.org 

while we cannot and do not solicit contribut from state where we 
have not met the solicit requirements, we know of no prohibit 
against accept unsolicit donat from donor in such state who 
approach us with offer to donate. 

intern donat are grate accepted, but we cannot make 
ani statement concern tax treatment of donat receiv from 
outsid the unit states. u.s. law alon swamp our small staff. 

pleas check the project gutenberg web page for current donat 
method and addresses. donat are accept in a number of other 
way includ checks, onlin payment and credit card donations. 
To donate, pleas visit: http://pglaf.org/don 


section 5. gener inform about project gutenberg-tm electron 
works. 

professor michael S. hart is the origin of the project gutenberg-tm 
concept of a librari of electron work that could be freeli share 
with anyone. for thirti years, he produc and distribut project 
gutenberg-tm ebook with onli a loos network of volunt support. 


project gutenberg-tm ebook are often creat from sever print 
editions, all of which are confirm as public domain in the u.s. 
unless a copyright notic is included. thus, we do not necessarili 
keep ebook in complianc with ani particular paper edition. 


most peopl start at our web site which ha the main PG search facility: 

http://www.gutenberg.org 

thi web site includ inform about project gutenberg-tm, 
includ how to make donat to the project gutenberg literari 
archiv foundation, how to help produc our new ebooks, and how to 
subscrib to our email newslett to hear about new ebooks. 
