the project gutenberg ebook, the waif woman, by robert loui stevenson 


thi ebook is for the use of anyon anywher at no cost and with 
almost no restrict whatsoever. you may copi it, give it away or 
re-us it under the term of the project gutenberg licens includ 
with thi ebook or onlin at www.gutenberg.org 





title: the waif woman 


author: robert loui stevenson 



releas date: novemb 10, 2006 [ebook #19750] 

language: english 

charact set encoding: iso-646-u (us-ascii) 


***start OF the project gutenberg ebook the waif woman*** 





transcrib from the 1916 chatto & windu edit by david price, email 
ccx074@pglaf.org 





the waif woman 


BY 
robert loui stevenson 

london 
chatto & windu 
1916 

_first edition_, _october_, 1916. 
_second edition_, _october_, 1916. 

thi unpublish story, preserv among mrs. stevenson' papers, is 
mention by mr. balfour in hi life of stevenson. write of the fabl 
which stevenson began befor he had left england and "attack again, and 
from time to time ad to their number" in 1893, mr. balfour says: "the 
refer to odin [fabl xvii] perhap is due to hi read of the 
sagas, which led him to attempt a tale in the same style, call 'the 
waif woman.'" 




the waif woman 
A cue--from A saga 

prefac 
thi is a tale of iceland, the isl of stories, and of a thing that 
befel in the year of the come there of christianity. 

In the spring of that year a ship sail from the south isl to traffic, 
and fell becalm insid snowfellness. the wind had speed her; she 
wa the first comer of the year; and the fisher drew alongsid to hear 
the news of the south, and eager folk put out in boat to see the 
merchandis and make prices. from the door of the hall on frodi water, 
the hous folk saw the ship becalm and the boat about her, come and 
going; and the merchant from the ship could see the smoke go up and the 
men and women troop to their meal in the hall. 

the goodman of that hous wa call finnward keelfarer, and hi wife aud 
the light-minded; and they had a son eyolf, a like boy, and a daughter 
asdis, a slip of a maid. finnward wa well-to-do in hi affairs, he kept 
open hous and had good friends. but aud hi wife wa not so much 
considered: her mind wa set on trifles, on bright clothing, and the 
admir of men, and the envi of women; and it wa thought she wa not 
alway so circumspect in her bear as she might have been, but noth 
to hurt. 

On the even of the second day men came to the hous from sea. they 
told of the merchandis in the ship, which wa well enough and to be had 
at easi rates, and of a waif woman that sail in her, no one could tell 
why, and had chest of cloth beyond comparison, fine colour stuffs, 
fine woven, the best that ever came into that island, and gewgaw for a 
queen. At the hear of that aud' eye began to glisten. she went 
earli to bed; and the day wa not yet red befor she wa on the beach, 
had a boat launched, and wa pull to the ship. By the way she look 
close at all boats, but there wa no woman in any; and at that she wa 
better pleased, for she had no fear of the men. 

when they came to the ship, boat were there already, and the merchant 
and the shore folk sat and jest and chaffer in the stern. but in the 
fore part of the ship, the woman sat alone, and look befor her sourli 
at the sea. they call her thorgunna. she wa as tall as a man and 
high in flesh, a buxom wife to look at. her hair wa of the dark red, 
time had not chang it. her face wa dark, the cheek full, and the 
brow smooth. some of the merchant told that she wa sixti year of age 
and other laugh and said she wa but forty; but they spoke of her in 
whispers, for they seem to think that she wa ill to deal with and not 
more than ordinari canny. 

aud went to where she sat and made her welcom to iceland. thorgunna did 
the honour of the ship. So for a while they carri it on, prais and 
watch each other, in the way of women. but aud wa a littl vessel to 
contain a great longing, and present the cri of her heart came out of 
her. 

"the folk say," say she, "you have the finest women' thing that ever 
came to iceland?" and as she spoke her eye grew big. 

"it would be strang if I had not," quoth thorgunna. "queen have no 
finer." 

So aud beg that she might see them. 

thorgunna look on her askance. "truly," said she, "the thing are for 
no use but to be shown." So she fetch a chest and open it. here wa 
a cloak of the rare scarlet laid upon with silver, beauti beyond 
belief; hard by wa a silver brooch of basket work that wa wrought as 
fine as ani shell and wa as broad as the face of the full moon; and aud 
saw the cloth lie fold in the chest, of all the colour of the day, 
and fire, and preciou gems; and her heart burn with envy. so, becaus 
she had so huge a mind to buy, she began to make light of the 
merchandise. 

"they are good enough things," say she, "though I have better in my 
chest at home. It is a good enough cloak, and I am in need of a new 
cloak." At that she finger the scarlet, and the touch of the fine 
stuff went to her mind like singing. "come," say she, "if it were onli 
for your civil in show it, what will you have for your cloak?" 

"woman," said thorgunna, "I am no merchant." and she close the chest 
and lock it, like one angry. 

then aud fell to protest and caress her. that wa aud' practice; 
for she thought if she hug and kiss a person none could say her nay. 
next she went to flattery, said she knew the thing were too nobl for 
the like of her--they were made for a stately, beauti woman like 
thorgunna; and at that she kiss her again, and thorgunna seem a 
littl pleased. and now aud pled poverti and beg for the cloak in a 
gift; and now she vaunt the wealth of her goodman and offer ounc 
and ounc of fine silver, the price of three men' lives. thorgunna 
smiled, but it wa a grim smile, and still she shook her head. At last 
aud wrought herself into extrem and wept. 

"I would give my soul for it," she cried. 

"fool!" said thorgunna. "but there have been fool befor you!" and a 
littl after, she said this: "let us be done with beseeching. the thing 
are mine. I wa a fool to show you them; but where is their use, unless 
we show them? mine they are and mine they shall be till I die. I have 
paid for them dear enough," said she. 

aud saw it wa of no avail; so she dri her tears, and ask thorgunna 
about her voyage, and made believ to listen while she plot in her 
littl mind. "thorgunna," she ask presently, "do you count kin with 
ani folk in iceland?" 

"I count kin with none," repli thorgunna. "mi kin is of the greatest, 
but I have not been alway lucky, so I say the less." 

"so that you have no hous to pass the time in till the ship return?" 
cri aud. "dear thorgunna, you must come and live with us. My goodman 
is rich, hi hand and hi hous are open, and I will cherish you like a 
daughter." 

At that thorgunna smile on the one side; but her soul laugh within her 
at the woman' shallowness. "I will pay her for that word _daughter_," 
she thought, and she smile again. 

"I will live with you gladly," say she, "for your hous ha a good name, 
and I have seen the smoke of your kitchen from the ship. but one thing 
you shall understand. I make no presents, I give noth where I go--not 
a rag and not an ounce. where I stay, I work for my upkeep; and as I am 
strong as a man and hardi as an ox, they that have had the keep of me 
were the better pleased." 

It wa a hard job for aud to keep her countenance, for she wa like to 
have wept. and yet she felt it would be unseemli to eat her invitation; 
and like a shallow woman and one that had alway led her husband by the 
nose, she told herself she would find some mean to cajol thorgunna and 
come by her purpos after all. So she put a good face on the thing, had 
thorgunna into the boat, her and her two great chests, and brought her 
home with her to the hall by the beach. 

all the way in she made much of the wife; and when they were arriv gave 
her a lock bed-plac in the hall, where wa a bed, a table, and a 
stool, and space for the two chests. 

"thi shall be your while you stay here," said aud. and she attend on 
her guest. 

now thorgunna open the second chest and took out her bedding--sheet of 
english linen, the like of it never seen, a cover of quilt silk, and 
curtain of purpl wrought with silver. At the sight of these aud wa 
like one distracted, greed blind her mind; the cri rose strong in her 
throat, it must out. 

"what will you sell your bed for?" she cried, and her cheek were 
hot. 

thorgunna look upon her with a duski countenance. "truli you are a 
courteou hostess," said she, "but I will not sleep on straw for your 
amusement." 

At that aud' two ear grew hot as her cheeks; and she took thorgunna at 
her word; and left her from that time in peace. 

the woman wa as good as her spoken word. insid the hous and out she 
wrought like three, and all that she put her hand to wa well done. when 
she milked, the cow yield beyond custom; when she made hay, it wa 
alway dri weather; when she took her turn at the cooking, the folk 
lick their spoons. her manner when she pleas were outsid 
imitation, like one that had sat with king in their high buildings. It 
seem she wa piou too, and the day never pass but she wa in the 
church there praying. the rest wa not so well. she wa of few words, 
and never one about her kin and fortunes. gloom sat on her brow, and she 
wa ill to cross. behind her back they gave her the name of the waif 
woman or the wind wife; to her face it must alway be thorgunna. and if 
ani of the young men call her _mother_, she would speak no more that 
day, but sit apart in the hall and mutter with her lips. 

"thi is a queer piec of good that we have gotten," say finnward 
keelfarer, "I wish we get no harm by her! but the good wife' pleasur 
must be done," said he, which wa hi common word. 

when she wa at work, thorgunna wore the rudest of plain clothes, though 
ever clean as a cat; but at night in the hall she wa more dainty, for 
she love to be admired. No doubt she made herself look well, and mani 
thought she wa a come woman still, and to those she wa alway 
favour and full of pleasant speech. but the more that some pleas 
her, it wa thought by good judg that they pleas aud the less. 

when midsumm wa past, a compani of young men upon a journey came to 
the hous by frodi water. that wa alway a great day for aud, when 
there were gallant at table; and what made thi day the greater, alf of 
the fell wa in the company, and she thought alf fanci her. So be 
sure aud wore her best. but when thorgunna came from the bed-place, she 
wa array like ani queen and the broad brooch wa in her bosom. all 
night in the hall these women strove with each other; and the littl 
maid, asdis, look on, and wa asham and knew not why. but thorgunna 
pleas beyond all; she told of strang thing that had befallen in the 
world; when she pleas she had the cue to laughter; she sang, and her 
voic wa full and her song new in that island; and whenev she turned, 
the eye shone in her face and the brooch glitter at her bosom. So 
that the young men forgot the word of the merchant as to the woman' 
age, and their look follow her all night. 

aud wa sick with envy. sleep fled her; her husband slept, but she sat 
upright besid him in the bed, and gnaw her fingers. now she began to 
hate thorgunna, and the glitter of the great brooch stood befor her 
in the dark. "sure," she thought, "it must be the glamour of that 
brooch! she is not so fair as I; she is as old as the dead in the 
hillside; and as for her wit and her songs, it is littl I think of 
them!" Up she got at that, took a light from the embers, and came to her 
guest' bed-place. the door wa locked, but aud had a master-key and 
could go in. inside, the chest were open, and in the top of one the 
light of her taper shone upon the glitter of the brooch. As a dog 
snatch food she snatch it, and turn to the bed. thorgunna lay on 
her side; it wa to be thought she slept, but she talk the while to 
herself, and her lip moved. It seem her year return to her in 
slumber, for her face wa grey and her brow knotted; and the open eye of 
her stare in the eye of aud. the heart of the foolish woman die in 
her bosom; but her greed wa the stronger, and she fled with that which 
she had stolen. 

when she wa back in bed, the word of thorgunna came to her mind, that 
these thing were for no use but to be shown. here she had the brooch 
and the shame of it, and might not wear it. So all night she quak with 
the fear of discovery, and wept tear of rage that she should have sin 
in vain. day came, and aud must rise; but she went about the hous like 
a crazi woman. she saw the eye of asdi rest on her strangely, and at 
that she beat the maid. she scold the hous folk, and, by her way of 
it, noth wa done aright. first she wa love to her husband and 
made much of him, think to be on hi good side when troubl came. then 
she took a better way, pick a feud with him, and rail on the poor man 
till hi ear rang, so that he might be in the wrong beforehand. the 
brooch she hid without, in the side of a hayrick. all thi while 
thorgunna lay in the bed-place, which wa not her way, for by custom she 
wa earli astir. At last she came forth, and there wa that in her face 
that made all the hous look one at the other and the heart of aud to be 
straitened. never a word the guest spoke, not a bite she swallowed, and 
they saw the strong shudder take and shake her in her place. yet a 
little, and still without speech, back she went into her bad-place, and 
the door wa shut. 

"that is a sick wife," said finnward, "her weird ha come on her." 

and at that the heart of aud wa lift up with hope. 

all day thorgunna lay on her bed, and the next day sent for finnward. 

"finnward keelfarer," said she, "mi troubl is come upon me, and I am at 
the end of my days." 

He made the customari talk. 

"I have had my good things; now my hour is come; and let suffice," quoth 
she. "I did not send for you to hear your prating." 

finnward knew not what to answer, for he saw her soul wa dark. 

"I sent for you on need matters," she began again. "I die here--i!--in 
thi black house, in a bleak island, far from all decenc and proper way 
of man; and now my treasur must be left. small pleasur have I had of 
it, and leav it with the less!" cri she. 

"good woman, as the say is, need must," say finnward, for he wa 
nettl with that speech. 

"for that I call you," quoth thorgunna. "in these two chest are much 
wealth and thing greatli to be desired. I wish my bodi to be laid in 
skalaholt in the new church, where I trust to hear the mass-priest 
sing over my head so long as time endures. To that church I will you 
to give what is sufficient, leav your conscienc judg of it. My 
scarlet cloak with the silver, I will to that poor fool your wife. she 
long for it so bitterly, I may not even now deni her. give her the 
brooch as well. I warn you of her; I wa such as she, onli wiser; I warn 
you, the ground she stand upon is water, and whoso trust her lean on 
rottenness. I hate her and I piti her. when she come to lie where I 
lie--" there she broke off. "the rest of my good I leav to your black- 
eye maid, young asdis, for her slim bodi and clean mind. onli the 
thing of my bed, you shall see burned." 

"it is well," said finnward. 

"it may be well," quoth she, "if you obey. My life ha been a wonder to 
all and a fear to many. while I live none thwart me and prospered. 
see to it that none thwart me after I am dead. It stand upon your 
safety." 

"it stand upon my honour," quoth finnward, "and I have the name of an 
honour man." 

"you have the name of a weak one," say thorgunna. "look to it, look to 
it, finnward. your hous shall rue it else." 

"the rooftre of my hous is my word," said finnward. 

"and that is a true saying," say the woman. "see to it, then. the 
speech of thorgunna is ended." 

with that she turn her face against the wall and finnward left her. 

the same night, in the small hour of the clock, thorgunna passed. It 
wa a wild night for summer, and the wind sang about the eav and cloud 
cover the moon, when the dark woman wended. from that day to thi no 
man ha learn her stori or her people' name; but be sure the one wa 
stormi and the other great. she had come to that isle, a waif woman, on 
a ship; thenc she flitted, and no more remain of her but her heavi 
chest and her big body. 

In the morn the hous women streak and dress the corpse. then 
came finnward, and carri the sheet and curtain from the house, and 
caus build a fire upon the sands. but aud had an eye on her man' 
doings. 

"and what is thi that you are at?" said she. 

So he told her. 

"burn the good sheets!" she cried. "and where would I be with my two 
hands? no, troth," said aud, "not so long as your wife is abov ground!" 

"good wife," said finnward, "thi is beyond your province. here is my 
word pledg and the woman dead I pledg it to. So much the more am I 
bound. let me be do as I must, goodwife." 

"tilly-valley!" say she, "and a fiddlestick' end, goodman! you may 
know well about fish and be good at shear sheep for what I know; 
but you are littl of a judg of damask sheets. and the best word I can 
say is just this," she says, lay hold of one end of the goods, "that 
if ye are made up to burn the plenishing, you must burn your wife along 
with it." 

"I trust it will not go so hard," say finnward, "and I beg you not to 
speak so loud and let the hous folk hear you." 

"let them speak low that are ashamed!" cri aud. "I speak onli in 
reason." 

"you are to consid that the woman die in my house," say finnward, 
"and thi wa her last behest. In truth, goodwife, if I were to fail, it 
is a thing that would stick long in my throat, and would give us an ill 
name with the neighbours." 

"and you are to consider," say she, "that I am your true wife and worth 
all the witch ever burnt, and love her old husband"--her she put her 
arm about hi neck. "and you are to consid that what you wish to do 
is to destroy fine stuff, such as we have no mean of replacing; and that 
she bade you do it singli to spite me, for I sought to buy thi bed 
from her while she wa aliv at her own price; and that she hate me 
becaus I wa young and handsome." 

"that is a true word that she hate you, for she said so herself befor 
she wended," say finnward. 

"so that here is an old faggot that hate me, and she dead as a bucket," 
say aud; "and here is a young wife that love you dear, and is aliv 
forby"--and at that she kiss him--"and the point is, which are you to 
do the will of?" 

the man' weak caught him hard, and he faltered. "I fear some hurt 
will come of it," said he. 

there she cut in, and bade the lad tread out the fire, and the lass 
roll the bed-stuff up and carri it within. 

"mi dear," say he, "mi honour--thi is against my honour." 

but she took hi arm under hers, and caress hi hand, and kiss hi 
knuckles, and led him down the bay. "bubble-bubble-bubble!" say she, 
imit him like a baby, though she wa none so young. "bubble-bubble, 
and a silli old man! We must buri the troll wife, and here is troubl 
enough, and a vengeance! hors will sweat for it befor she come to 
skalaholt; 'ti my belief she wa a man in a woman' habit. and so now, 
have done, good man, and let us get her wake and buried, which is more 
than she deserves, or her old dud are like to pay for. and when that is 
ended, we can consult upon the rest." 

So finnward wa but too well pleas to put it off. 

the next day they set forth earli for skalaholt across the heaths. It 
wa heavi weather, and grey overhead; the hors sweat and neighed, and 
the men went silent, for it wa nowher in their mind that the dead wife 
wa canny. onli aud talk by the way, like a silli sea-gul pipe on a 
cliff, and the rest held their peace. the sun went down befor they were 
across whitewater; and the black night fell on them thi side of 
netherness. At nether they beat upon the door. the goodman wa not 
abe nor ani of hi folk, but sat in the hall talking; and to them 
finnward made clear hi business. 

"I will never deni you a roof," said the goodman of netherness. "but I 
have no food ready, and if you cannot be do without meat, you must 
e'en fare farther." 

they laid the bodi in a shed, made fast their horses, and came into the 
house, and the door wa close again. So there they sat about the 
lights, and there wa littl said, for they were none so well pleas 
with their reception. presently, in the place where the food wa kept, 
began a clatter of dishes; and it fell to a bondman of the hous to go 
and see what made the clatter. He wa no sooner gone than he wa back 
again; and told it wa a big, buxom woman, high in flesh and nake as she 
wa born, set meat upon a dresser. finnward grew pale as the dawn; 
he got to hi feet, and the rest rose with him, and all the parti of the 
funer came to the buttery-door. and the dead thorgunna took no heed of 
their coming, but went on set forth meats, and seem to talk with 
herself as she did so; and she wa nake to the buff. 

great fear fell upon them; the marrow of their back grew cold. not one 
word they spoke, neither good nor bad; but back into the hall, and down 
upon their bend knees, and to their prayers. 

"now, in the name of god, what ail you?" cri the goodman of 
netherness. 

and when they had told him, shame fell upon him for hi churlishness. 

"the dead wife reprov me," said the honest man. 

and he bless himself and hi house, and caus spread the tables, and 
they all ate of the meat that the dead wife laid out. 

thi wa the first walk of thorgunna, and it is thought by good judg 
it would have been the last as well, if men had been more wise. 

the next day they came to skalaholt, and there wa the bodi buried, and 
the next after they set out for home. finnward' heart wa heavy, and 
hi mind divided. He fear the dead wife and the living; he fear 
dishonour and he fear dispeace; and hi will wa like a sea-gul in the 
wind. now he clear hi throat and made as if to speak; and at that aud 
cock her eye and look at the goodman mocking, and hi voic die 
unborn. At the last, shame gave him courage. 

"aud," said he, "yon wa a most uncanni thing at netherness." 

"no doubt," said aud. 

"I have never had it in my mind," said he, "that yon woman wa the thing 
she should be." 

"I dare say not," said aud. "I never thought so either." 

"it stand beyond question she wa more than canny," say finnward, 
shake hi head. "no manner of doubt but what she wa ancient of mind." 

"she wa get pretti old in body, too," say aud. 

"wife," say he, "it come in upon me strongli thi is no kind of woman 
to disobey; abov all, be dead and her walking. I think, wife, we 
must even do as she commanded." 

"now what is ever your word?" say she, ride up close and set her 
hand upon hi shoulder. "'the goodwife' pleasur must be done'; is not 
that my finnward?" 

"the good god know I grudg you nothing," cri finnward. "but my blood 
run cold upon thi business. wors will come of it!" he cried, "wors 
will flow from it!" 

"what is thi todo?" cri aud. "here is an old brimston hag that 
should have been stone with stones, and hate me besides. vainli she 
tri to frighten me when she wa living; shall she frighten me now when 
she is dead and rotten? I trow not. think shame to your beard, goodman! 
are these a man' shoe I see you shake in, when your wife ride by 
your bridle-hand, as bold as nails?" 

"ay, ay," quoth finnward. "but there goe a byword in the country: 
littl wit, littl fear." 

At thi aud began to be concerned, for he wa usual easier to lead. So 
now she tri the other method on the man. 

"i that your word?" cri she. "I kiss the hand of ye! If I have not 
wit enough, I can rid you of my company. wit is it he seeks?" she cried. 
"the old broomstick that we buri yesterday had wit for you." 

So she rode on ahead and look not the road that he wa on. 

poor finnward follow on hi horse, but the light of the day wa gone 
out, for hi wife wa like hi life to him. He went six mile and wa 
true to hi heart; but the seventh wa not half through when he rode up 
to her. 

"i it to be the goodwife' pleasure?" she asked. 

"aud, you shall have your way," say he; "god grant there come no ill of 
it!" 

So she made much of him, and hi heart wa comforted. 

when they came to the house, aud had the two chest to her own bed-place, 
and gloat all night on what she found. finnward look on, and troubl 
darken hi mind. 

"wife," say he at last, "you will not forget these thing belong to 
asdis?" 

At that she bark upon him like a dog. 

"am I a thief?" she cried. "the brat shall have them in her turn when 
she grow up. would you have me give her them now to turn her minx' 
head with?" 

So the weak man went hi way out of the hous in sorrow and fell to hi 
affairs. those that wrought with him that day observ that now he would 
labour and toil like a man furious, and now would sit and stare like one 
stupid; for in truth he judg the busi would end ill. 

for a while there wa no more done and no more said. aud cherish her 
treasur by herself, and none wa the wiser except finnward. onli the 
cloak she sometim wore, for that wa her by the will of the dead wife; 
but the other she let lie, becaus she knew she had them foully, and she 
fear finnward somewhat and thorgunna much. 

At last husband and wife were bound to bed one night, and he wa the 
first strip and got in. "what sheet are these?" he screamed, as hi 
leg touch them, for these were smooth as water, but the sheet of 
iceland were like sacking. 

"clean sheets, I suppose," say aud, but her hand quaver as she wound 
her hair. 

"woman!" cri finnward, "these are the bed-sheet of thorgunna--thes 
are the sheet she die in! do not lie to me!" 

At that aud turn and look at him. "well?" say she, "they have been 
washed." 

finnward lay down again in the bed between thorgunna' sheets, and 
groaned; never a word more he said, for now he knew he wa a coward and a 
man dishonoured. present hi wife came besid him, and they lay still, 
but neither slept. 

It might be twelv in the night when aud felt finnward shudder so strong 
that the bed shook. 

"what ail you?" said she. 

"I know not," he said. "it is a chill like the chill of death. My soul 
is sick with it." hi voic fell low. "it wa so thorgunna sickened," 
said he. and he aros and walk in the hall in the dark till it came 
morning. 

earli in the morn he went forth to the sea-fish with four lads. aud 
wa troubl at heart and watch him from the door, and even as he went 
down the beach she saw him shaken with thorgunna' shudder. It wa a 
rough day, the sea wa wild, the boat labour exceedingly, and it may be 
that finnward' mind wa troubl with hi sickness. certain it is that 
they struck, and their boat wa burst, upon a skerri under snowfellness. 
the four lad were spill into the sea, and the sea broke and buri 
them, but finnward wa cast upon the skerry, and clamber up, and sat 
there all day long: god know hi thoughts. the sun wa half-way down, 
when a shepherd went by on the cliff about hi business, and spi a man 
in the midst of the breach of the loud seas, upon a pinnacl of reef. He 
hail him, and the man turn and hail again. there wa in that cove 
so great a clash of the sea and so shrill a cri of sea-fowl that the 
herd might hear the voic and nor the words. but the name thorgunna came 
to him, and he saw the face of finnward keelfar like the face of an old 
man. live ran the herd to finnward' house; and when hi tale wa told 
there, eyolf the boy wa live to out a boat and hasten to hi father' 
aid. By the strength of hand they drove the keel against the seas, and 
with skill and courag eyolf won upon the skerri and climb up, there 
sat hi father dead; and thi wa the first vengeanc of thorgunna 
against broken faith. 

It wa a sore job to get the corps on board, and a sorer yet to bring it 
home befor the roll seas. but the lad eyolf wa a lad of promise, 
and the lad that pull for him were sturdi men. So the break-faith' 
bodi wa got home, and waked, and buri on the hill. aud wa a good 
widow and wept much, for she like finnward well enough. yet a bird sang 
in her ear that now she might marri a young man. littl fear that she 
might have her choic of them, she thought, with all thorgunna' fine 
things; and her heart wa cheered. 

now, when the corps wa laid in the hill, asdi came where aud sat 
solitari in hall, and stood by her awhil without speech. 

"well, child?" say aud; and again "well?" and then "keep us holy, if you 
have anyth to say, out with it!" 

So the maid came so much nearer, "mother," say she, "I wish you would 
not wear these thing that were thorgunna's." 

"aha," cri aud. "thi is what it is? you begin early, brat! and who 
ha been poison your mind? your fool of a father, I suppose." and 
then she stop and went all scarlet. "who told you they were yours?" 
she ask again, take it all the higher for her stumble. "when you are 
grown, then you shall have your share and not a day before. these thing 
are not for babies." 

the child look at her and wa amazed. "I do not wish them," she said. 
"I wish they might be burned." 

"upon my word, what next?" cri aud. "and whi should they be burned?" 

"I know my father tri to burn these things," said asdis, "and he name 
thorgunna' name upon the skerri ere he died. and, O mother, I doubt 
they have brought ill luck." 

but the more aud wa terrified, the more she would make light of it. 

then the girl put her hand upon her mother's. "I fear they are ill come 
by," said she. 

the blood sprang in aud' face. "and who made you a judg upon your 
mother that bore you?" cri she. 

"kinswoman," said asdis, look down, "I saw you with the brooch." 

"what do you mean? when? where did you see me?" cri the mother. 

"here in the hall," said asdis, look on the floor, "the night you 
stole it." 

At that aud let out a cry. then she heav up her hand to strike the 
child. "you littl spy!" she cried. then she cover her face, and 
wept, and rock herself. "what can you know?" she cried. "how can you 
understand, that are a baby, not so long weaned? He could--your father 
could, the dear good man, dead and gone! He could understand and pity, 
he wa good to me. now he ha left me alon with heartless children! 
asdis," she cried, "have you no natur in your blood? you do not know 
what I have done and suffer for them. I have done--oh, and I could 
have done anything! and there is your father dead. and after all, you 
ask me not to use them? No woman in iceland ha the like. and you wish 
me to destroy them? not if the dead should rise!" she cried. "no, no," 
and she stop her ears, "not if the dead should rise, and let that end 
it!" 

So she ran into her bed-place, and clap at the door, and left the 
child amazed. 

but for all aud spoke with so much passion, it wa notic that for long 
she left the thing unused. onli she would be lock somewhil daili in 
her bed-place, where she pore on them and secretli wore them for her 
pleasure. 

now winter wa at hand; the day grew short and the night long; and 
under the golden face of morn the isl would stand silver with frost. 
word came from holyfel to frodi water of a compani of young men upon a 
journey; that night they sup at holyfell, the next it would be at 
frodi water; and alf of the fell wa there, and thongbrand ketilson, 
and hall the fair. aud went earli to her bed-place, and there she pore 
upon these fineri till her heart wa melt with self-love. there wa 
a kirtl of a mingl colour, and the blue shot into the green, and the 
green lighten from the blue, as the colour play in the ocean between 
deep and shallows: she thought she could endur to live no longer and 
not wear it. there wa a bracelet of an ell long, wrought like a serpent 
and with fieri jewel for the eyes; she saw it shine on her white arm and 
her head grew dizzi with desire. "ah!" she thought, "never were fine 
lend better met with a fair wearer." and she close her eyelids, and 
she thought she saw herself among the compani and the men' eye go after 
her admiring. with that she consid that she must soon marri one of 
them and wonder which; and she thought alf wa perhap the best, or 
hall the fair, but wa not certain, and then she rememb finnward 
keelfar in hi cairn upon the hill, and wa concerned. "well, he wa a 
good husband to me," she thought, "and I wa a good wife to him. but 
that is an old song now." So she turn again to handl the stuff and 
jewels. At last she got to bed in the smooth sheets, and lay, and 
fanci how she would look, and admir herself, and saw other admir 
her, and told herself stories, till her heart grew warm and she chuckl 
to herself between the sheets. So she shook awhil with laughter; and 
then the mirth abat but not the shaking; and a grue took hold upon her 
flesh, and the cold of the grave upon her belly, and the terror of death 
upon her soul. with that a voic wa in her ear: "it wa so thorgunna 
sickened." thrice in the night the chill and the terror took her, and 
thrice it pass away; and when she rose on the morrow, death had 
breath upon her countenance. 

she saw the hous folk and her children gaze upon her; well she knew why! 
she knew her day wa come, and the last of her days, and her last hour 
wa at her back; and it wa so in her soul that she scarc minded. all 
wa lost, all wa past mending, she would carri on until she fell. So 
she went as usual, and hurri the feast for the young men, and rail 
upon her hous folk, but her feet stumbled, and her voic wa strang in 
her own ears, and the eye of the folk fled befor her. At times, too, 
the chill took her and the fear along with it; and she must sit down, and 
the teeth beat togeth in her head, and the stool totter on the floor. 
At these times, she thought she wa passing, and the voic of thorgunna 
sound in her ear: "the thing are for no use but to be shown," it said. 
"aud, aud, have you shown them once? no, not once!" 

and at the sting of the thought her courag and strength would revive, 
and she would rise again and move about her business. 

now the hour drew near, and aud went to her bed-place, and did on the 
bravest of her finery, and came forth to greet her guests. wa never 
woman in iceland robe as she was. the word of greet were yet 
between her lips, when the shudder fell upon her strong as labour, and 
a horror as deep as hell. her face wa chang amidst her finery, and 
the face of her guest were chang as they beheld her: fear pucker 
their brows, fear drew back their feet; and she took her doom from the 
look of them, and fled to her bed-place. there she flung herself on the 
wife' coverlet, and turn her face against the wall. 

that wa the end of all the word of aud; and in the small hour on the 
clock her spirit wended. asdi had come to and fro, see if she might 
help, where wa no help possibl of man or woman. It wa light in the 
bed-plac when the maid returned, for a taper stood upon a chest. there 
lay aud in her fine clothes, and there by her side on the bed the big 
dead wife thorgunna squat on her hams. No sound wa heard, but it 
seem by the movement of her mouth as if thorgunna sang, and she wave 
her arm as if to singing. 

"god be good to us!" cri asdis, "she is dead." 

"dead," said the dead wife. 

"i the weird passed?" cri asdis. 

"when the sin is done the weird is dreed," said thorgunna, and with that 
she wa not. 

but the next day eyolf and asdi caus build a fire on the shore betwixt 
tide-marks. there they burn the bed-clothes, and the clothes, and the 
jewels, and the veri board of the waif woman' chests; and when the tide 
return it wash away their ashes. So the weird of thorgunna wa 
lift from the hous on frodi water. 

print BY 
bill and sons, limit 
guildford, england. 



***end OF the project gutenberg ebook the waif woman*** 


******* thi file should be name 19750.txt or 19750.zip ******* 


thi and all associ file of variou format will be found in: 
http://www.gutenberg.org/dirs/1/9/7/5/19750 



updat edit will replac the previou one--th old edit 
will be renamed. 

creat the work from public domain print edit mean that no 
one own a unit state copyright in these works, so the foundat 
(and you!) can copi and distribut it in the unit state without 
permiss and without pay copyright royalties. special rules, 
set forth in the gener term of use part of thi license, appli to 
copi and distribut project gutenberg-tm electron work to 
protect the project gutenberg-tm concept and trademark. project 
gutenberg is a regist trademark, and may not be use if you 
charg for the ebooks, unless you receiv specif permission. If you 
do not charg anyth for copi of thi ebook, compli with the 
rule is veri easy. you may use thi ebook for nearli ani purpos 
such as creation of deriv works, reports, perform and 
research. they may be modifi and print and given away--y may do 
practic anyth with public domain ebooks. redistribut is 
subject to the trademark license, especi commerci 
redistribution. 



*** start: full licens *** 

the full project gutenberg licens 
pleas read thi befor you distribut OR use thi work 

To protect the project gutenberg-tm mission of promot the free 
distribut of electron works, by use or distribut thi work 
(or ani other work associ in ani way with the phrase "project 
gutenberg"), you agre to compli with all the term of the full project 
gutenberg-tm licens (avail with thi file or onlin at 
http://www.gutenberg.org/license). 


section 1. gener term of use and redistribut project gutenberg-tm 
electron work 

1.a. By read or use ani part of thi project gutenberg-tm 
electron work, you indic that you have read, understand, agre to 
and accept all the term of thi licens and intellectu properti 
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agre to abid by all 
the term of thi agreement, you must ceas use and return or destroy 
all copi of project gutenberg-tm electron work in your possession. 
If you paid a fee for obtain a copi of or access to a project 
gutenberg-tm electron work and you do not agre to be bound by the 
term of thi agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or 
entiti to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.e.8. 

1.b. "project gutenberg" is a regist trademark. It may onli be 
use on or associ in ani way with an electron work by peopl who 
agre to be bound by the term of thi agreement. there are a few 
thing that you can do with most project gutenberg-tm electron work 
even without compli with the full term of thi agreement. see 
paragraph 1.c below. there are a lot of thing you can do with project 
gutenberg-tm electron work if you follow the term of thi agreement 
and help preserv free futur access to project gutenberg-tm electron 
works. see paragraph 1.e below. 

1.c. the project gutenberg literari archiv foundat ("the foundation" 
or pglaf), own a compil copyright in the collect of project 
gutenberg-tm electron works. nearli all the individu work in the 
collect are in the public domain in the unit states. If an 
individu work is in the public domain in the unit state and you are 
locat in the unit states, we do not claim a right to prevent you from 
copying, distributing, performing, display or creat deriv 
work base on the work as long as all refer to project gutenberg 
are removed. Of course, we hope that you will support the project 
gutenberg-tm mission of promot free access to electron work by 
freeli share project gutenberg-tm work in complianc with the term of 
thi agreement for keep the project gutenberg-tm name associ with 
the work. you can easili compli with the term of thi agreement by 
keep thi work in the same format with it attach full project 
gutenberg-tm licens when you share it without charg with others. 

1.d. the copyright law of the place where you are locat also govern 
what you can do with thi work. copyright law in most countri are in 
a constant state of change. If you are outsid the unit states, check 
the law of your countri in addit to the term of thi agreement 
befor downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distribut or 
creat deriv work base on thi work or ani other project 
gutenberg-tm work. the foundat make no represent concern 
the copyright statu of ani work in ani countri outsid the unit 
states. 

1.e. unless you have remov all refer to project gutenberg: 

1.e.1. the follow sentence, with activ link to, or other immedi 
access to, the full project gutenberg-tm licens must appear promin 
whenev ani copi of a project gutenberg-tm work (ani work on which the 
phrase "project gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "project 
gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed, 
copi or distributed: 

thi ebook is for the use of anyon anywher at no cost and with 
almost no restrict whatsoever. you may copi it, give it away or 
re-us it under the term of the project gutenberg licens includ 
with thi ebook or onlin at www.gutenberg.org 

1.e.2. If an individu project gutenberg-tm electron work is deriv 
from the public domain (doe not contain a notic indic that it is 
post with permiss of the copyright holder), the work can be copi 
and distribut to anyon in the unit state without pay ani fee 
or charges. If you are redistribut or provid access to a work 
with the phrase "project gutenberg" associ with or appear on the 
work, you must compli either with the requir of paragraph 1.e.1 
through 1.e.7 or obtain permiss for the use of the work and the 
project gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraph 1.e.8 or 
1.e.9. 

1.e.3. If an individu project gutenberg-tm electron work is post 
with the permiss of the copyright holder, your use and distribut 
must compli with both paragraph 1.e.1 through 1.e.7 and ani addit 
term impos by the copyright holder. addit term will be link 
to the project gutenberg-tm licens for all work post with the 
permiss of the copyright holder found at the begin of thi work. 

1.e.4. Do not unlink or detach or remov the full project gutenberg-tm 
licens term from thi work, or ani file contain a part of thi 
work or ani other work associ with project gutenberg-tm. 

1.e.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribut or redistribut thi 
electron work, or ani part of thi electron work, without 
promin display the sentenc set forth in paragraph 1.e.1 with 
activ link or immedi access to the full term of the project 
gutenberg-tm license. 

1.e.6. you may convert to and distribut thi work in ani binary, 
compressed, mark up, nonproprietari or proprietari form, includ ani 
word process or hypertext form. however, if you provid access to or 
distribut copi of a project gutenberg-tm work in a format other than 
"plain vanilla ascii" or other format use in the offici version 
post on the offici project gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org), 
you must, at no addit cost, fee or expens to the user, provid a 
copy, a mean of export a copy, or a mean of obtain a copi upon 
request, of the work in it origin "plain vanilla ascii" or other 
form. ani altern format must includ the full project gutenberg-tm 
licens as specifi in paragraph 1.e.1. 

1.e.7. Do not charg a fee for access to, viewing, displaying, 
performing, copi or distribut ani project gutenberg-tm work 
unless you compli with paragraph 1.e.8 or 1.e.9. 

1.e.8. you may charg a reason fee for copi of or provid 
access to or distribut project gutenberg-tm electron work provid 
that 

- you pay a royalti fee of 20% of the gross profit you deriv from 
the use of project gutenberg-tm work calcul use the method 
you alreadi use to calcul your applic taxes. the fee is 
owe to the owner of the project gutenberg-tm trademark, but he 
ha agre to donat royalti under thi paragraph to the 
project gutenberg literari archiv foundation. royalti payment 
must be paid within 60 day follow each date on which you 
prepar (or are legal requir to prepare) your period tax 
returns. royalti payment should be clearli mark as such and 
sent to the project gutenberg literari archiv foundat at the 
address specifi in section 4, "inform about donat to 
the project gutenberg literari archiv foundation." 

- you provid a full refund of ani money paid by a user who notifi 
you in write (or by e-mail) within 30 day of receipt that s/he 
doe not agre to the term of the full project gutenberg-tm 
license. you must requir such a user to return or 
destroy all copi of the work possess in a physic medium 
and discontinu all use of and all access to other copi of 
project gutenberg-tm works. 

- you provide, in accord with paragraph 1.f.3, a full refund of ani 
money paid for a work or a replac copy, if a defect in the 
electron work is discov and report to you within 90 day 
of receipt of the work. 

- you compli with all other term of thi agreement for free 
distribut of project gutenberg-tm works. 

1.e.9. If you wish to charg a fee or distribut a project gutenberg-tm 
electron work or group of work on differ term than are set 
forth in thi agreement, you must obtain permiss in write from 
both the project gutenberg literari archiv foundat and michael 
hart, the owner of the project gutenberg-tm trademark. contact the 
foundat as set forth in section 3 below. 

1.f. 

1.f.1. project gutenberg volunt and employe expend consider 
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcrib and proofread 
public domain work in creat the project gutenberg-tm 
collection. despit these efforts, project gutenberg-tm electron 
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain 
"defects," such as, but not limit to, incomplete, inaccur or 
corrupt data, transcript errors, a copyright or other intellectu 
properti infringement, a defect or damag disk or other medium, a 
comput virus, or comput code that damag or cannot be read by 
your equipment. 

1.f.2. limit warranty, disclaim OF damag - except for the "right 
of replac or refund" describ in paragraph 1.f.3, the project 
gutenberg literari archiv foundation, the owner of the project 
gutenberg-tm trademark, and ani other parti distribut a project 
gutenberg-tm electron work under thi agreement, disclaim all 
liabil to you for damages, cost and expenses, includ legal 
fees. you agre that you have NO remedi for negligence, strict 
liability, breach OF warranti OR breach OF contract except those 
provid IN paragraph f3. you agre that the foundation, the 
trademark owner, and ani distributor under thi agreement will not BE 
liabl TO you for actual, direct, indirect, consequential, punit OR 
incident damag even IF you give notic OF the possibl OF such 
damage. 

1.f.3. limit right OF replac OR refund - If you discov a 
defect in thi electron work within 90 day of receiv it, you can 
receiv a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by send a 
written explan to the person you receiv the work from. If you 
receiv the work on a physic medium, you must return the medium with 
your written explanation. the person or entiti that provid you with 
the defect work may elect to provid a replac copi in lieu of a 
refund. If you receiv the work electronically, the person or entiti 
provid it to you may choos to give you a second opportun to 
receiv the work electron in lieu of a refund. If the second copi 
is also defective, you may demand a refund in write without further 
opportun to fix the problem. 

1.f.4. except for the limit right of replac or refund set forth 
in paragraph 1.f.3, thi work is provid to you 'as-is', with NO other 
warranti OF ani kind, express OR implied, includ but not limit TO 
warranti OF merchant OR fit for ani purpose. 

1.f.5. some state do not allow disclaim of certain impli 
warranti or the exclus or limit of certain type of damages. 
If ani disclaim or limit set forth in thi agreement violat the 
law of the state applic to thi agreement, the agreement shall be 
interpret to make the maximum disclaim or limit permit by 
the applic state law. the invalid or unenforc of ani 
provis of thi agreement shall not void the remain provisions. 

1.f.6. indemn - you agre to indemnifi and hold the foundation, the 
trademark owner, ani agent or employe of the foundation, anyon 
provid copi of project gutenberg-tm electron work in accord 
with thi agreement, and ani volunt associ with the production, 
promot and distribut of project gutenberg-tm electron works, 
harmless from all liability, cost and expenses, includ legal fees, 
that aris directli or indirectli from ani of the follow which you do 
or caus to occur: (a) distribut of thi or ani project gutenberg-tm 
work, (b) alteration, modification, or addit or delet to ani 
project gutenberg-tm work, and (c) ani defect you cause. 


section 2. inform about the mission of project gutenberg-tm 

project gutenberg-tm is synonym with the free distribut of 
electron work in format readabl by the widest varieti of comput 
includ obsolete, old, middle-ag and new computers. It exist 
becaus of the effort of hundr of volunt and donat from 
peopl in all walk of life. 

volunt and financi support to provid volunt with the 
assist they need, is critic to reach project gutenberg-tm' 
goal and ensur that the project gutenberg-tm collect will 
remain freeli avail for gener to come. In 2001, the project 
gutenberg literari archiv foundat wa creat to provid a secur 
and perman futur for project gutenberg-tm and futur generations. 
To learn more about the project gutenberg literari archiv foundat 
and how your effort and donat can help, see section 3 and 4 
and the foundat web page at http://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/pglaf. 


section 3. inform about the project gutenberg literari archiv 
foundat 

the project gutenberg literari archiv foundat is a non profit 
501(c)(3) educ corpor organ under the law of the 
state of mississippi and grant tax exempt statu by the intern 
revenu service. the foundation' ein or feder tax identif 
number is 64-6221541. contribut to the project gutenberg 
literari archiv foundat are tax deduct to the full extent 
permit by u.s. feder law and your state' laws. 

the foundation' princip offic is locat at 4557 melan dr. S. 
fairbanks, ak, 99712., but it volunt and employe are scatter 
throughout numer locations. it busi offic is locat at 
809 north 1500 west, salt lake city, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email 
business@pglaf.org. email contact link and up to date contact 
inform can be found at the foundation' web site and offici 
page at http://www.gutenberg.org/about/contact 

for addit contact information: 
dr. gregori B. newbi 
chief execut and director 
gbnewby@pglaf.org 

section 4. inform about donat to the project gutenberg 
literari archiv foundat 

project gutenberg-tm depend upon and cannot surviv without wide 
spread public support and donat to carri out it mission of 
increas the number of public domain and licens work that can be 
freeli distribut in machin readabl form access by the widest 
array of equip includ outdat equipment. mani small donat 
($1 to $5,000) are particularli import to maintain tax exempt 
statu with the irs. 

the foundat is commit to compli with the law regul 
chariti and charit donat in all 50 state of the unit 
states. complianc requir are not uniform and it take a 
consider effort, much paperwork and mani fee to meet and keep up 
with these requirements. We do not solicit donat in locat 
where we have not receiv written confirm of compliance. To 
send donat or determin the statu of complianc for ani 
particular state visit http://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/don 

while we cannot and do not solicit contribut from state where we 
have not met the solicit requirements, we know of no prohibit 
against accept unsolicit donat from donor in such state who 
approach us with offer to donate. 

intern donat are grate accepted, but we cannot make 
ani statement concern tax treatment of donat receiv from 
outsid the unit states. u.s. law alon swamp our small staff. 

pleas check the project gutenberg web page for current donat 
method and addresses. donat are accept in a number of other 
way includ checks, onlin payment and credit card donations. 
To donate, pleas visit: 
http://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/don 


section 5. gener inform about project gutenberg-tm electron 
works. 

professor michael S. hart is the origin of the project gutenberg-tm 
concept of a librari of electron work that could be freeli share 
with anyone. for thirti years, he produc and distribut project 
gutenberg-tm ebook with onli a loos network of volunt support. 

project gutenberg-tm ebook are often creat from sever print 
editions, all of which are confirm as public domain in the u.s. 
unless a copyright notic is included. thus, we do not necessarili 
keep ebook in complianc with ani particular paper edition. 

most peopl start at our web site which ha the main PG search facility: 

http://www.gutenberg.org 

thi web site includ inform about project gutenberg-tm, 
includ how to make donat to the project gutenberg literari 
archiv foundation, how to help produc our new ebooks, and how to 
subscrib to our email newslett to hear about new ebooks. 
