the project gutenberg ebook of isl of the undead, by lloyd arthur eshbach 

thi ebook is for the use of anyon anywher at no cost and with 
almost no restrict whatsoever. you may copi it, give it away or 
re-us it under the term of the project gutenberg licens includ 
with thi ebook or onlin at www.gutenberg.org 


title: isl of the undead 

author: lloyd arthur eshbach 

releas date: may 21, 2010 [ebook #32470] 

language: english 


*** start OF thi project gutenberg ebook isl OF the undead *** 




produc by sankar viswanathan, greg weeks, and the onlin 
distribut proofread team at http://www.pgdp.net 







transcriber' note: 

thi etext wa produc from weird tale octob 1936. extens 
research did not uncov ani evid that the u.s. copyright on 
thi public wa renewed. 


[illustration: "one hand close on hi thin neck, and the other, a 
rock-lik fist, made a bloodi ruin of hi mouth."] 


isl of the undead 


By lloyd arthur eshbach 


_A gripping, thrilling, uncanni tale about the fright 
fate that befel a yacht parti on the dread island of 
live dead men_ 

* * * * * 




_1. A horror from the past_ 
prefac 
A drab gray sheet of cloud slip stealthili from the moon' round 
face, like a shroud slip from the face of one long dead, a coldli 
phosphoresc face from which the eye had been plucked. yellow 
radianc fell toward a calm, oili sea, seek a narrow bank of fog 
lie low on the water, penetr it somber mass like frozen yellow 
fingers. 

vilma bradley shudder and shrank against clifford darrell' brawni 
form. "it's--it' ghastly, cliff!" she said. 

"ghastly?" darrel lean against the rail, laugh softly. "one 
cocktail too many--that' the answer. it' given you the jitters. 
listen!" faintli from the salon came strain of danc music and the 
rhythmic shuffl of feet. "A nifti yacht, a south sea moon, a radio 
danc orchestra, dancers--and littl clifford! and you call it 
ghastly!" almost savag hi arm tighten about her, and the 
banter note left hi voice. "i'm crazi about you, vilma." 

she tri to laugh, but it wa an unconvinc sound. "it' the moon, 
cliff--i guess. I never saw it like that before. something' go to 
happen--someth dreadful. I just _know_ it!" 

"oh--b sensible, vilma!" there wa a hint of impati in cliff' 
deep voice. A gorgeou girl in hi arms--dark-haired, dark-eyed, made 
for love--and she talk of dread thing which were go to happen 
becaus the moon look screwy. 

she releas herself and glanc out over the sea. "I know i'm silly, 
but----" her voic froze and her slender bodi stiffened. 
"cliff--look!" 

darrel spun around, and as he stared, he felt a dryness seep into 
hi throat, choke him.... 

out of the winding-sheet of fog into the moonlight crept a strange, 
strang craft, her crumbl timber blacken and rot with 
incred age. the corps of a ship, she seemed, resurrect from the 
grave of the sea. her prow thrust upward like a scimitar bent 
backward, hover over the gaunt ruin of a cabin whose seaward side 
were form by port and starboard bows. from a shallow pit amidship 
jut the broken arm of a mast, it splinter tip point toward 
the blindli watch moon. the stern, thickli cover with the 
molder encrust of age, curv inward abov the strang high 
poop, beneath which lay anoth cabin. and along either side of her 
worm-eaten freeboard ran a row of apertur like oblong portholes. out 
of these project great oars, long, unwieldy, as somberli black as 
the rest of the ancient hulk. 

now a sound drift across the waters, the steady, rhythmic 
_br-rr-oom, br-rr-oom, br-rr-oom_ of a drum beat time for the 
rowers. it hollow thud check the heart, set it to throb in 
tempo with it own weari pulse. ghostli fingers, drip dread, 
crawl up darrell' spine. 

stiff-lipped, vilma gasped: "what--what is it?" 

cliff answer in a dri huski voice, the word seem to trip over an 
awkward tongue. "it's--it's--it _can't_ be, damn it!--but it' a 
galley, a ship from the day of alexand the great! what' it 
doing--here--_now_?" 

closer she came through the moon-path, a froth lip of brine curl 
away from her swell prow. closer--h cours cross that of the 
_ariel_--and the watcher saw her crew! they gasped, and the blood 
eb from their faces. 

men of ancient persia, clad in leather kirtl and rust armor, and 
they were hideous! In the yellow moon-glow cliff could see them 
clearli now--a lookout stand motionless in the stem, the steersman 
on the poop-deck, the drummer squat besid the broken mast, the 
rower in the pit--and all, _all_ were a bloodless white, the skin of 
their face puf and bloat and horribl wrinkled, like flesh that 
had been under water a long time. 

dead men ... men whose movement were stiffli wooden ... as dead as 
their faces. but most horribl wa the fact that they were there, that 
they move at all! 

* * * * * 

"A queer mirage, isn't it?" A hollow voic spoke suav behind them. 

vilma gasp at the sudden sound, and they whirled. A foot away stood 
the tall, lean figur of the _ariel's_ captain, leon corio. A queer 
smile twist hi thin lips. 

"what' the idea--sneak up on us?" darrel demand angrily. He 
didn't like thi man, hadn't like him from the moment he had 
approach cliff to sell him the yacht. but cliff had bought the craft 
becaus she wa a bargain, and in accord with their agreement he 
had hire corio as captain. 

the tall man' smile remain fixed, and he bow gravely. "sorry, 
sir. I alway walk softly. A habit, I suppose." He gestur toward 
the galley. "it look quit life-like, don't you think so?" 

"life-like?" cliff spoke between hi teeth as he again face the black 
ship. "it look _dead_ to me!" 

the galley had almost reach them _now_, _veer sharpli to draw up 
beside_ the _ariel_. the drum quieted, and the oar trail in the 
water, motionless except for the sway impart by the waves. A 
musty, age-old odor filter through the air like a breath from a 
grave. the music and danc had stopped. A fear-fil hush shroud 
the yacht. 

vilma drew cliff' arm about her shoulder. He glanc back at the 
motionless captain. 

"_do_ something, corio!" he rasped. "don't stand there like a dummy!" 

corio nod with hi same queer smile. hi hand dart to an insid 
pocket, came out bear a curiou instrument like four twist cone 
of silver bound togeth with silver thongs. As he rais thi to hi 
mouth, hi eyelid were slit behind which burn the ember of hi 
eyes. 

out over the sea crept a singl note, deep, hollow, laden with eeri 
minor wailings--a sound that summon imperatively, yet a sound that 
repelled. It wa a moan, hideou as the moan of a die demon. It 
rake the heart with fear-tip claws. It rose, and fell, and rose 
again, and as it died, it awaken the crew of the ancient galley to 
motion, sweep them in a hord to the rail of the yacht. 

cliff swung toward corio in burst fury, furi mingl with dread. 
hi fist lash out at that glitter silver instrument and the face 
behind it, but corio avoid him like a wraith, still smile fixedly, 
the horn again at hi lips. cliff cursed, and hurl himself through 
the air. one hand caught a boni shoulder; he felt finger like hook 
close on hi own throat. He wrench free, land a stun blow on 
corio' face--saw him reel and crash to the deck--and then he heard 
vilma scream! 

He whirled. she wa struggl between two of the _flabby-fac thing 
from_ the galley! In an instant he wa upon them, hi fist thud 
against ici flesh, buri itself in someth horribl soft and 
yielding. startled, cliff swung a second blow; and an arm, tomb-cold 
and strong as the tentacl of an octopus, wrap itself around him--a 
vise of thin-cov bone! A dead, drown face peer over hi 
shoulder, stare blankly. other arm seiz hi legs, and though he 
struggl and writh with the strength of a mount fear, he wa 
born to the rail. over they went, and drop to the rot deck of 
the galley. 

A numb wa creep through him like a contagion, spread from 
those crush hand of ice. hi struggl ceased. with eye that 
turn stiffli in their socket he look for vilma, saw her rais 
high abov the head of two other pallid creatures, saw them climb 
over the rail. then the black of a dank and musti cabin envelop 
him; and he wa drop with jar force. hi captor bulk black 
against the moonlit doorway, tread soundlessly, and were gone. 

cliff lay in rigid paralysis, everi sens keenli alive, hi mind 
strive to clutch a singl spar of reason in thi chaotic whirlpool 
of the incredible. thi _couldn't_ be! soon he'd awaken to laugh at 
hi absurd nightmare.... yet it seem horribl real.... It _was_ 
real! 

from the _ariel_ boil a fear bedlam. scream of terror. curses. 
then other shadow loom in the doorway, and vilma, motionless and 
rigid, wa drop brutal besid him on the spongi floor. 

furious cliff struggl against the madden restraint of 
paralysis. He couldn't lie here helpless! vilma need him! he'd--he'd 
_have_ to do something. with an effort that stud hi forehead with 
round drop of sweat and sent the blood throb through the 
distend vein of hi neck, he sought to move. and like a cord 
snapping, hi invis bond fell from him. 

He wa crouch over vilma, rub her wrists, call to her, when 
again he heard the silver horn of corio. A low drone utterli unlik 
the note that had awaken the galley' crew, it drift languidli 
along a channel of endless sleep. It seep through the ear-drums, 
touch everi nerve-tip with resistless lassitude. doggedli cliff 
fought against the sound, press hi hand over hi ears, grit 
hi teeth, hold hi eyelid wide. yet he felt hi muscl weaken, 
began to relax, knew dimli that hi mind, sodden with drowsiness, wa 
creep toward the pit of slumber--and the vibrant drone ended! 

* * * * * 

hi head clear rapidly, and he bent over vilma. As he touch a limp 
arm, he knew she had pass from paralysi into a deep, quiet sleep. 
He shook her. It wa useless. He listened, heard her steadi breathing; 
and at that instant realiz that the nois from the yacht had 
ceased. 

rising, he strode toward the squar of chalki moonlight. A foot away 
he halted, fell back. He had heard a faint footfall, had seen an 
armor-clad figur climb over the rail! with silent hast he flung 
himself down besid vilma. 

and there he lay while the crew of the galley carri hi friend from 
the _ariel_, all slump in that unnatur sleep, and stretch them 
out on the floor of the black cabin. unmoving, he watch through 
narrow lid till all save corio had been carri aboard, and the 
drown thing had gone back to their place in the rowers' pits. 
again the hollow voic of the drum began throb through the 
silence, and the oar creak a faint accompaniment. He could feel the 
galley cleav the oili sea. 

On hi feet, he peer through the doorway. the back of the rower 
rose and fell with stiff, mechan rhythm. beyond the galley' stern 
came the yacht, slink along like a thief, onli one dim light 
showing, her diesel engin pur almost soundlessly. 

He turn and bent over vilma, still in thrall to that strang deep 
slumber. As he trace the delic outlin of her love face, now so 
lifeless and pale, bitter wrath flare within him, wrath and hatr 
for leon corio. but as he thought of the ghastli _undead_ thing out 
there in the galley pit, thought of thi water-soak anachron 
which had no right to be afloat, hi skin crisp with a sens of 
foreboding, a fear of what wa yet to come. He must do something! 

step over the still form of hi friends, he move to the forward 
wall where a beam of radianc crept fear through a gap between 
two boards. hi hand touch the hull--and he jerk them away. 
rotten, clammy, like a decay corpse, partli frozen. crouching, he 
peer through. 

far ahead, a blotch of evil black squat on the horizon, an 
island crouch low like a black beast readi to spring. around it the 
moonlight seem to dim, as though it were strive to hide some 
nameless horror. intermin cliff watch while the shadow mass 
drew closer ... closer.... 

they were head for a tower wall of black basalt; and as the 
galley near it, cliff saw that it bore strike resembl to a 
gigant human skull, it round surfac broken by cave that the 
sea had carv into hollow eye-socket and an empti nasal cavity. the 
rock wall end high abov the water; beneath it lay a gape chasm of 
pitchi darkness. and the galley, drum silenced, oar at rest, slid 
under the ledge, into the mouth of the skull! 

just befor total black fell, cliff sprang to vilma' side and 
rais her in hi arms. If he hope to do anything, he must do it now! 
He grope hi way to the starboard bow and move one hand along the 
dank timbers, searching. He found what he sought, a wide gap at the 
edg of a board. gentli lower vilma to the floor, he grip the 
slimi wood with both hand and thrust outward mightily. A wide strip 
of decay timber burst free. He drop it into the sea and attack 
the next board. In moment a wide irregular open yawn in the 
galley' hull. 

lean out, cliff look down. He could see nothing. then suddenli a 
faint light appeared, and he heard the hum of the _ariel's_ motor as 
she enter the cave. the hum ceas instantly, but the faint 
light persisted. 

now he could see the black of waters, a rock wall beyond. He drew 
back--and a he did so, he heard movement on deck! At ani moment the 
rower might enter! he'd have to risk a drop into the water with 
vilma--ther wa noth els to do. If onli she were conscious! 

He stoop and rais her, hold her firmli with one arm. grip 
the hull with the other, he climb through the opening, inhal 
deeply, and dropped! A heart-stop plunge--and cold water close 
over them. down, down--then they shot upward, reach the surface; and 
even as cliff gulp a singl gasp breath, someth struck hi 
skull a blinding, stun blow! the oars! 

with rapidli numb arm and leg cliff kick and flail the water, 
strive for land. dimli he knew he no longer held vilma; dimli he 
vision her as were those ghastli undead; then hi bodi scrape on 
someth hard, and a black that wa not physic blot out 
consciousness. 


_2. the dread isle_ 

red-hot hammer pound against hi templ waken cliff darrell. He 
open hi eye to stare into total dark crawl with mental 
monster spawn by hi pain-stab brain. He lay half immers in 
shallow brine, hi head rest on a jag stone just abov the 
surface. struggl to hi hand and knees, he shook hi head from 
side to side, dumbly, like an anim in pain. someth had hit 
him--and now he wa in water--and there wa no light. what had 
happened? where wa vilma? 

vilma! He groaned. He rememb now. they had dropped--and hi head 
had struck something--and--and--mayb she wa float out there even 
now, dead eye stare upward. 

"vilma!" he cried, hi voic pleading. "vilma!" 

onli a mock echo answer him. there wa no other sound, not even 
the whisper of wave swish among the rocks. 

cliff press hi hand fierc against hi throb head. the pain 
had becom a madness, match onli by the agoni of hi own 
helplessness. He felt hi reason reeling; he fought an insan desir 
to fling himself shriek into that silent expans of water to search 
for vilma; then with a tremend physic effort he jar himself 
back to sanity. 

He stagger to hi feet, grope stumblingli over the rock away from 
the water. hi hand touch a rock wall broken and pit by the 
action of the sea; and he crept slowli inland, feel hi way like a 
blind man. As he plod on hi thought blend into one fix idea: 
he must get to light, must get light to search for vilma. 

gradual the insens pound in hi head abated, and strength 
return to hi body. when at last he saw light beyond a narrow 
fissur around an angl in the cavern, he had almost recovered. In 
moment he wa gaze out over a plain bath in the glow of a leprou 
moon. As he stared, he shivered; and it wa not becaus of the cold 
draft draw through the fissure, fan hi brine-drench body. 

grim and starkli forbid the plain lay befor him, dead as the 
frozen landscap of the moon. onc there had been life there, but now 
onli the skeleton of tree remained, lift their wast limb in 
rigid plead to an unrespons sky. some, there were, that had 
fallen, uproot by the furi of pass hurricanes; these lay like the 
scatter bone of a dismemb giant, age-blackened, and paint 
with hoarfrost by the brush of moonlight. feebli the dead forest 
stir under the touch of a moan wind, and the gaunt shadow cast 
by the tree seem to be multi-arm monster slither over the 
rocki earth. 

He look beyond the trees, and he saw light. littl squar of pale 
radianc cut high in the wall of an ancient black castle. castle? 
cliff frowned. He could liken it to noth else, though he could not 
recal ever have seen a castl which thrust curving, needle-thin 
spire into the sky like a devil' horns. 

impati cliff step from the wall of rock and glanc along a 
path that writh through the forest; glanced--and crouch swiftly, a 
low cri escap him. A singl spot of water on a smooth, flat stone! 
A spot shape like a woman' shoe! vilma had pass thi way! 

but--might it not have been some other woman from the _ariel_? no! 
they had been carried--and even if they had walked, their feet were 
dry! 

like a hound on the scent, cliff darrel sped along the serpentin 
path. the wind moan abov him, and the sough branch seem to 
whisper croak warnings, but he ran on, hi eye constantli seek 
sign of vilma' course. here a drop of water shaken from her drench 
skirt, there another; and cliff bless the full moon whose light made 
possibl hi trail of the almost invis spoor. 

now he had pass beyond the dead forest and wa move toward the 
castle. the trail had been grow steadili fainter, but he manag to 
follow it. It led him toward a narrow stone stairway climb 
crookedli to a misshapen open in the wall. light glow faintli 
lurid somewher deep within; and now cliff heard a blasphem sound 
belch from the depth of the castle--a wheezing, sardon croak 
like the moan of a demoniac organ, rumbl an obscen dirge. hi hair 
bristled, and he stop short. 

He look at the steps, search for the fade trail--and he 
stiffened. there on the second step wa an irregular blotch of 
moisture! what did it mean? had vilma crouch there? had she ascend 
those steps? entered? 

* * * * * 

with drawn face he began to skirt the base of the black building, 
search everi nook and cranny, scan the bare walls. hi heart 
lay like ballast in hi breast. if--if someth had lure vilma into 
that demon-infest vault ... he check the thought. 

suddenli he cursed. mechan he had begun to measur hi stride in 
time with the dole dirg from the castle. He stalk on with 
alter pace. As he round the corner at the rear of the structure, 
he saw a shadow outlin against the sky, crouch on a ledg below 
one of the littl windows. He look again--cried: 

"vilma!" 

the figur abov him stirred, look down, then climb hastili 
earthward. It wa vilma ... vilma, with black hair hang stringili 
about her head, face pale, eye fix in the wide of fear ... 
vilma, with her wet cloth cling to the love contour of her 
symmetr body. 

"oh, cliff!" she gasped, a dri sob choke her. "thank god--thank 
god!" 

she clung to him, her face hidden against hi shoulder, quiver 
uncontrollably. then tear came, save tears, reliev her pent-up 
emotions. 

cliff said nothing, onli held her close, strongli protective. and 
gradual he felt the tempest of terror subside. At last she look 
up. some of the dread had gone from her face, and she tri to smile. 

"I guess--i can't take it," she said. 

cliff shook hi head solemnly. "you'r a game girl, vilma! you'v 
nerv enough for two men. If you can, tell me what happened. Or if 
you'd rather let it wait, just say so." 

"i'll feel better if I get it off my chest," she said. "you probabl 
saw those--things--carri me from the yacht." cliff nodded. "well, I 
wa just about paralyz when they drop me in their terribl boat. 
I remember, you tri to arous me; then that horn blew, and I just 
seem to float away in an ocean of sleep. 

"after that I can rememb noth till I awok with water fill my 
eye and nose and mouth, choke me. someone' arm were around me--it 
must have been you, cliff--and then they weren't there ani more, and I 
struggl wildly, out of my wits. I don't know how I got to shore, but 
I did, and I lay there in the shadow of the galley, choke and 
gagging, but afraid to cough. It wasn't altogeth dark, and I could 
see those dread thing with peopl hang over their shoulders, 
carri them along a narrow ledg close to the water' edge, head 
inland. I thought mayb you were one of those limp bodies; and i--i 
almost die of fright. after a while the last one had gone, and the 
light went out. then I heard anoth pair of feet move over the 
rocks. corio, I suppose. the sound died--and I wa alone. 

"that place wa awful, cliff. the black almost drove me mad. I 
want to scream, but I wa afraid to. some terribl weight seem to 
be crush my lungs. If I follow those undead things, they might 
captur me, but it seem wors to stay there in that dread dark. 

"I got out of there somehow, though it seem to take hours. then I 
didn't know what to do. I stood at the edg of the dead forest tri 
to decide; trying, too, to keep myself from shriek and 
running--anywhere. then corio' horn blew again--a sound, cliff, wors 
than anyth i'v ever heard. it--it wa a wick sound, promis to 
fulfil everi foul desir that ever taint a human mind. It repelled, 
yet it lure irresistibly. and--i answered!" 

she stopped, and buri her face in her hands. after a moment she went 
on. "the sound stop just as I found myself crawl on hand and 
knee up the stone stairway on the other side. anoth started--that 
aw groaning--music--but it didn't draw me. I ran down the step and 
scurri away like a rabbit tri to find a place to hide. 

"after a while I came back--i thought you must be in there--and I 
climb up to the window. and--and--cliff, it' hellish!" 

her eyes, bore into his, widen in the same rigid terror he had 
seen in them when he join her. 

"we could go back to the cove and get away on the _ariel_, vilma," 
cliff said stonily. "and if you think we should, we will. but--i 
brought our friend here, and--well, I want to get them out if I can." 

with an effort vilma nodded. "of course. We can't do anyth else." 

He releas her and step up to the wall. 

"i'm go to see what' go on in there," he said. "you wait here 
till I come down." 

In sudden dread vilma seiz hi arm. "no, cliff. I couldn't stand 
wait here alone. i'll go with you." 

He nod understandingly. and togeth they began climb the 
precipit wall, fit hand and feet in step-lik crevic that 
made progress fairli rapid. soon they were crouch on a wide stone 
ledge, cling to thin, rust bars, stare into the black castle. 


_3. the step of torture_ 

A gigant hall lay befor them, a singl chamber whose wall were the 
wall of the castle, whose arch ceil rose far abov them. 
directli below their window a stone platform jut from the wall, 
spread entir across the chamber. A stone altar squat in the 
center of the platform, a strang phosphoresc fire smolder on 
it top. and from the altar descend a wide, wide stairway end in 
the middl of the hall. all thi cliff saw in a singl sweep 
glance; afterward he had eye for noth save the lethal horror of a 
mad, mad scene, reveal by the dim radianc of the altar fire. 

behind the altar stood five huge figur clad in long, hood cloak 
of scarlet. the central figur had arm rais wide, hi cloak spread 
like the wing of some bloodi bird of prey; and from hi lip came a 
guttur incantation, a blasphem chant in archaic latin, in time 
with the wheez of the buri organ. now hi arm dropped, and he wa 
silent. 

from the room below came a concert whine of ceremoni devotion, a 
hollow, hungri wail. It rose from the bloodless lip of strang 
assort human figur rang down the center of the long stairway in 
two face columns. A hundr or more there must have been, 
repres half as mani period and countries, accord to their 
strang and ancient costumes. men in the armor of mediev persia--th 
crew of the black galley; yellow-hair vikings; hawk-fac egyptian 
with leather-brown skins; half-nak islanders; red-sash pirat 
from the spanish main; men of today! and about all, like the damp 
that cling to a tombstone, hover a cloud of--death! the undead! 

cliff' gaze rove over the tens wait columns, then leap to 
the foot of the stairs. there, cower dumbl like sheep in a 
slaughter-pen, were hi friend from the _ariel_. all cloth had 
been strip from them, and they stood wait in waxen, statuesqu 
stiffness. He saw then that three other lay prone befor the stone 
altar, nake and omin still. 

and far down at the veri end of the hall stood leon corio, drape in a 
hood cape of unbroken black, a glint of silver in hi hand--hi horn 
of drug sounds. 

now, as though at a silent command, a girl left the group and began to 
mount the stairs, as those motionless three must have mounted! 
vivaci ann--sh had been the life of cliff' yacht party; but now 
she was--changed. her blanch face wa rigid with inexpress 
terror despit the semi-stupor which numb her senses. her nude bodi 
glow like marbl in the dim light. horribly, her feet began their 
climb with a littl catch step suggest by the moan chant of that 
crack organ note. 

she reach the first of the undead, and cliff saw light glint on a 
knife-blade. A crimson gash appear in the flesh of her thigh; and 
dead lip touch that wound, drank thirstily. the girl strode on, 
blood gleam darkli on the white skin. A second drank of the crimson 
flow--a third--and the blood ceas gush forth. 

anoth knife flashed--and lip close again and again on a redli 
drip wound. and the girl with the unchang pace of a robot 
climb the stairway to it veri top--climb while fiendish corps 
drank her life' blood--climbed, to sink down on the altar. 

one of the red-clad figur stoop over her, lift her, buri long 
teeth in her throat--and cliff saw hi face.... hi own face paled, 
and talon of fear rake hi brain. those other on the stairs--they 
were abhorrent, zombi freed from the grave. but thi monster! A 
vampir vest with the lust and cruelti and power of hell! 

He lower her, finally, and she sank down, lay still, besid the 
other three. 

anoth began the hellish climb, a giant of a man with a thickli 
muscl torso. cliff knew him instantly; and hi heart seem to stop. 
lesli starke! they'd play footbal together. A brave man--a 
fighter. He mount the stairway with the same littl catch step, the 
same plod stiffness. No resistance, no struggle--onli a hell of 
fear on hi face. 

the marrow melt from cliff darrell' bones. what--what could he do 
against a power that did _that_ to le starke? He tri to swallow, 
but the saliva had dri on hi tongue. He want to turn to vilma, 
but he could not wrench hi eye from the fright spectacle. 

Up the stone step stark strode. and no blade leap toward him; no 
thirsti lip close on hi flesh! In an unwav line he mount 
toward the cowl monster in the center of the dais, like a puppet on 
the end of a string; mount to paus befor the stone altar, to lie 
on it, head bent back, throat bared.... merci cliff regain 
enough control to close hi eyes. 

He open them at a gasp from vilma; saw the vampir rais the flaccid 
bodi of le stark and hurl it far from him, to crash to the stone 
steps, to roll and thud and tumble, down and down, sickeningly, to lie 
awkwardli twist on the floor befor hi companions! 

and anoth began to climb the long stone steps.... 

all through the intermin night cliff and vilma crouch on the 
ledge, stare through the bar window. A hundr time they would 
have fled to escap the madden scene, but they could not move. 
sens reel befor the aw monotoni of the ceaseless climbing, 
their eye smart with fix staring, their tongu and throat were 
parch to desert dryness; yet onli after hour of endless watching, 
onli after the last victim had climb the steps, did the edg of 
terror dull, and a modicum of control return to their bodies. 

stiffli cliff look over hi shoulder. A faint ting of gray rim 
the sea on the eastern horizon. 

"almost daylight," he whisper hoarsely. 

vilma nodded, her gaze still held by that chamber of horror. cliff 
follow the direct of her eyes; and saw corio stand like a 
great bat in hi hood cape close to the far wall. He rais hi 
four-pip horn to hi lips. and the instrument' fourth note crept 
through the room. 

* * * * * 

It wa a dole sound, a cri like the cri death itself might possess; 
yet oddly--and horribly--it wa soothing, promis the peac of 
endless sleep. and touch by it power, the column of undead 
stiffened, thin to wraiths, flow as water flow down the stone 
steps, vanished! 

the dead-alive--thos five vampir in crimson cowls--look upward 
uneasily. the shadow under the roof were gray with the light of 
dawn. cliff could sens their thought. befor sunris they must be in 
their tomb under the castle, to sleep until anoth night. with one 
accord they strode down the stairs, past corio who had prostrat 
himself, and enter a black open in the wall. with their departur 
the altar fire dim to a sullen ember. 

corio arose. He wa alon in the chamber save for that dead, broken 
bodi lie in a twist heap at the foot of the stairs, and those 
other half-al wretch stretch out befor the altar. now, cliff 
told himself, wa the time for him to get in there at corio; now wa 
the time to rescu hi friends--but he continu to crouch, unmoving. 

again corio blew on hi silver horn, and a faint cri leap from 
vilma' tens lips. the lure note that had drawn her, cliff thought 
hazily; then he thought of noth save the sound, the sound that 
promis him all he could desire. earth and it dominion, hi for the 
taking--if he answer that call!... then even the sound elud hi 
senses, and he heard onli the promise.... He must answer, must claim 
what wa right his! 

but those half-dead creatures--sight of their stir steadi hi 
stagger sanity. here and there head lift and bloodless husk of 
bodi tri to rise. In the pallid light they seem like corpses, 
freed from newli open graves. some could onli reach their knees; 
other rose to uncertain limbs. and all move down the stairway toward 
corio, answer hi summons; follow as he made hi slow way toward 
the open in the wall, still blow the singl note--th note that 
promis earth and all it held.... 

cliff glanc toward vilma--and she wa not there. He look down, saw 
her far below, drop from crack to crevic with amaz speed and 
daring, hasten toward--corio! 

the thought jar ani linger taint of allur from cliff' 
mind. He must stop her. He swung around, ignor the cramp 
stiff of hi legs, and start down the steep wall. down, down, 
recklessly, with corio' horn-not onli a faintli heard sound fade 
behind him. 

now he saw vilma reach the rock below and dash around the corner of 
the castle, and he cursed, redoubl hi speed. down--down--and 
suddenli the ancient rock crumbl underfoot. for an instant he hung 
from strain fingertips--then dropped. 

A smash impact--a stone that slid beneath him--and hi head crash 
against the castl wall. through a fieri mist of pain he pictur 
vilma in the grasp of corio. the mist thickened--grew black--engulf 
him. 


_4. In corio' hands_ 

cliff awok with the sun glare down on hi face. He open hi eyes, 
and stab lanc of light pierc hi eyeballs. momentarili 
blinded, he press hi hand across hi face and struggl erect. 
there wa a sick feel in hi stomach, and the back of hi head 
throb incessantly. He touch the ach area, and winced. A lump 
like an egg thrust out hi scalp; it wa sticki with blood. He stood 
there, weav from side to side, tri to recal something.... 

As memori came, he groaned. vilma! He had last seen her race madli 
toward corio, lure by hi damn horn. It wa daylight now; the sun 
had risen at least an hour ago. An hour--with vilma gone! 

shake hi head to clear it, and grit hi teeth at the pain, he 
stalk along the wall. turn the corner he strode on toward the 
crook steps. the lifeless terrain reel dizzily, but he went on 
resolutely. the pain in hi head wa fade to a dull ache; and as he 
mount the steps, strength seem to flow back into hi legs. with 
everi sens taut he pass into the gloom of the castle. 

A quick glanc he cast about--saw the bodi of stark lie where it 
had fallen. No use to examin it; there wa no life there. hi gaze 
swept up the slope of the stairway to the altar at it head, linger 
on the phosphoresc eye of light still glow there. then he 
shrug grimli and move on to the doorway in the wall. warili he 
peer in. 

As hi eye adjust themselv to the greater darkness, he saw a 
narrow stairway lead downward into a shadowi corridor. somewher in 
the tunnel' depth a faint light shone. He could see noth more. He 
move stealthili down the damp, dank stairs. 

At the bottom he paused, listening. He could hear nothing. A hundr 
feet ahead, the corridor divid in two; a burn torch wa thrust in 
the wall at the junction. cliff nod with satisfaction. corio _must_ 
be somewher near by; for onli a human need light. 

silent cliff strode along the corridor. At the fork he hesitated, 
then chose the right branch, for light glow faintli along that 
passageway. the other led downward, black as the pit of hell. 

A doorway appear in the wall ahead, and he move warily, with fist 
clenched. flicker torchlight filter into the corridor. there wa 
no audibl sound. now cliff peer into a small chamber, and gasp in 
sudden horror, hi eye stare unwinkingli at a spectacl incred 
pitiful. 

here were the passeng of the _ariel_, white naked, and lie in 
littl group on the cold stone floor, huddl togeth for warmth. 
their face turn toward darrel as he stood in the doorway, but 
there wa no recognit in the vacuou eyes, no thought, no 
intelligence, and littl life in the wide-mouth stares. It seem as 
though their soul had been drain from their bodi with their 
blood. 

sickened, cliff turn away, curs hi own helpless to aid them, 
curs leon corio who wa respons for their plight. black wrath 
grip him as he move on. 

again the corridor branched, and again he kept to the right. suddenli 
he halted, ear straining. He heard the sound of a voice--th hollow 
voic of corio! It came faintli but clearli from a room at the end of 
the passageway. cliff went forward slowly. 

"and so, my dear," corio wa saying, "we enter into a pact with 
the--master, a pact seal with blood. In exchang for our live we 
three were to bring other human to thi island for the feast of 
the dead-alive. everi third month each of us must return with our 
cargo when the moon is full; and sinc we come back on altern 
months, they have a constant suppli of fresh blood. usual some of 
our captiv live from full moon to full moon befor they becom like 
those of the galley--th undead. some of these we waken when it suit 
our fancy; they are not like the masters; they awaken onli when we 
call them--w three or the masters. 

"more than life they give us for what we do. centuri ago pirat 
use thi island for refuge. they--died--and they left their treasur 
in thi castle. It lie in the room where the master lie; and we 
three receiv payment in gold and gems. tonight I receiv my pay, and 
tomorrow I leav on the _ariel_--and you go with me!" 

cliff heard vilma answer, and even while hi heart leap with relief, 
he marvel at the cool scorn in her voice. 

"so I go with you, do I? i'd rather climb the stair with the rest of 
your victim than have anyth to do with you--you monster! when 
cliff darrel find you----" 

"darrell!" corio' voic wa a frozen sneer. "he'll do nothing! i'll 
find _him_--and he'll wish he could climb the stair of blood! As for 
you, you'll go with me, and like it! A drop of my blood in your veins, 
and you will belong to the master, as I do. We shall attend to that; 
but first there is someth else--mor pleasant." hi word fell to 
an indistinguish purr. 

still move stealthily, cliff hasten forward. suddenli vilma 
screamed; and he launch himself madli across the remain distance, 
stood crouch at the threshold. 

vilma lay on an ancient bed, her wrist and ankl bound with leather 
thong drawn about the four tall bed-posts. onli the torn remnant of 
her under-gar cover the round contour of her body, and corio 
crouch over her, caress the pink flesh. vilma writh beneath hi 
touch. 

* * * * * 

cliff growl deep in hi throat as he sprang. corio spun around and 
leap aside, but he wa too slow to escap cliff' power lunge. 
one hand close on hi thin neck, and the other, a rock-lik fist, 
made a bloodi ruin of hi mouth. howl with pain, corio tri to 
sink hi teeth in cliff' arm. 

cliff flung him aside, follow with the easi glide of a boxer. corio 
crawl to hi feet, cringing, dodg befor the nemesi that stalk 
him. again cliff leaped, and corio, yellow with fear, dart around 
the bed and ran wildli into the hallway. At the door cliff check 
himself, reason hold him. corio could elud him with eas in thi 
labyrinth of passages; and hi first concern wa vilma' safety. 

He return to the bed. vilma look up at him with such relief and 
thank on her face that cliff, with a littl choke cry, flung 
himself to hi knee besid the bed and kiss her hungrily. for 
moment their lip clung; then cliff straighten shakily, tri to 
laugh. 

"we'v got to get out of here, sweetheart," he said. "i'm not afraid 
of corio, but he know thing about thi place that we don't know. 
after you'r safe on the yacht, i'll come back and get him." 

He look around for someth with which to cut her bonds. On the 
wall abov the bed were cross a pair of murderous-look cutlasses. 
seiz one of these, cliff wrench it from it fasten and drew 
it through the cords.... she stood besid him, free. 

"your clothing----" cliff began, hi eye on her almost-nud body. 

she blush and point mute to a heap of rag on the floor. her 
eye flame wrathfully. "he--h rip them from me!" 

the muscl of cliff' jaw knotted, and he scowl as he survey the 
room for a drape or hang to cover her. for the first time he realli 
saw the place. all the lavish splendor of royalti had been expend 
on thi chamber. It might have been the bedroom of a king, except that 
the ancient furnish belong to no particular period; were, in 
fact, the loot of raid extend over centuries. yet despit it 
splendor, everyth wa repulsive, cloak with the same air of 
unearthli gloom that hover about the galley. 

He move toward an intric woven tapestry; but vilma check him, 
shudder with revulsion. 

"no, cliff--it' too much like grave clothes. everyth about thi 
place make my flesh crawl. i'd rather stay as I am than touch ani of 
it!" 

cliff nod slowly. "let' go then." 

they hurri through the corridor toward the stairway, with cliff 
hold the cutla in readiness. As they pass the room in which lay 
the _ariel's_ passengers, he tri to divert vilma' attention, but 
she look in as though hypnotized. 

"I saw them before," she whispered. "it' awful." 

As they start up the stairway to the great hall, cliff took the 
lead. He move with utmost caution. 

"it doesn't seem right," he said uneasily. "we should hear from 
corio." 

At that moment they did hear from him--literally. from somewher in 
the maze of tunnel came the sound of hi accurs horn--th note of 
sleep! It swirl insidi about their heads, numb their senses. 
cliff felt hi stride falter, saw vilma stumble, and he hurl himself 
forward furiously, grip her arm. 

"hurry!" he shouted, strive to pierc the fog of sleep. "we'v _got_ 
to get out! damn him!" 

vilma ralli for an instant, and they reach the top of the stairs. 
on--across that wide, wide room, each step a struggle.... On while the 
drone sound float languidli through everi nerv cell.... on--til 
their muscl could no longer move, and they sag to the hard stone, 
asleep. 

* * * * * 

moment later cliff open hi eye to meet the hellish glare of leon 
corio. corio smile thinly. 

"so--you awaken. good! I would have you know the fate I have plan 
for you. you see this?" He held the cutla high abov darrell' throat 
like the blade of a guillotine. "with thi I could end your life quit 
painlessli and quickly. It realli would prove entertain for miss 
bradley, i'm sure." He chuckl faintli behind bruis and swollen 
lips. 

cliff squirmed, strive to rise, then subsid instantly. He wa 
bound hand and foot. 

"I _could_ kill you," corio repeat musingly, "but that would lack 
finesse." hi teeth bare in a felin smile. "and it would be such a 
waste--of blood! instead, i'll take you out to the galley and let you 
lie there till her crew awaken tonight. they have tast blood, and 
after tonight will tast none again for anoth month. I imagin 
they'll--drain you dry!" the last phrase wa a viciou snarl. 

cliff heard vilma utter a suppress sob, and he turn hi head. she 
lay close by, bound like him with strip of leather. furious cliff 
strain at hi fetters, but they held. 

"and while you wait for those gentl persian to awaken," corio 
continu in tone caressingli soft, "you can think of your sweetheart 
in my arms! It may teach you not to strike your betters--though you 
can never profit by your lesson." 

stooping, he rais cliff' power form and manag to fling him 
over one shoulder. then he move from the great hall, down the stone 
steps, and across the dead plain with it sigh skeleton trees. He 
wa pant jerkili by the time he came to the fissur lead to the 
cove, but he reach it, despit cliff' two hundr pounds. without 
pausing, he went on into the cavern, along the rock ledge, to step at 
last upon the deck of the black galley. 

"pleasant thoughts," he said gentli as he drop cliff to the spongi 
boards. "you have onli to wait till dark!" 

cliff listen to hi rapid footfal till they die in distance; then 
there wa no sound save hi own breathing. 

gradual hi eye becam accustom to the heavi gloom, and he saw 
that corio had drop him just at the edg of the rowers' pit. there 
were white thing down there--bones, pale as marble, scatter about 
aimlessly. could--could those bone join to make the rower who would 
aris with the night? It seem absurd--_was_ absurd--yet he knew it 
wa so! He had seen too much to doubt it. 

He roll over on hi back and stare upward into the shadows. He must 
lie here helpless while corio return to vilma--did with her as he 
pleased! perhap he might even transform her into a blood-taint 
monster like himself! He saw her again in that room of ancient 
splendor, spread-eagl to the bed; and the muscl cord in hi 
arms, and hi lip strain white in a futil effort to break free. 

intermin he lay there waiting. the galley wa damp with the 
chill damp of a sepulcher, and the damp penetr deeper 
and deeper. clamp hi jaw togeth to prevent their quivering, he 
struggl against a rise tide of mad which gnaw at hi reason. 
hi mind began to crunch and jangl like a machin out of gear, 
threaten to destroy itself. 

On and on in plod indiffer the stolid moment passed, till at 
last cliff realiz that it wa grow darker. He roll over on hi 
side and stare into the galley pit, eye fix on the inert mass of 
white. soon they would move! soon the undead would rise! hi thoughts, 
touch by the whip of dread, sped about like slave seek escap 
from a tortur pit. and abruptli out of the welter of chaotic idea 
came one straw of sanity; he seiz it, hi heart hammer with hope. 

those persian sailor were armed! their sword and knive were real, 
for they cut flesh! somewher among their bone must lie sharp-edg 
blades! 

He struggl to the edg of the pit, let hi feet drop over. As they 
touched, he balanc precari for an instant, then fell to hi 
knees. He peer feverishli about among white bones, molder 
garments, and rust armor--and saw a faint glimmer of light on 
point steel. He sank forward on hi face in the direct of the 
gleam, turn over, squirm and writh till he felt the cold blade 
against hi hands. He caught it between hi finger and began saw 
back and forth. 

It wa heart-break work. age had dull the weapon, and long 
sliver of rust flake off, but the leather which bound him wa also 
ancient. though progress wa slow, and the effort laborious, cliff 
knew hi bond were weakening. 

but it wa grow darker. even now he could see onli a suggest of 
gray among the shadows. If those undead thing materi while he 
lay among them!... sweat stood out on hi forehead and he redoubl 
hi efforts, strain at the leather as he sawed. 

with a snap the cord part and hi hand were free. A singl slash 
sever the thong about hi ankles, and he stood up, leap to the 
deck. not an instant too soon! there wa movement in the pit--a 
hideou crawl of bone assembl themselv into skelet form.... 

cliff wait to see no more. there were limit to what one could see 
and remain sane. with a bound he cross the rot deck, and sprang 
ashore. despit the dark, he almost ran from the mad of that cave, 
ran till he pass through the wall of rock, till he saw the rim of 
the moon gleam behind the castle. 


_5. the end of the island_ 

out on the plain he sprint through the ghostli forest. He knew he 
had no time to spare--knew that soon the march of tortur would 
begin--knew that if vilma were within the castle, she must answer the 
summon of corio' horn. even now light glow faintli in the high, 
squar windows. 

that horn! At the foot of the step he stop short. If _he_ heard 
the horn, he too must answer! He dare not risk it. with impati 
finger he tore a strip of cloth from hi shirt, roll it into a 
cylinder, and thrust it into hi ear. anoth for the other ear--and 
he dart up into the castle. 

A sweep glanc reveal no one, onli the murki glow of the altar 
fire, and the wraith of smoke plume upward toward the shadow 
roof. wish now that he had brought a weapon from the galley, cliff 
cross to the open in the wall. He stood at the top of the steps, 
listening, then curs silent as he rememb that he could hear 
none but veri loud sounds. He saw nothing; so he hasten down into 
the corridor. hi step were swiftli stealthi as he move toward 
corio' room. 

He wa past the first branch passage, when a sixth sens warn him 
of someone' approach. He ran swiftli to the next fork, then paus 
within it shelter and glanc back, saw five red-cowl figur glide 
along the tunnel and vanish up the stairway. cliff frowned. with the 
vampir in the great hall, corio must soon follow, lead hi 
victim to the blood-feast. He drew back deeper into the shadows. 

hi grope hand touch someth in the dark--round and hard--lik 
a keg. curious he investigated. It _was_ a keg, and there were 
others. A sandi powder trail to the floor from a crack in one of 
them. thought cliff let it run through hi fingers. gunpowder! Of 
course--h had heard corio mention pirat and their treasure, and 
thi had been their cach of explosive. An idea wa forming.... 

He look up to see a shadow pass the mouth of the tunnel; he crept 
forward and peer out. He saw the black-hood figur of leon corio 
stride along, saw him enter the room where the passeng of the 
_ariel_ lay. In a breath cliff wa down the corridor to corio' room. 
A tarnish silver candelabrum shed faint light through the chamber, 
and by it flicker glow he search for vilma, thoroughly, 
painstakingly--futilely. 

He stood in the center of the room in indecision, hi forehead creas 
with anxiety. If onli he could find her, he'd know how to plan! He ran 
hi hand through hi hair helplessly, then heard veri faintli the 
lure note of corio' horn. she must answer that summons, unless 
corio had her tie somewhere. hi best chanc of find her lay in 
the hall above. 

On the wall still hung the mate of the cutla he had use to free 
vilma; he wrench it down and ran out into the corridor. the last of 
the nake marcher wa disappear up the stairway. now the 
horn-not died, and he could feel more than hear the rumbl bass of 
the dirg from the depth below him. 

He ran the rest of the distanc along the passageway and mount the 
step two at a stride. He look into the tortur hall. As on the 
previou night, corio stood far back, close to the wall in which cliff 
crouched. the arm of the master were rais high; raised, cliff knew 
though he could not hear it, in a blasphem incantation. and then he 
saw someth that sent a crimson lanc of furi crash through hi 
brain. 

vilma, strip like the rest, stood with the other victim at the 
foot of the long steps! her bodi gleam pinkly, in contrast to the 
pallid drab of the half-dead automatons, and she held her head 
proudli erect. but from where he stood cliff could see the side of her 
face, and it bore a look of terror. 

He could see corio' face, too, and he wa look at the girl, 
baffl furi glare from hi eyes--a though she were there against 
hi will. 

cliff' first impuls wa to fling himself out there with hi cutla 
and hack a way to freedom for vilma and himself, but cold reason 
check thi folly. such a cours could end onli in death. motionless 
he watch the scene befor him, hi brain frantic seek a plan 
with even a ghost of a chanc of succeeding. 

the gunpowder! there wa enough of the stuff below to blast thi 
entir castl into the hell where it belonged! hastili he retrac hi 
step to the tunnel in which he had found the kegs, pluck the torch 
from it nich in the wall as he pass it. He held it high abov hi 
head as he examin the content of the broken keg. unmistak 
gunpowder! 

thrust the cutla beneath hi belt, he clutch a hand of the 
black dust. then, crouch close to the floor, he drew an irregular 
thread through the passageway toward the stairs. onc he return for 
more powder, but in a few minut the job wa done. At the foot of the 
step where the trail ended, he touch hi torch to the black line 
and watch a hiss spark snake it white-smok way back toward the 
powder kegs. An instant he watch it, then sprang up the stairs. he'd 
have to move fast! 

with a hideou howl he dart into the hall, hi cutla abov hi 
head. corio spun about--and it wa hi last live act. A singl sweep 
of the great blade shear hi head from hi neck, sent it roll 
grotesqu along the floor. for three heart-beat the bodi stood with 
a fountain of blood spurt from sever arteries; then it crashed. 

coolli cliff lean over the twitch cadaver, ignor the bedlam on 
the stairs, the hord sweep down toward him, hurl asid the 
wait humans. He pri open clutch fingers, seiz a twist 
silver instrument, and rais it to hi lips. 

* * * * * 

the mass of undead were almost upon him, the murki light glint on 
menac blades, when cliff blew the first note. the note of sleep! He 
tri again, hastily. and it wa the right one! 

At the doleful, sooth sound the undead halt in their tracks; 
halted--and melt into nothing befor hi eyes! 

but now those other five in their robe of bloodi red--they were 
charging, and even though they were unarmed, cliff felt a stab of 
fear. they possess power beyond the human, power a mortal could 
not combat. He brace himself and waited. 

At the bottom of the step they stopped, rang in a wide 
half-circle. the central monster--th master--flung up hi arm in a 
strang terrifi gesture, and cliff saw hi carmin lip move in 
a chant which he could not hear. something, a chill presence, 
hover about him, seem to settl upon him, cloak him with the 
might of the devil himself. that unheard incant continued, and 
cliff felt a cold rigid creep through everi fiber, slowli 
freez hi limb into column of ice. 

with a mighti effort of will he flung himself toward that accurs 
drinker of blood--and at that instant a terrif deton rock the 
ancient building, and a cloud of smoke and flame burst from the 
open in the wall. cliff wa hurl from hi feet, roll over and 
over, and crash against the wall by the aw concussion, the cutla 
and silver horn sent whirl through the air. 

dizzili he stagger to hi feet, crouch defensively. sound came 
to him clearli now; the explos must have jar the plug from hi 
ears. He scan the room; saw the unclad human scatter everywhere, 
most of them lie still and unconscious. He saw vilma rise slowly; 
then he look for the monster in red. startled, he saw them rush 
toward the open in the wall, to vanish in it smoke-fil 
interior. whi did they----? then he knew. down there somewher were 
their graves--grav rent and broken by the explosion--grav 
threaten by the flames--and panic had seiz the vampires, fear of 
the death which would result with exil from their tombs! 

unsteadili cliff cross to vilma. she saw him come and flung 
herself sob into hi arms. He crush her lith form close--and 
anoth explosion, more violent than the first, sent a section of the 
stone floor leap upward as though with life of it own. cling to 
vilma, cliff manag to maintain hi footing, though the floor buck 
and heaved. A snapping, boom roar--and a great chasm open in the 
floor. A breathless instant--and a segment of the stone stairs, 
rumbl thunderously, drop out of sight into a newli form pit! 
with it went the blasphem altar and it phosphoresc fire. 

deafened, stunned, momentarili powerless to move, cliff' mind grope 
for an explanation. It seem incred that gunpowd could caus 
such havoc. and the sway of the floor continued; the thick stone 
wall shook alarmingly. suddenli he understood. An earthquake! the 
explos had jar the none-too-st understrata of rock into 
spasmod motion that must grind everyth to bits! the island wa 
doomed! and earth would be better without it. 

If onli they could reach the _ariel_ first! 

new strength flow through him, and hug vilma close, he stagger 
toward the spot where he knew the door must be. somehow he reach it, 
and reel down the broken stone steps. 

the plain of dead tree sway like the deck of a ship in a storm as 
cliff start across it. A gale had arisen and swept in from the sea, 
rip dri branch from the skeleton growth and whirl them about 
like straws. yet somehow cliff reach the crevic in the rock wall 
with hi burden, reach the deck of the galley, cross it, and won 
to the safeti of the _ariel_. minut later, with diesel engin 
purring, they crept out through the narrow channel into the open sea. 

* * * * * 

ten minut later the isl of the undead lay safe behind them. vilma 
had dressed; and now they sat togeth in the pilot house. cliff had 
one arm about her, and one hand on the wheel. 

"and so," the girl wa saying, "while corio carri you to that 
terribl old boat, I got loose. He hadn't tie me veri tightly, and I 
slip my hand free. I had to hide, and I could think of onli one 
place that might be safe, where he wouldn't think to look for me. I 
ran down to the room where those--thos other lay; I undressed, and 
buri myself among them. It wa horrible--th way they suck each 
other' wounds...." 

cliff press a hand across her lips. "forget that!" he said almost 
fiercely. "forget all of it--d'you hear?" 

she look up at him and said simply: "i'll try." 

they glanc back toward the black blotch on the horizon. the seismic 
disturb continu unabated. At that moment they saw the barrier 
of rock like a skull split and sink into the sea. beyond, cleans 
tongu of flame lick the sky. they saw a singl jag wall of the 
castl still standing, one window glow in it black expans like a 
square, bloodi moon against a bloodi sky. It crumbled. 

they turn away, and cliff' arm circl the girl he loved. their 
lip met and clung.... and the _ariel_ plow on through the froth 
brine, bear them toward safeti and forgetfulness.... together. 

* * * * * 






end of project gutenberg' isl of the undead, by lloyd arthur eshbach 

*** end OF thi project gutenberg ebook isl OF the undead *** 

***** thi file should be name 32470.txt or 32470.zip ***** 
thi and all associ file of variou format will be found in: 
http://www.gutenberg.org/3/2/4/7/32470/ 

produc by sankar viswanathan, greg weeks, and the onlin 
distribut proofread team at http://www.pgdp.net 


updat edit will replac the previou one--th old edit 
will be renamed. 

creat the work from public domain print edit mean that no 
one own a unit state copyright in these works, so the foundat 
(and you!) can copi and distribut it in the unit state without 
permiss and without pay copyright royalties. special rules, 
set forth in the gener term of use part of thi license, appli to 
copi and distribut project gutenberg-tm electron work to 
protect the project gutenberg-tm concept and trademark. project 
gutenberg is a regist trademark, and may not be use if you 
charg for the ebooks, unless you receiv specif permission. If you 
do not charg anyth for copi of thi ebook, compli with the 
rule is veri easy. you may use thi ebook for nearli ani purpos 
such as creation of deriv works, reports, perform and 
research. they may be modifi and print and given away--y may do 
practic anyth with public domain ebooks. redistribut is 
subject to the trademark license, especi commerci 
redistribution. 



*** start: full licens *** 

the full project gutenberg licens 
pleas read thi befor you distribut OR use thi work 

To protect the project gutenberg-tm mission of promot the free 
distribut of electron works, by use or distribut thi work 
(or ani other work associ in ani way with the phrase "project 
gutenberg"), you agre to compli with all the term of the full project 
gutenberg-tm licens (avail with thi file or onlin at 
http://gutenberg.org/license). 


section 1. gener term of use and redistribut project gutenberg-tm 
electron work 

1.a. By read or use ani part of thi project gutenberg-tm 
electron work, you indic that you have read, understand, agre to 
and accept all the term of thi licens and intellectu properti 
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agre to abid by all 
the term of thi agreement, you must ceas use and return or destroy 
all copi of project gutenberg-tm electron work in your possession. 
If you paid a fee for obtain a copi of or access to a project 
gutenberg-tm electron work and you do not agre to be bound by the 
term of thi agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or 
entiti to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.e.8. 

1.b. "project gutenberg" is a regist trademark. It may onli be 
use on or associ in ani way with an electron work by peopl who 
agre to be bound by the term of thi agreement. there are a few 
thing that you can do with most project gutenberg-tm electron work 
even without compli with the full term of thi agreement. see 
paragraph 1.c below. there are a lot of thing you can do with project 
gutenberg-tm electron work if you follow the term of thi agreement 
and help preserv free futur access to project gutenberg-tm electron 
works. see paragraph 1.e below. 

1.c. the project gutenberg literari archiv foundat ("the foundation" 
or pglaf), own a compil copyright in the collect of project 
gutenberg-tm electron works. nearli all the individu work in the 
collect are in the public domain in the unit states. If an 
individu work is in the public domain in the unit state and you are 
locat in the unit states, we do not claim a right to prevent you from 
copying, distributing, performing, display or creat deriv 
work base on the work as long as all refer to project gutenberg 
are removed. Of course, we hope that you will support the project 
gutenberg-tm mission of promot free access to electron work by 
freeli share project gutenberg-tm work in complianc with the term of 
thi agreement for keep the project gutenberg-tm name associ with 
the work. you can easili compli with the term of thi agreement by 
keep thi work in the same format with it attach full project 
gutenberg-tm licens when you share it without charg with others. 

1.d. the copyright law of the place where you are locat also govern 
what you can do with thi work. copyright law in most countri are in 
a constant state of change. If you are outsid the unit states, check 
the law of your countri in addit to the term of thi agreement 
befor downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distribut or 
creat deriv work base on thi work or ani other project 
gutenberg-tm work. the foundat make no represent concern 
the copyright statu of ani work in ani countri outsid the unit 
states. 

1.e. unless you have remov all refer to project gutenberg: 

1.e.1. the follow sentence, with activ link to, or other immedi 
access to, the full project gutenberg-tm licens must appear promin 
whenev ani copi of a project gutenberg-tm work (ani work on which the 
phrase "project gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "project 
gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed, 
copi or distributed: 

thi ebook is for the use of anyon anywher at no cost and with 
almost no restrict whatsoever. you may copi it, give it away or 
re-us it under the term of the project gutenberg licens includ 
with thi ebook or onlin at www.gutenberg.org 

1.e.2. If an individu project gutenberg-tm electron work is deriv 
from the public domain (doe not contain a notic indic that it is 
post with permiss of the copyright holder), the work can be copi 
and distribut to anyon in the unit state without pay ani fee 
or charges. If you are redistribut or provid access to a work 
with the phrase "project gutenberg" associ with or appear on the 
work, you must compli either with the requir of paragraph 1.e.1 
through 1.e.7 or obtain permiss for the use of the work and the 
project gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraph 1.e.8 or 
1.e.9. 

1.e.3. If an individu project gutenberg-tm electron work is post 
with the permiss of the copyright holder, your use and distribut 
must compli with both paragraph 1.e.1 through 1.e.7 and ani addit 
term impos by the copyright holder. addit term will be link 
to the project gutenberg-tm licens for all work post with the 
permiss of the copyright holder found at the begin of thi work. 

1.e.4. Do not unlink or detach or remov the full project gutenberg-tm 
licens term from thi work, or ani file contain a part of thi 
work or ani other work associ with project gutenberg-tm. 

1.e.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribut or redistribut thi 
electron work, or ani part of thi electron work, without 
promin display the sentenc set forth in paragraph 1.e.1 with 
activ link or immedi access to the full term of the project 
gutenberg-tm license. 

1.e.6. you may convert to and distribut thi work in ani binary, 
compressed, mark up, nonproprietari or proprietari form, includ ani 
word process or hypertext form. however, if you provid access to or 
distribut copi of a project gutenberg-tm work in a format other than 
"plain vanilla ascii" or other format use in the offici version 
post on the offici project gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org), 
you must, at no addit cost, fee or expens to the user, provid a 
copy, a mean of export a copy, or a mean of obtain a copi upon 
request, of the work in it origin "plain vanilla ascii" or other 
form. ani altern format must includ the full project gutenberg-tm 
licens as specifi in paragraph 1.e.1. 

1.e.7. Do not charg a fee for access to, viewing, displaying, 
performing, copi or distribut ani project gutenberg-tm work 
unless you compli with paragraph 1.e.8 or 1.e.9. 

1.e.8. you may charg a reason fee for copi of or provid 
access to or distribut project gutenberg-tm electron work provid 
that 

- you pay a royalti fee of 20% of the gross profit you deriv from 
the use of project gutenberg-tm work calcul use the method 
you alreadi use to calcul your applic taxes. the fee is 
owe to the owner of the project gutenberg-tm trademark, but he 
ha agre to donat royalti under thi paragraph to the 
project gutenberg literari archiv foundation. royalti payment 
must be paid within 60 day follow each date on which you 
prepar (or are legal requir to prepare) your period tax 
returns. royalti payment should be clearli mark as such and 
sent to the project gutenberg literari archiv foundat at the 
address specifi in section 4, "inform about donat to 
the project gutenberg literari archiv foundation." 

- you provid a full refund of ani money paid by a user who notifi 
you in write (or by e-mail) within 30 day of receipt that s/he 
doe not agre to the term of the full project gutenberg-tm 
license. you must requir such a user to return or 
destroy all copi of the work possess in a physic medium 
and discontinu all use of and all access to other copi of 
project gutenberg-tm works. 

- you provide, in accord with paragraph 1.f.3, a full refund of ani 
money paid for a work or a replac copy, if a defect in the 
electron work is discov and report to you within 90 day 
of receipt of the work. 

- you compli with all other term of thi agreement for free 
distribut of project gutenberg-tm works. 

1.e.9. If you wish to charg a fee or distribut a project gutenberg-tm 
electron work or group of work on differ term than are set 
forth in thi agreement, you must obtain permiss in write from 
both the project gutenberg literari archiv foundat and michael 
hart, the owner of the project gutenberg-tm trademark. contact the 
foundat as set forth in section 3 below. 

1.f. 

1.f.1. project gutenberg volunt and employe expend consider 
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcrib and proofread 
public domain work in creat the project gutenberg-tm 
collection. despit these efforts, project gutenberg-tm electron 
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain 
"defects," such as, but not limit to, incomplete, inaccur or 
corrupt data, transcript errors, a copyright or other intellectu 
properti infringement, a defect or damag disk or other medium, a 
comput virus, or comput code that damag or cannot be read by 
your equipment. 

1.f.2. limit warranty, disclaim OF damag - except for the "right 
of replac or refund" describ in paragraph 1.f.3, the project 
gutenberg literari archiv foundation, the owner of the project 
gutenberg-tm trademark, and ani other parti distribut a project 
gutenberg-tm electron work under thi agreement, disclaim all 
liabil to you for damages, cost and expenses, includ legal 
fees. you agre that you have NO remedi for negligence, strict 
liability, breach OF warranti OR breach OF contract except those 
provid IN paragraph f3. you agre that the foundation, the 
trademark owner, and ani distributor under thi agreement will not BE 
liabl TO you for actual, direct, indirect, consequential, punit OR 
incident damag even IF you give notic OF the possibl OF such 
damage. 

1.f.3. limit right OF replac OR refund - If you discov a 
defect in thi electron work within 90 day of receiv it, you can 
receiv a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by send a 
written explan to the person you receiv the work from. If you 
receiv the work on a physic medium, you must return the medium with 
your written explanation. the person or entiti that provid you with 
the defect work may elect to provid a replac copi in lieu of a 
refund. If you receiv the work electronically, the person or entiti 
provid it to you may choos to give you a second opportun to 
receiv the work electron in lieu of a refund. If the second copi 
is also defective, you may demand a refund in write without further 
opportun to fix the problem. 

1.f.4. except for the limit right of replac or refund set forth 
in paragraph 1.f.3, thi work is provid to you 'as-is' with NO other 
warranti OF ani kind, express OR implied, includ but not limit TO 
warranti OF merchant OR fit for ani purpose. 

1.f.5. some state do not allow disclaim of certain impli 
warranti or the exclus or limit of certain type of damages. 
If ani disclaim or limit set forth in thi agreement violat the 
law of the state applic to thi agreement, the agreement shall be 
interpret to make the maximum disclaim or limit permit by 
the applic state law. the invalid or unenforc of ani 
provis of thi agreement shall not void the remain provisions. 

1.f.6. indemn - you agre to indemnifi and hold the foundation, the 
trademark owner, ani agent or employe of the foundation, anyon 
provid copi of project gutenberg-tm electron work in accord 
with thi agreement, and ani volunt associ with the production, 
promot and distribut of project gutenberg-tm electron works, 
harmless from all liability, cost and expenses, includ legal fees, 
that aris directli or indirectli from ani of the follow which you do 
or caus to occur: (a) distribut of thi or ani project gutenberg-tm 
work, (b) alteration, modification, or addit or delet to ani 
project gutenberg-tm work, and (c) ani defect you cause. 


section 2. inform about the mission of project gutenberg-tm 

project gutenberg-tm is synonym with the free distribut of 
electron work in format readabl by the widest varieti of comput 
includ obsolete, old, middle-ag and new computers. It exist 
becaus of the effort of hundr of volunt and donat from 
peopl in all walk of life. 

volunt and financi support to provid volunt with the 
assist they need, are critic to reach project gutenberg-tm' 
goal and ensur that the project gutenberg-tm collect will 
remain freeli avail for gener to come. In 2001, the project 
gutenberg literari archiv foundat wa creat to provid a secur 
and perman futur for project gutenberg-tm and futur generations. 
To learn more about the project gutenberg literari archiv foundat 
and how your effort and donat can help, see section 3 and 4 
and the foundat web page at http://www.pglaf.org. 


section 3. inform about the project gutenberg literari archiv 
foundat 

the project gutenberg literari archiv foundat is a non profit 
501(c)(3) educ corpor organ under the law of the 
state of mississippi and grant tax exempt statu by the intern 
revenu service. the foundation' ein or feder tax identif 
number is 64-6221541. it 501(c)(3) letter is post at 
http://pglaf.org/fundraising. contribut to the project gutenberg 
literari archiv foundat are tax deduct to the full extent 
permit by u.s. feder law and your state' laws. 

the foundation' princip offic is locat at 4557 melan dr. S. 
fairbanks, ak, 99712., but it volunt and employe are scatter 
throughout numer locations. it busi offic is locat at 
809 north 1500 west, salt lake city, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email 
business@pglaf.org. email contact link and up to date contact 
inform can be found at the foundation' web site and offici 
page at http://pglaf.org 

for addit contact information: 
dr. gregori B. newbi 
chief execut and director 
gbnewby@pglaf.org 


section 4. inform about donat to the project gutenberg 
literari archiv foundat 

project gutenberg-tm depend upon and cannot surviv without wide 
spread public support and donat to carri out it mission of 
increas the number of public domain and licens work that can be 
freeli distribut in machin readabl form access by the widest 
array of equip includ outdat equipment. mani small donat 
($1 to $5,000) are particularli import to maintain tax exempt 
statu with the irs. 

the foundat is commit to compli with the law regul 
chariti and charit donat in all 50 state of the unit 
states. complianc requir are not uniform and it take a 
consider effort, much paperwork and mani fee to meet and keep up 
with these requirements. We do not solicit donat in locat 
where we have not receiv written confirm of compliance. To 
send donat or determin the statu of complianc for ani 
particular state visit http://pglaf.org 

while we cannot and do not solicit contribut from state where we 
have not met the solicit requirements, we know of no prohibit 
against accept unsolicit donat from donor in such state who 
approach us with offer to donate. 

intern donat are grate accepted, but we cannot make 
ani statement concern tax treatment of donat receiv from 
outsid the unit states. u.s. law alon swamp our small staff. 

pleas check the project gutenberg web page for current donat 
method and addresses. donat are accept in a number of other 
way includ checks, onlin payment and credit card donations. 
To donate, pleas visit: http://pglaf.org/don 


section 5. gener inform about project gutenberg-tm electron 
works. 

professor michael S. hart is the origin of the project gutenberg-tm 
concept of a librari of electron work that could be freeli share 
with anyone. for thirti years, he produc and distribut project 
gutenberg-tm ebook with onli a loos network of volunt support. 


project gutenberg-tm ebook are often creat from sever print 
editions, all of which are confirm as public domain in the u.s. 
unless a copyright notic is included. thus, we do not necessarili 
keep ebook in complianc with ani particular paper edition. 


most peopl start at our web site which ha the main PG search facility: 

http://www.gutenberg.org 

thi web site includ inform about project gutenberg-tm, 
includ how to make donat to the project gutenberg literari 
archiv foundation, how to help produc our new ebooks, and how to 
subscrib to our email newslett to hear about new ebooks. 
